
===PAGE 1===
ANTHR OPOLOGY
Genetic population structure of the Xiongnu Empire at
imperial and local scales
JuhyeonLee1†,BryanK.Miller2,3,4†*,JamsranjavBayarsaikhan2,5,ErikJohannesson6,
AliciaVentrescaMiller2,3,7,ChristinaWarinner8,9*,ChoongwonJeong1*
TheXiongnuestablishedthefirstnomadicimperialpower,controllingtheEasternEurasiansteppefromca.200
BCE to 100 CE. Recent archaeogenetic studies identified extreme levels of genetic diversity across the empire,
corroborating historical records of the Xiongnu Empire being multiethnic. However, it has remained unknown
how this diversity was structured at the local community level or by sociopolitical status. To address this, we
investigated aristocratic and local elite cemeteries at the western frontier of the empire. Analyzing genome-
wide data from 18 individuals, we show that genetic diversity within these communities was comparable to
the empire as a whole, and that high diversity was also observed within extended families. Genetic heteroge-
neitywashighestamongthelowest-statusindividuals,implyingdiverseorigins,whilehigher-statusindividuals
harboredlessgeneticdiversity,suggestingthatelitestatusandpowerwasconcentratedwithinspecificsubsets
of the broader Xiongnu population.
Copyright©2023The
Authors,some
rightsreserved;
exclusivelicensee
AmericanAssociation
fortheAdvancement
ofScience.Noclaimto
originalU.S.Government
Works.Distributed
underaCreative
CommonsAttribution
License4.0(CCBY).
INTRODUCTION
The Xiongnu Empire was the first of many historically documented
steppe empires to arise in Eurasia, and its formation foreshadowed
the rise of subsequent nomadic imperial powers, including the
Mongol Empire, whose reach a millennium later stretched from
the East Sea to the Carpathian Mountains (1). Centered on the ter-
ritory of present-day Mongolia, the Xiongnu empire controlled the
Eastern Eurasian Steppe and surrounding regions in northern
China, southern Siberia, and Central Asiafor nearly three centuries,
starting from ca. 209 BCE until their eventual disintegration in the
late first century CE. At its height, the Xiongnu profoundly influ-
enced the political economies of Central, Inner, and East Asia, be-
coming a major political rival of imperial China and establishing
far-flung trade networks that imported Roman glass, Persian tex-
tiles, Egyptian faience, Greek silver, and Chinese bronzes, silks,
and lacquerware deep into the heart of their empire (2).
The Xiongnu represented a radically new kind of political entity
that incorporated heterogeneous nomadic and sedentary groups
spanning the Eastern Steppes and as far west asthe Altai Mountains,
under a single authority. As the Xiongnu expanded their empire
from its core in central and eastern Mongolia, they conquered
and integrated numerous neighboring groups. They successfully ex-
panded into western Mongolia and southern areas of Lake Baikal,
while winning decisive victories in northern China (3). However,
the Xiongnu were much more than just experts in mobilizing
cavalry forces for conquests. They were also shrewd trade partners
who exerted considerable influence over the Silk Road kingdoms of
Central Asia (4), with even greater control over Eurasian exchange
networks during the late Xiongnu period (ca. 50 BCE to 100 CE).
Nevertheless, a detailed understanding of their internal social and
political organization is lacking (5).
Historical narratives of the Xiongnu were largely authored by
their Han Chinese political rivals, who repeatedly and dismissively
characterized their polityas a “simple body” of nomadic elites (3, 6).
Much of what is now known about Xiongnu sociopolitical organi-
zation has been gleaned from textual evidence alongside a growing
body of archaeological sites throughout Inner Asia, consisting pri-
marily of cemeteries (2, 7–9). The mortuary record indicates that
there is a sociopolitical hierarchy among the Xiongnu, with clear
differences between individuals in terms of burial type, investment
in construction, and offerings. Most identified graves of the late
Xiongnu period are shaft pits set beneath thick stone rings on the
surface. These conspicuous burials represent the vast network of re-
gional and local elites of Xiongnu society, while commoners were
likely buried under less conspicuous stone piles or in unmarked
pits (10). The uppermost aristocratic ruling elites of the empire
were buried in large square stone tombs, often flanked by satellite
burials of lower-status individuals, forming a mortuary complex
(11). Elites in square tombs and large circular graves were richly
buried, typically in decorated wood-plank coffins and accompanied
by foreign luxury goods, gold, or gilt objects, and sacrifices of horses
and other valuable livestock. Metal discs and crescents representing
the sun and moon, a symbol of the Xiongnu empire, are also fre-
quently found in such elite graves. Because of their wealth and con-
spicuous appearance on the landscape, many Xiongnu graves have
been looted since antiquity, but the differences in grave forms nev-
ertheless reflect clear social gradations, with the square tombs as an
exclusive political faction within the empire (2).
Previous archaeogenetics studies have sought to identify the
people who made up the Xiongnu and have found an extremely
high level of genetic diversity across the Xiongnu empire (12–16).
Recently, a genome-wide study of 60 individuals from 27
Xiongnu sites found that this diversity was initially formed by the
1SchoolofBiologicalSciences,SeoulNationalUniversity,Seoul08826,Republicof
Korea. 2Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History, Jena 07745,
Germany. 3Museum of Anthropological Archaeology, University of Michigan,
AnnArbor,MI48109,USA.4HistoryofArt,UniversityofMichigan,AnnArbor,MI
48109,USA.5NationalMuseumofMongolia,Ulaanbaatar,Mongolia.6CircleCRM
GroupInc.,Calgary,ABT2B2X3,Canada.7DepartmentofAnthropology,University
ofMichigan,AnnArbor,MI48109,USA.8MaxPlanckInstituteforEvolutionaryAn-
thropology,Leipzig04103,Germany.9DepartmentofAnthropology,HarvardUni-
versity,Cambridge,MA02138,USA.
†Theseauthorscontributedequallytothiswork.
*Correspondingauthor.Email:cwjeong@snu.ac.kr(C.J.);warinner@fas.harvard.edu
(C.W.);bkmil@umich.edu(B.K.M.)
Lee et al., Sci. Adv.9,eadf3904(2023) 14April2023 1of14
SCIENCE ADV ANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on August 26, 2026

===PAGE 2===
unification of two genetically distinct pastoralist populations in
Mongolia—one descending from groups associated with the Deer-
stone Khirigsuur, Mönkhkhairkhan, and Sagly/Uyuk cultures in the
west and the other the descendants of the Ulaanzuukh and Slab
Grave cultures in the east—followed by additional population
influx from other regions, most likely Sarmatia (near present-day
Ukraine) and imperial China (14). However, while this evidence
supports previous claims that the Xiongnu Empire was likely a mul-
tiethnic, multicultural, and multilingual entity, until now, it has not
been possible to determine whether such diversity was composed of
a heterogeneous patchwork of locally homogenous communities or
whether local communities themselves were also internally diverse.
Moreover, many aspects of Xiongnu political constituencies still
remain unknown, such as who made up the imperial elite occupants
of the square tombs, and what their relationship was to lower-status
individuals, including those buried in satellite graves within their
elaborate tomb complexes. It also remains unclear whether high-
status square tomb elites and local elites in the standard circular
graves were drawn from the same segments of the Xiongnu popu-
lation, or whether local elites were more likely to genetically resem-
ble prior local populations than their incoming imperial
counterparts, which would suggest that demographic processes as-
sociated with empire formation may have been stratified by status
and origin.
To address these questions, here, we genetically investigate in
detail a range of burials from the aristocratic elite cemetery of Ta-
khiltyn Khotgor (TAK) and the local elite cemetery of Shombuuzyn
Belchir (SBB), located at the far western frontier of the empire in
Mongolia’s present-day Khovd province. Analyzing the genome-
wide data of 18 individuals from high and low-status burials, we
show that both communities harbored an extremely high level of
genetic diversity that is comparable to that of the Xiongnu
Empire as a whole. High genetic diversity is reflected within indi-
vidual tomb complexes and burial clusters and even extended
family groups. Thus, we find that the same sociopolitical processes
that produced a genetically diverse empire on a vast scale also op-
erated at the smallest scale, creating highly diverse local communi-
ties over the span of only a few generations. There are also
discernable genetic patterns with respect to social and political
status at TAK and SBB, where individuals of the lowest status
(based on grave form and mortuary remains) have the highest
degree of genetic heterogeneity. In contrast, higher-status individu-
als are less genetically diverse and have high levels of eastern Eur-
asian ancestry. This further suggests the existence of an aristocracy
in the Xiongnu empire, that elite status and power was concentrated
within specific subsets of the broader population.
RESULTS
Generationofgenome-widedatafromXiongnuaristocratic
elites,localelites,andsubordinates
Before this study, two archaeogenetic studies had intensively inves-
tigated Xiongnu-era cemeteries in the political core of the Xiongnu
empire at Egyin Gol (12) and Tamir Ulaan Khoshuu (16), but these
studies did not generate genome-wide data and thus they have
limited capacity to trace individual ancestries and relationships.
Other studies have focused on producing genome-wide datasets
(13–15), but the small number of individuals they analyzed per
site make these data insufficient to explore genetic diversity
within Xiongnu communities or potential associations with socio-
political status. To address this, we conducted an intensive genome-
wide archaeogenetic investigation of two Xiongnu cemeteries, the
aristocratic elite cemetery of TAK and the local elite cemetery of
SBB, which are located at the far western frontier of the Xiongnu
empire in the Altai mountains. These cemeteries include the full
social spectrum of individuals from exclusive square tombs to stan-
dard circular gravesto meager pit graves. This dataset helpsto better
understand the genetic diversity, heterogeneity, and relationships
among elites and subordinates at Xiongnu communities in the
social and spatial edges of their empire. We then compared these
frontier Xiongnu communities to previously published archaeoge-
nomic data for 29 additional Xiongnu sites across Mongolia
(Fig. 1A) (13, 14).
The aristocratic cemetery of TAK, dating to ca. 40 BCE to 50 CE
(17, 18), is notable not only for its large circular graves of local elites
but also for its numerous square tombs (Fig. 1B and fig. S1), which
Fig.1.MapofXiongnusitesinthisstudy,andburialplansoftheTAKandSBB
cemeteries.(A)Geographiclocationsofthesitesanalyzedinthestudyarepre-
sentedwiththeculturalaffiliationandthetimeperiod.Newlysequencedindivid-
ualswereexcavatedfromthearistocraticelitecemeteryofTakhiltynKhotgor(TAK)
(yellow square) and the local elite cemetery of Shombuuzyn Belchir (SBB) (red
circle)inwesternMongolia. PreviouslyreportedXiongnusiteswithfiveormore
sequenced individuals are also labeled in the figure: Salkhityn Am (SKT),
UguumurUul(UGU),andtheIl’movayaPad(IMA)(14).OtherXiongnusitesarein-
dicatedwithwhitediamonds(earlyXiongnu)orblackdiamonds(lateXiongnu).
Sitesofthepreceding EarlyIronAge(EIA)associatedwiththeSagly/Uyuk (pink
triangle) and SlabGrave(green down-pointing triangle) archaeological cultures
arealso shown.(B)Plan detail oftheTAKcemetery indicating thesquaretomb
complexes and associated graves (yellow). See fig. S1 for afull cemetery plan.
(C)PlanoftheSBBcemeteryindicatingstonecircleandstonepilegraves.Excava-
tionfocusedonadensegravecluster(pink)andaselectionofotherrepresentative
graves (red). See fig. S2 for afull cemetery plan. For both sites, tomb or grave
numbersareindicatedinboldred;eachanalyzedindividualisnumberedinblack.
Lee et al., Sci. Adv.9,eadf3904(2023) 14April2023 2of14
SCIENCE ADV ANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on August 26, 2026

===PAGE 3===
were reserved for individuals of the highest status within the impe-
rial Xiongnu hierarchy. Flanking many of these tombs are low-
status “commoner ” graves consisting of simple stone piles over
stone cist or earthen pit burials. Together, these square tombs and
satellite graves form extended mortuary complexes. At TAK, two
complete square tomb mortuary complexes have been excavated,
THL-82 and THL-64, and a third complex, THL-25, has been
partly excavated (fig. S1). THL-82 consists of a large central elite
square tomb flanked by two satellite graves to its east and west
(Fig. 1B). The tomb contained the remains of an adult female,
TAK001, who was buried in a decorated wood-plank coffin with
six horses, Chinese bronze chariot pieces, and a bronze spouted
pot (19). The use of a wood-plank coffin, in strict adherence with
elite Xiongnu political culture and rituals, is particularly notewor-
thy in this frontiercontext, asthe large larch wood planks must have
been imported at great effort and expense into this largely treeless
mountain region (20). The satellite graves each contained an adult
male interred in an earthen pit burial (TAK008 and TAK009), one
of whom (TAK008) was interred in a prone (face-down) position,
which differs from the supine (face-up) position that is more typical
of Xiongnu burials. THL-64 consisted of a large central elite square
tomb with two satellite graves on its eastern side (Fig. 1B). Like
THL-82, the tomb also contained the remains of an adult female,
TAK002, who was buried in a wood-plank coffin with one horse,
four caprines (either sheep or goat), and a golden disc and crescent,
representing the sun and moon (17). The satellite graves each con-
tained an adolescent male (TAK003 and TAK004) buried in simple
stone cists in a semi-flexed position, a position consistent with long-
standing local mortuary traditions in western Mongolia (21). Tomb
complex THL-25, for which only the satellite graves have been ex-
cavated to date, consisted of a large central square tomb flanked by
three satellite graves on its eastern side (Fig. 1B). The three satellite
graves consisted of simple earthen pit burials, marked only by small
piles of stones, containing the remains of a child (TAK005) and two
adult males (TAK006 and TAK007). In total, we genetically inves-
tigated eight individuals from TAK cemetery, seven new to this
study and one (TAK001) published in a previous study (14).
Located approximately 50 km to the southwest of TAK, the local
elite cemetery of SBB is situated along a strategic high mountain
pass and spans a period from ca. 50 BCE to 210 CE (18, 20). Con-
sistent with other local elite Xiongnu cemeteries, it consists primar-
ily of circular graves containing the remains of both adult females
and males, as well as children (datafile S1A). Fifteen of the 33 graves
have been excavated to date, of which 11 were genetically screened
in this study and 10 of 11 were sufficiently preserved for genome-
wide analysis (Fig. 1C and fig. S2). The analyzed individuals span
the full spectrum of marked social status, from individuals in
large stone-encircled graves with decorated wood-plank coffins
and elaborate grave goods to humble burials consisting of small
stone cists (fig. S2). Five of the analyzed graves were arranged into
a cluster (graves 12, 13, 14, 15, and 18), while the others were spa-
tially dispersed and selected as a representative sample of the re-
mainder of the cemetery (graves 2, 7, 8, 19, 26, and 29). Graves 7,
8, 15, and 19 were the highest-status graves analyzed in this study,
and each consisted of an adult female buried in a wood-plank coffin
surrounded by a stone ring. Grave 7 contained the remains of an
older adult female (SBB002) buried with a disassembled wooden
cart, a bronze cauldron, a ceramic cooking pot, and a golden sun
disc and moon crescent nailed to the wood-plank coffin. Grave 8
contained the remains of an older adult female (SBB003) buried
in a quatrefoil-decor ated coffin and interred with gilded glass
beads and a Chinese mirror fragment, as well as a large deposit of
livestock offerings consisting of at least 12 caprines (sheep or goats).
Grave 15 contained the remains of an adult female (SBB007) buried
in a decorated wood-plank coffin overlain with wooden cart pieces,
as well as horse-riding tack, a gilded iron belt clasp, and a Han
Dynasty–painted lacquer cup. Grave 19 contained the remains of
a young adult female (SBB008) who had apparently died in child-
birth; she was buried alongside an infant and wore a paste-bead
necklace containing a faience bead depicting the phallus of Bes,
an Egyptian god associated with the protection of children. Like
SBB003, this woman was also buried with Chinese mirror frag-
ments. The remaining graves were simpler, consisting of a small
stone circle or stone pile overlying a stone cist. Grave 13 contained
the remains of a middle-aged adult male (SBB001) buried with a
bow, arrows, and spear. An adolescent (SBB011) buried in grave
12 was also buried with a bow, arrows, and spear, and a child
(SBB009) buried in grave 26 was buried with a child-sized bow.
Three additional children were buried in graves 14 (SBB005), 18
(SBB006), and 29 (SBB004), and grave goods consisted of varied
glass beads in graves 14 and 18, while the child in grave 29 was
buried with silk, leather, and felt. Last, grave 2 (SBB010) contained
the remains of an older adult male buried with an iron sun disc and
moon crescent. Screening of burial sediments recovered traces of
silk clothing in all SBB burials.
For this study, we generated new genome-wide data for 19 indi-
viduals from TAK and SBB, of which 17 yielded sufficient human
DNA for analysis (>0.1% human DNA), and we further enriched
these DNA libraries for a panel (“1240K”) of 1,233,013 ancestry-in-
formative single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) using an in-sol-
ution DNA capture method (22). Afterenrichment and sequencing,
between 11,950 and 659,982 SNPs were successfully covered by at
least one high-quality read for each individual (data file S1A). For
six individuals with endogenous DNA preservation in excess of 30%
(SBB003, SBB007, SBB010, TAK002, TAK006, and TAK008), we
also produced whole-genome shotgun sequencing data to 0.7 to
2.5× coverage (data file S1A). All libraries exhibited characteristic
patterns of ancient DNA damage, including short fragment
lengths and cytosine deamination at fragment ends. Genetic sex
was determined for all 17 individuals (data file S1A), and all indi-
viduals exhibited low contamination (<6%; data file S1A), as esti-
mated using mitochondrial DNA for all individuals (23) and the
X chromosome for 10 males (24). For downstream population
genetic analyses, we performed pseudo-haploid genotype calling
(https://github.com/stschiff/sequenceTools; v1.5.2 last accessed at
25 April 2022) and concatenated our new genotype data with pre-
viously published genotype data for TAK001 (14) and other ancient
(13–15, 22, 25–58) and present-day (25, 29, 59–63) individuals (data
file S1B). We also attempted to assign uniparental haplogroups to
each individual and successfully determined the mitochondrial
haplogroup for 17 individuals and the Y-chromosome haplogroup
for 6 of 10 males (data file S1A). We estimated genetic relatedness
among individuals from TAK, SBB, and previously reported sites
(14). Two pairs of genetic relatives were identified at the SBB site:
one pair of second-degree relatives (SBB005-SBB007) and a pair of
second-degree or more distant relatives (SBB001-SBB005; data
file S1E).
Lee et al., Sci. Adv.9,eadf3904(2023) 14April2023 3of14
SCIENCE ADV ANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on August 26, 2026

===PAGE 4===
ModelingXiongnuancestry
Before proceeding to a more granular genetic analysis of the TAK
and SBB sites, and of the Xiongnu population more generally, we
first refined and updated our modeling of Xiongnu ancestry to in-
corporate newly available genome-wide data from the preceding
Late Bronze Age (LBA) and Early Iron Age (EIA) periods in
central and eastern Mongolia (15). In a previous study, we
modeled individuals of the early Xiongnu period as a mixture of
two distinct genetic groups present in Mongolia during the EIA
(ca. 900 to 300 BCE): “Chandman_IA” and “SlabGrave.” Chandma-
n_IA was representative of people in far western Mongolia associ-
ated with Sagly/Uyuk (ca. 500 to 200 BCE), Saka (ca. 900 to 200
BCE), and Pazyryk (ca. 500 to 200 BCE) groups in Siberia and Ka-
zakhstan. “SlabGrave” was representative of people in eastern and
central Mongolia associated with Slab Grave (ca. 1000 to 300
BCE) mortuarysites (14). Likely arising out of the LBA Ulaanzuukh
archaeological culture (ca. 1450 to 1150 BCE) in eastern Mongolia,
Slab Grave groups expanded into central and northern Mongolia as
far north as the Lake Baikal region (7, 14, 64). Overall, individuals
from the Ulaanzuukh and the Slab Grave cultures present a homo-
geneous genetic profile that has deep roots in the region and is re-
ferred to as Ancient Northeast Asian (ANA) (14). The recent
publication of additional genome-wide data for Ulaanzuukh and
Slab Grave individuals (15) provided an opportunity to investigate
the genetic profile of the Slab Grave individuals across a wider geo-
graphical distribution (Fig. 1A) and to refine our genetic modeling
of the formation of the Xiongnu more generally. We updated our
admixture modeling of Ulaanzuukh and Slab Grave individuals
using the qpAdm program (25).
First, we detected a subtle genetic shift in eastern Mongolia
between the preceding pre–Bronze Age period and LBA Ulaan-
zuukh individuals (n = 13) (Fig. 2A, fig. S3; and data file S2A).
We model this difference as gene flow from a nearby LBA
population in northern Mongolia, such as that found in the north-
ernmost province of Khovsgol (“Khovsgol_LBA”). Collectively,
Ulaanzuukh individuals are adequately modeled as having a
24.5% contribution from Khovsgol_LBA (P = 0.550; data file
S2A), and at an individual level most also fit the same model with
13.9 to 33.4% contributions from Khovsgol_LBA (data file S2A),
with the exception of one individual with an unusually high Khovs-
gol_LBA contribution (ULN005; 63.5%). On the basis of the admix-
ture modeling results, we grouped 12 of 13 Ulaanzuukh individuals
as an analysis unit (“Ulaanzuukh1”), excluding ULN005 for its
much higher Khovsgol_LBA affinity (separately analyzed as
“Ulaanzuukh2”), and used it as a representative of the Ulaanzuukh
gene pool.
To better understand the genetic make-up of Iron Age Slab
Grave individuals (n = 16), we compared their genetic profiles
with the preceding Ulaanzuukh individuals. Incorporating data
from 11 newly published individuals (15), we identified a subtle
genetic heterogeneity not detected in our previous study (14).
While 13 of 16 individuals are cladal with Ulaanzuukh1, the re-
maining 3 individuals require additional Khovsgol_LBA ancestry
(Fig. 2, fig. S3, and data file S2B). In particular, Slab Grave individ-
uals I6359, I6369, and DAR001 are markedly distinct from the
others by carrying high proportions of Khovsgol_LBA ancestry
(42.6 to 79.7%) (data file S2B). This pattern, in which most Slab
Grave individuals are genetically homogeneous while some have a
large and heterogeneous ancestry fraction deriving from a Khovs-
gol_LBA-like gene pool, is likely due to population mixing in
their recent past and is consistent with archaeological evidence
that the Slab Grave culture expanded into central and northern
Mongolia and replaced the preceding inhabitants in the region
with a low level of mixing (65). On the basis of individual ancestry
modeling, we assigned most of the Slab Grave individuals (13 of 16)
into a single group “SlabGrave1,” while we assigned the remaining
Fig.2.qpAdmmodelingofTAKandSBBindividuals.Thegeneticprofilesofancientindividualsaremodeledasthemixtureoftwoorthreepopulations.Theancestry
proportionofeachsourcepopulationisrepresentedbythesizeoftheboxonthexaxis.Horizontalbarsrepresent±1SEestimatedbyqpAdmusing5-cMblockjackkn-
ifing.DetailedresultsarepresentedindatafileS2.(A)UlaanzuukhandSlabGraveindividualsaremodeledasthemixturebetweenAncientNortheastAsian(ANA),rep-
resentedbyeastMongolia_preBAinthisstudy,andKhovsgol_LBA.WemodeledTakhiltynKhotgor(TAK)(B)andShombuuzynBelchir(SBB)(C)individualsasthemixture
oftheprecedinggroupsfromMongoliaandthesurroundingregions:SlabGrave1,Chandman_IA,Han_2000BP,Gonur1_BA,earlyXiongnu_west,Khovsgol_LBA,andUKY.
WepresenttwomodelsforTAK008andTAK009.
Lee et al., Sci. Adv.9,eadf3904(2023) 14April2023 4of14
SCIENCE ADV ANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on August 26, 2026

===PAGE 5===
three individuals with high Khovsgol_LBA ancestry into another
group, “SlabGrave2,” for their use in the downstream group-based
analyses.
To characterize the genetic profiles of our new Xiongnu-period
individuals, we modeled the ancestry composition of the TAK and
SBB individuals using qpAdm (Fig. 2). Most individuals (15 of 18)
are adequately modeled by the admixture models previouslyapplied
to Xiongnu individuals, which used Ulaanzuukh/SlabGr ave and
Han_2000BP as eastern Eurasian sources (data file S2C) (14).
Eight of these 15 individuals are adequately modeled with two an-
cestries, SlabGrave1 and Chandman_IA: Five are mixed between
SlabGrave1 and Chandman_IA (SBB001, SBB002, SBB006,
SBB008, and SBB009; 32 to 91% from SlabGrave1), one is indistin-
guishable from Chandman_IA (TAK005), and two are indistin-
guishable from SlabGrave1 (SBB004 and TAK004). A further five
individuals aremodeled using anadditional East Asian ancestrydis-
tinct from ANA, here represented by Han_2000BP (14): Three are
modeled as a mixture of SlabGrave1, Chandman_IA, and
Han_2000BP (SBB003, SBB005, and SBB007; 28 to 77% from Slab-
Grave1, 11 to 52% from Chandman_IA, and 12 to 19% from
Han_2000BP), and two are modeled as a mixture of SlabGrave1
and Han_2000BP (TAK002 and TAK006; 48 to 74% from Slab-
Grave1 and 26 to 52% from Han_2000BP). Last, two individuals
require an Iranian/Central Asian ancestry represented by
Gonur1_BA (26): One is modeled as the mixture of SlabGrave1,
Chandman_IA, and Gonur1_BA (SBB010; 39% from SlabGrave1,
48% from Chandman_IA, and 13% from Gonur1_BA), and the
other as the mixture of Chandman_IA and Gonur1_BA (TAK003;
28% from Gonur1_BA). TAK003 has a higher Gonur1_BA-related
ancestry proportion than previously described early Xiongnu indi-
viduals with the same ancestry combination (“earlyXiongnu_w-
est”), corroborating a previous report of continued gene flow
from Central Asia between the early and late Xiongnu periods (14).
We note that all qpAdm admixture models equally fit when Slab-
Grave1 was replaced by “AR_Xianbei_IA” from the Mogushan ar-
chaeological site in Inner Mongolia that belongs to the Iron Age
Xianbei context (data file S2C) (27). All but two males (BUL002
and I6365) associated with the Ulaanzuukh and Slab Grave cultures
belong to Y-haplogroup Q, all three AR_Xianbei_IA males belong
to Y-haplogroup C, and the Xiongnu males harbor both Q and C
(data file S1C) (14, 15). Although not conclusive, this suggests that
the ANA ancestry source of the Xiongnu-period individuals may
not be exclusively traced back to the Slab Grave culture but may
also include nearby groups with a similar ANA genetic profile,
such as the Xianbei.
The remaining 3 of 18 individuals are excavated from the same
mortuary complex, THL-82, and require a distinct eastern Eurasian
ancestral component. Two individuals from satellite graves,
TAK008 and TAK009, have a high proportion of western Eurasian
ancestry but are not modeled as a sister clade with either Chandma-
n_IA orearlyXiongnu_west (qpWave P = 1.98 × 10−7 for Chandma-
n_IA and qpWave P = 2.42 × 10−3 forearlyXiongnu_west). We then
compared their genetic profile with earlyXiongnu_west by calculat-
ing f4(Mbuti, world-wide; TAK008/TAK009, earlyXiongnu_west)
for a set of world-wide ancient and present-day populations.
While there is no population showing significant extra affinity
with earlyXiongnu_w est, several populations show extra affinity
with TAK008/TAK009. For TAK009, the top signals are mostly
ancient individuals/popula tions from East Asia (fig. S4). In line
with this, we adequately model TAK009 as a mixture of earlyXiong-
nu_west and various East Asian populations, including Khovs-
gol_LBA, SlabGrave1, and Han_2000BP (data file S2C). For
TAK008, we observe an overall similar trend but find populations
withhigh Ancient North Eurasian (ANE) affinity, such asthe Upper
Paleolithic individual from the Ust-Kyakhta-3 site (UKY) (28) and
present-day Native Americans (Mixe and Quechua), among the top
signals (fig. S4). Consistent with this, TAK008 is adequately
modeled with ~10% contribution from Khovsgol_LBA or UKY,
but not with other East Asian proxies with no ANE affinity, such
as SlabGrave1 or Han_2000BP (datafile S2C). TAK001, a previously
published female from a square tomb (14), is well explained by the
same model with TAK008 and TAK009 but with different admix-
ture proportions. TAK001 derives 90.7% of her ancestry from
Khovsgol_LBA and the rest from earlyXiongnu_west. It is rather
unexpected to observe the presence of Khovsgol_LBA ancestry in
a form not associated with SlabGrave ancestry during the
Xiongnu period, as it had largely been replaced by Slab Grave in
Mongolia by the EIA (14). Khovsgol_LBA ancestry was also report-
ed from the Mongol era site Khalzan Khoshuu, which is located
only 95 km away from the TAK site (14). Further sampling is re-
quired to understand the spatial and temporal distribution of
Khovsgol_LBA ancestryafter the LBA, especially in the Altai region.
HighgeneticdiversitywithinXiongnucommunitiesand
acrosstheempire
To examine spatial patterns of Xiongnu genetic diversity at TAK
and SBB, as well as across their empire as a whole, we performed
principal components analysis (PCA) (Fig. 3) following the ap-
proach described by (66), projecting ancient individuals onto the
genotype dataset of present-day individuals genotyped on the Affy-
metrix Axiom Genome-Wide Human Origins 1 (“HO”) array (data
file S1B) (59). All new Xiongnu individuals fall within the diverse
range of genetic profiles previously reported for the Xiongnu (14)
and are widely scattered along PC1 between western and eastern
Eurasians. This pattern indicates that the marked genetic heteroge-
neity observed for the Xiongnu as a whole was also present at sites
along its western frontier, far from the imperial core. We next quan-
tified the level of genetic heterogeneity within each site and com-
pared it with the overall Xiongnu genetic diversity within
Mongolia (Fig. 4). We used the PC1 coordinates of each individual
as a primary variable of the analysis because PC1 capturesthe major
axis of genetic variation within both the Xiongnu and Eurasians in
general: High and low PC1 values represent high genetic affinity to
eastern and western Eurasians, respectively.
On the basis of the broad distribution of SBB and TAK individ-
uals along the PC1 axis, we find that each site is highly heteroge-
neous. To statistically compare the genetic diversity of each site
and the Xiongnu as a whole (“all Xiongnu”), we applied the
Brown-Forsythe test for the null hypothesis that two groups have
equal PC1 variances (data file S1D). TAK is highly heterogeneous
to the level indistinguishable from the variance across all Xiongnu
individuals (P = 0.622), while SBB shows less diversity than all
Xiongnu (P = 0.030). We also compared the genetic diversity of
the previously published Xiongnu sites with at least five sampled
individuals (14). The early Xiongnu site Salkhityn Am (SKT;
n = 11) in northern Mongolia exhibits a high degree of heterogene-
ity similar to all Xiongnu (P = 0.411). The late Xiongnu site of
Uguumur Uul (UGU; n = 5) located further to the east shows a
Lee et al., Sci. Adv.9,eadf3904(2023) 14April2023 5of14
SCIENCE ADV ANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on August 26, 2026

===PAGE 6===
more intermediate level of diversity with higher contributions of
western Eurasian ancestry, but is still statistically comparable to
the all Xiongnu (P = 0.185); however, the small sample size for
this site provides limited statistical resolution. Still, UGU shows
much higher diversity than the preceding EIA groups (P = 0.001
and 0.015 for SlabGrave and Chandman_IA, respectively). In con-
trast, another late Xiongnu site that is located further to the north-
east, Il’movaya Pad (IMA; n = 8), has predominantly eastern
Eurasian ancestry. Its genetic diversity is much lower than all
Xiongnu (P = 0.002), and is comparable to those of the preceding
EIA groups (P = 0.975 and 0.398 for SlabGrave and Chandman_IA,
respectively) (Fig. 4). We note that the low genetic diversity at the
IMA site may be an artifact of biased sampling as only eight indi-
viduals were analyzed among 300 circular grave and square tomb
burials at the site (67). By repeating PC coordinates calculation
100 times for each individual with genotype data downsampled to
10,000 SNPs, we found that the results were not affected by higher
uncertainty in PC coordinates in low-coverage individuals (fig. S5).
The comparable level of genetic diversity of all Xiongnu individ-
uals broadly and local communities suggests that the dynamic de-
mographic processes that constituted the highly heterogeneous
Xiongnu empire also occurred at local scales. High genetic diversity
within the cemeteries of TAK, SBB, and UGU confirm the coresi-
dence of individuals with diverse genetic backgrounds within a
single local community and that this continued even into the late
Xiongnu period, centuries after the political formation of the
Xiongnu and the associated demographic processes of genetic ad-
mixture that were already in progress during the initial early
Xiongnu period. Overall, the high genetic diversity found among
the Xiongnu during all periods prevents any meaningful attempt
to define a “representative” Xiongnu genetic profile, as it is
instead population-level genetic heterogeneity spanning nearly the
entire breadth of Eurasian genetic diversity that most characterizes
the Xiongnu Empire.
Geneticdiversityandarchaeologicalsignifiersof
socialstatus
To better understand how Xiongnu genetic diversity might be struc-
tured by social status or social group affiliation, we examined ar-
chaeogenetic data from the aristocratic elite cemetery of TAK
(Fig. 3D) and the local elite cemetery of SBB (Fig. 3E) separately.
At TAK, two complete square tomb complexes have been excavated
(THL-82 and THL-64), allowing genetic diversity within discrete
mortuary units to be investigated. For the richest tomb complex,
THL-82, which contained an older adult female buried in a
square tomb (TAK001) flanked by two satellite graves of adult
males (TAK008 and TAK009), we identified no genetic relatedness
between them. While the genetic profile of the high-status female
strongly differed from that of the two low-status males (Fig. 3D),
the latter were genetically similar to each other and had much
Fig.3.GeneticdiversityoftheXiongnu.(A)Principalcomponentsanalysis(PCA)ofTakhiltynKhotgor(TAK)(yellowsquares)andShombuuzynBelchir(SBB)(redcircles)
individuals.OtherXiongnuindividualsareshownashollowdiamonds(earlyXiongnu)andblackdiamonds(lateXiongnu).AncientindividualswereprojectedonthePCs
calculatedwith2077present-dayEurasianindividuals(gray).InsetshowsPC1onthex-axisandPC3ontheyaxis.PC3explainsthe0.33%ofthetotalvariance.Thexaxis
andyaxistickshavethesamevaluesacrossallpanels,excepttheinsetof(A)wheretheyaxisrangesfrom −0.04to0.06.(B)PCAofGolMod2(azuresquares)andother
Xiongnusiteswithfiveormoregeneticallyanalyzedindividuals:SalkhitynAm(SKT)(purplesquares),UguumurUul(bluecircles),andIl’movayaPad(IMA)(greencircles).
(C)PCAoftheprecedingEarlyIronAge(EIA)Sagly/Uyuk(pinktriangles)andSlabGrave(greendown-pointingtriangles)individuals.(D)PCAofTAKindividuals,withcolor
indicatingtombcomplexandsizereflectinggravetype.(E)PCAofSBBindividuals,withcolorindicatingclustermembershipandsizereflectinggravetype.SBB005isa
second-degreegeneticrelativeofSBB001andSBB007.
Lee et al., Sci. Adv.9,eadf3904(2023) 14April2023 6of14
SCIENCE ADV ANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on August 26, 2026

===PAGE 7===
higher levels of western Eurasian ancestry (Fig. 2B and data file
S2C). That is, these two males are collectively modeled with
86.8% earlyXiongnu_west ancestry, while TAK001 requires only
9.3% of this ancestry component. In contrast to the high western
ancestry of the low-status males, the high-status women
(TAK001) shows a high level of eastern ancestry, represented by
Khovsgol_LBA, not SlabGrave1.
For the other square tomb complex, THL-64, which contained
an adult female buried in a square tomb (TAK002) along with
two satellite graves of adolescents, we determined that both adoles-
cents were males. Unlike THL-82, however, the two low-status
young males were genetically dissimilar (Fig. 2B and data file
S2C), with one (TAK003) having a very high level of western Eur-
asian ancestry (Chandman_IA and Gonur1_BA) and the other
(TAK004) having a high level of eastern Eurasian ancestry (Slab-
Grave1). The high-status female likewise had a high degree of
eastern Eurasian ancestry (Fig. 3D) deriving from two sources
(SlabGrave1 and Han_2000BP).
Last, we analyzed the three satellite graves associated with THL-
25, for which the square tomb has not been excavated. Two of the
three individuals yielded sufficient DNA for analysis: a child
(TAK005) and an adult male (TAK006). We determined that both
were unrelated males and that they were highly genetically dissim-
ilar (Fig. 3D). The child had a very high level of western Eurasian
ancestry (Chandman_IA), while the adult male had the highest
eastern Eurasian ancestry (SlabGrave1 and Han_2000BP) observed
at the TAK site. Thus, we find very high genetic diversity within in-
dividual tomb complexes at the TAK cemetery. Although both
high-status females had relatively high levels of eastern Eurasian an-
cestry, the low-status satellite males exhibited extremely high
genetic heterogeneity ranging from very high levels of western Eur-
asian ancestry to very high levels of eastern Eurasian ancestry. If the
low-status males were retainers or servants of the high-status
females, it suggests that they were drawn from diverse parts of the
Xiongnu empire and possibly beyond.
Fig.4.GeneticdiversityoftheXiongnuatlocalandimperialscales.LeftpresentsPC1coordinatesforindividualsatTakhiltynKhotgor(TAK),ShombuuzynBelchir
(SBB),andthreepreviouslyreportedXiongnusiteswithfiveormoresequencedindividuals(14).Forcomparison,wealsodisplayPC1coordinatesforXiongnu,Chand-
man_IA,andSlabGraveindividualsasthreeindependentclusters.Thecoloroftheboxesindicatesthetimeperiod:EarlyIron,pink;earlyXiongnu,darkgray;lateXiongnu,
lightgray;andentireXiongnu,lightblue.Newlyreportedsites(TAKandSBB)aremarkedbyasurroundingbox.ThePC1distributionofXiongnuindividualsasawhole
exceedsthatofthepriorEarlyIronAge(EIA).WiththeexceptionofIl’movayaPad(IMA),thePC1distributionofindividualswithineachXiongnusiteisbroaderthanthatof
eitherChandman_IAorSlabGrave,andtheoverallPC1distributionofindividualsatXiongnusitesisgenerallyhigh.Thisindicatesthatthehighgeneticdiversityobserved
amongtheXiongnuasawholeisalsoreflectedwithinXiongnucommunities.Ontheright,wecomparePC1coordinatesofTAK/SBBindividualsaccordingtotheirsocial
status(highversuslow).Thecoloroftheboxesindicatessocialstatus:green,high;yellow,low;anditmatchesthecolorofthedotsontheleft.TheoverallPC1distribution
ofthehigh-classindividualsismorerestrictedthanthatofthelowerclassindividuals.
Lee et al., Sci. Adv.9,eadf3904(2023) 14April2023 7of14
SCIENCE ADV ANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on August 26, 2026

===PAGE 8===
At the SBB site, we found loweroverall genetic diversity, and spe-
cifically, no individuals with very high levels of western Eurasian
ancestry (Fig. 3E). However, the individuals with the highest
levels of western Eurasian ancestry were both adult males
(SBB001 and SBB010), although they derived their western ancestry
from slightly different sources (Chandman_IA for SBB001 and
Chandman_IA and Gonur1_BA for SBB010). As at TAK, the
highest-status graves belonged to females (SBB002, SBB003,
SBB007, and SBB008), whose modeled ancestries all included Slab-
Grave1, with other minorancestry contributions. The genetic deter-
mination of SBB007 as female was particularly noteworthy because
the grave goods included horse-riding equipment, a gilded iron belt
clasp, and a Han-painted lacquer cup, which have been assumed in
other contexts to be accouterments associated with male horse-
mounted warriors. Similarly, SBB010, an adult male, was buried
with a bone tube case containing an iron needle, indicating that
sewing implements were not exclusively associated with women.
We also determined the genetic sex of three children (SBB004,
SBB005, and SBB006) and one adolescent (SBB009) whose sex
was uncertain. SBB005 and SBB006 were females, while SBB004
and SBB009 were males. SBB009, an adolescent 11 to 12 years
old, was buried with a child-sized bow similar to the bow buried
with the adult male SBB001 and the older adolescent SBB011, cor-
roborating accounts of males in Xiongnu society learning to wield
bows at a young age (68), likely by a young male’s early teens as in
the case of SBB009, but likely not in very early childhood, as evi-
denced by the absence of such equipment in the grave of SBB004,
a child 4 to 6 years old.
Examining spatial relationships of burials at SBB, we did not find
a significant correlation between spatial proximity and genetic an-
cestry profiles (Fig. 3E). To represent the similarity of the genetic
ancestry profiles of two individuals, we used the Euclidean distance
between two points defined in the space of the top two PCs. We
could not reject the null hypothesis that the spatial proximity
between two burials and genetic distance was unrelated, with a P
value of 0.146 provided by the Mantel test. Nor could we support
a hypothesis that the individuals in the five-grave cluster in SBB
(consisting of SBB001, SBB005, SBB006, and SBB007; SBB011 did
not produce analyzable genome-wide data) were more similar in
their genetic profilesthan the others. To determine this, we replaced
the geographic distance of each individual pair with 1 for within-
cluster pairs and 0 for the others, respectively (Mantel test P
value = 0.3085). However, we did find that the relatives were
placed significantly closer to each other (Mantel test P
value = 0.0025), based on the two pairs of related individuals
buried next to each other: the pair SBB001 and SBB005 and the
pair SBB005 and SBB007. These were the only genetically related
individuals identified at either SBB or TAK. Although the adult
male SBB001 and the female child SBB005 were second-degree rel-
atives, they were genetically dissimilar to one another, with the male
having a much higher level of western Eurasian ancestry (Chand-
man_IA). SBB005 was also a second-degree relative of SBB007,
the high-status woman buried with the gilded belt clasp and Han
lacquer cup. Both females shared a minor ancestry component
modeled as Han_2000BP. Previous investigations of genome-wide
genetic relatedness among the Xiongnu have identified 10 other
cases of kinship pairs (14). Among these, all pairs were buried
within the same site or at closely neighboring sites, and most
pairs are genetically similar. However, one pair of second-degree
maternally related males at the site of Tamiryn Ulaan Khoshuu
(TUH001 and TUH002) in north-centr al Mongolia likewise
showed a relatively high degree of genetic dissimilarity (14), with
one male having substantially more western Eurasian ancestry
than the other, although the difference was not as great as
between SBB001 and SBB005. Such extended families containing
higher degrees of genetic diversity may have been relatively
common among the Xiongnu, but denser sampling of cemeteries
will be necessary to identify them. Beyond detecting genetic relat-
edness (69, 70), we also examined runs of homozygosity (ROH)
blocks (71). We found that SBB005 had long ROH blocks totaling
55.1 centimorgan (cM), with the longest block extending 40.7 cM
(fig. S6), suggesting that she is the offspring of a pair of second-
degree relatives. Because consanguinity can distort estimates of
genetic relatedness, the degree of genetic relatedness between her
(SBB005) and SBB001 and SBB007 may be slightly overestimated.
Nevertheless, the overall patterns of genetic diversity, heterogeneity,
and genetic relatedness at SBB suggest that some local elite families
were highly genetically diverse, with marriages occurring between
genetically heterogeneous individuals that created complex net-
works of extended kinship.
GeneticdynamicsoftheXiongnuelite
Together, we observe a high degree of genetic heterogeneity and di-
versity at the elite sites of TAK and SBB, with the highest genetic
heterogeneityobserved among the lowest-status individuals. In con-
trast, we find that the highest-status individuals in this study, the
aristocratic and local elite females, tended to be less diverse
(P = 0.011 for Brown-Forsythe test to compare the PC1 variances
of low-status and high-status individuals) with higher levels of
eastern Eurasian ancestry. Eastern Eurasian ancestry is represented
by the higher PC1 values and the mean of PC1 of the high-status
individuals is significantly greater than that of the low-status indi-
viduals (P = 0.032 for one-sided Welch’s t test to test the null hy-
pothesis that PC1 mean of high-status individuals is equal to that
of low-status individuals). This suggests that elite status and
power was disproportionately concentrated among individuals
who traced their ancestry back to the preceding EIA Slab Grave
groups. Three of the six elite females, one low-status female child,
and one low-status male had minor ancestry contributions consis-
tent with Han_2000BP (14, 72), suggesting that interregional con-
nections to groups in Han Dynasty China may have been greater,
and more complex, than previously understood.
Before this study, only one other individual from an elite square
tomb had been analyzed in a genome-wide manner: DA39 from
Tomb 1 at the imperial elite site of Gol Mod2 in central-northMon-
golia (13). This adult male, buried in one of the largest square tomb
complexes excavated to date, surrounded by at least 27 satellite
burials, and containing rare exotic items such as Roman glass
bowls, was likely a chanyu, or ruler of the empire (73, 74). Like
the elite women at the western frontier, he also had very high
eastern Eurasian ancestry (deriving 39.3 and 51.9% from Slab-
Grave1 and Han_2000BP, respectively, and the rest from Chandma-
n_IA; data file S2C) and was genetically similar to TAK002 in tomb
THL-64 (Fig. 3B). Such patterns of ancestry, stratified by indicators
of status and power, provide clues as to the nature of the political
formation of the Xiongnu and the relative power dynamics of the
empire’s diverse political actors.
Lee et al., Sci. Adv.9,eadf3904(2023) 14April2023 8of14
SCIENCE ADV ANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on August 26, 2026

===PAGE 9===
Last, the concentration of wealth and elite status specifically
among women in these frontier communities warrants further at-
tention. It has been previously noted that Xiongnu-era female
graves in peripheral regions of the empire tend to be especially
wealthy and high status (75, 76). The elite women’s graves at TAK
and SBB conform to fashions befitting higher-ranking persons in
Xiongnu society. The association between the social rank and bio-
logical sex is statistically significant with P value of 0.002 for the
Fisher ’s exact test. The only females not elaborately buried in
wood-plank coffins were children. The prominent status of
Xiongnu women at TAK and SBB speaks to the powerful role of
women in the empire and their likely prominent place in strategies
for expansion and the integration of new realms and territories.
DISCUSSION
In this genome-wide archaeogenetic study, we find high genetic het-
erogeneity among late Xiongnu-era individuals at two cemeteries
located along the far western frontier of the Xiongnu empire and
describe patterns of genetic diversity related to social status.
Overall, we find that genetic heterogeneity is highest among
lower-status individuals. In particular, the satellite graves surround-
ing the elite square tombs at TAK show extreme levels of genetic
heterogeneity, suggesting that these individuals, who were likely
low-ranking retainers, were drawn from diverse parts of the
empire. In contrast, the highest-status individuals at the two sites
tended to have lower genetic diversity and a high proportion of an-
cestry deriving from EIA Slab Grave groups, suggesting that these
groups may have disproportionately contributed to the ruling elite
during the formation of the Xiongnu empire. Nevertheless, the aris-
tocratic elite mortuary pattern at the frontier cemetery of TAK con-
trasts with that of the much larger square tomb cemeteries located
within the core of the empire, where burial complexes like Gol Mod
2 Tomb 1 are flanked by satellite burials of elite circular graves (10),
whose mortuary treatment and grave inventories indicate that they
were of much higher social rank than the retainersat TAK. Thus, the
extreme genetic heterogeneity within satellite graves observed at
TAK may be more typical of frontier contexts, but further research
at core imperial cemeteries is needed to understand these dynamics.
Despite the general trends associating genetic diversity and
status, we also identified Xiongnu families at the sites of SBB and
TUH whose extended kin networks were genetically diverse, pro-
viding a snapshot of the admixture processes that shaped the
Xiongnu genetic diversity. Of note, such unions were not limited
to the early formative phase of the Xiongnu empire but continued
throughout the late Xiongnu period. In contrast to some previous
investigations of Xiongnu cemeteries (12, 16), we did not identify
close (first-degree) relatives within the cemeteries nor did we
observe a strong correlation between grave location and similarity
in genetic profiles; however, we did observe two cases of second-
degree relatives buried in close proximity to one another at the
SBB site. Future studies with more comprehensive sampling of
entire cemeteries are necessary to resolve how and where close
kin were buried within different mortuary contexts.
Last, our findings also confirm that the highest-status individu-
als in this study were females, supporting previous observationsthat
Xiongnu women played an especially prominent role in the expan-
sion and integration of new territories along the empire’s frontier.
Building on this work, future research focusing on dense sampling
and genome-wide archaeogenetic analysis at large, extensively exca-
vated Xiongnu cemeteries across the empire promises to reveal in
high resolution the complex structure of Xiongnu society from its
core to its vast frontier.
MATERIALSANDMETHODS
Archaeologicalsitesandsampledescription
TAK
This cemetery lies along the foothills of the Southern Altai and is a
mixture of 34 exclusive square tombs of the Xiongnu aristocracy, 35
small satellite burials flanking these tombs, and 60 large standard
elite graves (47.403058N, 92.104914E; 1470-m elevation). Two
large square tombs were excavated in the 1990s (19), and one of
those individuals was later sampled for genetic analysis (TAK001)
(14). In 2007, the two satellite burials beside that tomb, three satel-
lite burials flanking another tomb, and the entire complex of a third
tomb with two satellite burials were excavated, to investigate the dif-
ferences between aristocratic tombs in the frontier and the core
realms and to study the relationships between individuals in
square tombs and those who accompanied them in death in the sat-
ellite burials (17). While the contents and forms of the square tombs
correspond as well to those of royal square tombs in central Mon-
golia, the satellite burials are far smallerand more meager than stan-
dard Xiongnu graves and many show burial traditions more akin to
pre-Xiongnu local practices than to Xiongnu customs (10). Further
information about the TAK burials are provided in data file S1A.
SBB
This small cemetery of 33 standard local elite graves (circular
graves) is located at the far western edge of the Xiongnu realms in
the high mountain passes of the Southern Altai (46.921828N,
91.934913E; 2390-m elevation). Fifteen graves were excavated at
the site, sampling across the burial ground but also giving special
attention to the main cluster, which included males and females
as well as a full spectrum of older and younger adults, and children
and infant subadults (20). The manner of burial goods and funerary
practices of these graves correspond to Xiongnu traditions in the
core imperial realms, demonstrating a community of local elites
who participated fully in the imperial network (10). Further infor-
mation about the SBB burials are provided in data file S1A.
Sampleprovenance
Excavations were conducted in 2007, 2008, and 2010 undera permit
of the Mongol-American Khovd Archaeology Project granted
through the National Museum of Mongolia. The principal investi-
gators of the project were J. Bayarsaikhan (National Museum of
Mongolia) and B. K. Miller (at that time, University of Pennsylva-
nia). The burial sites from which all human remains were excavated
are (i) Takhiltyn-Khotgor (Mankhan sum, Khovd aimag, Mongolia)
and (i) Shombuuzyn-Belchir (Mönkhkhairkhan sum, Khovd
aimag, Mongolia). The time period of the burial sites was validated
by radiocarbon dating (18). The risk of damage or looting of the
sites is minimal (3, on scale of 1 to 10). Bone samples used for
the genetic analysis were exported from Mongolia to Germany
(Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History, Jena)
for analyses under contract no. 2015.03.30, reference no. MN DE
7 14583. All human remains are housed at the National Museum
of Mongolia in Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia.
Lee et al., Sci. Adv.9,eadf3904(2023) 14April2023 9of14
SCIENCE ADV ANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on August 26, 2026

===PAGE 10===
SamplingforancientDNArecoveryandsequencing
We extracted genomic DNA and prepared single-stranded DNA se-
quencing library for 8 individuals from TAK site and 11 individuals
from SBB site. For this, we followed published protocols (77, 78) in a
dedicated ancient clean room facility at the Max Planck Institute for
the Science of Human History. During the library preparation, we
added unique 8-mer index sequences at both P5 and P7 Illumina
adapters for double indexing. Details of the laboratory protocols
are available online (https://protocols.io/view/a-z-of-ancient-dna-
protocols-for-shotgun-illumina-36wgq529xgk5/v2). We then per-
formed shallow shotgun sequencing to screen 19 individuals and
found that 17 individuals are sufficiently preserved with ≥0.1%
reads mapped on hs37d5, the human reference genome GRCh37
with decoy sequences. To enrich these libraries for 1,233,013
nuclear SNPs (1240K), we used oligonucleotide probes targeting
1240K sites and performed in-solution DNA capture (22). We
then generated single-end 76–base pair (bp) sequences on the Illu-
mina HiSeq 4000 platform. For the 6 of 19 individuals with suffi-
ciently high preservation (>30% human DNA), we produced in-
depth whole-genome shotgun sequencing data at the Bauer Core
Facility of Harvard University. For these shotgun libraries, we gen-
erated paired-end 100-bp sequences on Illumina NovaSeq 6000
platform. We demultiplexed the output sequences allowing at
most one mismatch in each index. The sequencing scheme of
each individual is described in data file S1F.
Quantificationandstatisticalanalysis
DNA sequence data processing
Wetrimmed the Illuminaadapter sequences at the ends of each read
and discarded reads shorter than 35 bp using AdapterRemoval
v2.3.0 (79). Then, we mapped the retained reads to hs37d5 with
the aln and samse modules in the Burrows-Wheeler Aligner
program v0.7.17 with noncustom options for disabling seeding
(“-l 9999”) and allowing additional mismatches (“-n 0.01”) (80).
We removed polymerase chain reaction duplicates with dedup
v0.12.5 (81) and then removed reads with the Phred-scaled
mapping quality score lower than 30 using SAMtools v1.9 (82).
We report the summary statistics based on the 1240K sites in data
file S1A.
Data quality control
Before population genetic analysis, we assessed the authenticity of
our ancient DNA sequence data using multiple measures. We first
tabulated the postmortem damage pattern of each library using
mapDamage v2.0.9 (83) and checked whether each library showed
increased C-to-T misincorporation at both ends of the reads as ex-
pected for single-stranded libraries (datafile S1A). We then estimat-
ed the mitochondrial contamination rate of all individuals using
schmutzi v1.5.4 (23). Schmutzi distinguishes between endogenous
and contaminant reads based on the deamination frequencyand the
read lengths. For males, we additionally estimated the nuclear con-
tamination rate using the contamination module of the ANGSD
v0.929 program based on the X chromosome data (24). In brief,
the method compares mismatch rates between multiple reads of
known polymorphic sites on X chromosomes and that of flanking
monomorphic sites, interpreting higher mismatch rate of polymor-
phic sites as evidence of contamination because males have onlyone
X chromosome and thus reads from polymorphic sites should not
show any more mismatches than those from monomorphic ones.
Genotyping and dataset compilation
For genotype calling, we randomly chose one high-quality base
(Phred-scaled base quality score 30 or higher) from one high-
quality read per each position and considered the chosen base as
a homozygous genotype for that position (“pseudo-haploid geno-
type”), using the pileupCaller v1.4.0.5 program with the “random-
Haploid” option (https://github.com/stschiff/sequenceTools; v1.5.2
last accessed at 25 April 2022). Because our libraries were single-
stranded, we used the “singleStrandMode” option to use only neg-
ative strand reads to genotype C/T SNPs and only positive strand
reads to genotype G/A SNPs. We then merged genotyped data of
17 new individuals with genotype data of previously published
worldwide present-day (25, 29, 59–63) and ancient (13–15, 22,
25–58) individuals, typed on the two sets of SNPs: the Affymetrix
Axiom Genome-Wide Human Origins 1 array (“HumanOrigins”)
(59) and a set of 1,233,013 SNPs including the HumanOrigins
SNPs (1240K) (data file S1B).
Sex determination and uniparental haplogroup assignment
To determine the genetic sex of each individual, we estimated the
ratio of the sequence coverage of sex chromosomes to that of auto-
somes. It isexpected that the ratio of X to autosomalcoverage is~0.5
for males and ~1 for females and the ratio of Y to autosomal cov-
erage is ~0.5 for males and ~0 for females. The individuals with the
ratio of Y to autosomal coverage >0.3 are reported as a male and
individuals with the ratio <0.1 are reported as a female (data file
S1A). We also retrieved uniparental haplogroups of each individual.
First, we generated mitochondrial consensus sequences of quality ≧
10, using the log2fasta program in the Schmutzi package (23). Each
sequence is assigned into the specific haplogroup using HaploGrep
v2.1.20 (data file S1A) (84). For the 10 males, we called 13,508 Y
chromosome SNPs from the ISOGG database with pileupCaller
v1.4.0.5 option “majorityCall” and assigned Y-chromosomal hap-
logroup using a modified version of the yHaplo program (85)
(https://github.com/ale xhbnr/yhaplo; version 2016.01.08. last ac-
cessed at 28 April 2022) (data file S1A).
Estimation of genetic relatedness
We calculated the pairwise mismatch rate (pmr) of pseudo-haploid
genotypes between every pairof individuals by dividing the number
of sites genotyped differently from one another by the number of
sites covered by both individuals (70). The low pmr value suggests
close genetic relatedness between individuals, and we used pmr
between unrelated individuals as the baseline to estimate the
kinship coefficient. We observed two pairs of genetic relatives
with sufficient coverage, SBB001 and SBB005 and SBB005 and
SBB007 (data file S1E). SBB005 is inferred to be inbred between
second-degree relatives by hapROH (fig. S6) (71). HapROH identi-
fies ROH, regions that lack heterozygous genotypes and estimates
the degree of inbreeding. Long ROH blocks suggest that parents
of the individual are genetically related to each other.
Populationgeneticanalysis
Analysis of population structure and relationships
We performed PCA on the merged Human Origins dataset using
the smartpca v16000 program in the Eigensoft v7.2.1 package
(Fig. 3 and fig. S3) (66). With the option “lsqproject: YES,” we
first calculated eigenvectors with 2077 present-day Eurasian indi-
viduals and projected the ancient individuals on the calculated ei-
genvectors (25). PC1 separates the eastern and western Eurasians
and we used PC1 to measure the genetic diversity of the Xiongnu
Lee et al., Sci. Adv.9,eadf3904(2023) 14April2023 10of14
SCIENCE ADV ANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on August 26, 2026

===PAGE 11===
communities (Fig. 4). We also calculated f4 statistics with option
“f4mode: YES” to further understand the genetic profiles of
ancient individuals. We used qpDstat v970 from admixtools v7.0
(59) on the 1240K dataset to maximize SNP coverage of ancient in-
dividuals. SEs were calculated with 5 cM block jackknifing as imple-
mented in the admixtools package (fig. S4).
Admixture modeling using qpAdm
We modeled ancient individuals as a mixture of source populations
and estimated ancestry proportions using the qpWave v1200 and
the qpAdm v1201 programs in the admixtools v7.0 package (25).
We used the 1240K dataset for these analyses and used the following
set of 10 populations as the base outgroup set (“right populations”):
central African rainforest hunter-gatherer (Mbuti, n = 5), Anda-
manese islander (Onge, n = 2), Taiwanese Aborigine (Ami,
n = 2), Central American (Mixe, n = 3), Epipaleolithic Levantine
(Natufian, n = 6) (25), Neolithic Iranians from the Ganj Dareh ar-
chaeological site (Iran_N, n = 8) (25, 26), Epipaleolithic European
hunter-gatherer (Villabruna, n = 1) (33), Anatolian Neolithic from
the Barcin site (Anatolia_N, n = 23) (22), Eneolithic hunter-gather-
er from northern Kazakhstan (Botai_pub, n = 3) (31), and Neolithic
individuals from southern Russia (West_Siberia_N, n = 3) (26). For
Xiongnu individuals, we added Khovsgol_LBA (n = 14) (69) to the
base outgroup set to increase the resolution and to better distin-
guish the eastern ancestries. When there are multiple combinations
of source populationsthat fit the given target population, we tried to
increase the resolution by taking the “rotating” approach (86), in
which we added source populations in one model to the right pop-
ulations when testing a competing source combination.
Statistical tests for sociopolitical and spatiotemporal
distribution of the genetic profiles
We performed several tests using the program R v4.1.2 (87) to stat-
istically compare the genetic profiles or prove the association
between genetic profiles and other factors. To represent the
genetic profiles, we used PC values calculated by PCA of present-
day Eurasian individuals. We first grouped individuals by the ar-
chaeological site or by the social status. We tested the equality of
the PC1 mean and variances of the groups using Welch’s t test
and Brown-Forsythe test, respectively, to compare the genetic an-
cestry and diversity among groups. For Welch’s t test, we used the
function t.test of R package stats (v4.1.2; the package “stats” is part of
R) and for the Brown-Forsythe test, we used the function leveneTest
of R package car (v3.1.0). We also tested the association between the
similarity of the genetic profiles and the spatial proximity of the
burials. We performed the Mantel test on matrices of physical dis-
tances and the Euclidean distances between two points on the PC
plane defined by the top two PCs, using the function mantel.rtest of
R package ade4 (v1.7.19). To statistically test the association
between sex and the social status and explain the sex bias in social
status, we performed the Fisher ’s exact test using the fisher.test
function of R package stats (v4.1.2; the package stats is part of R).
SupplementaryMaterials
ThisPDFfileincludes:
Figs.S1toS6
LegendsfordataS1andS2
OtherSupplementaryMaterialforthis
manuscriptincludesthefollowing:
DataS1andS2
View/requestaprotocolforthispaperfrom Bio-protocol.
REFERENCESANDNOTES
1. D.Sinor, The Cambridge Historyof Early Inner Asia(CambridgeUniv.Press,1990).
2. U.Brosseder,B.K.Miller,Eds.,XiongnuArchaeology:MultidisciplinaryPerspectivesoftheFirst
Steppe Empire in Inner Asia(BonnUniv.Press,2011).
3. N.DiCosmo,AncientChinaandItsEnemies:TheRiseofNomadicPowerinEastAsianHistory
(AncientChina&itsEnemies,CambridgeUniv.Press,2002).
4. A.F.P.Hulsewé,M.Loewe,G.Ban,ChinainCentralAsia:TheEarlyStage,125B.C.-A.D.23:An
Annotated Translation of Chapters 61 and 96 of the Historyof the Former Han Dynasty(E.J.
Brill,1979).
5. B.K.Miller, Xiongnu “kings”andthepoliticalorderofthesteppeempire.J.Econ.Soc.Hist.
Orient 57, 1–43(2014).
6. S.Qian,Shiji(ZhonghuaShuju,1959),vol.10,pp.2900.
7. W.Honeychurch, Inner Asia and the Spatial Politics of Empire: Archaeology, Mobility,and
Culture Contact(Springer,2014).
8. T.Törbat, Khunnugiin Jiriin Irgediin Bulsh(MongolianStateEducationalUniv.Press,2004).
9. G.Eregzen,Khünnübulshnykhelber,bütetsbaontsagiinkhamaaral[Structure,typology
andchronologyofXiongnugraves],in Mongolchuudyn Garal, Ugsaa-Soyolyn Khögjil,
A.O.a.T.Törbat,Ed.(InstituteofArchaeology,MAS,2020),pp.121–142.
10. B.K.Miller,PermutationsofperipheriesintheXiongnuempire,in Xiongnu archaeology –
Multidisciplinary Perspectives of the FirstSteppe Empire in Central Asia,U.Brosseder,
B.K.Miller,Eds.(BonnContributionstoAsianArchaeology,BonnUniv.Press,2011),
pp.559–578.
11. U.Brosseder,Xiongnuterracetombsandtheirinterpretationaseliteburials,in Current
Archaeological Research in Mongolia,H.P.JanBemmann,E.Pohl,D.Tseveendorzh,Eds.
(BonnContributionstoAsianArchaeology,BonnUniv.Press,2009),pp.247–280.
12. C.Keyser-Tracqui,E.Crubezy,B.Ludes, NuclearandmitochondrialDNAanalysisofa2,000-
year-oldnecropolisintheEgyinGolValleyofMongolia. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 73,
247–260(2003).
13. P.deBarrosDamgaard,N.Marchi,S.Rasmussen,M.Peyrot,G.Renaud,T.Korneliussen,
J.V.Moreno-Mayar,M.W.Pedersen,A.Goldberg,E.Usmanova,N.Baimukhanov,V.Loman,
L.Hedeager,A.G.Pedersen,K.Nielsen,G.Afanasiev,K.Akmatov,A.Aldashev,A.Alpaslan,
G.Baimbetov,V.I.Bazaliiskii,A.Beisenov,B.Boldbaatar,B.Boldgiv,C.Dorzhu,S.Ellingvag,
D.Erdenebaatar,R.Dajani,E.Dmitriev,V.Evdokimov,K.M.Frei,A.Gromov,A.Goryachev,
H.Hakonarson,T.Hegay,Z.Khachatryan,R.Khaskhanov,E.Kitov,A.Kolbina,T.Kubatbek,
A.Kukushkin,I.Kukushkin,N.Lau,A.Margaryan,I.Merkyte,I.V.Mertz,V.K.Mertz,
E.Mijiddorj,V.Moiyesev,G.Mukhtarova,B.Nurmukhanbetov,Z.Orozbekova,
I.Panyushkina,K.Pieta,V.Smrčka,I.Shevnina,A.Logvin,K.-G.Sjögren,T.Štolcová,
A.M.Taravella,K.Tashbaeva,A.Tkachev,T.Tulegenov,D.Voyakin,L.Yepiskoposyan,
S.Undrakhbold,V.Varfolomeev,A.Weber,M.A.WilsonSayres,N.Kradin,M.E.Allentoft,
L.Orlando,R.Nielsen,M.Sikora,E.Heyer,K.Kristiansen,E.Willerslev, 137ancienthuman
genomesfromacrosstheEurasiansteppes. Nature 557, 369–374(2018).
14. C.Jeong,K.Wang,S.Wilkin,W.T.T.Taylor,B.K.Miller,J.H.Bemmann,R.Stahl,C.Chiovelli,
F.Knolle,S.Ulziibayar,D.Khatanbaatar,D.Erdenebaatar,U.Erdenebat,A.Ochir,
G.Ankhsanaa,C.Vanchigdash,B.Ochir,C.Munkhbayar,D.Tumen,A.Kovalev, Adynamic
6,000-yeargenetichistoryofEurasia’sEasternSteppe. Cell 183, 890–904.e29(2020).
15. C.C.Wang,H.Y.Yeh,A.N.Popov,H.Q.Zhang,H.Matsumura,K.Sirak,O.Cheronet,
A.Kovalev,N.Rohland,A.M.Kim,S.Mallick,R.Bernardos,D.Tumen,J.Zhao,Y.-C.Liu,J.-
Y.Liu,M.Mah,K.Wang,Z.Zhang,N.Adamski,N.Broomandkhoshbacht,K.Callan,
F.Candilio,K.S.D.Carlson,B.J.Culleton,L.Eccles,S.Freilich,D.Keating,A.M.Lawson,
K.Mandl,M.Michel,J.Oppenheimer,K.T.Özdoğan,K.Stewardson,S.Wen,S.Yan,
F.Zalzala,R.Chuang,C.-J.Huang,H.Looh,C.-C.Shiung,Y.G.Nikitin,A.V.Tabarev,
A.A.Tishkin,S.Lin,Z.-Y.Sun,X.-M.Wu,T.-L.Yang,X.Hu,L.Chen,H.Du,J.Bayarsaikhan,
E.Mijiddorj,D.Erdenebaatar,T.-O.Iderkhangai,E.Myagmar,H.Kanzawa-Kiriyama,
M.Nishino,K.-i.Shinoda,O.A.Shubina,J.Guo,W.Cai,Q.Deng,L.Kang,D.Li,D.Li,R.Lin,
Nini,R.Shrestha,L.-X.Wang,L.Wei,G.Xie,H.Yao,M.Zhang,G.He,X.Yang,R.Hu,
M.Robbeets,S.Schiffels,D.J.Kennett,L.Jin,H.Li,J.Krause,R.Pinhasi,D.Reich, Genomic
insightsintotheformationofhumanpopulationsinEastAsia. Nature 591,
413–419(2021).
16. C.Keyser,V.Zvénigorosky,A.Gonzalez,J.-L.Fausser,F.Jagorel,P.Gérard,T.Tsagaan,
S.Duchesne,E.Crubézy,B.Ludes, Geneticevidencesuggestsasenseoffamily,parityand
conquestintheXiongnuIronAgenomadsofMongolia.Hum.Genet.140, 349–359(2021).
17. B.K.Miller,Z.Baiarsaikhan,T.Egiimaa,P.B.Konovalov,J.Logan,EliteXiongnuburialsatthe
periphery:TombcomplexesatTakhiltynKhotgor,MongolianAltai,in Current Archaeo-
logical Research in Mongolia,H.P.JanBemmann,ErnstPohl,D.Tseveendorzh,Eds.(Bonn
ContributionstoAsianArchaeology,BonnUniv.Press,2009),pp.301–314.
Lee et al., Sci. Adv.9,eadf3904(2023) 14April2023 11of14
SCIENCE ADV ANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on August 26, 2026

===PAGE 12===
18. U.Brosseder,J.Bayarsaikhan,B.K.Miller,T.Odbaatar, SevenradiocarbondatesforXiongnu
burialsinwesternandcentralMongolia. Nüüdelchdiin öv sudlal 11, 234–240(2011).
19. D.Navaan,Khünnügiinövsoyol:arkheologiinsudalgaanymaterial[XiongnuCulture:Studies
of Archaeological Material](MongolianAcademyofSciences,1999).
20. B.K.Miller,J.Bayarsaikhan,T.Egiimaa,P.B.Konovalov,E.Johanneson,M.Machicek,
J.Logan,C.Neily, ShombuuzynBelchirdekhKhünnügiindursgal[Xiongnumonumentsof
ShombuuzynBelchir]. Nüüdelchdiin öv sudlal 11, 156–183(2011).
21. J.Gantulga,SagsaiKhelberiinBulsh(SagsaiTypeGraves),inMongolchuudynGaral,Ugsaa-
Soyolyn Khögjil,T.T.A.Ochir,Ed.(InstituteofArchaeology,MAS,2020),pp.9–22.
22. I.Mathieson,I.Lazaridis,N.Rohland,S.Mallick,N.Patterson,S.A.Roodenberg,E.Harney,
K.Stewardson,D.Fernandes,M.Novak,K.Sirak,C.Gamba,E.R.Jones,B.Llamas,
S.Dryomov,J.Pickrell,J.L.Arsuaga,J.M.B.deCastro,E.Carbonell,F.Gerritsen,A.Khokhlov,
P.Kuznetsov,M.Lozano,H.Meller,O.Mochalov,V.Moiseyev,M.A.RojoGuerra,
J.Roodenberg,J.M.Vergès,J.Krause,A.Cooper,K.W.Alt,D.Brown,D.Anthony,C.Lalueza-
Fox,W.Haak,R.Pinhasi,D.Reich, Genome-widepatternsofselectionin230ancient
Eurasians. Nature 528, 499–503(2015).
23. G.Renaud,V.Slon,A.T.Duggan,J.Kelso, Schmutzi:Estimationofcontaminationand
endogenousmitochondrialconsensuscallingforancientDNA. Genome Biol. 16,
224(2015).
24. T.S.Korneliussen,A.Albrechtsen,R.Nielsen, ANGSD:Analysisofnextgenerationse-
quencingdata. BMC Bioinformatics 15, 356(2014).
25. I.Lazaridis,D.Nadel,G.Rollefson,D.C.Merrett,N.Rohland,S.Mallick,D.Fernandes,
M.Novak,B.Gamarra,K.Sirak,S.Connell,K.Stewardson,E.Harney,Q.Fu,G.Gonzalez-
Fortes,E.R.Jones,S.A.Roodenberg,G.Lengyel,F.Bocquentin,B.Gasparian,J.M.Monge,
M.Gregg,V.Eshed,A.-S.Mizrahi,C.Meiklejohn,F.Gerritsen,L.Bejenaru,M.Blüher,
A.Campbell,G.Cavalleri,D.Comas,P.Froguel,E.Gilbert,S.M.Kerr,P.Kovacs,J.Krause,
D.M.Gettigan,M.Merrigan,D.A.Merriwether,S.O’Reilly,M.B.Richards,O.Semino,
M.Shamoon-Pour,G.Stefanescu,M.Stumvoll,A.Tönjes,A.Torroni,J.F.Wilson,L.Yengo,
N.A.Hovhannisyan,N.Patterson,R.Pinhasi,D.Reich, Genomicinsightsintotheoriginof
farmingintheancientNearEast. Nature 536, 419–424(2016).
26. V.M.Narasimhan,N.Patterson,P.Moorjani,N.Rohland,R.Bernardos,S.Mallick,I.Lazaridis,
N.Nakatsuka,I.Olalde,M.Lipson,A.M.Kim,L.M.Olivieri,A.Coppa,M.Vidale,J.Mallory,
V.Moiseyev,E.Kitov,J.Monge,N.Adamski,N.Alex,N.Broomandkhoshbacht,F.Candilio,
K.Callan,O.Cheronet,B.J.Culleton,M.Ferry,D.Fernandes,B.Gamarra,D.Gaudio,
M.Hajdinjak,É.Harney,T.K.Harper,D.Keating,A.M.Lawson,M.Mah,K.Mandl,M.Michel,
M.Novak,J.Oppenheimer,N.Rai,K.Sirak,V.Slon,K.Stewardson,F.Zalzala,Z.Zhang,
G.Akhatov,A.N.Bagashev,A.Bagnera,B.Baitanayev,J.Bendezu-Sarmiento,
A.A.Bissembaev,G.L.Bonora,T.T.Chargynov,T.Chikisheva,P.K.Dashovskiy,
A.Derevianko,M.Dobeš,K.Douka,N.Dubova,M.N.Duisengali,D.Enshin,A.Epimakhov,
S.Freilich,A.V.Fribus,D.Fuller,A.Goryachev,A.Gromov,S.P.Grushin,B.Hanks,M.Judd,
E.Kazizov,A.Khokhlov,A.P.Krygin,E.Kupriyanova,P.Kuznetsov,D.Luiselli,F.Maksudov,
A.M.Mamedov,T.B.Mamirov,C.Meiklejohn,D.C.Merrett,R.Micheli,O.Mochalov,
S.Mustafokulov,A.Nayak,D.Pettener,R.Potts,D.Razhev,M.Rykun,S.Sarno,
T.M.Savenkova,K.Sikhymbaeva,S.M.Slepchenko,O.A.Soltobaev,N.Stepanova,
S.Svyatko,K.Tabaldiev,M.Teschler-Nicola,A.A.Tishkin,V.V.Tkachev,S.Vasilyev,
P.Velemínský,D.Voyakin,A.Yermolayeva,M.Zahir,V.S.Zubkov,A.Zubova,V.S.Shinde,
C.Lalueza-Fox,M.Meyer,D.Anthony,N.Boivin,K.Thangaraj,D.J.Kennett,M.Frachetti,
R.Pinhasi,D.Reich, TheformationofhumanpopulationsinSouthandCentralAsia.Science
365, eaat7487(2019).
27. C.Ning,T.Li,K.Wang,F.Zhang,T.Li,X.Wu,S.Gao,Q.Zhang,H.Zhang,M.J.Hudson,
G.Dong,S.Wu,Y.Fang,C.Liu,C.Feng,W.Li,T.Han,R.Li,J.Wei,Y.Zhu,Y.Zhou,C.-C.Wang,
S.Fan,Z.Xiong,Z.Sun,M.Ye,L.Sun,X.Wu,F.Liang,Y.Cao,X.Wei,H.Zhu,H.Zhou,
J.Krause,M.Robbeets,C.Jeong,Y.Cui, AncientgenomesfromnorthernChinasuggest
linksbetweensubsistencechangesandhumanmigration.Nat.Commun.11, 2700(2020).
28. H.Yu,M.A.Spyrou,M.Karapetian,S.Shnaider,R.Radzevičiūtė,K.Nägele,G.U.Neumann,
S.Penske,J.Zech,M.Lucas,P.LeRoux,P.Roberts,G.Pavlenok,A.Buzhilova,C.Posth,
C.Jeong,J.Krause, PaleolithictoBronzeAgeSiberiansrevealconnectionswithfirst
AmericansandacrossEurasia. Cell 181, 1232–1245.e20(2020).
29. I.Lazaridis,N.Patterson,A.Mittnik,G.Renaud,S.Mallick,K.Kirsanow,P.H.Sudmant,
J.G.Schraiber,S.Castellano,M.Lipson,B.Berger,C.Economou,R.Bollongino,Q.Fu,
K.I.Bos,S.Nordenfelt,H.Li,C.deFilippo,K.Prüfer,S.Sawyer,C.Posth,W.Haak,F.Hallgren,
E.Fornander,N.Rohland,D.Delsate,M.Francken,J.-M.Guinet,J.Wahl,G.Ayodo,
H.A.Babiker,G.Bailliet,E.Balanovska,O.Balanovsky,R.Barrantes,G.Bedoya,H.Ben-Ami,
J.Bene,F.Berrada,C.M.Bravi,F.Brisighelli,G.B.J.Busby,F.Cali,M.Churnosov,D.E.C.Cole,
D.Corach,L.Damba,G.vanDriem,S.Dryomov,J.-M.Dugoujon,S.A.Fedorova,
I.G.Romero,M.Gubina,M.Hammer,B.M.Henn,T.Hervig,U.Hodoglugil,A.R.Jha,
S.Karachanak-Yankova,R.Khusainova,E.Khusnutdinova,R.Kittles,T.Kivisild,W.Klitz,
V.Kučinskas,A.Kushniarevich,L.Laredj,S.Litvinov,T.Loukidis,R.W.Mahley,B.Melegh,
E.Metspalu,J.Molina,J.Mountain,K.Näkkäläjärvi,D.Nesheva,T.Nyambo,L.Osipova,
J.Parik,F.Platonov,O.Posukh,V.Romano,F.Rothhammer,I.Rudan,R.Ruizbakiev,
H.Sahakyan,A.Sajantila,A.Salas,E.B.Starikovskaya,A.Tarekegn,D.Toncheva,
S.Turdikulova,I.Uktveryte,O.Utevska,R.Vasquez,M.Villena,M.Voevoda,C.A.Winkler,
L.Yepiskoposyan,P.Zalloua,T.Zemunik,A.Cooper,C.Capelli,M.G.Thomas,A.Ruiz-
Linares,S.A.Tishkoff,L.Singh,K.Thangaraj,R.Villems,D.Comas,R.Sukernik,M.Metspalu,
M.Meyer,E.E.Eichler,J.Burger,M.Slatkin,S.Pääbo,J.Kelso,D.Reich,J.Krause, Ancient
humangenomessuggestthreeancestralpopulationsforpresent-dayEuropeans. Nature
513, 409–413(2014).
30. M.E.Allentoft,M.Sikora,K.-G.Sjögren,S.Rasmussen,M.Rasmussen,J.Stenderup,
P.B.Damgaard,H.Schroeder,T.Ahlström,L.Vinner,A.-S.Malaspinas,A.Margaryan,
T.Higham,D.Chivall,N.Lynnerup,L.Harvig,J.Baron,P.D.Casa,P.Dąbrowski,P.R.Duffy,
A.V.Ebel,A.Epimakhov,K.Frei,M.Furmanek,T.Gralak,A.Gromov,S.Gronkiewicz,
G.Grupe,T.Hajdu,R.Jarysz,V.Khartanovich,A.Khokhlov,V.Kiss,J.Kolář,A.Kriiska,I.Lasak,
C.Longhi,G.M.Glynn,A.Merkevicius,I.Merkyte,M.Metspalu,R.Mkrtchyan,V.Moiseyev,
L.Paja,G.Pálfi,D.Pokutta,Ł.Pospieszny,T.D.Price,L.Saag,M.Sablin,N.Shishlina,
V.Smrčka,V.I.Soenov,V.Szeverényi,G.Tóth,S.V.Trifanova,L.Varul,M.Vicze,
L.Yepiskoposyan,V.Zhitenev,L.Orlando,T.Sicheritz-Pontén,S.Brunak,R.Nielsen,
K.Kristiansen,E.Willerslev, PopulationgenomicsofbronzeageEurasia. Nature 522,
167–172(2015).
31. P.deBarrosDamgaard,R.Martiniano,J.Kamm,J.V.Moreno-Mayar,G.Kroonen,M.Peyrot,
G.Barjamovic,S.Rasmussen,C.Zacho,N.Baimukhanov,V.Zaibert,V.Merz,A.Biddanda,
I.Merz,V.Loman,V.Evdokimov,E.Usmanova,B.Hemphill,A.Seguin-Orlando,F.E.Yediay,
I.Ullah,K.-G.Sjögren,K.H.Iversen,J.Choin,C.delaFuente,M.Ilardo,H.Schroeder,
V.Moiseyev,A.Gromov,A.Polyakov,S.Omura,S.Y.Senyurt,H.Ahmad,C.M.Kenzie,
A.Margaryan,A.Hameed,A.Samad,N.Gul,M.H.Khokhar,O.I.Goriunova,V.I.Bazaliiskii,
J.Novembre,A.W.Weber,L.Orlando,M.E.Allentoft,R.Nielsen,K.Kristiansen,M.Sikora,
A.K.Outram,R.Durbin,E.Willerslev, ThefirsthorseherdersandtheimpactofearlyBronze
AgesteppeexpansionsintoAsia. Science 360, eaar7711(2018).
32. M.Feldman,E.Fernández-Domínguez,L.Reynolds,D.Baird,J.Pearson,I.Hershkovitz,
H.May,N.Goring-Morris,M.Benz,J.Gresky,R.A.Bianco,A.Fairbairn,G.Mustafaoğlu,
P.W.Stockhammer,C.Posth,W.Haak,C.Jeong,J.Krause, LatePleistocenehumangenome
suggestsalocaloriginforthefirstfarmersofcentralAnatolia. Nat. Commun. 10,
1218(2019).
33. Q.Fu,H.Li,P.Moorjani,F.Jay,S.M.Slepchenko,A.A.Bondarev,P.L.Johnson,A.Aximu-
Petri,K.Prüfer,C.DeFilippo,M.Meyer,N.Zwyns,D.C.Salazar-Garcia,Y.V.Kuzmin,
S.G.Keates,P.A.Kosintsev,D.I.Razhev,M.P.Richards,N.V.Peristov,M.Lachmann,
K.Douka,T.F.G.Higham,M.Slatkin,J.-J.Hublin,D.Reich,J.Kelso,T.B.Viola,S.Pääbo,
Genomesequenceofa45,000-year-oldmodernhumanfromwesternSiberia.Nature 514,
445–449(2014).
34. Q.Fu,C.Posth,M.Hajdinjak,M.Petr,S.Mallick,D.Fernandes,A.Furtwängler,W.Haak,
M.Meyer,A.Mittnik,B.Nickel,A.Peltzer,N.Rohland,V.Slon,S.Talamo,I.Lazaridis,
M.Lipson,I.Mathieson,S.Schiffels,P.Skoglund,A.P.Derevianko,N.Drozdov,V.Slavinsky,
A.Tsybankov,R.G.Cremonesi,F.Mallegni,B.Gély,E.Vacca,M.R.GonzálezMorales,
L.G.Straus,C.Neugebauer-Maresch,M.Teschler-Nicola,S.Constantin,O.T.Moldovan,
S.Benazzi,M.Peresani,D.Coppola,M.Lari,S.Ricci,A.Ronchitelli,F.Valentin,C.Thevenet,
K.Wehrberger,D.Grigorescu,H.Rougier,I.Crevecoeur,D.Flas,P.Semal,M.A.Mannino,
C.Cupillard,H.Bocherens,N.J.Conard,K.Harvati,V.Moiseyev,D.G.Drucker,J.Svoboda,
M.P.Richards,D.Caramelli,R.Pinhasi,J.Kelso,N.Patterson,J.Krause,S.Pääbo,D.Reich,
ThegenetichistoryoficeageEurope. Nature 534, 200–205(2016).
35. É.Harney,H.May,D.Shalem,N.Rohland,S.Mallick,I.Lazaridis,R.Sarig,K.Stewardson,
S.Nordenfelt,N.Patterson,I.Hershkovitz,D.Reich, AncientDNAfromChalcolithicIsrael
revealstheroleofpopulationmixtureinculturaltransformation. Nat. Commun. 9,
3336(2018).
36. C.Jeong,A.T.Ozga,D.B.Witonsky,H.Malmström,H.Edlund,C.A.Hofman,R.W.Hagan,
M.Jakobsson,C.M.Lewis,M.S.Aldenderfer,A.DiRienzo,C.Warinner, Long-termgenetic
stabilityandahigh-altitudeEastAsianoriginforthepeoplesofthehighvalleysofthe
Himalayanarc. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 113, 7485–7490(2016).
37. E.R.Jones,G.Gonzalez-Fortes,S.Connell,V.Siska,A.Eriksson,R.Martiniano,
R.L.McLaughlin,M.GallegoLlorente,L.M.Cassidy,C.Gamba,T.Meshveliani,O.Bar-Yosef,
W.Müller,A.Belfer-Cohen,Z.Matskevich,N.Jakeli,T.F.G.Higham,M.Currat,
D.Lordkipanidze,M.Hofreiter,A.Manica,R.Pinhasi,D.G.Bradley, UpperPalaeolithic
genomesrevealdeeprootsofmodernEurasians. Nat. Commun. 6, 8912(2015).
38. H.Kanzawa-Kiriyama,T.A.Jinam,Y.Kawai,T.Sato,K.Hosomichi,A.Tajima,N.Adachi,
H.Matsumura,K.Kryukov,N.Saitou,K.-I.Shinoda, LateJomonmaleandfemalegenome
sequencesfromtheFunadomarisiteinHokkaido,Japan. Anthropol. Sci. 127,
190415(2019).
39. G.M.Kılınç,A.Omrak,F.Özer,T.Günther,A.M.Büyükkarakaya,E.Bıçakçı,D.Baird,
H.M.Dönertaş,A.Ghalichi,R.Yaka,D.Koptekin,S.C.Açan,P.Parvizi,M.Krzewińska,
E.A.Daskalaki,E.Yüncü,N.D.Dağtaş,A.Fairbairn,J.Pearson,G.Mustafaoğlu,Y.S.Erdal,
Y.G.Çakan,İ.Togan,M.Somel,J.Storå,M.Jakobsson,A.Götherström, Thedemographic
developmentofthefirstfarmersinAnatolia. Curr. Biol. 26, 2659–2666(2016).
Lee et al., Sci. Adv.9,eadf3904(2023) 14April2023 12of14
SCIENCE ADV ANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on August 26, 2026

===PAGE 13===
40. G.M.Kılınç,N.Kashuba,D.Koptekin,N.Bergfeldt,H.M.Dönertaş,R.Rodríguez-Varela,
D.Shergin,G.Ivanov,D.Kichigin,K.Pestereva,D.Volkov,P.Mandryka,A.Kharinskii,
A.Tishkin,E.Ineshin,E.Kovychev,A.Stepanov,L.Dalén,T.Günther,E.Kırdök,M.Jakobsson,
M.Somel,M.Krzewińska,J.Storå,A.Götherström, Humanpopulationdynamicsand
Yersinia pestisinancientnortheastAsia. Sci. Adv. 7, eabc4587(2021).
41. M.Krzewińska,G.M.Kılınç,A.Juras,D.Koptekin,M.Chyleński,A.G.Nikitin,N.Shcherbakov,
I.Shuteleva,T.Leonova,L.Kraeva,F.A.Sungatov,A.N.Sultanova,I.Potekhina,S.Łukasik,
M.Krenz-Niedbała,L.Dalén,V.Sinika,M.Jakobsson,J.Storå,A.Götherström, Ancient
genomessuggesttheeasternPontic-CaspiansteppeasthesourceofwesternIronAge
nomads. Sci. Adv. 4, eaat4457(2018).
42. T.C.Lamnidis,K.Majander,C.Jeong,E.Salmela,A.Wessman,V.Moiseyev,V.Khartanovich,
O.Balanovsky,M.Ongyerth,A.Weihmann,A.Sajantila,J.Kelso,S.Pääbo,P.Onkamo,
W.Haak,J.Krause,S.Schiffels, AncientFennoscandiangenomesrevealoriginandspread
ofSiberianancestryinEurope. Nat. Commun. 9, 5018(2018).
43. I.Lazaridis,A.Mittnik,N.Patterson,S.Mallick,N.Rohland,S.Pfrengle,A.Furtwängler,
A.Peltzer,C.Posth,A.Vasilakis,P.J.P.McGeorge,E.Konsolaki-Yannopoulou,G.Korres,
H.Martlew,M.Michalodimitrakis,M.Özsait,N.Özsait,A.Papathanasiou,M.Richards,
S.A.Roodenberg,Y.Tzedakis,R.Arnott,D.M.Fernandes,J.R.Hughey,D.M.Lotakis,
P.A.Navas,Y.Maniatis,J.A.Stamatoyannopoulos,K.Stewardson,P.Stockhammer,
R.Pinhasi,D.Reich,J.Krause,G.Stamatoyannopoulos, GeneticoriginsoftheMinoansand
Mycenaeans. Nature 548, 214–218(2017).
44. J.Li,Y.Zhang,Y.Zhao,Y.Chen,A.Ochir,H.Zhu,H.Zhou, ThegenomeofanancientRouran
individualrevealsanimportantpaternallineageintheDonghupopulation. Am. J. Phys.
Anthropol. 166, 895–905(2018).
45. M.Lipson,O.Cheronet,S.Mallick,N.Rohland,M.Oxenham,M.Pietrusewsky,T.O.Pryce,
A.Willis,H.Matsumura,H.Buckley,K.Domett,G.H.Nguyen,H.H.Trinh,A.A.Kyaw,T.T.Win,
B.Pradier,N.Broomandkhoshbacht,F.Candilio,P.Changmai,D.Fernandes,M.Ferry,
B.Gamarra,E.Harney,J.Kampuansai,W.Kutanan,M.Michel,M.Novak,J.Oppenheimer,
K.Sirak,K.Stewardson,Z.Zhang,P.Flegontov,R.Pinhasi,D.Reich, Ancientgenomes
documentmultiplewavesofmigrationinSoutheastAsianprehistory. Science 361,
92–95(2018).
46. I.Mathieson,S.Alpaslan-Roodenberg,C.Posth,A.Szécsényi-Nagy,N.Rohland,S.Mallick,
I.Olalde,N.Broomandkhoshbacht,F.Candilio,O.Cheronet,D.Fernandes,M.Ferry,
B.Gamarra,G.G.Fortes,W.Haak,E.Harney,E.Jones,D.Keating,B.Krause-Kyora,
I.Kucukkalipci,M.Michel,A.Mittnik,K.Nägele,M.Novak,J.Oppenheimer,N.Patterson,
S.Pfrengle,K.Sirak,K.Stewardson,S.Vai,S.Alexandrov,K.W.Alt,R.Andreescu,
D.Antonović,A.Ash,N.Atanassova,K.Bacvarov,M.B.Gusztáv,H.Bocherens,M.Bolus,
A.Boroneanţ,Y.Boyadzhiev,A.Budnik,J.Burmaz,S.Chohadzhiev,N.J.Conard,R.Cottiaux,
M.Čuka,C.Cupillard,D.G.Drucker,N.Elenski,M.Francken,B.Galabova,G.Ganetsovski,
B.Gély,T.Hajdu,V.Handzhyiska,K.Harvati,T.Higham,S.Iliev,I.Janković,I.Karavanić,
D.J.Kennett,D.Komšo,A.Kozak,D.Labuda,M.Lari,C.Lazar,M.Leppek,K.Leshtakov,
D.L.Vetro,D.Los,I.Lozanov,M.Malina,F.Martini,K.M.Sweeney,H.Meller,M.Menđušić,
P.Mirea,V.Moiseyev,V.Petrova,T.D.Price,A.Simalcsik,L.Sineo,M.Šlaus,V.Slavchev,
P.Stanev,A.Starović,T.Szeniczey,S.Talamo,M.Teschler-Nicola,C.Thevenet,I.Valchev,
F.Valentin,S.Vasilyev,F.Veljanovska,S.Venelinova,E.Veselovskaya,B.Viola,C.Virag,
J.Zaninović,S.Zäuner,P.W.Stockhammer,G.Catalano,R.Krauß,D.Caramelli,G.Zariņa,
B.Gaydarska,M.Lillie,A.G.Nikitin,I.Potekhina,A.Papathanasiou,D.Borić,C.Bonsall,
J.Krause,R.Pinhasi,D.Reich, ThegenomichistoryofsoutheasternEurope. Nature 555,
197–203(2018).
47. H.McColl,F.Racimo,L.Vinner,F.Demeter,T.Gakuhari,J.V.Moreno-Mayar,G.vanDriem,
U.GramWilken,A.Seguin-Orlando,C.delaFuenteCastro,S.Wasef,R.Shoocongdej,
V.Souksavatdy,T.Sayavongkhamdy,M.M.Saidin,M.E.Allentoft,T.Sato,A.-S.Malaspinas,
F.A.Aghakhanian,T.Korneliussen,A.Prohaska,A.Margaryan,P.deBarrosDamgaard,
S.Kaewsutthi,P.Lertrit,T.M.H.Nguyen,H.-C.Hung,T.M.Tran,H.N.Truong,G.H.Nguyen,
S.Shahidan,K.Wiradnyana,H.Matsumae,N.Shigehara,M.Yoneda,H.Ishida,T.Masuyama,
Y.Yamada,A.Tajima,H.Shibata,A.Toyoda,T.Hanihara,S.Nakagome,T.Deviese,A.-
M.Bacon,P.Duringer,J.-L.Ponche,L.Shackelford,E.Patole-Edoumba,A.T.Nguyen,
B.Bellina-Pryce,J.-C.Galipaud,R.Kinaston,H.Buckley,C.Pottier,S.Rasmussen,T.Higham,
R.A.Foley,M.M.Lahr,L.Orlando,M.Sikora,M.E.Phipps,H.Oota,C.Higham,D.M.Lambert,
E.Willerslev, TheprehistoricpeoplingofSoutheastAsia. Science 361, 88–92(2018).
48. J.V.Moreno-Mayar,B.A.Potter,L.Vinner,M.Steinrücken,S.Rasmussen,J.Terhorst,
J.A.Kamm,A.Albrechtsen,A.-S.Malaspinas,M.Sikora,J.D.Reuther,J.D.Irish,R.S.Malhi,
L.Orlando,Y.S.Song,R.Nielsen,D.J.Meltzer,E.Willerslev, TerminalPleistoceneAlaskan
genomerevealsfirstfoundingpopulationofNativeAmericans. Nature 553,
203–207(2018).
49. M.Raghavan,P.Skoglund,K.E.Graf,M.Metspalu,A.Albrechtsen,I.Moltke,S.Rasmussen,
T.W.StaffordJr.,L.Orlando,E.Metspalu,M.Karmin,K.Tambets,S.Rootsi,R.Mägi,
P.F.Campos,E.Balanovska,O.Balanovsky,E.Khusnutdinova,S.Litvinov,L.P.Osipova,
S.A.Fedorova,M.I.Voevoda,M.DeGiorgio,T.Sicheritz-Ponten,S.Brunak,
S.Demeshchenko,T.Kivisild,R.Villems,R.Nielsen,M.Jakobsson,E.Willerslev, Upper
PalaeolithicSiberiangenomerevealsdualancestryofNativeAmericans. Nature 505,
87–91(2014).
50. M.Raghavan,M.Steinrücken,K.Harris,S.Schiffels,S.Rasmussen,M.DeGiorgio,
A.Albrechtsen,C.Valdiosera,M.C.Ávila-Arcos,A.-S.Malaspinas,A.Eriksson,I.Moltke,
M.Metspalu,J.R.Homburger,J.Wall,O.E.Cornejo,J.V.Moreno-Mayar,T.S.Korneliussen,
T.Pierre,M.Rasmussen,P.F.Campos,P.deBarrosDamgaard,M.E.Allentoft,J.Lindo,
E.Metspalu,R.Rodríguez-Varela,J.Mansilla,C.Henrickson,A.Seguin-Orlando,
H.Malmström,T.StaffordJr.,S.S.Shringarpure,A.Moreno-Estrada,M.Karmin,K.Tambets,
A.Bergström,Y.Xue,V.Warmuth,A.D.Friend,J.Singarayer,P.Valdes,F.Balloux,
I.Leboreiro,J.L.Vera,H.Rangel-Villalobos,D.Pettener,D.Luiselli,L.G.Davis,E.Heyer,
C.P.E.Zollikofer,M.S.PoncedeLeón,C.I.Smith,V.Grimes,K.-A.Pike,M.Deal,B.T.Fuller,
B.Arriaza,V.Standen,M.F.Luz,F.Ricaut,N.Guidon,L.Osipova,M.I.Voevoda,O.L.Posukh,
O.Balanovsky,M.Lavryashina,Y.Bogunov,E.Khusnutdinova,M.Gubina,E.Balanovska,
S.Fedorova,S.Litvinov,B.Malyarchuk,M.Derenko,M.J.Mosher,D.Archer,J.Cybulski,
B.Petzelt,J.Mitchell,R.Worl,P.J.Norman,P.Parham,B.M.Kemp,T.Kivisild,C.Tyler-Smith,
M.S.Sandhu,M.Crawford,R.Villems,D.G.Smith,M.R.Waters,T.Goebel,J.R.Johnson,
R.S.Malhi,M.Jakobsson,D.J.Meltzer,A.Manica,R.Durbin,C.D.Bustamante,Y.S.Song,
R.Nielsen,E.Willerslev, GenomicevidenceforthePleistoceneandrecentpopulation
historyofNativeAmericans. Science 349, aab3884(2015).
51. M.Rasmussen,Y.Li,S.Lindgreen,J.S.Pedersen,A.Albrechtsen,I.Moltke,M.Metspalu,
E.Metspalu,T.Kivisild,R.Gupta,M.Bertalan,K.Nielsen,M.T.P.Gilbert,Y.Wang,
M.Raghavan,P.F.Campos,H.M.Kamp,A.S.Wilson,A.Gledhill,S.Tridico,M.Bunce,
E.D.Lorenzen,J.Binladen,X.Guo,J.Zhao,X.Zhang,H.Zhang,Z.Li,M.Chen,L.Orlando,
K.Kristiansen,M.Bak,N.Tommerup,C.Bendixen,T.L.Pierre,B.Grønnow,M.Meldgaard,
C.Andreasen,S.A.Fedorova,L.P.Osipova,T.F.G.Higham,C.B.Ramsey,T.v.O.Hansen,
F.C.Nielsen,M.H.Crawford,S.Brunak,T.Sicheritz-Pontén,R.Villems,R.Nielsen,A.Krogh,
J.Wang,E.Willerslev, AncienthumangenomesequenceofanextinctPalaeo-Eskimo.
Nature 463, 757–762(2010).
52. M.Rasmussen,S.L.Anzick,M.R.Waters,P.Skoglund,M.DeGiorgio,T.W.Stafford,
S.Rasmussen,I.Moltke,A.Albrechtsen,S.M.Doyle,G.D.Poznik,V.Gudmundsdottir,
R.Yadav,A.-S.Malaspinas,S.S.WhiteV,M.E.Allentoft,O.E.Cornejo,K.Tambets,
A.Eriksson,P.D.Heintzman,M.Karmin,T.S.Korneliussen,D.J.Meltzer,T.L.Pierre,
J.Stenderup,L.Saag,V.M.Warmuth,M.C.Lopes,R.S.Malhi,S.Brunak,T.Sicheritz-Ponten,
I.Barnes,M.Collins,L.Orlando,F.Balloux,A.Manica,R.Gupta,M.Metspalu,
C.D.Bustamante,M.Jakobsson,R.Nielsen,E.Willerslev, ThegenomeofaLatePleistocene
humanfromaClovisburialsiteinwesternMontana. Nature 506, 225–229(2014).
53. M.Rasmussen,M.Sikora,A.Albrechtsen,T.S.Korneliussen,J.V.Moreno-Mayar,
G.D.Poznik,C.P.Zollikofer,M.S.PoncedeLeón,M.E.Allentoft,I.Moltke,H.Jónsson,
C.Valdiosera,R.S.Malhi,L.Orlando,C.D.Bustamante,T.W.StaffordJr.,D.J.Meltzer,
R.Nielsen,E.Willerslev, TheancestryandaffiliationsofKennewickMan. Nature 523,
455–458(2015).
54. M.Sikora,V.V.Pitulko,V.C.Sousa,M.E.Allentoft,L.Vinner,S.Rasmussen,A.Margaryan,
P.deBarrosDamgaard,C.delaFuente,G.Renaud,M.A.Yang,Q.Fu,I.Dupanloup,
K.Giampoudakis,D.Nogués-Bravo,C.Rahbek,G.Kroonen,M.Peyrot,H.M.Coll,
S.V.Vasilyev,E.Veselovskaya,M.Gerasimova,E.Y.Pavlova,V.G.Chasnyk,P.A.Nikolskiy,
A.V.Gromov,V.I.Khartanovich,V.Moiseyev,P.S.Grebenyuk,A.Y.Fedorchenko,
A.I.Lebedintsev,S.B.Slobodin,B.A.Malyarchuk,R.Martiniano,M.Meldgaard,L.Arppe,
J.U.Palo,T.Sundell,K.Mannermaa,M.Putkonen,V.Alexandersen,C.Primeau,
N.Baimukhanov,R.S.Malhi,K.-G.Sjögren,K.Kristiansen,A.Wessman,A.Sajantila,
M.M.Lahr,R.Durbin,R.Nielsen,D.J.Meltzer,L.Excoffier,E.Willerslev, Thepopulation
historyofnortheasternSiberiasincethePleistocene. Nature 570, 182–188(2019).
55. E.Skourtanioti,Y.S.Erdal,M.Frangipane,F.B.Restelli,K.A.Yener,F.Pinnock,P.Matthiae,
R.Özbal,U.-D.Schoop,F.Guliyev,T.Akhundov,B.Lyonnet,E.L.Hammer,S.E.Nugent,
M.Burri,G.U.Neumann,S.Penske,T.Ingman,M.Akar,R.Shafiq, Genomichistoryof
neolithictobronzeageAnatolia,northernLevant,andsouthernCaucasus. Cell 181,
1158–1175.e28(2020).
56. M.Unterländer,F.Palstra,I.Lazaridis,A.Pilipenko,Z.Hofmanová,M.Groß,C.Sell,J.Blöcher,
K.Kirsanow,N.Rohland,B.Rieger,E.Kaiser,W.Schier,D.Pozdniakov,A.Khokhlov,
M.Georges,S.Wilde,A.Powell,E.Heyer,M.Currat,D.Reich,Z.Samashev,H.Parzinger,
V.I.Molodin,J.Burger, AncestryanddemographyanddescendantsofIronAgenomadsof
theEurasianSteppe. Nat. Commun. 8, 14615(2017).
57. M.A.Yang,X.Gao,C.Theunert,H.Tong,A.Aximu-Petri,B.Nickel,M.Slatkin,M.Meyer,
S.Pääbo,J.Kelso,Q.Fu, 40,000-year-oldindividualfromAsiaprovidesinsightintoearly
populationstructureinEurasia. Curr. Biol. 27, 3202, 3208.e9(2017).
58. M.A.Yang,X.Fan,B.Sun,C.Chen,J.Lang,Y.-C.Ko,C.-h.Tsang,H.Chiu,T.Wang,Q.Bao,
X.Wu,M.Hajdinjak,A.M.-S.Ko,M.Ding,P.Cao,R.Yang,F.Liu,B.Nickel,Q.Dai,X.Feng,
L.Zhang,C.Sun,C.Ning,W.Zeng,Y.Zhao,M.Zhang,X.Gao,Y.Cui,D.Reich,M.Stoneking,
Q.Fu, AncientDNAindicateshumanpopulationshiftsandadmixtureinnorthernand
southernChina. Science 369, 282–288(2020).
59. N.Patterson,P.Moorjani,Y.Luo,S.Mallick,N.Rohland,Y.Zhan,T.Genschoreck,T.Webster,
D.Reich, Ancientadmixtureinhumanhistory. Genetics 192, 1065–1093(2012).
Lee et al., Sci. Adv.9,eadf3904(2023) 14April2023 13of14
SCIENCE ADV ANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on August 26, 2026

===PAGE 14===
60. P.Flegontov,N.E.Altınışık,P.Changmai,N.Rohland,S.Mallick,N.Adamski,D.A.Bolnick,
N.Broomandkhoshbacht,F.Candilio,B.J.Culleton,O.Flegontova,T.M.Friesen,C.Jeong,
T.K.Harper,D.Keating,D.J.Kennett,A.M.Kim,T.C.Lamnidis,A.M.Lawson,I.Olalde,
J.Oppenheimer,B.A.Potter,J.Raff,R.A.Sattler,P.Skoglund,K.Stewardson,E.J.Vajda,
S.Vasilyev,E.Veselovskaya,M.G.Hayes,D.H.O’Rourke,J.Krause,R.Pinhasi,D.Reich,
S.Schiffels, Palaeo-EskimogeneticancestryandthepeoplingofChukotkaandNorth
America. Nature 570, 236–240(2019).
61. C.Jeong,O.Balanovsky,E.Lukianova,N.Kahbatkyzy,P.Flegontov,V.Zaporozhchenko,
A.Immel,C.-C.Wang,O.Ixan,E.Khussainova,B.Bekmanov,V.Zaibert,M.Lavryashina,
E.Pocheshkhova,Y.Yusupov,A.Agdzhoyan,S.Koshel,A.Bukin,P.Nymadawa,
S.Turdikulova,D.Dalimova,M.Churnosov,R.Skhalyakho,D.Daragan,Y.Bogunov,
A.Bogunova,A.Shtrunov,N.Dubova,M.Zhabagin,L.Yepiskoposyan,V.Churakov,
N.Pislegin,L.Damba,L.Saroyants,K.Dibirova,L.Atramentova,O.Utevska,E.Idrisov,
E.Kamenshchikova,I.Evseeva,M.Metspalu,A.K.Outram,M.Robbeets,L.Djansugurova,
E.Balanovska,S.Schiffels,W.Haak,D.Reich,J.Krause, Thegenetichistoryofadmixture
acrossinnerEurasia. Nat. Ecol. Evol. 3, 966–976(2019).
62. S.Mallick,H.Li,M.Lipson,I.Mathieson,M.Gymrek,F.Racimo,M.Zhao,N.Chennagiri,
S.Nordenfelt,A.Tandon,P.Skoglund,I.Lazaridis,S.Sankararaman,Q.Fu,N.Rohland,
G.Renaud,Y.Erlich,T.Willems,C.Gallo,J.P.Spence,Y.S.Song,G.Poletti,F.Balloux,G.van
Driem,P.deKnijff,I.G.Romero,A.R.Jha,D.M.Behar,C.M.Bravi,C.Capelli,T.Hervig,
A.Moreno-Estrada,O.L.Posukh,E.Balanovska,O.Balanovsky,S.Karachanak-Yankova,
H.Sahakyan,D.Toncheva,L.Yepiskoposyan,C.Tyler-Smith,Y.Xue,M.S.Abdullah,A.Ruiz-
Linares,C.M.Beall,A.D.Rienzo,C.Jeong,E.B.Starikovskaya,E.Metspalu,J.Parik,R.Villems,
B.M.Henn,U.Hodoglugil,R.Mahley,A.Sajantila,G.Stamatoyannopoulos,J.T.S.Wee,
R.Khusainova,E.Khusnutdinova,S.Litvinov,G.Ayodo,D.Comas,M.F.Hammer,T.Kivisild,
W.Klitz,C.A.Winkler,D.Labuda,M.Bamshad,L.B.Jorde,S.A.Tishkoff,W.S.Watkins,
M.Metspalu,S.Dryomov,R.Sukernik,L.Singh,K.Thangaraj,S.Pääbo,J.Kelso,N.Patterson,
D.Reich, TheSimonsgenomediversityproject:300genomesfrom142diversepopula-
tions. Nature 538, 201–206(2016).
63. P.Qin,M.Stoneking, DenisovanancestryinEastEurasianandnativeAmericanpopula-
tions. Mol. Biol. Evol. 32, 2665–2674(2015).
64. T.Törbat,L.Erdenebold,Dörvöljinbulshnytarkhats,tüünniiezdiinorshuulgynyos,ontslog
[SlabBurialsDistribution,theirBurialRites,andCharacterization],inMongolchuudynGaral,
Ugsaa-SoyolynKhögjil,T.T.A.Ochir,Ed.(InstituteofArchaeology,MAS,2020),pp.87–118.
65. R.J.Losey,A.L.Waters-Rist,T.Nomokonova,A.A.Kharinskii, Asecondmortuaryhiatuson
LakeBaikalinSiberiaandthearrivalofsmall-scalepastoralism. Sci. Rep. 7, 2319(2017).
66. N.Patterson,A.L.Price,D.Reich, Populationstructureandeigenanalysis. PLOS Genet.
2,(2006).
67. P.Konovalov, Khunnu v Zabaikal’e (Pogrebal’nye pamiatniki) [Xiongnu in Transbaikal Area
(Funerary Sites)](Buriatskoeknizhnoeizdatel’stvo,1976).
68. S.Qian,Shiji(ZhonghuaShuju,1959),vol.10,p.2880.
69. C.Jeong,S.Wilkin,T.Amgalantugs,A.S.Bouwman,W.T.T.Taylor,R.W.Hagan,S.Bromage,
S.Tsolmon,C.Trachsel,J.Grossmann,J.Littleton,C.A.Makarewicz,J.Krigbaum,M.Burri,
A.Scott,G.Davaasambuu,J.Wright,F.Irmer,E.Myagmar,N.Boivin,M.Robbeets,F.J.Rühli,
J.Krause,B.Frohlich,J.Hendy,C.Warinner, BronzeAgepopulationdynamicsandtherise
ofdairypastoralismontheeasternEurasiansteppe. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 115,
E11248–E11255(2018).
70. D.J.Kennett,S.Plog,R.J.George,B.J.Culleton,A.S.Watson,P.Skoglund,N.Rohland,
S.Mallick,K.Stewardson,L.Kistler,S.A.LeBlanc,P.M.Whiteley,D.Reich,G.H.Perry, Ar-
chaeogenomicevidencerevealsprehistoricmatrilinealdynasty. Nat. Commun. 8,
14115(2017).
71. H.Ringbauer,J.Novembre,M.Steinrücken, Parentalrelatednessthroughtimerevealedby
runsofhomozygosityinancientDNA. Nat. Commun. 12, 5425(2021).
72. A.Kovalev,D.Erdenebaatar,S.Matrenin,I.I.Grebennikov,TheShouxiangchengfortressof
theWesternHanperiod:ExcavationsatBaianBulag,NomgonSum,Ömnögov'aimag,
Mongolia,inXiongnuArchaeology:MultidisciplinaryPerspectivesoftheFirstSteppeEmpirein
InnerAsia,U.Brosseder,B.K.Miller,Eds.(BonnContributionstoAsianArchaeology,Bonn
UniversityPress,2011),pp.475–508.
73. B.K.Miller,F.Allard,D.Erdenebaatar,C.Lee, AXiongnutombcomplex:ExcavationsatGol
Mod2cemetery,Mongolia(2002–05). Mongolian J. Anthropol. Archaeol. Ethnology 2,
1–21(2006).
74. D.Erdenebaatar,T.Iderkhangai,E.Mijiddorj,S.Orgilbayar,N.Batbold,B.Galbadrakh,
A.Maratkhaan, Balgasyn Tal dakh’Gol Mod 2-yn Khünnügiin Yazgurtny Bulshny Sudalgaa
(MonkhiinUseg,2015).
75. U.Brosseder,FremdefraueninIvolga?,in Scripta Praehistorica in Honorem Biba Teržan,
M.Blecic,Ed.(NarodnimuzejSlovenije,2007),vol.44,pp.883–893.
76. K.M.Linduff,ThegenderofluxuryandpoweramongtheXiongnuineasternEurasia,inAre
All Warriors Male? Gender Roles on the Ancient Eurasian Steppe(AltaMira,2008),chap.9,
pp.175–212.
77. M.Kircher,S.Sawyer,M.Meyer, Doubleindexingovercomesinaccuraciesinmultiplex
sequencingontheIlluminaplatform. Nucleic Acids Res. 40, e3–e3(2012).
78. M.-T.Gansauge,A.Aximu-Petri,S.Nagel,M.Meyer, Manualandautomatedpreparationof
single-strandedDNAlibrariesforthesequencingofDNAfromancientbiologicalremains
andothersourcesofhighlydegradedDNA. Nat. Protoc. 15, 2279–2300(2020).
79. M.Schubert,S.Lindgreen,L.Orlando, AdapterRemovalv2:Rapidadaptertrimming,
identification,andreadmerging. BMC. Res. Notes 9, 88(2016).
80. H.Li,R.Durbin, FastandaccurateshortreadalignmentwithBurrows–Wheelertransform.
Bioinformatics 25, 1754–1760(2009).
81. A.Peltzer,G.Jäger,A.Herbig,A.Seitz,C.Kniep,J.Krause,K.Nieselt, EAGER:Efficient
ancientgenomereconstruction. Genome Biol. 17, 60(2016).
82. H.Li,B.Handsaker,A.Wysoker,T.Fennell,J.Ruan,N.Homer,G.Marth,G.Abecasis,
R.Durbin;1000GenomeProjectDataProcessingSubgroup, Thesequencealignment/map
formatandSAMtools. Bioinformatics 25, 2078–2079(2009).
83. H.Jónsson,A.Ginolhac,M.Schubert,P.L.Johnson,L.Orlando, mapDamage2.0:Fastap-
proximateBayesianestimatesofancientDNAdamageparameters. Bioinformatics 29,
1682–1684(2013).
84. H.Weissensteiner,D.Pacher,A.Kloss-Brandstätter,L.Forer,G.Specht,H.-J.Bandelt,
F.Kronenberg,A.Salas,S.Schönherr, HaploGrep2:Mitochondrialhaplogroupclassifica-
tionintheeraofhigh-throughputsequencing. Nucleic Acids Res. 44, W58–W63(2016).
85. G.D.Poznik,IdentifyingY-chromosomehaplogroupsinarbitrarilylargesamplesofse-
quencedorgenotypedmen. bioRxiv,088716(2016).https://doi.org/10.1101/088716.
86. E.Harney,N.Patterson,D.Reich,J.Wakeley, AssessingtheperformanceofqpAdm:A
statisticaltoolforstudyingpopulationadmixture. Genetics 217, iyaa045(2021).
87. RCoreTeam(2021).
Acknowledgments
Funding:ThisworkwassupportedbyMaxPlanckSociety(A.V.M.andC.W.),TheEuropean
ResearchCouncilundertheEuropeanUnion’sHorizon2020researchandinnovationprogram
804884-DAIRYCULTURES(C.W.),NationalResearchFoundationofKorea(NRF)grantfundedby
theKoreagovernment(MSIT)2020R1C1C1003879(C.J.),TheSilkRoadFoundation(BKM),anda
dissertationresearchgrantfromAmericanCouncilofLearnedSocietiesandtheHenryLuce
Foundation(B.K.M.).Authorcontributions:Conceptualization:B.K.M.,C.W.,andC.J.
Methodology:J.L.,B.K.M.,J.B.,E.J.,A.V.M.,C.W.,andC.J.Investigation:J.L.,B.K.M.,J.B.,E.J.,A.V.M.,
C.W.,andC.J.Visualization:J.L.,B.K.M.,C.W.,andC.J.Supervision:B.K.M.,C.W.,andC.J.Writing–
originaldraft:J.L.,B.K.M.,C.W.,andC.J.Writing–reviewandediting:J.B.,E.J.,andA.V.M.
Competinginterests:Theauthorsdeclarethattheyhavenocompetinginterests.Dataand
materialsavailability:Alldataneededtoevaluatetheconclusionsinthepaperarepresentin
thepaperand/ortheSupplementaryMaterials.Allnewlygeneratedsequencingdatareported
inthisstudy,includingrawreads(FASTQ)andalignedreads(BAM),areavailablefromthe
EuropeanNucleotideArchiveundertheaccessionnumberPRJEB55185.Thegenotypedatafor
the1240KpanelhavebeendepositedintheEdmondDataRepositoryoftheMaxPlanckSociety
[https://doi.org/10.17617/3.DYCH7D].
Submitted18October2022
Accepted16March2023
Published14April2023
10.1126/sciadv.adf3904
Lee et al., Sci. Adv.9,eadf3904(2023) 14April2023 14of14
SCIENCE ADV ANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on August 26, 2026

===PAGE 15===
Genetic population structure of the Xiongnu Empire at imperial and local scales
Juhyeon Lee, Bryan K. Miller, Jamsranjav Bayarsaikhan, Erik Johannesson, Alicia Ventresca Miller, Christina
Warinner, and Choongwon Jeong
Sci. Adv. 9 (15), eadf3904.  DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.adf3904
View the article online
https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/sciadv.adf3904
Permissions
https://www.science.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Use of this article is subject to the Terms of service
Science Advances (ISSN 2375-2548) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 1200 New York Avenue
NW, Washington, DC 20005. The title Science Advances is a registered trademark of AAAS. 
Copyright © 2023 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim
to original U.S. Government Works. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 (CC BY).
Downloaded from https://www.science.org on August 26, 2026
