
===PAGE 1===
PERSONAL NAMES, SOGDIAN I. IN CHINESE SOURCES|Yutaka
Yoshida
1
PERSONAL NAMES, SOGDIAN I.
IN CHINESE SOURCES
PERSONAL NAMES, SOGDIAN
i. IN CHINESE SOURCES
Sogdians were famous as traders along the Silk Road before the Islamization
of Central Asia (see SOGDIAN TRADE ). The earliest Sogdian record of their
activities are the so-called Ancient Letters (s.v.) of the early 4th century
discovered some 90 km west of DUNHUANG. However, close investigations of
the Chinese sources lead one to assume that the Sogdians came to China for
trading during the Later Han Dynasty, when the name of Sogdiana was first
recorded in China (see Shiratori, pp. 94-100). The 5th-8th centuries saw the
heyday of Sogdian merchants’ activities; especially during some hundred
years before the An Lushan’s rebellion (755-63 C.E.), when Tang controlled
Central Asia, a great many Sogdians were encountered in northern China.
In those days, when foreigners came to China, they were given special
surnames mostly in accordance with their origins or homelands ( TABLE 1 ).
For example, those originating from India bore a surname Zhu (1) [numbers in
parentheses refer to Table 1 entries], which is a short form of Tianzhu (2), the
ancient Chinese designation of India. The number and the popularity of
Sogdians in China was apparently the reason why they were given several
different surnames, representing each oasis state from which they originated.
PERSONAL NAMES, SOGDIAN I. IN
CHINESE SOURCES
Article by Yutaka Yoshida
Published: August 15, 2006
Last Updated: November 8, 2012
===PAGE 2===
PERSONAL NAMES, SOGDIAN I. IN CHINESE SOURCES|Yutaka
Yoshida
2
Thus, those from Samarqand bore the surname Kang (3), Bukhara An (4),
Kabudhan (north of Samarqand) Cao (5), Kushaniyya He (6), Tashkent (older
Chach) Shi (7), Kesh Shi (8), and Maymurgh (modern Panjikant?) Mi (9)
(Pulleyblank, p. 320). For example, a Sogdian ( hu) boy who accompanied the
Chinese pilgrim Xuanzang (? – 664 C.E.) at the beginning of his travels was
named Shi Pantuo (10), whose surname indicates that he originated from
Tashkent. The boy’s given name Pantuo (< *bʻuân dʻâ) is a transcription of a
Sogdian name vandak  (β ntk) “slave,” which is attested as a personal name
among the Upper Indus inscriptions (Sims-Williams, 1992, p. 47).
All these surnames were collectively referred to as Zhaowu (jiu) xing (11)
“(nine) surnames of Zhaowu,” because Sogdians were believed by the Chinese
to have originated from Zhaowu, a town in Gansu; the number nine in this
case seems to mean “numerous.” Among the seven surnames, Kang and An are
the oldest and were attested already in the Han time. However, in the older
days Kang represented Kangju (12), which denotes a nomad state once ruling
the area including Sogdiana, while An is short for Anxi (13), a transcription of
Aršak “Arsaces,” i.e., the Parthian state, dating back to the Han period. An
Shigao (14), who came to China in the 2nd century and was alleged to be a
Parthian crown prince, is the earliest example of An as a surname. Later,
when Kangju and Anxi no longer existed, the names came to be applied to
Samarqand and Bukhara respectively. The others began to be attested later in
the 6th century. Mi (< Middle Chinese *miei), Shi (8) (< *ṣi), and Shi (7) (< *źiäk)
are characters representing parts of their original names: Maymurg, Kesh, and
Chach. However, the reason why Cao and He were selected is not known.
Apart from the seven most common surnames, there were a few others, but
only Bi (15) has been identified (with Paykent). It is also to be noted that the
other six names, but not Mi, were also borne by non-Sogdians (see de la
Vaissière, pp. 124-27). On the other hand, due to the intermarriage between
Turkish peoples, one sometimes finds Sogdian names among those who bore
the surname Zhe (16), which is generally assumed to be a surname of a Turkic
tribe, e.g., (Zhe) Hutianpantuo (17) (Li and Wang, p. 113) = Xwatenvandak
(xwtʾyn-βntk) “queen’s slave.”
Names of Sogdians transcribed in Chinese characters are attested both in the
Chinese historical records handed down to this day and in the documents or
inscriptions unearthed in modem times. However, since Sogdians were
foreigners and did not play a main role in historical events, the number of
their names recorded in the chronicles and similar historical texts is
===PAGE 3===
PERSONAL NAMES, SOGDIAN I. IN CHINESE SOURCES|Yutaka
Yoshida
3
restricted. Although more and more funeral inscriptions of Sogdian-Chinese
people have been discovered in recent years, most of their given names are
totally sinicized. Thus, the bulk of Sogdian onomastica transcribed in Chinese
characters are attested in Chinese texts discovered in Dunhuang and East
Turkestan. In particular, recent excavations of the graveyards of Astana and
Karakhoja in Turfan have brought to light many Chinese documents of the
6th-8th centuries, in which numerous Sogdians, both sedentary and itinerant,
are mentioned. Of a total of ca. 10,500 persons named in the documents, more
than 850 bear Zhaowu surnames; those with Kang number 352, Cao 179, An
118, Shi (< *ṣi) 115, He 59, Shi 38, Mi 12. About one third or one quarter of
them bear names that sound like Sogdian. Among the Dunhuang texts there
has survived one census document dating back to ca. 750 C.E. for a Sogdian
settlement named Conghuaxiang. The register was extensively analyzed by O.
Ikeda, who also attempted to reconstruct some of the names in their original
forms (Ikeda, 1965); as a Sogdianist, D. Weber followed him in reconstructing
others. According to Ikeda’s study, out of 236 personal names found in the
register, 214 people bear Zhaowu surnames, and 100 personsʼ given names are
in Sogdian or at least do not sound like Chinese.
Names of the rulers of Sogdian oasis states consitute an independent group.
Each time they sent tribute to the Chinese court, their names were recorded in
the Chinese chronicles. Their names, either without surnames or with a
surname Zhaowu, were collected by O. I. Smirnova and compared with
legends of coins found in Sogdiana and with those in Islamic sources. For
example, the three Samarqand kings of the 8th century are as follows: Tu hun
(18) (*tʻuət xuən) = Tarkhun (trxwn); Wu lei qie (19) (*˙uo lək g’ia) = Urak
(ʾwrʾk); Duo he (20) (*tuət γât) = Turghar (twrγʾr; Smimova, pp. 423-31).
When one tries to find out the original forms of the names phonetically
transcribed in Chinese, one first reconstructs the Middle Chinese
pronunciation of each character. Then, considering the subsequent
phonological change and possible range of correspondence between Chinese
sounds and Sogdian phonemes, one searches for a candidate among those
Sogdian names so far known; however, one sometimes tries to reconstruct
possible but so far not attested forms purely from the transcription. A case in
point is An Lushan (21) (? – 757 C.E.), who is perhaps the most famous Sogdian
in the history. Son of a Sogdian father and a Turkish mother, he became a
favorite of the emperor Xuanzong (r. 712-56 C.E.) but later rebelled against
him and attempted to be an emperor himself. His surname suggests his
===PAGE 4===
PERSONAL NAMES, SOGDIAN I. IN CHINESE SOURCES|Yutaka
Yoshida
4
father’s Bukharan origin, and his given name Lushan (< *luk ṣan) was
recognized by W. B. Henning as transcribing rwxšn- [ roxšn-] “light, bright”
(apud Pulleyblank, p. 333, n. 1). Though rwxšn- has not been attested as a
personal name in Sogdian texts, Henning compared it with cognate
onomastica in other Iranian languages, such as Rōxanē, the princess of Bactria
who became the wife of Alexander the Great. His name happened to be the
first to be identified with the corresponding Sogdian form.
In some cases popular elements found in Sogdian names help identify the
original forms of the Chinese names. Such are βntk “slave,” prn “glory,
fortune,” and yʾn “boon,” the three most frequent second members of Sogdian
onomastica, and -c, the most common suffix constituting the hypocoristics or
short names. Some examples are as follows: Cao Naningpan (22) (*nâ nieng
pʻuân; Li and Wang, p. 329) = Nanaifarn (nny-pm); An Fuyemenyan (23) (*bʻi̯u
i̯a muən i̯än; Li and Wang, p. 183) = Avyāman-yān (ʾ βyʾmn-yʾn); An
Fuyemenzhe (24) (*bʻi̯u i̯a muən tśi̯a; Li and Wang, p. 183) = Avyāmanch
(ʾβyʾmnc). For the form ending with -βntk, see examples cited above and below.
However, it is to be noted that, in view of great differences existing between
phonological and syllabic structures of Chinese and Sogdian, uncertainties
always surround the proposed identifications, and there remain numerous
transcriptions left unreconstructed.
Among the theophoric names one often finds the Zoroastrian deities. Since the
names of deities also served as calendar terms, their names may perhaps
represent the day or month when they were born. The above-mentioned
examples contain nn(y) “Nana(i),” the most popular goddess in Sogdiana, and
ʾβyʾmn “Avyāman,” a Sogdian counterpart of Wahman (Sims-Williams, 1992, p.
40). Ahuramazda is referred to as “creator” in Dishebo (25) (*dʻi śi̯a puât;
Yoshida, p. 38) = δš(c)yʾpt “protected by the creator.” The Sogdian form of
Tištrya is encountered in Zhishifan (26) (*tie śi pʻi̯wen; Li and Wang, p. 312) =
tyš-prn “Tishtrya’s glory.” Mithra is nicknamed as “god” by Sogdians (Sims-
Williams, 1991 [1992]), and several names containing the element βγ- “god”
are found in the materials, e.g., Baobi (27) (*bʻuâk bʻji; Li and Wang, p. 417) =
βγyβyrt “obtained from the god.” Another popular goddess is the Moon, as in
Mopan (28) (*mâk pʻuân; Li and Wang, p. 129) = mʾx-prn “the Moon’s glory.”
Zymtyc, the 11th month of the Sogdian calendar, is named after a god Zymt,
who is mentioned in the name Shewupantuo (29) (*dźi̯a mi̯uət bʻuân dʻâ;
Ikeda, 1965, p. 64) = zymt- βntk. In the light of its Bactrian counterpart
drēmatigano, Sims-Williams (2000, p. 190) proves that the god originated from
===PAGE 5===
PERSONAL NAMES, SOGDIAN I. IN CHINESE SOURCES|Yutaka
Yoshida
5
the Greek earth goddess Demeter. A Middle Persian loanword for “Tuesday” is
found in the name Wenhan (30) (*˙˙uən xân, cf. British Library MS S. 542, line
74; Ikeda, 1979, p. 537) = wnxʾn.
Some Sogdians were converted to Buddhism and bear names beginning with
buti- “the Buddha,” e.g.—one of the rare female personal names in the
material—Fuzhitai (31) (*bʻi̯tu tie dʻai; Li and Wang, p. 180) = pwty- δʾyh “the
Buddha’s slave [fem.].” It is interesting to note that these Buddha names are all
attested only after the latter half of the 7th century. The fact seems to hint at
the period when Sogdians were converted to Buddhism (Yoshida, 1998, pp.
40-41). Names which can be attributed to Christianity or Manicheism are very
few. The one such name known to me is Yousuoyan (32) (*ji̯ǰu ṣi̯wo i̯än; Li and
Wang, p. 128) = yšw-yʾn “Jesus’ favor.” Hypocoristics are also found: Yena (33)
(*i̯a nâ; Li and Wang, p. 332) = yʾnʾkk (derived from yʾn), Funa (34) (*pʻi̯uət nâ;
Li and Wang, p. 312) = prnʾkk (derived from prn). Adjectives derived from
place names serve as personal names in the following: Boxi (35) (*puât si̯ək; Li
and Wang, p. 333) = pʾrsyk “Persian,” Yintujianing (36) (*i̯en tʻuo ka nieng;
Ikeda, 1965, p. 65) = ʾyntwkʾnʾk “Indian.”
Ordinary Sogdian words, adjectives, nouns, and compounds are also employed
as personal names: Yexi (37) (*i̯a xjei; Ikeda, 1965, p. 65)= yʾxy “brave,” Zhejie
(38) (*tśi̯a ki̯et; Ikeda, 1965, p. 65) = cʾkr “warrior,” Fudanyan (39) (*pʻi̯uət tâm
i̯än; Ikeda, p. 63) = ʾprtmyʾn “first boon” (a name given to a first born). As a
result of intermarriage between Sogdians and Turkish people one sometimes
finds Turkish titles as personal names, e.g., Yijin (40) (*i̯et ki̯ən; Ikeda, 1965, p.
65) = Turk. irkin (a title borne by tribal chiefs; Clauson, p. 225).
As Ikeda’s study clearly shows, after settlement in China Sogdians became
sinicized and came to be given Chinese names. No case is known where sons
are given Sogdian names by fathers with Chinese names. Recently, tombs of a
Sogdian family were excavated in Guyuan, and the epitaphs attest names of
the members of the families for seven generations. Their geneological table
shows that the first four generations continued to give Sogdian names to their
sons (Luo, p. 216). Some other names are assumed to be translated from
Sogdian originals. According to Henning (apud Pulleyblank, p. 337, n. 3),
Shennu (41) lit. “godʼs slave” can be a translation of βγy-βntk. But, it is always
possible that such names are genuine Chinese.
===PAGE 6===
PERSONAL NAMES, SOGDIAN I. IN CHINESE SOURCES|Yutaka
Yoshida
6
BIBLIOGRAPHY
G. Clauson, An Etymological Dictionary of Pre-Thirteenth-Century Turkish,
Oxford, 1972.
O. Ikeda, “Hasseiki chūyō ni okeru Tonkō no Sogudojin shūraku” (A Sogdian
colony at Tunhuang in the mid-eighth century; with English summary),
Yūrashia bunkakenkyū (Hokkaidō University)1, 1965, pp. 49-92.
Idem, Chūgoku kodai sekichō kenkyū: gaikan, rokubun  (English title: Ancient
Chinese household registers and related documents: a historical study: general
introduction and collected documents; with English summary), Tokyo, 1979.
B. Karlgren, Grammata Serica Recensa, Stockholm, 1957.
Li Fang and Wang Su, Tulufan chu tu wen shu ren ming di ming suo yin  (Index
of personal names and place names attested in the Chinese documents
unearthed in Turfan), Beijing, 1996.
Luo Feng, Guyuan nan jiao Sui Tang mudi  (Graveyard of Sui and Tang
dynasties in the south suburbs of Guyuan;with English summary), Beijing,
1996.
E. G. Pulleyblank, “A Sogdian Colony in Inner Mongolia,” T’oung Pao 41, 1952,
pp. 317-56.
K. Shiratori, “A Study on Su-tʻê [42] or Sogdiana,” Memoirs of the Research
Department of the Toyo Bunko 2, 1928, pp. 8 1-145.
N. Sims-Williams, “Mithra the Baga,” in P. Bernard and F. Grenet, eds., Histoire
et cultes de l’Asie centrale pré-islamique, Paris, 1991 [1992], pp. 177-86.
Idem, Sogdian and Other Iranian Inscriptions of the Upper Indus II, London,
1992. Idem, Bactrian Documents I, Oxford, 2000.
O. I. Smirnova, Svodnyĭ katalog sogdiĭskikh monet (A summary catalogue of
Sogdian coins), Moscow, 1981.
E. de Ia Vaissière, Histoire des marchands sogdiens, Paris, 2002.
===PAGE 7===
PERSONAL NAMES, SOGDIAN I. IN CHINESE SOURCES|Yutaka
Yoshida
7
D. Weber, “Zur sogdischen Personennamengebung,” Indogermanische
Forschungen 77, 1972, pp. 192-208.
Y. Yoshida, “Sino-Iranica” (in Japanese), Bulletin of the Society for Western and
Southern Asiatic Studies (Kyoto University),no. 48, 1998, pp. 33-51.