--- pdf page 35 ---
MYTHOLOGICAL AND LEGENDARY 11
quoted as an authority in later works on the subject.
There can be no doubt that this work of Shén-nung’s is as
much a fabrication of later periods as the emperor himself.
What it teaches us, however, is that the knowledge con-
veyed in it could not be historically assigned to any other
period and was handed down from a time lying beyond the
beginning of Chinese history. Possibly it is identical with
some similar production supposed to have existed during
the Han dynasty. The Emperor Shén-nung’s name may
have been added to the title, in order to show that the
knowledge conveyed in the work is of the most ancient
origin. Chang Yii-si, an author of the eleventh century,
says with regard to it: —
“Tn remote times, when the art of writing was not yet known,
science was transmitted from generation to generation by oral
tradition, and what was called Pén-ts’au then was not a written
book. From the period of the Han dynasties medical art began to
develop. Chang Ki and Hua T’o [celebrated physicians in the
third century of our era] contributed largely to the completion and
diffusion of medical knowledge, commented on previous writings
and added new information, arranging the whole into a system;
and this was probably the time when the materia medica of Shon-
nung first appeared as a written treatise.”
The localities mentioned in connection with the life of
Sh6n-nung are for the most part in the northwest of China,
he having resided in the old capital of his predecessors.
But he is supposed to have come originally from a place in
Hu-pei, to have lived later on at K’i-f6u, the birthplace of
Confucius, in Shan-tung, and to have been buried in
Ch’ang-sha, the present capital of Hu-nan. It would
seem that the manufacturers of the accounts of the legend-
1 Bretschneider, Botanicon Sinicum, in Journal of the China Branch
of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1881, p. 28.

--- pdf page 36 ---
12 THE ANCIENT HISTORY OF CHINA
ary era wished to indicate thereby the gradual increase of
the Chinese sphere of civilization in the prehistoric period.
To Shén-nung is ascribed the foundation of a family
which furnished emperors in several generations. Since
these are mere names, and the authorities disagree as to
their chronology, we need not trouble about them till we
come to Huang-ti, “ Yellow Emperor.”
§ 4. Huane-tT1 (2704-2595 B.c.)
The accounts regarding the life of this monarch, the
third of the series of great emperors grouped by the Chinese
under the name of wu-ti, ‘The Five Rulers,” are also very
contradictory. According to Ssi-ma Ts’ién he was the
son of Shau-tién, which would imply his relationship to
Shon-nung; Shau-tién being mentioned as the father of
the latter emperor also, in spite of discrepancies in the
chronology, which is, of course, as fictitious as the entire
structure of legends before us. Huang-ti’s supernatural
qualities became apparent from his very birth, since as an
infant he had a full command of language. From Ssi-ma
Ts’ién’s account it would appear that Huang-ti, whose
personal name was Hvén-ytian, was a contemporary of
Shon-nung; that anarchy had set in under the eyes of
the old emperor, his own descendants fighting each other;
and that Hién-yiian became emperor by virtue of his su-
perior energy. As such he persecuted the refractory, while
leaving alone the peaceful. He cut passages through the
hills and built roads, so that in times of peace he did not
enjoy a moment’s rest. He extended his empire in the
east to the sea of Shan-tung, in the west far beyond Kan-su,
and in the south to the Yang-tzi-kiang; while in the north

--- pdf page 37 ---
MYTHOLOGICAL AND LEGENDARY 13
he drove away the Hun-yii. This name is probably merely
another transcription of what the Chinese afterward called
Hiung-nu, their old hereditary enemy on the northern
boundary, and the ancestors of King Attila’s Huns. If we
cannot look upon these tribes in this remote legendary
period as having a historical existence, the mention of them
certainly seems to show that a nation called Hun-yii, and
occupying the northern confines of China, may have been
among the earliest historical traditions of the Chinese.
Having consolidated his empire, Huang-ti moved to and
fro within its limits with his military encampments, with-
out having a fixed place of residence. Chavannes' suggests
that this passage in Ssi-ma Ts’ién’s account may point to
nomad life among the ancient Chinese. Huang-ti regu-
lated the sacrificial and the religious ceremonies of his
people, and he further improved upon Shon-nung’s agri-
cultural work by determining the time when cereals were
to be sown and trees planted, and by devoting his attention
to the animal kingdom. Astronomy, too, received his
attention, as did the waves of the sea, the rocks, metals,
and jade. Quite a number of the fundamental inventions
of Chinese civilization are ascribed to him.
It is hardly necessary to enumerate here all the facts
ascribed to this legendary period, which, as I have said,
cannot be historical. For us the legendary emperors from
Fu-hi onward are nothing more than symbols of the earli-
est developments of Chinese civilization, as the inventors
imagined it, possibly in connection with old traditions.
From the time of Fu-hi, however, a certain logic in the
order in which the principal phases of Chinese civilization
follow each other becomes apparent; and we shall not
1 Les mémotres historiques, vol. i, p. 31, note 3.

--- pdf page 38 ---
14 THE ANCIENT HISTORY OF CHINA
venture too much if, on the one hand, we discard all chro-
nology in connection with these emperors, and, on the
other, regard their names merely as representatives of the
preparatory periods of culture in Chinese national life.
If the old accounts say of Fu-hi that the people before
him lived like animals, wrapped their bodies in skins, ate
raw meat, knew only their mothers and not their fathers,
and did not practise matrimony; that it was he who raised
his nation from this state of savage life by introducing
hunting, fishing, cattle-breeding, the calendar, matrimony,
and cooking, —all this means no more than that he was the
representative of what is found in the beginnings of all
histories; namely, the period of hunting and nomadic life.
As regards the chronology assigned to the legendary period,
if the time allotted to some of these rulers is much too long
as a term of government for a single human life, it is, on
the other hand, much too short, if we measure it by the
cultural progress it involves for the nation. Fu-hi’s period
of hunting life must have lasted many generations before
it led to the agricultural period represented by the name
Shén-nung ; and this period in turn could not possibly have
led within a little more than one hundred years to the
enormous progress ascribed to Huang-ti.
§ 5. Supposep INTRODUCTION OF A FOREIGN CIVILIZA-
TION UNDER HUANG-TI
An ingenious, but, I am afraid, hopeless attempt was
made by the late Professor Terrien de Lacouperie to explain
the several cultural developments ascribed to the Emperor
Huang-ti as offshoots of Babylonian civilization. I have
already declared my own views to be those of an agnostic.

--- pdf page 39 ---
MYTHOLOGICAL AND LEGENDARY 15
Chinese tradition contains no clue to a migration of the
Chinese race, or any part of it, from west to east; and the
arguments laid down by De Lacouperie in his bulky
volume devoted to this problem! seem to be doomed to
share the fate of De Guignes’ attempt (before the French
Academy in 1758) to prove that the Chinese had grown
out of an Egyptian colony.
Every student of the Chinese language is aware that
the Chinese are very fond of expressing categories in
certain round numbers, which have no deeper meaning
than, say, the Latin sexcenti, in the sense of an indefinitely
large number. Thus the word pai or po, which is pro-
nounced pak (bak) in the Canton dialect, is placed before
quite a number of nouns, in order to denote “totality.”
Pai-kuan, “the hundred Mandarins,” means “all the
Mandarins,” or “the official world’; pai-ts’au, “the hun-
dred plants,” means “all plants,” or “the vegetable king-
dom.” Similarly pat-sing, or po-sing, ‘the hundred sur-
names,”’ means “all the surnames,” or “the people.”
De Lacouperie ignores these analogies, of which, to judge
from his general knowledge of the language, he must cer-
tainly have been aware, by explaining the term po-sing as
not anumerical category, but an ethnical name. He gives
this number pai (i.e. “a hundred’’) its Cantonese, or old,
pronunciation pak or bak, and translates the term by the
“ Bak tribes.”’ Bak Sing, he says, ‘is the earliest denomi-
nation in their historical literature which the Chinese used
to give to themselves, exclusively of the native populations
they had subdued. The Bak Sings were the followers of
Huang-ti, who came with him from the northwest and
settled at first in the southwest corner of Kansuh.”’ For
1 Western Origin of the Early Chinese Civilization. London, 1894.

--- pdf page 88 ---
64 THE ANCIENT HISTORY OF CHINA
loyal and good. He hasripped up pregnant women. Great Heaven
was moved with indignation, and charged my deceased father
Won-wang reverently to display its majesty; but he died before
the work was completed.
“On this account, I, Fa [Wu-wang], who am but a little child,
have by means of you, the hereditary rulers of my friendly states,
contemplated the government of Shang; but Chéu-sin has no
repentant heart. He abides squatting on his heels, not serving
God or the spirits of heaven and earth, neglecting also the temple
of his ancestors, and not sacrificing in it. The victims and the
vessels of millet all become the prey of wicked robbers; and still
he says, ‘The people are mine; the decree is mine,’ never trying to
correct his contemptuous mind. Now Heaven, to protect the
inferior people, made for them rulers, and made for them instruc-
tors, that they might be able to be aiding to God, and secure the
tranquillity of the four quarters of the empire. In regard to who
are criminals and who are not, how dare I give any allowance to
my own wishes? Where the strength is the same, measure the
virtue of the parties; where the virtue is the same, measure their
righteousness. Chdu-sin has hundreds of thousands and myriads
of ministers, but they have hundreds of thousands and myriads of
minds; I have three thousand ministers, but they have one mind.
The iniquity of Shang is full. Heaven gives command to destroy
it. If I did not comply with Heaven my iniquity would be as
great.
“J, who am a little child, early and late am filled with appre-
hensions. I have received charge from my deceased father Won-
wang; I have offered special sacrifice to God; I have performed
the due services to the great Earth—and I lead the multitude of
you to execute the punishment appointed by Heaven. Heaven
compassionates the people. What the people desire, Heaven will
be found to give effect to. Do you aid me, the one man, to cleanse
for ever all within the four seas. Now is the time! It may not be
lost.”
With similar speeches Wu-wang addressed the leaders
and soldiers of his army and his allies, who had ‘“‘ come from
afar, being men of the Western regions.” This may pos-

--- pdf page 89 ---
THE SHANG, OR YIN, DYNASTY (1766-1122 B.c.) 65
sibly imply that he relied on the help of the Huns, his
neighbors in the West. He certainly mentions a number
of ethnic names belonging to non-Chinese tribes. “Lift
up your lances, join your shields, raise your spears.’’
“Chou, the king of Shang, follows only the words of his
wife.” “They are only the vagabonds of the empire,
loaded with crimes, whom he honors and exalts, whom he
employs and trusts, making them great officers and nobles,
so that they can tyrannize over the people, exercising their
villainies in the city of Shang.”
On having made a goodly number of speeches, which are
preserved in the Shu-king, Wu-wang gave battle to the
assembled army of the emperor. After a bloody fight the
latter was completely defeated. Chdéu-sin took refuge in
his palace, where he ordered all his most valuable jewels
to be brought, and set fire to the building, in order not to
fall into the hands of the enemy. When the news of
Chéu-sin’s death was brought to Wu-wang, he entered
Chéu-sin’s palace to convince himself of the fact. Ssi-ma
Ts’ién informs us that Wu-wang shot three arrows at the
emperor’s corpse, descended from his car, and stabbed it
with his dagger, after which he severed the head from the
body and suspended it from a white standard. Madam
Ta-ki and another favorite of the emperor were killed, and
their corpses were similarly treated.
The word used by Ssi-ma Ts’ién for the dagger with
which Wu-wang stabbed the dead emperor is king-kién,
which means a “light two-edged sword.” But this is
clearly not the original reading. The latter is preserved
in the Chéu-shu, a work which Chavannes* has good
reason to believe to be older than the Shi-ki. In the cor-
1 Les mémoires historiques, vol. i, p. 235, note 1, and vol. v, p. 457.
F

--- pdf page 90 ---
66 THE ANCIENT HISTORY OF CHINA
responding passage of the Chdu-shu, which appears with
but slight alterations in Ssi-ma Ts’ién’s text, the word
used for Wu-wang’s dagger is king-lu (king = “light,” lui =
“a musical pipe”). The two characters employed in
describing this sound give absolutely no sense in ordinary
Chinese, and the commentators found it necessary to add
that the term represents the “name of a double-edged
sword,” or “a dagger” (kién-ming). Ssi-ma Ts’ién, or per-
haps some later editor of his text, who did not understand
the word, substituted king-kién, “light double-edged
sword.’ But the word is easily explained if we look upon
it as a foreign term. We receive a broad hint as to its
origin in the account of a historical event preserved in the
history of the earlier Han dynasty. When, in 47 B.c.,
the chief of the Hiung-nu, or Huns, was about to conclude
a treaty with the Chinese court, the ceremony of swearing
a solemn oath had to be gone through, in which the Great
Khan, or Shan-yti, had to swallow a beverage prepared by
himself and consisting of the blood of a white horse mixed
with wine. The khan stirred the wine with a king-luk and
a golden cyathus, and the scholiast explains the term king-
luk as “the precious sword of the Hiung-nu.” I have for
years, in the course of my readings of Chinese texts re-
garding the Turkish nations in central Asia, tried to trace
the prototypes of Chinese transcriptions representing
Turkish words; and quite a number of examples seem to
suggest that the language used by the ancient Huns, or
Hiung-nu, was actually Turkish, as has been suggested by
Klaproth and others. The word corresponding to the
Chinese transcription king-luk may be easily recognized
in a word found in the modern Turki language and some
1 Ts’ién-han-shu, ch. 94 B, p. 6.

--- pdf page 91 ---
THE SHANG, OR YIN, DYNASTY (1766-1122 B.c.) 67
other Turkish dialects; namely, kingrak, “a two-edged
knife, a sabre.”” I do not hesitate to apply this identifica-
tion to the word used for Wu-wang’s dagger, king-lii, which
may be merely another transcription for the purely Turk-
ish word kingrak. If my deductions are correct, they
would indicate that a Turkish name was in use for a kind
of weapon which the first emperor of the Chéu dynasty
carried with him in the twelfth century B.c., and that this
is the oldest Turkish word on record. But it seems also to
suggest that Wu-wang, whose dominions lay on the western
border of China, stood in certain relations with his next-
door neighbors, the ancestors of the Hiung-nu. It is
highly probable that the barbarians mentioned in connection
with certain inroads they made on Chinese territory during
the remotest periods of Chinese history are identical with
the well-known hereditary enemy of the Chinese, the
Hiung-nu, whose history begins to be told with palpable
detail from the beginning of the third century B.c.
The various names under which these northern and west-
ern neighbors of the Chinese are mentioned during the
earlier periods of history appear to be variants in the
transcription of the same name Hun or Hunnu. Thus we
find the Hun-yii mentioned as a tribe on the northern bor-
ders, against whom the Emperor Huang-ti is supposed to
have made war in the twenty-seventh century B.c. A later
name was Hién-yiin, the designation in use previous to
the introduction of the term Hiwng-nu in the third century
B.c. The root Hun or Kun will appear to those gifted
with a lively imagination to occur in various other names
for the ancestors of King Attila’s people, then occupying
the northern and western borders of China. The reason
why the Chinese compare these northern nomads and other

--- pdf page 92 ---
68 THE ANCIENT HISTORY OF CHINA
barbarous tribes to “dogs” (K’iian or K’tin) may have
originated in a kind of jeu de mot. As early as 689 B.c.
we read in Tso’s commentary on the “Spring and Autumn
Annals”! that the ‘dog barbarians,” in Chinese K’tan-
jung, were defeated. If this word K’wan (in Cantonese
K’iin), “dog,” is another transcription for Hin or Hun,
this may remind us of the popular etymology of the Ger-
man abusive term Hundsfott, which has been wrongly
explained as having originated in the words Hunnus
fuit. One of these tribes, whom Wé6n-wang is supposed
to have defeated 1138 B.c., was called Kuan, Kun, or Hun,
and has been located by the Chinese historians in the south
of the present Ordos territory. Mencius praises W6n-
wang for the wisdom with which he “served” the Kun
barbarians. “It requires a perfectly virtuous prince,” he
says,? ‘‘to be able with a great country to serve a small
one, as, for instance, King Won served the Kun barbarians.
And it requires a wise prince to be able with a small country
to serve a large one, as King T’ai [W6n-wang’s grand-
father, 1327 B.c.] served the Hiin-yii.” The two ethnic
names here mentioned probably both refer to the Huns.
How Won-wang served his neighbors, the Huns, may be
seen from another passage in Mencius,? who says: —
“Formerly, when King T’ai dwelt in Pin, the barbarians of the
north were constantly making incursions upon it. He served them
with skins and silks, and still he suffered from them. He served
them with dogs and horses, and still he suffered from them. He served
them with pearls and gems, and still he suffered from them. See-
ing this, he assembled;the old men, and announced to them saying:
‘What the barbarians want is my territory. I have heard this —
that a ruler does not injure his people with that wherewith he
* Legge, Ch’un-ts’iu, p. 126. * Mencius, ed. Legge, p. 31. % Men-
cius, ed. Legge, p. 52.

--- pdf page 93 ---
THE SHANG, OR YIN, DYNASTY (1766-1122 B.c.) 69
nourishes them. My children, why should you be troubled about
having no prince? I will leave this.’ Accordingly, he left Pin,
crossed the mountain Liang, built a town at the foot of Mount K’i,
and dwelt there. The people of Pin said: ‘He is a benevolent man.
We must not lose him.’ Those who followed him looked like crowds
hastening to market.”
We learn from this passage that T’ai-wang, known also
as Ku-kung, whose personal name was T’an-fu, the grand-
father of Won-wang, changed his residence from a place
called Pin to another called K’i, and that the move was due
to the grinding tribute exacted from him by his neighbors,
the Hiin-yii (Hunnu), or, as they were afterward called
by the Chinese, Hiung-nu tribes. The foundation of the
duchy of Chéu is, therefore, closely connected with this
historical fact, placed by Chinese standard chronologists,
whether rightly or not, in the year 1327 B.c._ I am inclined
to believe that the steady growth in the power of this
house of Chéu was due to two main causes: (1) the rotten-
ness of the Chinese government under Chéu-sin, who lacked
the backbone absolutely essential to protect the nation
against the common enemy that, after the lapse of fifteen
hundred years, was to become fatal to powerful Europe;
(2) the exposed position of the dukes of Chéu, who had for
generations to defend their distant palatinate against the
common enemy, while the responsible head of the nation
roasted his subjects to please his favorite Ta-ki. But for
the dukes of Chéu, China would have then become a prey
to the Huns. In one of his speeches to the assembled army,
preserved in the Shu-king,| Wu-wang mentions eight
ethnic names: “O ye men of Yung, Shu, Kiang Mau,
Wei, Lu, P’éng and Po, lift up your lances, join your
1 Legge, op. cit., p. 301.

--- pdf page 94 ---
70 THE ANCIENT HISTORY OF CHINA
shields, raise your spears! I have a speech to make.”
The Chinese commentators hold that these names belong
to barbarian tribes living outside of China proper, and
insinuate that they were subject to the dukes of Chéu
without falling under the dominions of the emperor of
China. Some of them may be safely located in the south
and southwest of the Chéu duchy; others are stated to
have occupied the western and northern borders. In the
Bamboo Books Wu-wang is represented as ‘assembling the
barbarians of the West (s7-1) and the princes to attack Yin”
(i.e. Shang) ;’ which seems to imply that his ascendency
was actually brought about by a foreign army. It is,
therefore, quite possible that a portion of Wu-wang’s army
was formed by the Kun barbarians, or Huns, of the Ordos
territory, his nearest neighbors, defeated and, as we may
assume, incorporated into his dominions by his father
Won-wang in 1138 B.c.
We need not be astonished from all this to find that
Turkish words, like the one for Wu-wang’s dagger, have
crept into the Chinese language, which is as much mixed
up with fureign elements as is Chinese civilization gen-
erally. I wish to lay stress on this idea, which, it appears
to me, has not been sufficiently appreciated by the his-
torians, although at this stage we can but faintly trace the
foreign influences affecting the nation, which during later
centuries, in spite of the well-known conservative character
of Chinese culture, have assumed such dimensions as almost
to amount to amalgamation.
1 Legge, Shu-king, Prolegomena, p. 144.
|

--- pdf page 95 ---
THE SHANG, OR YIN, DYNASTY (1766-1122 3.c.) 71
§ 21. CULTURE OF THE SHANG PERIOD
Before leaving the Shang dynasty, which may be de-
scribed as the semi-historical period of Chinese history,
a few words as to its culture will be in place. The Shang
and Chéu dynasties have left to the Far-eastern world
most valuable legacies in the shape of monuments of
national art, chiefly sacrificial vessels and bells made of
bronze and covered with characteristic ornaments, some-
times also with hieroglyphic inscriptions. Under the
Emperor Shi-huang-ti works of literature and of art had
a narrow escape from being consigned to oblivion, owing
to the persecution of this enemy of all ancient civilization.
Lovers of these precious monuments of antiquity had to
bury, immure, or conceal them, lest they might be dis-
covered and destroyed under a cruel law. Later centuries
rediscovered them, when a period of renaissance set in,
culminating in the imperial collections of the T’ang dy-
nasty in the eighth, and again in the twelfth, century, under
the great imperial collector Hui-tsung, and finally under
K’ién-lung of the present dynasty. Chinese archeologists
have done excellent work in applying a sound method of
criticism to the examination of such works; and I am per-
sonally inclined to place confidence in the results of their
researches. Whether an ancient bronze vessel is 1000,
2000, or 3000 years old, can in my opinion never be decided
on the mere appearance of its surface. Chemical analysis
might throw light on the question; but I am not aware
that this has been attempted. In deciding whether such
vessels date from the Shang dynasty, Chinese archeologists
were guided by the style of ornament — which only a trained
eye can distinguish from that of the succeeding Chéu dy-

--- pdf page 146 ---
122 THE ANCIENT HISTORY OF CHINA
North of Ts’ing-chéu, occupying the northern part of the
present Shan-tung, was the province of Yen-chéu, with the
celebrated Mt. T’ai as its sacred hill. It was situated on
the banks of the Yellow River, which then ran into the
Gulf of Chi-li as nowadays. Men and women were in the
proportion of two to three respectively.
The extreme west, the country south of the Ordos ter-
ritory, with Mt. Yo as its sacred hill, was called Yung-chou.
It was bounded by the river Wei on the south, and its
trade consisted of jade and other minerals. The male sex
predominated to the extent of five men to three women.
Oxen and horses were the principal animals, and certain
kinds of millet were grown.
That part of the present province of Chi-li which faces
the sea-coast was called Yu-chéu. Its sacred hill was Mt.
I-wu-lii, situated in the present province of Shéng-king.
Fish and salt were its chief products, and the proportion
of females to males was three to one.
The southern part of Shan-si was occupied by the province
of Ki-chéu. Its sacred hill was called Ho. The trade
of the district was in pines and cypresses; the male sex
prevailed in the proportion of five to three; horses and
oxen were the chief animals; and millet was grown.
The northernmost province, Ping-chéu, occupied the
north of Shan-si, with the celebrated Mt. Hong as its sacred
hill. Its products were cotton and silk textures. Ping-
chéu and Yung-chéu were the two frontier provinces which
came most into contact with the nomad tribes of the
northern steppe, and most of the great battle-fields com-
memorating that endless contest between the Chinese race
and its northern neighbors lie within their boundaries.
The geography of the Chéu-li bears a remarkable resem-

--- pdf page 147 ---
FROM WU-WANG TO K’ANG-WANG 123
lance to that of the Yii-kwng, though differences in de-
tail can be traced. What we learn of China during the
Shang dynasty appears quite different from either, and it
would seem that the conjecture that Yii’s nine provinces
are a "econstruction of the philosophers of the Chéu dynasty,
is supported by this consideration. Scanty though it is,
the geographical section of the Chéu-li gives us an idea of
the extent of China during the early part of that period.
The care with which the proportions of the sexes in the
several provinces is placed on record shows that no little
attention was paid to vital statistics, which is quite in
accord with the lessons given to his prince by the philosopher
Kuan-tzi.
The fifth great governmental division was the Board of
Justice, presided over by the Mandarin of Autumn, who was
supposed to be “in charge of the brigands.” He and his
subordinates had to mete out justice in criminal cases.
The penal code of the Chéu dynasty represents a system
full of detail which may be called humane when compared
with other Asiatic systems. Before capital punishment
could be pronounced on a criminal, the most minute and
rigid rules had to be observed; appeals were made first to
a board of high officers, then to a commission composed of
officers of lower rank, and lastly to the people themselves;
and it appears that the people’s verdict was final, some-
what like that of the juries of modern civilized nations, the
sovereign alone having the right to pardon. The people
were also consulted in cases of punishment for minor
offenses. All subjects were equal before the law; but
members of the imperial house and the administrative
officers enjoyed the privilege of being punished behind the
scenes, as it were, so that the dignity of their positions

--- pdf page 148 ---
124 THE ANCIENT HISTORY OF CHINA
might be maintained. The people had also to deliberate
and decide under the authority of government justices
what was to be done in the case of invasion of the country
by an enemy; or, when a part of the population had to be
transferred to another province, owing to a failure of the
means of subsistence in their original homes; also, when a
new king had to be elected, there being no heir to the
throne,—in brief, we find traces of parliamentary power.
Certain officials subordinate to the Mandarin of Autumn
were, conjointly with the delegates of the Board of Cere-
monies, charged with the responsibility of legalizing state
contracts, such as the agreements made between the em-
peror and his feudatory princes, or between the latter
themselves. Other officials had to superintend the cere-
monial connected with contracts among the people, the
main feature of which was an oath in which the blood of an
animal sacrifice was an important factor. Also subordinate
to this board was the official called ta-hing-j6n, the “Great
Traveler,” as Biot translates, the chief authority in charge
of ambassadorial matters, who, together with his staff,
performed functions somewhat resembling those of a foreign
office. He was in charge of the ceremonial connected with
the reception of visitors to the court, whether from the
feudatory states or from abroad. The most minute details
regarding these court receptions have been placed on record
in the Chéu-li. The “Great Traveler” and his junior col-
league, the “Small Traveler” (stau-hing-jén) were, more-
over, charged with police duties, inasmuch as their sub-
ordinates had to inspect the condition of the feudatory
states and their population. They had to keep the em-
peror informed of all that was going on within his dominions.
The emperor himself traveled through his dominions to see

--- pdf page 149 ---
FROM WU-WANG TO K’ANG-WANG 125
for himself where his authority was called upon to inter-
fere. In his journeys through the empire, he was accom-
panied by an official provided with charts of his provinces,
which gave him the information he desired in connection
with the countries he visited. Another officer had to keep
himself posted on historical, social, and economical ques-
tions concerning the localities visited.
The Great Traveler also convened periodical meetings
of the court interpreters, the musicians, and the official
historians. The Interpreters (stang-sti) had to be familiar
with the languages of the surrounding nations and to assist
at the court receptions; the musicians are called ku, “blind,”
because the performers on the various musical instruments
and the singers at court were selected from blind men.
The court historians are represented by a large and com-
plicated staff of officials, one of whom, the stau-shi, or
“Small Historian,” was in charge of the documents con-
taining the material for the history of the states of the
empire, whereas another, the wai-shi, the “ Historian of the
Exterior,” was charged, among other duties, with the record
of the history of foreign nations as well as of that of the
Three Emperors and the Five Rulers (san-huang-wu-t.).
It is probably one of these officials who, on higher inspi-
ration, is responsible for the fabrications placed on record
in connection with the fabulous Fu-hi, Shon-nung, and
Huang-ti, the fine speeches of Yau and Shun, and the
engineering exploits of the great Yu.
The sixth great board was that of Public Works. The
section of the Chéu-li describing the organization of this
department is lost and has been replaced under the
Han dynasty by a work called T'ung-kuan-k’au-kung-ki,
“ Records of the Public Works of the Mandarin of Winter,”

--- pdf page 150 ---
126 THE ANCIENT HISTORY OF CHINA
or Ssi-kung, “Superintendent of Works.” We learn from it
nothing about the administrative functions of this important
division of government life; but the work contains an
enormous mass of detail concerning the arts and industries
of the period, of which so few remnants have come down
to later generations. Thus most valuable facts are re-
corded with regard to the manufacture of bronze imple-
ments and vessels. Bells, tripods, and other sacrificial
objects contained one-sixth part of tin in an alloy ~f cop-
per; hatchets of all sizes contained one-fifth; lances and
spears, one-fourth; knives and swords, one-third; erasing
knives and arrow-heads, one-fifth, and metallic mirrors, one-
half. All the important objects of art and productions of
handicrafts are fully described in this interesting chapter,
which is quoted by the historians of Chinese culture in
connection with the origin of quite a host of characteristic
products of Chinese civilization.
Such as it is, the Chéu-li is a mine of information on the
culture of the Chou period, which has in many respects
become the prototype of later institutions. The very few
facts I have extracted from it are but a poor substitute for
the work itself, for more detailed information as to which
the reader is referred to Biot’s French version. It should
be remarked that the style of the work is often so terse and
ambiguous that a comprehension of it, as of the other
Chinese classics, is in many cases impossible without the
aid of later Chinese commentaries.
§ 25. OrIGIN OF THE MARINER’s Compass IN CHINA
The reign of Ch’6ng-wang (1115-1079 3.c.) has been
quoted by Chinese and foreign authors alike as the period

--- pdf page 166 ---
ne
a a~ o=
: =
4)
: *
a
+ ™,
a
ul
- - =~ \
mh
' me . .
- ~ WS ws 7 4
OA EY BY Bree TG

--- pdf page 167 ---
V
GRADUAL DECLINE OF CENTRAL POWER
§ 28. CHavu-wana (1052-1002 B.c.)
SI-MA TS’IEN insinuates that under Chau-wang “the
king’s ways became feeble and defective.” He left
the cares of government to his ministers, among
whom were none like the dukes of Chéu and Shau. In
spite of serious warnings given by Heaven in the shape of
natural phenomena, the king would not change his ways,
but devoted himself solely to pleasure. To indulge in the
chase, he did not mind spoiling the crops in the fields of
his subjects. The respectful remonstrances of his ministers
made no impression on him. In 1002 B.c. there was a
revolt among the people of Ch’u, the semi-barbarous state
on the southern frontier. Chau-wang went south to make
war on the barbarians. Even then he looked upon the
campaign as a sort of pleasure trip and, by damaging the
fields of his people in pursuit of his hunting parties, drew
on himself their dislike. To enable him to cross a river,
—said by some to have been the Kiang or Yang-tzi, by
others, the Han-kiang,—the people furnished him with a
boat, the boards of which were insecurely fastened together
—the time-honored method of committing a political mur-
der. In the middle of the river the boat broke up, and the
king had a narrow escape from drowning. He died soon
after as a result of this “accident.”
143

--- pdf page 168 ---
144 THE ANCIENT HISTORY OF CHINA
§ 29. Mu-wane (1001-947 B.c.)
On going south with his army, Chau-wang had appointed
regent his son Man, and the latter on his father’s death
ascended the throne under the name of Mu-wang. He was
then at the ripe age of fifty, and was a great admirer of the
virtue of his forefathers Wé6n and Wu. Details of his life
and government in the Shu-king are very scant, and a great
deal of what we know about him has been supplemented
by later authorities. The most prominent of his charac-
teristics referred to by these is his restless love of traveling
beyond the confines of his empire. His alleged journeys
to the West have given rise to the wildest speculations as
to his having been a mediator between the western Asiatic
and Chinese civilizations. The Bamboo Books contain
only a few allusions to his expeditions against the hordes of
the K’iian barbarians, or K’tan-jung, identified by the
Chinese commentators with the later Hiung-nu, or the
Huns, who, as I have already shown, had under various
names linguistically answering to the root Hun or Kun,
engaged the king’s forefathers, when they (the Hiung-nu)
were still holding the northwestern borders of the empire
during the Shang dynasty under T’ai-wang and Wo6n-wang.
Besides a number of hunting and punitive expeditions and
journeys described as “tours of inspection,’ the Bamboo
Books * record that, “in his seventeenth year he [Mu-wang]
went on a punitive expedition to Mt. K’un-lun and saw the
Si-wang-mu [lit. “Western King’s Mother’’]. That year
he [Si-wang-mu] came to court.” Here a note is added,
which may be that of a commentator of later date, saying
that “the king, in his expeditions to the north, traveled a
1 Legge, Shu-king, Prolegomena, p. 150 seq.

--- pdf page 169 ---
GRADUAL DECLINE OF CENTRAL POWER 145
thousand li over the Liu-sha” (“The Moving Sands,” by
which name any part of the central Asiatic desert west of
the Great Wall may be understood, if not the Desert of
Takla-makan); that he also traveled “a thousand li over
the Tsi-yii”’ {lit. “Heaped-up Feathers’’]; and that “he
made war on the K’tan-jung [Huns?] and returned to the
east with their five kings as captives.’ Westward he is
said to have “pushed his expeditions to where the green
birds cast their feathers”’ (said by some Chinese commenta-
tors to be identical with the San-wei-shan near the Tang-ho,
an affluent of the Bulungir). The note ends by saying that
on these expeditions he traveled over 190,000 li. This
dry-as-dust account is greatly supplemented by another
work specially devoted to Mu-wang’s expeditions, the
Mu-t’ién-tzi-chuan, “ Biography of Mu, the Son of Heaven,”
probably originating in a period not later than the third
century B.c., if we accept the fact that it was found in a
tomb of one of the Wei princes dating from 281 B.c. Of
this work Wylie‘ says: “It savors too much of the fabulous
to be admitted among the authentic records, but it is pre-
served as a specimen of ancient composition.”
The work contains a host of geographical names which
it is scarcely possible now to identify, the best known of
which is that of Mt. K’un-lun, where the king is supposed
to have met Si-wang-mu. The name K’un-lun first occurs
in the Shu-king? in the list of articles said to have been sent
to the Emperor Yii; but in that passage it seems extremely
doubtful whether it does not apply to the name of some
wild tribe of the West furnishing “hair-cloth and skins.’’
It seems quite possible that this name, as-mentioned in the
Bambvo Books, amounts to no more than this; but since
1 Notes on Chinese Literature, p. 153. 2 Legge, p. 127.
it

--- pdf page 170 ---
146 THE ANCIENT HISTORY OF CHINA
it is there described as a hill, it can be understood how the
author, or some interpolator, of the Mu-t’1én-tzi-chuan came
to identify it with the K’un-lun-shan, or Karakorum range,
the reputed sourceo f the Yellow River, which, according
to early Chinese ideas, took its rise in the affluents of the
Tarim, and disappeared into the ground at Lake Lob-nor,
reappearing at its real source in northwestern Tibet. The
K’un-lun-shan has in times much more recent than the
Shu-king grown into a sort of fairy-land and become the
seat of numerous legendary creations, among which is the
Si-wang-mu, who, owing to the meaning of these three
words, is usually represented as a queen, the “Royal Lady
of the West,” heading the troops of genii inhabiting Mt.
K’un-lun and holding from time to time intercourse with
favorite imperial votaries. Such is the legend which has
grown up in the course of ages from the slender basis
afforded by the occurrence of the name in very early tra-
ditions. An obscure reference to Si-wang-mu is also to be
found in the Shan-hai-king, a geographical record possibly
as old as it is insipid; and upon these ancient notices the
philosopher Lié-tzi is supposed to have based in the fifth
century B.c. a fanciful and perhaps allegorical tale of the
entertainment with which King Mu was honored and en-
thralled by the supernatural being. In later ages the
superstitious vagaries of the Emperor Wu-ti (140-87 B.c.)
gave rise to innumerable fables respecting the alleged visits
paid to that monarch by Si-wang-mu and her fairy troop;
and the imagination of the Tauist writers of the ensuing
centuries was exercised in glowing descriptions of her
mountain palace.! Her palace was supposed to stand on
Mt. K’un-lun which, after Wu-ti’s expeditions, was well
1 From Mayers, The Chinese Reader’s Manual, p. 178; cf. p. 108 seq.

--- pdf page 189 ---
GRADUAL DECLINE OF CENTRAL POWER 165
the year corresponding to the end of May and the beginning of
June. They marched 30 li per day, about 11 kilometers, if we
value the li at 1800 cubits and 10 centimeters each. For a grand
army of 300 chariots, 10 chariots formed the advanced guard.
“On the banners were figures of birds and of serpents. There
were attached to them little bells and ribbons. On the royal
standard there was the image of the sacred dragon. The princes of
the blood, and secondary chiefs or viceroys had broad pennons or
flags. One pennon, formed of an ox-tail upon a pole, was placed
behind in the chariot of the chief of a squadron.
“The warriors wore colored cuisses, and buskins on their legs.
In one of the odes a man of Ts’in engages another to follow him to
the war by the promise of clothes, shoes, and weapons, should he
need them. The commandant of a corps d’armée had the title
K’i-fu or of Shang-fu. Several odes designate the general by the
name of ‘the illustrious man,’ meaning ‘the Prince,’ ‘the Dignitary.’
“The drum gave the signal for departure, for attack, and for
retreat. Large drums were covered with the skin of a lizard called
t’o. Before the battle, the warriors excited one another by mock
combats. They leaped, ran, and threatened one another with their
weapons.
“Tn one of the odes, King Won causes the assault of a fortified
city, and his soldiers ascend the wall by means of hooked ladders.
He takes some prisoners and punishes them as rebels, proportion-
ing their chastisement to the gravity of their offense. He causes
the left ears of his captives to be cut off; and in contenting himself
with this punishment he passes for a just and humane man. In
the state of Lu (towards the south of Shan-tung), the army returns
from an expedition. They present to the prince the ears that have
been cut off; they bring the captive chiefs in chains before the
judge, by whom they are condemned by regular sentence. Like
the tribes of America, the Chinese then made very few prisoners ;
they put the vanquished chiefs to death, and released the com-
mon soldiers after cutting off one of their ears, as a mark of dis-
honor, or that they might recognize them if they met with them
again.
“On the parade ground of the capital they practised archery
and the use of other weapons.”

--- pdf page 190 ---
166 THE ANCIENT HISTORY OF CHINA
This graphic description of the Chinese method of war-
fare under the Chéu dynasty has been gathered from
numerous passages in the Shi-king. It will serve as an
example showing how the old poetical literature fills a gap
in the historical tradition similar to that filled up by the
Homeric epics in Greek history. The student will find
references in detail, with some valuable critical notes, partly
modifying the results drawn by Biot from the Shi-king, in
Legge’s translation.
From a military point of view the Chinese method of
warfare does not strike one as very practical, if one con-
siders that the Hién-yiin, or Huns, as true sons of the
steppe, which they must have been at all times, ought to
have enjoyed a great advantage in moving about on their
fleet horses against an enemy possessing no cavalry what-
ever. Although the Chinese have been defeated here and
there by the Huns, it appears that on the whole, in spite of
their clumsy chariot fighting, on roads which were probably
hardly any better than those of the present day, they have
had on their side greatly superior armament and a certain
uniformity of organization; but their chief advantage dur-
ing centuries of this warfare may have been the fact that
the fighting took place on hilly territory, where cavalry
forces could not well be displayed, the Huns having always
been more successful on extensive plains, like the Mon-
golian steppe, than in alpine regions, like the north of
Shan-si. When they broke into Europe twelve hundred
years after Siian-wang, their first successes were largely
supported by the conditions of the ground, those extensive
plains of southern Russia, over which they sent that ava-
lanche of warlike hordes, increasing their power by forcing
kindred folks into their service. Finally, we have to con-

--- pdf page 191 ---
GRADUAL DECLINE OF CENTRAL POWER 167
sider the probability that, during the Chéu period, the Huns
had not as yet consolidated into a nation, whereas the
Chinese, although a confederation of smaller states some-
what like the German empire, cheerfully followed the call
of the Son of Heaven when the nation was in danger.
With all the welcome detail regarding the Chinese side of
that warfare, the Shi-king tells us very little about the Huns
of those days. The earliest account of the gradual develop-
ment of Hunnic life has been supplied by Ssi-ma Ts’ién,
who probably reconstructs his sketch of the most ancient
Huns from what he had learned about these nomads at
his own time, the beginning of the first century B.c. Ssi-
ma Ts’ién’ gives us the following account of the oldest
Hiung-nu.
“Their earliest ancestors were the descendants of the
Emperor Yu of the Hia dynasty and were styled Shun-wei.”’
Parker suggests that this name Shun-wei, which most prob-
ably applies to the chief of the country, —since not the
whole nation, but merely the reigning family could have
descended from the Emperor Yu, —is related to an old
Chinese family name Shun-yii. This seems quite possible,
although the Chinese themselves derive it from a small
state mentioned in their ‘Spring and Autumn Annais.”
Since we hardly know anything about the sounds of Chinese
characters during the Chéu dsnasty, excepting the some-
what doubtful conclusions we may arrive at from a study
of the rhymes in the Shi-king odes, it may not be too bold
a conjecture if we connect this title Shun-wei, or Shun-yi,
with the sound Shan-yii, by which throughout Chinese his-
tory the supreme ruler of the Hiung-nu is designated.
1 Shi-ki, ch. cx; cf. E. H. Parker, The Turko-Scythian Tribes, in
China Review, vol. xx, p. 1 seqq.

--- pdf page 192 ---
168 THE ANCIENT HISTORY OF CHINA
“Before the time of Yau and Shun there were the Shan-jung,
the Hién-yiin and the Hun-yii, who occupied the northern de-
pendencies, following their cattle and shifting their abodes. Their
herds chiefly consisted of horses, oxen and sheep, these being the
animals commonly reared by them; the camel, mules and other
equine animals [named in the text, but difficult to identify] being
of less frequent occurrence. Following their pasturages, they shifted
about and had neither cities and towns, or other fixed abodes, nor
regular agriculture, though they divided their territories; they had
no written documents, the spoken word being sufficient by way of
contract. From early childhood they were taught to ride on sheep,
to draw the bow and shoot birds and rats; when half grown they
would shoot foxes and hares as game for food. Having grown to
become soldiers, they would thus become excellent archers, when
they were all supplied with armors on horseback. In easy times
they would follow their cattle and live on the chase, but in times of
trouble every man was trained to fight in battle and ready to make
raids on other lands. This was their natural disposition. For
distant fight their weapon was the bow and arrow; for close fight
they used swords and small spears. If they could, they would go
on and on in fighting, but withdraw if they were not successful.
They were not ashamed to take to flight, and as long as a matter
was of advantage to them, they did not know propriety or justice.
From their prince and king downward they all lived on the flesh
of their cattle, using their skins for clothing ; they wore felt coats.
The able-bodied would eat the fat and dainty parts of meats,
leaving the remnants of meals to old folks, for they honored strong
and robust men, and despised those that were old and decrepid.
The man whose father had died would marry his step-mothers
(z.e. his father’s own wives except his own mother); when a brother
died his consorts became the wives of the surviving brother. It
was their custom not to taboo names; and they had no clan names
or by-names. When the Hia dynasty became weak, Kung Liu
[Duke Liu, an ancestor of the Chéu emperors] had lost his hus-
bandry-post, he changed to become a western Tartar and had his
city in Pin. Three hundred years after this, the Jung and the Ti
Tartars attacked the great king T’an-fu [the grandfather of Woén-
wang.”

--- pdf page 193 ---
GRADUAL DECLINE OF CENTRAL POWER 169
I am inclined to assume from this passage that the ances-
tors of the house of Chéu had for centuries adopted semi-
Tartar life, which supports the hypothesis that Wu-wang
brought about the downfall of the Shang dynasty with the
assistance of Hunnic tribes and helps to explain the use of
a Turkish word for the dagger handled by him in giving
the body of his enemy Chéu-sin his final coup.
“T’an-fu fled and went to the foot of Mount K’i, whither the peo-
ple of Pin followed him and founded a city which was the beginning
of the state of Chéu. Fully a hundred years after this the Duke of
the West [7.e. Won-wang] made war on the Kun barbarians, and some
twelve or thirteen years afterwards Wu-wang made war on Chéu-
sin and took up his camp at the city of Lo and again lived in Fong
and in Hau, and scattered and drove away the Jung barbarians to
the north of the rivers King and Lo, from whence they offered
periodical tribute, and orders were given to call them Huang-fu,
the ‘Steppe Dependency.’
“More than two hundred years later the prestige of the Chéu
dynasty began to decline, and when Mu-wang made war on the
K’iian barbarians, he obtained four white wolves and four white
deer to come back with. From this time onward the Huang-fu
did not come, upon which Chéu introduced the punishment of
mutilation [probably referring to the habit of cutting off the left
ear of prisoners in war, which thus seems to be looked upon as an
act of reprisal for the Huns not sending tribute to the Chinese
court]. Over two hundred years after Mu-wang, Yu-wang of the
Chou dynasty had quarreled with the Marquis of Shén [father of
the legitimate empress] on account of his favorite sultana Pau Ssi.!
The Marquis of Shon got angry and formed an alliance with
the K’iian barbarians and attacked and killed Yu-wang of the
Chéu dynasty below the Li-shan. Upon this they seized certain
territories of the Chéu and settled down between the rivers
1Cf. Chavannes, Mémoires historiques, vol. i, p. 281; also Giles,
A Chinese Biographical Dictionary, p. 619, who represents Yu-wang
as “King of Yu” in modern Chi-li, though I do not know on what au-
thority.

--- pdf page 206 ---
182 THE ANCIENT HISTORY OF CHINA
other, falling under the nominal sway of the Chéu dynasty.
Each generation of those days presents a different view.
The geography of the Chéu-li, with its nine provinces, or
chéu, bearing such close resemblance to the divisions of the
empire under the Great Yu, is a simple affair when com-
pared with that multiplicity of states which began to grow
up from small beginnings, some of them attaining great
power, others being short-lived and swallowed up by their
neighbors. Their development in history may be traced
in the T’so-chuan; but as affecting the history of China at
large, I shall mention only the more important ones among
them. Students who care for further detail will find it in
Legge’s edition of the historical classic itself.
The development of supremacy among certain states,
nominally coming within the jurisdiction of the emperor,
is probably to a large extent the result of their geographical
position. The states occupying the eastern part of the
empire were naturally prevented from expansion by their
being situated so close to the sea-coast; those in the north,
west, and south had the opportunity to join arms with
rude but warlike neighbors, whose territories, by force or
persuasion, they managed to incorporate into their own
dominions, allowing their populations to amalgamate,
spreading Chinese civilization among them, while profiting
by their warlike spirit. The states which most benefited
by such a conjuncture were those of Tsin, Ts’in, and Ch’u.
The first two names, so similar in sound, should not be con-
founded with each other; the initial of the tsin (without
an apostrophe) being comparatively soft, whereas ts’in is
pronounced with a hard explosive almost approaching an
aspirate. The countries represented by these names were
next-door neighbors and occupied the entire northwest of

--- pdf page 207 ---
GRADUAL DECLINE OF CENTRAL POWER 183
the present empire. Tsin held the greater part of the
present province of Shan-si and the adjoining portion of
Chi-li with that portion of Shen-si which lay on and near
the opposite shore of the Yellow River. The large tract of
country west of it, comprising that fertile valley of the Wei
River with a number of seats of the ancient Chinese civili-
zation, had from small beginnings grown into the dominion
of the Ts’in state. Both these states had for centuries
to do all the fighting for the Chinese of the interior against
their northern and western enemies, the Huns, whose several
divisions are mentioned under various names, as we have
seen. The result of this fighting was the gradual increase
of their military strength. We have seen how the ancestors
of the Chéu emperors originally also occupied a small terri-
tory on the western frontier, and how the warlike spirit
and the virtue of their rulers was exercised and fostered
by their having to do the fighting for that lazy and voluptu-
ous court of the decadent Shang dynasty; also, how thereby,
from small beginnings, the dukes of Chou had grown so
powerful that with the assistance of Huns and other
boundary tribes they managed to throw the Shangs out
of the field, whose last scion they placed in charge of the
kingdom of Corea as a vassal state.
The states of Tsin and Ts’in and their great rival in the
south, the state of Ch’u, now tried with the assistance of
the foreign elements on the boundary to make use of the
weakness of the imperial court to increase their power.
Who those foreigners were is, of course, not an easy ques-
tion to decide. If I speak of the neighbors of Tsin and
Ts’in as “Huns,” I wish this term to be understood in its
broadest sense. The Huns that broke into Europe in the
fourth century A.D. should be looked upon as a political,

--- pdf page 208 ---
184 THE ANCIENT HISTORY OF CHINA
and not a racial, union. The Huns proper, as the dominant
race, were probably of Turkish extraction. So were
the Hiung-nu, their predecessors in the east. But the
Hiung-nu, as a political power, comprised, besides the
Turkish elements among central Asiatic nations, also
the ancestors of the races which we now separate from them
as being of Mongolic and Tungusic extraction. It is quite
probable that the different tribes of the north and west of
China whose names appear in the history of the Ch’un-
1 Quite a number of arguments support this hypothesis. The dis-
covery and decipherment of the Old-Turkish stone inscriptions found
on the banks of the Orchon and of the Tonjukuk inscription found near
Urga leave not the slightest doubt that the language in which they are
written is Turkish. There can, further, be no doubt whatever that
the two allied nations, the Tiirk and Sir-Tardush, a portion of whose
history is described in those inscriptions, are identical with the na-
tions called T’u-kiié and Sié-yen-t’o respectively in Chinese records,
both of whom are distinctly stated to have been offshoots of the old
Hiung-nu. Similarly the nation described by the Chinese as Kau-ki,
which we know to be identical with the Uigurs, one of the chief repre-
sentatives of the Turkish stock during the Middle Ages, is stated in
Chinese accounts as considering the Hiung-nu as their ancestors.
They were even said to speak the language of these, their forefathers,
with but slight differences occasioned by the lapse of centuries.
This may account for the fact that many of the Hiung-nu words, of
which the approximate sound and the meaning have been preserved
in Chinese contemporaneous records, are easily explained by the cor-
responding words in the Uiguric vocabulary or that of its modern
representatives such as the Turki, Djagatai, or Teleutic dialects.
The only conclusion we can draw from these considerations is, that the
Hiung-nu, or Huns, were actually Turks in a racial sense, whatever
the other nations may have been, whether Mongols or Tunguses,
who were forced to join arms with them and formed part of the
Hiung-nu, or Huns, as a political union. The identity of the Huns
of Europe and the Hiung-nu of Chinese historians, denied by Rémusat
and Ritter, has been proved in my paper Ueber Wolga-Hunnen und
Hiung-nu (Sitzwngsberichte der philos.-philol. Classe der k. bayer.
Akademie d. Wissensch., 1899, Band ii, Fasc. ii, Munchen, 1900).

--- pdf page 209 ---
GRADUAL DECLINE OF CENTRAL POWER 185
ts’iu period were just as different in race and language as
they are nowadays, and that it was merely their nomadic
life and a certain uniformity in social organization which
united them into one group. In the T'so-chuan these
northern and western barbarians appear under various
names, which now take the place of the former Hun-yii
and Hién-yiin, the Huns of the earliest periods, with whom
they are identified by the later Chinese historians. As
falling within this category, we may regard the hordes
described in the T'so-chuan as Jung, Ti, and I. The Jung
were chiefly found in the west, the 77 in the north, and the
I in the east of the present Chinese dominions. We know
nothing about their relations with the inhabitants of the
more distant parts of the Asiatic continent; and if they
had anything in common with the earliest Scythians, which
have become more or less imperfectly known in Europe,
such a supposition can only rest on conjecture. Their be-
ing mentioned under so many different names seems to
show that in the earliest times they did not form a polit-
ical union, as they certainly did at the end of the third cen-
tury B.c., when Mau-tun,—which name I have endeavored
to explain as the old Chinese transcription of Turkish
Baghatur, “valiant,” “hero,” —as Great Khan of the Hiung-
nu nation, united under his scepter the Tartars of all races
between Manchuria in the east and Lake Aral in the west.
An old Latin chronicle, the “Chronica Hungarorum,” by
John of Thurécz, who probably wrote about the year 1490,
has placed on record a list consisting of thirty-seven
names said to represent King Attila’s ancestors. We
1 Hirth, Sinologische Beitrége zur Geschichte der Turkvélker:
I. Die Ahnentafel Attila’s nach Johannes von Thurécz, in Bulletin of
the Imperial Academy of St. Petersburg, 5th series, vol. xiii, no. 2.
(September, 1900.)

--- pdf page 210 ---
186 THE ANCIENT HISTORY OF CHINA
do not know what sources this author had before him; and
it was generally believed that he had drawn upon his
imagination for his facts. This was my own belief, too,
until I compared the names found in the Latin chronicle
with those appearing in a genealogical table of Hiung-nu
kings, reconstructed from Chinese records. I then found
that some of the names of the chronicle in their proper
generations and the identical sequence are strongly sug-
gestive of the Chinese transcriptions of the names of certain
Hiung-nu kings then settled in the north of China. The
Hungarian carries his list to the thirtieth ancestor of King
Attila. At the head of it he places, in accordance with the
time-honored custom of medieval authors, certain Biblical
names. If we except these, from Noah down to Nimrod, the
first name having an indigenous coloring is that of King
Attila’s thirty-third ancestor which, if we give an average
of thirty-three years to each generation, carries us to about
the year 635 B.c. If we can make up our minds as to the
chronicler’s bona fides with regard to King Attila’s ancestors
during the Han period, we may perhaps be justified in
doing so as regards the Chou dynasty to the extent of
assuming that at least that portion of the northern tribes
which was looked upon as the ancestral horde of the later
Hiung-nu was governed by kings of the same family.
Ssi-ma Ts’ién (Shi-ki, ch. ex, p. 9) even goes a good deal
farther, when he asserts that “from Shun-wei [their alleged
first monarch, called a descendant of the Chinese Emperor
Yui] down to T’éu-man [probably standing for Turkish
Tuman, or Tiéimdn, ‘ten thousand,’ Mau-tun’s father, who
died 209 B.c.] fully a thousand years elapsed, though their
genealogy could not be traced.” This would bring us to
the thirteenth century B.c., as the period in which regal

--- pdf page 211 ---
GRADUAL DECLINE OF CENTRAL POWER 187
power was organized at least among some portion of the
Huns.
The name Jung, found in the T'so-chuan, is probably
nothing but another form of the root Hun or Kun, which,
we hive seen, has assumed the most different shapes in the
course of Chinese history. For like the Hun-yii, Hién-
yun, etc., they may be located, from the indications of the
Tso-chuan, in certain parts of the northern or western
boundary. ‘This boundary was then, however, much nearer
the center of the empire than it was later on. One of the
tribes called Jung for generations made constant inroads
on the state of Lu in the present Shan-tung, and is said to
have had its seat at one time in the present prefecture of
Ts’au-chéu, south of the Yellow River. The Pei-jung, or
“Northern Jung,” the Shan-jung, or “Hill Jung,” which
name seems to indicate that they were not occupants of
the steppe, and the Wu-chung were settled in Tsun-hua-
chéu about one hundred miles east of Peking. According
to the T’so-chuan, the Northern Jung made a raid on the
state of Chong in the north of K’ai-foéng-fu, Ho-nan. This
entry in the T'so-chuan* is of importance, inasmuch as it
states that, while the Chinese were fighting in chariots, the
Jung had only foot-soldiers. The T'’so-chuan says :—
“The Earl of Chung withstood them, but was troubled by the
nature of their troops, and said, ‘They are footmen, while we
have chariots. The fear is, lest they fall suddenly upon us.’
His son Tu said: ‘Let a body of bold men, but not persistent,
feign an attack upon the thieves, and then quickly draw off from
them; and at the same time place three bodies in ambuscade to
be ready for them. The Jung are light and nimble, but have no
order; they are greedy and have no love for one another; when
they conquer, no one will yield place to his fellow; and when they
1 Legge, p. 28.

--- pdf page 212 ---
188 THE ANCIENT HISTORY OF CHINA
are defeated, no one tries to save another. When their front men
see their success, they will think of nothing but to push forward.
When they are thus advancing and fall into the ambush, they
will be sure to hurry away in flight. Those behind will not go
to their rescue, so there will be no support to them; and thus
your anxiety may be relieved.’ The earl followed this plan. As
soon as the front men of the Jung met those who were in am-
buscade, they fled, pursued by Chu Tan. Their detachment was
surrounded and smitten both in front and in rear till they were
all cut to pieces. The rest of the Jung made a grand flight.”
This description of the battle, recorded under the year
714 B.c., shows that the Northern Jung, then said to be
settled in Yung-p’ing-fu, Chi-li, were fighting without
horses and that this was regarded as a disadvantage to the
Chinese, who fought in chariots. We are further told by
the T'so-chuan’* that the Jung and the Ti were continually
changing their residence, and were fond of exchanging land
for goods. This latter weakness, if we may so call it, was
probably the reason for the Chinese buying the barbarians
off their territory, when an appeal to arms failed, and of
finally driving them into the Mongolian steppe, their later
home. This is also probably one of the reasons why the
federal states occupying the boundaries facing uncivilized
barbarians, have grown so powerful as compared with the
emperor’s own dominions, which lay in the middle of the
empire and occupied a comparatively small territory north
and south of the Yellow River about the present city of
Ho-nan-fu. The states of Tsin and Ts’in had apparently
the lion’s share in territorial extension at the expense of
their Hunnish neighbors. The state of Yen, occupying the
present Chi-li, was similarly successful; other states like
Ts’i, Lu, Wei, Chu, Sung, Ki, etc., were hemmed in by the
1 Legge, p. 424.

--- pdf page 213 ---
GRADUAL DECLINE OF CENTRAL POWER 189
sea-coast and could not, of course, increase by conquest
among the barbarians. This, however, was the case in a
prominent degree with the third of the great feudal states,
Ch’u (to be distinguished from Chu mentioned above).
The state of Ch’u was chiefly occupied by the southern
barbarians known as Man, or Man-izi, Marco Polo’s Manzi.
Ch’u was its name as a state, which, like Tsin and Ts’in
and all the other territories surrounding the imperial do-
main, was under the more or less nominal jurisdiction of
the Son of Heaven. In those very scanty records preserved
of the reign of Chau-wang, the region where this worthless
monarch came to grief, while crossing a river in 1002 B.c.,
is described as “the south.” Ssi-ma Ts’ién simply says
that Chau went to “the south” on a tour of inspection,
and that he did not return, having died on the kiang, or
river. Later commentators, however, identify “the south”
with the Ch’u country; and, since this entire region was
even at a much later period occupied by the Man barbarians,
we may look upon this as an early mention of their country.
In the T’so-chuan commentary on the “Spring and Autumn
Annals,” the Ch’u state is constantly referred to under this
name; but in the main text it was called King down to the
year 659 B.c., when the name Ch’u took its place. From
the tradition preserved in the commentaries’ it would
appear that the semi-barbarous state, if we may so call it,
was from remote antiquity governed by rulers of Chinese
extraction. The chiefs of Ch’u were at first viscounts with
the surname Mi, which means “the bleating of sheep.”
Their lineage is traced up to prehistoric times, the family
being said to be descended from the Emperor Chuan-hii
1Chavannes, Mémoires historiques, vol. i, p. 250. ? Legge, Ch’ un-
ts’iu, p. 86.

--- pdf page 214 ---
190 THE ANCIENT HISTORY OF CHINA
(2510-2433 B.c.). This sounds, of course, very fabulous;
but representatives of the line are mentioned by name as
early as the times of Won-wang and Wu-wang, 7.e. in the
twelfth century B.c., when the head of the family was named
Yii-hiung. His great-grandson, Hiung I, was invested by
Ch’6ng-wang, the second Chéu emperor, with the lands of
King-man, 7.e. “the Man barbarians of King.” His capital
was Tan-yang in the neighborhood of the present city of
Ichang, in Hu-pei. It appears that after him the ‘amily
name of the Man rulers was Hiung, “Bear,” and from
them this Chinese family name is supposed to have been
derived.’ In 887 B.c. one Hiung K’ti usurped the title
of king, which was afterward dropped for a time, but
permanently resumed by Hiung T’ung, known as King Wu,
in 704 B.c., who also moved his capital to Ying, near the
present city of King-chéu-fu.2 The rule of the Hiung
family extends from 1078 B.c. down to the extinction of
the Ch’u state by that of Ts’in in 223 B.c. Whether the
forty names mentioned in this list are those of descendants
of an originally Chinese family, as their being traced to the
mythical emperor Chuan-hii would indicate, or whether
they were the descendants of an aboriginal Man family,
is immaterial. This seems a matter of doubt. On the one
hand, their pedigree being traced to the Emperor Chuan-hii
may not have more historical value than King Attila’s
in John of Thurécz’s “Chronica Hungarorum,” headed,
as that is, by the Biblical names Noah, Japheth, Cush, and
*See Giles, The Family Names, in Journ. of the China Branch
of the Royal Asiatic Society, New Series, vol. xxi, 1886, p. 265, no. 121.
? For a genealogical table of the rulers over the state of Ch’u, see
Appendix: Chronological Tables, xi; also Legge, Ch’ un-ts’iu, Prole-
gomena, p. 109 seq.; and Shi-ki, ch. xiv, Chavannes, vol. iii, p.
35 seq.

--- pdf page 215 ---
GRADUAL DECLINE OF CENTRAL POWER 191
Nimrod. The Hungarian chronicler here merely indulges
in what may be called the European practice of his age.
The Chinese did something similar in extending the pedi-
grees of distinguished barbarian houses to some of their
old legendary emperors. We find a perfect parallel in the
great khans of the Hiung-nu, whom the Chinese described
as descendants of their Emperor Yi, and we can prove
from Chinese history that, within historical times, princes
of the same family were proud to refer to their Chinese
pedigree. The rulers of the state of Ch’u certainly identi-
fied themselves with their people, at least in certain pas-
sages of Ssi-ma Ts’ién’s Shi-ki,' where Hiung K’t, ruler of
Ch’u some time in the ninth century B.c., justifies the
appointment of his sons as “kings” of certain Man bar-
barians in the Yang-tzi region, saying, ‘We are Man
barbarians and have nothing to do with Chinese titles,”’
which refer to the year 704 B.c., when Hiung T’ung, dis-
satisfied with the scant recognition he had hitherto received
at the hands of the imperial court, assumed on his own
responsibility the title of “king,” as under the existing
circumstances he seemed justified in doing. In a discus-
sion with his opponent, the Prince of Sui, he distinctly says,
“We are Man barbarians” (Wo Man-i yé). Chavannes?
translates these words even by “Je suis un barbare’’; but
it appears that both interpretations may be justified.
Anyhow, he may have called himself a barbarian in spite
of Chinese descent. He goes on to say that “now the
princes of the empire are in a state of rebellion, that they
encroach on their territories and that some even kill each
other.” On expressing his desire that the emperor should
give him a higher title, the court refused this request, upon
1 Ch, xl, pp. 3B and 5A. 2Vol. iv, p. 344.

--- pdf page 216 ---
192 THE ANCIENT HISTORY OF CHINA
which the barbarian chief recapitulates the history of his
house, saying, “My forefather Yu Hiung was instructor to
Won-wang. Ch’6ng-wang gave my forefathers a baronetcy
and instructed them to live in Ch’u, and the Man barbarians
all recognized him as their leader,” etc.’ This again may
involve that the Ch’u princes were originally a Chinese
family, and that we may place confidence in the detailed
pedigree communicated in Ssi-ma Ts’ién’s chapter devoted
to the Ch’u kingdom,’ which contains no allusion +o the
Man barbarians down to the time of Ch’éng-wang. The
non-barbarian origin of this pedigree is, moreover, if lineage
and names as given by Ssi-ma Ts’ién are correct, greatly
supported by the fact of Yui Hiung, Won-wang’s teacher,
having been one of the most distinguished writers of the
Chinese language during his time, he being known as the
author of a book, the Yw-tzi, the “ Philosopher Yu,” which
is possibly the oldest specimen of Chinese literature; older
even than the J-king, though opinions are divided on that
point. In forming an opinion as to the cultural develop-
ment of the barbarians, we should take the following facts
into consideratio:n —
The Man barbarians were organized into a state, ruled
over by a continuous line of princes, and, as such, formed
an integral part of the Chinese empire under the Chéu
dynasty. Their state territory extended from about 23
degrees north latitude in the north to Lake Tung-t’ing and
beyond in the south. An expansion from north to south
probably took place during this long period of political
life, since we find Man barbarians occupying the whole
south and southwest of China and the adjacent parts in
1 Chavannes, loc. cit. * Chavannes, p. 337 seqg. * Wylie, Notes on
Chinese Literature, p. 125.

--- pdf page 217 ---
GRADUAL DECLINE OF CENTRAL POWER 193
Tung-king. For, soon after the absorption of the state of
Ch’u by Ts’in, the native state of Ts’in-shi-huang-ti (em-
peror of China in 221 B.c.), we find a native of north China,
Chau T’o, appointed king of the Man barbarians. Accord-
ing to Chinese views, the south of China in the present coast
provinces and on the Tung-king border was an uninhabited
wilderness at the dawn of history, and the inhabitants
found there later on were immigrants from north and
central China. The word Man, as an ethnic term, is liable
to create confusion, and requires some specification to be
rightly understood. The term Nan-man, “southern Man,”
or “barbarians,” in its widest sense comprises nations of
quite different affinities from those of the Man barbarians
who formed the state of Ch’u under the Chéu dynasty;
but from the genealogy of the southern and southwestern
tribes, as reconstructed from Chinese sources, it appears
that the Man of that southern state of the Chéu empire
retreated before the extension of Chinese culture into their
later southern territories, which extended far beyond the
present limits of China deep into the Malay Peninsula.
It is, of course, quite possible, that races of the Man type
have been settled there from times immemorial and that the
Chinese idea of their having immigrated there from the
north originated in the fact that they were discovered
within historical periods in parts of the continent formerly
believed to be uninhabited. Yet the wandering spirit of
some of their tribes can be clearly traced in Chinese history.
The best proof for this is what we read, for instance, about the
history of one of their great divisions, the Liau barbarians,
whose original seats were in Han-chung, south of the pres-
ent Si-an-fu, whence they spread over the province of Ssi-
ch’uan and farther on to Kui-chéu. In the twelfth century
re)

--- pdf page 292 ---
268 THE ANCIENT HISTORY OF CHINA
the time when Tsin and Ts’i fell victims to internal dissensions,
Ts’in and Ch’u became the leading actors in that drama destined
to end with the triumph of Ts’in and the establishment of the
empire by Ts’in Shi-huang-ti in 221 B.c. We may thus say that
the revolution which finally led to the establishment of imperial
China can be traced to the year 403 B.c., and that this is the reason
why Ssi-ma Kuang makes this year the starting point of his great
history entitled T'zi-chi-t’ung-kién.”
This, it appears to me, is the only theory which helps to
explain quite a number of cultural problems encountered
by the student of Chinese history a few centuries later in
the shape of important changes that must have taken place
in the popular views of the masses, in folk-lore, supersti-
tions, and art. We possess the most plausible arguments
for the introduction of foreign influences in Chinese culture
at the time when relations with western Asia were opened
under the Emperor Wu-ti at the end of the second century
B.c.; but if we examine numerous facts still on record as
referring to times immediately preceding the Wu-ti period,
we are bound to notice that changes of a different kind had
come over the Chinese of this as compared with those of
the Confucian and pre-Confucian periods. The growing
influence of foreign elements from Ts’in in the west, Chau
in the north, and Ch’u in the south may account for this.
Possibly much of what impresses us as new under the Ts’in
dynasty and the early part of the western Han had existed
for centuries before those times. For we must not forget
that our main sources down to the end of the Ch’un-ts’iu
period originate with writers of the Confucian school, who
would not place on record facts and ideas at variance with
their own views; and it is quite possible that ancient China,
as represented to us by Confucian writers, would appear
quite different if other sources existed. The little we know

--- pdf page 293 ---
THE CONTENDING STATES 269
of Lau-tzi as a personage and of the teachings which became
the germ of Tauism is an almost foreign element in Con-
fucian China, and this seems to confirm our theory; for
Lau-tzi, as a native of the state of Ch’u, was born, and
probably brought up, among the southern barbarians.
The Chau family, which now seems to have become the
strongest among the three usurpers of Tsin, was of old
standing in that state. Its pedigree is traced to a common
origin with the Ts’in princes at the time of Chéu-sin, the
last monarch of the Shang dynasty, when two brothers be-
came the respective ancestors of the two lines of Ts’in and
Chau. The Emperor Mu of the Chéu dynasty was accom-
panied in one of his expeditions by a member of this family
as his charioteer; and he rewarded him with the city of
Chau in the present South Shan-si. The power of the
family was further augmented by gifts of territory under
the dukes of Tsin. We have met the names of members of
this remarkable family on former occasions. Chau Ts’ui
had been the companion of Duke Won of Tsin during his
voluntary exile among the Tartars, and after his return
had become prime minister of Tsin. His son and successor
in office, Chau Tun, was the son of a Tartar’ wife. But
Chau Tun was not the only bastard in the family. Chau
Siang-tzi, who died after a reign of thirty-three years in
425 B.c., and whose personal name was Wu-sii, was also
the son of a Tartar wife, and he himself married a Tartar
woman.2 Need we be astonished, therefore, to find that in-
1 Chavannes, op. cit., vol. v, p. 13. His son Chau Sho and his
posthumous child Chau Wu were the subject of the romantic drama
of the Mongol period translated by St. Julien in his L’ orphelin de la
Chine (Syntaze nouvelle, etc., vol. ii, p. 309 seqq.).
2 Chavannes, op. cit., pp. 32, 51.

--- pdf page 294 ---
270 THE ANCIENT HISTORY OF CHINA
fluences quite foreign to Chinese tradition were even then at
work in the introduction of hitherto unknown elements in
the life of these quasi-Chinese princes? Altogether, readers
of the history of Chau, as represented in Ssi-ma Ts’ién’s
account, will receive the impression that it contains various
prognostics of that important change in cultural life which
became dominant in the age of Ts’in Shi-huang-ti; namely,
a Tartarized China, the traditional Confucian views of life
having been supplanted by Tartar, Scythian, Hunnic, or
Turkish elements —elements that, whatever name we may
give them, had grown out of the national life of central
Asiatic foreigners and that now began to disturb the
quiet development of the nation whose civil code was the
Chéu-li and whose model gentleman had been Confucius.
Chavannes ‘ says in connection with the history of Chau: —
“You will remark in this chapter the important part played by
the Wonderful; dreams, predictions and visions of supernatural
beings will be found in it in much greater numbers than in any other
part of the Shi-ki.”
Liu An, who died 122 B.c., has preserved a characteristic
anecdote of Chau Siang-tzi. The interests of the house of
Tsin had, after its fall, been represented by a faithful ad-
herent named Chi Po. In the struggle between the latter
and the united forces of Chau, Han, and Wei, Chi Po was
killed, and Chau Siang-tzi took possession of his skull,
which he had made into a drinking vessel.?
This procedure, which I am inclined to regard as a ritual
act rather than as a whim of the perpetrator, seems to
speak volumes in favor of Hunnic influences, since we have
a perfect parallel in the history of the Huns, or Hiung-nu,
‘ Loc. cit., p. 8. ? A slightly later author makes it “a drinking ves-
sel varnished or lacquered.”

--- pdf page 295 ---
THE CONTENDING STATES 271
under their Great Khan Lau-shang, who reigned 175 to
160 B.c., and who, having defeated the Yiié-chi, or Indo-
Scythians, decapitated their king and made his skull into
a drinking vessel. Chinese archeologists have quibbled a
good deal about the sense of the word translated “ drinking
vessel,’’ some holding that it was a cup used in wine feasts,
others giving it a still more cynical interpretation; but the
truth is, probably, that such trophies served a ritual pur-
pose, since we learn from later accounts that the skull of
the defeated king had been preserved by the Hiung-nu for
generations, and that it was reserved for a solemn state
act, the drinking of the blood of a white horse in taking an
oath to sanctify the conclusion of a treaty of peace. Cha-
vannes’ refers to an interesting parallel furnished by Livy,’
who, describing a disaster suffered by the Romans under
their consul Lucius Posthumius in 216 B.c. at the hands
of Gaulic hordes, says: —
“The Boii, having cut off his head, carried it and the spoils they
stripped off his body in triumph into the most sacred temple they
had. Afterwards they cleansed the head according to their custom,
and, having covered the skull with chased gold, used it as a cup for
libations in their solemn festivals, and as a drinking-cup for their
high priests and other ministers of the temple.” *
The Boians, who then occupied certain territories in the
north of Italy, were a nation of very doubtful origin.
Zeuss‘ speaks of them in connection with Celtic tribes,
but, in view of the conflicting notices of classical authors,
thinks they may have come across the Danube from the
north; and he quotes a passage from Strabo to show that
1Chavannes, op. cit., p. 50. ? xxiii, ch. 24, §§ 11-12, ed. Weis-
senborn. * Transl. by Spillan and Edmonds, vol. ii, p. 180, ‘ Die
Deutschen und die Nachbarstiémme, Munich, 1837, p. 244,

--- pdf page 296 ---
272 THE ANCIENT HISTORY OF CHINA
at one time they occupied the Hercynian forest surrounding
Bohemia. The skull story related by Livy might involve
a hint as to Scythian origin; but it will be difficult to prove
that Scythians in those days had extended their wander-
ings as far west as that, though they are said to have been
settled near the lower course of the Danube.
Another instance of the gradual Tartarization, if we may
so call it, of Chinese culture was chronicled a few genera-
tions later, when the king of Chau, who reigned under the
name of Wu-ling (329-299 B.c.), resolved for political
reasons to exchange the traditional Chinese court dress for
that of a Tartar ruler. He did this in spite of the re-
monstrances of several members of his family, who pleaded
in vain for the retention of the traditional Chinese eti-
quette. The manners and customs of antiquity,h et hought,
were good enough for the ancients, but the modern man
had to conform to the requirements of his time; this is
the leading idea of the replies made to remonstrances of his
friends, as recorded by Ssi-ma Ts’ién.'
A still more thorough change made by Wu-ling in this
process of Tartarization was the introduction of cavalry
in the army. During the early part of the Chéu dynasty
' Chavannes, op. cit., pp. 70-84. Whatever innovations were
implied in the adoption of Tartar dress, were attributed to king Wu-
ling of Chau, who is supposed to have been the first to break
through the traditional lines in regard to dress, though Tartar cus-
toms were again cultivated on a larger scale at various later periods.
It appears that the mode of dress now adopted was better suited to
the quick movement of the body. Those cumbrous big sleeves of
the old Chinese court robe were abandoned for narrower shapes;
and the sandals and shoes of straw or hemp were replaced by short
boots, varying in style down to the present dynasty. Indeed King
Wu-ling is credited with having introduced the boot into the Chinese
gentleman’s attire. It was in those days made of yellow leather.

--- pdf page 297 ---
THE CONTENDING STATES 273
the horse had been used mainly in harness. The heroes
of Chinese warfare fought on chariots, standing up and not
sitting, accompanied, of course, by a retinue of pedestrians;
and to sit astride on horseback was originally not a Chinese,
but a Hunnic custom, which possibly took its rise from
King Wu-ling’s adoption of cavalry fighting. I find it
stated in a later commentary on the 7T'so-chuan that riding
on horseback did not become customary before the time
of the “Six States,” 7.e. the third century B.c. The king-
dom of Chau had absorbed too much of the Tartar element ;
and the purely Chinese subjects of King Wu-ling seem to
have been in too great a minority to maintain the traditional
conservative spirit of an original Chinese dynasty.
§ 56. AN-wancG (401-376 B.c.)
Under this emperor a great change took place in the
state of Ts’i. During the time of Duke Huan and his
minister Kuan-tzi, a prince of Ch’6n had taken refuge in
Ts’1, whose descendants had grown into a powerful clan.
For some reason or other they changed their name to T’ién.
In 481 B.c. a member of this family named T’ién Ch’ang
had managed to drive Duke Kién of Ts’i from the throne,
have him murdered and replaced by the duke’s younger
brother, who made him his minister. His grandson T’ién
Ho in 410 s.c. actually deposed the then reigning duke,
usurped the throne for himself, and was finally confirmed
by An-wang as Duke of Ts’i. In this he had obtained the
good offices of the Marquis of Wei, one of the San-tsin.
Another state of Wei (so pronounced at present, but the
sound of the name was different in ancient times) had given
birth to one of the typical characters of the time, which,
T

--- pdf page 372 ---
348 APPENDIX
B.C.
Sauice Shéu-méng . 5 ° . ° 3 < - 585-561
Chu-jfan - c 5 : ° 2 6 - 560-548
“ Yii-chai 5 : - “ ° ° : . 547-544
ssl-me*. i - 4 - A ° A . 543-527
King Inau . 5 : A a . . . - 526-515
se PH O-Lt, , : ; d : . = - 514-496
“« Fu-ch’ai 5 : 5 C 6 - 495-473
Wu was annexed by Yiié in 473 B.C.
XXII. KINGS OF YUE
The kingdom of Ywé, during the Chéu period, occupied about
the present province of Ch’6-kiang. Although Yiié is mentioned
as a state asearly as 601 B.c.in the T'so-chuan (Legge, Ch’un-ts’iu,
p. 302), its history as. known to us begins with its king Kéu-tsién
fully a century later.
King Kéu-tsién é : - : : : . 496-465
“ Lu-ying : : : A : : - - 464-459
“ Purshéu : 5 4 A : ; . . 458-449
© Chu-kéu : F 4 ‘ 6 4 . 448-412
“< T and his successors : ; é 5 - 411-334
Yué was annexed by Ch’u in 334 B.c.

--- pdf page 373 ---
INDEX
Agreements, state: see CONTRACTS. 7, note 2, 52, note 2, 174, note 1,
Agriculture: introduction , of, as- 175; on the mother of Mencius,
cribed to Shén-nung, 10; im- 283, note 1, 329, note 1.
proved by Huang-ti, 13; during Army: beginnings under Huang-ti,
Chéu dynasty according to 22; no standing, at beginning
the Chéuti, 110; in charge of of Chéu dynasty, 119; with all
Mandarin of Earth, 113; Huns accoutrements marched 30 li
have no regular, 168; Hi (10 miles, or less) a day, 159,
Hing’s theory regarding, re- 165 ; characteristics of, compiled
futed by Mencius, 290; taxation from the Shi-king, 158-166;
of, 296-298; see also IrRIGA- infantry composed of husband-
TION OF Sort; LANDHOLDERS; men, 163; regimental divisions
Lanp TENURE. and ‘‘chariots,’”’ 163-164; train-
Altruism: see Mo Tr. ing before the battle, 165; cav-
Amazons, corps of: under Ho-lu, alry introduced by King Wu-
King of Wu, 234. ling of Chau, 272-273; see also
Ambassadors: from the Yiié-ch’ang CHARIOTS ; Horses; War;
tribes, 127; see also D1ipLomats. WEAPONS.
Amiot, Father: first to point out Arrow-heads: see WEAPONS.
identity of eclipse referred to Art: works of, destroyed and con-
in Shi-king, 174. cealed under Shi-huang-ti, re-
Ancestors: merits of, become a bene- discovered in periods of renais-
fit to descendants, 82; cause sance; early collectors of, 71;
descendants to be rewarded as during Shang dynasty chiefly
fief-holders, 99 ; Ch6u-kung prays symbolic, 84; Confucian age
to, and not to God, for the re- responsible for forgeries in, 90;
covery of Wu-wang, 102-103; autochthonous, during Shang
have charge in Heaven of de- dynasty, 91; objects of, and
scendants on earth, 103; Chéu- handicraft described in Chéu-li,
kung’s prayer to, reveals his 126; see also ARCHHOLOGISTS ;
loyalty, 105; see also SACRIFICE Bronze Drums; BrRoONzES;
to ANCESTORS; SPIRITS OF DRAGON AND PHENIX; HIERO-
THE DEPARTED. GLYPHICS; JADE; NINE TRIPODS,
Antiquity, monuments of: none THE; Pa-KuA; PoTrery; T’savu-
comparable to those of Egypt, T’1£; THUNDER PATTERN ; WRIt-
77. ING, ART OF.
An-wang, the Emperor: 273-274, Artisans: rank fifth in population,
332. 110.
Archzologists, Chinese: trustworthi- Astrologers, duties of: 118.
ness of, 50, 71-73, 74. Astronomers, duties of: 118.
Archives, state: 125. Astronomy: practised by Huang-ti,
Arendt, C.: his chronological tables, 13, 21-22; progress in, under
349

--- pdf page 374 ---
350 INDEX
Chuan-hii, 25; Hi and Ho, Battles, Important: Wu-wang de-
astronomers under Yau, 30; feats Chéu-sin [at Mu-yé], 65;
under Chung-k’ang Hi and Ho between Chinese and Tartar
fail to predict eclipse of sun, 39- armies mostly in North Shan-si
40; eclipse recorded in the Shu- and Ordos territory, 122; of
king, 40-41, 174; ‘‘a conjunc- Ts’ién-méu, 789 sB.c., 158;
tion of five planets,” 54; ‘‘two against the Huns under Siian-
suns appeared together,” 55; wang, 827 B.c., 158-161; sea-
duties of officers in charge of, sons and mode of procedure,
118-119; use of gnomon, 119; 164-165; mode of fighting
eclipse of 776 B.c., foreboding among the Huns, 168, 189; 7'so-
disaster, confirmed by Western chuan describes battle of 714
savants, 172-175; eclipse of B.c., 187-188; between Ts’i and
694 B.c., 201. Ch’u, 208-209; between Tsin
Attila, King of the Huns: his an- and Ch’u at Ch’6ng-p’u, 216 ; be-
cestors among the sovereigns tween Sung and Ch’u, 219; Tsin
of the Hiung-nu nation, 185— and Chong beaten by Ch’u, 223;
186, 190. between Wu and Yié, 233, 234,
Autumn, Mandarin of (ts’tu-kuan) : 261; five confederate states
113, 123-125. beaten by Ts’in at the Han-ku
Avalokités’vara: 149. Pass, 313; Po K’i of Ts’in
crushes Han and Wei at I-k’ié,
Bactria: 148. 318; Po K’i takes the city of
Badge of jade (kuz): 103. Hang-tang, 321; Ts’in de-
Baggage, army: watched by the feated at siege of MHan-tan,
feeble during battle, 164. 322; Ts’in’s victories in 256
Baghatur (‘“‘hero’’), probable Turk- and 249 5.c., 325; Ts’in de-
ish form of the name Mau-tun: feated in 247 B.c., its final
185. engagements against federal
Bak tribes: T. de Lacouperie’s, 15. states, 328.
Bamboo Books, the: chief authority Beacon fires: lighted as signals of
on Yii’s successors, 41; and on alarm, 172, 176-177.
the Shang dynasty, 5C; dis- Beasts: not hostile to man in pri-
covery of, 50; their chronology meval period, 4.
differs from that of other Biblical names at the head of King
sources, 51, 175-176, 329, note Attila’s genealogical table: 186,
1; their account of the Shang dy- 190-191.
nasty dry as compared to the Biot, Edouard: on Yii’s engineering
Shu-king’s model emperor chap- exploits, 34, 36-38; his trans-
ters, 52; specimen from, on lation of Bamboo Books, 51,
Chéu-sin, 53-55; Chavannes, note 1; of the Chéu-li, 108 ; con-
Legge, and Biot on, 51, mote 1; siders immutability of govern-
throw light on Shang culture, ment based on that of individual
76; on Mu-wang and Si-wang- life, 109; extracts from his notes
mu, 144-145, 148; mention on the customs of the ancient
visit of Si-wang-mu to Em- Chinese collected from the Shi-
peror Shun, 150-151; on the king, 162-166.
Kung-ho period, 157. Boards, the Six (liu-pu), of modern
Bamboo roots: as modern instru- times: correspond to six cate-
ments of digination, 83. gories of the Choéu-li, 111;
Bamboo tablets: see WRITING, ART basis of classification of official
OF. work, 113.

--- pdf page 375 ---
INDEX 30)
Boians, the: like the Hiung-nu, con- Carriages, Cars, and Carts: see
verted skulls into drinking ves- CHARIOTS.
sels, 271-272. Cassini, D.: on the Shu-king eclipse,
Boots: when introduced, 272. 41.
Botany: research in, ascribed to Cattigara: the terminus of western
Sh6n-nung, 10-11. navigation, 127.
Bows and arrows: see WEAPONS. Cattle-breeding : see FLocxs.
Bretschneider, E.: quoting passage “Censer,’”’ the term: wrongly ap-
on Sh6én-nung’s botany, 11. plied to bronzes of the Shang
Brigands: Mandarin of Autumn in and Chéu dynasties, 84.
charge of, 123. Censors, public (yti-shi): officers
Bronze age, the, in China: 236. performing duties similar to
“Bronze drum nations”: 195; com- those of, 116.
prise elements of different affini- Censorship, public: evil effects of
ties, 196. too much, 155.
Bronze drums: manufacture of, at Census of population: 119.
Canton, a family secret, 117; Ceremonial: love of, predominates
of the Man barbarians, 195-196 ; long before Confucius, 83-84,
emblems found among the or- 230, 241; holds together Chéu
naments of, 196. dynasty, 109; in emperor’s
Bronzes: copper mine discovered by personal life, 115; in charge of
Huang-ti supposed to have fur- Mandarin of Spring, 118; Con-
nished oldest, 23, 90, 236; of fucius exaggerates funeral, 230,
the Shang and Chéu dynasties 244; the people of Chung-tu
destroyed, buried, and immured, educated by strict, 244-245;
under Shi-huang-ti and later on Confucius’ personal life regu-
rediscovered; difficulty of fix- lated by, 256-257; Chuang-tzi
ing age of, 71, 77; personal despises, 304. ,
names in legends of Shang, 72; Ceremonies, Board of: 113, 117-119.
private collections of, 73; sac- Chalfant, F. H.: on early Chinese
rificial, and bells the only wit- writing, 74, note 1.
nesses of high antiquity, 77; Chalmers, John: on the Shu-king
have become models in ceramic eclipse, 41; his year dates B.c.
and jade industries, 84, 91: differ from those of astronomers,
alloys of, according to the Chéu- 174.
li, 126; the tripod of 812 B.c., Chan-kuo: see CONTENDING STATES,
161; swords still in use about THE.
500 B.c., 235; see also BRONZE Chan-kuo-ts’6: 262, 264.
Drums; NINE TRIPODS, THE. Chang Hong, the astronomer: 129,
Bucklers: 164. 135.
Burnouf, E.: on Si-wang-mu, 151, Chang I, statesman: pupil of Kui-
note 2. ku-tzi, 285, 286, 308; his career,
Bushell, S. W.: on ‘‘The Stone 311-314; K’i Yiian warns king
Drums of the Ch6éu Dynasty,” of Ch’u against, 315-316; dies
171. as minister in Wei, 316.
Chang K’ién, the general: 147, 148.
Calendar: supposed to have been Chang Yii-si: on Sh6n-nung’s bot-
introduced by Fu-hi, 9, 14; any, 11.
developed by Huang-ti, 21, 22; Ch’ang-an: old capital, seat of col-
by Chuan-hi, 25; by Wu-wang, lectors of anciént bronzes, 73.
98; see also CrcLicAL CHAR- Ch’ang, Duke of Chéu: see Won-
ACTERS. WANG.

--- pdf page 376 ---
352 INDEX
Ch’ang-sha (Hu-nan): burial place married to, Tartar woman, 269;
of Shon-nung, 11. and changes enemy’s skull into
Chaos: social, before Fu-hi, 9, 14. a drinking vessel, 270-272; its
Charioteers: 163. history full of supernatural
Chariots (ch’é or ki): drawn by accounts, 270; joins confed-
oxen under Huang-ti, 22; word eration against Ts’in, 310; head-
for, occurs among oldest hiero- quarters of Su Ts’in, represent-
glyphics, 75; south-pointing, ing the ‘‘Six States,” 311, 313;
127-136; used in war against attacked by Ts’i and Wei, 313;
the Huns, 159-160, 163, 273; kingdom since 329 B.c., 315; de-
“chariot” as a collective name, feated by, and repulses Ts’in,
163; outfit of war, 163-164; 319 ; defeated by Ts’in at Shang-
baggage cars drawn by oxen, tang, 321; P’ing-yuan-kin,
164; chief officer’s, had ox-tail a prince of, 321; MHan-tan,
pennon, 165; fighting on char- capital of, besieged by Ts’in,
iots against foot-soldiers a dis- 322; Prince I-jén of Ts’in at
advantage to the Chinese, 187; the court of, 323-325; defeated
a technical term in population by Ts’in, 325; annexed by
statistics, 203; had parts of Ts’in, 328, 336; princes of, 336.
iron in seventh century B.c., Chau Tsui, companion of Duke Won
204. and prime minister of Tsin:
Chau, Ch’6ng-wang’s son: see K’ANG- 220, 269.
WANG. Chau Tun, minister in Tsin: 220,
Chau: city in the present South 269.
Shan-si, 269. Chau-wang, the Emperor: 143, 189,
Chau, Duke of Lu: 230, 243-244, 331.
341. Chau Wu, sen of Chau Sho: subject
Chau, Marquis of Tsin: appoints of a historical drama, 269.
his uncle lord of K’ii-wu, 334. Ch’au, the Emperor King*-wang’s
Chau Sh6, commander in Chau: 319. brother: flees to Ch’u, 233.
Chau Sho, son of Chau Tun: 269. Ch’au-yé-ts’tén-tsai: 132.
Chau-siang, king of Ts’in: 317-325, Chavannes, douard: on_ trust-
333; under the regency of his worthiness of Chinese history
mother with Wei Jan as chan- previous to Chéu-sin, 55-56;
cellor, 317-319; sole regent with on dragons and phenixes, 88;
Fan Tsti as chancellor, 320-325 ; on Si-wang-mu, 151; on the
practically ‘‘Son of Heaven,” “Stone Drums of the Chéu
offers sacrifice to Shang-ti, 326. Dynasty,” 171; on Ts’in and
Chau Siang-tzi: son of, and marries Ch’u as non-Chinese states, 267—
Tartar woman, 269; uses skull 268; on the supernatural ele-
of enemy for drinking vessel, ment in history of Chau state,
270. 270; on skulls changed into
Chau, the state of: beginnings, 263 ; drinking vessels, 271; see also
confirmed as a feudal state, 264; Sxi-x1 and Wvu-cHi-SHAN-TOMBS.
one of the ‘Seven Heroes” Chi: see Rosser Cui.
states, 266; thoroughfare for Chi, the Emperor: see T1-cui.
northern tribes, 267; its princes Chi-nan: term for the magnetic
favor Tartar customs, 269-273, needle, used metaphorically, 129,
316; common descent with 135.
princes of TS’in, grow in power Chi Po, official of Tsin: opposes the
by gifts of territory, 269; its San-T sin, 270.
chief Chau Siang-tzi, son of, and Ch’i-yu: rebel under Huang-ti, 20.

--- pdf page 377 ---
INDEX 303
Chinchew (Zaitun): 132. with territory of Man barbari-
Chén-ting-wang, the Emperor: 263, ans, 190, 192, 336; fixes the
332. Nine Tripods and _ prognosti-
Chén-to, brother of Wu-wang: in- cates duration of dynasty, 222;
vested with Ts’au, 343. wall painting representing, with
Ch’6n, the city of: capital of the his guardian Chéu-kung, 243;
Emperor Fu-hi, 9. invests younger brother with
Ch’6n, the state of: on side of Ch’u Tsin, 266, 334; see also Cudu-
in war with Tsin, 216; descend- KUNG.
ants of its house become sover- Chéu: dukes of, descendants of
eigns of Ts’i, 273; princes of, Ti-k’u and his posthumous son
342-343. Héu-tsi, 25, 26; early history
Ch’6n Chung, ascetic: 289-290. of, 57-58; causes tending to
Chong, ante-nuptial son of Prince develop influence of ducal state,
I-j6n of Ts’in: 324-325; crown- 69, 183; Wu-wang twelve years
prince and King of Ts’in, 327- duke of, 97; ancestors of, said
328, 334; see also SHI-HUANG-TI. to have adopted Hunnic life,
Chong, the state of: attacked by 168, 169; chronology, 331;
Jung tribes, 187; travelers T’an-fu, Duke of, see T’an-Fu;
from Ts’i to Ch’u passed, 214; Cu’anc, Duke of, see Won-
the Emperor Siang-wang a wane; Ki-li, Duke of, see K1-11;
fugitive in, 216, 219; on the Fa, Duke of, see Wu-wane;
side of Ch’u in war with Tsin, Tan, Duke of, see CHO6U-KUNG;
216; under the supremacy of dukes of, descendants of Chéu-
Ch’u, 223; of Tsin, 227; its kung : a minister under Chau-
minister Tzi-ch’an, 232; con- wang, 143; the co-regent during
quered by Han, 274, 345; Siian- the Kung-ho period and min-
wang invests his brother Yu ister to Siian-wang, 157; Hei-
with, 344; princes of, 344-345. kién, Duke of, under Chuang-
Ch’6ng-ki (Kan-su): birthplace of wang, 201.
the Emperor Fu-hi, 8. Ché6u dynasty: 93-328, 331-332.
Ch’6éng-p’u: city near the present Chéu-kuan: original title of the
Ts’au-ch6u in Shan-tung, 216, Chéu-li, 110.
219. Chéu-kung: fourth son of Wo6n-
Ch’6ng-t’ang, the Emperor: de- wang, 58; addresses ancestors
scendant of Ti-k’u, 25; over- in prayer for Wu-wang’s life,
throws the Hia dynasty under 81, 102-103; practised divina-
Kié, 44, 47; founder of the tion, 83; soul of Wu-wang’s
Shang dynasty, 47, 330; his government, 79-103; becomes
benevolence toward animals, 47 ; fief-holder of K’iu-f6u (Lu),
his successors, 47-57; referred 99-100, 340; thinks fate is
to as an ancestor by the Em- directed by God, one’s ancestors
peror P’an-kéng, 82; system of and oneself, 101-102; is aware
taxation under, 297. of his ability, 103; becomes
Ch’6ng-wang, the Emperor: 104-— Ch’6ng-wang’s guardian, but
107, 136-138, 331; appoints to meet the intrigues of his
Ch6u-sin’s stepbrother, Wei-tzi, brothers keeps away from court,
prince of the empire, 106-107, writing extension of I-king, 104;
341; receives ambassadors from an ode in Shi-king ascribed to,
the Yiié-ch’ang tribes, 126-128 ; his loyalty revealed, 105; de-
moves capital to Lo-yang, 136; feats his enemies, 106; organizer
his death, 138; invests Hiung I of Ch6u government; supposed
2a

--- pdf page 383 ---
INDEX 359
Flocks, keeping of: said to have Gabelentz, G. von der: on Kuan-tzi,
been commenced by Fuw-hi, 9, 202; on Confucius, 242; on Mo
14, Ti (Mek Tik), 282, note 1.
Foéng [-ch’6ng]: old capital of the Gardeners hold second rank in popu-
dukes of Chéu, south of the Wei lation : 110.
River, 99, 169. Gardner, C. T.: on the Tablet of Yi,
Fong-hu-tzi, expert on swords: 235. 90.
Fong, Prince of K’ang, Wu-wang’s Gaubil, A.: 30, 41.
brother: invested with Wei, Gem, the sacred (pt): 102.
346. Genealogy: of early emperors, 25;
Foreign affairs: no special Board pedigrees of Yui, Shun, Chi, Yau,
of, before 1901 a.p., 111 and Ch’éug-t’ang, and the Chéu
note 1; in charge of subordi- emperors derived from Ti-k’u,
nate of Mandarin of Autumn, 25-26; Yii a descendant of
124. Huang-ti, 33; Confucius’, 228;
Foreigners: superior civilization of, see also CHRONOLOGICAL TABLES.
compared by Chinese to their Generals in command: how styled,
own, 19. 165.
Foreign influences before the time Geographical position of states closely
of Wu-ti: 268-273. connected with their develop-
Foreign nations regarded as mere ment: 182, 188.
boundary tribes: 112. Geography: of the Empire accord-
Forke, A.: on Mu-wang and the ing to the Chéu-li, 119-123;
Si-wang-mu legend, 150-151; resembles that of the Yu-kung,
on Yang Chu, 277, note 1. 123, 182; legendary terms in
“Four Books,” the: see Ssi-sHu. Chinese, connectéd with western
Four Nobles, the: 321-326, 328. boundary, 147; of the Ch'un-
Fowls: 121. ts’iw period, 181=197.
Fréret, N.: on the Shu-king eclipse, Geomancers (fang-kia) : 132.
41. Germany: China during the Chéu
Frogs: an emblem on ancient bronze dynasty resembles, 108, 181.
drums, possibly a totem of Man Giles, H. A.: his chrofiology of Fu-hi,
barbarians, 196. 7, note 2; on Si-wang-mu, 151,
Frontier posts: relieved annually, note 2;. on Kuan-tzi’s work,
supplied from peasantry, 163: 202; on the Tau-té-king, 238;
Fu-ch’ai, King of Wu: 234, 348; on the T’’ung-kién-kang-mu, 264—
commits suicide, 262. 265; on Lié-tzi, 276; on Lau-tzi
Fu-hi: alleged first historical ein- and Chuang-tzi, 300-301.
peror, 7, 329; appearance and Gnomon: see ASTRONOMY.
pictorial representations of, 7, 8; God (Shang-ti) : prayers to, referred
organizes society, 9; intro- to in accounts of oldest emper-
duced hunting, fishing, cattle ors, 100, 253; never disavowed
flocks, music, the pa-kua sym- by the ancient Chinese, 101;
bols, hieroglyphics, etc., 9; Chéu-kung’s views on, 102-103;
divides all things into male and see also HEAVEN; SACRIFICE TO
female, 59-61; replaces matri- Gop.
archy by matrimony, 60. Goethe: interested in Chinese stud-
Fu-nan: 127. ies, v, vii.
Future life: see ANCESTORS; Government: strictness and liber-
HEAVEN; LiFE AFTER DEATH; ality of Huang-ti’s, 22; divided
SPIRITS OF THE DEPARTED. into eight branches by Shun, 31;
Fu-yiié: minister under Wu-ting, 53. share of responsibility in, by

--- pdf page 384 ---
360 INDEX
ministers and advisers, 33; the and is annexed by Ts’in, 326,
sovereign responsible for natural 328, 336; princes of, 335-336.
catastrophes, 36, 79-80, 105, Han-cho, usurper: 42, 330.
172-174; reorganized under Wu- Han-fei, the philosopher: mentions
wang, 98-99; democratic sys- “‘south-pointers,’”? 128; pupil of
tem in promotion of officers of, Sin K’uang, the anti-Confu-
99; foundation of government cianist, 326.
due to Chéu-kung, 107; immu- Han-fei-tzi (the book): 128, note 2;
tability of, based on that of see also HAN-FEI, THE PHILOS-
individuals in public and _ pri- OPHER.
vate life, 109; patriarchal char- Han-ku Pass: Lau-tzi there takes
acter of, 110; six divisions of, leave of China, 307, 313; Ts’in’s
prototype of modern “Six victory at the, 313,
Boards,” 111, 112-113; inter- Han River: 143.
ference with private life, 115- Han-tan: capital of Chau, 322-324;
117; officers of, selected from the “Lady of Han-tan,”’ mother
among the people, 99, 117; not of Shi-huang-ti, 324, 328.
punished in public, 123-124, Han Yi, author: defends Confu-
322; ‘‘the five articles ”’ fixing cianism, 302.
principles of, 210; Confucius’ Hangchow: 132.
views of, based on filial piety, Happinesses, the Five: 82.
254; see also Cuovu-L1; Con- Harakiri: traces of, in China, 322,
Fucius; Kuan-Tzi; MENcIus. note 1.
Great Khan: see SHAN-YU. Hatchets: see WEAPONS.
Greek pattern: see THUNDER PAT- Hau: city built by Wu-wang near
TERN. the present Si-an-fu, 54, 99, 169.
Groot, J. J. M. de: 196, note 2. Heaven and Earth: as objects of
Grosier, Abbé: 265. worship, 79.
Ground taxes: 296-298; see also Heavenly emperors: 5, 329.
TAXES. Heaven, Mandarin of (t'%én-kuan) :
Grube, W.: on the preponderance 111, 112-115.
of speeches in oldest historical Heaven: the term ?¢’ién for, may
texts, 156 ; considers both Ch’un- mean the ‘other world” and
ts’u and T'so-chuan works of Allah; or God, 96; ancestors in,
Confucius, 181; on Kuan-tzi, have charge of descendants, 103 ;
202, 205; on Yang Chu, 279. gives warnings on account of
Gumpach, J. von: on the Shu-king bad government, 143, 172-174;
eclipse, 41. see also ANCESTORS; GOD.
Heger, Franz: 196, note 2.
Haenisch, E.: on the Tablet of Yi, Hei-kién, Duke of Chéu: 201.
90, note 1. Hell and purgatory : none referred to
Han, the state of: beginnings, 263; in the Chinese Classics, 82.
recognized as a feudal state, Helmets: worn by princes and war-
264; one of the ‘“‘Seven Heroes”’ riors, 164.
states, 266; conquers Chong, Hemp: 121.
274; joins confederation against Hereditary monopolies: 117.
Ts’in, 310; kingdom since 332 D’Hervey de Saint-Denys: 194,
B.c., 315; loses territory against notes 1 and 2.
Ts’in, 316; defeated by Ts’in in Hi and Ho, the astronomers: fail to
battle of I-k’ié, 318; defeated predict an eclipse under Yau,
by Ts’in, 325; does homage to 30; under Chung-k’ang, 39-41.
Ts’in, neglecting the emperor, Hi-wang, the Emperor: 218, 332.

--- pdf page 385 ---
INDEX 361
Hia dynasty, the: 32-44, 330. Chéu-sin, 55-56, 125; keep
Hia Kui (Japanese Kakez), artist : 89. emperor posted on local his-
Hia-po, title of the Emperor Yii: 32. tories; division of work among,
Hiau, Duke of Ts’i: 218-219, 340. during the Chéu dynasty, 125;
Hiau-king (‘‘Canon of Filial Piety’’) : ought to enjoy liberty of speech,
249. 155; method adopted in con-
Hiau-wang, the Emperor: 153, 332. structing most ancient history,
Hiau-w6n, King of Ts’in: 334; 156; partiality of Confucianist,
father of Prince I-jén, declared 268.
heir apparent by Li Pu-wei’s Historical period: beginning of,
intrigue, 323-324; reigned but variously dated, 175.
one year, 327; premature death History, the ancient, of China: best
of, possibly due to Lii Pu-wei, basis for knowledge of nation,
328. vii-viii.
Hides: see SKINS. Hiung: clan name of the sovereigns
Hién, Duke of Tsin: 212, 334. of Ch’u, 190, 336.
Hién-wang, the Emperor: 275, 332. Hiung I: ancestor of the kings of
Hién-yang: capital of Ts’in, the Ch’u, invested with this terri-
present Si-an-fu, 317. tory, 190, 192, 336.
Hién-yiian : personal name of Huang- Hiung-ir (Ho-nan): supposed home
ti, 12; of a primeval emperor of primeval emperors, 5.
previous to Fu-hi, 236. Hiung K’ii of Ch’u: usurps the title
Hién-yiin: see Huns. “King,” 190, 337.
Hieroglyphics: of 299 B.c. deciphered Hiung-nu: see Huns.
by connoisseurs in 280 a.p., 50; Hiung T’ung of Ch’u: confirmed as
on bronze vessels of the Shang King Wu, 190, 337.
dynasty, 71-76; Chinese works Ho: a sacred mountain, 122.
containing facsimile reproduc- | Ho-lu, King of Wu: 233-234, 348.
tions of, 73-74; words repre- Ho-sii, primeval emperor: 236.
sented by, of the Shang dynasty, Ho-tan-kia, the Emperor: 49, 331.
75-76; the, for “thunder” used Hong: a sacred mountain, 121, 122.
for ornamental purposes; sym- Horn: bows made of, 164.
bolic meaning, 89; hieroglyphics Horses: in hieroglyphics of Shang
attributed to the Emperor Yi dynasty, 75; with oxen, chief
probably forgeries, 90; on the produce of Yung-ch6u (the
“Stone Drums of the Chéu Dy- Ordos territory), and Ki-chéu
nasty,” 170-171; see also CHAL- (South Shan-si), 122; a dealer
FANT, F. H. in, elevated to rank of Prince of
Hill Jung: see SHAN-JUNG. Ts’in, 153; four steeds har-
Historians: not critical as to be- nessed to war chariots in cam-
ginning of historical period, 3; paign against the Huns, 159;
board of, ascribed to Huang-ti, long, stout, and large-headed,
20, 156; Ts’ang-kié, the first 160; how yoked, harnessed, and
state historian, 20; some, ex- adorned before war chariots,
clude period of mourning from 163-164; guided by foot-sol-
sovereigns’ reign, 31; ascribe diers in war, 164; with oxen
great decisions to ministers and and sheep, reared by the Huns,
advisers, 33, 34; extol virtues 168; cavalry, introduced by
of founders and blacken char- King Wu-ling of Chau, 272-
acter of last rulers of dynasties, 273; riding, not usual before
43, 53; responsible for legendary third century B.c., 273.
character of periods down to| Héu (= marquis): 98.

--- pdf page 386 ---
362 INDEX
Héu-han-shu: 19. represents the prehistoric
H6u-i minister and _ general-in- neolithic period, 236.
chief, 39-42. Huber, Ed., on Si-wang-mu: 151,
Hé6u-tsi: posthumous son of the note 2.
Emperor Ti-k’u, 26. Hui, Duke of Tsin: 213, 215, 334.
House-building: first introduced by Hui, King of Liang, i.e. Wei: 335;
Huang-ti, 21. Mencius’ conversations with,
Hii Hing, ‘the agriculturist’’: re- 287, 289.
futed by Mencius, 290. Hui-tsung, the Emperor: a patron
Hu, a descendant of the Emperor of art, 71, 73, 131.
Shun : invested with Ch’6n, 343. Hui-wang, the Emperor: 218, 332.
Hu An-kuo, historian: on Lii Pu- Hui-won, King of Ts’in: 316, 333.
wei, 328. Human emperors: 5, 329.
Hu-nan-fang-wu-chi: 121. Humboldt, Von, on Si-wang-mu:
Hu-pei province: supposed home 151, note 2.
of Shon-nung, 11. “Hundsfott” (German): wrongly
Hua: a sacred mountain, 121. derived from “‘Hunnus fuit,”’ 68.
Hua-sii: mother of the Emperor Huns: known in China as. Hun-yii,
Fu-hi, 8. Hiin-yii, Hién-yiin, K’iian, and
Hua Tu: minister in Sung, 229. Hiung-nu, names _ connected
Hua-yang: principal wife of Hiau- with the root Hun or Kun, 13,
won, the King, as Prince of Ts’in, 67-69, 159, 168; driven away
323. by Huang-ti, 13; as Wu-wang’s
Huai, King of Ch’u: 315, 317, 337. allies help to overturn the Shang
Huai-nan-tzi: see Liv An. dynasty, 64-65, 70, 169; con-
Huan, Duke of Ts’i: first of the clude treaty with China in 47
“Five Leaders,’”’ 201, 206, 207- B.c.; words from their language
211, 217, 218, 339; given to preserved in Chinese literature
evil courses in old age, 211; his prove to be Turkish, 66; levy
end, 211, 218-219; his treat- tribute from T’ai-wang and W6n-
ment of Duke Won of Tsin, 214; wang and attack T’ai-wang’s
favors legitimate succession to state, 68-69, 169; defeated by
imperial throne, 209, 218. Won-wang (1138 sB.c.), 70; en-
Huan-wang, the Emperor: 197, 332. croached on Chinese territory
Huang-fu (= Nan-chung), general: during Chéu dynasty, 120;
161. campaign against, described in
Huang-fu: special term for the the Shi-king, 159-161; at one
“Steppe Dependency,” 169. time held territory as far as the
Huang Hié: see CHUN-SHON-KUN. River King and T’ai-yiian, 160,
Huang-ho: see YELLOW RIVER. 161; Chinese soldiers afraid of,
Huang-ti: first emperor according 163; expeditions against, in
to Ssi-ma Ts’ién, 7, 329; his what season undertaken, 164;
person and government, 12; more successful on large plains
makes war on the Huns, 13; than on hilly territory, 166;
inventions ascribed to, 13, 20- advantages on the Chinese side
23; alleged connection with in war against, 166-167; Ssi-ma
Babylonia, 14-18; further deeds Ts’ién’s account of, 167-170;
of, 20-23; his death, 24; de- Shan-jung, Hién-yiin, and Hun-
scendants of, appointed fief- yl divisions of, before the time
holders under Wu-wang, 99; of Yau and Shun; honor robust,
said by some to have invented and neglect old and weak men,
south-pointing chariots, 129; 168; attack and kill Yu-wang,

--- pdf page 387 ---
INDEX 363
169, 177; the states of Tsin I-hu (= Kung-wang): 152.
and Ts’in fight against Huns to I-jon, Prince of Ts’in: see CHUANG-
protect China, 183; a political, SIANG.
not a racial union, 183-184; I-king, or “‘Book of Changes”: one
Huns of Europe and Hiung-nu of the oldest products of Chinese
identical and of Turkish extrac- literature, 59, 192; based on
tion; the Tiirk and Sir-Tardush Fu-hi’s mystic trigraphs (sge
nations and the Uigurs off- Pa-KuA); ascribed to W6n-
shoots of the Hiung-nu, 184, wang, 59-62; recommended by
note 1; possibly related to Confucius, 62; extended by
Scythians, 185; their line of Chéu-kung, 104; Confucius’ re-
kings compared with Chinese lation to, 251.
records, 185-187; Northern I-kiu: personal name of P’ing-wang,
Jung send foot-soldiers to fight 177.
the Chinese, 187-188; early I-k’ii-jung (Huns): withstand Tsin
contests between, and Man bar- and Ts’in, 263.
barians according to old legend, I-k’iié: city in the present Ho-nan
194; depend on the coast of province, celebrated battle-field,
Ts’i for salt, 204; after war with 318.
Tsin and Ts’in cease to make I-ling: the mausolea of the kings of
inroads, 263; use skull of enemy Ch’u, 319.
for ritual purposes like the I?-wang, the Emperor: 154, 332.
Boians, 270-272; see also I-K’t- It-wang, the Emperor: 153, 332.
sune; June and Ti; K’van- I-wu-lii: a sacred mountain, 122.
JUNG. I Yin: minister under Ch’6ng-t’ang
Hun-yii and Htin-yii: see Huns. and his successors, 47; consoli-
Hunting: introduction of, ascribed dates the power of the Shang
to Fu-hi, 9, 14; hunting parties dynasty, 47-48.
cause of political troubles, 39, Indian population in Eastern Turke-
42, 143; sportsmanlike treat- stan: 19.
ment of, by Ch’éng-t’ang, 47; Industries described in the Chéu-li:
Chéu-sin’s hunting parties, 53, 126.
54; soldiers enlisted for, 119; Inscriptions, hieroglyphic: on the
Chau-wang’s passion for, 143; bronze vessels of the Shang
Mu-wang’s hunting expeditions, dynasty, 71-76; on stone and
144; hunting the image of war, jade attributed to the Emperor
162; birds, rats, foxes, and Yii, 90; on the bronze tripod of
hares shot by children; hunting Silver Island, 161; on the Stone
and cattle-breeding means of Drums, 170-171; see also Hizro-~-
livelihood among Huns, 168; GLYPHICS.
Siian-wang’s hunting expedi- Intercalary month: introduction of,
tions described on Stone Drums, ascribed to Huang-ti, 22.
170. Interpreters, court: 125; accom-
pany ambassadors from Tung-
I: a sacred mountain, 121. king, 127.
I (barbarians of the east): referred Interregnum: when there was no
to in Tso-chuan, 185. emperor in China, 327; see also
I Chi: minister during the Shang KUNG-HO PERIOD, THE.
dynasty, 48. ; Inundation: see DELUGE; YELLOW
I-hing, the astronomer: aware of RIveErR.
the deviation of magnetic needle, Irrigation of soil: under advice of
131, 136. government officers, 110.

--- pdf page 388 ---
364 INDEX
Tron age, the, in China: 236. K’ang-wang, the Emperor: 138, 331 ;
Irop ; consumption and taxation of, after him the house of Chéu fell
‘n Ts’i; Chinese, best on Roman into decay, 159, 178.
market, 204; implements of, Karashar: 149.
in seventh century B.c., 204; Kau-lié, King of Ch’u: 321, 337.
arms of, about 500 B.c., Kau-yang: private name of the
~ 235. Emperor Chuan-hi, 25.
Ivory : formerly produced in Hu-nan, K’au-ku-t’u: 72-73.
121; and in the kingdom of K’au-kung-ki: 125.
Ch’u, 214; brought from Tung- K’au-wang, the Emperor: 263, 332.
king, 127; bows had ornaments Khan, or Great Khan: see SHAN-yv.
of, 164. Khotan : oldest inhabitants of, 18-19,
151; jade quarries of, 91.
Jade age in China corresponding to Ki (= Mu-yé) in North Ho-nan: old
neolithic period: 236. manuscripts discovered at, 50.
Jade: said to have been known to Ki-chéu province: 122.
Huang-ti, 13; works of art made Ki-fu: see Yin KI-Fv.
of, 89-91; the word yi for, Ki-li, or Ki, Duke of Chéu: 58, 103,
occurs in the oldest texts, 91; 331.
as coming from Khotan prob- K’i-fu, or Shang-fu: ancient term
ably sparingly used before sec- for general, 165.
ond century B.c., 91; article of K’i, Mount: selected as residence by
trade in Yung-chéu south of T’ai-wang, 69, 169; ancestral
Ordos territory, 122. home of the Ché6u emperors,
J6én-hau (or Mu), Duke of Ts’in : 333. 170.
Jén-huang: see HUMAN EMPERORS. K’i, the Emperor: see T1-«’1.
Jon-tsung, the Emperor: 131, 136. Kiang, Lady, wife of Duke W6n of
Jo-shui (‘Weak Water ’”’): 147, 148. Tsin: 214, 215.
Julien, Stanislas: translates his- Kiang: see YANG-Tzi RIVER.
torical drama, 269, note 1. Kiang-yiian, the Empress: 25,
Jung (Huns): attack T’an-fu, 168; K’iang tribes: see TANGUTANS.
driven away by Wu-wang and Kié-kui: see Kr.
called Huang-fu as a tributary Kié: the last emperor of the Hia
state, 169; referred to in T7'so- dynasty, 43-44, 330; deposed,
chuan, 185, 187, 188; emperor’s 47; his history a parallel to
war against, supported by Tsin, that of Chéu-sin, 53; loses
219; Tsin and Ts’in unite the Nine Tripods, 222; Yang
against, 263. Chu thinks his a happy life,
Juries: see PEOPLE’S VOICE. 278.
Justice, Board of: 113, 123-125. Kién, Duke of Ts’i: 340; deprived
Justice of the peace, Mandarin of of throne and murdered, 273.
Earth acts as: 116. Kién-wang, the Emperor: 227, 332.
K’ién-lung, the Emperor : his collec-
K’ai-fong-fu (Ho-nan): various art tions, 71; publishes an illus-
collections at, 73. trated catalogue of bronzes,
Kan-p’an: adviser under Wu-ting, 73.
53. Kin-shi-so: 73.
Kan-su and Shen-si: the cradle of “King ” (= wang): when the title
Chinese civilization, 4. was enforced by federal states,
K’ang-hi, the Emperor: has the 314-315.
T’ung-kién-kang-mu translated King-chéu province: 121, 189; see
into Manchu, 265. also CH’U, THE STATE OF.

--- pdf page 389 ---
INDEX 365
King, Duke of Ts’i: 243-244, 340. by P’an-hu, the ancestor of
King-lii and king-luk = kingrak (‘‘a the Man barbarians, 194.
sabre’’): oldest Turkish word Kua: see Pa-KUA.
on record, 66-67, 169. Kuan Chung: see KuAN-T2i.
King-kiau, the early Christian re- Kuan I-wu: see Kuan-rTzi.
ligion: 238. Kuan-tzi, the philosopher: an early
King, River: Huns penetrate to statistician, 119, 123, 203; as
south of, 160, 161. minister of Ts’i helps Duke
King?-wang, the Emperor: 232, 332. Huan to leadership, 201, 207,
King*-wang, the Emperor: 233, 332. 217; opinions divided as to
K’ing-wang, the Emperor: 219-220, his work on government meth-
332. ods, 202, 205; his adminis-
Kingsmill, T. W.: 147. tration in Ts’i a model to later
Kiu-ting: see NINE TRIPODS, THE. generations, exemplified by his
K’iu, personal name of Confucius: views on the taxation of salt
229. and iron, 203-205; his expedi-
Knives: alloys of bronze, 126; made tion against the Shan-jung, 207;
of iron in seventh century B.c., his policy against the Ch’u
204. state, 208; his death and last
Knot-writing: 7, 9. advice, 210.
Ko-chi-king-yiian: i131. Kuan-tzi: work of the philosopher
Kéu-tsién, King of Yiié: 234-235, so-called; see KUAN-Tzi, THE
261-262, 348. PHILOSOPHER.
Ki, the state of: 188. Kuan Yin: legend of his farewell to
K’ii-f6u (Shan-tung) : supposed resi- Lau-tzi, 307.
dence cf Shon-nung, 11; burial Kuan-yin, the ‘‘Holy Virgin’’: orig-
place of Shau-hau, 24; the earl- inally a male deity, 149.
dom of, given to Chéu-kung, Kuan-yin-tzi: 307.
99-100; home of the K’ung K’uang-wang, the Emperor: 220,
(Confucius) family, 228. 332.
K’ii-wu, in South Shan-si: seat of a Kihnert, F.: 40.
family usurping the throne of Kui: see BADGE OF JADE.
Tsin, 334. Kui-chu: see Hien, Duxe or TSIN.
K’ii Yuan, the poet: 315-316, 317. Kui-ki: a sacred mountain, 120.
Kiin-tzi: see Superior MAN, THE. Kui-ku-tzi: 128, 285, 307-308.
Kublai Khan: causes the T’ung- Kui, the Emperor: see Kis.
kién-kang-mu to be translated Kun barbarians (Huns): 68, 70, 169.
into Uigur, 264-265. Kun: minister of works under Yau
Ku-kin-chu: 129. and father of the Emperor Yi,
Ku-kung: see T’ANn-Fv. 31; fails to stay deluge, 31-35.
Ku-liang Chi: his commentary on K’un-lun, Mount: 144-151.
the Ch’un-ts’iu, 180. Kung (= duke): 98.
Ku-yiit’u-p’u: 89, 90. Kung-ho period: 157, 176, 332.
K’u, the Emperor: see T1-x’v. Kung-kung: smashes the vault of
K’iian-jung (Huns): 68; Mu-wang’s heaven, 9.
campaign against the, 144, 152, Kung Liu: an ancestor of the Ch6u
169; bring about the ruin of emperors, 168.
Yu-wang and his paramour Kung-sun Tzi-ch’an: see Tzi-cHw’ANn.
Pau Ssi, 169, 172-177; they Kung-sun Yen, statesman, breaks up
settle between the rivers King confederation against Ts’in, 313.
and Wei, 169-170; legend of Kung-wang, the Emperor: 152-153,
one of their chiefs being killed 331.

--- pdf page 390 ---
366 INDEX
Kung-yang Kau: his commentary Law: administration of, 123-124;
on the Ch’un-ts’iu, 180. forbidding states to cross each
K’ung, dukes of: in K’ii-féu, de- other’s boundaries except by
scendants of Confucius, 228. emperor’s orders, 207; Con-
K’ung-fu-tzi and K’ung K’iu: see fucius’ method, 245.
ConFucivs. Legge, James: his edition of the
K’ung Kia: an ancestor of Con- Chinese classics, 26, note 1;
fucius, 228; murdered, 229. on Yi’s engineering exploits,
Kuo-tzi: see Sons oF THE EMPIRE. 34, 36-38; translation of the
Kuo-yii: 155. Bamboo Books, 51, note 1, 53-
55, 56-57; on south-pointing
Lacouperie, T. de: on the Western chariots, 128; on Si-wang-mu,
origin of Chinese civilization, 151; on customs of the ancient
14-18, 32; on the extent of Chinese, translated by, after
Mu-wang’s peregrinations, 149- Biot, 162-167; his year dates
150. B.c. differ from those of astrono-
Lacquer industry: that of Foochow mers, 174; on the eclipse of
a family secret, 117. 776 B.c., 175; on gap in Shu-
Ladders, hooked: used in assault king’s account of emperors,
of a fortress, 165. 178; eulogizes T'so-chuan, 180;
Lances: see WEAPONS. his lecture on Huan of Ts’i
Landholders: rank first in popula- and W6n of Tsin, 206-217; on
tion, 110. Confucius’ family, 229; on
Land tenure: 296-298; laws of, Tau-té-king, 238; on Tzi-lu,
changed under Shi-huang-ti, 298. 248; on Confucius’ personal
Lan-t’ién (Shen-si): birthplace of life, 256-257 ; on Yang Chu and
Hua-sii, the Emperor Fu-hi’s Mo Ti, 277, note 1, 278, 282, note
mother, 8. i; see also the several classics
Largeteau, M.: on the Shu-king quoted from his edition under
eclipse, 41. their respective titles.
Latinized names of sages (Confucius, Legitimacy of throne rights: began
Mencius, Micius, Licius): 281. to be recognized after Ti-k’i, 39;
Lau-shang, Great Khan of the Hiung- respected by Chung-k’ang, 39;
nu: 271. based according to Shu-king on
Lau-tzi: name and life of, 231-232; the authority of God, 79, 100;
possibly of foreign birth, 231, on the example set by the peo-
269; interviewed by Confucius, ple’s ancestors, 82, 100-101, 218;
232, 240-241, 243; his doctrine and individual merit, 101-102;
as starting-point of an indigenous Chéy-kung main spokesman of
religion, 237; his Tau-té-king, absolute, 137; of emperor’s
238-240, 305; lLegge’s and position loyally supported by
Giles’, the positive and sceptical Duke Huan of Ts’i, 207, 209,
views of, 238; difficulty of re- 217; respect of, holds together
constructing system from his Chéu dynasty, 217-218; recog-
sayings, 239-240; compared nized by victorious dynasty by
with Confucius, 240-241; Giles giving high appointments to
on, 300; some undisputed sen- members of ruined house, see
tences from his sayings, 300-301 ; Wvu-kone and WEI-rzi.
bids farewell to Kuan Yin at Lei-tsu, the Empress: 22.
the Han-ku Pass, 307, 313. Lei-wén: see THUNDER PATTERN.
Lau-tzi and Confucius, the age of:| Li, son of Confucius: 230, 248.
227-257. Li Ir: see Lavu-rzi.

--- pdf page 391 ---
INDEX 367
Li-jung: a wild tribe, 212, 213. according to Mencius, 293-295;
Iki: 163, 252. see also LEGITIMACY OF THRONE
Li Lung-mién, artist and collector: RIGHTS.
helps to illustrate and bring out | Li: family name of the original
a@ work on ancient art, 73. princes of Ts’i, 339.
Iv-sau, the poem: 315-316. Lii Pu-wei: prime minister of Ts’in,
Li-shan: a hill famous for an attack caceer of, 323-328.
by the Huns on Yu-wang, 169. Lu, the state of: treatment of pris-
Li Ssi, anti-Confucianist : 326. oners of war in, 165; history of,
Li T’ang (Japanese Rito) artist: 89. described in Ch’un-ts’iu and
Li-wang, the Emperor: 154, 332; Tso-chuan, 179, 197; Jung
driven away by the people, 157, tribes make inroads on, 187;
159. as an inland state could not
Liang, Mount : separates T’ai-wang’s extend its territory, 188; Con-
old and new residences, 69. fucius a native of, 229; Duke
Liau barbarians: wanderings of Chau of, patronizes Confucius,
the, 193-194. 230; Confucius’ sojourn in,
Licius (= Lié-tzi): 281. 243, 244-246, 248; Duke Chau
Lié-tzi (the book): see Lié-Tzi, THE of, an exile in Ts’i, 243-244;
PHILOSOPHER. Duke Ting of, 244-246; Con-
Lié-tzi, the philosopher: on the Si- fucius’ influence on government
wang-mu legend, 146; his work of, 246; Wu K’i studies warfare
may be fictitious, 276; referred anc’ becomes military leader in,
to by Chuang-tzi and Mencius, 274; Mencius a native of, 274;
277 and note 1, 281. and ends his days in, 287-288;
Lié-wang, the Emperor: 274, 332. dukes of, never became kings,
Life after death: reward for virtue, 315; annexed by Ch’u, 326,
82; cf. HELL AND PURGATORY. 341; princes of, 340-341.
Life, value of: Yang Chu on the, Lu-fu: see Wu-KONG.
277-278. Lun-yii (‘Confucian Analects ”’) : 26,
Lin-i: 127. note 1, 253-254, 255.
Ling, Duke of Wei: 246-247, 248, Lung-m6n (in North China): sup-
347. posed home of primeval em-
Ling, Duke of Tsin: 220, 335. perors, 5.
Ling-wang, the Emperor: 227, 332. Luxury of rich men described by
Liu An, author: 270. Yang Chu: 277, note 1.
Liu-kuo: see ‘Six StTates,’’ THE.
Liu-sha (“The Moving Sands’): see Macklin, Dr. W. E.: on Mencius,
SI-WANG-MU. 291.
Livestock holders: how ranking in Magnetic needle: see MARINERS’
population, 110. ComPAss.
Livy: describes custom the Boians Mailed warriors: 163.
had in common with the Hiung- Mailla, Father de: on Kung-wang,
nu, 271. 153; author of a voluminous
Lo or Lo-yang: imperial capital . “History of China,” 265.
built by Ch’dng-wang, 136, Ma Ki (tenth century) on Si-wang-
169, 177; see also TuNG-TU. mu: 151.
Loadstone: 128, 131, 132, 135. Man barbarians: defeated near Lake
Lob-nor: 146, 147. Tung-t’ing by Siian-wang, 171;
Loyalty : example of, set by Chéu- rulers of the Ch’u state call
kung, 137; Duke Huan’s, to themselves, 191; occupy the
the emperor, 207; offenses in, south of China and possibly

--- pdf page 392 ---
368 INDEX
territories south of it, 192-194; attend, 216; under Ch’édng-
their wanderings from north to wang represented on wall paint-
south, 193; bronze drums of ing, 243; under Lié-wang, 275.
the, 195-196; see also Cu’v, Megalomania, national: 112.
THE STATE OF. Mei-hi: the Emperor Kié’s para-
Man: personal name of Mu-wang, mour, 43.
144. Mencius: on Wo6n-wang, 68; on
Manuscripts buried in tombs: 50. T’ai-wang’s migration, 68-69;
Maps and charts of the Empire: 119, calls Yii, Confucius, and Chéu-
125. kung the “Three Sages, ”’ 137 ; eu-
Mariners’ Compass: origin of, 126— logizes Yu and Chéu-kung, 138;
136. on ‘“‘the Five Articles’ fixing
Marriage: introduced by Fu-hi, 9; principles of government, 210;
special officer in charge of, 115— criticizes Tzi-ch’an, 232-233;
116; between parties of same work bearing his name M éng-tzi,
surname treated as incest, 152; 255; a native of Lu, 274; refers
among the Huns, 168; between to Lié-tzi, 277; opposed to
Chinese and foreign tribes, 212, Yang Chu and Mo Ti, 276, 282;
213, 269; with several wives his life, his mother, 282-284;
apparently on equal terms, 215. opposes anti-Confucian spirit
Martin, W. A. P., on Su Ts’in: 310. of his time, serves and declines
Mastiff, the Tibetan: possibly the salary in Ts’i, 286; his relations
prototype of the T’au-t’ié mon- to King Hui of Liang, sojourn
ster, 87. in Ts’i, Sung and Lu, 287; his
Matriarchy: see MATRIMONY. death, 288; his views on life,
Matrimony: introduced by Fu-hi, government, and political econ-
9, 14, 60; see also MARRIAGE. omy, 288-289; his method of
Mau-tun, 7.¢. Baghatur, “hero,” arguing, 290-292; an educator
an early sovereign of the Hiung- in morals, 292-293 ; his political
nu (Huns): 161, 185; probably views, 293-296; better expo-
one of King Attila’s ancestors, nent of Confucianism than the
185-186. master himself, 299.
Mayers, W. F.: chronological tables, Merchants: how ranking according
7, note 2, 17; on Si-wang-mu, to the Chéu-li, 110; Lau-tzi on,
146. 240.
Ma Yiian (Japanese Bayen), artist: Meyer and Foy: 196, note 2.
89 Mi: old family name of the sovereigns
Mean, Doctrine of the: see CHuNnG- of Ch’u, 189.
YUNG. Mi, the Duke of: 152.
Medicine: early efforts in, ascribed Miau-tzi (aborigines of Southwest
to Shon-nung, 10-11. China) : derive their origin from
Meeting of princes: under Wu-wang, the banished San-miau tribes,
103; under I?-wang, 154; em- 86, 196; from P’an-hu, 194.
peror’s power to preside over, Micius: see Mo Ti.
delegated to Duke Huan of Ts’i, Middle Kingdom (chung-kuo) : origin
207; Huan overrules emperor’s of the term, 137.
decision by a, 209; and ex- Migration: of Chinese nation in
presses his loyalty in another, prehistoric and legendary period,
209, 218; ‘“‘the Five Articles ” 8; alleged, from Babylonia to
agreed upon in, 210; presided China, 14-18; from Khotan,
over by Duke W6n of Tsin, 18-20; T’an-fu and his people’s,
when the emperor is required to from Pin to Chéu, see T’aN-FuU;

--- pdf page 393 ---
INDEX 369
of Tangutans, Tibetans, and Mu, Duke of Ts’in: according to
Miau-tzi from Central China Chavannes, identical with Mu-
to their later seats, 86; of Man t’ién-tzi of the Si-wang-mu
barbarians, 193. legend, 151; fourth among the
Millet: 122. “Five Leaders,’’ 206, 219, 333.
Min, King of Ts’i: 318-319, 340. Mulberry tree, an ill-portending: 48.
Ministers and advisers: partiality of Murder, political: attempted by
historians in ascribing great means of unsafe boats, 143.
decisions to, 33, 34. Music: instruments of wood and silk
Minister, prime (ta-tsai): 110-111. thread constructed by Fu-hi, 9;
Miracles: an ill-portending mulberry the shéng, or reed organ, in-
tree, 48; a minister selected by vented by Ni-kua, 9; construc-
emperor’s dream, 53; several, tion of instruments of, leads to
mentioned in Bamboo Books, system of weights and measures,
53-55; dreams, visions, etc., in 22, 23; a drum hung before the
history of Chau state, 270. Emperor Shun’s gate, 32; court
Mirrors, bronze, alloys of: 126. musicians and singers under the
Model emperor lore of Shu-king: Chéu dynasty selected from the
how originated, 33. blind, 125; drums in military
Méng Au, Ts’in general: 328. use, 165; big drum sounded on
Mong-ch’ang-kiin: one of the ‘‘ Four approach of enemy, 176; Con-
Nobles,” diplomatic agent in fucius impressed by, 243; see
Ts’in, 317; turns against Ts’in, also BRONZE DRUMS.
serving his native state, Ts’i, Musicians, court: 125.
318, 321. Mu-t’ién-tzi (“Mu, the Son of
Moéng-k’i-pi-t’an: 132, note 1. Heaven ’’): 145.
Mong K’o: see MENCcIUvs. Mw-t’1én-tzi-chuan : 145, 148-149.
M6ng-tsin (the ford of Mong): 55; Mu-wang, the Emperor: 144-152,
Wu-wang’s manifesto to his 169, 269, 331.
army at, 63-65. Mythological Period : 3-26, 329.
Moéng-tzi: see MEncrus.
Money: see EXCHANGE, MEANS OF. Nakhunte, Kudur, of the Baby-
Monopolies, origin of the salt and lonians: referred to Huang-ti
iron: 203-205. by De Lacouperie, 17-18.
Monotheism: see Gop; SACRIFICE Names, clans, and by-names not
to Gop (SHANG-TI). known among the Huns: 168.
Moon, the: as an object of worship, Nan (= baron): 98.
79. Nan-chung: name of two generals
Mo Ti: the philosopher of mutual referred to in the Shi-king, also
love, 280-282. in inscription of 812 B.c., 161.
Mo-tzi: see Mo Ti, THE PHILOSOPHER. Nan-ts’i-shu: 130, note 1.
Mountains, sacred: as objects of Nan-tzi, the ill-reputed Duchess of
worship, 79, 120-122. Wei, 246-247, 248.
Mourning : period of three years’, not Nan-wang, the Emperor: 314-321,
counted as office by historians, 325, 326, 332.
31; spent in preparing for Nan-yiié, the state of: 196, 227.
duties of government, 47; Con- Needles: among necessaries of life in
fucius’ respect for persons in, seventh century B.c., 204.
256 ; Confucius exaggerates, 230; Nest-builders: 5, 6, 329.
Mencius’, for his mother, 287; Niau-tsi-wén (‘script of birds’ foot-
Chuang-tzi says, ‘‘real, grieves prints’): see WRITING, ART OF.
in silence,’”’ 304. Nine Tripods, the (kiu-ting) : corre-
2B

--- pdf page 394 ---
370 INDEX
spond to nine provinces of Yii, Pages: see Sons OF THE EMPIRE.
36, 90; taken possession of by Pai, or po (“hundred”): as a nu-
Wu-wang, 98; as emblems of merical term denoting totality,
imperial dignity ridiculed by a 15. ’
vassal, 221; history and sym- Pai-hu-t’ung: 60.
bolic power of, described by Palace: first, built by Huang-ti, 21;
Ting-wang, 221-222; seized by emperor’s, during the Chéu
the King of Ts’in, 325; loss of, dynasty, 114-115.
forfeits title of ‘‘Son of Heaven,” Pan Ku, historian: 60.
326. P’an-hu: legendary ancestor of the
Nobles, the Four: see Four Noss, Man barbarians, 194.
THE. P’an-k6éng, the Emperor: 53, 82, 83,
Nobility, the five grades of: regu- 100-101, 331.
lated by Wu-wang, 98; see also P’an-ku: first human being, 4, 329.
Cuu-HO6v. Paravey, le Chevalier de: cited by
Nomadic life: under Fu-hi, 9-14; M. Huber as identifying Si-
under Huang-ti, 13; of the wang-mu with the Queen of
Huns, 168. Sheba in 1853, 151, note 2. [I
Nii-kua, the Emperor: Fu-hi’s co- find that Paravey first wrote on
regent or successor, 9; repairs the subject in 1839 ; see his ‘‘ Dis-
vault of heaven, 10. sertation sur les Amazones,”
Paris, 1840, p. 15. F. H.]
Oath: legalized by blood of animal, Pardon: the sovereign’s right, 123.
124, 271. Parker, E. H.: 130.
Oppolzer, T. von: on the Shu-king Parliamentary power, traces of: 124.
eclipse, 41. Pau, the state of: 171.
Old-Turkish stone inscriptions: 184, Pau-hi: see Fu-x1.
note 1. Pau-shi: an officer with censorial
Oracles: see D1vINATION. functions, 116.
Origin of Chinese race: not known, Pau Ssi: sultana of Yu-wang, 169,
3-4, 8; oldest names ascribed 171-174, 176-177.
to prehistoric period belong to Pear-tree, the sweet: symbol of
northwestern China, 4, 5; re- people’s love, 139.
ferred to Babylonia, 14-18; to Pedigrees: extended to legendary
Khotan, 18-20. emperors, 99, 191, 228.
Ou-yang Siu: on the “Stone Drums Pei-jung tribes: 187.
of the Chéu dynasty,” 171. Penal code: that of Ch6u dynasty
Ox: the Emperor Shén-nung repre- comparatively humane, 123.
sented with head of, 10. People’s voice, the, in important
Oxen: said to have been first used decisions: 124.
by Huang-ti for drawing carts, Pessimism: see YANG CHU.
22; produced in Ordos territory Pheasants: represented on oldest
and North Shan-si, 122; bag- bronzes, 88; offered as tribute,
gage-cars drawn by, in war, 164; 127, 128.
with horses and sheep reared by Phenix, the, on bronzes : see DRAGON.
the Huns, 168. Philosophers, minor : 264, 305-308.
Philosophy: Chinese natural, based
Pa-kua, symbols of oldest system of on male and female principles,
“ Chinese philosophy: invention 59-62; Yu-tzt, ‘the Philosopher
of, ascribed to Fu-hi, 9; de- Yi,”’ possibly oldest work on,
scription of, 59-61; as means of 59, note 1, 192; difficulty of
auguration, 118; see also I-K1NQ. translating works of, 239-240;

--- pdf page 395 ---
INDEX 371
flourishing at time of political public matters, 124; transfer of,
troubles, 262; some _philoso- away from original homes, 124;
phers’ works throw light on, and mixed character in, of boundary
reflect spirit of, Contending states, 267-268.
States, 264, 276; statesmen and Porcelain: see PoTrmry.
diplomats study, 285; applica- Pottery: in the East and in Europe
tion of, to affairs of government, it has derived models from
295-296; texts of, 305-307; Shang and Chéu - sacrificial
classification of works of, 306; bronzes, 84.
minor works of, compiled or Prayer by substitute: 103.
added to by later writers, 307; Prehistoric lore: 3-7, 235-237.
see also CONFUCIANISTS; CHO6U- Pride, Chinese national: origin of,
KunG; Han-rei; Kuvuan-1zi; 112,
Mo Tr; Sun Wu; Siw K’vane; “Princes of the Empire”: see
Tauvists; Won-wane; Wu K’; Cuu-HOv.
Yano Cou; YU-HIuna. Products of provinces: 120-122.
Pi: see GEM, THE SACRED. Professions, the nine: 110.
Pi-kan: killed by Chéu-sin, 63. Provinces: empire divided into,
Pin: residence of the dukes of Chéu under Huang-ti, 21; nine cre-
before T’an-fu’s migration, 58, ated under Chuan-hii, 25; nine
68, 169. under Yi, 36, 37; pictorially
Pines: 122. represented by Nine Tripods,
P’ing, Duke of Lu: 341; and Men- 90; according to the Chéwli,
cius, 287. 119-122.
P’ing-chéu-k’o-t’an: 133. P’u: city in the state of Tsin, now
P’ing-wang, the Emperor: 177, 332. province of Shan-si, 212, 213.
P’ing-yiian-kiin: one of the ‘‘ Four
Nobles,” 321. Quipu: see KNoT-wRITING.
Piton, Ch.: on Su Ts’in and Chang I, Quivers: 164.
311, note 1.
Ploughs: of iron in seventh century Rain, praying for: 36.
B.c., 204. Red: declared the national color of
Pén-ts’au-yen-t: 131. the Ché6u dynasty, 98.
Poetry, Chinese: difficulty of trans- Reed stalks: as instruments of divi-
lation, 239-240; see also Sui- nation, 83.
KING and K’t YUAN. Revenue, Board of: 113; see also
Po (=earl): 98. TAXES.
Po-fu: Yu-wang’s son by his sul- Rice: produced in Yang-chéu, 120;
tana Pau-ssi, 172. in Ts’ing-chéu, 121.
Po-i, ancestor of the princes of Ts’in: Richthofen, Baron F. von: derives
153. origin of Chinese race from
Po K’i, commander of Ts’in: 318- Khotan, 18-20; on Shu-king,
323; besieges Shang-tang, 321; 33; on the Emperor Yii’s en-
commits suicide, 322. gineering works, 34, 38; his
Po-ku-t’u-lu; 73. view on the old model emperors,
Po-yang: court astronomer under 33-34; on the Yi-kung; his
Yu-wang, 172. authority in Chinese research
Po-yii: see Li, son oF CoNnFUcIvs. limited, 38.
Police functions: 124. Ririumin: see Lt LuNG-MIEN.
Population: nine ranks of, 110; cen- Roasting, the punishment of: 53,
sus of, how taken, 119; has 57 and note 1.
share in important decisions in Robber Chi, the story of: 302-303.

--- pdf page 396 ---
372 INDEX
Roman Orient: inhabitants of, said Servants: rank eighth in population,
by native author to be like 110.
Chinese, 19. Seven Heroes, the: see Ts’I-HIUNG.
Rulers, the Five: 12. Sha-chéu: eastern terminus of tract
Rushes; 121. known as liu-sha, 147.
Sha-k’iu: one of Chéu-sin’s resi-
Sacks : used for provisions in war, 164. dences, in the present Chi-li,
Sacrifice: leading feature in life of 57.
nation during Shang dynasty, Shan-hai-king: 146.
83; viands and libations used as Shan-jung (= “Hill” Jung): a
offerings, 84; sacrifice to God [Mongolic ?] branch of the Huns,
(Shang-ti), first introduced by 168, 187; Duke Huan of Ts’i’s
Fu-hi, 9; regulated by Huang-ti, expedition against, 207.
13, 21; neglected by Shau-hau, Shan-yii: title of the Great Khan
24; reorganized by Chuan-hi, of the Huns, 66, 167; see also
25; during the Shang and Chéu Hons.
dynasties, 78-80, 118; claimed Shang, Duke of Sung: 229, 342.
as the emperor’s privilege by Shang dynasty, the: 47-91; 330—-
King of Ts’in, 326; sacrifice to 331; its records consist chiefly
minor deities, 80-81, 118; see of emperors’ names, 49; its
also MOUNTAINS, SACRED; sac- culture, 71-91; causes of its
rifice to ancestors, 81-83, 118, downfall, 69-70; destroyed with
177; see also ANCESTORS. the assistance of Tartar tribes,
Sacrificial vessels: see BRONZES. 169, 183; probably first his-
Salt: produced in Yu-chéu (Chi-li), torical period, 252.
122; monopoly created by Shang Jung: former minister of
Kuan-tzi, 203-205. Chéu-sin, assists Wu-wang in
San-kiau (‘‘the Three Religions’) : government, 95.
237-238. Shang-tang: city in the state of
San-kuo-chi: 129, note 1. Chau, the present Lu-an-fu in
San-miau tribe: banished by Yau, Shan-si, 321.
identified by some with T’au-t’ié Shang-ti, ‘the Supreme Ruler’’:
monster, 85-87 ; supposed ances- see Gop.
tors of Tangutans, Miau-tzi, and Shau-hau, the Emperor: 24, 329.
Tibetans, 86, 196. Shau-k’ang, the Emperor: 42, 330;
San-T sin (=The Three Tsin States) : his successors, 330.
264, 335-336. Shau-kung (= Duke of Shau):
San-wei: locality in western Kan-su, (1) prime minister to K’ang-
near the northern boundary of wang, 138; his popularity eulo-
Tibet, 87, 145. gized in the Shi-king, 139; min-
School: established under Ti-k’u, ister to Chau-wang, 143; first
25; the Duke of Chéu (Won- prince of Yen, 338; (2) prime
wang) builds animperial college, minister to Li-wang, advocates
54; school at Wu-wang’s capi- freedom of speech, 154-155;
tal, 99; philosophical school of shields Li-wang’s son, Siian-
Kui-ku-tzi, 285, 307. wang, against revolutionists and
Scythians: possibly Hunnic tribes, becomes his minister, 157.
185. Shau-tién : supposed father of Shén-
Self-culture: the subject of the nung and Huang-ti, 12.
Ta-hio, 254; recommended by Sheba, Queen of: identified with
Mencius, 292. Si-wang-mu by Professor Forke,
Sericulture: see SILK. 150-151; also by Paravey, 151.

--- pdf page 401 ---
INDEX 377
Ku-Tzi, Lau-rzi; Lis-rzi; WoOn- T’ién-tzi: see Son or HEAVEN.
TzI. Tin: produced in Yang-chéu prov-
T’au Hung-king, scholar: 308. ince, 120.
T’au-t’ié, the monster: a native Ting, Duke of Lu: 244-246, 341.
invention, 84-87; held to be Ting-wang, the Emperor: 220, 332.
identical with San-miau tribe, Tithe, levied on harvests: 297-298.
85; possibly the Tibetan mastiff, Tonjukuk, inscription of: 184, note
87 1
Taxes: amount of, fixed by Man- T’ong, the state of : 290.
darin of Heaven, 114; collected Tortoise shells: as instruments of
by Mandarin of Earth, 116; on divination, 83, 102, 103, 118.
salt and iron, 203-205; on agri- Traffic, land and water: regulated
culture, 296; systems of raising, under Huang-ti, 22.
297-298. Translation of poetry and _ philo-
Ten Stems: see CYCLICAL CHARAC- sophical texts: 239-240.
TERS. Traveler, the Great and the Small:
Terrestrial emperors: 5, 329. 124-125.
Textures of cotton (vegetable fiber) Traveling philosophers: 285.
and silk: 122, Tribute (kung): 112.
Thunder pattern (lei-wén): derived Tripods, the Nine: see NinE TrRIPops,
from hieroglyphic for ‘‘ thunder,” THE.
88, 89; used as an ornament for Tsai Yu: see Tzi-o.
filling-in purposes; symbolic Ts’ai, the state of: Duke Huan of
meaning, 89. Ts’i’s expedition against, 208;
Thurécz, John of: his list of King its first prince a brother of Wu-
Attila’s ancestors, 185, 190. wang; princes of, 345-346;
Ti (northern barbarians, Huns) : 168; annexed by Ch’u, 346.
referred to in Tso-chuan, 185, Ts’ang-kié, state historian: reputed
188; Duke W6n of Ts’i among inventor of the art of writing,
the, 213. 20-21.
Ti-chi, the Emperor: 25, 26, 329. Ts’au, the state of: on route from
Ti-huang: see TERRESTRIAL EM- Ts’i to Ch’u, 214; Wu-wang in-
PERORS. vests his brother Chon-to with,
Ti-k’i, the Emperor: 39, 330. 343; princes of, 343-344; an-
Ti-k’u, the Emperor: 25, 329; nexed by Sung, 344.
father of Yau, ancestor of Shang Ts’i, the state of : becomes powerful
and Chéu emperors, 25. under P’ing-wang, 178; as an
Ti-kui, the Emperor: see Kis. inland state could not extend,
Ti-siang, the Emperor: 41, 330. 188; rise of, to great power; its
T’iau-chi (Chaldea) : 148. Duke Huan, first of the ‘‘Five
Tibetans: supposed descendants of Leaders,’ and his minister Kuan-
the San-miau tribe, 86. tzi, 201-211, 217-218, 295; its
T’ién, the, family: usurpers in Ts’i, salt and iron industries, 204-
273, 339, 340. 205; Duke Won of Tsin as an
T’ién Ch’ang, minister in Ts’i: 273. exile in, 213-214; on side of
T’ién Ho, usurper in Ts’i: 273, 340. Tsin in war with Ch’u, 217;
T’ién-chu-kiau (= Roman Catholi- under Duke Huan’s successors,
cism): 238. 218-219; Duke Chau of Lu an
T’ién-huang: see HEAVENLY EM- exile in, with Confucius, 243-
PERORS. 244; its court had good music,
T’ién-kuan: see HEAVEN, MANDARIN 243; its jealousy of Confucius’
oF. good goverumert in Lu, 246,

--- pdf page 402 ---
378 INDEX
one of the ‘Seven Heroes”’ its situation, 183; its Duke Mu
states, 266; change of dynasty, one of the ‘‘ Five Leaders,’ 206,
the T’ién family, 273; assumes 219; interferes with succession
title of ‘‘King,” but remains in Tsin, 213, 215; on side of
loyal to emperor, 275, 315; Tsin in war with Ch’u, 216; one
princes of, known for luxury, of the “Seven Heroes” states,
277, note 1; Mencius in, 283, 266; its boundaries constantly
287; plans conquest of Yen, extending, 266-267; non-Chi-
287; joins confederation against nese character of, 267-268, 275;
Ts’in, 310; attacks Chau, 313; common descent of its princes
Su Ts’in assassinated in, 314; with those of Chau, 269; claims
Mong-ch’ang-kiin, native of, hegemony among Contending
takes service in Ts’in and re- States; regarded as barbarian
turns to, 317; the title of country by Chinese, 275; Chang
‘Emperor’? proposed for King I minister in, 286, 312; Ts’in
Min of, 318-319; conquers and Anti-Ts’in, the main politi-
Sung, 319; suffers defeat by cal factions in fourth century
Yen and its allies, 319; annexed B.c., 309; sends Chang I on a
by Ts’in, 328, 340; princes of, successful mission to Ch’u, 312,
339-340. 315; confederation against, bro-
Ts-hiung: the seven powerful con- ken up by Kung-sun Yen, 313;
tending states, 266. Chang I recalled to; conquers
Ts"én-han-shu: 66. Shu (Ssi-ch’uan), 314; strongest
Ts’ién-mé6u: battle-field, near the state long before being styled
present Liau-chéu, Shan-si, 158. kingdom in 325 Bs.c., 314;
Tsin, the state of : becomes powerful Kings Hui-w6n and Wu of, 316;
under P’ing-wang, 178; causes Chang I leaves, for want of ap-
of its growth, 182, 188, 212; its preciation; war with Han, 316;
situation, 183; its Duke Won King Chau-siang, 317-325;
one of the “‘ Five Leaders,”’ 206, regency of Queen Dowager,
211-217, 219; a son of Wu- 317-320; Wei Jan, commander
wang’s invested with, 212, 266, in, 317; and chancellor, 318—
334; its Duke Hién, 212; de- 320; reverses in war with Ts’i,
feats Ch’u in the battle of Han, and Wei, 317-318; Po Ki,
Ch’éng-p’u, 216; Chau Ts’ui commander in, 318-322; wins
and Chau Tun ministers in, great battle at I-k’iié; title of
220, 269; defeated by Ch’u, “‘Emperor ” proposed for king of,
223; six grandees of, wrangling 318; defeats Chau and Ch’u,
for supremacy, 263; the fami- conquers city of Ying and de-
lies of Han, Chau, and Wei stroys I-ling; Wei Jan’s rule in,
become powerful in, 263 ; break- overthrown, 319; King Chau-
ing up of, into three states, 264; siang sole regent with Fan Tsi
its former territory finally an- as chancellor, 320-323; de-
nexed by Ts’in, 328, 335-336; feats Chau at Shang-tang, 321;
princes of, 334-335. the ‘‘ Four Nobles ’’ work against,
Ts’in, the state of : Duke Mu of, held 321-326; besieges Han-tan and
to be the Mu-wang of the Si- is defeated, 322; loses its great-
wang-mu legend, 151; Fei-tzi, est general by Fan Tsii’s jeal-
a dealer in horses, elevated to ousy, 322-323; Prince I-jén of,
rank of prince of, 153; becomes and Lii Pu-wei, 323-328; an-
powerful under P’ing-wang, 178 ; nexes imperial dominion and
causes of its growth, 182, 188; sacred tripods, 325; annexes

--- pdf page 403 ---
INDEX 379
Han; King Chau-siang offers Tung-tu: eastern capital of Chéu
sacrifice to Shang-ti in lieu of emperors, 177.
emperor, 326; its final struggle T’ung-kién-kang-mu: 264-266, 268,
for supreme power with Li 326.
Pu-wei as prime minister, 327- Turk, the Turks of Central Asia:
328; deposes last prince of the identical with the T’u-kiié of the
Chéu dynasty and annexes Chinese, 184, note 1.
federal states; Chéng (= Shi- Turkestan, Eastern: 18-19, 91, 146-
huang-ti), king of, 328; princes 150, 151.
of, 332-334. Turkish: the language of the Huns,
Tsing, Duke of Tsin: loses his 66, 70, 184, note 1.
throne to the princes of Wei, Turkish word, the oldest, on record:
Han, and Chau, 335. see KING-LU.
Tsing: personal name of Siian-wang, Twelve Branches: see CYCLICAL
157, 159. CHARACTERS.
Tsing (“well”), the: system of taxa- Tzi (= viscount): 98.
tion, 296-297. Tzi-ch’an, the prudent minister of
Ts’ing-chéu province: 121. Chong: 232.
Tsong Ts’an, disciple of Confucius: Tzi-chi-t’ung-kién: see T’UNG-KIEN-
author of Hiau-king, 249 ; teacher KANG-MU.
of Wu K%i, 274. Tzi-kung: supposed author of the
Tso-chuan, commentary on the Yué-tsiié-shu, 234; disciple of
Ch’un-ts’iu: contains an expla- Confucius, 249.
nation of the name T’au-t’ié, 85; Tzi-lu, Confucius’ favorite disciple:
principal source for the Ch’un- 248-249.
ts’iu period, 179-181, 182, 197, Tzi-o, disciple of Confucius: 250.
253; on foreign tribes (Jung, Tzi-shu-pai-chung, ® collection of
Ti, etc.), 185, 187; describes philosophical texts: 306.
battle with foreign tribes, 187- Tzi-yii: see TsOnNG Ts’ANn.
188; contains history of the Tzi-yiian, disciple of Confucius:
“Five Leaders,” 20€; Ch’6dng- 249.
wang’s mistake as to duration
of dynasty reproduced in, sup- Uigurs (Kau-kii): described by the
ports trustworthiness of, 222; Chinese as offshoots of the
extends beyond Confucius’ death, Hiung-nu, 184, note 1; the T’ung-
262. kién-kang-mu translated into
Tso-k’iu Ming: supposed author of their language, 264-265.
the T'so-chuan, 179. Uniforms: devised by Huang-ti, 23;
Tsu-i, the Emperor: 49, 331. embroidered beasts and birds
Tsung-héng, the term: 307. on, introduced by Shau-hau, 24;
Tsung-li-yamen, the: 111. of the Sons of the Empire, 117;
Tsung-mu: 133, note 1, 148-149. of soldiers in war, 165.
Tu, brother of Wu-wang: invested
with Ts’ai, 345. Varnish: 121.
Tuan-mu Shu: 277. Vegetarian diet in primeval times : 6.
Tuan-mu Tz: see Tzi-KUNG. Virtue rewarded in future life: 82.
Tung-ch6u, the ‘Eastern Ch6u”’:
so-called since P’ing-wang, 179. Wai-jon, the Emperor: 49, 330.
Tung-ché6u-kiin: the last nominal Wai-shi (‘Historian of foreign na-
regent of the Ché6u dominion, tions and ancient rulers”) : 125.
325, 326, 332. Wai-wu-pu, the Board of Foreign
Tung-kuan-k’au-kung-ki: 125. Affairs, 111, note 1.

--- pdf page 404 ---
380 INDEX
Wall, the Great: a comparatively I-k’iié, 318; Fan Tsii a native
modern structure, 37, 77. of, 320; Prince Wu-ki of, 321;
Wang Fu, archeologist: 73. at the head of five states tries
Wang Ho, general of Ts’in: 322. to check, but finally is annexed
Wang Hii: see Kul-Kv-T2i. by, Ts’in, 328, 335; princes of,
War: Board of, 113, 119-123; 335.
people’s share in decision on Wei, the state of [not to be con-
defensive, 124; methods and founded with Wei of Tsin, 273]:
outfit of, 162-166; May and bad treatment in, of Duke
June the usual season for, 164- Won of Tsin, 213; Duke
165; prisoners of, punished as Ling of, his lascivious wife and
rebels by cutting off left ear, Confucius, 246-247; Confucius’
165, 169; Chinese and Hunnic second sojourn in, 248; Wu K4i,
methods of, compared, 166, 187; military leader, a native of,
see also ARMY; BATTLES; CHAR- 273-274; its princes reduced in
tots ; Horses ; Huns; HuntTIne ; rank, 315; Wu-wang’s brother
WEAapons. Fong invested with, 346; only
Watters, T.: on Tzi-ch’an, 233. state surviving creation of Shi-
Weapons: bows, arrows, swords, huang-ti’s empire, 347; princes
and lances ascribed to Huang-ti, of, 346-347.
22; hieroglyphics for, occur on Wei, Viscount of: see WEi-T2i.
vessels of the Shang dynasty, 75; Wei Jan, commander and chancel-
alloys of bronze weapons pre- lor in Ts’in: 317-320; plans
scribed according to the Chéu-li, coronation of King of Ts’in as
126; same weapons used in war emperor, 318; fears itinerant
as in hunting, 162, 164; practice politicians and excludes them
of archery, 165; of the Huns, from Ts’in, 320; his fall, 319-320.
168; hatchets made of iron in Wei-lié-wang, the Emperor: 263-
seventh century B.c., 204 ; swords 273, 332.
of bronze and iron, 235; during Wei-tzi (Ki): joins Wu-wang’s
the stone, jade, bronze, and iron forces, 63; appointed prince of
ages, 236. Sung, 106, 341-342.
Weaving: see Dress. Weights and measures: system of,
Wei, the River: 54, 122. derived from efforts in construct-
Wei, the state of (Wei of Tsin, also ing musical instruments, 22, 23.
called Liang): beginnings, 263; Western Chéu: see Si-cHov.
recognized as a feudal state, 264; Winter, Mandarin of (tung-kuan) :
one of the ‘‘Seven Heroes” 113, 125-126.
states, 266; supports the usurp- Wives: rank seventh in population,
er T’ién Ho as Duke of Ts’i, 110.
273; Wu K’i takes service in, Wizards, court: duties include the
274; Chang I, a native of, and denunciation of subjects heard
minister in, 286; King Hui of, speaking disrespectfully of sov-
converses with Mencius on ereign, 155.
matters of government, 287; Wolves, white: presented as tribute
joins confederation against Ts’in, to Mu-wang, 169.
310; Chang I returns to, 312; Woman’s position and duties ac-
Kung-sun Yen, a native of, per- cording to the mother of Men-
suades his king to attack Chau, cius ; 283-284.
313; Chang I chancellor of, 314; Won, Duke of T’éng: 290.
kingdom since 370 B.c., 315; Won, Duke of Tsin ( = Ch’ung-ir) ;
defeated by Ts’in in battle of third of the ‘Five Leaders,’’

--- pdf page 405 ---
INDEX 381
206, 211-217, 335; assists em- Wu-chung tribes: 187.
peror in fighting the Jung bar- Ww-ki, Prince of Wei: see S1N-LING-
barians, 219; Chau Tsui, one KUN.
of his partisans, shared his exile, Wu K’°i, philosopher, military leader
213, 220, 269.
and minister : 274.
W6n-tzi (“the Philosopher W6n ”): Wu-king (‘‘ Five Canons”) : 251-253.
306-307. Wu-king, Chéu-sin’s son: appointed
Won-wang, Duke of Chéu: inci- King of Corea, 96; intrigues
dents of his life quoted from against Chéu-kung, 104; sup-
Bamboo Books, 53-55; his ports rebellion, but is made
career as Duke of Chéu, 57-62, prisoner and killed, 104, 106.
331; his sons, 58; remonstrates Wu-ling, King of Chau: 336; wears
against Chéu-sin’s cruelty; his Tartar dress and _ introduces
imprisonment, and authorship of cavalry, 272, 316.
the I-king, 59; his rehabilitation Wu-lung: see Five Dracons.
and death, 62; serves the Kun Wu-pa (= the ‘“‘ Five Leaders’’) : 206.
barbarians, 68; defeats them, Wu-sii: see CHAavu SIANG-TZI.
70, 169; builds his capital Fong, Wu-tau-tzi, artist: 149.
99; Ché6u-kung’s prayer ad- Wu-ti, the Han Emperor: 146.
dressed to, 103; offered a white Wu-ti: see Five RULERS, THE.
pheasant by foreign tribe, 128; Wu-ting (Kau-tsung), the Emperor:
greatly admired by Mu-wang, 53, 331.
144. Wu-ting, the Emperor: T’ai-kia’s
Woodmen (foresters): how ranking son, 48, 330.
in population, 110. Wu-tzi: see Wu K’1.
Works, Board of: 113, 125-126. Wu-yiié-ch’un-ts’iu: 234.
World, the (t’2én-hia) = China: 112. Wu-wang: Duke of Chéu and first
Writing, art of: knot-writing as- emperor of the Chéu dynasty,
cribed to Sui-jén, 6; replaced second son of Wo6n-wang, 58,
by hieroglyphics under Fu-hi, 331; liberates his father by a
9; Ts’ang-kié imitates birds’ ruse, 62; assembles army to
footprints, 20-21; oldest ma- fight Chéu-sin, explaining his
terials: bamboo boards, brush, motives in several speeches, 63-
and varnish, 20, 21, 50; com- 65; defeats Chéu-sin, 65, 169;
plaints to emperor written on as King of Chéu, 95-103, 331;
boards, 31; edicts on bamboo his title, 96-97; secures posses-
tablets, 163; no writing among sion of the Nine Tripods, 98,
Huns, 168. 221; appoints descendants of
Wu, King of Ch’u: see Hruna T’una. old emperors and his brothers
Wu, King of Ts’in: 316, 333. fief-holders, 99-100; his illness,
Wu (Soochow): eastern capital of 102-103; greatly admired by
the state of Ch’u, 322. Mu-wang, 144; the unequaled
Wu, the state of: situation, 227; sovereign of the Chéu dynasty,
its king, Ho-lu, removes capital 178; one of his sons invested
to Soochow, 233; annexed by with Tsin, 212, 334; invests
Yuié, 234, 261-262, 348; T’ai-po, T’ai-kung Shang with Ts’i, 339;
son of T’an-fu, supposed an- Duke Hu with Ch’6n, 343; his
cestor of sovereigns of, 347; brother Ch6én-to with Ts’au,
Princes of, 347-348. 343; his brother Tu first Prince
Wu-chi-shan tombs: stone sculp- of Ts’ai, 346.
tures of, contain image of Fu-hi, Wu-wei (‘‘non-action,” ‘“ inaction”) ;
2. Lau-tzi on, 239, 301.

