baxtersagart -- lines containing a Later Han syllable of 耆
Source: Old Chinese _ A New Reconstruction -- William H_ Baxter, Laurent Sagart -- Illustrated, FR, 2014 -- IRL Press at Oxford University Press -- isbn13 9780199945375.pdf
Keys: gɨ, ki, tśi

--- pdf page 7  (matched ki) ---
4.2.2.2 Hmong-Mien 94
4.2.2.3 Lakkia 96
4.2.3 Inferring Old Chinese manner distinctions from

--- pdf page 11  (matched ki) ---
6 Conclusion 316
6.1 What kind of language was Old Chinese? 316
6.2 Dialect differences in Old Chinese 319

--- pdf page 12  (matched ki) ---
in real time from any internet connection.
We also thank the following individuals who have provided us various kinds of help
and support: Michelle Abud, Akitani Hiroyuki 秋 谷 裕 幸, Wolfgang Behr, Chén Jiàn

--- pdf page 12  (matched ki) ---
We also thank the following individuals who have provided us various kinds of help
and support: Michelle Abud, Akitani Hiroyuki 秋 谷 裕 幸, Wolfgang Behr, Chén Jiàn
陳 劍, Katia Chirkova, Michel Ferlus, Paul Goldin, Zev Handel, Guillaume Jacques,

--- pdf page 12  (matched ki) ---
陳 劍, Katia Chirkova, Michel Ferlus, Paul Goldin, Zev Handel, Guillaume Jacques,
Lái Guólóng 來 國 龍, Alain Lucas, Nohara Masaki 野 原 將 揮, Weera Ostapirat, Pān
Wùyún 潘 悟 云, Thomas Pellard, Phạm Thị Thu Hà 范 氏 秋 河, Qiú Xīguī 裘 錫 圭,

--- pdf page 17  (matched ki) ---
of his time and produced a phonetic reconstruction of Old Chinese (summarized in
Karlgren 1954; his term for it was “Archaic Chinese”), relying on three main kinds
of evidence:

--- pdf page 18  (matched ki) ---
Karlgren’s approach, which became traditional, was to propose pronunciations for Old
Chinese that were both consistent with these three kinds of evidence and (to one degree
or another) plausible for a natural language. Baxter’s Handbook of Old Chinese phonol-

--- pdf page 18  (matched ki) ---
1.1.2 A BROADER APPROACH
In our new reconstruction we still rely heavily on the three kinds of evidence used in tra-
ditional reconstructions. But a number of recent developments have now made it feasible

--- pdf page 19  (matched ki) ---
made it difficult to identify the patterns involved. Improved phonological reconstruc-
tions, along with evidence from dialects and early loanwords, are now making it pos-
sible to identify morphological processes with more precision.

--- pdf page 19  (matched ki) ---
1.2.1 THE NATURE OF LINGUISTIC RECONSTRUCTION
We view linguistic reconstruction as a process of making inferences about earlier stages
of a language or languages by forming hypotheses and testing them empirically. The

--- pdf page 20  (matched ki) ---
broadly consistent with observed data but that also make predictions about data
not yet seen. Our Old Chinese reconstructions make predictions about what kinds
of rhymes should and should not occur in texts that are either newly discovered

--- pdf page 21  (matched ki) ---
need to be modified. We believe that the basic hypotheses of our reconstruction are suf-
ficiently stable that it makes sense to publish our results now. But we are making the
reconstructions themselves available on a public website so that they may be revised as

--- pdf page 22  (matched ki) ---
Introduction 7
Our use of each of the main kinds of evidence is summarized in Chapter 2. First,
though, some remarks about our notation are in order.

--- pdf page 22  (matched ki) ---
while OC *kaŋ and *kraŋ are still distinguished in Middle Chinese as kjang and kjaeng,
respectively, OC *ka and *kra both became MC kjo. Similarly, MC ki can reflect either
OC *kə or *krə, and MC kje can reflect either OC *kaj or *kraj. We consider it desir-

--- pdf page 23  (matched ki) ---
1.3 Plan of the book
Chapter 2 discusses in more detail the kinds of evidence on which our reconstruction
is based. Chapter 3 gives a brief summary of the history of proposed reconstructions of

--- pdf page 24  (matched ki) ---
piled in the late sixth century ce, which gives details on the pronunciations of words
in particular contexts. A third kind of written source is the somewhat later rhyme
tables (yùntú 韻 圖), which arrange syllables in two-dimensional grids according to

--- pdf page 26  (matched ki) ---
Chinese pronunciations, so they do not tell us in concrete terms how the words were
actually pronounced. But by linking up the fǎnqiè spellings, we can establish equiva-
lence classes: we know that according to these spellings, 德 dé, 多 duō, and 得 dé are all

--- pdf page 27  (matched ki) ---
guage of any single time and place; indeed it is obvious from their content that they do
not. The preface of the Qièyùn clearly indicates that its system is a kind of compromise
between at least two varieties of pronunciation (see Zhōu Zǔmó 1966, 1968). Both the

--- pdf page 28  (matched ki) ---
no convenient ASCII equivalent for [ə] or [ʌ]; besides, how do we know that
the vowel was unrounded—and which dialect would we be talking about
anyway? Although the notation kwok may not exactly match any Middle

--- pdf page 29  (matched ki) ---
14 Old Chinese
Incidentally, this is an example of the kind of information about dialect diversity
that the Qièyùn system gives us. The finals written -aen and -ean in our system cor-

--- pdf page 36  (matched ki) ---
Colorful is the plantain, we pluck it 捋 luō < MC lwat
3 Colorful is the plantain, we hold it in our skirts 袺 jié < MC ket
Colorful is the plantain, we tuck it up in our skirts 襭 xié < MC het

--- pdf page 36  (matched ki) ---
3 Colorful is the plantain, we hold it in our skirts 袺 jié < MC ket
Colorful is the plantain, we tuck it up in our skirts 襭 xié < MC het
From the structure of the poem, it is easy to identify the rhyme words: they are the

--- pdf page 36  (matched ki) ---
always be assumed to reflect spoken language in a simple way. The intended audience
for works of literature frequently does not coincide with the population speaking any

--- pdf page 37  (matched ki) ---
22 Old Chinese
single dialect, and compromises of one kind or another are to be expected (see Baxter
1992:87–97 for further discussion). But Old Chinese rhyming shows no signs of the

--- pdf page 39  (matched ki) ---
There are 16,368 ways to divide a group of fifteen rhyme words into two rhyme groups,
so checking all the possible solutions one by one would be a huge task.12 As a practi-
cal matter, we will make progress with the problem only if we start with some specific

--- pdf page 40  (matched ki) ---
see. But discovering which rhymes do not occur is a more subtle matter. It is dif-
ficult to discover such distinctions inductively just by looking through the corpus;
we have to be guided by some kind of hypothesis that suggests what distinctions to

--- pdf page 40  (matched ki) ---
ficult to discover such distinctions inductively just by looking through the corpus;
we have to be guided by some kind of hypothesis that suggests what distinctions to
look for. The Qīng philologists relied on hypotheses suggested by the arrangement

--- pdf page 41  (matched ki) ---
the script can help us reconstruct earlier pronunciations. Evidence from the script
is especially important because of the three kinds of evidence used in traditional
approaches to reconstruction—Middle Chinese, Old Chinese rhymes, and the

--- pdf page 42  (matched ki) ---
(15) 度 duó < dak < *[d] ˤak ‘measure (v.)’
鐸 duó < dak < *lˤak ‘a kind of bell’
(16) 屠 tú < du < *[d] ˤa ‘butcher (v.)’

--- pdf page 44  (matched ki) ---
available large samples of pre-Qín writing were the oracular inscriptions of the late
Shāng dynasty and bronze inscriptions. Both kinds of texts tend to be short and formu-
laic, and the domain of their content is limited; many Old Chinese words are simply

--- pdf page 45  (matched ki) ---
Wú suǒ wéi yán shì (*ŋ̊et-s) zhě, yán rén zhī suǒ shè (*ŋ̊et) yě.
‘The setup (*ŋ̊et-s) of which I am speaking refers to what is set up (*ŋ̊et)
by men.’

--- pdf page 45  (matched ki) ---
In the standard script, the character 改 gǎi < kojX ‘change’ appears to be a phonetic
compound with 己 jǐ < kiX ‘sixth heavenly stem; self’ as phonetic, and that is what the
Shuōwén says (SWGL 1337b). But in excavated documents, we find that it is consis-

--- pdf page 46  (matched ki) ---
(Jì Xùshēng 2010:1020). Our reconstructions are as follows:
(31) 己 jǐ < kiX < *k(r)əʔ ‘sixth heavenly stem’
巳 sì < ziX < *s-[ɢ]əʔ ‘sixth earthly branch’

--- pdf page 46  (matched ki) ---
< kuwng < *C.qˤoŋ ‘father, prince’, discussed above. The replacement of the phonetic
element 巳 sì < ziX < *s-[ɢ]əʔ by 己 jǐ < kiX < *k(r)əʔ, with original *k-, reflects the
sound change *C.qˤ- > *k-, which evidently had already happened by late Hàn and is

--- pdf page 48  (matched ki) ---
nearly pan-Chinese first palatalization of velars, which Mǐn did not undergo (see section
4.1.2). Schuessler (2010:305) places the palatalization of OC *ki- to [ʨi-] during the
western Hàn period (207 bce to 9 ce); if this is so, then a branch of Chinese ancestral

--- pdf page 49  (matched ki) ---
the late third century bce. Around the time of the fall of the Qín dynasty, the Chinese
general Zhào Tuó 趙 佗 established the Nányuè 南 越 kingdom and ruled over portions
of modern Guǎngdōng, Guǎngxī, and northern Vietnam; in the second century bce, this

--- pdf page 49  (matched ki) ---
of modern Guǎngdōng, Guǎngxī, and northern Vietnam; in the second century bce, this
kingdom became a vassal state of the Western Hàn dynasty (Aurousseau 1923). His king-
dom probably included speakers of both Kra-Dai and Vietic languages, so it is likely that

--- pdf page 51  (matched ki) ---
to exclude the later layers from her Proto-Hmong-Mien reconstruction. Exclusion of
late loans makes for a much simpler and more natural-looking system.
The dates of Proto-Hmong-Mien are a matter of some uncertainty. The period dur-

--- pdf page 51  (matched ki) ---
Kam-Sui subgroups, have had sustained contact with Chinese since the establishment of
the Nányuè kingdom of Zhào Tuó in the Guǎngdōng and Guǎngxī region in about 206
bce, so far we have reconstructions only for subgroups of Kra-Dai: Proto-Kra (Ostapirat

--- pdf page 51  (matched ki) ---
loans in individual Kra-Dai languages.
Among these, Lakkia (Lakkja) must be singled out. Lakkia, a Kra-Dai language
spoken in China by a group officially classified as Yáo 瑤, is known to be the only

