 
 
 
   
     Notice 
   
   
      This book was produced in EPUB format by the Internet Archive.   The book pages were scanned and converted to EPUB format automatically. This process relies on optical character recognition, and is somewhat susceptible to errors. The book may not offer the correct reading sequence, and there may be weird characters, non-words, and incorrect guesses at structure. Some page numbers and headers or footers may remain from the scanned page. The process which identifies images might have found stray marks on the page which are not actually images from the book. The hidden page numbering which may be available to your ereader corresponds to the numbered pages in the print edition, but is not an exact match;  page numbers will increment at the same rate as the corresponding print edition, but we may have started numbering before the print book's visible page numbers.  The Internet Archive is working to improve the scanning process and resulting books, but in the meantime, we hope that this book will be useful to you.   The Internet Archive was founded in 1996 to build an Internet library and to promote universal access to all knowledge. The Archive's purposes include offering permanent access for researchers, historians, scholars, people with disabilities, and the general public to historical collections that exist in digital format. The Internet Archive includes texts, audio, moving images, and software as well as archived web pages, and provides specialized services for information access for the blind and other persons with disabilities.  Created with hocr-to-epub (v.1.0.0)  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 0 
     
   
   
     An Etymological Dictionary of Pre-Thirteenth-Century Turkish SIR GERARD CLAUSON OXFORD AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 1972 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1 
     
   
   
     Oxford University Press, Ely House, Loudcn W. 1 GLASGOW NEVV YORK TORONTO MEI BOURNE. WELILANGTON CAFE TOWN IBADAN NAIROPRÍ DAR- ES SALAAM 1L,USAKA. ADDIS ATL UY DELHI DOMBAY CALCUTTA MADRAS KARACIHT LAXHORE DACCA KUALA LUMPUR. SINGAPORR. HONU KONG. TOKYO ()OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 1972 .— TEINT"D IN GREAT BRITA:N AT THE UNIVERSITY FRESS, OXFORD BY VIVIAN PİDLER PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 2 
     
   
   
     ə. PRETACE r. İn the first two chapters of Turkish and Mongolian Studies, Royal Asiatic Society Prize Publication Fuad, vol, XX, London, 1962 (hereafter referred to as Studies), I gave a brief sketch of the history of the Turkish peoples and of their languages from the earliest period (the eighth century A.D.) at which they become directly known to us down to the medieval period, and attempted to identify and name the various dialects and ianguages which evolved during that period. 2. 'The broad thesis of this sketch was that a unitary "Turkish language, which was not genetically connected with any other language known to us, and specifically not connected genetically with the Mongolian and Tungus languages, took shape, almost certainly in the steppe country to the west and nerth of the Great Wall of China, at some date which we cannot now determíne, but certainly long before the start of the Christian era; that this unitary language split into two main branches, “standard Turkish” and “İ/r 'Turkish', not later than, and perhaps before, the beginning of the Christian era; and that during the first millennium A.D. standard Turkish slowly broke up into two or three dialects, which soon became independent languages. No substantial early texts of any form of l[r Turkish have survived, but there are in Chinese historical works a few words of Tavğaç, the language of the Turkish tribe called by the Chinese “”o-pa, who were the ruling element in the Chinese Northern, or Yüan, Wei dynasty (A.D. 386-535), and there are some Turkish loan-words in Mongolian and Hungarian which were almost certainly borrowed from an Ilr language, by the Mongols probably in the fifth or sixth centuries, and by ihe Hungarians probably in the ninth. The slight remains of Proto-Bulgar arc in 4 similar language and so too are a few funerary inscriptions of the Volga Br!gars of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. The material is, however, very scanty and I have made only a few references herein to words in İfr Turkish, and those mainly where the only surviving I/r language, Chuvash (Cuv.), throws light on the phonetic structure of individual standard “Furkish words. "These citations are from N. I. Ashmarin, Thesaurus linguae Tschuvaschorum, 17 vols., KazanCheboksary, 1928-50, cited as Ash. followed by the volume and page. 3. As I pointed out in Studies, p. 53, an essential basis for any scientific study of the comparative etymology of the Turkish languages is a list of ail genuine "Turkish words which aie known to have existed before the various inedieval "Turkish languages were subjected to a mass invasion cf loan-words from the languages of the foreign peoples (mainly Arabs, Iraniars, and later Mongols) with şəxs the 'Turkish peoples then came into contact. "The present work contains just such a list, 1 have endeavoured to include in it all the words known E uds existed in the earliest known standard "Turkish languages, that is Türkü, D ———À9.0 7 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 3 
     
   
   
     vi PREFACE Uyğur, including Uygur-A, Old Kirfiz, Xakani, Oğuz, Kipçak, and some minor dialects, prior to the Mongolian invasion at the beginning of the thirteenth century, excluding, except in a few special cases, words borrowed directly or indirectly from the Indian, Iranian, and Semitic languages. All references to “early Turkish" and “the early period” relate to the Turkish languages as we know them in the eighth to twelfth centuries inclusive. 4. One of the special characteristics of the Turkish languages is the manner in which derived words are constructed from the basic words of the language by a process of attaching suffixes to them. It 1s important, therefore, not merely to compile a bare list of these early words and their meanings, but also to indicate what kind of words they are (nouns, verbs, adverbs, etc.), verbs being distinguished from the rest by the attachment of a hyphen, c.g. at (noun) “a horse”, at- (verb) “to throw', and in addition, in the case of derived words, to analyse their structure and indicate from what basic words they were derived, since this often explains their semantic evolution. This is all the more important since, even at the earliest date at which it becomes known to us, Turkish had already had a long history, in the course of which some basic words had already become obsolete, leaving the words derived from them, so to speak, “in the air”, with no obvious origin; on this point sec, for example, Studies, pp. 140 ff. In giving these morphological explanations I have used thc grammatical terminology customary among English scholars of ''urkish, eschewing the new terminologies which are now taking shape in some academic circles. s. My second purpose has been to establish the original meanings of all words in the list and trace their subsequent semantic evolution by illustrating each word by a quotation, or series of quotations, of passages in early texts in which they occur, For this purpose I have examined all the surviving texts in the languages enumerated above to which I have been able to obtain access. ""hese texts are enumerated in paras. 20-6 below. 6. The onİy words which have been included in the list without at least one such quotation are a few which can first be traced in an actual Turkish text only in the medieval period, that is during the thirteenth to sixteenth centuries inclusive, but which demonstrably existed at an carlier period for such reasons as that they exist both in standard "Turkish and in Chuvash (in a distinctive form peculiar to that language) so that they must already have existed beforc the split between standard and Ifr Turkish, or that words derived from them are attested in the early period, or that they occur as loan-words in foreign languages in forms which indicate that they must have been borrowed in, or before, the early period. "The texts which have survived from the early period are of course only a fraction of those which once existed and there are no doubt other words which existed in the early period but do not happen to occur in the texts which have survived. Some of these words occur in medieval texts or still exist in modern Turkish languages, but I have not attempted to identify and include them in the list, since the evidence that they were re»lly early words is lacking. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 4 
     
   
   
     PREFACE vii 7. A surprisingly large number of early words are Rağax legomena (Hap. leg.), that is, occur only once, and have not so far been discovered elsewhere; they have, however, been included in the list because they scem to be genuine "Turkish words and may later be discovered elsewhere; but the fact that they are Hap. leg. makes it impossible to determine whether they are correctly transcribed. Properly speaking the term implies one single occurrence, but it has been stretched to include verbs listed in Kaş. with an enumeration of the Perf., Aor., and Infin. forms, since experience shows that if a word is mis-spelt in the Perf. it may also be mis-spelt in the Aor. and Infin. 8. When an early word has survived into the medieval period, 1 have also added a selection of quotations from the texts enumerated in paras. 27-52, and when it still survives in one or more modern languages I have usually recorded this fact also. There are two reasons for doing this: the first is that evidence of this kind is often required to fix the exact meaning and pronunciation of the word in the early period; the second is that, as I understand it, the main purpose of compiling a dictionary of this kind is not only to help students to read and understand the meaning of early texts, but also to provide a solid basis for the etymological dictionaries of medieval and modern Turkish languages which are now being compiled or will be compiled in future. I must, however, make it clear that my quotations from medieval texts and enumerations of modern languages in which a word survives do not profess to be as comprehensive as the quotations from early texts. THE SYSTEM OF TRANSCRIPTION 9. The problems of transcribing early "Turkish texts are discussed at length in Studies, Chap. 3 and elsewhere, and it is unnecessary to cover the whole ground again. There is, of course, no means of discovering exactly how Turkish was pronounced between goo and 1200 years ago; the alphabets employed are all to a greater or less degree unscientific; the most that can be achieved is a broad system of transcription which will give an approximate idea of the pronunciation of the words concerned in the languages enumerated in para. 3. "The transcription alphabet which I suggested in Studies and which is used here can best be described as the official alphabet of the "Turkish Republic with one minor modification (regarding the use of ğ and ğ) and a few extra letters to represent sounds which either do not exist in Republican Turkish (Rep. Turkish) or, if they exist, are not represented by a distinctive letter. This alphabet was selected on the basis that the phonetic structure of early "Turkish was probably much the same as that of Rep. Turkish, apart from certain sounds for which special letters have been provided. "These sounds can be tabulated as follows: 10. Vosgels. 'There are four back and five front vowels, all of which may be either short or long. The only additional letter is 6 for close e, a sound which 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 5 
     
   
   
     vii PREFACE certainly existed in early "Fürkish and still survives at any rate in some dialects of Rep. Turkish. shortaiou Back r long à:1:0: u: " shorteéió ü Front əsə long e: 6: i: ó: ü: "Fhese are arranged, when circumstances demand it, in thc following order: a, a:, e, et, 6, öz, 1, 15, İ, iz, 0,0: ü, u:, 6, Öz, ü, ü:; note that u, u: precede ö, öz, The round vowels represent a range of sounds which merge imperceptibly into one another in the various languages. In most, but not all, modern languages the vowels 0 and ö occur only in first syllables of words, but there is good evidence, which I assembled in “Three Notes on Early Turkish”, Türk Dili Araştırmaları Yıllığı, 1966, pp. 1 fF., that they were also used in the second and later syllables of many words in early Turkish. This evidence is, however, too fragmentary and imperfect, and in some cases too inconsistent, to justify restoring such spellings at the beginning of all the entries concerned, I have therefore entered all these words in the conventional spelling with ufü in the second and later syllables. Where there is good evidence in regard to individual words that these vowels were originally ofó I have entered these spellings in brackets, c.g. tórü: (törö:), but I must emphasize that these sounds occurred in far more words than are singled out for this treatment, for example, in all words with the Suffix -uk/-ük (-ok/-ök). 11. Consonants, 'The conclusion reached in Studies was that the sounds which existed in early Turkish can be tabulated as follows, v. representing voiced and 1, unvoiced sounds: SemiPlosive Fricative Nasal Afiricate Sibilant vowel  v. d. Uu v 7. OT v Labia! b p wv (f m (w) Dental d t d n Z s Denti-palatal c ç Palatal n (b s y Post-palatal BÉ k 2 ) Velar P2 k ğ x n t  Liquids (v.) 1 r (Aspirate (v.) h) 'The post-palatal sounds occur only in association with front vowels and the velar sounds only in association with back vowels, so only one letter, k, is required to represent both unvoiced plosives. The unvoiced labial fricative f probably did not exist in early Turkish as an independent sound, but seems to 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 6 
     
   
   
     PREFACE ix have arisen as a secondary form of v in association with some unvoiced sounds. "The voiced palatal sibilant probably did not exist as an independent sound in early Turkish, but is noted as a secondary sound in one or two words containing €, e.g. cój- probably for çöz-. It also occurred in a few Sogdian loan-words, e.g. a:ju:n, and: a few other words, e.g. üjme:, which are probably, but not demonstrably, Sogdian loan-words. "Phe labial semi-vovvel vv was not a native "Turkish sound, but evolved as a secondary form of v in one or two languages like early Oğuz and also occurred in some loan-words. "The voiced post-palatal $ was normally a plosive, but may in certain positions have been a fricative; conversely the voice velar ğ was normally a fricative but may in certain positions have been a plosive. The unvoiced velar fricative x probably did not exist as an independent sound in early Turkish, but seems to have arisen as a secondary form of k in association with some sounds, and also occurred in a few loanwords, some of them very old like xağan and xan. Kaşğari says that the simple aspirate h was not a native Turkish sound but occurred in some “impure” dialects and in one or two words like ühi: in which it seems to be a secondary form of £g. "The consonants are arranged, when the circumstances demand it, in the following order: b, p, v, (f), (vv) ş c, €, İs d, d, t; B, (velar) k, x, €, (postpalatal) k, (b) ;1; m;n, y, i; r;s;9; y ; z. Note that the letters are arranged in classes, and not in the normal conventional order, but that the first letters of the classes are arranged in the conventional order. 12. There are some particular difficulties in transcribing some early languages, of which the following are the most important: (1r) In Türkü there was a tendency towards dissimilation, so that when 4 suffix beginning alternatively with a voiced or unvoiced consonant like the Perf. suffix -dı:/-ti:/-di:/-ti: was attached to a verb ending in a consonant, the unvoiced form was attached to a voiced consonant and vice versa, e.g. erti:, tapdı:. In Xak. the position tended to be exactly the opposite, at any rate to the extent that suffixes with voiced initials were attached to verbs ending with voiced consonants, e.g. erdi:, although cases of suffixes with voiced initials being attached to verbs ending in unvoiced consonants are very common, at any rate in our manuscript of Kaş. Chronologically speaking Uyğ. lay squarely between "Türkü and Xak. but nearly all the alphabets in which it is written are so ambiguous that it is quite uncertain whether it was a dissimilating language like the former or an assimilating language like the latter, or whether the change took place at some date between the eighth and eleventh centuries. I cannot therefore claim to have been in the least consistent in transcribing Uyğ. texts, usually following the scriptions in the published texts. (2) The Runic alphabet (see S'udrer, pp. st ff.) in which nearly all the Türkü texts have survived, the Manichaean Syriac alphabet, and the Bráhmi alphabet had different letters for b and p and for &amp; and post-palatal k, the other early alphabets did not, and the Brahmi spellings are very erratic; there is indeed some doubt regarding the phonetic value of some of the letters of this alphabet 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 7 
     
   
   
     x PREFACE in its Central Asiatic form. İt is therefore almost impossible to decide how some words should be transcribed. In some cases assistance can be got from the modern languages, but some of these have undergone quite considerable phonetic changes. (3) Only one of the alphabets ə, Brahmi, had separate letters for 0, u, Ö and ü, and the spellings of the texts in this alphabet are often inconsistent. In this case, however, the correct form can often be established if the word was a loan-word in Mongolian, or survives in modern languages; but the spellings in modern languages are often inconsistent, particularly as between languages in the Oğuz group and the rest. 13. The alphabet set out above has also been used for transeribing (or perhaps it would be more accurate to say transliterating, since the system adopted is purely mechanical) quotations from Arabic and Persian texts, with the addition of the following letters: t, d, t, h, s, and z, hamsa”, "ayı" and q for the unvoiced velar plosive, which must be distinguished from the unvoiced post-palatal plosive in these languages. In these languages, too, vowel length is indicated in the usual manner by a superscribed line, e.g. à. The same letters are also used to transcribe Mongolian, but Sanskrit is transcribed in the conventional way. THE ARRANGEMENT OF WORDS IN THE DICTIONARY 14. As pointed out above, the Turkish texts quoted in this book are written in a variety of alphabets, all more or less ambiguous, and it is often impossible to determine the correct transcription of a number of words; moreover, some words were pronounced slightly differently in different languages. It would, therefore, not be sensible to arrange the words in the strict alphabetical order to which we are accustomed in the dictionaries of European languages, since this would involve a great many double or multiple entries and greatly add to the difficulty of finding individual words. This problem and the means of solving it are discussed in detail in SZudtes, Chap. 4. The arrangement which emerged from this discussion can be summarized as follows: — (1) The words are broken down into fourteen groups, containing respectively words beginning with tlie following sounds: (a) vowels | . (h) m .(5) labial plosives (b, (p)) () n (c) denti-palatal affricate (c) (f r (d) dental plosives (t, (d)) (k) s (e) velar plosives (k, (x)) () s . (f) post-palatal plosives (k, (&amp;)) (m) y (g) 1 : (a) z (2) Each of these fourteen groups is divided into sub-groups; in each case the first sub-group contains monosyllables ending in an open vowel; the order of the 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 8 
     
   
   
     PREFACE oxi remainder is determined in the case of the first group (words beginning with vowels) by the first consonant, and, if there is one, the second consonant or failing that the final vowel, if any, and in the case of other groups by the second consonant, and the third consonant, if any, or failing that the final vowel, if any. For purposes of classification these are the only significant sounds; vowels other than initial and final vowels are disregarded except for purposes of arranging the order of the words in a sub-group. 15. Each sub- group i is identified by from one to three code letters representing the significant sounds efiumerated above, the code letters being as follows: A, or if one of the significant sounds is post-palatal $ or k, E, representing vowels. B representing labials, b, p, v, (f), (w) but not m. . C representing denti-palatal affricates c, c, (1). D representing dentals d, d, t but not n. G representing velars ğ, k, x but not y. G representing post-palatals £, k, (h) put not T. L representing 1. M representing m. N representing n, n, fi R representing r. S representing s. S representing S. Y representing y. |5 Z representing Z. Each sub- -group is divided into the following parts: (1) monosyllables, if any, coded as Mon. (2) monosyllabic verbs, if any, coded as Mon. V. (3) disyllables, coded as Dis.” (4) disyllabic verbs, coded as Dis. V. (5) longer words, coded as Tris. (6) longer verbs, coded as Tris. V. 16. In order to locate a word in the dictionary: (1) declensional and conjügational suffixes must be removed; " (2) the part in which it appears in the dictionary must be determined by converting the significant sounds in it into the appropriate code letters, account E taken of the fact whether it is either a verb or not a verb, e.g.: u: : . Mon. A ?ui- |! Mon. V. A-. ak, of, u d ok Mon. AĞ . eg-, ek-i öğ-, HE —— Mon. V. EGbu: : 6. Mon. BA   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 9 
     
   
   
     xii PREFACE cars Mon. CRS tüpi:, tópü: Dis. DBA tapin-, tevin- Dis. V. DBNtügü:nük 'Tris. DGN tıltağlığ Tris. DLD yarlıka:- 'Tris. V. YRL17. Within each part of a sub-group the words are arranged in the following order, which is designed to make it as easy as possible to locate a word written in any of the various scripts: (1) in Mon. and Mon. V. in the alphabetical order of the vowel, and when two or more words have the same vowel (o and u, and à and ü, respectively being regarded as identical since they are not distinguished in these scripts) in the order of the final consonants; thus in Mon. V. AD- the order is ad-, at-, ét-, i;d-, it-, u:d-, ut-, üd-, öt-, üt-. (2) in Dis. and Dis. V., (a) all words ending in a closed syllable precede those ending in an open vowel, thus in Dis, V. ADL- ütül- precedes atla:-; (b) if two words contain, in addition to the letters represented in the heading, further consonants belonging to different classes, these determine their order; thus in Dis. V, SCD- sıçtur- precedes saçtaş-, (c) in other cases, subject to (a) above, the order is determined by the first vowel; thus under Dis. V. SCD- the order is saçıt-, sigit-, sucit-, sücit-, and under Dis. V. ADL- atla:-, edle:-, or, if the vowels are identical, by the order of the consonants following, thus under Dis. V. ADL- odul, udul-, otul-. (3) in Tris. and "Tris. V. the same principles are observed, mutatis mutandis. 18. Most words in the dictionary are preceded by code letters in capitals, only basic words of which the pronunciation is reasonably certain not being preceded by one. These letters have the following meaning: (1) C compound; used when a word is composed of two shorter words, e.g. C içkur “belt”, composed of iç and kur. Such words are rare. (2) D Derived; placed before every word other than a compound which is not a basic word, e.g. D evdil-, the Passive form of evdi:-. (3) F Foreign: placed before words which are known to be loan-words, e.g. F 8:ju:n borrowed from Sogdian. Words which are believed to be loan-words are preceded by ?F if definite proof is lacking. (4) PU Pronunciation uncertain; see (6). (5) S Secondary; placed before words which are secondary forms of other words in the list; such words are followed by a reference to the words of which they are the secondary forms. (6) VU Vocalization uncertain. This prefix is used when the vocalization of a word is uncertain but there is no doubt about its consonantal structure, e.g. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 10 
     
   
   
     PREFACE xiii VU etec indicates that this is the most probable pronunciation of the word but that it might be ataç, atıç, atuç, etc. Words are preceded by PU when there is some doubt about the pronunciation of one or more consonants in them whether or not the vocalization is certain. (7) When a word is known to have existed at an earlier date but was already obsolete by the eighth century so that it is known only from its derivatives the basic word is entered with a preceding asterisk and followed by cross-references to some of the words derived from it, e.g. 1 *ad-, see adın, adır-. (8) E Erroneous; unfortunately a few completely non-existent words have found their way into söme medieval and modern dictionaries and word-lists owing to misreadings of ancient texts. A small selection of these is included in the list, preceded by E and followed by an explanation, in order to indicate that such words really did not exist and have not merely been overlooked, e.g. E amuç which arises from an erroneous scription of the Arabic word asafih in the manuscript of Kaş. AUTHORITIES QUOTED, WITH SHORT TITLES I, EARLY TEXTS 19. All quotations in the paragraphs about individual words are preceded by the name of the language in which they were written and the date of composition expressed in centuries denoted by roman numerals: vii1 — eighth century A.D. and so on. When two or more quotations are taken from the same language they are grouped under a single head, possibly with different chronological indications. A. Türkü 20. "Tvvo periods are distinguished: (1) vir, Several major inscriptions in the Runic alphabet fall under this heading; there is a brief note on the best editions of them in Studies, p. 68, but my own quotations are derived, wherever possible, from a personal exarnination of the photographs and squeezes of the inscriptions. As a result in one or two cases I have, I think, found better readings of some difficult passages than those in any of the editions; examples will be found under olğurt-, berüki, sin-. In addition to the major inscriptions listed separately below there are some shorter inscriptions, but as they are undated and may be later than vııı they are included under the next heading. The major inscriptions are the following: (a) the funerary inscription of Tofukuk (this is the customary transcription of the name but it is VU) composed probably in the second, but possibly the third decade of virt; cited as T' followed by the number of the line; (5) the funerary inscription of Kül Tégin, composed in A.D. 732, cited as 7 followed by the side (E, W, N, S) of the stone and the line on the side; (c) the funerary inscription of Bilge: Xağan, composed in A.D. 735, cited as 1] similarly followed; 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 11 
     
   
   
     xiv PREFACE (d)thefuneraryinscriptionof the Küli Cors at 1xe-Xuşotu in central Mongolia, roughly contemporary with the preceding; cited as 7x. followed by the line, (e) the relatively brief inscription at Ongin, cited as Orngin followed by the line. - (2) virt ff. Under this heading are included texts which may have been composed in viit, but were possibly, in some cases probably, composed in ix, or perhaps in one or two cases even later. "Vhese fall under the following heads: (a) a few minor inscriptions from Mongolia, of which the most convenient editions are those in the second volume of H. N. Orkun, Eski Türk Yazıtları, 3 volumes and index, Istanbul, 1936-41, (cited as ETY followed by the volume in roman and the page in arabic figures). These are occasionally cited under the names given in that volume followed by a reference to ETY 1]; (b) those of the so-called Yeniseian (Yen.) inscriptions which were found in Khakassia and were probably erected by minor Western Türkü chieftains who escaped to Khakassia after the fall of the "Türkü empire in the middle of vur, see Studies, p. 69. The most convenient edition is that in S. Ye. Malov, Yerisetskaya pis'mennost' tyurkov, Moscow, 1952; they are cited as Mal. followed by the number of the inscription and the line, but my readings sometimes differ from Malov's; (c) a few inscriptions found at Ayrtam Oy near the town of Talis or the river of the same name and probably datable to 1x or x (see Studies, pp. 72 and 256). "The texts are almost illiterate and in a deplorable state, and I have quoted them only occasionally, citing them as Talas followed by the number of the Doct pHen and the line; (d) paper manuscripts in the Runic alphabet. ""he only substantial one is a book of divination called /rk Bitig, which I cite as Irk B followed by the number of the paragraph and not, as has usually been done, by the page, since the page numbers used do not correspond to those of the actual manuscript. "The most convenient edition of the rest, which are rather miscellaneous in character, is in ET Y IH, but as Orkun's system of references is rather chaotic 1 have substituted my own, followed by a reference to the page in E TY IJ. İt is commonly believed that these documents can be dated to about 1x; (e) Manichaean (Man.) texts in the Manichaean Syriac or Uyğur alphabets and what Prof. A. von Gabain in her Aittürkische Grammatik, Leipzig, 1941, p. 5 (cited as v. G. ATG) called “the N-dialect', but which seems in fact, see Studies, p. 118, to be "Türkü written in a non- Runic alphabet. The longest and most important of these texts is the Confession of Sins” known as the Chuastuanift (more correctly Xwastwan&amp;ft). The best manuscript, almost complete, is in the British Museum, and there are other fragments, some of the beginning of the text missing in that manuscript, in Germany. The most convenient edition, with a facsimile of the B.M. manuscript, is still that by A. von Le Coq in JRAS 1911, pp. 279 ff., although the translation is not entirely accurate. I cite it as Chuas. followed by the line of the B.M. manuscript or, in the case of the first part, as Chuas. 1 followed by the line in von Le Coq's numeration. The other 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 12 
     
   
   
     PREFACE xv Manichaean Türkü texts which I quote have all been published in the AöRandlungen or Sitzungsberichte of the Academy of Sciences in Berlin (originally the Kónigliche preussische, later Preussische, and later still Deutsche, Akademie der Wissenschaften). As these publications also contain Manichaean texts-ín Uyğur and Uygur-A it is more convenient to list all the publications of Manichaean texts here to avoid additional references in subsequent paragraphs. The main bulk of them is in A. von Le Coq's Türkische Mantchaica aus. Chotscho I (AKPAVV, 1912); II (APAW, 1919); III (APAW, 1922), cited as M I, İT, and III followed by the page and line, the last followed. by (i), (ii), etc. if the same line number appears more than once on the same pàge. Others were published in a series called Türkische Turfantexte (cited as T T), edited at one time or another by W. Bang, A. von Gabain, and G. R. Rachmati (later R. R. Arat), which also contains Uyğur Buddhist and Civil texts. "Those parts which contain Manichaean texts (mostly not in Manichaean Türkü) are 77 II (SPÁW, 1929) cited by page and line, and T'T 7/7 (SPAW, 1930) and, TT 2X (ADAV, 1958) both in Uyğur and cited by line. Other short Mahichaean texts are in A. vori Le Coq, Eín manichdisch-nigurisches: Fragment. aus. Idiqut-Schachri (SKPAW, 1908) cited as Man. -uig. Frag. followed by page. and line, and W. Bang and A. von Gabain, El wigurisches Fragment über den manicháischen VVindgott (Ungarische” ju eer VIII, pp. 247 ff.), cited as Wind. follówed i the line. B. Uyğur and Uyur-A (Uy. and Uyp. -A) . m. ; 5 21. The reasons for supposing that two Separate, but closely related, Uyg. dialects existed are stated in Studies, p. 42. There are obvious traces of Uy£: -A in some Buddhist texts, e.g. those in 7T VI and TM I V (althought it is stated in the introduction to the latter that the Üyğ.-A forms had been “corrected”i in the transcription so that they are no longer apparent); but such texts dö not seeni to be entirely homogeneous, so that it is only i in the, Manicheaean texts. that it seems possible iore or less to isolate the two dialects, "Three periods can be distinguished: MP m: x. (1) vun, "The earliest and most substancia Uyğ. inscription : in the Runic alphabet is that situated at Şine-usu in Outer. Mongolia, which is the funerary monument of an Uyğur Xağan who ruled from A.D. 746. t to 759: It is: .. as Şu, followed by the side and line on the side. (2) rx. "The second such inscription, only fragments of the yi. text ot səhich still survive, is the funerary memorial at Kara Balgasun of an Uyğur Xafan who probably ruled from a.p. 808 to 821. It is cited as £27 followed by a letter and line and a reference to ET'Y 7I. The third is the short funerary inscription at Suci in Outer Mongolia, probably datablé to the fist —. ok IX; p eited as Suci followed by the line, - -. (3) vir ff., that is, in this case, texts the catiest of Which may go bash as: [for as vil, although the actual manuscripts are probably later, while the latest, apart from the xvırr manuscript of the Stveargaprabhasa Sütra, the composition of which was much earlier, is probably a Civil document dated firmly to the second 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 13 
     
   
   
     PREFACE xvii lines 1 to 324, the second lines 1763 to 2160, the rest being unpublished); and the Turkish translation of the Suvarngaprabhásasütra, published by V. V. Radlov and S. Ye. Malov, St. Petersburg, 1913 ff, cited as Suv. followed by the page and line. (d) Civil (Civ.) texts, that is not religious. These fall into four classes: (i) Medical texts, probably mere translations of texts in otherlanguages.The main collection is in G. R. Rachmati, Zur Hetlkunde der Uiguren Y (SPAW, 1930) cited as H 1 followed by the line, and 11 (SPAW, 1932) cited as H 1I followed by the page and line. There are also one or two such texts in 77 VII and VIII. (ii) Astronomical, astrological, magic, and omen texts, published in TT 7 (SPAW, 1929), cited by the line, TT VII and VIII and USp. Texts of the first two kinds are mainly translated from the Chinese, generally with an Indian background, and are mostly late in the period; the line between unorthodox Buddhist and purely magical texts is iBdetmite and I may have put some texts the wrong side of it. (iii) Commercial and legal documents and (iv) miscellaneous texts. The main collection of these is in U.Sp.; there is one in TT VII, No. 42, a very late text apparently transcribed from an original in the Arabic alphabet, and there are one or two published elsewhere. When quoting the last I have indicated where they may be found. A good many of the Uy£. texts listed above have been completely or partially indexed ; but no index is available for others, including Suv. which is much the longest, and I cannot guarantee that I have listed every word which occurs in these unindexed texts. C. Old Kırğız (O. Kir.) 22. İt is commonly believed that those of the Yeniscian inscriptions which were found not in Khakassia but in Tuva were set up by Kırğız chieftains in that area and are in the Old Kırğız language. İt has been suggested that they are the oldest monuments in the Runic alphabet and may date back as far as vr, but L. R. Kyzlasov has recently proved by archaeological methods (see Studres, p. 7o) that most of them date from 1x and x and that some may be even later. I have classified them as 1x ff. The most convenient edition is that of Malov mentioned in pata. zo (2) (P), but A. M. Shcherbak has published revised texts of some of them, and some photographs and squeezes are available. I have therefore not always followed Malov's readings. D. Xahàni (Xah.) 23. Xak. is a language closely related both to Türkü and to Uyg., but sufficiently distinct from both to be regarded as a separate language. It was certainly not directly descended from the latter, indeed it existed side by side with Uyg. for two or three centuries, and was perhaps not quite directly descended from the former, İt is first identified in xr, and there are two Xak. xı texts of major 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 14 
     
   
   
     xvi PREFACE quarter of xiv. "The actual date of composition of the remainder is quite uncertain; some of the legal and commercial documents are certainly not older than xitI and contain Mongolian, Arabic, and Persian loan-words, but İ have taken them into account with suitable precautions, since it is quite impossible to divide these documents neatly into two categories, those anterior and those subsequent to A.D. 1200. These texts can be divided into the following classes: (a) Christian texts (CAr.). These are likely to be quite early in the period. Only two seem to have survived, the well-known apocryphon about the Magi published in F. W. K. Müller, Uigurica (AKPAW, 1908) pp. 5 ff., cited as U 7 followed by the page and line, and a fragment published in M 111 cited by page and line. (5) Manichaean (Man.) texts in Uyğ. and Uyg.-A published in the various works listed in para. 20 (2) (e) above. All are fragmentary and vary greatly in length, though none are very long; in the case of the longer texts it is usually possible to determine whether they are in Man. Türkü, Uy. or Uyğ.-A, when this is impossible they are cited as Uyğ. The earliest of these texts probably go back to vir and the latest are unlikely to be much later than 1x. (c) Buddhist ( Bud.)texts. 'These have been published in substantial quantitics ; the following is a list of those which I have quoted. "There are four volumes of Uigurica, the first three edited by F. W. K. Müller, tbe last by A. von Gabain. U 1 has already been mentioned under (a); U /7 (AKPAW, 1911), U 117 (APAW, 1922), and U IV (APAW, 1931) are cited by page and line. “The following volumes of the 777 series mentioned in para. zo (2) (e) contain Buddhist texts: TT IV (SPAW, 1930); TT V (SPAW, 1931); TT VI (SPAW, 1934); TT VII (APAW, 1937); TT VII (ADAW, 1954, the volume containing the texts in the Brahmi alphabet), and 7T' X (ADAW, 1959). Of these VI and X are cited by the line, /V and V by page and line, and V/7 and VII] by document and line. 'There is a useful and complete Zra/vtischer Index su den fünf ersten Stücken der T T (SPAW, 1931) and VI contains a partial and V77, VIII, and X a complete index of words. Another AKPAW volume containing Buddhist texts is F. W. K. Müller, Ztwei Pfahlinschriften aus dem Turfanfunden, 1915, cited as Pfahl. followed by the page and line. W. RadlolT, Uigurische Sprachdenkmáler, Leningrad, 1928, cited as U.Sp. followed by document number and line, contains infer alia a number of Buddhist texts. Other publications wbich I have quoted are the following: Paul Pelliot, La Version ouigoure de l'histoire des princes. Kalyánamkara et. Pápamkara, 'T'oung Pao. XV. 2, 1914, cited as PP followed by the page and line; W. Bang and G. R. Rachmati, TWrlti Cehennemler üzerine Uygurca Parçalar, "Vürkiyat Mecmuasi IV, Istanbul, r934, cited as TM IV followed by the Jine; Şinasi Tekin, Kuangt İm Pusar, Erzurum, 1960 (superseding Radloff's partial edition, St. Petersburg, 1911) cited as Kuan. followed by the line; W. Radloff, Tzsastuustik, ein in türhischer Sprache bearbeitetes buddhistisches Sutra, St. Petersburg, 1910, cited as 7?., followed by the manuscript page and line; A. von Gabain, Die urgurische Übersetzung der Biographie Hiüen-tsangs (SPAW, 1935) and Briefe der wuigurischen. Hüen-tsang- Biographie (SPAW, 1938), both cited as Hen-ts. followed by the line (the first containing 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 15 
     
   
   
     xviti PREFACE importance. The first is the earliest, and by far the most important, "FurkishArabic dictionary, the Diod Lufati'l- Turk of Mahmüd al-Kaşğari, dating from the third quarter of X1 and cited as Kaş. The quotations in the form Kaş. followed by a roman number and an arabic number and sometimes a second arabic number are from the Turkish translation by B. Atalay, Drvanü Lugat-tt-türk Tercumesi, 3 volumes and index, Ankara, 1940—3, since this edition is rcasonably accessible, and the index is excellent and comprehensive. "The principle which I have followed is to cite the volume and page for main entries and the line as well for quotations from other parts of the book. I have, I hope, included every word which it contains. Atalay's translation is not wholly satisfactory and I have in every case consulted the facsimile (the printed text contains many minor inaccuracies) and normally quote the original Arabic in my citations, so that the accuracy of the translation can be checked. In a number of cases I have altered Atalay's readings and spellings. The second major text is the Kutadju: Bilig of Yüsuf Xass Hacib of Dalasagun, the earliest surviving purely literary text in any "Furkish language, also dating from the third quarter of xı, My quotations are taken from R. R, Arat's critical edition, Istanbul, 1947, cited as K B followed by the line in that edition. In cascs of doubt I have also consulted the facsimiles of the three manuscripts; in some cases my spellings are slightly different from Arat's. As his index has not yet been published, I cannot guarantee that 1. have listed cvery word which occurs in this text, but I have searched it fairly thoroughly. I have classified all the words from these two sources as Xi since this date is certain. The Verse Preface of KB is not part of the original text and its language is obviously a little later; quotations from it have therefore been entered under the heading of xii (?) KBVP followed by the linc. 'U'he Prose Preface is later still and perhaps not really Xak. but a few quotations from it have been entered as xttt(?) K&amp;BPP followed by the line. E. Ofuz 24. Kaşğari lists a certain number of words in a language which he calls “the language of al-Guzzrya' and says that owing to long contact between the people who spoke it and Persian-speakers it had acquired a number of Persian loanwords, often in a rather corrupt form (see ören and turma:). It was no doubt the language spoken by the Oğuz tribes, who were then living in the neighbourhood of the Aral Sea and had to some extent lost contact with the other Turkish tribes. They were descendants of the Oğuz (Tokkuz Oğuz etc.) who had played quite an important part in history during vir and viti and probably even earlier. 'l'here is no reason to suppose that during that period they spoke a language markedly different from that of the "Türkü, but although even by xı the Oğuz language had undergone some phonetic decay and accepted a number of loanwords, it retained, and its modern descendants still retain, some characteristics more primitive even than those of Türkü, e.g. initial d- in certain words (see para. 14 (1)). Only a few specifically Oğuz words are listed in Alaş. but d are the earliest surviving specimens of the language. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 16 
     
   
   
     PREFACE xix F. Ktpgak (Kip.) 25. Kaşğari also cites a number of words in a language which he calls “the İanguage of Qifcaq', a language which he describes as similar to Oğuz. Several words are mentioned as being common to Kip. and Oguz but not known in Xak. In xi the Kıpçak were west of the Oğuz in southern Russia and Kaş. is the earliest authority for thcir language. G. Minor eleventh-century dialects 26. Kaşğari describes a "few words as belonging to other contemporary dilecta with which he was acquainted; those mentioned most often are the dialects of Arğu:, Cigil, and Gancak (the last probably not really Turkish, see Stadres, p. 132 and the remarks on kendük below). I have included these words with Kaşğari”s descriptions of them. : II. MEDIEVAL TEXTS 27. "The Uyğ. language lingered on for some centuries in Chinese Turkistan (Sinkiang); indeed the latest surviving Bud. Uyf. manuscript, that of the Suvarnabrabhdsasütra already mentioned, was copied. in xvılı, but the only accessible authority for Uyğ. in this latest state is.the Chinese-Uyğ. dictionary (Chin.-Uyğ. Dict.) prepared by a committee of Chinese scholars towards the end of xiv. Some words from this work are included in Radloff's Worterbuch and,a complete list from another edition was recently published by Prof. L. Ligeti in Un Vocabulaire sino-outgoure des Ming, le Kao-tch'ang-kouan. Yi-chou du Bureau des Traducteurs, Dissertationes Sodalium Instituti Asiae Interioris 11, Budapest, 1966. I have included references to this work as Ligeti, followed by the page. 28. "he difficulty about classifying most of the remaining medieval texts, which were, with only one or two exceptions, written by or for Moslem Turks, is that in x1 the only literary language in which texts have survived, and probably the only literary language then in use, was Xak., but that towards the end of that century or very soon afterwards literary languages emerged which were written in different areas where the spoken languages were rather different from one another, and so very soon began to pursue different courses. There are interesting discussions of the problem of classifying the texts concerned in Pizlologiae Turcicae Fundamenta 1, Wiesbaden, 1959 (cited as Fundamenta) and more particularly in J. Eckmann's article “Das Chwarezmtürkische' in that volume, and also in the introduction to A, K. Borovkov, Leksika bici cd Ti 77 X111—XV vv., Moscow, 1963 (cited as Tef.). M 29. What can perhaps be called the direct line of descent, or selten stream, evolved in the area called in the early medieval period Khorasan and the southern part of Mà wara'u'l-nahr (Transoxiana). By xv the literary language used in that area was what is commonly, if inaccurately, called. Çağatay (Çağ.), but at any 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 17 
     
   
   
     XX PREFACE rate three, and probably four, texts have survived which were written between Xt and xv (both excluded) in languages intermediate between Xak. and Çağ. 'The spoken language in this area during this period seems to have been fairly homogeneous with the literary language, except that there was probably a greater concentration of Arabic and Persian, and perhaps from xtir onwards also Mongolian, loan-words in the literary than in the spoken language. 30. Possibly the earliest of these intermediate texts which, since it contains some Mongolian words, cannot be earlier than xii, is the didactic poem edited by R. R. Arat under the title Ztebeti Ehakayık, Istanbul, 1951, cited as At. followed by the lines. 31. An even earlier date has been suggested for a few Turkish tafsirs, that is interlinear translations of the Koran (mostly bilingual, some trilingual with a Persian translation of the Arabic and a Turkish translation of the Persian) with commentaries and other additional matter. "The difficulty in determining the date of these texts and the exact language in which they were composed lies in the fact that the surviving manuscripts of them were all written later, perhaps a good deal later, than the date at which they were composed and have been subjected to a good deal of modernizing by the copyists, later phonetic forms, and cven actual words, being substituted for the author's own phonetic forms and words. İt is not at all clear whether all, or at any rate all the earlier, bilingual manuscripts go back to a single archetype or whether some are independent translations and compilations, but the latter is the more probable. Borovkov in Tef. has indexed the "Turkish vocabulary of one such work, the manuscript of which was found in the town of Karshi. The name of the authot, the date of composition, the name of the copyist, and the date of copying are all equally unknown, but the manuscript seems to be Jater than that of a similar fafsir found in Turkey dated A.b. 1333 (see Tef,, p. 4) which is said to have a text close to that of the Karshi manuscript. An examination of the vocabulary shows that it is very heterogeneous. It includes a number of words of great antiquity for some of which, e.g. 2 ap, it is the latest authority. On the other hand, it also includes Arabic, Persian, and even some Mongolian, loan-words, which proves that in its present form it cannot be earlier than xır, and it even contains different forms of the same word, e.g. adril-, ayril-, ayrul-, which belong to different periods in the history of the language. It has been suggested that these are evidence that the language used, even if basically Xak., has been heavily influenced by Oğuz and Kip. and that it must therefore have becn composed in some northern area and ought to be classified as Xwarazmian (see para. 37). "There is not, however, any conclusive evidence that this is so, and there are other possible explanations of the non-Xak. elements in the text. In the circumstances it seems better to regard the language as intermediate between Xak. and Çağ., to date Tef. as xiri(?) and cite it immediately after At, 32. Next in time, and in much the same language, comes the Qrsagu'l-anbryàá of Náasiru'l-din al-Rabğüzi composed in A.D. 1310. In this case, too, all the surviving 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 18 
     
   
   
     PREFACE xxi manuscripts are later than the work itself and have been subjected to a good deal of modernization. No index of the vocabulary has been compiled, but a number of words from a XiX printed edition are cited in Radloff's VVörterbuch and some of these citations have been included here as xıv Abg., followed by a reference to Radloff, 33. One Arabic-Turkish vocabulary, the Hilyatu'-insán wa halbatı” İ-lisan of Camalu'l-din ibnu'l-Muhanná (see Studies, p. 193) is probably of about the same date as Rb. It contains an extensive list of Arabic words with the "Turkish equivalents. The authof in his preface says that they are in two languages 'those of our country and of “Türkistan”, and enumerates the phonetic differences between the two. The facts given suggest that the first is an early form of Azerbayjani and the second a late form of Xak., but, except in a minimum number of cases, it is impossible to decide whether any given word belongs to one of these languages or both. Very probably the great bulk of them are early Azerbayjani, but as a matter of convenience it is easier to cite this work as xiv Mu. immediately after Rb. followed by the page and line of Melioranski's edition (Mel.) and the page of Kilisli Rif'at's edition (Rif); the two editions are not identical and it is likely that the latter, which is based on a single manuscript, contains a good many words added to the author's text by later copyists. 34. Finally there are many texts in Çağatay, the earliest perhaps late xiv, the great bulk xv or even a little later. The language still survives in a later form as modern Uzbek, and no attempt has ever been made to define the latest date at which Çağ. proper was still in use. Apart from a very extensive literature, three major Çağ.-Persian and Çağ.-Old Osmanli dictionaries have been published which, although they all profess to be primarily dictionaries of the language used by Mir “Ali Şir Nawa'i, probably give a fairly exhaustive list of the Çağ. vocabulary, excluding the Arabic and Persian, but not the Mongolian, words which it includes. 'T'hese are, in order of age: (1) Badá'i'wl-Iugat written in Herat by Tali'-i Harawi during the reign of the "Timurid Sultan Husayn (A.D. 1438-1506), a Çağ.-Persian dictionary of which the only(?) surviving manuscript, dated A.H. 1117 (A.D. 1705-6) was published in facsimile with a comprehensive index by A. K. Borovkov, Moscow, 1961. (2) The anonymous Çağ.-Old Osmanli dictionary commonly known (after the first entry in it) as the Abugka, compiled during the first half of xvı and published ' by V. de Véliaminof-Zernof as Dictionnaire diagatai-turc, St. Petersburg, 1869. (3) The Sanglax, a Çağ.-Persian dictionary written by Muhammad Mahdi Xan and finished in A.H. 1172 or 1173 (roughly A.D. 1759). A facsimile of one of the best manuscripts was published with an introduction and comprehensive indices by myself as E. J. W. Gibb Memorial, New Series XX, London, 1960. Of these the Sanglax, although the latest, is much the most extensive and best, the author correcting a good many mistakes made in previous dictionaries, including the two mentioned above and others which have not survived, I have 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 19 
     
   
   
     xxii PREFACE cited the first occasionally as Bad. followed by the page, the second more frequently as Vel. followed by the page and the last, almost comprehensively, as San. followed by the page and line of the facsimile. j5. Exaggerated importance has been attached by some scholars to Şayx Sulayman Buxari, Lufat-t Çağatay wa. Türki ' Otmáni, Istanbul, A.H. 1298 (A.D. 1881); it contains very little original matter, apart from the mistakes which abound in it (see Saz., p. 31) but I have occasionally cited it as S.S. followed by the page. 36. "Vhere is in Bokhara an important manuscript of the Mugaddimatu'l- Adab of Mahmüdu'l-Zamaxgari, a classified Arabic glossary compiled early in xır with an interlinear translation in 'l'urkish (as well as in Persian and Mongolian). The manuscript is dated A.D. 1495 and there is no prima facie reason for supposing that the Turkish translation is much older. The language is therefore likely to be Çağ. and this is confirmed by an examination of the Turkish equivalents in N. Poppe's index to the Mongolian translation in Mongol'skii slovar' Mukaddimat al- Adab, Moscow, 1938. Prof. Borovkov, when he died in 1963, had almost completed an index of the Turkish words in this manuscript, but it is uncertain whether it will now be completed and published. The Turkish entries in Prof. Poppe's work are not in a convenient form for use in preparing a Turkish dictionary, and are not, according to Prof. Borovkov, wholly accurate. I have not, therefore, quoted this work except occasionally (as Zam.). 37. The history of the northern stream of literary languages is a great deal more complicated. There vvas undoubtedly in xır a second literary focus further north than the area described in para. 28, centred perhaps in the court of the Xwàrazmşahs who first became important early in xit, 'l'he most convenient name for texts belonging to this stream is that recently adopted in such works as the Fundamenta, X warazmian (Xwar.), although the literary language which evolved there must also have been in use over a much wider area extending into southern Russia, The spoken languages in this area at this period were markedly different from Xak.; the Turks in Xwarazm and the Aral Sea area were Oğuz and those in southern Russia Kıpçak and already in xı Kaşğari regarded Oğuz and Kip. as separate languages fairly close to one another but different from Xak. Thus, so far as literary works are concerned, it is safe to assume that Xak. was very quickly modified to bring it closer to the local languages. 38. The oldest text from this area, if its colophon is to be relied on, was in fact composed not in Xwürazm but in the Crimen. It is the Qrssa-? Yüsuf written by a certain 'Ali, of whom nothing further is known, in A.H. 630 (A.D. 1233). As usual the manuscripts are a good deal later and have been more or less modernized. D. Brockelmann listed a number of words from this work in “42”: Qissa-i. Yüsuf, der álteste Vorláufer der osmantschen Literatur (AKPAW, 1917). It has long been recognized that the language is not Osmanli and 1 have cited the words quoted in 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 20 
     
   
   
     PREFACE xxiii this paper as X war. xti "4£ followed by the page, but it may well contain more Oğuz elements than most other X war. texts. 39. Another text which can be tentatively identified as coming from the Aral Sea area is the enigmatic text sometimes called Oğuz Name (see Studies, pp. 48, etc.) written in the Mongolian Official Alphabet and edited by W. Bang and G. R, Rachmati, Die Legende von Oghuz Qaghan (SPAW, 1932). It contains several Mongolian loan-words and so cannot be earlier than xii, but can hardly Be much later. Considering its subject-matter, the language is likely to be much more specifically Oguz than most other contemporary texts, but the ambiguity of the alphabet used makes it impossible to determine whether it has such a specifically Oğuz trait as initial d-. It is cited as xır(?) Of., followed by the line in the edition mentioned. 40. Next in order of time come five texts which are all more or less solidly dated. "The oldest is the Mu'inu'l-murid written in Xwarazm in A.D. 1313 (see Eckmann, op. cit., p. 115), but I have not been in a position to cite any words from it. 41. The next is the Xusrato u Şirin, written by a certain Qutb at the court of Tini Beg Xan of the Golden Horde in A.D. 1341-2. It has been admirably edited by A. Zajaczkowski, Najstarssa wersja turecka husráv u irin, 3 vols., Warsaw, 1958-61, with a facsimile of the only manuscript, a transcription, and a full index excluding the Arabic and Persian loan-words. It is cited as xiv Qutb followed by the page in Zajaczkowski's index. 42. The third is the Muhabbat Nama of one 'Two manuscripts of this poem have survived, the second containing a number of verses which did not form part of the original text; see my paper on this poem in C47 VII. 4, 1962. Unfortunately verses 437 and 440 which state that the poem was composed 'on the banks of the Sir Darya in A.H. 754 (A.D. 1353), are among the interpolated verses but the date must be approximately correct, since it falls within the reign of Cani Beg Xan of the Golden Horde, during whose reign the poem was composed. It is cited from the recent editions (es Studies, p. 48) as xiv MN 0. by the number of the verse. — 43. Next ihere is the Nahcı”l-Faradis written by Mahmüd ibn “Ali in Xwarazm, or perhaps Saray on the Volga, sometime before A.D. 1358, the date of the earliest manuscript, but not necessarily much before, since there is fairly good evidence that the author did not die until A.D. 1360. A reproduction of one of the best manuscripts was published in J. Eckmann, NehciI-Feradis 1, Ankara, Hen but unfortunately his index is not yet published. 44. Finally there is the free translation into "Turkish of Sa'di's Gulistán. Only one manuscript of this work has survived, and a facsimile of it, with a preface by 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 21 
     
   
   
     xxiv PREFACE Prof. F. N. Uzluk, was published by the Türk Dil Kurumu in 1954 under the title Seyfi Serdyi Gülistan. Tercümesi, 'The translator was a native of Sarai on the Volga, but made his translation at the Mamluk court in Egypt in A.D. 1391. 45. Quite recently there has appeared the first half of an admirable dictionary by E. Fazylov of Qutb, MN, the NaAhcu'l-Farádis, and the Gulistan, with extensive quotations and references, under the title Szarouzbehskit yazik, Khorezmiiskie pamyatniki XIV veka, Tashkent, 1966. [ have used this work extensively to provide references to the Nahcu'l- Farádis, under the title Nahc. followed by the page and line in Eckmann's facsimile for those words contained in this part of the dictionary; for the rest of the vocabulary 1 have had to rely on a very inadequate list of words published by Kivámettin in 7M 7 V. 1 have not thought it necessary to add references to the Gulistan (GuZ) except very occasionally, since its vocabulary is practically identical with that of the other works mentioned. 46. Apart from the texts mentioned above a few other Xwar. texts have survived and one or two short ones have been published, at any rate in facsimile, but are not cited herein. 47. Seven vocabularies of medieval Kip. have been published, some of them containing some "Türkmen ( Tem.) words. The most important, and the only one which is purely Kip., is the Codex Cumanicus, a handbook of the Koman (Kom.) language, a Kip. dialect, in Latin, compiled early in xiv (see Studres, p. 48 and Fundamenta). "The text is not entirely homogeneous; the earlier part was compiled for Italian merchants, but it also contains later additions by German missionaries, An index to it was published in K. Grenbech, Komanisches VVörterbuch, Copenhagen, 1942, and is cited as xiv Kom. CCI (for the İtalian) and CCG (for the German part); Gr. sometimes followed by the page. 48. The remaining six are all in Arabic, one a list of "Turkish words in alphabetical order with Arabic equivalents, the others Arabic handbooks with Turkish equivalents. All these vocabularies have a specified or inferable Egyptian Mamluk background, and it seems clear that basically they are handbooks of the languages spoken by Turkish slaves brought to Egypt from southern Russia, some of them spoke Kip. and others Tkm., an Oğuz dialect. For example, Hou. (see para. 49) seems from internal evidence to have been compiled from oral information collected in the Mamluk possessions in Syria. In some cases an Arabic wotd is translated by different Kip. and Tkm. words, in others individual words are described as Kip. or 'Tkm., but in the great majority of cases no such indication is given. The presumption in nearly all cases is that the word is Kip., but there are one or two passages in 7d. (see para. şo) which seem to imply the contrary. 49. Until almost today it vvas generally accepted that the oldest of these vocabularies vvas the anonymous Arabic-Turkish vocabulary in Leiden manuseript 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 22 
     
   
   
     PREFACE xxv $17, Warner, published in M. 'T. Houtsma, Ein türkisch-arabisches Glossar, Leiden, 1894, cited herein as xit1 Hou. followed by the page and line of the Arabic text. Dut as this book was actually going to press an article by Barbara Flemming (Hamburg) was published in Der 7slam, Band 44, Berlin, June 1968, pp. 226 ff., in which she announced that Houtsma, who purported to publish the exact text of this unique manuscript had converted the date in the colophon into the figures 643, whereas the facsimile published in her article shows quite clearly the words taldta wa arba'in wa sab'umi' ya that is (Sa'bàn) A.H. 743 equivalent to (January) A.D. 1343. Instead, therefore, of dating back to xır and being the oldest of these vocabularies, it goes baek only to the middle of xiv and comes chronologically between the two vocabularies mentioned in the following paragraphs. This announcement unfortunately appeared too late for it to be possible to correct the numerous references to Hou. in the dictionary. şo, "here are two other xiv vocabularies. The Krtabu'Ll-idrák li-lisant'l-atrák, the only list of Turkish words with Arabic equivalents, was written in Egypt, probably in A.p. 1313, by Atiru'l-din Abü Hayyan Muhammad ibn Yüsuf, originally a native of Granada. A critical edition was published by A. Caferoğlu, Abu Hayydn, Kitáb al-Idrák li-lisán al- Atráh, Istanbul, 1931. İt is cited as xiv İd. followed by the page in the Arabic text. sı, The Kstàb Bulğatı”L-muştüq fi lufati'l-turk. wa'l-qifráq. was written by Camalu'l-din Abü Muhammad “Abdullah al-Turki probably in the middle of xiv and perhaps also ín the Mamluk dominions in Syria. The only manuscript, which is not quite complete, was published with a comprehensive index by A. Zajaczkowski, Manuel arabe de la langue des Turks et des Kiptchaks, Warsaw, I, 1938; II (title in Polish), 1954. It is cited as xiv Bul. followed by the page and line of the printed text in I and the page of the manuscript in II (verbs). 52. There are two XV vocabularies, both surviving in unique manuscripts and dating from early in the century, but it is uncertain which is the older. Al-tuhfatu l-zakiya fi lufati -turkiya, an Arabic- Turkish vocabulary in alphabetical order, mainly Kip. with a number of 'Tkm. words, was written almost certainly in Egypt and before A.D. 1426 (the date of a note on the first page). It was edited with a facsimile, translation, and index in B. Atalay, Ettuhfet-üz-zekiyye fil-lügat-it-türhiyye, Istanbul, 1945. It is cited as Tu, followed by the page and line of the facsimile. 53. Al-qawáninu'l-kulliya. fi-dabti'l-lugati'l-turkiya was compiled by an unknown author in Cairo by cross-questioning Turks living there. The book is undated, but a reference in it to Tamerlane makes it certain that it was written in Xv, and probably early in the century. The text was published by Kóprülüzade Mehmed Fuad (Prof. F. Köprülü), Istanbul, 1928. It is cited as Kan, followed by the page and line. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 23 
     
   
   
     xxvi PREFACE 54. Quite recently Prof. Zajaczkowski published an account of a short ArabicKip. vocabulary entitled a/- Durratu'l-mud?'a fi lufatil-turkiya discovered in Florence, with an extract from the text and an index to the extract, in Aoczmi Ortentalistycsny XXIX, Pt. i, pp. 39 ff. 'The work is anonymous and undated but clearly belongs to the first half of xv. It adds little to our knowledge of Kip. but 1 have quoted a few words from it as xv Dur. followed by the page. şs. The Oğuz language which is conveniently, but not quite accurately, called “Old Osmanli” (Osm.), since the earliest texts in it date from before the foundation of the Ottoman Empire, is recorded from mid xitt, but the xın material is scanty. 'The earliest is a few verses in the works of Mawlana Calàlu'l-din al-Rümi (A.p. 1207/8-1273/4) and a few verses in those of his son commonly called Sultan Veled, These verses might more properly be classified as Salcuk, but as they are the first stage of a continuous literary tradition it seems more convenient to classify these very early texts and other slightly later texts which are not strictly Osm., like the Kitab Dede Korkut, which seems to be in a 'T'km. language, probably xv., as Osm. so as to avoid an excessively complicated terminology. A good many early works of this kind have been published with partial or complete indices, but it did not seem to me necessary for the purposes of this dictionary to do more than cite under the heading xiv ff. Osm. (since the xii material is so inconsiderable) those of the words contained in this dictionary which reappear in the Türk Dil Kurumu publication. Tamklariyle Tarama Sözlüğü, 4 vols., Istanbul, 1943-5; Ankara, 1953-7 (T TS I-IV) or as ! Rümi words in Sar, A new edition of T'T'S is now being published, but is not yet sufficiently far advanced to make citation from it very convenient. . THE MODERN LANGUAGES 56. It would not be possible to include in this book all the evidence which could be assembled regarding the survival in modern languages of the early words listed herein without a much greater delay in its publication and a much greater increase in its bulk than would be regarded as advantageous. İn any event it is sufficiently obvious to all students of the Turkish languages that common words like at 'a horse' and al- 'to take' still survive almost everywhere to make a detailed proof of the point unnecessary. Nor is it very important, when a basic word is known to survive in some or all modern languages, to know whether its various derivatives survive also. On the other hand, for the reasons stated in para. 8, the subject cannot be entirely neglected, and it is important to include at any rate some references to modern languages. This immediately raises the question how modern languages should be classified and grouped. A good many systems of classification have already been suggested; there are two quite different ones in Furtdamenta; but for present purposes it is hardly necessary to use anything more elaborate than a simple geographical system. Even this is open to some objections, since there are no clear-cut geographical lines between the modern descendants of the early languages, and some modern languages 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 24 
     
   
   
     PREFACE xxvii descended from different ancient languages have in the course of time developed characteristics which bring them closer to onc another than to languages with which they are genetically related. Áfter a good deal of reflection I finally decided upon a sixfold division: north-eastern (NE), south-eastern (SE), northcentral (NC), south-central (SC), north-western (NW), and south-western (SW). Of these the NW languages are, genetically speaking, Kip. and the SW Oğuz, the SC and probably SE are, broadly speaking, descended from Xak. but by different lines of descent. $7. In the NE group afe included the languages spoken, but until recently not written, in eastern Siberia and adjacent areas. Yakut, however, which has been isolated from the rest so long that it has acquired very special characteristics of its own, is seldom cited, the authority used being E. K. Pekarsky, Slovar' yakutskogo yazyka, St. Petersburg, 1907-30, cited as Pek. "The most important. authority for the vocabulary of these languages is W. Radloff, Verrech eres V/örterbuches der türk- Dialecte (Obyt: slovarya tyurkshikh narechit), 4 vols., St, Petersburg, 1888-1911, cited as R followed by the volume in roman, and the column in arabic numerals, individual languages being mentioned in the abbreviated forms used in that work with the minor alterations of spelling shown in the List of Abbreviations. 1 have also used the K/Aakassko-russkit slovar', edited by N. A. Baskakov, Moscow, 1953, cited as Kak, sometimes followed by the page, the Tuvitsko-russki? slovar', edited by A. A. Pal'mbakh, Moscow, 1955, cited as T'v. sometimes followed by the page, and occasionally the modern Russian-Khakas, Russian-Tuvan, and Russian-Altay dictionaries. 58. In the SE group are included the Turkish languages and dialects of Chinese 'Turkistan and adjacent areas, which have traditionally been called Eastern "Türki and are now called Neo-Uyğur by Soviet and Chinese scholars. These fall into two main groups, the literary language written in Árabic script and the spoken dialects. 1 have called both Türlz. For the first, citations are from R. B. Shaw, 4 Sketch of the Turki Language, Calcutta, 1878, cited as Shato followed by the page, and Burhan Sehidi Uyğurya- Xenura- Rusça Luğat (Usgurskokitaisko-russkdi slovar, Pekin, 1953, cited as BS followed by the page. A good many words in one dialect, "Parançı, spoken in southern Siberia are included in &amp;., and are cited as Tai. followed by a reference to R. For the rest, mainly dialects spoken in southern Sinkiang, I have used G. Jarring, 4n Eastern Turki- English Dialect Dictionary, Lund, 1964, cited as Şarring followed by the page. One language in this area is in a class by itself, that of the Sarığ Yuğur in Kansu, the only language which can reasonably be regarded as directly descended from early Uyg. It is recorded in S. Ye. Malov, YazyR zheitykA uigurov, Alma Ata, 1957. cited occasionally as Sari Yuğ. followed by the page. 59. In the NC group are included Kırğız (Kir.) and Kazax (Kzx.), called in R Kara Kırğız and Kırğız respectively. Historically Kir. belongs to the same family as the NE languages and Kzx. seems to be a Kip. dialect, but the peoples talking 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 25 
     
   
   
     xxviii PREFACE them have lived in close propinquity to one another for so long that they now have many common characteristics. "The authorities which I have used principally are, for Kir., K. K. Yudakhin's Krzrgrzsko-russkit slovar', Moscow, 1965, cited as Yrd, followed by the page, and for Kzx. IKh. Makhmudov and G. Musabaev, Kazaklisko-russkii. slovar', Alma Ata, 1954, and DB. N. Shnitnikov's Kazakh-English Dictionary, "Vhe Hague 1966, cited as MM and Shnit. respectively followed by the page. I have also occasionally used the equivalent RussianKir. and. Russian-Kzx. dictionaries, and only occasionally quoted R since the modern authorities scem to be rather fuller and more reliable. 60. 'l'here arc several modern SC spoken dialects, but the only literary language is Uzbek (Uzb.) for which I have used. A. K. Borovkov, Uzbehsho-russkii slovar', Moscow, 1959, cited as Bor. followed by the page, and less often the Russian-Uzb. dictionary of 1954. The vocabulary in H. Vambery's Cagataische Sprachstudien, Leipzig, 1867, is very heterogeneous in character. "The bulk of the words in it are classical Çağ. taken, often with some errors, from various oriental authors; the remainder seem to be colloquial xix Uzb. words collected by the author himself, and occasionally cited as Var. followed hy the page. 61. The NW group comprises a rather wide range of languages. ''hosc quoted in R include Kazan Tatar (Kaz.) and three Karaim dialects, those of the Crimea, Lutsk, and Troki (Kar., Krm., L., and T.) but he also uses K?oy, for the nonKaraim language spoken in the Crimea which is indistinguishable from Osm., so that the only safe indication that a word is Karaim is that it is given in the Hebrew alphabet. "The words quoted from these languages are reproduced with the same abbreviations and the reference in R. For Kar. 'l'. I have occasionally used T. Kowalski, Karaimische Texte ün Dialekt von Troki, Cracow, 1929, cited as Kore. followed by the page. For (Kazan) Tatar I have used the T'atarskorusskii slovar', Moscow, 1966, cited as Kaz. or Tat., and for Karakalpak (KR.) and Nogay (Nog.) I have used the Karakalpahsko-russkii slovar', Moscow, 1958 and the Nogaisko-russkit slovar', Moscow, 1963, both edited by N. A. Baskakov and cited by the page, and occasionally the Russian-Kk. and -Nog. dictionaries. For Kumyk (AKunz.) there is at present available only the Russkokumyhkskii. slovar', Moscow, 1960, edited by Z. Z. Bammatov, Bashkir has diverged so far from the rest of the group that I have not taken it into account, No convenient authorities for minor languages like Karaçay and Balkar are at present available. As regards Chuvash (Ctv.) see para. 2. öz. In the SW group are included only three languages, Azerbayjani (Az.), Osm. (including Rep. Turkish), and "Tkm. For Az. I have used various authorities published in the Soviet Union, not citing them individually. There are many authorities for Osm., but those which I have generally used are Sir James Redhouse, A Turkish and English Lexicon, in the Constantinople, 1921, reprint, cited as Red. followed by the page; Şayx Sami, Qamüs-f Turki, 2 vols., Istanbul, A.H. 1318 (A.D. 1900-1) cited as Sami followed by the page; and occasionally the 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 26 
     
   
   
     PREFACE xxix A.H. 1306 (A.D. 1888) edition of the Lehce-1 Osmaniya, cited as Ze. followed by the page. İn noting the survival of words in modern languages İ have not included those words which have recently been re-introduced into Rep. Turkish to replace Arabic and Persian loan-words. Some of these are genuine old words which had become obsolete in Osm., others are old loan-words like acun (for a:ju:n, a word borrowed from Sogdian) and çağ “period” (a medieval loan-word from Mong.), but they have not had a continuous history in Osm. 63. As pointed out in paras. 2 and 12 it is often important in tracing the history of a Turkish word to kn6w whether it became a loan-word in Mongolian and, if so, when, since this often throws light not only on the age of a word but also on its original pronunciation and meaning. The question of such loan-words is discussed at length in Studies, Chap. tr, and it is there suggested that these words were borrowed in three main periods, the first, probably v and vr, during which words were borrowed by a Mongolian-speaking people, possibly the Kitafi, from an l[r Turkish-speaking tribe, possibly the Tavğaç: the second, probably between vili and xır, and the third during and after the reign of Chinggis. The earliest substantial remains of Mongolian are not, however, earlier than xrır, İn citing Mongolian words borrowed from Turkish I have normally used three authorities ; (1) E. Haenisch, Hörferbuch zu Manghol un Ni'uca Tobca'an, Leipzig, 1939, which contains a list of the words in the well-known Mong. xim Secret History (SH), cited as Haentsch followed by the page. (2) The standard, though now somewhat antiquated, dictionary of Classical Mongolian, J. E. Kowalewski, JDrctionnaire | mongol-russe-frangais, Kazan, 1841 ff., cited as Kow. followed by the page. (3) A good dictionary of modern written Mongolian, 77e Mongol-English Practical Dictionary, compiled by M. Haltod and others and published by the Evangelican Alliance Mission (in the U.S.A.) 1949-53, cited as Haltod followed by the page. OTHER MODERN AUTHORITIES 64. In addition to the modern authorities quoted above use has been made of the following other modern authorities: (r) A. Caferoğlu, Uygur Sözlüğü, 3 parts, Istanbul, 1934—8, a useful list of the words contained in the indices to the texts enumerated in paras. 20 (2) (e) and 21 above and one or two others, cited as Caf. (2) v. G., ATG, see para. zo (2) (e). (3) G. Doerfer, Türkische und mongolische Elemente im. Neupersischen; 1 Mongolische Elemente, Wiesbaden, 1963; 11 Türkische Elemente, alif bis tà, 1965; 111 ditto j£m bis kàf 1967, cited as Doerfer, followed by the volume and the number of the word. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 27 
     
   
   
     xxx PREFACE (4) €. Brockelmann, Osttürkische Grammatik. der islamischen Litteratursprachen. Mittelasiens, Leiden, 1954, cited as Brockelmann followed by the number of the paragraph. (s) A. M. Shcherbak, “Nazvaniya domashnikh i dikikh zhivotnykh v tyurkskikh yazykakh' ("The names of domesticated and wild animals in the Turkish languages”), one of several articles in 7storzcheskoe razvitie lehsihi tyurkshikh yazykov, Moscow, 1961, cited as Sicherbah, followed by the page. (6) The reproductions of MS. No. S. J. Kr. 4638, Packet 8 in the manuscript collection of the Leningrad branch of the Institute of the Peoples of Asia, recently published in D. I. "Tikhonov, KAozyazstvo i obshchestvennyi stroi uigurskogo gosudarstva X— XİV vv., Leningrad, 1966, and again with transcription and translation by E. R, "Tenishev in an article called 'Khozyaistvennye zapisi na drevneuigurskom yazyke” in İss/edovaniya po grammatike 1 lehsike tyurkskikh yazykov, 'l'ashkent, 1966. The manuscript is a late Uyg. family archive, and is cited as Fam. Arch. followed by the line, THE ARRANGEMENT OF INDIVIDUAL ENTRIES 65. In paragraphs 4, 5, and 8 some account has been given of the kind of information which is supplied about individual words. 'l'here is not a single word regarding which the full range of information is available, and it may therefore be useful to set out here what the full range is and how the various items are arranged. The word may be preceded by a code letter (see paragraph 18). If it is a habax legomenon (see paragraph 7) it is immediately followed by *Hap. leg.”. From this point the order varies slightly. It is sometimes convenient to enter next the original meaning possibly with some remarks on later developments, but this is superfluous if the word is Hap. leg., since the quotation will supply it, and if the word is derived it is more logical to record the derivation before the meaning. After this it may be desirable to add some other remarks. If the fact that the word is a loan-word in Mongolian is relevant, this is mentioned next, Information regarding the survival of the word then follows. İt cannot be given earlier since there are many instances of words surviving in modern languages, usually NE, not because they have existed continuously in those languages but because they have been reborrowed from Mongolian, perhaps quite recently. Finally, cross-references may be given to other words etymologically related or other words with the same or a similar meaning. The quotations then follow in the following order: Türkü viu; vir ff; vir ff. Man.; vir ff. Yen.: UyE. viit; ix? viti ff, Chr.; Man.-A? Man. ; Bud.) Civ.; xiv Chin.-Uyj. Dict.: O. Kir. ıx ff.: Xak. x1 (including KB); xu(?) KBVP; xui?) KBPP, At.) Tef.; xiv Rhj, Muh.: Arğu, Çigil, Gancak xr: Çağ. xv f: Oğuz xi: Xwar. xır “Ali, xiu(?) Og.; xiv Qutb, MN, Nahc.: Kip. xi: Kom, xiv CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. /Tkm. xim How.; xv İd., Bul.; xv Tuh., Kav., Dur.: Osm. xiv ff. 66. In conclusion may I very humbly submit that this book contains a vast niimber nf auotations. translations, and references, and that it is hard to believe —————,—  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 28 
     
   
   
     PREFACE xxxi that in such a large flock there are no black sheep? May I plead, as the father of Turkish lexicography did nine centuries ago, that yazma:s atım yağmur yanılma:s bilge: yanku: “the only shot that never misses is the rain, the only scholar who never makes a mistake is the echo” Kaş. 117 379, 20, and present in advance my apologies for these and other shortcomings. It would not be proper for me to end this preface without expressing my sincere gratitude to the British Academy for their generous contribution towards the cost of producing this volume. GERARD CLAUSON August 1968 ö 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 29 
     
   
   
     ABBREVIATIONS, SHORT TITLES, ETC. Bor. Brockelmann Bud. Bul. Cc CAJ CCG CCI cf. c. i. a. p. (a. 1.) Caf. Caus. Chin.-Uyg. Dict. Chr. Chuas. Civ. Conc. N. Co-op. Çağ. Quv. D Dat. . 8841125 Code letter, para. 15. Abhandlungen, etc., para. 20 (2) (e). see ADAW. Abstract noun; cf. Conc. N. see ADAW. another occurrence. and offer occurrences. Ablative case. Accusative case; according to. Adjective. Adverb. para. 38. Altay, NE dialect, later called Oyrot, now Gornoaltay (Mountain Altay), para. 57. Aorist. Arabic. Ashmarin, para. 2. Atebeti”l-hahayık, para. 30. Auxiliary (verb). Azerbayjani, SW language, para. 62. Code letter, para. 15. Burhan Sehidi, para. 58. Badà'i'wl-lufat, para. 34 (1). Baraba, NE dialect, para. 57. Prof. N. A. Baskakov, para. 57. Prof. A. K. Borovkov, para. 60. para. 64 (4). Buddhist (Uyğur), para. 21 (3) (c). Bul£atu' l-mugtáq, etc., para. so, (1) Code letter, para. 15; (2) prefix 'Compound', para. 18 (1). Central Asiatic Journal. Codex Cumanicus, German entries, para. 47. Codex Cumanicus, Italian entries, para. 47. (Latin) confer, ' compare', common in all periods (and Tenguagen). Caferoğlu, para. 64 (1). Causative (form of verb). Chinese-Uygur Dictionary, para. 27. Christian (Uyğur), para. 21 (3) (a). Chuastuanift (Xuvdstmaneft), para. zo (2) (e). Civil (Uygur), para. 21 (2) (d). noun describing a concrete object, cf. A.N. Co-operative (form of verb); cf. Recip. Çağatay language, para. 29. Chuvash language, para. 2. (1) Code letter, para. 15; (2) prefix, "Derived', para. 18 (2). Dative case. b 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 30 
     
   
   
     xxxiv ABBREVIATIONS, SHORT TITLES, ETC. Den. Denominal, derived from a noun, der. derived. Desid. Desiderative (form of verb). Dev. Deverbal, derived from a verb. Dict. Dictionary. Dim. Diminutive (form of noun). Dis. Dissyllable. do. ditto, 'the same'. Doerfer Prof. G. Doerfer, para. 64 (3). E (1) Code letter, para. 15; (2) ptefix, 'Ertor', pata. 18 (8). ETY Eshi Türk Yazitlari, para. 20 (2) (a). e.g. (Latin) exempli gratia, "for example". Emph. Emphatic (form of verb). esp. especially. etc, (Latin) et cetera, "and others”, F prefix, 'foreign loan-word', para. 18 (3). f. form. ff. and following (pages, etc.). Fam. Arch. Family Archive, para. 64 (6). fr. from. Fundamenta para. 28. G Code letter, para. 15. G Code letter, para. 15. Gen. Genitive case. Ger. Gerund. Giles H. A, Giles, Chinese-English Dictionary, London, 1912. Gr. Prof. K. Gronbech, para. 47. HIEII Heilkunde, etc., para. 21 (3) (4). Haenisch Prof. Erich Haenisch, para. 63 (1). Haltod Matthew Haltod, para. 63 (3). Hap. leg. Hapax legomenon, "occurring only once”, para. 7. Hend. Hendiaduoin, two words combined to give one meaning. Tlou. M. Th. Houtsma, para. 40. Hüen-ts. Hüen-tsang, para. 21 (3) (c). I inscription of Kül Tegin, para. zo (1) (5). I1 inscription of Bilge: Xağan, para. zo (1) (c). II Karabalgasun inscription, para. 21 (2). ie. (Latin) 1d est, “that is”, İd. Kitábu l-idrák, etc., para. 5o. Imperat. Imperative (mood of verb). Inf. Infinitive (of verb). Instr. ; Instrumental case. Intrans. Intransitive (verb). IrkB Irh Bitig, para. zo (2) (d). Ix. Ixe-xugotu inscription, para. 20 (1) (d). JRAS Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. Jarring Dr. Gunnar Jarring, para. 58. KB Kutadéu: Bilig, para. 23. KBPP Prose Preface of KB, para. 23. KBVP Verse Preface of KB, para. 23.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 31 
     
   
   
     ABBREVIATIONS, SHORT TITLES, ETC. M I, II, III MM MN MS., MSS. Mal, Man. Man.-A Man.-uig. Frag. Mel. metaph. Mon. Mon. V. Mong. Muh. Kaga, NE dialect, para. 57. Karaim, NW language, Crimean dialect, para. ör. ditto, Lutsk dialect, para. 6r. ditto, Troki dialect, para. ör. Karagas, NE dialect, para. $7. Kaşğari, para. 23. Qawáninw I-kulliya, etc., para. 53. (Kazan) Tatar, NW language, para. 61. Khakas, NE language, para. 57. Kipéak, NW language, para. 25, etc. Kirğiz, NC language, para. 59. Kızıl, NE dialect, para. 57. Karakalpak, NW language, para. 61. Koibal, NE dialect, para. 57. Koman, NW language, para. 47. (1) T. Kowalski, para. 61; (2) J. E. Kowalewski, para. 63. XXXV Krım, the Crimea, (1) see Kar. Krm; (2) SW language, para. 61. — Kuanşi İm Pusar, para. 21 (3) (c). Kumyk, NW language, para. 61. Kumandu, NE dialect, para. 57. Küerik, NE dialect, para. 57. Kazax, NC language, para. 59. Code letter, para. 15. loan-word. Lebed, NE dialect, para. 57. Lehce-t Osmaniye, para. 62. Prof. L. Ligeti, para. 27. literal, literally. Locative case. Code letter, para. 15. Manichatca I, etc., para. zo (2) (5). Makhmudov and Musabaev, para. 57. Muhabbat Nàma, para. 42. manuscript, manuscripts. S. Ye. Malov, para. zo (2) (5). Manichaean (texts, dialects, etc.), paras. zo (2) (e), 21 (3) (b). Manichaean Uy£.-A dialect. para. 20 (2) (e). Melioranski, para. 33. metaphorical, metaphorically. Monosyllable (other than a verb), para. 15. Monosyllabic verb, para. 15. Mongolian (language). ibn Muhanná, para. 33. (1) Code letter, para. 15; (2) noun. noun/adjective, a word performing both functions. ditto connoting a situation or state. Nomen actionis, a noun describing an action. Nomen agentis, a noun describing one who performs an action. north-central language group, para. 59. north-eastern language group, para. 57. Nomen instrumenti, a noun describing an instrument or tool. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 32 
     
   
   
     xxxvi ABBREVIATIONS, SHORT TITLES, ETC. n.m.e. no main entry. n.o.a.b. noted only as below. N. of Assn. Noun describing persons associated in some way. N.S.A. Noun describing a single action. NW north-western language group, para. 61. Nahc. Nahcu l-Farüdis, para. 43. Neg. Negative (form of verb). Nog. Nogay, NW language, para. 6r. O. Kir. Old Kırğız language, para. 22. 0.0. other occurrences, Og. Oğuz Nüme, para. 39. Ongin Ongin inscription, para. 20 (1) (e). Osm. Osmanli, SW language, paras. 55, 62. p. pp- page, pages. P.N. Proper, or personal name. P.N./A. Possessive Noun/Adjective. PP Prof. Paul Pelliot, para. 21 (3) (c). PU prefix, “pronunciation uncertain”, para. 18 (4). Pal. A. A. Pal'mbakh, para. 57. para., paras. paragraph, paragraphs. Particip. Participle. Pass. Passive form of verb. Pe. Persian. pec. to peculiar to (a particular language, etc.). Pek. L. K. Pekarsky, para. 57. Perf. Perfect tense. Pfahl. para. 21 (3) (c). phr. phrase. Pres. Present tense. , Priv. N/A. Privative N./A. connoting non-possession of something. prob. probably. prov. proverb quoted. q.v. (Latin) quod vide, "see that (word, etc.)”. Qutb para. 41. R (1) Code letter, para. 15; (2) W. W. Radloff's Versuch, etc. paras. 16, 57. Rbg. Rab£üzi, para. 32. Recip. Reciprocal form of verb, morphologically same as Co-op. Red. Sir James Redhouse, para. 62. refce., refces. reference, references. Ref. Reflexive form of verb. Rep. Turkish Republican “Turkish, the language now spoken in Turkey. Rif. : Kilisli Rif"at, para. 33. S (1) Code letter, para. 15; (2) prefix, Secondary form, para. 18 (5). SC south-central language group, para. 6o. SDD Söz Derleme Dergisi, İstanbul, 1939 ff. SE south-eastern language group, para. ş8. SH Secret History of the Mongols, para. 6o (1). s.1.a.m.l.(g.) survives in all modern languages (language groups). $.i.m.m.l.(g.) survives in most modern languages (Innguages groups). SKPAW Sitzungsberichte, etc., para. 20 (2) (e). 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 33 
     
   
   
     ABBREVIATIONS, SHORT TITLES, ETC. 8.0.İ. survives only in. SPAVV see SKPAW. s.v. (Latin) sub voce, “under the word . . .'. SW south-western language group, para. 62. Sag. Sagay, NE language, para. 57. Sami Seyh Sami, para. 62. San. Sanglax, para. 34 (3). Sang Yuğ. Sarığ Yuğur, modern SE language, para. 58. Sec. Secondary (form). Shaw R. B. Shaw, para. 58. Shcherbak A. M. Sheherbak, para. 64 (5). Shnit. B. N. &amp;hnitnikov, para. 59. sic (Latin) sic, *thus'. Studies Turkish and Mongolian Studies, para. 1. Suci Suci inscription, para. 21 (2). Suff. Suffix. Suv. Suvarnabrabhösasütra, para. 21 (3) (c). syn. w. synonymous with. S Code letter, para. 15. SS Seyh Süleyman, para. 35. Sor NE language, para. 57. Su. Sine-usu inscription, para. 21 (1). T inscription of (VU) 'T'ofiukuk, para. zo (1) (a). TM IV Türkiyat Mecmuası IV, para. 21 (3) (c). TT Türkische Turfantexte, para. 20 (2) (e). TTS Taniklariyle Tarama Sözlüğü, para. 55. "Talas inscriptions near River Talas, para. zo (2) (c). Tar. "Tarançı, SE dialect, para. 58. ı "Tara NE dialect, para. 57. "Fat, "Tatar, NVV language, para. ör. Tef. Tefsir, para. 28. Tel. "Teleut, NE dialect, para. 57. Tis. Tigastoustik, para. 21 (3) (c). 'Tkm. "Türkmen, SW language, paras. 47, 62. Tob. "Tobol, NE dialect, para. 57. "Trans. "Transitive (verb.). Tris. "Erisyllabic or longer word, other than verb, para. 15. Tub. 'Tuba, NE dialect, para. 57. 'Türki SE language, para. 58. "Türkü early language, para. 20. Tuv. "Puvan, NE language, para. 57. U 1, etc. Uigurica I, etc., para. 21 (3) (c). USp. Uigurische Sprachdenkmáler, para. 21 (3) (c). Uyg. Uyğur language, para. 21. Uyğ.-A Uyğur A dialect, para. 21. Uzb. Uzbek, SC language, para. 6o. V. verb. v. (Latin) vide, “see”, v. G. ATG A. von Gabain, Alttürkische Grammatik, para. 20 (2) (e). vil, (Latin) varia lectio, 'alternative reading”. VU prefix, vocalization uncertain, para. 18 (6). VIIT, etc. the 8th, etc., century A.D. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 34 
     
   
   
     xxxviii Vam. Vel. ABBREVIATIONS, SHORT TITLES, ETC. A. Vambéry, para. 60. V. de Véliaminov-Zernov, para. 34 (2). with para. 20 (2) (3). the rıth, etc. century A.D. the Xakani language, para. 23. the Xwarazmian (Turkish) language, para. 37. Code letter, para. 15. the inscriptions on the River Yenisei, paras. 20 (2) (^), 22. Prof. K. K. Yudakhin, para. 59. Code letter, para. 15. Prof. A. Zajaczkowski. Zamaxgari, para. 36. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 35 
     
   
   
     SUFFIXES TH importance of Suffixes in the formation of the Turkish vocabulary needs no explanation, and nearly every Turkish grammar contains lists of the Suffs. (excluding declensional and conjugational Suffs.) used to form derived words. There are, for example, extensive lists in v. G., AT'G, paras. 44 to 167 and Brockelmann, paras. 20 to 121 and 148 to 176. I included such a list in Studies, pp. 143 ff. and made some corrections and additions to it in Three Notes on Early Turkish, "Türk Dili Aragtirmalari Yıllığı, 1966, pp. x ff. “The following is a more complete list of the Suffs. identified in this dictionary. It is divided into five parts, each arranged in a reversed alphabetical order from the last letter backwards. "The first two parts contain the Suffs. attached to Nouns (including under this heading all words which are not Verbs) and Verbs respectively to: form derived Nouns, and the next two parts the Suffs. attached to Nouns and Verbs respectively to form derived Verbs. The fifth is a list of Noun endings, which are not technically Suffs., since if they are removed what is left is not a recognizable Turkish word, but are found at the end of a sufficient number of Nouns with similar meanings to suggest that they form a class of some sort. "Tvvo of these endings are known Iranian Suffs., and the words to which they are attached must be Iranian loan-words. Some other endings are not recognizably, or even probably, foreign and seem to go back to a period far beyond our ken, when the 'T'urkish vocabulary was being built up by methods which have long since been forgotten. Between these two classes are some endings which might be, but are not necessarily, foreign. It is noticeable that there is a high proportion of names of animals, insects, and plants in words with these endings. It should be noted that, although there is commonly supposed to be a clear distinction between Denominal and Deverbal Suffs., the division is not at all clear cut; several Suffs. which might be regarded as properly Den., like -çı:, -duruk, also occasionally occur as Dev. Suffs., and the Dev. Suff. -ma:k occasionally as a Den. Suff, Scattered through Xaş. are several remarks on the functions of some of these Suffs.; the relevant references are given in the lists below. The concept of Active, Passive, Transitive, and Intransitive Verbs is a familiar one in all grammars; in Turkish the same terms must necessarily also be applied to N.s and N./A.s, since, for example, Dev. N.À.s like sınuk (sın- -uk) “broken”, köçürme: (hógür- -me:) travelling (stove)', and égidüt (éjid- -iit) “hearing” can be translated only by Participles. ' "The word “dominant” applied to a Suff. beginning with a vowel means that this vowel is an integral part of the Suff. and if the word to which it is attached ends in a vowel it is the latter that is elided, e.g. tarmut (ftarm(a.-) -ut). When a Suff. consisting of, or beginning with, a vowel is attached to a Dis. or Dis.V. ending in a consonant the second vowel of the V. is usually, but not always, elided, e.g. adrı: (ad(1)r-1:), but biriki: (birik-£:). 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 36 
     
   
   
     xl SUFFIXES It should be noted that when a Suff. beginning with -B-/-&amp;- is attached to a word ending with -n the two sounds are combined as -r-, e.g. yayak( yan-£ak) and that when such a Suff. is attached to a word ending in -&amp;[- or -k in both cases the two sounds are combined as -kk-, which becamc in practice -k-, e.g. baku: (bak-fu:), tiken (tik-gen), yaku: ( yag-£u.). 1l. NOMINAL SUFFIXES (a) DENOMINAL (Den. N.) -ça: about half a dozen words carry this Suff., which is more in the nature of an Equative Case-ending than a Suff. Most are Advs., like ança:, but at least one, barça: is used as a N./A. The Dim. Suff. -ça:/-çe:, which did not appear till the medieval period, was borrowed from Pe. -ke: Dim. Suff., only(?) in siyirke:, yipke:, perhaps a crasis of - kiiie:. -]a:-le: very rare; forms Advs. in ayla:, tünle:, and perhaps birle:, and Adjs. in körkle:/körtle: if these are not 1.-vv.s. -kifia:/kile: Dim. Suff.; very rare. -ra:/-re: forms Loc. Advs., e.g. içre: "inside, within'; very rate. -ya:/ye: only in bérye:, yırya:, prob. Sec. f. of -ra:[-re:. -çı:/-çi: forms N.Ag.s; see Kaş. I1 48; very common. -nçı:/-nçi: See -nç. -t:[-ti: forms Advs. from Adis., e.g. edgü:ti::, very rare; ? also a Dev, Suff. -nti: forms an Ordinal, only in ékkinti: “second”, perhaps an earlier form of -nç. -tirti:/-türti:, etc. forms Loc. Advs., e.g. içtirti: which is practically syn. w. igre:; very rare. -kt:[-ki: forms N./À.s describing position in time or space, e.g. aşnu:ki: 'former”, üze:ki: "situated on or above”: fairly common in the early period; later the practice grew up of attaching this Suff. only to words in the Loc., e.g. evdeki: “in the house”, -du: dubious; only(?) in kardu: which might be a Dev. N. -ğu:/-gü very rare as a Den. Suff.; forms A.N.s like önçgü:, Conc. N.s like tuzğu:, and Adj.s like buğra:ğu:: also a Dev. Sufi. -a :ğu:/-e:gü: dominant; forms Collectives, usually fr. Numerals e.g. üçe:gü: “three together', but see also içe:ğü:, yüze:gü:. -pü: only(?) in esripü: syn. vv. esri: 'dappled'; also a Dev. Suff., but this word can hardly be a Dev. N./A. -ru:/-rü: Directive Suff. meaning *towards'; very rare; syn. vr, -Baru:[-gerü:. -Éaru:[-gerü: Directive Suff. like -ru:[-rü:; hardly to be explained as that Suff. attached to the Dat., since it is attested in dialects earlier than those in which the Dat. Suff. -kaj- -ke: became -Ba:[-e:; rather rare. -İayu:/-leyü: meaning “like”, e.g. bürileyü: “like a vvolf”, properly Ger. in -u:/-ü: fr. a Den. V. in -1a:-/-1e:-, but usually the only recorded form of the V. concerned, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 37 
     
   
   
     SUFFIXES xli -ç (after vowels) /-aç/-eç/-iç/-iç (after consonants) Dim. Suff.; very rare, esp. the last two. -Éac, etc. function obscure; only(?) in odğuç, kuşğaç, and perhaps sügic; also a Dev. Suff. -leç certainly Turkish in üclec; Wiherwise see List III. -nç/-ınç/-inç/-unç/-ünç the ordinary early Suff. of Ordinals; replaced in the medieval period by -nçı:/-nçi:, etc.; see also -nti:. (F) -t a Sogdian Plur. Suff. found in tégit, tarxat Plurs. of tégin, tarka:n which are prob. very old l.-w.s. (-ta:B[-teg in words lik f antağ 'thus' is not a Suff. but the Postposition te: $ fused vv. the stem of ol.) -H1ğ/-lig/-1uğ/-lüg forms Poss. N./A.s, see Kaş. 7 500; very common. -siB[-sig forms N./A.s meaning 'resembling (something) and the like; properly Dev. N./A.s in -É[-g fr. Simulative Den. V.s in -sı:-/-si:-, but the actual V.s are seldom recorded; rare. -k/ (after vowels and -r) -ak/-ek (the normal forms) /-ık/-ik/-uk/-ük (all rare) usually forms Dim. N.s, but also less restricted words like ortuk; fairly common. -çak/-çek forms Conc. N.s, usually N.Ls, e.g. ağırçak 'spindle-whorl'; rare. -çuk/-çük as correctly stated in Kaş. ££7 226 forms Dim. N s, but generally vv. à metaph. sense; e.g. baka: 'frog', baka:çuk 'muscle'; very rare in the early period, later became the commonest Dim. Suff. -dak/-dek and also(?) -duk/-dük both very rare vv. uncertain functions, see bağırdak, beligdek, burunduk; in the last perhaps a crasis of -duruk; beligdek might be a Dev. N./A. in -k fr. a Den. V. in -de:- fr. belin. -Éa:k[-ge:k usually forms Conc. N.s, e.g. epek, kidizge:k, mibplizge: k, yanak, very rare, but a common Dev. Suff. -Buk dubious, only(?) in camguk; commoner as a Dev. Suff. -lik/-Tik/-luk/-lük usually forms A.N.s, but quite often Conc. N.s; its various usages are analysed in Kaş. 7 505; 510-11. -mak/-mek forms Conc. N.s, e.g. kógüzmek, but the connection vv. the basic N. is sometimes tenuous; very rare, but common as a Dev. Suff. -muk/-a:muk forms N.s some of which seem to be pejorative, e.g. kara:muk, sola:muk; very rare. -üak perhaps Dim., only(?) in baka:fiak “the frog in a horse's hoof”, -rak/-rek forms Comparative Adjs.; common. -duruk/-dürük usually forms N.s describing pieces of equipment, e.g. boyunduruk 'yoke'; rather rare; also a Dev. Suff. -sa:k/-se:k properly Dev. N./A. fr. a Den. V. in -sa:-[-se:- but the V. itself is sometimes not recorded; very rare attached to basic N.s, e.g. tavarsa:k, less rare attached to Dev. N.s in -£, etc., e.g. barığsa:k: see Kaş. 1 24; // 55-6. -suk/-sük function obscure; forms Conc. N.s, eg. ilersük, bağırsuk, siparsuk and N.Ls, e.g. tapysuk; perhaps Dev. Suff. in -uk[-ük fr. Simulative Den. V.s in -si:-[-si:-. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 38 
     
   
   
     xlii SUFFIXES -çıl/-çil forms N./A.s of addiction, e.g. igcil 'sickly' fr. i:&amp; 'disease'; rare. -ğıl/-gil (a) attached to Numerals, e.g. üçgil 'triangular'; (5) otherwise forms N./A.s relating to colour or shape, e.g. başğil, tarğıl, kırğıl, yipgil, yalğıl, rare; also Dev. Suff. -S1l in arsıl, syn. w. a:r, 'auburn'; prob. a Dev. N./A. in -il fr. a Simulative Den. V. in -St:-; the alternative spelling arsa/ is improbable; both words are Hap. leg. -1m[-im forms Conc. N.s, only(?) in edrim, barım, a common Dev. Suff. -dam][-dem forms N./A.s meaning 'resembling (something), e.g. tepridem 'god-like' ; rare. -a:n[-e:n/-un an obsolete Plur. Suff, (see Kaş. 1 76); only(?) in oğla:n, ere:n, bodun, and perhaps öze:n. -çın/-çin function obscure; only(?) in balıkçın, kökçin/kökşin. -tın/-tun/-dın/-dun, etc. a Loc. Suff., e.g. tagtin 'outside' ; to be distinguished fr. the partially homophonous Abl. Suff. -ğa:n/-ge:n forms Conc. N.s vv. a more restricted meaning than the basic N.; e.g. arpağa:n, temürgen; very rare; also a Dev. Suff. and an Ending. -ğun/-a:ğun etc. (also -ge:n in yettige:n) forms Collectives, e.g. alkuğun, kadna:ğun, kelipün; very rare; cf. -a:ğu:/-e:gü:, -ka:n|ke:n forms an Adj. in tepri:ken 'devout' and Temporal Advs. in amtıkan, ançağınçakan, very rare; also an Ending. (-man)/-men function obscure in (PU) kükmen, kózmen; in Türkmen prob. a corruption of Pe. Suff, -mand "resembling” , also a Dev. Suff, -şin, See -cin. -in/-ün Adj. Suff. in yelin “vindy”, Dim. Suff. in kölün 'puddle'; also a Dev. Suff. : -dan/-dun, etc. forms Conc. N.s only(?) in otup, uldap, and perhaps izdey. -ar/-er (also -rer in ikkirer)/-şar/-şer (after vowels) forms Distributives after Numerals, e.g. birer “one each”, and Adjs of quantity, e.g. azar “a few each”, very rare; also a Dev. and Conjugational Suff. -ş/-ış/-uş, ete. function obscure; see ödüş, bağış, 2 ba:ş, kökiş: very rare; also a Dev. Suff. -da:ş/-de:ş forms N.s of Association indicating that two persons have a common possession of some kind, e.g. kada:ş “kinsman”, yerde:ş “compatriot”, see Kaş. I 406. It has been plausibly suggested that this Suff. is a crasis of the Loc. Suff. -da:/-de: and €:ş “companion”. Rather rare. -mış/-miş only in altmış, yetmiş “sixty, seventy”, a common Conjugational Suff. -gey only(?) in kücgey 'violent' fr. kü:ç "violence". -z demonstrably a Den, N. Suff. only in ékkiz 'twin' fr. ékki:; also a Dev. Suff. and an Ending. (-tüz in küntüz, q.v., is prob. a separate word not a Suff., cf. -ta:B.) -siz[-siz|-Suz|-süz forms Priv. N./A.s connoting the non-possession of a thing, quality, etc.; the opposite of -lığ, etc.; cognate to the Den. V. Suff. -SITa:-, etc.; very common. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 39 
     
   
   
     SUFFIXES xliii (5) DEVERBAL (Dev. Ns) -a:/-e:/-n/-i:/-u:/-ü taken together fairly common; there is no discoverable rule prescribing which Suff. should be attached to any given V., all being attached to V.s with unrounded and with rounded vowels; when one is attached to a V. ending in a vowel a euphonic -y- is inserted, e.g. ula:yu:. Usually forms Advs., less often Conjunctions, like ótrü:, Postposns. like tapa:, Conc. N.s like opri:, adrı:, A.N.s like 3 kece: or Adjs. like eğri:, köni:. -ğa:/-ge: forms Adjs., e.g. kısğa:, N./A.s, usually Active, e.g. üge:, bilge:; and N s either Intrans; e.g. kóli:ge: or Pass., e.g. tilge:; rare and obsolescent; also an Ending. -ma:[-me: forms Pass. N.s and N./A.s; fairly common; ite use as an ordinary Dev. N., N.Ac., etc., prevalent in Osm., did not develop till the medieval period. -Éma:[-gme: properly a Conjugational Suff.; occasionally forms N.s like tanığma: “riddle”. -çı:/-çi: forms N.Ag.s, e.g. ota:cı:, okl:çi:, common Den. Suff., very rare as a Dev. Suff. -ğu:çı:/-gü:çi: properly a Conjugational Suff., see Kaş. 77 49, but occasionally forms N.Ag.s, e.g. ayğu:çı, bitigü:ci:. -di:[-di:, etc. a common Conjugational Suff., sometimes used to form Pass. N./A.s, usually attached to Refl. V.s, e.g. üdründi:, occasionally to basic V.s, e.g. ögdi:, alka:di:, sókti:. -ti:[-ti: different fr. the foregoing; used to form Advs., e.g. arıtı:, uza:ti:, tüke:ti:; very rare; also a Den. Suff. : -çu:/-çü: forms Pass. N./As; attached only to Refl, f.5; syn. vv. -di:, etc. , rare. -du:, etc. in eğdü:, umdu:, süktü: seems to be a Sec. f. of dt:. -ğu:/-gü: properly a Conjugational Suff. but forms a good many N.s and N./As; rather more than half are N.1.s, e.g. bile:gü: “vhetstone” ; most of the remainder are Conc. N.s, e.g. kedgü: “clothing”: the rest are miscellaneous, e.g. oğla:ğu: 'gently nurtured'; it appears in crasis in words like ertipü: and yaku:. (-yu:, etc.; see -a:, etc.) -ç forms ordinary N.Ac.s, N./A.S.s, etc.; attached only to Refl. f.s (and tin-); prob. a crasis of -iş etc. which seems not to be attached to Refl. f.s in the early period; common. -ğa:ç/-geç only(?) in büsgec, a Conc. N., and kısğaç, a N.I. in the early period but commoner later; perhaps merely a Sec. f. of -ğuç. -ğuç/-güç normally forms N.Ls, e.g. bıçğuç: rare; also a Den, Suff. -maç/-meç forms names of foodstuffs, e.g. tutmac; rare. -t (only after -r-)/-ut/-üt dominant; forms N.Ac.s, A.N.s, and Conc. N.s which are usually Active , rare. -ğut/-güt usually describes persons, e.g. alpa:ğut, urunut, baya:But, and (etymologically obscure) ura:gut; also forms A.N.s, etc. in ögüt, çapğut, kızğut, etc.; very rare and obsolescent. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 40 
     
   
   
     xliv SUFFIXES -81-ı61-16/-uğ/-üg the commonest Dev. Suff.; forms a wide range of Dev. N.s and N./A.s, N.Ac.s, etc.; see Kaş. 7 26—7. -çığ/-çiğ, forms Intrans. and Pass. N./A.s; attached only to Refl. f.s, perhaps a crasis of -çsığ/-çsiğ, in which case the words concerned are N./A.s in - B fr. Simulative V.s in -st:-[-si:- fr. Dev. N.s in -ç. -k (after vowels and -r-)/f-ak/-ek/-ık/f-ik of these -k is rather common, the rest rather rare. Practically syn. vv. -ğ there does not seem any discoverable rule for deciding which Suff. should be used, but on the whole most words ending in -B, etc. are N.s and most words ending in -k, etc. are N./A.s, but it also forms A.N.s, e.g. emge:k, kilik; Conc..N.s, c.g. kesek, and N.ILs, e.g. bıçak, See Kaş. I 27. -uk/-ük (-ok/-ök) dominant (e.g. in ağruk, esrük); usually forms Intr. or Pass. N./A.s; also a few Pass. N.s, e.g. buyruk, köpük, kölük. Common. -çak/-çek and -çuk/-çük not direct variants since the first is also attached to V.s containing rounded vowels and the second to V.s containing unrounded vowels; the semantic difference may be the same as that between -ak and -uk. Both form Conc. N.s and N.I.s; rare. Also a Den. Suff, -dak/-dek it is doubtful whether this is a Dev. as well as a Den, Suff.,, but órdek looks more like a Dev. N. than a Den. N. -duk, etc. properly a Conjugational form (Perfect Participle, etc.) but Kaş. I 65 may well be right in defining ağduk as a Dev. N./A. vv. this Suff. -ğa:k/-ge:k usually forms N./A.s connoting habitual or repeated action; also a few Conc. N.s, e.g. içğek, kudurğa:k, and N.Ls, e.g. bicóa:k, tarğa:k vv, the same connotation implied; cf. -ğa:n/-gğe:n. -ğuk/-gük forms Conc. N.s and some N.I.s; rare. -ma:k/-me:k properly the Infinitive Suff,, but also used to form a fevr Conc. N.s, e.g. çakma:k, and, with vocalic decia lation: ügrümük. -duruk/-dürük forms N.s describing pieces of equipment, e.g. tizildürük; very rare; also a Den. Suff. -sık/-sik forms N.Ac.s, usually Intrans.; properly the Suff. -k attached to a Simulative V. in -s1:-[-si:-, but the V.s themselves are not noted; rare. -yuk[-yük properly a Conjugational Suff., see v. G. A TG, para. 218, but forms some Intrans. N./A.s; note the -2-y- crasis in bulğafuk, etc.; rare. -1 (after vowels)/-11/-il forms N./A.s usually Intrans. or Pass.; rare. - £il[- gil in kiz£il relates, like the Den. Suff., to colour; in bıçğıl forms a N.T.; very rare. -m][-ium[-im[-um[-üm properly describes a single action, e.g. ölüm “death” (you can only die once) or içim “a single drink', but sometimes used less precisely as a N.Ac. or Conc. N.; common. -n[-en-(?only in evren, tevren) /-ın/-in/-un/-ün partially dominant, see, e.g. uzun, tütün fr. uza:-, tüte:-, but after vowels -n is more usual; forms N./A.s and Conc. N s, usually Intrans.; not very common. -Éa:n[-ge:n properly a Conjugational form, Present Participle, but, at any rate in Kaş., connoting repeated or habitual action, see Kaş. 7 24; // 53; fairly common? cf. -Éa:k[-ge:k; also a Den. Suff. and Ending. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 41 
     
   
   
     SUFFIXES xlv -ğın/-gin (after unrounded vowels) /-ğun/-gün (after rounded vowels) forms N.s and N./A.s, usually Intrans. or Pass.; not very common; -ğun/-gün also a Den. Suff. -ma:n/-me:n forms N.I.s; very rare; also a Den. Suff. -D/-an (in çalan)/-fün (in bürün) very rare; the full phonetic range is prob. wider; forms N.s and N/A s, exact function obscure. -çan only(?) in ayançan, perhaps connotes habitual action. -ar[-er[-1r[-ir[-ur[-ür properly an Aor. Participial Suff.; forms a few N.s and N./A.s. -mur only(?) in yaámurvand perhaps çağmur. -8 only(?) in öles, ? Sec. f. of -z. - fas only(?) in bıçğas, perhaps Sec. f. of - Bac. -ş/-ış/-iş/-uş/-üş there are perhaps two different series here, cf. -k, etc. and -uk/-ük, in some cases a vowel is followed by -ş but in others the -1$, etc. are dominant, e.g. alkış, ülüs, arvis, busuş, fr. alka:-,üle:-,arva:-, busa:-, and, although these words are N.Ac.s, in some cases, e. g. uruş "hitting one another”, the action is reciprocal, in others, e.g. ağiş “rising” it is neutral or at most co-operative; cf. the Dev. V. Sufi. -ş-, etc. The connotation of “a way of (doing something)', prevalent in Osm., is unknown in the early period. Common. -z]-1z|-iz|-uz|-üz forms N.s and N./A.s, usually Intrans. or Pass., but precise function obscure; it is doubtful whether 1 ö:z and uz should be regarded as Dev. N.s fr. ö:- and u:- as Bang suggested; very rare and obsolescent. -duz forms an Intrans. N./A.; only(?) in munduz. 1. VERBAL SUFFIXES (a) DENOMINAL (Den. V.s) -ai-[-e:-[ -1:-[-1:- | -u:-] -ü:- the first two fairly common, the rest rare; attached only to consonants; prob. the oldest Den. V. Suff., forms Intrans. and less often Trans. V.s; see Kaş. I zo. -da:-/-de:-/-ta:-/te:- rare and attached only to a limited range of consonants, forms only(?) Trans. V.s. -ka:-/-ke:- very rare; only(?) in irincke:- and yarlıka:-, and, in the Refl. f, ağrıkan-, in the last two the -k- is a crasis of -k-. -irka:-furka:-, etc. function obscure, very rare; see tanırka:-, tsoyorka:-, and, in the Refl. f., alpırkan-, ózirken-; see the Dev. Suff. -ırkan-. -]a:-]-le:- attached to all vowele and consonants; forms Trans. and Intrans. V.sş when attached to the names of parts of the body means “to strike-on the . ^5 see Kaş. I 22; much the commonest Den. Suff. -Ta:-/-re:- a very rare Sec. f. of -1a:-/-le:-, eg kekre:-, kókre:-. -sira:-/-sire:- forms Priv. Den. V.s meaning “to be without, or deprived of, something”, e.g. ógsire:-; cognate to the Den. N. Suff, -sız, etc.; rare and obsolescent. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 42 
     
   
   
     xlvi SUFFIXES -Sa:-]-se:- forms Desid. Den. V.s; fairly common; these V.s form two classes: (1) those derived fr. basic N.s, e.g. evse:- 'to long for home'; (2) those derived fr. N.Ac.s, e.g. barığsa:- “to wish to go”, Also a Dev. Suff., equally common; in Kaş. 7 281, rı it is said that barsa:- is permissible, but barığsa:- the more usual form. See also 7 279 ff. -1:- (-li:-) very rare Sec. f. of -1a:-/-1e:-, e.g. tumli:-. -81:-[-si:- forms Simulative Den. V.s, e.g. açığsı:-, very rare in the basic f. but sce -sın-/-sin- , sec Kaş. 7 282; also a Dev. Suff. -d- (after vowels)/a:d-/[-e:d- (after consonants) these V.s arc usually Intrans. and mean “to be, or become (something), but occasionally Trans., e.g. kóze:d-; as in the Perf. the -d- merged with the Suff, -tı:/-ti: and became -ttt:[-tti:, Kaş, erroneously indexed some of these V.s vv, final -t- but it is unlikely that this was the pronunciation except in the Perf. -it- (? -id-) the nature of this Suff. in tönit- and terit- is obscure. -k- (only after vovvels)/-ık-/-ik-/-uk-/-ük- forms Tntrans., and occasionally Pass., V.s; see Kaş. 1 zo, II 118, 165; rather common. -]- forms Intrans. V.s, e.g. tusul-; very rare; also a Dev. Suff. -sın-/-sin- the Refl. f. of-sı:-/-si:- forming Intrans. Simulative V.s; rare when attached to basic N.s, e.g. uluğsın-, but fairly common when attached to N.S.A.s in -m, etc., e.g. alımsın- translated in Kaş. 7 zo “to pretend to take, without actually taking” , see also 17 202, 259; there are several hybrid forms like beğimsin- in which -im- is inserted between the basic N. and the Suff. -r- (after vowels) /-ar-/-er- (the ordinary form after consonants) [-1r-[-ir(very rare, after Dis, N.s in which the second vowel, -1-[-i-, is elided, e.g. kurğir- fr. kurig) forms Intrans. V.s; sce Kaş, J1 165; fairly common. -ğar-/-ger-/-kar- (after -) /(-ker-p) normally forms Trans. V.s, occasionally Intrans., fairly common. -ğır-/-gir- forms Inchoative V.s meaning 'almost to do (something); to be on the point of doing (something), (see Kaş. 1I zoo, which relates to Dev. V.s); e.g. tazğır-, tozğur , very rare; also a Dev. Suff. -ş- identical vv. the Dev, Suff. -ş-, etc.; noted only in arkaş-. (P) DEVERBAL (Dev. V.s) -sa:-/-se:- forms Desid. V.s; see Kay. 7 21; also a Den. Suff.; fairly common. -81:-/-si:- forms Simulative V.s, e.g. emsi:-; very rare; also a Den. Suff. -d- Trans. and prob. Emphatic in to:d-, ko:d-, yo:d-, yüd-. -t- (after vowels and -r-) /-ıt-/-it/-ut-/-üt- the only common Suff. of Caus. V.s fr. basic V.s ending in vowels; the other forms are rather rare. See Kaş, / 20. -k- (after vowels and -r-)/-1k-[-ik-[-uk-[-ük- when attached to Intrans. V.s intensiftes the meaning, e.g. a:ç- “to be hungry'; açık- “to be famished', see Kaş. 1 20; when attached to Trans. V.s forms either Pass. V.s, e.g. sanç- “to rout'; sançık- “to be routed'; or Intrans. V.s, e.g. böl-. “to divide, separate' (Trans.), bölük- “to separate, part” (Intrans.); rather rare. -tik-[- duk- forms Emphatic Pass. V.s, only(?) in bulduk-, bastik-. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 43 
     
   
   
     SUFFIXES xlvii -sik-/-sik-/-suk-/-sük- forms Emphatic Pass. V.s, e.g. bil- “to know'; bilsik- “to be well known, notorious'; see Kag. 7 21; 77 138, 237; rare. -1-[-11-/i1- /-u1-/-ül- the normal Suff. for Pass. V.s; see Kaş, 1 21; 11 138,237; very common. -n-/-ın-/-in-/-un-/-ün- forms Refl. V.s, which acc. to Kaş, had four shades of meaning 'to do somcthing to oneself, for oneself, or by oneself; or pretend to do something but not actually do it' (the last practically unknown elsewhere); it was also used to form Intrans. and sometime Pass. V.s fr. ''rans.; see Kaş. I zı, İİ 168, 254; very common. : -ırkan-/-irken- in isirken-, kısırkan-, function obscure; see Den. V:Suff. -irka:-. -r- (in one or two V.s, ürper-, kurır, yélpir-, etc.)/-çır- | -cir- (in tamçırkülçir-) /-ğır-/-gir- (perhaps occasionally -ğur-/-ğür- , rare) [-sir- (in külsir-) all form Inchoative V.s; see the Den. Suff. -ğır-/-gir-. (ar-)/-er-/-ur-/-ür-, attached only to consonants, the first two very rare, the second two fairly common, form Caus. V.s, see Kaş. // 87, 199. -dur-/-dür-/-tur-/-tür-, attached only to consonants, the commonest Suff, for forming Caus. V.s; see Kay. / zo, JI 197. -ğur-/-gür- attached only to a limited range of consonants, forms Caus. V.s; see Kaş. I7 198; rather rare. -şur-/-şür- (occasionally in the Sec. f. -çur-/-çür-) is not a primary Suff. but a combination of -ş- and -ur-, the preceding vowel often being elided, e.g. tap-, tapış-, tapşur-. -$- (only after vovvels) / -ış -/-iş -/-uş- ] -üg- forms Co-operative and Reciprocal V.s which, according to Kaş., meant “to do (something) together (with a Plur. Subject); to do (something) in every part (with a Sing. Subject); to do (something) to one another (with a Plur. Subject); to help (someone Dat.) to do (something Aec.), to compete with (birle:, someone) in doing (something Acc.). N. See Kaş. 1 zo, Tİ 113 ff., 225; common. -uz -/-üz- (dominant, e.g. tüte:-, tütüz-)/-duz-/-düz-/-ğuz -/-güz- form Caus. V.s; obviously cognate to -ur-, etc. (cf. -sız, -sıra:-): acc. to Kaş, II 87 -duz- was an Oğuz Suff.; see also /7 164; all rare in the early period; became commoner, and in some languages almost standard, in the later period. ENDINGS -ğa:/-ğe, which was a rare and obsolescent Dev. N. suffix, also appears at the end of a larger number of words which cannot be so explained. Some are pretty certainly not l.-w.s, others, like sırıçğa: 'crystal, glass” prob. are. The list includes one, perhaps significant, pair. avıçğa: “old man”, kurtğa: “old vvoman”, and several names of animals and insects cekürge:, (PU) çınçırğa:, torı:ğa:, kumurs£a:, karğa:, karınçğa:, kaşğa:, sarıçğa:, etc. -va:ç/-vva:ç in sanduvva:ç, yala:vaç is the Iranian word (and Suff.) seç “voice”, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 44 
     
   
   
     xlvii SUFFIXES -dig occurs in tardic, savdic, sağdıç. -la:ç/-liç in ikizla:ç, ipliç, todlic, karğıla:ç, sokarlaç, sondila:c, three of them names of birds, is prob., but not demonstrably, foreign. -ğa:n/-ge:n (also Den. and Dev. Suffs.)/-ka:n[-ke:n occurs at the end of several names of animals: tavışğa:n (a very old word), tayğa:n, sıçğa:n, sağızğa:n, sıkırkan, etc., and of plants: çıbıka:n, tuturka:n, kara:kan, kóvürgen, etc. -la:n occurs at the end of the names of several animals arsla:n, bakla:rı, bula:n, bursla:n, kapla:n, kula:n, sirtla:n ('hyaena', first noted in the medieval period), yila:n, and one title çoğla:n. -va:r in çığılva:r, yala:var is an Iranian Suff. meaning “carrying”. -Z occurs at the end of three numerals: ottuz, tokkuz, sekkiz, several names of parts of the human or animal body: ağız, boğuz, büfiüz, tiz, köküz, kóz; and several names of animals and insects: uyaz, topuz, kunduz, etc., as well as miscellaneous words like yıltız and yultuz. None of these are likely to be l.-w.s.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 45 
     
   
   
     Mon. A Preliminary note. Tere tere never many Turkish words consisting of à single vosvel, and all of them except a: became obşolete at a very early date. To Kaş., swith. his bachground of Arabic philology, the tuhole concept was strange, but he did devote a section, headed rather inscrutablyy dawàtu'l-arba'/a, 'four-letter wwords', I 39-40, in the chabter containing two-letter tords of svhich the first is hamza to such words. Jt originally contained one tvord hamza alif, four hamza vvövv, and three hamza yà, but in the survtving M.S. some of the second group have had letters added to them. As vv it not a genuine Turkish sound, the second group must all have been 0:, üz, öz, or üt, Of the third group one seas almost certainly ay, the others probably x; or İt, The only common word, iz, occurs in Kaş. as yx, ils true nature and meaning having already been forgotten. ı a: Exclamation, usually vocative in character, occasionally expressing surprise, in the early period usually affixed to the word qualified, later, perhaps under foreign influence, placed before it. The attachment of -a/-e metri gratia at the end of lines in KB and other poems is a Pe, trick, and perhaps not native Turkish. S.i.a.m.l.g., but also in contiguous non"Turkish languages. Uy&amp;. vir ff. Bud. tüzün oBlum-a “my good son” U III 35, 26; anaçım-a “my dear mother” U III o, 2 (ii); baxşı-a “my teacher” U IV 28, 4; a.o.o.: Xak, xi 8: an exclamation (harf) of surprise (al-tahavyur); hence one says ol meni: a: kildi: “he surprised me” Kaş. I 39: KB -a is a common verse-filler, e.g. tus teg-a (or -e?) rhyming with sapa 7: Gag. xvíL a: (sic) “vocative” (harf-i nida) San. 27v. 1. (quotn. including a: yiğit “oh youth'; also described as an abbreviation of an in such words as alar for anlar): Korn. xiv e 'vocative exclamation” CCG; Gr. 84 (guotn.): Kip. xv “vocative" (al-munádi wa'l-mufrig) a e.g. a kiçi (for kişi) “oh man” Tuh, 6ob. 2 (also B4b. 3; 8sb. 7); harfu'l-nidá a (also é) placed before the name of a person called, e.g. a Altunbuğa Kar. 52, ır. 1l r usually translated “vegetation”, but the contexts show that it meant something between a plant and a tree, probably 'bush' (singular or collective); n.o.a.b. Türkü vir ida: taşda: kalmigr: “those of them who remained in the bush and stony desert” T 4; atığ ika: bayu:r ertimiz “ve tied the horses to bushes'! 7 27: 8641125 B Uy£. vin ida: kavuşalım “let us assemble in the bush' Su. E 10-11; vi ff, Man.-A beş tórlüg 1da ığaçda “in the five kinds of bushes and trees" M 7 8, 19-20; kaltı 1$ yanı yerden témin örtürürçe “as one can grow bushes almost immediately on newly planted ground' M I 14, ro, bir narwan(?) atlığ 1 a bush called marsvan(?) (Persian. nárteaàn ^witch elm, Ulmus montana) Man.-utg. Frag. 406, 4; ol 1 :ug1nda olurdi “he sat on the top of that bush' do. qor, 1; Man. ne taglar111$ac kaya kum bari 'whatever mountains, bushes, trees, rocks, and sand there are” M 7II 8, 3-4 (ii): Bud. (fruits that grow) 1 18acda U 1 27, 5; 1 tarif “bushes and cultivated land” U 7 27, 3; U Il yy, 27; TT IV io, 6; VIII K.4; a.0.0.: Xak. xı one says y1: yığa:ç for “tangled trees' (mö”ltaffa müna”l-şacar), originally yigi: 'bushy' (mutardşs) but contracted Kaş, /7/ 216 (perhaps a false etymology); a.o. //7 25 (yigi:). PU 2 x: Hap. leg.; apparently so vocalized in MS. Xak. xı x "a word used to express refusal' (kalimatu'l-inkár) alternative to 2 u: Kaş. I 40. PU ?F 3 ın Hap. leg.; like many names . of fabrics prob. a l.-w., perhaps Chinese; apparently vocalized ay; if 1: or İ: perhaps some Chinese word like ? “variegated, rainbowcoloured (clothing) (Giles $5,434). Xak. xr x: 'orange-coloured brocade' (dibàüe máranciyu'l-lason) Kaş. 1 40. PU 1 o: Hap. leg.; the word, no doubt hamza teáto was inadvertently omitted in the MS. and replaced in the margin by o:ka: presumably taken from the example; it is not clear whether this word is an abbreviation of OĞ, which appears as below and elsewhere in the medieval period, or whether the latter is an expanded form, prob. the latter. Xak. xı (0:5 al-kafil, 'surety, security, pledge'; one says men anı: o:ka: aldım “1 took him as security” (kaffaltu bihi) Kaş. I 40; (xıv Muh.(?) damana wa kafala "to stand surety' o:ğlan- Rif. i11 (only): Xwar. xiv man takallafa li 'whoever has guaranteed to me” translated kayu . .. mana oğ bolsa Nahc. 346, 7; same phr. 162, 6 and IŞ. PU 2 o: Hap. leg.; originally hamza toàáto, but later a fatha was placed over the /arıza and an alif added in both places. Xak. 0: 'an exclamation (ğerf) in reply to a caller. When yd Muhammad is called out, the man who answers says 0: meaning “vhat are your orders?' Kaş. I 40 (see 2 ut). S 3 0: Sec ol, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 46 
     
   
   
     2 MON. À lu: 'sleep'; the Dev. V. is exceptionally udi:-, which suggests that this word may originally have been *u:d, but that word is nowhere noted in this sense; not noted later tban xı. Türkü viii uda: basdimiz “ve surprised . . . in their sleep” 7 E 35, 37; II E 27; uka (sic) basdımız T 27; vin ff. Man usinta odunti “he woke frorn his sleep! M 7 6, 21-1: Uyğ. vir ff. Man, (gap) uu (nic) üze udiyu 'sleeping a , ... sleep” TT III 160: Bud. uvlarindin (? read nularindin) odğurup 'arousing . . . from their sleep! U 777 rr, 8; u TT VIII 4.13 (see udik); Civ. uda (Usb, 77, 14 (see ud-): Xak, xı u: (later altered to sdu:) 'sleep" (al-nawm); hence one says udi:diim “1 slept, abbreviated from u:di:di:m Kaş, 7 qoş u:din (MS. in error u:dun) anı: odgura: 'arousing him from sleep' 77 193, 4; similar phr. 7 46, zo, ağır u:nı: ugursa:dim “1 wished to drive away heavy sleep” 771 247, 23: KB u teg "like sleep" 1424; kiterse ust “let him repel sleep' 2331; 0.0. 3952, 4963, 6637. PU 2 u: (bi-rghá'i'l-alif) Hap. leg.; in Kaş, işbd" normally means “back-vovvels”, e.g. both 1 to:z and tu:z are so described to distinguish them from tö:z and tü:z, but, if some contrast with 2 0: is intended, it night mean, as in Sam., u not o, since ü: is not a very likely sound for an exclamation; see 2 :, Xak. xı u: "an exclamation of refusal (ğarf inkár) to obey an order” (Kaş, I. 40). Mon, V. APreliminary note. 7'he only tteo basic verbs of this shape are u:i- and öt- ; in various medieval and modern languages more such verbs appeared as the result of the elision of final consonants, e.g. e-/i- (€ 1 er-) "to be”. u:- there are a few early occurrences of this verb as an ordinary finite verb meaning 'to be capable' and the like, but it is normally used as an Aux. verb following a verb in the Ger, f. -u:/-ü:, or less often -ğalı:/-ğeli:, meaning “to be able'. Even in this sense thc word is rare after x1 except in the Neg. f. The Pres. Particip. ufa:n, however, used as a N/A. meaning “God, Almighty' survived rather longer. 'l'he later history of the Neg. f. is discussed by Mal. in USp., pp. 224-5. Brietly the Ger. suff. -u:/-ü: and u:- coalesced to produce -uma-/-üme- the *Impossible' f. of the verb. 'Tbis stage was reached in Osm. in the early medieval period, but later, probably as the result of a dcnasil tendency to 'unround' round vowels, this became -ama-/-eme-, producing such forms as Osm. seveme- 'to be unable to love”, It has been suggested that in such forms the -a-/-e- is a reduced form of al- which is used as an Aux. verb in the same sense in some modern languages, but this is improbable. It is more plausible that the Osm. Continuous Pres. Suff. -uyor (not subject to phonetic harmony) is a survival of the positive form of u:-. Türkü vii: étinu: yaratu:nu: umaduk 'because they could not organize themselves (Elend.)” / E ro, // E 9; usar "if possible" T' 11: viii ff. kamsgayu: uma:ti:n 'without being able to inove' IrkB 16 (and four o.o. of Neg. f); edgüsi: uyu:ri: "his good and capable men' do. 28: otsu:z suvsu:z kalti: uyun 'how can 1: (get on) without fodder or water?' do. 45; (the fat horse's mouth became hard) idi:si: uma:z 'its master cannot (control 10” do. 65; nda:rtu: uma:z 'cannot endanger him" 7'oyok 25, 29 (ET Y II 59): Uyft. vir (T. Man.-A sózieyü umağay "will be unable to speak” M 7 is, 2-3: Man. yok kim ol umasar Simnu küclpe kopuğ ufay 'there is nothing that he cannot do; by the power of Ahriman he vill be able to do everything! M II 5, 10-11: Bud. berü umadi "he could not give” PP s, 8 (2.0.0. of Neg. £); kilu usar 'if he can make' PP 35, 4; ertini evdigeli uyur “he can collect jewels' TT V 26, 91-2; Sanskrit abhavvyatd "incapacity” uma:ta:çı bolma:k VIII 4.44 (a.o.o.), kórgeli udaçı bolğay “he will be able to sec” Suv. 444, 4: Civ. tın alu umasar “if he cannot draw breath” H 7 141-2 (a.o.o. in Zİ 1I): Xak. xı uğan “having power over all things” (al-qàdir "ala"l-aşyd), hence God is called uğan tenri: 'almighty God” Kaş, I 77; (N.B. no occurrences of u:-) u:ğança: 'to the best of your ability” 7 44, 2: KB uğan bir bayat “the one almighty God” z (a.o.o.), usn 'if possible" 549, 721; uğança (mis-spelt vğınra) 4256: xıı(?) uğan “God”, common in Zt: xiv Rbğ. uğan used both as a name and as an epithet of God, R 7 1007; Mu. qadara $a atága "to be mighty, to be able" u:- Rif. 114; al-qadir u:sğa:sn Mel. 13, 1; Rif. 88; al-garci 'powerful', one of the names of God u:ğa:n Rif. 137: Çağ. xv ff. ukan (sic) “God” Bad. 100; uğan (also, incorrectly, uus) "a name of God” Vel. 108 (quotns.); uğan (spelt) "a name of God' San. 76 v. 18 (quotn., points out that the word is once entered correctly in Vel. and is also split into o ğan, the latter being entered separately (Vel. 308) with the same meaning and quotns.): Xwar. xii uğan “God” ' Ali 46; xiv ditto Qutb 195; MN 378: Kip. xin Allah (tepri:, and in a dialect (/uğa) which only a few people know) uğa:n Horn. 3, 12; xiv ğan Allah, İd. ış. ö:- “to think; to think of (something Zcc.)', hence “to remember! (something cc.) ; often used in the Hend. ö- sakın-, conunon down to xı, not traceable thereafter. Türkü vri anığ bilig anta: öyü:r ermiş “they then seem to have thought evil thoughts! 7 S 5, I2 N 4 n:çsar tosik ömezsen bir todsar a:çsık ömezsen “if you are hungry you do not remember being satiated, but if you are once satiated, you do not remember being hungry” 1 S 8, II N 6: viurff. turuk at semri:ti: yeri:n öpen “a lean horse remembering the place which fattened him” J[rRB 16: Uy. vur ff. Man.-A bu savı... . Ömeksakınmak kergek "he must meditate (Hend.) on this vvord of his" M III iz, 7-8 (iii): Man. Amrağım óyürmen “I think of my beloved' M 7I 8, 8: Bud. ajun ödeçi Sanskrit jifismara remembering former    
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 47 
     
   
   
     MON. AB 3 existences' U /7 44, 34-5; burxanlarığ öp sakinip 'meditating (Hend.) on the Buddhas' U 11 80,61; edgü ögli “having good thoughts', and ayığ öğli “having evil thoughts! PP passim; öğeli köpülğerip 'thinking deeply' U 11 8, 22; 0:0. 9, 11 9, 11-12 (mis-spelt ongali); 47, 73-4; USp. 102b. 22-3, a.0.0.: Xak. xı ö:di: ne:mni: "he understood ( fatina) the matter, after he had thought (tafakkara) about it Kaş. I 11, 19; óme: “do not (stop to) think” 7 93, 3; n.mn,e.: KB esit&amp;ü ögğü “he will hear and think about (what the saye says)” 306; öyü sakinu (Iend.) 4334; etözke ömiş berme yapğıl kapuğ “do not give the body what it thinks about [i.e. desffes], close the door (on it)' 4560. Mon. AB 1 ap/ep, etc. Reduplicative intensifying prefix, usually placed before N./A.s connoting colour or physical shape. Occasionally at later periods the two words are fused, and the compound thus formed entered in dicts.; in such cases the final consonant of the prefix is sometimes doubled. Other such prefixes are lísted below. C.i.a.p.a.l. Uyğ. vii ff, Bud. for a possible occurrence see 2 ap: Xak. xr ap/ep "a strengthening and intensifying particle' (harf ta'hid wa mubdlağa), to describe something 'particularly good” one says ep edgü:, and in Oğuz for 'intensely white! ap ak . . . up/üp “a strengthening particle for [words connoting] colours'; hence one says, in Gigil, üp ürüp 'intenscly white" Kaş. 1 34: xiv Mwh. gadidu'l-bayád "intensely white! ap ak Mel. 68, s, Rif. 168: Çağ xv ff. San. 16v. 8 ff, contains a short note on prefixes of this nature, enumerating several of them, ap (ağ), sap (sarığ), etc.; some of these rcappear in the lexicon, e.g. ap (*with p") ag/ak “very white' 27v. 7: Xwar. xın(?) ap ak Of. 231: Ktp. xır Hou. 31, 4ff. has a note on such prefixes and ]ists several, ap (ak), kap (kara:), etc.: XIV appak sadidu'L-bavád, followed by a note and another example /d. 7: xv Kaw. s, 4 ff. and Tuh. 85a. 6 ff, have similar notes with examples appak, etc.: Osm. xiv ff. Several examples, from all periods, appak, apansızda, apapsızına, etc. TT. S 7 1, 32; 11 44; İİİ 30; IV 32. 2 ap n Conjunction unique in having a Neg. connotation and being used with the positive form of the verb (the meaning was not understood by F. W. K. Müller and he mistranslated U 11 4, 2-3). 'There are two usages, (1) ap... ap “neither . . . nor", (z) Neg. verb .... Ap “nor”, sometimes followed by positive verb. Not traceable later than T'ef. Uyğ. vri ff. Bud, bilmezler ap riomlug(?) yoluğ ukarlar “they do not know (the way and direction], nor do they understand the way of the Lav" U II 4, 2-3; ap yeme közünür ajunda ap yeme ikintl ajunda “neither in this world nor the next” U /11 86, 8-9; o.o. Su. $28, 2-3; Ti. 48a. 3; USb. 102, 33-9; in a long listin TT VII 40, 77 beginning “if any monk or nun, lay brother.or lay sister' the words ap ayağlığ ap ayağs:z uluğ kiçiğ can hardly mean 'neither honourable nor dishonourable, great and small”, and this must be a rather unusual use of 1 ap “very honourable, very dishonourable”: Xak. X1 ap a word taking the place of là, “not”, as in ap bu: ap ol "neither this nor that” Kaş. 1 34: K B (the mind of an ignorant man is like a sand dune) ógüz kirse tolmaz ap ot yem önür “if the river comes in it does not fill, nor do spices and fragrant herbs grow on it” s xn(?) ap yeme kónl ol ap yeme yaruk bit 'neither is he upright nor is [his] writing clear": yetmes anlarka ziyán ap yeme asığ "no harm nor advantage comes to them” Tef. 35. a:V originally prob. a Conc. N. 'wild game", but from the earliest period also used abstractly for 'hunting wild game”, S.i.a.m.L.g. except NE where the synonymous word ap (3 en, q.v.) is used. From about xi onwards the sound change v 7 vv took place in some languages, and in case of doubt it has been transcribed aw. İn some modern languages aW represents 2 a:ğ. Türkü vri av aviasar "when he goes hunting! Ex, 9; vini ff. er avka: barmi:s "a man went hunting! IrkB 12; xanlık süsi: avka: ünmi:g “the army of the Khanate set out on a hunt' do. 63: Uy. vint ff. Bud. biçin avka barmarplar "do not go hunting monkeys' U IV 28, 25: Xak, xr a:v al-sayd, primarily "hunting”, also “game caught hunting'; hence one says beg avka: çıkti: “the beg went hunting! Kaş. 7 81; “the Turks call "hunting" a:v, but they (i.e. Oğuz and related tribes] call it a:w' I 32, 1: KB (if a chief has zeal and generosity, he becomes famous) tileki yorir ötrü av “his wishes are fulfilled and his huntíng (successful]' 2125; a.o. 3602: xut(?) av 'hunting' Tef. 35; xiv Muh. “the people of "Turkestan call “hunting” a:v and those of our country a:vv” Mel. 7, 19; Rif. 79: Çağ. xv ff. aw 'hunting' (şayd wa şikdr) San. sar. 27 (adding incorrectly that it also means “a person” (şaxs), this was due to the mistaken belief that Collective numerals like birevv (bireğü:) were two words bir “one” and ew "person”): Xwar. xin(?) aw “hunting” Og. 17, etc.: xiv av 'wild game, hunting! Qutb 16; Nahc. 155, 12-16: 116; Kom. xiv uv 'hunting' CCG; Gr.: Kip. xivaw 'hunting' 7d. 25; 'hunting' (al-şayd ma"l-qanj) do. Bul. ro, s, xv şayd aw (also awlak) Tuh. 22a. 9. Sep See lap. €:v basically “dvvelling place”, with the particular connotation of a separate dwelling place, the exact meaning, “tent, house”, etc. depending on local circumstances. İn some literary texts it also has the same metaph. meanings as Ar. bayt, e.g. 'celestial mansion'. C.i.a.p.a.l. The phonetic history is unusual; the original form was e:v, but this had become ew in some languages by xi and from this followed the development ew 5 üvv üwi — üy; üy, less often öy, is the normal form in all modern language groups except NE, where it has undergone further distortions, and SW where 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 48 
     
   
   
     4 MON. AB ev still survives, as it does sporadically clsewhere. "The phr. ev bark 'dwelling and movable property" is common, particularly in the early period. Türkü vrir ev 'dwelling place”, presumably 'tent' is very common and ev bark occurs 3 or 4 times, see ET Y Index and bark: vir ff. ev occurs in İrRE5 s, 9 and ss, but not 8 (see evin): Uyğ. viii ff. Man., Bud. ev and ev bark are common, sce Caf. and TT /J-V Index, etc.: Xak. xi the word is very common, but the main entry, Kaş. I 81 (53, 7 of the facsimile) is confused. It is in a section devoted to words beginning with long vowels and comes between a:v (alif alif ud) and 1 a:k (alif alif qdf), but is spelt alif vd and translated al-bayt, bi-işmömyl-alif, wa'l-qasr. fihi afşah 'dwelling place, with a front vowel, the form with a short vowel is more correct”, which clearly implies that it should be spelt e:v in this entry, though ev is more correct in current usage; “the Turks call al-bayt ev, and they fi.e. the Oğuz and related tribes] ew 7 32, 1; 2.0. I] 21 (1 sök-) q.v.; see bark, kurga:g: KB ev (1) 'residence, dwelling place” 948, 1524 2.0.0. (2) üpürde evl “his home is in a cave' 6155; 'celestial mansion, i.e. sign of the Zodiac' 131, 132, 743, 744 (evriil-); (in the MSS. usually spelt alif yd vd, i.e. öv, less often alif và ev): xiv Muh. al-bayt ew Mel. 76, 45; Rif. 179: Çağ. xv ff. üy ev, xdna ma'násina *house' Vel. 122 (quotn.); üy xana San. gər, 15 (quotn.): Xvvar, xi ew "A 40; xin(?) bedük bir üy “a large house” Oğ. 248; (he went back) yurtika üyke “to his country and home” do. 309: XIV ev Qutb sz, MN 137; Nahe. 11, 10-14: Kom. xiv ev (s or 6 spellings, sce Gr. 96) 'house' CCT, CCG: Kip. xir al-bayt ev (wie) Hou. 6, 3; fi'l-bayt é:vde: (sic) do. is, 17: XIV ev (tedzo) al-bayt İd. 25; al-dar “house” ev (tedte), saray 'palace'(?) ditto Bul. 14, 9: Xv al-bayt ev (zudt) Kav. 27, 14; 59, 9; bayt üy ; Tkm. ev Tuh. 8a. s: Osm. ev in various phr. fr. xiv onwards 7 TS 7 284-5 (ev bark); 11: 407; 11! 271; İV 315-16. S İp Scc yip. VU o:b o:b Hap. leg. Xak. xt “one says to a man when he boasts about something and fails to carry it out 0:b o:b' Kaş. I 43. VU 1 op survives in NC Kir. op “a group of animals used to tread out the corn”, Arğu xı op 'with -p' al-rákis mina'l-tirán “an ox used on the threshing floor” Kaş. I 34. PU 2 op Hap. leg. Xak, x1 op op an exclamation (harf ) used when a donkey stumbles, equivalent to Arabic /a'a(n) meaning “hold up" Kaş. 134. (S) up/1 üp See 1 ap (Xak.). *2üp See üple:-. Mon. V. ABE ab- read in Uy$. vir fi, Bud, kan abip ünti "the blood spurted out U 17 27, 22 is no doubt a misreading of ak-. a:V- "o crowd round (someone, etc, Dat); not noted later than Xak.; sce 2 avla:-, Uy£&amp;. vin ff, Man. (in the end comes death and the descent into a dark hell: countless demons come) tumanlığ yekler avar 'foggy demons crowd round" M 17 11, 10-11: Xak. xı apa: kişi: a:vdi: “people crowded (izdahama) round him” Kaş. 1 iya (8:va:r, svma:k); körünçke: kişi: avdı: “people gathered round (haffa . ... hatıl) the thing to see it” 7 167 (ava:r, avme:k in error); a.0.0.: KB (the people of the world hearing this, and longing for him) ava yığlu keldl “came crowding together' 460; ava yığlu terlür anar xalq Ever (correct transcription thus) “they crowd together and assemble, people hurry towards him" 6107. é:v- "to be in a hurry, to hurry'; survives in SW (only?), Xak. xı er evdi: "the man hurried' ('acila) Kaş. I 167 (verse, éve:r, evme:k), er 6:vdi: “the man hurried” ('accala) II 183 (6:ve:r, 6:vme:k), a.o.0.; KB év- "to hurry! is common, and usually deseribed as a vice, 323, 538, 1107, 1998 a.0.0.: xir?) évüp sözleme "do not speak in a hurry' At. 357, év- “to hurry' Tef. 68: xiv Muh. ista"cala “to be in a hurry! ew- Mel. 22, 8, e:v- Rif. 103; asra'a (terkle-; in margin) €:vv- Mel. 22, ro: (Çağ. xv ff. evüp “hurry” Vel. 84, a dubious entry, San. 118v. 26 says specifically that the word is Rümi]: Xwar. xiv €v-/ev- “to hurry! Qutb 23, 62; Nahc. 133, 8: K1p. xi 'accala 6:vv- İlou, 42, 12: xiv éW- (v.l. ew-) ista'cala İd. 25: Osm. xiv ff. év- (sometimes spelt ev-) c.La.p. TTS I 396; II ssa, İİİ 389; IV 445. . 0:p- “to gulp down, swallow'; the evidence for a back vowel is overwhelming; but the facts that “to sip” is given as an alternative meanirig of óp-, and that the der. f.s ópül-, ópün-, öpür-, öprül-, and Öprüş- are all shown with infin. in -me:k suggest that at any rate in Xak. (there is no trace of these words elsewhere) there may have been an alternative form with a front vowel with the attenuated meaning 'to sip', which has a slight semantic connection vvith öp- "to kiss”. Survives in NE Tob. up- R 7 r?8o: NC Kzx. op- S/mt, 153; NW Kar. T. op- Kow. 240; Kaz. upR I 1780: SW Anat. up- SDD 1419. Türkü viuit ff. azu: turu:k suv erser opa:yı:n “or, if it is clear water, 1 will swallow it” Toy. III r. 1-3 (ET Y II 178); Xak. xı er su:v o:pdi: 'the man swallowed ('abba) the water' Kaş, I 172 (0:pa:r, o:pma:k), (after 1 öp-), and one says mü:n ópdl: "he sipped (asd) the soup (etc.)'! I 163 (öpe:r, öpme:k), müm öpti: (sic) III 122 (so:r-): Ktp. xiv ob- (^with back vovvel?) 'abba İd. 7: xv ditto Tuh. 26a. 9: Osm. xvi Ob-/op- translating "abba TTS IV 596. uv- 'to crush, crumble, reduce to powder'. "Vhe word seems to have been extended to uva- in some languages in the medieval period, sec uvul-, uvun-; a Caus. f. uvatand a Dev. N. ufak (uvak) also appeared in  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 49 
     
   
   
     DIS this period. Survives in NE u:- R £ 1591: SE "Türki uwa- Shaw 16: SW Az, Tkm. ovOsm. oğ-/ov-, with some developments of meaning. Xak. xı ol etme:k uvdt: “he crumbled (fatta) the brcad” Kaş. I 167 (uvarr, uvma:k corrected from tvme:k); uvvdi: (sic) I 11, zo (uvva:): KB elgin uva 'wringing his hands! 5967; Kom. xiv “to break up, crush' uv- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv uw- (not vocalized) fatta, and in the Kitdb. Beylik uw- (spelt au-) tahana “to grind” İd. zs: xv faraha "to rub (something) in the fingers” u- (or uw-?) Tuh. 28a. 13; kabasa “to squeeze” do. 31b. 1. 1 öp- “to kiss”, c.i.a.p.a.l.; thprabsence of citations prior to XI is fortuitous, der. f.s occur at an earlier date. Xak. xı ol meni: öpdi: qabbalani"he kissed me'(prov.; ópe:r, ópme:k) Kaş. 1 163: KB öp- “to kiss), usually "to kiss the ground' as a token of respect, is common 4S1, 939 a.0.0.: XIV Muh. “to kiss (basa wa qabbala) öp- Mel. 23, 14; Rif. 105; al-taqbil öpmek 38,8; 119: Caf. xv ff. öp- (with -p-? büsidan “to kiss” San. $7 v. 11 (quotns.): Xvvar. xii öp- “to kiss” "Ali 26: xıv ditto Qutb 120; MN 38, etc.: Kom. xiv “to kiss” öp- CCI, CCG, Gr. 2 öp- See o:p-. Dis. ABA aba:/1 apa:/ebe:/epe: words of this form, connoting various terms of relationship abound in modern Turkish languages vvith meanings as various as (1) “ancestor”, (2) “grandfather” , (3) "grandmother ; (4) “father” , (s) “mother” , (6) “paternal uncle'; (7) “paternal aunt; (8) 'elder brother”, (9) 'elder sister; (ro) (presumably metaph.) “midvvife”, Some, e.g. aba: 'paternal uncle', an abbreviation of Mong. abaga, and other words beginning ab...,etc. are certainly foreign; others, often occurring in only one fanguage group, are of unknown origin. The only early forms seem to be Türkü, etc. apa: 'ancestor' and Ofuz ebe: “mother”. Kaş. does not record the former, but it occurs in K B. In this early period it is often impossible to be sure whether the vowels are back or front and the consonant voiced or unvoiced; the following are the likeliest transcriptions. Türkü vir eçü:m apa:m “my ancestors! / E 1, I1 E 3; 1 E 13, II E 12; ecü:miz apa:miz I E 19; Ongin 1; apa: also occurs as an element in P.N.s, possibly as a title, e.g. apa: tarxan T 34; this phr. occurs in Chinese refces. to the Türkü and seems to be interpreted as 'commander-in-chief', see Liu Mau-tsai, Die chinesischen Nachrichten. zur Geschichte der Ost- Türken, T'u-hie, index, s.v. A-po-ta-kan: Uyğ. vur ff. Man. (the god Zurvan who is) eçesi (sic?) apasi “the ancestor? (of all the other gods) M 7 22, 3 (ii): Civ. 'Tartis apam possibly "my ancestor Tartiş” USp. 12, 2: Tibetan (sic) xı PU aba: a/-db 'father' Kaş. I 86 (said to be an Arabic 1.-vv., with an absurd pseudo-historical explanation; “father” in Tibetan is a-p'a): Xak. xi KB ajunka apa €nmişinde berü 'since . ABA 5 our ancestors came down to earth' 219; apa oğlanı 'ancestors and their descendants' 1386, 1732, 1922, 1958, etc.; apa yazdı erse “if an ancestor has sinned” 3520; a.o. 3$22 (evin): Çağ. PU ebe cadd, 'ancestor' (and in Rümi, zan-i qdbila 'midwife'); apa (with , -p-”) xtcádliar-i buzurg 'elder sister', also called égecl (Mong. l-w.) San. 27v. 5; ebem kómeci a plant called panirak and ndn-t huldğ in Pe. and xubbázi in Ar., "the roundleafed mallow' do. 27v. 15: Oğuz xi ebe: al-umm 'mother', pronounced with -p- by the Karluk Türkmen Kaş. / 86: Kip. xiv ebe: al-umm wa asluhu li'l-cadda wa yuqádl li'lLumm "ald tariqi'l-tahannun originally 'female ancestor', used for “mother” as a term of respect İd. 7; ebem eçkisin kostu: qats quzah 'rainbow' (lit. “ny mother has collected her goats") ld. 5; Bul. 3, 1: xv cadda (dede in margin) ebe Tuğ. 11a. 11: Osm. xiv ff. ebe; in xiv and xv ebe seems to mean 'grandmother' TTS 7 252; II 357, by xvirt it meant 'midwife' (see Çağ.), it is also noted in one or two phr. including ebem gömeçi // 358; IV 274. PU 2 apa: 'bear' (animal); “bear” is normally 1 adiğ, but there is a good deal of folklore, mixed up with an ancestor-cult, about bears in Siberia, and this word is prob. merely 1 apa: used metaph.; survives in NE Kaç., Koib., Sag. R I 620 and Khak. aba, same meaning. Kip. xı (PU) apa: 'with back vowels! al-dubb “bear”: . . . apa: başı: al-tannüm "Cannabis sativa'; it is a plant which grows like al-gittà 'Cucumis sativus” and has a thorny stem, it is eaten in the mountains 7 86 (this is the normal meaning of al-tarüm but the description hardly agrees with it). ava: an exclamation; as such Hap. leg.(?), but of a class common in Turkish. Xak. xı ava: harf ta'allum 'exclamation of pain, equivalent to Ar. táwayli'; a man who is in pain says ava: ava: Kaş. 1 89. oba:, etc. Preliminary note. There are three early words of this general form; the only one certainly Turkish is uva:; oba: “clan” is Oğuz and may well be a L- w., though not demonstrably so; PU opo: 'white cosmetic ir prob. a Chinese lw. Ova “plain” is peculiar 1o Osm. and seems to be quite a modern word. Oba: *heap of stones, grave möund” and the like, noted from Kom. xiv. CCI onwards is a. L.- w. fr. Mong. obo (Kow. 370, Haltod 78). oba: name of a small social unit, possibly 'clan', but prob. even smaller, 'extended family" and the like; from this the word came to mean 'the dwelling place of such a unit; small encampment or large tent', and thence more generally *tent, hut', and the like; survives in these later senses in Osm., including Rep. Turkish and Anat. (SDD 1081, 1411), and Tkm. (o:ba) only(?). Oğuz xı oba: al qabila “clan” (?, an imprecise word) Kaş. I 86: Çağ. xv ff. oba “the small tents (xaymahá) which nomads pitch and in which they reside, when they stop 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 50 
     
   
   
     6 DIS somewhere; and metaph. the place where they stop” Sar. ş8r. 22: Osm. xiv ff. oba c.ia.p., in XIV to XVI it seems to mean 'a small encampment, in a XIV text an ev qawmt “the family living in one tent” is more important than one man, and an oba qavvmı “the families living in a small encampment' are morc important than an ev qavvmı, from XvI onwards it seems to mean “a tent or hut', particularly a large one occupied by more than one family TTS 1 533; II 713; III 530; IV $596. D uva: Dev. N. in -a: fr. uv-; pec. to Kaş. Xak. x1 uva: “a kind of food” (ta"dm), to make it rice is cooked and thrown in cold water; then it is drained and mixed with ice (or 'snow' ?, camd)and eaten to cool one (It l-burüda) Kaş. I go, "a kind of food is called uwa: (sic) derived fr. the word uwdx: (sic), fatta, because sugar is crushed in it” 7 ır, zo. VU ?F opo: “a white cosmetic or face powder', contrast eplik 'rouge'; prob. a Chinese l.-w., the second syllable perhaps po "white' (Giles 8,556); survives in NE Şor oba R 7 1157; Tel. obo R I 1159: SE Türki upa Sas, Jarring, etc. (and Tar. upta R 7 1782): NC Kir. upa; Kzx. opa; cf. kirşe:n. Uyğ. vir ff. Man.-A opoca TT İl 17, 77 (öpül-): Civ. kunçıt yağı (PU) opo katıp “mixing sesame-seed oil and white lead” H 7 132, similar phr. 77 12, 89: Xak. xi opo: al-isfidác “vhite lead” Kaş. 1 86: Çağ. xvff. opa (with -p-”) 'liquid white (safid ab) which women put on their faces' San. 58r. 23 (quotn.): Kip. xv isfidác (kirşe:n and) opa Tuh. 4b. 13. Dis. V. ABAabı:- Hap. leg., but see abit-, abın-. Xak. xı ol anı: kişi:din abı:dı: “he hid him (satarahu) from the people”, also used of any thing that one conceals (zudrd) from someone Kaş. III 250 (abı:r, abı:ma:k). *nvr- See avit-, avın-, etc. Dis. ABB S üpüp See üpgük. Dis. ABC S avüç See adut. D avçı: N.Ag. fr. a:v, “hunter”, s.i.a.m.l.g.w. phonetic changes. Uy£. vırı ff. Bud, avçı “a hunter (of wild game)', included in a list of various kinds of hunters PP r, 8; avçı keyikçı U IV 32, 2: Xak. xı avçı: al-qdniş 'hunter' I 63, 12; 311 (apdr:-); al-sá'id “hunter” 7 425, 19; n.m.e.: KB avçı 1t “hunting dog” 3601: xiv. Müuh. al-şayydd "hunter” avvçı: Mel. 57, 16; Rif. 156: Çağ. xv ff. avvçı şayydd San. 53V. r: Xwar. xiv avçı “hunter” Quib. 16: Kip. xv şayıdd (avvlavvçı, in margin) awci Tuh. 22a. 9. D evçi: N.Ag. fr. e:v with the specific connotation of 'housewife', hence more generally, "wife, woman'; s.i.s.m.L, mainly NE. Uyğ. . ABA virt ff. Bud. er evel “man and woman' (or "husband and wife'?) Kuam. 137, 1:38 (mistranscribed fri in U II 19, 19; zo, zo): Civ. uri oğlanlığ evçi sütl “the milk of a woman who has born a man child" H 7 18, 65; epçi karabaş bözçi '[my] female slave, a weaver' USb. 73, 4; xiv. Chin.-Uyğ. Dict. “voman" epçi R 1 923; Ligeti 134: Xak. (xı the word does not occur; “voman” is ura:ğut or İsşle:r) xiv. Muh. al-mar'a ebçi: Mel. 45, 4; 54, 14; Rif. 138: Kom. xiv “voman, wife' epel; 'domestic servant” evdeki epçi CCI; Gr, Tris. ABC ?D aba:çı: Hap. leg.; morphologically a N.Az. but not semantically connected with aba:/apa:; there is, however, a semantic connection with. aba:kı: q.v. Xak. xı aba:çı: al-cátiim "a bogy'; to frighten a child one says aba:çı: keldi: "the bogy has come” Kaş. I 136. (D) avicga: properly "an old man”, but with some extended meanings; an old word w. ending -fa:, cf. kurtga:; survives vv. extensive phonetic changes in NE only, e.g. Khak. apsax; Sag. apcax; Tuv. aşak, Türkü vir ff. Man. M III 11, iş (i) (ersi:-): Uyğ. vri ff. Bud. avıçğa “old man” PP əş, 7; a.o.0.: Civ. abuçğa do. USp. 32,22: xiv Chin.-Uxg. Dict. “mother, nurse' (sic) abuşka R I 632; Ligeti 125: Xak. xı avıçğa: al-sayx "old man” Kaş. I 143: KB avic£a ditto 1638 a.o.o.: ed avunca ditto Tef. 36: xiv abuşka 'old man, husband' Rbj. R 1 632: Caf. xv ff. abuşka term of address by a wife to her husband, meaning $jZy 'husband' Vel s (quotn.): avuşka same as abusgka, do. 33 (quotn.); abuşğa “husband” San. 27v. 17 (same quotn.): Xwar. xiv abuşka “old man” Nahc. 69, 15; 285, 16 a.o.o.: Kom. xiv “old man” abuşka CCI; abiska CCG; Gr.: Kip. xii al-şayx abiska Hou. 24, 16: xv (al-şayx karı) tea”İladi akbar minhu "and for someone even older' abışka (and kartay) Tuh. zob. 3; haram “advanced old age” (kart and) abışka a?b. 8. F avulğu:n Hap. leg., the -]- suggests an Iranian l.-w. Xak.İxı avulğu:n a/-qaraz "the fruit of Quercus aegilops with which hides are tanned” Kaş. I 157. Dis. ABD S awut Sce adut. S 1 evet Sec yemet. E 2 e:vet is written quite clearly in a verse in Xak. xr teme: 6:vet ışka: körüp turğıl ele: 'look at everything which is hurried, stop and go gently' Kaş. III 26, r, but is prob. a scribal error for €:vek, q.v.; €:vek iş is almost a stock phr. and the only other record of this word seems to be in SW xx Anat. evet SDD 558; ivet do. Soz. uvut 'modesty, shyness'; practically synonymous with uyat, q.v., with which it is often used in Hend.; nearly all modern languages use d 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 51 
     
   
   
     TRIS. ABD 7 uyat in this sense and there does not seem to be any certain survival of this word except in SW xx Anat, but SE Türki uwat .Shato; uvat HS; ubat/uvat Jarríng seems to preserve some memory of it. Sometimes transcribed otut, but uvut is certainly correct, cf. uvtan-, uvutluğ. Türkü vi arı:ğ uvutí yeg [a prov.] 'rodesty in a pure man is better [than pridel” T 37: Uy£. vur ff. Bud. uvut uyat üze çavıkmış 'famed for his modesty' (Hend.) Suv. 489, 12; in. TT V 24, 60-1 uvut uyat (mistranscribed avyat) 'modesty, humility' is one of the seven constituents of piety: Civ. uvut icine sürtser 'if one rubs [the ointment] into the sexdal organs! H 1 78; uvut yanında “in the sexual organs! TT VII 21, 8; uvut yerinde men bolsar “if there is a mole on the sexual organs' do. 37, 4 (USp. 42, 3): Xak. xı uvut a/-hayd 'modesty, shame'; uvut al-da'wa ild ta'ám awt'l-sultán "a summons to a meal or [the presence of] the Sultan' Kaş. I şı (there is no other trace of the second meaning); uwut /ufa 'dialect form” of uvut li'l-hayá I 83; o.0. 1 116, 5; 131, 22 (see utançÇ), 469, 12, same translation: KB uvut bérdi (God) gave [man] modesty' 149; o.o. 1660, 2290-2, 4981, 6474: xin(?) uvut/ugut ditto Tef. 230, 232: Xwar. xiv uvta (metri gratia for uvutta) tur- "to be shamed by (something 4b.) Qutb zor: Kip. xi ort *vegetables' is said also to mean “fire, remedy' and ai-hayá Hou. 8, 18 (presumably read utt): xiv ud al-hayá (also called uyad) /d. 9; Tkm. (uyat and) ut a/l-hayd do. 27: Osm. xiv ff. udyut is common till xvi and ut yerl till xvii, both occur sporadically thereafter 773 I 730; II 934; III 718; IV 790; ud/ut yeri is mentioned in xIX dicts; in xx Anat. ud SDD 1412 occurs and ut is fairly common do. 1422. Dis. V. ABDD abit- Caus. f. of abi:- but with thc same mcaning; pec. to Kaş, Xak, xı ol özin mendin abıttı:. “he hid (katama) himself from me", also used when one “conceals and hides (safara . . , swa hatama) anything Kaş. I 206 (abitur, abitma:k); ol anı: kisi:din abı:ddı: (sic) “he hid and concealed him (satarahu wa axfáhu) from the people' also used of anything that you hide (wdraytahu) from someone else J 216 (abitur, abitma:k, sic); ol er ol ö:zin kişi:din abıtğam “that man has a habit of hiding himself (al-ixtifá") from the people” 7 154, 14. D avıt- Caus. f, of "avı:- "to comfort (e.g. a crying child 7fcc.); to amuse or distract (somone Ace.) ; s.i.m.m.l.g., often in altered forms, e.g. NE Tel. u:t- R I 1702; Tuv. a:d-/a:t-: NW Kar. L. T. uwut- R I 1786, uvut- Kor, 276; see yubat-, Xak, xı KB seve bakti erse sen özni avit if it looks lovingly at you, take comfort” 135; yok erse min edgün avıtğu kerek “if he is not [to blame] you must comfort him with countless kindnesses' 642; 0.0. 628, 3574: xın(?) avut- “to console' Tef. 36: Çağ. xv ff. awut- (spelt) tasalli düdan "to .comfort” Sar. 53r. 4 (quotns.): X war. xtv avit-favut- 'to comfort, console', Qutb 17; oyut- ditto 116; avut- Nahe. 107, 4; Kom. XIV uwut-(?) ditto CCG; Gr, 268: Kip. xiv awut- "to comfort' (şdğala) a crying child" i 25: Osm. xv avit- "to comfort! TTS 11 evdi:- 'to gather, pick up (things Jcc)'; pec. to Xak. and Uyg, where it has been mistranscribed as E idk-, q.v. Xak. xı ol yinçü evdi:di: "he picked up, gathered (lagafa) pearls'; also used of fruit Kaş, / 273 (evdi:r, evdi:me:k): KB (I composed the whole of this book in eighteen months) üdürdüm ağırdım söz evdip tere “1 chose, picked out, and collected what I had to say” 6624. D evdil- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of evdi:-. Xak. xı evdildi: ne:n "the thing was picked up" (ultugita) Kaş. 1 246 (evdilür, evdilme:k). D evdin- Refl. f. of evdi;-; survives only in SW xx Anat. evtin- (of a dying man) 'to pluck at the bedclothes' SD2 563; ividin- do. 802. Xak, xi çol)ö:zipe: yeml:ş evdindi: "he gathered (/taqafa) fruit for himself” Kaş. I 251 (no Aor.; evdinme:k), a.o. II 254, 15. * D uvtan- Refl. Den. V. fr. uvut, “to feel shy, bashful; to be ashamed (of something A4bl.); to be abashed (by something 5L.) ; generally abbreviated to utan- from an early date; survives in NW Kaz. oftan-: SW utan-; syn. w. uyal-, q.v. and uvutlan, Xak. xin(?) At. ani baxşışındın bulit uvtanur “the clouds are abashed by his generosity' 57: xiv Rbg. uftando, R I r784; Muh. istahyd “to feel shy' u:ta:n- (?uwta:n-) Mel. 22, 8; Rif. 103 (in margin ufta:n-); hacala “to be ashamed' 25, 4; al-hayd” u:ta:nmmak (?uwta:nmak) 38, 9; 125; Qağ. xv ff. utğan-(-ıp) utan- Vel. 91 (quotn.); utğan- (spelt) a Refl. V., şarı kardan “to be bashful, ashamed' Saz. 60v. 25 (same quotn.): Oğuz xr ol mendin utandı: istahyd minni "he felt shy of me" Kaş. I 199 (utanu:r, utanma:k); a.o. 7 291 (uvutlan-): Xwar. xur utan- "to be shy, ashamed' ' Ali 55: XIV uvtan- do. Quib. zor ; (there is a word in my heart but) aymakka uftanurmen 'I am shy of saying it” Nahe. 360, 3: Kap. xiv (after uyat) Tkm. ufan- isahyá İd. 27; istahyd utan- Bul, 25r.; xv istahyd (u:yal- and also) ufan- used chiefly by Tkm. Kav. 76, 9; istahya (uyal- and) utan- Tuh. 62, ro. D óptür- Caus. f. of 1 óp-; 'to order (someone Dat., if mentioned) to kiss (someone Acc.) ; survives at least in SW; contrast öpür-. Xak. xı ol anı: öptürdi: amarahu hattd qabbala Şayrahu "he ordered him to kiss him [i.e. a third party? Kag. 1217 (öptürür, öptürme:k): Çağ. xv ff. öpdür- Caus. f. busánidan “to order to kiss” San. 57v. 29. Tris. ABD D evdindi: Hap. leg.; Dev. N. in -di: (Pass.) fr. evdin-. Xak. xı evdindi: ne:n 'gleanings (kaqdta) of anything! Kaş. I 145 (hitherto misread as atrindi:, but -d- is clear in the MS.). 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 52 
     
   
   
     8 TRIS D uvutluğ P. N./A. fr. uvut; “modest, ashamed'; survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. utlu SDD 1423. UyB. vin ff. Man. kamlar uluğı uvutluğ bold: “the chief of the magicians became ashamed' Man.-utg. Frag. qor, 9-10: Bud. Sanskrit /ri 'bashfulness, shame' uvu:tluğ (so spelt, but uvu:tluk intended). TT VIII 74.33: Xak. xi uvutluğ kişi: al-raculu'l-raqiqu'l-hayyi “a: humble, modest person" Kaş, I 146: KB (of the Prophet) uvutlu£ “humble” 43; (of a girl) *modest' 44706; a.o.o.: Xwar. xiv uvutluğ 'modest' Qutb 201: Osm. xiv to xvir utlu 'humble, modest', 778 I 731; II 935; Hİ 718. D uvutsuz Priv. N./A. fr. uvut; 'shameless, immodest', in the early period usually with a sexual connotation; n.o.a.b. Türkü vir ff. Man. uvutsuz biliğ sürüp “having sexual intercourse” M 7 5, 6; a.o. 6, 15: Uyğ. vir ff. Man.-A uvutsuz işiğ sürü umaz 'cannot have sexual intercourse! M 7 16, 19-20; uvu[tsuz billiğ do. 35, 6: Bud. uvutsuz biligin U II 77, 23; 86, 40 (mis-spelt uufsug?); a.0. U İV 38, 143: Xak. xı KB évek erse kilki uvutsuz közl “if his character is hasty and his eye shamcless” 849; (keep away) uvutsuz kişidin "from a shameless man” 1309: xiv. Muh.(?) al-maqih 'shameless, impudent” u:tsiz Rif. 153 (only). D uvutsuzluk A.N. fr. uvutsuz; 'immodesty, shamelessness'; n.o.a.b. Xak. xr KB uvutsuzluk erke idi tepsiz ig 'shamelessness is a completely unparalleled disease in a man” 1662: Osm. xiv utsuzluk “(female) immodesty” TTS I 732. Tris. V. ABDD uvutğar- Hap. leg.: Den. V. in -ğar(Trans.) fr. uvut. Xak. x1 ol meni: uvutfardi: alca'ani /la”l-hayd” hattà hayitu “he put me to shame, so that İ was ashamed” Kaş, 7 zgo (uvutğarur, uvutğarma:k) D uvutlan- Refl. Den. V. fr. uvut, “to be abashed, shy'; apparently survives only in SW xx Anat. udlan-/utlan- SDD 1412, 1423; cf. uvtan-, uyal-, Xak. xı er uvutlandi: istahya'l-racul 'the man felt shy'; the Oğuz say utandı:, leaving out several letters Kaş. I 291 (uvutlanur, uvutlanma:k). Dis. ABG S aba:k See aba:kt:. ; ?D avağ 'coquetry, affectation'; possibly a Dev. N. fr. a:v-, noab. Xak. x1 KB avağlar nece tutsa bérmez özin 'however much [fortune] may plav the coquette, it does not give itself! 403; (you must be frank with your Secretary and Vizier) söz açsa avağları yüdgil kerek 'if you are frank, you must put up with their affectations' 2680: Çağ. xv Zam. avağ is quoted as an equivalent to eda in Tarama Dergisi I 203 and naz in İ 615. ivik “the female gazelle”, the male is VU sukak, q.v.; n.o.a.b.ş it seems possible that ABD the medieval word spelt ayrak and the like is a misrcading of this word, and accordingly the occurrences are listed here, but this could be a Dev. N. fr. ayır- (adir-) in the sense of "an animal with branching horns', the translations of it are somewhat different. Xak. xr 1vik al-zabya "the female gazelle, which haunts hot places and deserts” Keş, I 67; o.0. 239, 17 (udlas-); 265, 17 (avlat-): KB sukak yàá ivik 5374: XIV. Muh.(?) al-dazál "gazelle" 1:wuk Rif. 175; (Mel. 72, 8 has arğalı:, a Mong. L-w. meaning mountain sheep): Çağ. xv Zam. Y:vuk 'gazelle', quoted in IHom., p. 59 s.v. aitcuk: xv ff, ayrak/ayrağ (sic, spelt) buüz-i-hühi nar "the male mountain goat! and some say that it is an animal like the mardl deer, which has twisted (?içida) horns San. 57r. 16: Xwar. xiv i1vik/ivuk “(female?) gazelle” Qutb 207; bir tişi 1vuk “a female gazcle' Nahe. 295, 12: Kip. xmi al-ğazal (6lik, in) Tkm. rvuk (vocalized with damma over yd) Hou. 11, 6; habgu'l-cabal 'mountain sheep ayrak (unvocalized, ?read İsvuk) do. ir, 8: xiv al-fazál (keyik, also called) 1i:wig(Kk) (sic, but vocalized aytwug) Bul. ro, 7: Osm. xvi ff. ayrik (so transcribed) occurs in two XVI and one xvitI-XIX dicts. translating Ar. and Pe, words for 'antelope' and "wild sheep? 7 TS 77 84; III sa. S uvak See uvşak. Tris. ABĞ aba:kı: an unusually shaped word but cf. aba:çı:, q.v.; as such Hap. leg., but survives as abak and the like as shown below and in NW Kar. T abax 'idol' Kom, 150; Krim. abak dirto, R I 621 (quotns.): SW xx Anat. apak “inn” Tarama Dergisi I 176 (cin), abak 'ghoul', do. 1 259 (gül), opak “inn” SDD 1092. Xak. xı aba:kı: a-xayálu'llati tunşab fi'l-mabágil tatcaggiya(n) 'ani'l-'ayn "a figure put up in kitchen gardens to avert the evil eye” Kaş. I 136: Kip. xin (in a list of things connected with women, clothing, etc.) al-iu'ba “doll?” aba:k Hor. 18, 6: xv şaxş 'shape, figure, etc. (sin/) abak Tuh. 21a. 6 (with a sıde-note saying that sin can cast a shadow (in 22b. 5 it translates samam 'idol' but abak cannot); şüra “picture” abak 22b. s. Dis. EBG PU epek Hap. leg.; but there are similar NW Kaz. childish words epey/epi in R 7 919 and İspi do. 1566; no doubt a mispronunciation of epmek. Xak. xi children call *'bread' (al-xubz) epek Kaş. 1 68. D e:ve:k N/A.Ac. fr. éiv-; “hurry, hurrying, in a hurry”, survives in NE Kaç., Koib., Sag. ébek “light, swift, daring" R 7 927; Khak. Íbek (of a horse) 'swift' and in Kaç. (of a man) punctual, attentive, Xak. xı éve:k al-raculu'l-'acil 'a man in a hurry! Kag. I 122; é:vek “acala 'hurry! J 77, 10; n.o.o. usually spelt é:vek; sce 2 évet: K B évek 'hasty' 849 (uvutsuz); 1997: xii(?) évek 'hurry' Tef. 68: 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 53 
     
   
   
     TRIS. V. EBG 9 Xwar. xiv andın évekrek işim bar “1 have something more urgent than that to do” Nahc. 436, 3: &amp;0.0.: Osm. xiv-xvi evek 'hasty, urgent! in several texts 7 7S 7 396; III 389; IV 444. S ibik/übük See üpgük. öpke: originally in a concrete sense "lung”ş by extension 'anger' an emotion supposed to originate in the lungs; originally prob. ópke: but övke: (?öfke:) occurs quite early, and a Sec. f. öyke: as early as xili, in one form or another s.i.a.m.l.g. Üyğ. viri ff. Man. öpke biliğ 'anger' 77” II 16, 3s(?) and 46; 17, 54; öpke nızbanı “the passion of anger do. 17, 73, and 81; övke nızvanı TT HI 29: Bud. (birds peck his entrails and) öpkesin “his lungs” Ü III 79, 4-—Ópke 'anger' U 1] 25, r, övke 'anger' U IJ 85, 25; Övke könül öritmeyük “not allowing angry thoughts to arise' U III 42, 12; 2.0.0.: Civ. tevenin övkesin “the lungs of a camel' H I 60; öpke:si "his lungs” TT VII Li: Xak. xı öpke: a/-r”a "lung'; öpke: a/-ğayz 'anger', so called because anger is generated in the lungs, and the two are closely connected Kaş. I 128; l 158, etc. (ürül-); 164 (0g-); 176 (ógür-); 233 (öçrüş-), IJI 392 (tapiz-); 428 (amurt-); öfkesinde: T ış (ürül-): KB öfke (so spelt in Fergana MS.) “anger” 322, 281: xiv Müh. al-r”a öpke: (ba) fuf. 141: Çağ. xv ff. öpke (so spelt) sus "lung' San. ş8r. 27; öfke qahr wa xişm 'rage, fury'; also spelt öyke 77r. 11; öyke (spelt) "rage, fury' 92v. 16: Xwar. xiv evke/öfke/övke "anger” Qutb 23, 121, 125: Kip. xui al-r”a öyke:, Tikm. öyken Hou. 21, 14 (neither vocalized): xiv. Öpke: (94) al-ri'a İd. 7: xv al-rPa öfke: Kav. 61, 10; al-r”a öpke (bd) in margin öyken Tuh. 11b. 8: Osm. xiv ff. óyke 'anger'; öyken 'lung' c.i.a.p. 7TS I 570; II 759, 760; III 569, 570; IV 632. üpgük the earliest of several early onomatopoeic names for this bird; the others are assembled below; some s.i.s.m.l., occasionally with the extended meaning in Çağ. Türkü vrit ff. kara: üpgü:k "the black hoopoe' IrkB 21: Uyğ. vini ff. Civ. üpüp kuşnun süpükin “the bones of a hoopoe” TT VII 23, 5: Xak. xı üpüp al-/tudhud 'hoopoe'; dialect form of (ufa fi) üpgük Kaş. 1 78; Cigll xı üpgük al-hudhud Kaş. 1 ııo: xiv Muh. hudhud übü:k (not vocalized) Mel. 73, 4 (v-L. ibi:k), Rif. rz6: Çağ. xv ff. übük “the crest' (fdc) on the heads of such birds as the cock and the hoopoe (Audhud), and metaph. *hoopoe'; the latter is also called püpük and püpüş and, in Rmi, ibik, übük kuşı 'hoopoe' in Pe. şünasar San. s8v. 2: Kip. xv Audhud übük Tuh. 37b. ro: Osm. xv ff. ibik/ibük c.i.a.p. TTS İl s11; III 351; IV 405. S ipgin See yipgin. Dis. V. EBGPU evük- hitherto transcribed bük-; occurs only iri Türkü vur ff. Yen, and O, Kir, ix ff. where it is very common. With one dubious exception the only known form is evükmedim in a standard formula in funerary inscriptions. ]t takes the Dat. and is used in contrast to adril- “to be separated from”, e.g. (xanimka:) élimke: evükmedim kuyda: kunçuyımka: ağrıltım Mal, 8, 1-2, which must mean something like 'I could not stay with my xar and realms; 1 have been separated from my wife in the women's quarters'. "The object of adril- is nearly always a person, wife, son, etc., that of evük- more often an institution, ruler, realm, and the like. Radloff (R V 1876) is prob. right in suggesting that it should be transcribed evük-; if so it can be taken as a Den. V. in -ük- (Intrans.) from e:v meaning “to reside, stay”. Tris. EBG E ebegü 'rib', error for eye:ğü. D öpkeçi: (etc.) N.Ag. fr. öpke:, 'angry, bad tempered' ; s.i.s.m.l. Uyğ. vit ff. Bud. övkeçi Kuan. 64; Civ. terk öpkeçi 'quicktempered' TT VH v7, 23. D éveklik A.N. fr. €:ve:k, 'urgency, (undue) hurry; n.o.a.b. Xak. xr eveklik al-'acala fi l-umür "urgeney in affairs! Kaş. I 153: KB eveklik kisike isiz "undue hurry in a man is a vice” 629; o.o. 1996, 2078 (similar). D öpkeliğ (etc.) P.N./A. fr. ópke:; usually *angty, bad tempered'; s.i.s.m.l.: Xak. xi KB öfkeliğ “bad tempered' 342, 780, 85o: Çağ. xv ff. ópkelig kindya az diláwar "a metaphor for bold, bellicose! Sam. s8r. 27; öykeliğ xaşmndh wa gahrálüd *furious, enraged' 92v. 17: Xwar. xiv (the envious man) menim fadli:mka övkeliğ turur “is hostile to My” grace' Nah. 414, 4. Tris. V. EBGD ópkele:- (etc.) Den. V. fr. ópke: in both meanings; (1) (?only Xak.) 'to wound in the lung'; (2) “to be angry (with someone Dat. or Abi.) , s.ís.m.l in various forms. Türkü vir ff. oğli: öğinte: kanı:nta: övkele:pen “a son, being angry with his mother and father" IrkB ş8: Üyğ. vi fi. Bud. yérke teprike .. yörinür övkileyür (sic) he is disgusted and angry with earth, heaven ...” TT VI 1718; óvkelegülük Sumo. 228, rs (yérin-): Xak. xı ol apar ópkeledi: ra'àhu wa huma an yadrib "alda ri'atihi "he struck him in the lung' (öpkele:r, öpkele:me:k), ol andın öpkl:le:di: "arada "anhu limd ğadiba "he shunned him because he was angry (öpkidle:r, öpki:le:me:k) Kaş. I 317 (the difference in spelling seems deliberate but is not confirmed elsewhere except once in Uyğ.): xiv Röğ. öpkele- “to be angry, R I 1310; Muh.(?) ğadiba öpke:le:- (bd) Rif. 113 (only; vil. ópke:len-): Xwar. xiv efkele-/öfkele- “to be angry” Qutb 19, 121 (also evkelen-/öfkelen-): Kom. “to be angry” öpkele- CCI; Gr. D öpüğse- Hap. leg.; Desid. Den. V. fr. a N,Ac, of 1 öp-, cf. öpse:-. Uyğ. vin fi, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 54 
     
   
   
     10 TRIS. V. EBGMan. öz amrakimin öpüğseyürmen "TI wish to kiss my own beloved! M 1I 8, 10 (ii). Dis. ABL D evlig P.N./A. fr. e:v; lit. possessing (one's own) dwelling', usually “married”, applied both to men ("the head of the household") and women ('living at home); s.i.a.m.lg.; in NE somewhat distorted. Xak. xı evligni: rabbu'l-bayt “the master of the house” 7 106, 1; II 176, 27; evlüg (sic) al-xateca "the woman of the house” 7 251, 9; n.m.e.: K B aya evliğ er sak 'householder, beware! 164; (there are twelve signs of the Zodiac) kayu iki evlig kayu birke én 'some occupy two celestial mansions (i.e. Ar. 5ayt), some have the width of one" 138; kalı evlig almak tilese özün “f you wish to take a wife' 4475: xin(?) İmrün evlüği “the wife of Imrán' Tef. 68: xiv Rbg. evliğ 'wife' Tarama Dergisi I 84x (s.v. zetce): Muh.. al-muta'ahhil “married” ewll:g Rif. 153: Çağ. xv ff. üylük (^with -k”) ev/ü, in the sense of 'householder' (ketxudàá) Vel. 122 (quotn.): üylük (spelt) xdmwári “family, household! San. 92v. 18 (same quotn.; perhaps here really. the A.N. in -1ik): Kip. xit ai-muta'ahhil (PU) i:lü: (so spelt, error either for evlü: or üylü:) Hou. 25, 4: xiv evvlü: (with front vowels!) al-mutazawtwac sca ma"nahu dü l-bayt 'married', literally 'house-owner' Id. 25. PU abla:n (unvocalized) Hap. leg. Xak. xı dutcaybba min. cinsi l-curdán "a small animal of the rat family” Kaş. 7 120. Dis. V. ABLD é:vil- Hap. leg.?; Pass. f. of 6:v- used impersonally with the logical subject in the Dat. Xak, xı r:gka: évildl 'ucila HH-amr “the affair was hurried” Kaş. 7 271 (é:vllür, é:vllme:k). D opul- See uvul-, D uvul- Pass. f. of uv-; “to be crushed, broken into small pieces'; s.ia.m.lg., usually as uval-fuwal-/ufal-, but Osm., as well as ufal-, has oğul- (pronounced orzeud-, ovul-) "to be rubbed, kneaded', which seems to be a survival of this word. “The rare Türkü word hitherto transcribed opul- müght be a Pass. f. of o:p-, but the meaning “to be swallowed" is awkward, and it is perhaps likelier that it should be transcribed uful- and taken as a Sec. f. of this word, "Türkü vr (gap) binip oplayu: tegip sança: idıp at ufulu:(?) ünti: yana: agitrp (gap) "he mounted . . . and attacked, panting with fury and plying his lance; his horse was crushed(?); he got up, making it stand up again” 7x. 19; (gap) ülügl: ança: ermiş erinç yağı:ka: yalpu:s oplayu: teğip ufulu: kirip özi: kişğa: kerğek bulti: "his fate was, it seems, this; panting with fury and attacking the enemy all alone, entering (the battle) and being crushed, he met his end at an enrly age' Ix. aş: Xak. xı uvuldi; ne: “the thing was crushed' (futta) Kaş, 1 197 (uvulur, uvulm&amp;a;k): Kip. xv gugrya Hayhi "to faint' uvul-, "Tkm. ugul- Tul. 27a. 11 (cf. uvun-). Osm. xvi (s.v. ovundu) uvulan nesne 'something which is crushed' 7TS IV 615. ?S ópel- Sce öpül-. D üpül- Pass. f. of 2 üp- (sce 0:p-); the only modern form seems to be NW Kaz. ubil- “to be sucked in, swallowed; to collapsc, subside'. Uy£f. vin ff. Man-A (sinful human beings in the long cycle of rebirths) otça öpelür (sic) opocn(?) kinfenürler tegzinürler "are swallowed [by the earth] like grass and crushed like white face powder(?) and go round and round! TT II 17, 77-9: Xak. xı sü:t öpüldi: husivati'l-maraqa — wa — fayruhu “the milk [Kag., in error, 'broth', etc.) was sipped” Kaş. I 193 (0pülür, ópülme:k). D 1 avla:- Den. V. fr. a:v, "to hunt (wild game); s.i.a.m.l.g., with some phonetic changes. Türkü vrir av avlasar 'when he hunted wild gamc' Ix. 9: Uy&amp;. vri ff. Bud. avlap ölürdi "he hunted and killed” (innumerable wild animals) U IV 34, 57: Xak. xı beg av avla:dı: “the beg hunted wild game” (şdda . . . al-şayd) Kaş. 1 287 (avla:r, avla:ma:k): xiv Muh. iştdda "to hunt n:wla:- Mel. 22, iy, Rif. 103: Çağ. xv ff. awla:- (spelt) (r) p&amp;dr kardan "to hunt (and (2) mdlidan, in Arabic dalaka, "to rub, polish', hardly to be regarded as a translation of 2 avla:-; inexplicable) Sam. szr. 21: Xwar. xiv avla- "to hunt! Qutb 16; MN 271: Kip. xir iştada müna"l-şayd awla:- Hou. 34, 4; şdada mina'l-sayd awla:- (vocalized 1:a:-) do. AT, I1: Xiv (awlu: 'hunting grounds', the verb derived from it is) avvla- yyrdda İd. 25: xv şüda awla- Tuh. 22b. 8: Osm. xiv avla- "ta hunt' (actually "to fish”) TTS I 53. D 2 avla:- “to crowd round (someone Dat.), to surround'; ava: the Ger, of a:v-, q.v., is used almost as an Adv. and this scems to be an abbreviated form of ava:la:-, a Den. V. fr. that word noted only in Kaş. Survives only (?) in NE Khak. abia- “to attack (someone) in large numbers; to surround (someone or something). Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. (then the demons, seeing King Çastana...)teğirmileyü avlap 'milling about and crowding round him' U IV 8, 19-20; same phr. do. 18, 192: Xak. xı anip tegre: kişi: ava:la:dı: “the people surrounded him (ğafa hasolaktw); this word is used only of disorderly behaviour, in other cases the word used is a:vdı: Kaş, / 310 (ava:Ja:r, ava:la:ma:k), anar kişi: avla:di: "the people crowded round him” (izdahama 'alayhi) 1 285 (avla:r, avla:ma:k): Osm. xvi slm ü zerle kemer avlayıp "wrapping his belt round with silver and gold" TTS 7I 69.D evle:- Den. V. fr. €:V, survives in one form or another in NE Küer. R I 921; SE Türki Shaw 29; NC Kir., but usually meaning “to live in a house; to marry! ; the usual modern word for the meaning in Uyg. is evlendir-. Uy£. 1x (I had seven younger brothers, three sons and three daughters) evledim bağladım 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 55 
     
   
   
     DIS. ABM 11 *J installed (my brothers and sons) in dwellings of their own and married (my daughters) into (other) clans” Suci 6 (translation from Grenbech, “The Turkish System of Kinship', Studia Ortentalta ... . Johanni Pedersen dicata, Munksgaard, 1953). PU opla:- Den. V. fr. a word which survives in NC Kir. op “a sigh' and SW Osm. uffu:f *an expression of impatience or disdain; an onomatopocic for a puff of breath ” Redhouse 258; survives in Osm. ufla- “to ejaculate uf” do. 259. "Türkü vri oplayu: teğ- “to attack panting with fury' is a stock phr. in descriptions of battles, /x. 19 and 24 (see uvul-) o.o. Ix. 10, ir, (15); E E 32, 365 N 3, (4), s. VUD üple:- Den. V. fr. 2 *üp, which seems to be identical with NE Tuv. üp, Pal. 54, citing the phr. dayın üvü 'trophies (of an enemy), the verb itself survives in "Tuv. üpte- “to pillage'. Xak. xr ol ani tava:rın üple:dl: “he stole (rakaba) his property! Kaş. I 284 (üple:r, üple:me:k). D avlat- Caus. f. of 1 avla-:; 'to order (someone Dat.) to hunt (something 4ce.?: Xak. xi ol maya: 1vik avlattı: “he ordered me to hunt (aşddani) the gazelle (etc.)' Kaş. I 265 (avlatur, avlatma:k): Çağ. xv ff. awlatCaus. f.; (1) şikdr farmüdan “to order to hunt'; (and (2) möldnidan 'to order to rub”, cf. 1 avla:-) San. s2v. 14. VUD üplet- Caus. f. of üple:- ; survives in NE Tuv. üplet- 'to (let oneself) be pillaged'. Xak. xı ol anip tava:rın üplettl; anhaba málahu "he ordered that his property should be stolen” Kaş. I 264. D avlan- Refl. f. of 1 avla:-; s.i.s.m.l,, usually in a Pass. sense. Xak. xı er ó:zipe a:vlandı: (sic) “the man busied himself with hunting for himself! (b?l-ispyád Hi-nafsihi) Kaş, 1 298 (a:vlanur, a:vlanma:k): Çağ. xv ff. awlan- Refl, f.; şikdr şudan "to he hunted' San. 52v. 15. D evlen- Refl. f. of evle:- lit. 'to get a dwelling of one's own', normally (of a man) “to get married', in this sense s.i.a.m.l.g.: the alternative translation is pec. to Kaş., in modern languages “to have a halo' is normally a£illan(not noted earlier than xv ff. Çağ.). Xak. xı ay evlendi: fttaxada” l-qamar dára 'the moon got a halo'; and one says ol bu evni: evlendl: “he got this house as a residence (maskan), and reckoned himself as one of the community of residents! (mit cumla gátinihi) Kaş. I 259 (evlenür, evlenme:k), nay kopup (vocalized kapup) evlenüp “the moon rose in a halo” 7 258, 1: xiv Muh. tazawtwaca (of a man) “to pet married” ewlen- Mel. 24, 5; 6:vvlen- Rif. 106: Çağ. xv ff. üylen- (spelt) “to be a householder! (şd)/5-f xana), and metaph. an expression for 'to take a wife, get married' (zan giriftan wa laxawwuc hardan) San. g1v. 15 (quotns.): Kıp. xiv ewlen- /azazewaca (s.v. evili:) /Z. 25: xv razawwaca üylen-: Tkm. ewlen- Tw. gb, 8. D avlaş- Co-op. f. of 2 avla:-; Hap. leg.?; the Co-op. f. of 1 avla:- is noted only in Çağ.: Xak. xı kişi: avlaşdı: "the people crowded together round (fadahama 'alá) something” Kaş. I 24o (avlaşu:r, avlaşma:k). D evleş- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of evle:-. Xak. xı beg canın) birle: evlesti: oyna:p (translated) “the beg gambled with him (/d'abahu) and made the stake (al-xatar) between them a dwelling place (baytY ; followed by a note on this use of the Recip. f. Kaş. I 240 (evleşü:r, evleşme:k, mis-spelt -ma:8). VUD üpleş- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of üple:-. Xak. xı bo:dunzbi;r? ekindi: tava:rın üpleşdi: "the people pillaged (ağdra) one another”s property' Kaş. 7 238 (üpleşür, üpleşme:k). Tris. ABL aba:lı: I ap. leg., but the kind of word often omitted from dicts. Xak. xr aba:zlı: harf yaqdl 'inda'l-istiglál bi'l-say' "an exclamation used to disparage a thing” Kaş. I 137. avilku: pec. to Kag.; like tavilku: morphologically inexplicable and prob. a l.-w. Xak. avilku: gacaru'l-qurm "the qurm tree' (species uncertain); it has a red fruit. which is used to colour futmaç (q.v.); its bark is used to treat ophthalmia and dye cloth Xaş. I 489; a.o. III 146 (2 ka:t). Tris. V. ABLD ava:la:- See 2 avla:-. Dis. ABM PU apamy/apan “if”, used with the Conditional mood. "The earlier form is fairly common in Uyg., the later is not traceable after XIV. In the early period the -sar form was not always strictly Conditional, and this word perhaps became superfluous and fell into disuse when its usage became more restricted; the word was sometimes used by itself and sometimes followed by birök, Von Le Coq in Turan, 1918, p. 457 stated, without giving a reference, that F. W. K. Müller described this Word as an “Aramaeo-Sogdian ideogram'; this is complete nonsense, apparently based on a misunderstanding of the Sogdian 'ideogram' ”P "and”, sometimes followed by zy, which was formerly read xy, Uyğ. viri ff. Man. apam birök . . . kodmasar “if he had ceased (to preach, etc.) TT 11164-5: Bud. apam birök bu etózümln titsermen “if I renounce this body of mine" Sut. 614, 1-2; the word is common in Suv. see T'T I 29, note 198: Civ. apam bir adakin sısar “if he breaks one of his legs' TT I 198; apam (by itself) U.Sp. ör, 13; 98, 19, etc.; apam birök do. ış, 13; 57, 16 etc.: Xak. xi apap a conjunction (Rharf) meaning lato *if'; one says apap sen barsa:sen “if you go” Kaş. I 133; 0.0. 7 399, 22; II 209, zo: KB apap iki ajun kolur erse sen 'if you desire the two worlds! 226; o.o. 8gs, etc.: xi1(?) 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 56 
     
   
   
     12 DIS. ABM KBVP apay dostup erse 'even if he is your friend” 21: xiv. Róg, apap “if” R I 623 (no quotns.). VUD öpüm Hap. leg.; the translation suggests this rather than opum; N.S.À. fr. 2 öp(op-) Xak. xr bir öpüm mün /asma min maraqa “a sip of soup” Kaş. 7 75. ?8 epmek “brcad",, cf. etmek the older, and prob. the original, form; in some modern languages there is a third form ekmek; cf. also epek; survives only(?) in SW Az. epmek/ eppek R 17 925. Yağma, Tuxsi, and some Oğuz and Kip. xi epmek af-xubz 'bread' Kag. I 101. Tris. ABM PUF abamu 'endless, everlasting'; no doubt a L.-w. (Indo-European?) Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. mentioned in Z/iüen-ts. Briefe 36, note r9go, as occurring in unpublished parts of that text, translating Chinese virg, same meaning (Giles 13,504), and in such phr. as abamu kalpka tegi "to endless ages”, PUDF abamuluğ Hap. leg.?; P.N./A. fr. abamu. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud, buyanlığ bilge biliğliğ yiviğin beş tağlarka menzeti abamuluğ keç kılzun “may he make a provision of virtue and vvisdom everlasting and enduring like the five mountains" Füen-ts. 1990. Dis. ABN apag See apam. VUF a:wan (zedme unvocalized). Sayram xi (under uvut) 'similarly a:wan “a: tree" (al-şacara) in the language of Sayram, that is Tspicab' (is also pronounced a:wan). Ka. I 84. 4. evin properly. 'secd, grain', less often "berry, fruit'; the curious idiom vvhereby it is used in Uvg. Bud. as a numerative is prob. due to over-literal translation; Pe. daha, same meaning is also so used. Survives in NE Tel, ebin 'kernel' R7 931 and SW xx Anat. efin "juniper berry! SDD soz, evin 'seed', etc. do. 598. Türkü vri ff. evintin “from the berries! (?) İrkB 8 (see in, might be evintin "from its house): Uyğ. vnurff. Man.-A kalti uruğ evin . . . örürçe 'just as a grain or seed springs up" (in fertile ground) M 1 17, 15: Bud. buğday evininçe “the size of a grain of wheat" Pfahl. 6, 6 (on this passage see Clauson, "Turkish Ghost Words', RAS, 1955, p. 134); tü evini sayu “each individual hair” TT V ız 117 (for 0.0. see note thereon, p. 19); bir evin tüsine “a single one of his hairs 'U TV 20, 259: Civ. evini (misread ecfsi) “her seed' (ie. foctus) H 1 22; üc tört evin yarma moncuk mürç “three or four split peppercorns” do. 149: Xak. xı evin o/-habb 'sced' Kaş. İ 77, ewin 'dialect form of evin” 7 84, 5: KB apa ucmiak içre yedi kör evin “our ancestor (i.e. Adam) eat the secd (i.e. fruit) in paradise” 3522: (Xwnr, xiv (a net to catch birds is useless) evünsüz 'without seed in it" Quib 17): Osm. xv evin suyu “semen” TT'S HI 260 (s.v. erlik); (of a plant) evin bağla- “o form secd' IV. 316. D avınç N.Àc. in -ç fr. avin-, "friendliness, kindliness'; survives in NW Kar. LL. uvants; 'T. uvunç R 7 1786, Kow. 276; hecame a L-w. in Persian as ttoanc (Steingass 122), and thence back into Osm. as fiveng, described as a Persian L-w. (Redhouse 271); cf. avingu:. Xak, avinc al-nucdnasa b?l-şay” 'friendliness, kindness about something! Kaş. / 132 (and see avın-), IH 449 (duplicate entry): KB (may his rule continuc) sevinçin avınçın küvençin “in happiness, kindliness, and pride” 1235 0.0. 037 (similar) 1424, 1849, 3629: xiv Muh.(?) al-mu'dnasa. avınç “in "'urkestan', awinc “in our country! Rif. 79 (only); munis avinca: (sic) do. 148. EF avant Sce anvant, Dis. V. ABND abin- Hap. leg., Refl. f. of abr-; misvocalized uban-. Xak. xi (ol»ruendin abindi: ixtafd minni “he hid himself from me" Kaş, 7 198 (abınu:r, abinma:k). D avın- Refi. f. of *avi:-; “to enjoy oneself, be happy” ; to be friendly, kind (to someone Dat.); to take pleasure in (something Dat.)' ; s.i.m.m.l. g. with phonetic changes, Xak. xr "ol maha: avindi: ista'nasa bi “he was friendly, kind to me” Kaş. / 202 (avinu:r, avinma:k); (after avınç) same phr. translated dmasa bi, same meaning 7 132, 22; badram kilip avnalım Het us hold a festival and enjoy ourselves” (iata'allal) I 263, ra: KB avin- is common; “to enjoy oncself” 49, 95, 1427 (avınçu:), 2694 a,0.0.ş "to take pleasure in (something Dat.) 1424, 2093 (see Oyun): a.o.o.: xit (?) Tef. anar avundi “vas friendly to him” 36: xiv Ro. cifti birle avuntp *enjoying himself with his wife" R17o: Çağ. xv ff. awun- fasalli yaftan "to find comfort! and the like San. 52v. 17 (quotns.): Xwar. xv avin- “to be comforted, consoled' Qutb 17: Osm. xiv avin- “to take comfort' TTS II 68. D évin- Refl. f. of é:v-; pec. to KB? Xak. KB (prefer quiet deliberation in all things) mağar tá'at erse évingil yügür "but if you receive an order, hurry and run' 1999. D uvun- Refl, f. of uv-; survives in fewer modern languages than uvsu/- with the same phonetic changes, most having uvan-/ufan-, but SW Osm. has both that form and oğunin different meanings; the first is usually used in a Pass. sense 'to be crushed, broken into small pieces', the second for “to faint', i.e. feel oneself to be crushed; the meaning in Kaş, is not traceable elsewhere, Xak. xi ol özİye: etme:k uvundi: "he occupied himself. with crumbling (bi-fatt) bread for himself'; and one says ol eligin uvundi: faraka yadayhi "he wrung his hands,, because of a calamity which had overtaken him or because af distressing 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 57 
     
   
   
     DIS news or pain" Kaş.İ zoə (uvunur, uvunma:k), İ/ ı4? (tevin-): xın(?) Tef. uvunur iki ayasın “he wrings his hands' 230; Xvvar, xi VU ufun- “to faint “İZ 56: Kip. xiv uğun- ujmiya 'alayhi "to faint! İd. 26: xv güşiya 'alayhi "to faint', in margin uğunTuh. 2725. tf (see uvul-); imqajafa "to be broken, split", in margin uwatn- do, 6a. 8 (sce kertil-); tafattata "to be erushed”, in margin uwan- do. 10a. 3 (these three side-notes prob. in a SW hand): Osm. xiv-xvi uvan- "to be broken up, crushed; to disintegrate” TTS I 732; II 938; III 720; IV 792; ufan- do. till xix 1 712, III 697; and uğyn- (once in xv uvun-) "to faint, lose consciousness' till xix 7 716; 1I 921; İİİ 707; IV 777; xviii uwan(spelt) in Arm, bi-hiss şudan 'to be unconscious' San. 89r. 15. D öpün- HRefl. f. of 2 öp- (o:p-), n.o.a,b. Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A kalti arslan óküzüg bórl koynka ópünü kelirce 'just as a lion comes to swallow up an ox or a wolf a sheep' M HI 11, 8-16 (i) (thus in MS. but obviously both objects should be in the same case, Acc. (with öpün-) or Dat. (with kel-)): Xak. xı ol mü:n ópündi: “he pretended to sip (yahisi?) the soup, without actually sipping it” Kaş. 7 198 (öpünür, öpünme:k). Tris. ABN D avınçu: Dev. N. in -çu: (Intrans.) fr. avin-, lit, 'something which gives pleasure”, but normally 'concubine'; n.o.a.b. Türkü vir ff. avi;ngu: xatu:n bolzu:n “may the concubine become a queen' J[rkB 38: Xak. xr avınçu: ne: al-gay u'lladi uta'allal bihi wa yusta'nas "a thing which gives enjoyment and pleasurc'; hence “concübines” (al-cawàri) are called avınçu: Kaş, I 134: KB avingu sevüğler bile avnur öz '(now) he enjoys himself with the Jove of a concubine! (soon he will be lying flat hidden beneath the ground) 1427: X war. xiy kópül avunçası “the cornfort of his heart" Qutb 16, a.o.c. D evinlig P.N./A. fr. evin, survives in SW xx Anat. evinli (crops) “in which the seeds have formed' SDD $9. UyB. vin ff. Bud. admagunup korığlığ evinliğ, uzuntonluğka yaztım yanıltım erser üf I have sinned against another man"s private pregnant woman' A, von le Cog CAuastuarnift (AKPAVV, 1911) 27, 8-9. Dis. ABR D evre: Ger. ín -e: of evir-; occasionally used as an Adv. meaning "again, in return”, and the like; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı K.B (whatever a man plants in the ground comes up) neğü bérse evre anı ok alır *whatever he gives he receives back” 1394; 0.0. 638: xiu(?) 7ef. evre (occasionally spelt ebre) is common, translating Ar. fa- 'then, again' and in such phr. as evre yan- “to turn back", evre çık- “to come back out” 67, 68. . ABR 13 PU? D opri: prob. Dev, N. in -1: fr, “opur-, Caus. f. of o:p- ; 'hollow, valley', and the like. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. virt ff. Man.-A M 111 29, 10—11 (sışlığ): Xak. xi opra: al-hufra "a hollow' Kaş. 1 125; İİİ 134 (kod): KB (Thou hast created all things) yazı tağ teniz kötki opri yérig 'plains, mountains, seas (or lakes?), high ground and valleys' zr, yazı ta:ğ kit opri 'plains, mountains, high ground, and vallevs' 69, 96. S avurt Sec adurt. D opra:k N./A.S. fr. opra:-, q.v.; originally 'shabby, ragged', esp. of clothing; hence later 'clothing' in general; also anything “old, disintegrated; survives in SC, NW, and SW in several forms hoth with back and front vowels. Xak. xi opra:k al-tawbu'l-xalaq wa gayruhu 'shabby clothing, etc”, hence opra:k to:n 'shabby clothing! Keş. I 118; oprak yasik "a shabby bow-case' IJ] 16, 25; nece:me: obrak kedük erse: 'however shabby a felt cap (sizr) may he” 7/1 38, 21: KB todur aç yalıpnı ham oprak bütür “feed the hungry and clothe the naked' 3923; bütür oprakığ 4527: xıu(?) At. yarağ bulsan oprak yalınnl bütür “if you find an opportunity, clothe the naked' 530: Çağ. xv ff. eprik ("vith -p-”) Ruhna wa mundaris "old, worn-out'; and metaph. ddam-t bir-t mustrn "an old man" San, 27v. 12; ofrağ (spelt) raxt tva libds 'clothing' San. 77r. 10 (quotn.) Kip. xiv aprak (34, so vocalized) al-gumöş "linen” or “rubbish”? 1d. 7 (the word has both meanings): xv qumdş aprak (bá) wa Autca'l-xalaq (and şüprek) Tuh. 298. 10 (sce çüprek): Osm. xv-xvi yıprak 'shabby' TTS II 1o51; V 884. S ovruğ See oğruğ. S evrek See órdek. ?E evrik Error? for 1 irig. PUD iprük Hap. leg., so vocalized, but prima facie Dev. N. in -ük (Pass.) fr. ópür-, to be read öprük., Xak. xr iprük "a mixture of curdled and fresh milk which is drunk; it is a laxative (dazod^ mushil) for anyone who has been constipated by drinking sour milk or butter milk” Kaş. I tor. D evren presumably Dev. N. fr. evir-, if so, the general connotation is of something which revolves; hence 'the firmament! which was tegarded as a revolving dome; and thence in Kaş. "a dome-shaped oven'; in NW, SW it was used for 'snake', presumably because it coils its body; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı evren şay” yubná “ala hVa kür”l-hadddad yuxbaz fihi "a thing built in the shape of a blacksrnith's oven in which bread is baked” Kaş, ] 109: KB yarattı kör evren tuct evrülür '(God) created the firmament which revolves continuously' 126; o.o. 92, 119, 344, 1642, etc.: xiv. Muh.. al-falak “the frmament ewren (mis-spelt ütcəern)fevren (mis-spelt aran) Mel. 78, 16; evre:n (mis-spelt euz:en) Rif. 183: 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 58 
     
   
   
     14 DIS. ABR Kip. xır al-tu'bàn 'adder' ewre:n (unvocalized) Hou. r1, 17: Osm. xiv ff. evren "large snake, dragon'; n.a.p. TTS I 285; II 408; II 272; İV 316. Dis. V. ABRevir- basically "to turn (something Zcc.)', with various special applications like 'to turn (a wheel /4cc.); to overturn (a cup Zec.); to turn (the face, /Acc., towards someone, Dat., or away from someone, 152), and, in the early period, "to translate (something, .dec., from one language, Ab, into another, -ça/-çe)". S.i.a.im.l.g., sometimes in forms so distorted that thev are hard to distinguish from modern forms of eglr-. Often associated, and syn., vv. çevür- and tevür-, q.v.; in Ar, script easily confused vv. 1 ör- which has a similar meaning. Türkü vin (we travelled for ten days) yantakı: tog evirü: 'skirting the spurs on the side (of the mountain)! T 26 köğmen yışığ evlrü: 'skirting the Kógmen mountain forest” T 28: Uyğ. vit ff. Bud. nom tilgenin evirgey (v.l. tevirgey) "he will turn the wheel of the lav” TT VI 455; (the acts of the body, the mind, and the tongue) ajunlar berü evirdeçi 'which cause the (various) states of existence to alternate' U II 7, 9; similar phr. do. 8o, 64; 81, 69 —enetkek tilintin tavğaç tiinca evirmiş “he translated from Sanskrit into Chinese' U I 14, 1-2; similar phr. U 7V 6 bassim,—(my mother and father, my wives) evirü uluğlarım “my various grcat ones' TT VII qo, 144: Xak. xı ol meni: yo:ldin evürdi: “he turned me aside (sarafani) from the road", and one says ol aya:k evürdl: (sic) “he overturned (galaba) the cup' (etc.) Kaş, I 178 (evüre:r, evürme:k); bu: er ol ı:şığ evürge:n tevürge:n 'this man is constantly upsetting and disturbing (Juretedl . . . ma qullab) the business” 7 157, 17; similar phr. 7 521, 24; II 81, 24 (tevür-): KJ evür- is common; evrer yüzin 'he turns his face away' 403; similar phr. 628, 649, 718, etc.; isiznip kini birle kilkin evür 'reform the wicked man's character with punishment" 5548: xın()) At, yüz evrüp 424; Tef. için evürse "if you turn (thc fabric) inside out”, yüz evür- (both 'away from” and 'towards") 69: Çağ. xv ff. éwür- (spelt) gardánidan “to turn. (away)! San. 118r. x4 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv evür- “to turn (towards or away) Qutb 23; MN 377; Nahc. 323, 2: Osm. xv evir- "to turn” (the eyes Acc., away from something 4451.) T'T:S 7 285. VUD öpür- Caus. f. of 2 öp- (o:p-), pec. to Kaş. Xak. xi ol mana: mü:n öpürdi: ahsáni'l-maraqa "he made me sip the soup” (etc.) Kaş. 1 176 (öpürür, ópürme:k); bu: er ol sü:t ópürge:n 'this man is in the habit of giving many sips (:isd' . . . katira(n)) of milk to someome' 7 157, 7. opra:- “to grow old, decay', and esp. (of clothes) “to wear out” (Intrans.). S.i.a.m.l.g. in a surprisingly wide variety of forms, including NE, NC ura-fu:rà- and SW Osm. ipra-, ipri-, yepre-, viprl-. 'l'he oldest form seems to be apra-, but this is noted only once, and the basic form can be taken as opra :-, Uyğ. vini ff. Man, (as the poison takes hold of him) adlurt11(?) erni yérup epeki tamğakı aprap (sec) "his cheeks(?) and lips split, his chin and his throat decay” TT” II 16, 14-16: Civ. (gap) opratı ól[ür](?) (gap) TT I sor (unintelligible, possibly oprat-): Xak. xi to:n opra:dı: "the garment wore out” (baliya) Kaş. I 273 (opra:r, opra:ma:k); kér tom opra:ma:s “a loose-fitting garment does not wear out” 771 358, 15: K B bu edğü karimaz yéme opramaz 'this good man does not get old or decrepit' 1640: xiv Rbg. ötükleri opradı “their boots wore out” R I r163: Muh.(?) 'ataqa wa gaduma “to become, or be old” (eski- ; in margin) o:pra:- Rif. 112 (only); al-datür "to be decrepit" o:pra:- 123: Çağ. xv ft. ópre- (spelt)/ópren- ma wa mundaris şudan “to be old and worn out”, in Rümi epri:- San. 57v. 29; ofra-/ofran- 'identical with opra-/opran- (sic) same translation do. 77v. 7: lpre- (spelt)/Apren- “identical with öpre-/öpren-”, same translation do. 93r. 3. VUD ópürt- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of, but syn. w., ópür-. Xak. xı men apar su:v öpürttüm hamaltuhu "ald gsurbi'l-má' wa ğayrihi "V urged him to drink water (etc.)” Kaş. /ZII 427 (öpürtür, öpürtme:k). D oprat- Caus. f. of opra:-, "to wear out (clothes)' and the like, S.i.s.m.l.g. vv, the same phonetic changes as opra:-, Xak. xi ol to:nin opratti: “he wore out (ab/d) his garment (etc.)'! Kaş. I 261 (opratur, opratma:k): Çağ. xvífl. opartmns (sic) birenmes ve eskinmez 'imperishable' Vel. 86 (quotn.): ipret- Caus. f., kuhna kardan "to make (something) old” Sam. gar, 5: X war. xiv oprat“to destroy'(?) Quib 194. D evril- Pass. f. of evir-; usually "to revolve”, sometimes “to turn (Intrans) away from (something 5L): S.ia.m.lg. vv, the same phonetic changes as evlr-. Uyğ. vitr ff. Bud. sansarnip berü evrilmekin ukup 'understanding the constant revolution of samsára' (i.e. the alternations of birth, death, rebirth, etc.) U II ir, 10-11; ölüt ayığ kilinctin evrilmeser 'if he does not turn away from the evil deed of killing! U 171 4, 12-13; (if the passion of lust rises in their minds) ayiğ törü eyin evrilürler "they constantly behave (?)in accordance with evil practices' do. 79, 4 (ti); 0.0. U II 4o, 102-3 (1 yan-); US). 43, 7; 100, 2; Suv. 192,6; 348, $: Xak. xrer evrüldi: raca"a"l-racul min toachihi. "the man turned back from his course”, also used of anyone who departs (?rrşarafa) from his course Kaş, 7 248 (evrülür, evrülme:k): KB (the moon is in the constellation of Cancer) bu ev evrülur, evi evrülür ham ózl çevrülür “this celestial mansion revolves: its celestial mansion revolves and it itself revolves' 744; 0.o. 119, 126 (evren): xıır(?) Tef. evrül- "to turn back” 69: Çağ, xv fT. éwrül- (spelt) gardidan "to revolve' San, 118r. 29 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv evrül- “to 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 59 
     
   
   
     DIS. ABS 15 turn towards; to turn downwards' (Intrans.) Qutb 23; “to be mixed with' Nahe. 179, 6. VUD öprül- Pass. f. of öpür-, the equivalent form with back vowels, obruf-, survives in SW Osm. Red, 234 and xx Anat. SDD 1081 meaning (of ground) “to subside, collapse. Xak. xi müm öprüldi: Ausiyatii-maraqa “the soup was sipped' Kaş. 7 245 (öprülür, öprülme:k). Osm. xiv, xv obrul- “to subside, collapse' in several texts 7755 I 534; IH 714; HI $30 (vocalization fixed by Dev. N. obruk “chasm,, etc.). au D evriş- Co-op. f. of evir-; with a curiously wide range of meanings. S.i.s.m.l.g. w. phonetic changes. Xak. xı anm birle: telim evrlgti: márasahu katira(n) "he often wrestled with hiny , and one says anip kacmr:s atın evrişti: “he helped to turn the horse's course back towards him ( fi radd wachi'l-xayl ilayhi) after it had run away from him'; and one says ol mapa: tawa:r (stc) evrişti: “he helped me to turn over( fi taglib) the goods (etc.), that is to turn them upside down' (yuc'al. zahruhd Hi-batn) Kaş. 1 235 (evrişü:r, evrişme:k), (of a poor man in winter) odğuç bile: evrişü:r yata'allal bi-gabasi'l-nár “he comforts himself with a firebrand' 7 248, 6 (the form must be right, as it rhymes with other similar words, but a der. f. of avit- might have been expected): Çağ. xvff évrüg- birdmün-i çizi gardidan "to surround, or encircle, something”, and metaph. kátwí$ kardan "to meditate, turn (something) over in one's mind” Sam. rr8v. 11 (quotns.). D opraş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of opra:-. Xak. xt to:nla:r oprasti: axadatm H-atmdb fi'l-bilá "the garments began to wear out”, also of other things Kaş. I 232 (opraşu:r, opraşma:k, prov.). VUD öprüş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of öpür-. Xak. xı ol mapa: mü:n öprüşdi: “he hclped me to sip ("a/d hasw) the soup (etc.)', also used for "to compete! Kaş. 7 232 (öprüşü:r, öprüşme:k). Tris. ABR PU?F avurta: (?avirda:) 'foster-mother, wetnurse'; in Osm. (only?) 'midwife'; the word looks foreign (?Iranian). N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. Sanskrit dhütri “vvet-nurse” a:virda: TT VIH D.11: Xak. xi avurta: zi'r 'fostermother" Kaş. 7] 144 (tutun-); n.m.e.: K B (if you have children) avurtası edğü kişi tut arığ "engage a gcod cleanly woman as their foster-mother' 4505: xiv Muh. zi'ru'l-sabi oğla:n awurta:sr Mel. 11, 7-8; Rif. 85: Osm. xiv to xvi avurda “midvvife” in two or three texts TT'S H 69; III 47; IV sı, D evrilincsiz Priv. N/A. fr. a Dev. N. fr. the Refl. f. of evril-; *which cannot be turned back (or aside)'; an epithet applied usually to the believer's mind; sometimes used in Hend. with “ağınçsız “unshakeable”, q.v. Pec. to Uyg. Bud. Uyğ vin ff. Bud. evrilinçsiz . . . kópül TT V 22, 35; ağınçsız evrilinçsiz . . . köpüllüğ Pfahí. 6, 3; evrilinçsiz törö Suv. igo, 16-17; evrilinçsizin (mis-spelt evrinügsüzin) ağınçsızın do. 488, 13. E avrındı: See evdindi:, E evrinügsüz Scc evrilincsiz. F avru:zi: Hap. leg.; indexed under Z as the last consonant; l.-w. fr. Pe. afrása, same meaning. Xak. xı avru:zt: (MS. avzu:ri:) al-mağlüt miüna"l-ta"üm “mixed food”, e.g. wheat and barley flour mixed and baked together Kaş. I 145. Dis. V. ARSevü:s- "to winnow'; very scantily attested; survives only in SW xx Anat. efis-, evís-, evse-, evs- SDD 508, $59, 561, 562. Xak. xt evü:s- n.m.e.; (in the Grammatical Introduction) evü:sgü: (q.v.) is derived from the expression evü:sd:l nasafa'l-say' “he winnowed the thing” Kaş. 7 ış, 18: Kip. xv nasafa üyüs- Tuh. aza. 10: Osm. xvi ff. evs- occurs in three xvt and one xvii Pe. dicts, in translations of words meaning ^vwinnowing basket'. D 1 evse:- Desid. Den. V. fr. e:v; pec. to Kaş. Xak. xi er evse:di: igtága'l-racul ild baytihi wa tamanná “the man longed for his home” Kaş. J 277 (evse:r, evserme:k); a.o. 279, 18. D 2 evse:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of 6:v-. Xak. xi er övse:di: tamannád'l-raculu'l-'acala "the man wished to hurry” Kaş. I 277 (övse:r, évse:mie:k). D öpse:- Desid. f. of 1 óp- ; pec. to Kaş, Xak. xi men anı: ópse:dim tamannaytu taqbilahu '[ wished to kiss him" Kay. 7 275 (öpserr, öpse:me:k), er kizi öpse:di: “the man wished to kiss his daughter' 7 28o, 13. D evset- Hap. lcg.; Caus. f. of 1 evse:-, Xak. xı oğlum meni: evsetti: “my son made me long (manndni va. yazwicagnni) for home" Kaş. I 262 (evsetür, evsetme:k). Tris. ABS D evü:sgü: Hap. leg.; N.I. fr. evü:s-, Xak. xı “the word evü:sgi: /imà yunsaf bih"l-şay”? for “the thing with which something is winnowed' is derived from evü:s-, q.v. Kaş. I 13, 18; n.m.e, Dis. ABS D uvus Dev. N. fr. uv-; as such Hap. leg., but oğuş, which is etymologically identical, survives in SW Osm. meaning “a way of rubbing with the hands', Red. 257. Xak. xı uvuş futát "fragments! of anything hence dugáqu'l-xubz 'bread-crumbs' are called uvuş etme:k Kaş. 1 61. D öpüş Dev. N. fr. 1 óp-; “a kiss”, S.i.s.m.l. Xak, xı öpüş al-faqbil "a kiss", ma huwa 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 60 
     
   
   
     16 DIS bayna”l-itnayn with -p-” Kaş, 1 60: xiv Mui al-büsa "a kiss” ópü:s(pa) Mel. 83, s: Rif. 188. D uvsa:k Dev. N./A.S. fr “uvşa:- ; very rare in its original form and soon replaced by uşak which s.La.m.l.g. A more or less synonymous word uvak, a similar Dev. N./A.S. fr. uva(€ uv-) is noted as early as xiv in Osm. and s.is.m.l.g., in Osm. since xvu aş ufak. Basically 'crushed, broken up srnall”, but in most languages hardly more than “small”, 'something small”, e.g. "a boy'; 'slander' which occurs from an early period and in several languages is an obscure metaph. meaning. Uyğ. vin ff. Man. (gap) ufşak (sie) kilinçliğ ikircgü köpüllügğ yalpuklarka "to men who make slanders(?) and have undecided minds" TT HI 1y7: Civ. (if a mouse) uvşak isirsar 'bites (a garment) into small pieces! TT VII 36, 4-5; uvsak yumğaklar 'broken (i.e. varicose) veins! /7 1I 31, 196 and 198—usak kart “a small swelling! 4 7 68; usak tograp 'slicing it up fine! do, 76: Xak. xı sifáru'l-5a)" "small things” are called uşak ne:n, hence al-gibyán “boys” arc called ugak ogla:n; and dugáqu'l-hatab 'bits of wood' are called usak o:tup; this word is not used in a singular sense (/4 yufrad) but only in the plural (/'[-cam') Kaş, I 67, uşa:k al-namima 'slander', one says uşa:k so:z 'slanderous words' (kalám) I 122; sa:v uşa:k al-namima II zo, 6; uşa:k ne: III 279 (tovra:-): KB yégü alsa tigle uşak tancula “if you take food, bite it and chew it up small" 4601: xir(?) At. usak taş “small pebbles” 60: xiv Róg. usak kil- 'to grind' (grain); uşak “as small” (as ants) R 7 1149 (quotns.): Muh. samak sigár "small fish” usak ba:l:k. Mel. 77, 6; Rif. 180 (u:şak), si'atu'l-xalq “the lower classes! u:şak 149(only): Çağ, xvff. uşağ/uşak riza wa haqir 'crushed, small' Sam. 75v. 26 (quotns.): Xwaur. xiv uşak (tas, etc.) Qutb zor, usak tas Nac. 73, 17: Kom. xiv uşax '(bread-)crumbs'; uysax (sic) 'deformation! CCG; Gr.: Kip xiv usak sidár cidlda(n) "very small (things) 7d. 15: Osm. xiV ff. uşak (1) “small” (without connotation of plurality); (2) “small boy” c.i.a.p. TS I 729; İI 933; İH 717; İV 778. evşük Map. leg.; al-'árida bas several widely divergent meanings, of which the likeliest is 'cross-heam, lintel". Xak. xr evşük ai-'árida Kaş. 1 103. Dis. V. ABŞD évig- Co-op. É. of 6:v-, "to hurry', sometimes with a connotation of group action or competition; survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. eviş- SDD ssp. Xak. xi kisgile:r s:şka: €:vişdi: 'the people hurried ("acz/a) about the business” Kaş, 7 186 (€:vişü:r, €:vişme:k): Osm. xiv-xvi eviş-/eviş- same meaning, in several texts T'TS II 554; İH 389; IV 445. D uvus- Co-op. f. of uv-; sis.ml. vv, phonetic changes e.g. NE, NW u:ş-, SW oğuş-/ovuş-, and some variations of meaning. Xak. xrol maya: etme:k nvusdi: “he helped . ABS moe to crumble( fi fatti) the bread (etc)! ; also for “to compete! Aug. / 18s (Gövüuşüu:r, uvuşina:k). D öpüş- Recip. f. of 1 öp-, “to kiss one another”, s.Ls.m.l.g. Uyf. vir ff. Bud. (the two brothers) öpişti (sic) kucusti 'kissed and embraced one another” PP 52, 8: Xak. xı ol menin birle: öpüşdi: qaöbalanı wa and qabbaltuhu "he kissed me and I kissed. him, Kaş. I 180 (öpüşür, öpüşme:k): Çağ. xv ff. öpüş- (spelt) Recip. f., yekdigarra büsidan “to kiss one another” Sam. s7v. 27: Xwar. xiv öpüş- ditto Qutb 120. D *uvga:- Den. V. fr. uvus; lit. “to become crumbled, crushed', etc. ; the only trace of this verb itself is dubiously in Mult., but it forms several derivatives. (Xak.) xiv Muh. tafattata “to be crusbed, crumbled' (mis-spelt fağatfata) (u:şan- (or uwsan-) Mel. 24, 7); u:Sac- (or uwsa:-) Rif. 106. D uvsat- Caus. f. of *uvga:-, "to crush. crumble! (something 71cc.) ; s.i.m.m.l.g, usually as ugat-. As in the case of uvga:k there is a more or less synonymous verb uvat-, Caus. f. of uva:- (€ uv-), noted as early as xit in Kip. (Hou. 42, 20) and s.i.m.m.l.g. with phonetic variations, e.g. NE a:t-, o:t- SW ufat-. “The Refl. f. uşan- is common from xiv onwards, but there is no trace of a parallel verh. uvan-, UyB. vir ff. Bud. (if people find gold ore, break it up, sinelt and purify thc gold, and make ornaments out of it) uvşatmış (misprinted uyşatmış) altun tózi yeme tegşilmez "the basic character [lit. 'origin'] of the crushed gold (ore) does not alter” Suv. 71, 20-1; Xak. xr ol etme:k uvsattt: “he cruhibled (tafattata) the bread (etc.)'; this is the correct (form, al-şahih), also pronounced uşat- Kaş. I 262 (uvşatur, uvşatma:k), ol etme:k uşattı: he crumbled (fatta) the bread (etc,)”, also used when one crushes and crumbles (radda . . . vea. fatta) anything 7 211 (uşatur, uşatma:k misprinted -me:k in printed text): KB tili sözde yazsa usatur tışın “if his tongue makes a mistake in speaking it breaks bis teeth' 2515: Çağ. xvíf. uşat-(-mak) muvat- "to break (one's bonds) Vel. 107 (quotn.); uşat- srkastan "to break” San. 7sr. 25 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv uşat- “to break” (a bottle, etc.) Quib 201; MN 12; Nahe. 216, ro: Kip. xiv uwsgat- Rasara 'to break İ4. 26 (in one MS. only, vocalized ategat-): xv faqaşa "to crack (an egg, nut, etc.) usat- Tuh. 28a. 12; mafqüş uşatıptır do. 34b. 4: Osm. xiv-xvi uşat- “to brenk” in several texts TTS 1 730; 11 934; İİİ 717; TV 790; and yuvat- (sic) in one xIv text /7/” 9o9. Tris. ADS S abugka Sec avıçğa:. Dis. ABY S avya: See ayva:. Dis. ABZ D opuz Dev. N. fr. o:;p- 'rough, uneven ground'; survives only in SW xx Anat, obus, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 61 
     
   
   
     MON. AC 17 obuz .$DD :ioR2; öbüz de. rroo; ubuz do. 141:.. Xnk. xi opuz Juill. ğalz fi'l-ard "any uneveness in the ground'; hence one says o:y opuz éd'it wa fadfad 'hollows and rough ground' Kaş, I 54. Dis. V. ABZevze:- Hap. leg.; but cf. SW xx Anat. evzil-/ evzin- 'to be flurried, confused, distressed', SDD $563. Xak. xı ol sö:zni: apar evze:di: Teaşd Mayhi bi-hádá'I-kaldm "he told him this story embellished with falsehoods' Kaj. 7 275 (evze:r, evze:me:k MS. esjei- but indexed under Z). Tris. ABZ F nbizan Hap. leg.; l.-w. fr. Persian dbzan "a bath filled with medicated water'. Uyğ. viti ff. Civ. abızan kılmış kerğek “you must give him a medicated bath” H II 22, 131-2. Sec avru:zir, Mon, AC Y a:ç (a:c) 'hunger, hungry; carly forms are all a:€ but the word is a:c in SW (Oğuz) languages from the carlicst period; homophonous vv, 2 a:g- (a:c-) Originally '"hungry' in a physical sense, hence metaph. “covetous” and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g., Cuv. vyg (visy), Zsh. V 217. Türkü vii Türkü bodun a:ç (sic) erti: the "Türkü people were hungry” 77 E 38, Uy£. virt ff. Bud. aç bars “a hungry tigress” Suv. 609, 17; a.0.0.: Civ. ag karınka "on an empty stomach' H 7 19; aç bagirsuktin ditto H I1 6, 11: Xak. xt a:g al-fartán 'hungry' Kaş. 1 79 (prov.); six o.0. spelt aç and translated al-ğartdn or al-cá'' "hungry: KB men aç men sapa 'I am hungry for you” 923; “every hungry (aç) man if he eats and drinks is then satisfied, and if a covetous (közİ aç) man dies he lays aside his covctousness (aglik)' 2003; 3.0. 3923 (see opra:k): xiv Muh. al-cüyü a:c (sic?) Mel. 54, 16; Rif. 152: Çağ. xv fI. ac gurusna "hungry! Sam, 32r. 25: Xwar, xiv aç 'hungry' Qutb 5; Nahc. 257, 7: Kip. xi al-cdyi' aç Hou. 26, 5: xiv aç (cim) al-cayi" İd. 8: xv ciydn “hungry” (acik, in margin) aş Twuh. rıb, 13: Kom. xiv “hüngry” aç CCI; Gr. (phr.): Osm. xiv ff. ac *hungry', and various derivatives, acın, acla, etc., c.i.a.p. 777 D 1-3, II 2, IV 2. VU 2 aç an exclamation pec. to Xay.; the form with h- is prob. der. fr. Ar. Xak. xı aç kalima taqüm bi-maqdm yá'r'l-niddà^ "a word equivalent to the (Arabic) word yd” used to summon (someone)'; one says aç beri: kel “Hil Come here” Kaş. I as: (VU) hae hac kalima tuzcar bihi'l-xayl “a word used to make a horse go faster', originally aç aç, with Ad substituted for hamza; this agrees with the Arabic, when one says hachactu br'l-anam “I shouted hac hac to the sheep, when riding ahead of them" JI 282. İç "the interior, or inside (of something)'; originally, and often still, in a concrete sense. E avzu:rı: "The word early acquired a number of specific connotations, esp. in its derivatives :- (1) 'the interior of the human body" (cf. ice:gü:); (2) "inner', as opposed to outer, clothing (cf. ictor); (3) “the interior of a household, esp. a royal household” (cf. igre:ki:); (4) secret, or mental processes, as opposed to physical. With the 5rd Pers. Suffix in the Dat., A8/., and Loc. it serves as a Postposition meaning “into, from within, within". In a few phr., the older of which are listed as main entries, it has been fused with another word to form a compound word. S.i.a.m.l.g., with some variations in final consonant. Türkü vri igi:n taşı:n “the interior and exterior (of the tomb)” 7 S 12, II N 14; iç buyruk “court official” I] S 14; vrrff. kere:kü içi: ne:teğ ol "what is the interior of the tent like?" IrkB 18: Yen. Türgeg el icinte: beg ben 'I was a chief in the 'l'ürges realm' Mal. 37, 3: UyB. vii ff. Man. kaş içinte törümiİş “created in the Kaş.(?) TT III 115: Bud. the word, usually in the form İçinte, is common, e.g. karam iginte “vithin the ditch” PP 39, s: balık içiye into the town' do, 41, 7, kaç kün içinte “vvithin a few days” do. 33, 6: Civ. kar içinte İğ kirdi 'disease entered the upper arm” TT I 18; common in H / and II, TT VII, and Usp. (in rə, 11; 47, 15, mis-spelt in iştin taştın “at home and abroad”)—yiç “the bowels' H 7 67 (see ki:r): Xak, xı ic “the interior (561) of anything'; hence “a belt” (al-zwijdh) is called iç kur because it is a girdle for the stomach (al-bátin) ; and “a secret' (a/-sir») is called iç sö:z, that is halám fi' l-bátin *words (hidden) within'; İç et “tender meat from near the liver” Kaş. 7 35: four o.o.; KB ay iç taş biliğli “oh (God) who knowest the inside and the outside (of everything) 11; kamuğ iş içinde yitig tutsa köz 'a man must keep a sharp eye on everything” 329; (if it were not for the merchants) kaçan kedgey erdi kara kiş İçi "when would you wear a lining of black sable” 4425: xmi(?) At, içi “the inside' (of a man) 383, (of a snake) 214; içine “into” 308; İçinde "in 53, 218: Çağ. xv ff. iç andarin wa ödtün "interior, inside' San. göv, ro (quotn.); followed by several phr. beginning vr. İç: Xwar. xui(?) Oğ. oşol orman içinde “in that forest” 22; içike “into” 233: xiv İÇ “inside” Qutb 56; içinde “in” MN 74, etc.; awwal baübu . . . içinde “in its first chapter” Nahe. 2, 13; a.o.o. Kom. xiv “interior, inside' iç CCI, CCG, Gr. 104 (phr.): Kap. xiv iç (cim) cawwáni 'interior' İ4. 9 (also içkur, icton); fi “in” içinde: (cim) Bul. r5, 9: Osm. xtv ff. İç in various forms, e.g. için 'secretly', and phr., cia.p. TTS I 363-4; İl 514-5; İİ 353-5; IV 407-10. l u:e (u:c) 'extremity, end, tip”, primarily in a physical sense, w. some metaph. extensions, e.g. “the frontier! (of a country)”. ""he voiced consonant survives in the SW (Oğuz) languages. 8.i.a.m.l.g. with some variations in the final consonant. Türkü vir bizinte: eki: uci sinparça: artuk erti: "their two wings were one and a half times as numerous as us' 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 62 
     
   
   
     18 MON. AC T 4o; vin ff. ucuna: begedmekke: tegi:r “he achieves his object of becoming a beg Toy. 24 (ETY II sg): Uyğ. vit [gap] uct: Selepeke: tegi: çeriğ étdi: "their . . . wing disposed its forces up to the Selenga River” Su. E 4: vu ff. Man.-A (from the top of the head) adaknar tirapak ucipa “to the tips of the toe-nails” MI 17, zo, ol 1 uçinda olurdi “he settled on the top of that bush' Man.-uig. Frag. 401, 1: Man. orukuguz üçin bulmadin 'without reaching the end of your path' TT III 46; wo. do 24: Bud, tuğ uginda "on the point of a standard” U /7 38, 77; (stretch out the two middle fingers of both hands and) uc1 bilen teğür 'bring them together at the tips' TT V 8, 56; yer orun uc kıdığ “a borderland” ZTürn-ts. 177: Civ. biçek ucinda “on the point of a knife' F 7 117; a.o. TT” VII 20, 17: xiv. Chin.-Uyg. Dict. “the tip of a branch' uç Ligeti 172: Xak. xı u:ç “the extremity (faraf ) of anything”, hence buta:k u:çi: "the tip of a branch': u:ç él al-tagr “borderland” Kaş. I 44; x.o, İİİ 426 (çert-): KB (death is a sea) uci yok tübi “vith no limits or bottom” 1140: xi?) Tef. uc "end, limit” 333: xiv Mü, ra'su'l-lisán “the tip of the tongue' tizl u:gt: (cim) Mel. 47, a, Rif. 140: Çağ. xv ff. uc (with -c”) “the tip, edge or summit (narok wa dam «a sar) of anything! San. 65r. 6 (quot.): Oğuz xı u:ç nafádu'l-say' "a shortage of something”, hence bo:yda: ne: u:ç war “there is no serious shortage in the clan” (qasım) Kaş. 1 44: Xwar. xiv uç “end, extremity” Qutb 194; MN 72: Kom. xıv “end” (physically, or of time) uç CCG; Gr. 263 (phr.): Kip. xit u:c eri: raculu'l-taraf 'frontiersman! Hou. 30, 2: XIV u:C (^with back vowels") taraf kull şay”: also used for “the rump' (a/-afya), hence ucun tepretgil alvatak huzz tva harrik “möve over your rump' 7d. 8 (there is a v.]. ucap, which suggests that the second meaning is an error for ugn:): xv faraf uc Ti. 23b. 4 (in Kip. consistently with cin, but this might represent -€): Osm. xiv ff. uc “end, edge, frontier noted in various phr. fr. xiv onwards TTS I 708-10; II gis-7; III 695-7; IV 772; ucundan “because of” also occurs at all periods, but can hardly be derived either from this word or from ücün; the likeliest explanation is that uc here is an early corruption of Ar. teach which has such a meaning. VU 2 uç Hap. leg.; a kind of tree; this entry follows that of Uc “vith back vowels, the wellknown town', i.e. Uc Turfan. Xak. xı uç “a mountain tfee (sacar), from which are made the pens with which the Turks write, and also distaffs and walking sticks” (al-magázzl wa'l-üşş) Kaş, I. as. 1 ö:ç (6:c) originally “malice, spite”, but from quite an early date 'revenge, vengeance', in which meaning it s.i.3.m.].g. The final -c survives in the SW (Oguz) languages in this word and its derivatives. Practically synonymous with kek, q.v. Uyğ. viii ft. Man. óc kek alisu "taking revenge on one another” TT II 17. 84-5: Bud. önre aluntakı öç (spelt ooç) kek özü [gap; tılltağınta “because she felt malice and spite (inherited) from a previous incarnation" U 7/7 23, 13-14: Xak. xr. özç al-hiqd 'malice'; ö:ç kek kamuğ kişi:nip yalyuk ü:ze: alım bil translated. al-fa^r matlüb bihi ha”l-dayn "vengcance is a thing sought after like a debt! Kaş. 7 435; ödleğ ö:çin aldızmu: “has time taken its revenge on him?” 7 41, 17; Ó:gin kekin irteşür “they seek to take revenge on one another” 7 230, 4; a.o. II 103, 27: KB üç in 145, 369, 10$3, 2290, 2311 means 'malice, spite; (a good army commander) titir buğrnsı teg kör óc sürse kek *must act as maliciously and spitefully as a stallion czmel with a herd of females! 2312; (do good) isizke öçün “in return for evil” 929: xın1(?) Tef. Öç "vengeance! 252; xiv Mult, al-diya tal-qasag "blood money, retribution” à: Mel. 83, 7; Rif. 188: Çağ. xv ff öc ("with -c”) intiqám. 'vengcance! San. 6sr. 7: Kom. xiv *vengeance'! öç CCGC; Gr. 181 (phr.): Kip. xiv. 6:c (with front vowel") ai-ta'r İd. 9: xv far óc Tuh. ib. 11; gob. 10-11: Osm. xv ff. óc “vengcance” occurs occasionally 77TS 1557; 1 742. 2 6:6 "a stake in gambling! is not noted before Kip. xii ff Hou. 22, 3-4 etc. and Osm, xv ff. T'TS I 557, etc. It can hardly be taken as a sec. meaning of 1 örç, but was an old word, see Öçeş. üç “three”, c.i.a.p.a.1, with some variations of the final consonant. Türkü vir and vil ff. common: Uyğ. vt f£., all varieties, comtnon: Xak. xı üç “the number three", hence üç yarma:k "three silver coins: (dirham) Kaş. 1 35: xın ff, Tef., At, noted: xiv Muh.. taláta "three! ü:ç (9c) Mel, 81, 7; 82, 4; Rif. 188: Çağ. xv ff. üç (with -Çç”) 'three' San. 65r. 8: Kom. xiv “threc" üç CCG; Gr.: Kip, xi faláta ü:ç Hou. 22, 3: XIV ditto İd. 8; taláta üç (cim) Bul. ız, ro: xv ditto Ttt. 60b. 7; tis (sic, as usual for -() Kas, 65, 6. Mon. V. AC1 aç- “to open” (Trans.), originally in a physical sense, with some extensions, physical, e.g. "to untie (a knot), to clear (the sky)', and metaph., e.g. “to disclose, explain'. C.i.a.m.l, Türkü xur [gap] süpügin açdımız “ve opened (a way?) with our lances' T 28. Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A (then the great king) açğay belğürtgey 'will disclose and display (his beauty) M I 11, 5; kapağın açdı “he opened his door M I 13, 7; 8.0. 15, 12: Bud. temir son act "he untied the iron chain” PP 33, 2-3; kapiğ açıp U II 56, 1; közin açıp “onening his eyes" U III 35, 29; ayağ kilinçiumnizni ... aça 'disclosing our evil deeds" TT IV 4, 18; a.o.o.:Xak.xıknpuğ açdı:"he opened ( fatalta) the door” Xaş. 1 163 (açn:r, açma:k), kara: buliti yel açar urunç bile: él açar "the wind clears away (zuqşi"”)the black clouds, with a bribe one opens the door (faftah báb) of the kingdom” 1354,9; ağzı: açıp 'opening his mouth! // 188, 115;2.0.0.: KB acti uştmax yoli “He opened the way to Paradise” 63; mnna ay aç-a "speak 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 63 
     
   
   
     MON. V. AC- 19 and explain to me" 267, 1000; sózüg acsamu yég, *vould it be better to make a statement? 1018; n.0.0.: xın(?) Tef. aç- (r) “to open'; (2) "to conquer (a city, etc.); açmak 'victory? 64, 65, At. yüz açar. “it reveals its face” 221: xiv Muh. fataha aç- Mel. 7, 17-18; 19, t1 etc.) Rif. 79, 99, etc. ; atodaha "to explain' aç- 23, 12, 105; naşara "to disclose, publish! aş(sic) Rif. 115: Çağ. xv ff. aç- (-kun, etc.) açVel. 10; aç- ('with -ç-") kugüdan "to open” San. 31r. 2(quotn.): Xwar. xirr aç- "to open” "Ali 28: xıu()) sen munda kal aç kalik “stay here and open the window! (?) Og. 254: XIV ac- "to open”, etc. Quib 34 MN 265; Nahe. B8, 8 etc.: Kom. xiv 'to open, to reveal' acCCI, CCG; Gr. (phr.): Ktp. xri fataha açHou. 34, 9: xiv ditto. İd. 8; fataha wa haşafa (“to reveal”) aç- Bul. 58r.: xv qadafa (to pour out”) wa fataha aç- Tuh. 30a, 13; Ragafa wa fataha wa 'addá (to cross a river, etc.)” açdo. 31b. 1; aç- aqhara muta'addi "as. a "Trans., to cause to be conquered' Kas, 9, 5 (cf. 2 a:g-): Osm. xiv ff. aç- c.i.a.p. in various metaph. meanings, esp. 'to conquer, to publish, to polish! TTS I2; 11 4; IH 2; IV 3. 2 a:ç- (a:c-) “to be hungry'; homophonous vv. 1 a:c (a:c), s.i.s.m.l., in SW (Oğuz) languages as ac-, but in others displaced by acik-, q.v. Türkü vırı a:çsa:r (sic) “if a man is hungry' IS8, II N 6: vir ff. Man. aca suvsamak-a [gap] (I have suffered?) hunger and thirst TT II 8, 37: Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. açmak suvsamak emğeki "the pangs of hunger and thirst! Suv. 118, 4: Xak. xı er a:çtı: “the man was hungry'(cá'a) Kaş. I 172 (açar, a:gma:k): KB sukun açmış ózler 'souls starved by greed' $384: xın(?) Tef. Maryamnir karnı acdı “Maryam was hungry! 64: xiv. Muh. cdta a:c-. Mel, 24, 16; Rif. 152: Xwar. xiv ditto Qur3 facsimile 49v. 15; Nahc. 269, 7: Kom. xiv “to be hungry' aç- CCTI; Gr.: Kip. xiv ac- cá'a İd. 8: xv ditto Tuh. rza, 5; Kav. 9, $ (after 1 ac-) (in all Kip. entries cim, but “ti: in xv): Osm. xiv-xv ac-(-di) “to be hungry' is common TTS I 2; II 2; III 1; IV 3. İç- "to drink' primarily of animated beings, but also of porous objects, earth, etc, 'to absorb'; used without an Object the implication is often “to drink to excess'. C.i.a.p.a.l. Türkü virr ff. suv içi:pen “drinking water' [rkB 17: Uyğ. viri ff Bud. kanıyızlarnı icgell “to drink your blood' U TV 12, 108; a.o.o.: Civ. İç- "to drink' is common, esp. in medical texts, in H I, Il; T T VII, VIII: Xak. xı er su:v içdi: “the man drank (sariba) water (etc.)' ; also used of anything that drinks or absorbs (sariba atı naşifa) anything Kaş. I 164 (içe:r, içme:k), seven o.o., two svith Perf. in -ti: : KB suv icer 73; bor icse “f a man drinks wine' 339: 8.0.0.: Xiri(?) Tef. İç- "to drink' 127; At. yemez içmez '(God) does not eat or drink' 262: xiv Muh. halafa "to swear an oath” and İç- Mel. 25, ro (Rif. 108 is corrupt, perhaps read antik-); şariba İtç- 27, 12 (110 ii:g- in error): Caf. xv ff. ic- (with -ç-”) şarab wa nüşidan "to drink' San. gsv. 24 (quotns.) Xwar. xii?) iç- “to drink”, common in OŞ.: xiv ditto Qutb 56; MN 84, etc.: Kom. xiv “to drink" İç-, to swear an oath' and iç- CCI, CCG; Gr. Kip. xim şariba iç- (cim) Hou. 34, 6; ditto (çim) 53, 2; xiv ditto İd, 8: xv ditto Tuh. 21b. 7, n.o.o, şariba İç- (sic) Kav. 7,13; İş- o, 8; al-maşrüb "a drink' işmek 63, 3. uç- basically (of a bird) “to fiy”, with various metaph. extensions. "The oldest is, as an honorific (of a superior), 'to die'; others are 'to go with great speed; to disappear; to twitch; (of colours) to fade', and, at any rate in recent Osm,, “to be dissolute", Cia p.al Türkü , vir Kül Tegin .. . uçdi: “Kül Tegin . . . died' I NE; eçim xağan uça: bardı "my (paternal) uncle, the xa£an, died' II E 20; a.o.o. of uça: bar-: vii ff. (the young bird) uça: azti: "lost its way in flight! JrkB rs; uça: uma:tin “because it could not fiy" 61: Uyf. vrir kapim xağan uçdu: “my father, the xagan, died Su. N i2; vurff, Bud. uçüğma tınliğlarığ 'füling creatures! TT IV 8, s7: Civ. kök kalıkda uçar küş 'birds flying in the sky” TT I 23; kuğu kuş ucti “the swan has flown away' ditto 215; bu yılda ağa ucup "as my elder brother died this year” U.Sp. 22, 53-4 (post-xri): Xak. xı kuş uçdu: “the bird flew' (tara), ani kuti: ucdi: “his luck deserted him" (dahaba), er attin kodi: uçdi: “the man fell (saqata) off the horse” . . . er tıni: uçdu: inqata'a nafsu'l-racul "the man's breath failed' Kaş. I 163 (uca:r, uçma:k, two phr. not quoted here belong to óc-, q.v., the last, however, seems to belong here); and four o.o.: K B uc- (of birds) "to fiy" 23, 74, etc.; tirlglik uçar “life is fleeting” 231; (if a stool collapses) uçar ol eri "the man on it falls off” 803: xrui(?) Tef. uçar kuşlar 334; At. uçğan yügürgen nep-e 'beings that fly or walk' 6; a.o.o.: xiv Muh. tára u:c- (sic) Mel. 28, 12; Rif. ir, al-[irán uc mak 36, rz, 122: Çağ. xv ff. uc(-mak, etc.) connotes movement, e.g. (of the eye) 'to twitch', (of the heart) 'to flutter', (of a bird) "to fiy”, (of sleep) “to desert one” Vel. 94-6 (quotns.); uç- ("vvith -ç-”) (1) tirán wa paridan “to fly; (2) ixtildc "to quiver, twitch'; (3) mahw wa ma'düm gudan “to perish' San. 62v. 19 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv uc- “to fly away" Qutb 194, MN 351: Kom. xiv “to fiy" uçCCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xin fara üç- (cim) Hou. 41, zo: Xiv ditto 7d. 8, Bul. 6or.: xv ditto Tuh. 24a. 3; US- (dra Kav. 9, 9; 78, 8: Osm. xiv ff. uc- (xv, once uŞ-) is noted in metaph. meanings in T'T'S I 710; II 934; III 696. öç- (of a fire) "to go out, be extinguished', with some metaph. extensions. In Ar. script indistinguishable fr. uc-, so that its separate existence was not recognized in Xaş. or XIX Osm. dicts. S.i.a.m.l.g. w. various phonetic changes, including SVV xx Anat. óc-, SDD 1100. Cf. són-, Uyğ. vrır ff, Bud. blligsiz bilig öçser “if ignorance is extinguished' (and so on, 24 occurrences) U II 12,24 fT.; alku ada tuda barça öçer aikinur “all dangers completely disappear and come to nothing” TT V 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 64 
     
   
   
     20 10, 87; ^.0. ZV zo, note 42; VIII 4.18 and 43: Civ. ot yalını ócti "the flame was extinguished' TT 1 124: Xak. xı (among examples of uc-) o:t öçdi: “the fire went out (sakana); ernin öpke:si: öçdi: "the man's anger dicd down! (sa&amp;ana) Kaş. 1 164: KB (in old age) tati. bardı öçti kuruğsak oti “the savour of life has gone and the fire in the belly died down' 375; bu dawlat oti barça ócgü turur “the fire of good fortune is all extinguished' $324: xin(?) 4t. ócer mihnat oti “the fire of affliction dies down' 351: Çağ. xv ff. öç- (-ti) if used of a candle, means "to go out” (söyün-) Vel. 95 (quotn.): öç- (with -Ç-”) xatdmüş sudan şama" ta dtaş "of a candle or fire to be extinguished” am. 62v. 23 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv üc- “to be extinguished” Qutb 120 (öş-), 194 (uç-), 202 (fç-). Dis. ACA eçe: etc. Preliminary note. There are in some modern languages, esp. NE and S|V XX Anat,, a good many scords of the form ACA which are terms of relationship or respect. Some are certainly Mong. loan-twords, e.g. ece "master and various forms of ccige “father , and others may be. The only certain old Turkish tcords of this form are ege:, égi:, and egü:. ege: both this word and eke:, q.v., seem to have meanings straddling the generations (see éci:), this word meaning both *one's mother's younger sister" and 'one's own elder sister and eke: both 'one's father's vounger sister" and *one's own elder síster'; this would explain why this word survives in residual form in NW and SW attached to tay (taga:y, q.v.) to give the meaning “maternal aunt” (Osm. teyze). As an independent word survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. ace, ece, ede, ici SDD 67, 503-5, 786 which all mean, rnter alta, "elder sister". Xak. xı ege: syn. vv. eke:, that is al-uxti” l-hubrd "elder sister'; the -Ç- was changed from -k- as in Ar, carm from garm and cunbad from günbad Kaş, I 86 (this phonology is absurd; both words with initial g- (so marked in the text) arc Pe, 1.-w. and the sound change is normal in such cases); Çağ. ece(^with -ç-")zan-f musimna'anelderly woman" San. 32v. 4. J éci: as pointed out in K. Gronbech, "The Turkish System of. Kinship', in Studia Orientalia . . . Johanni Pedersen dicata, Munksgaard, 1953, this word means “a close male relative vounger than one's father and older tban oneself”, i.e. both '(junior) paternal uncle and 'elder brother'. It soon lost its first meaning, and in the medieval period was displaced almost every wbere by the synonymous Mong. L-w. ağa (aha), it survives, however, in SW xx Anat. in forms like those quoted under eçe: Türkü vu eçi:m xağan olurti: “my (junior) paternal uncle ascended the throne' EE 16, IE E 14,2.0.0. in this sense; ini:li; eçisi: kikşü:rtüki:n üçü:n "because (the Chinese) aroused mutual enmity between | younger MON. V. ACbrothers (and nephews) and elder brothers (and uncles) 7 E 6, İl E 6; a.0.0. of egi: and ini: in apposition: virt ff. Yen. inim eçimiz Mal. 29, a, üç eçime: 32, r and i3: Man. inili €çill Chuas, 7 31; ini €çi M 117 6,6 (iii); In*i; écilerin do. 22, ro (ii): Uyğ. vur (E. Bud. eçi specifically 'elder brother! is common in PP; a.o, U II 82, 13 (in U Il 19, 18; zo, 21 égl is a misreading of evçi): Civ. Ini éci TT I 137; 661 is common in USp., prob. only *elder brother”: O. Kir. ix fT, eci:/éci: is fairly comimnon, and might have either meaning Mal. 6, 2 etc.: Xak. xı E€çi: al-axu'l-akbar sinna(n) 'elder brother” Keş, £ 87; HI 7 (yurg): KP ata bardi és tuş ö€çi yü ini "your father has gone and your comrades and elder and younger brothers! 3784 (prob. spurious): xir(?) Tef. eçi synonymous with Ar. "amm paternal uncle! 86; Kip. xiv. éci: al-'amm İd. 9; al-'amm eggi: Bul. 9, 3 (cim in both), VU 2 eçi: Hap. leg.; prob. a Sec. f. of eçüz, Barsğa:n xı eçi: al-şahla "an old man (or woinan)' Kaş, 7 87. ec: seems to menn rather vaguely 'ancestor'; very rare; perhaps survives in 8W xx Anat. acu “grandfather" (also 'elder brother) SDD 69. Türkü vı egü:m apa:m, etc. sec 1l apa:: Uy£. viri ff. Man. eçesi (sic) do.: Xak. xi KH (in an invocation of God) ay mengü ecü 'oh everlasting ancestor' 10. uça: (?uca:) an anatomical term used both for men and animals, 'the loins, haunches, rump', and the hke, s.i.m.m.l.g., with voiced consonant in some NE languages and SW Osm., perhaps the original pronunciation. Uyğ. virt ff. Civ. tórt yanıda uçada “on the fourth day of the month (the soul is) in the loins' TT VIT 20, 6-7: xiv. Chin.-Uyg.. Dict. the back” uça RID 1734; Hageti 273: Xak, xı uça: af-gahr "the back! Kaş, 1 87: Çağ, xv ff. uça “the back" (arka), more specifically the backbone (ogurga hemigi) in the middle of the back, and more generally "the back parts" (arka mahallinda), with a note on the ''urkish custom of regarding the loins as the most honourable joint at a feast. Vel. 96 (quotns.); uca ("with -c-”) (r) buşt the back'; (ə) malcá' wea panáh "protection, support” San. 65r. g (quotns.): Xwar. xiv uça “back” Qutb. 194: Kom. xiv “the back” uça CCG, Gr. 263 (quotn,): Kip. xiv u:cn: al-Rafal "the haunches' İZ. 26: xv al-xágira “the haunches” uca Tult. 14a. 5; al-'acaz "the buttocks' ditto 24b. 7 (cím everywhere): Osm, Xv ff, uca 'buttocks' c.i.a.p. 773 7 708-9; Zİ 914; III 694; IV 771; San. Əsr. 16 gives surin 'buttocks' as a specifically Riimi meaning of the word. Dis. V. ACAaçı:- (? acı:-) originally “o bc bitter" in a physical sense, later also “to be sour'; at a very early date developed several metaph. meanings, the commonest (of na disease, ctc.) “to be painful, hence (of a person) “to feel pain', and hence 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 65 
     
   
   
     DIS. "to feel the pain of others, to feel compassion” in most languages the original pliysical meaning is lost; Sami, zz, says that in Osm. ağrı:connotes deep-seated pain, acı:- superficial, but more acute and lasting pain, and sizinterrnittent muscular or nervous pain. S.i.a.m. Je, with voiced consonant in some NE languages and the SW (Oguz) languages. Uyf. vurff. Civ. iglp nğrığın acidi "your disease and pain have become acute' T'T I 49: Xak. xı sirke: açı:dı: — amuda'i-xall. 'the vinegar (ctc.) was sour'; also used of the pain (tvaca') of a wound when it aches (amadda) Kaş. III 252 (açı:r, ac:ma:k): KH uragun içer teg açır körse men 'Iftaste bitterness, see, like one who drinks uragun (q.v.)' 815; (Ógdülmis) keçmiş tiriğlikke açıp “regretting his past life” (begins to repent) Chap. 73 title (5631-2): xiv Muh. hamuda acı:- Mel. 25, ro: Rif. 108: Çağ. xv ff, aci- (with -c-") talx şudan “to be bitter" San. 31r. 18: Kip. xv haraqa "to have a burning feeling” acı- Tul. 13b. 8. D 1 öçe:- (óce:-) Den. V. fr. 1 6:6; “to feel hostile, desire revenge. Rare, but survives in several NE languages, R 7 r285, 1286, 3289, 1876, and 'Tuv. óJe-. Xak. xr KD öçep kek sorar ölse “if he dies seeking revenge” 4651: (Kom. xiv “to incite, goad on” öçü- CCG; Gr. might be a survival of this word). D 2 *óce- (öce:-) See 2 öçeş-. Dis. ACD D öçüt Hap. leg.; Dev, N. fr. 1 öçe:-, Xak. xı öçüt a/-fa"r məa"l-hiqd "revenge, malice'; its origin is 1 ó:c Kaş. I şo. C içton compound of İç 'inner' and to:n 'garments', used specifically for 'drawers', hence more gencrally “trousers”, S.i m.m] g., an early loan-word in Russian as shtamy. "The form in some modern NE, SE, and NC languages, iştan, suggests that some of these may be reborrowings from Russian but SW Osm. içdon is a direct survival. Uyf. viri ff. Civ. tişi kişinin ictomnig ağında (so read) "in the gusset of the woman's trousers! TT VII 26, 9-10: (Xak.) xiv Muh.(?) al-saráwil 'trousers, drawers! İşton | Rif. 167 (only); al-tikka "trouser band” uşta:n ba:ğı: (sic) Mel. 65, 5 (Rif. ile:rsük): Çağ, xv ff. iştan diz donu "'knee-length | drawers! Vel 63 (quotn.); İştan corruption (muharraf) of iç ton zir cáma 'under-garment', in Ar. izár San. 106v. 6 (quotn.): Ktp. xri a/-sardrvil (könçe:k and i:m and) içton al-qumágu'I-dáxil *underlinen Hou. 18, 13: xiv İçton (cin) al-sardwil, that is, farob catewádni "inner garment', compounded of İç 'inner' and ton 'garment' İd. 9: XV libds 'clothing' (könçek and) icton Tuh. 31b. ır. Dis. V. ACDD açıt- (?acıt-) Caus, f. of açı:- lit. “to make (something cc.) bitter, or sonr”, metaph. "to cause pain or grief to (someone. Acc.. ACG 21 S.i.a.m.l.g., almost always in a metaph. sense in SW and lit. sense elsewhere, Türkü vırı ff. Man. teprig nece açıt(Oımız ağrıt(tımız erser 'inasmuch as we have pained and grieved God” Chuas. 57; alo, go: Xak. xi ol sirke: açıttı: ammada'l-xall “he made the vinegar (etc.) sour'; and one says ol anin kóplin aç:ttı: amadda qalbahu bi-faci'a “he pained his heart with misfortunce'.. Kaş, / 207 (agitur, açıtma:k), ol küp ol sücigni: açıtğa:n "that jar always makes the wine (in it) sour' 1 154: KB kaşı közi tüğmiş açıtmış yüzin “he knitted his brovvs and his eyes and made his face grim” 770: xıı(?) At açıtma ağız "do not make your mouth [i.e. words] bitter” 162: Çağ, xv ff. acıt- Caus. f.; (r) talx kardan "to make bitter”, (2) metaph. süzmdk Rardan bd xdriş "to make inflamed (or painful) with an itch” San. 31r. 29 (quotns.): Osm. xvr acit"to cause pain” T'T'S I1 2; İİİ, IV 3. D açtur- Caus. f. of 1 ac-; 'toorder(somcone Dat.) to open (something ce.) S.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı ol kapuğ acturdt: “he ordered the opening (bi-fath) of the door', also used for opening anything else Kaş. I 218 (açturur, acturma:k): Çağ. xv ff. actur- Caus. f. (of 1 ac-) San. 31r. 18: Kip. xiv actur- aftaha “to cause to open” İ4. 8. D içtür- Caus. f. of iç- “to give (someone Dat., something /cc.) to drink'. Very rare alternative to İçür-, q.v. Xak. xi ol mapa: su:v içtürdi: agrabani'l-má' “he gave me water (etc.) to drink'; içürdi: is also used in this sense Kaş, I 218 (içtürür, içtürme:k): Kıp. xv “they sometimes omit tbe letter -d- and say for asqd “to give to drink” içir-, the original form being içdir- Tu. 83a. 3-4 Tris. ACD D ictinsiz Hap. leg.; Priv. N./À. fr. the Abi. of ic; "having no interior'. Uyğ. vrr ff. Bud. Sanskrit nirantarabáhya iti hrtvá "having made it completely external” içtinsiz (gap) TT VIII A.4. D içtirti: Adv. in -tirti: fr. ic; properly 'inside', but in practice 'inside one another, interlocked”, Pcc. to Uyğ. Uyğ.vrrr ff. Bud. atsız erpek kiçigğ erpek içtirti sola 'interlock the ring and little fingers (of both hands)” TT V 8, ss: on ergek içtirti solap 'interlocking the ten fingers' do. 10, 95. "Tris. V. ACDDC "Içtonlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. icton. Xak. xı er iştonlandı: “the man wore trousers! (al-sardwil); originally Içtonlandı:, but the -Ç- was changed into -ş- because of the proximity of the points of utterance (a/-maxrac) Kaş. I 314 (istonlanur, istonlanma:k). Dis. ACĞ D 1 açığ (?acığ) N./A.S. fr. açı:-, originally “bitter” in a physical sense, in some languages 'sour', although this is properly ekgig; it soon 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 66 
     
   
   
     22 acquired metaph. meanings 'grievous, painful”, and in some languages 'anger, angry". S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. phonetic changes; in some NW and SW languages there is a curious devclopment, act being used for 'bitter, painful', and BCik for "anger”, "he latter might be taken as a Dev. N. in -k but there is no early trace of such a word. Uyjf. vin ff. Man.-A açığ emğek 'gricvous pain” M 7 o, 6: Bud. açığ ünin siğtalyul 'sobbing in a doleful voice" U II 13, 5 (0; ağazımtakı tatağlar . ... açığ bolup “the sweet tastes in my mouth becoming bitter U İİ 37, 30-2; açığ emgek U JV 3o, 34; do, 188: oo. TT VII 40, 25-6; Suv. &amp;14, 15 (tarka:): Civ. açığ nara “a bitter pomegranate! H 11 16, 2; (when two hearts are linked as one) éldin xandin açığ bolur mu “can there come distress from the realm or ruler?” TT 1 179: Xak. xi aci 'anything bitter" (jurr) Kaş, 1 63; o.o. murr II 55, 13; hámid 'sour' İİ 311, iş and 19; III 272, 23; al-hümid wa'l-murr II 299, 25: KB açığka tatiğ 'sweet for bitter” 1087; açığ bu ölüm “death is grievous'; 1170; ağuda açığ “more bitter than poison” 3913; 8.0.0.: x11(?) Tef. açığ (1) "bitter", (2) “pain, grief" 64: 4t. süçüğ tattip erse açığka anun “if you have tasted sweetness, prepare yourself for bitterness” 209; 3.0. 436: Xiv Muh. a/-mürr acığ/acı Mel. 56, 6; Rif. 154; ditto acı:ğ 66, 3; 165; al-lidmid acı: 66, 3; 165; al-hirrif “pungent" acığ Rif. 154 (in 165 ekşi:): al-má'u l-imáli]t "salt water' acı: Su: 76, 17; 18o (aciB): Çağ, xv ff, aciB/acik (with -c-") talx “bitter”, iayf ca. ta'assuf "oppression, grief' Vel. ro, acığ (with -c-”) (r) xaşın va jayz 'anger, wrath'; (2) talx San. 32v. 5 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv açığ “bitter” Quib 3; MN 341; Nahc. 135, 5 etc.: Kip. xi aj-murr açı: İon, 27, 10; al-madad 'pain, inflammation” açık (unvocalized) 32, 20: xiv nci: al-murr ld. 9: xv hámid (ékgl and) acı Tuh, 13a. ii /aban “mülk” is translated (nter alia by acı 'sour! 31b. t2; al-má'u'i-máli a:c1: Su: Kav. 58, 13: Osm. xvff. acığ 'anger' in Dede (xv) TTS II 2; acığ/acık "pain, painful in Xv and xvi and acı “bitter” (physical and metaph.) fr. xv onwards TT I 1, 2; II 2; IL i; İV a, ə. D 2 açığ, although the semantic connection is tenuous, presumably a Dev. N. fr. 1 aç- cf. açın-, "a gift' and more specifically “a gift from a ruler'; Kag.'s second meaning is not noted elsewhere, N.o.a.b. Uyf. vr ff. Chr. yüklerin açtılar ertütin açuğın ötündiler (the Magi) "opened thcir packages and presented their gifts (Hend.)' U 7 6, 12-13 (mistranscribed and mistranslated): Civ. (if the base of his ear twitches) beğlerdin aci ayağ alır “he will receive gifts and honours from the beg's' TT VII 34, 10-11: Xak. xt açığ the word for "a gift from the Sultan” (ed isatı”l-sultdan), hence. xam mana: aci bé:rdi: acázani'I-malik “the king gave me a güft”: açığ af-tana"um *'contentment, wellbeing”, hence Ó:zü:gni: açığlığ tut “make vourself comfortable (»a' 75) with good food” DIS. ACĞ Kaş, 1 63: KI (the king speaks) menipdin açığ bolsu sendin tapuğ "let there be gifts from me and service from you” 596; €l(Diğme Açığ birle acti kapuğ “and the king opened the door with a gift' 616; 0.0. 1035, 2399, 2495, 5218. D açuk N./A.S. (Pass.) fr. 1 ag-; lit. “open” with metaph. extensions, esp. (1) “clear” (sky); (2) "frank, friendly" (disposition); (3) 'obvious, manifest”, (4) in recent Osm. “an open financial account, deficiency, bankruptcy'.. S.i,a.m.l.g. usually as açık and the like. Uyf. vin ff. Bud. acuk adırtlığ "clearly distinguishable' TT VI 383 (v.1); aguk (gap) U IJI 35, 16: Xak. xt aguk 'anything open" (maftif); hence acuk kapuğ "an open door'; aguk kó:k “a cloudless (mughiya) sky”, and anything obvious (bayyin) is called açuk rs Kaş. 7 64: KB aquk tutti yüz "hc maintained a friendly attitude! soo, acuk 'friendly' 691, 2122; xiit(?) 7ef. açuk 'obvious, clear” 65: xiv Muh. al-maftüh aguk (cim) Met, 56, 4; 82, 16; Rif. 154, 188: Çağ. xv ff. aguk (with -ç-”) huşdda "open" San. 32v. 2 (quotn,): Xvvar, xiv açük "open, clear" Quib 3; Nahc. 2, 16; 23, 6 etc.: Kip. xiv auk (cim) al-maftüh İd. 8: xv maftüh açık Tuh. 48b. 7: Osm. xiv ff. açuğ /açuk “open, clear", fr. xvi onwards açık TTS II 3, 5; Hİ 2. oçok/oçak (?ocok) originally “hcarth, fireplace”, and the like; hence esp. in SC, SW “a building of which the hearth is the centre”, and hence 'a group of persons assembling in such a building", that is “family, guild, regiment of Janissaries', ctc. S.i.a.1n.l.g.; in some NE and NC languages ocok and the Jike; in the SW (Oğuz) languages ocak. 'The evidence points to ocok as the original form. Uyğ. viti ff. Bud. (n a list of parts of the house) ocok taş 'hearthstonc' TT VI 86: Xak. xı oçak al-kánün 'fireplace' Kaş. 1 64; köçürme: oçok (sic) “a fireplace which is transported from place to place” 7 490, 26: xiv Mut. al-micmara o:ca:B (cim) Mel, 68, ış, Rif. 169: Çağ. xv ff. ocağ/ocak (r) diagdán-: matbax “a kitchen fireplace! on which they put cookingpots; hence metaph. düdmüán ca xánadàán-i buzurg a large family or clan", (2) “an iron ring” (fateq) which they put on a prisoner or criminal San. 65r. 19 (quotn.; there is no other trace of the last meaning): Korn. xiv "fireplace" oçak CCG; Gr.: Fap. xi al-hánin 0:c8:k (misspelt rcoca:k) Hou. 6, rs: xv kánrin ocak Tuh. 318. 5; Kat. 64, 6: Osm. xv ff. ocak is recorded for 'fireplace' fr. xv and with metaph. meaning fr. xvır T TS I 534; H1 530; IV 596. VU ?D ucuk assuming, as seems reasonable, that it is not Oçok, there is one early occurrence of this word, which might, in the context be taken as a Dev. N. fr. uç-. Therc is one certain survival of such a word, Kom. xiv ucux 'chaff' CCG; Gr., no doubt so called because it flies about, "This meaning survives in NW Kaz,, R7 1327. It is difficult, if not impossible, to connect ug- with Çağ. xv ff. ucuf/ucuk (with -ç-”) (1) tabxdl 'fcver spots'; 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 67 
     
   
   
     ' amr dxirahu TRIS. ACĞ (2) metaph., xd/ "a mole (or styc?) which grows in the eye” San. 65v. 18, or Osm. xiv ff. ucuk 'epilepsy' TTS I 712; 11 917; 111 696; IV 773 (and San. 6sv. 20). The early passage might possibly (other alternatives have been suggested) be translated as follows: Türkü viii (we lived in the Çoğay kuzi: and Kara: kurn, eating gazelles and hares; the people's bellies were full) yağımız tegre: uguk teg erti: 'our enemies were all round us like a flock of birds' T 8. VU açkı: “elder brother, (junior) paternal uncle'; cf. écl:; "Tbe Xak. entry follows oçak and might imply a basic form "açık, but the Kip. forms point to ackt:, N.o.a.b. Xak. the Xakini (Turks), addressing an elder hrother (al-axi'l-akbar) say açkım, the qdf is inserted only with the rst Pers. Poss. Suff.; it is not permissible to say açkın Kaş. 7 64: Kip. xut al-"amm 'paternal uncle! agku (sic; also ata: karındaşı:) İd. 31, 19: Xiv açğı: (cim, unvozalized) a/-şağır yuxáfibu'l-kabir "a junior thus addresses a senior' /d, 9. Duçğuk Han. leg.?, possibly the earlier form of some medieval words mentioned under uguk; presumably Dev. N. fr. uç-. Xak. xr uçğuk &amp;l-zukám 'catarrh, cold in the head” Kaş. 7 98. C ickur compound of 1c 'inner' and 1 kur “belt”. Survives in some NE, SE, NC, and SW languages as içkir, uckur, and the like, Xak. xı Kaş. 1 35 (iç): xiv Mut, al-kamarrán 'belt' uckur Mel. 67, 8; Xwar. xiu "A/ igkur “belt” 47: Kom. xiv “belt” içkir CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv. içkur al-kamarrán "a Pe. word' İd. 9: Osm. xvirr uçğur in “ünü, band-i izdr wa band-i şahsdr 'the belt of the trousers or drawers! San, 65r. 29. Dis. V. ACGD açık- (a:cik-) Intensive form of 2 a:ç-, originally stronger than the latter, "to be famished', but now the normal word for 'to be hungry' in a.m.l.g.; SW Osm. actk-, 'l'km. a:cık-, Xak, xı er açıktı: tadammara”l-racul mina"l-cü" the man writhed with hunger" Kaş. 1 190 (agika:r, açıkma:k): the suffix -k- is used in a Pass. (or Intrans.) sense when a mün is overcome by something, e.g. er açıkdı: cd"a”"l-racul [li-kasonihi mahbüs aw mahgür 'alayhi "the man was hungry because he was imprisoned or put under restraint" 7 21, 2: Çağ. xv ff. acık- gurusna. şudan “to be hungry" San. 32 r. 12: X war. xiv açıkmiş böri “a hungry volf” MN 76: Kom. xtv “to be hungry! acik- CCG; Gr. D uguk- (? ucuk-) Den. V. (Intrans.) fr. 1 u:g. N.o.a.b. Xak. xr 1:$ üçükti: balaga'l 'the matter reached its conclusion Kaş. 7 19o (uguka:r, ucukma:k): KB uçukmiş tün-e “the night was coming to an end" 6216: Osm. xiv göğe erlgmege burcu uçukmiş “his star had finally reached thc (height of) heaven" T TS I 712. (D) içğın- “to allow (someone or something - 23 Acc.) to disappear; to let (something) slip'; morphologically a Refl. f. but with no known basic form. Survives in NE Alt., Tel. ickinfikçın-, Sag. iskin- R. I 1355, 1384, 139r; Khak. tsxin-, Tuv. igkin-; NW Kaz. ickin-.. Türkü viri Türkü bodun élledük elin içğınu: idmiş "The "l'ürkü people let the realm which they had created completely disappear! 1 E 6, II E 2 (with id- as Aux. V.); torü:sü:n içğınmış bodunij “the people who had allowed the Türkü customary law to disappear" 7 E 13 (İT E 11); o.o. Ongin 1 and 2 (derived from I); vir ff uzu:nto:nlu:ğ közpü:si:n kölke: ıçğınmlış "a woran let her mirror fall in a lake" /rkB zz: Man. birök ol kişi öğin köpülin ıçğınsar “if that man loses his understanding and senses' M 111 17, 10-11 (i); 18, 9-10 (i): Uyğ. vi ff. Bud, birer birer ógümin kópülümin ıçğınurmen 'I lose my understanding and senses one bv one' U HI 37, 1; erdemlig etózüm içğınsarmen 'if 1 lose my (present) virtuous body' (when shall I be born again with another as good?) U 1I 88, 79: Civ. (if a man has a mole on his lip, it means that) tavar içğunğuçi bolur “he is going to lose his money” TT VII 37, 9-10: Xak. xı ol kuşnu: eliğden ıçğındr: “he let the bird slip (affata) out of his hand”, (prov.); er içğındı: "the man. broke wind (radama) in a public gathering, and to his confusion could not restrain himself! Kaş. 7 253 (içğınu:r, içğınma:k), olo. 7 447, 7; JII 307, 2: K B til ıçğınmasa “f he does not lose control of his tongue' 2350: xır(?) Tef. din ıçğırığaylar “they will abandon the (true) faith' 130: Çağ. xv ff. ıçkın- mutahayyar ol“fo be confused' Vel. 49 (quotn.; a mistranslation, the phr. means "letting the fish slip from his hand”), ıçğın- (with -ç-”) San. 96v. 8 (same quotn. and rnistranslation): Xwar. xiv içğın- (once uçğun-) “to release, let go, lose' Qutb 194, 205: Kom. xiv içkin- “to escape" (tic) CCG; Gr.: Kip. xv tafallata “to escape' (sic) ışkın- Tuh. gb. 1. Tris. ACG D 1 açığlığ (acığlığ) P.N./A. fr. 1 açığ, s.i,m.m.l.g. with a wide range of meanings including NE “miserable, unhappy'; NC 'angry'; INW usually 'angry'; SW 'distressing, tragic, distressed, grieved'. Xak, xr açığlığ küp dann dü humüdüt muhammid mà subba fihi 'a jar containing sour things which turns whatever is poured into it sour! Kaş. I 147: Çağ. xv ft. acığlığ xigmnák 'angry' San, 32v. 8. D 2 açığlığ P.N./A. fr. 2 acil; pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı açığlığ er al-raculu'l-muna" am “a comfortable, contented man” Kaş. 7 147 (prov.) I 63 (2 açığ). D açığlık (acığlık) A.N. fr. 1 açığ, 'bitterness. S.i.m.m.l.g., normally retaining this meaning and only occasionally having the metaph. meanings of 1 açığ and 1 açığlığ. Xak. xı açığlık a/-mardra "bitterness” Kay. 7 150: xin(?) Tef, ditto. 65: Xwar. xiv ditto. Qutb 3; Nahc. 164, 9; 338, 6. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 68 
     
   
   
     24 TRIS. ACĞ D açukluğ P.N./A. fr. açuk, N.o.a.b. Xak. xı açukluğ (MS. ayuğluğ) kişi: al-insanu'l-talq hasanu'l-xulq "a generous, good-natured man” Kaş. I 147: KB ayu bérdim emdi açukluğ sapa “1 have now spoken frankly to you” 851; similar phr. 2176. D açukluk A.N. fr. açuk, “openness (lit. or metaph.), clearness, frankness', and the like. S.is. NE, NW, SW languages. Xak. xı yü:z açukluğu: (aláqatu'l-scach 'cheerfulness of countenance", kapuğ acuklu£i: “means that the door is open” (maftüh) Kaş. I 150 (so spelt in MS,, but in the list of words ending in -luk): xii(?) Tef. acukluk 'clear utterance' 65: Osm. xiv açukluğ 'friendliness, kindness' TTS I 3; xvi agukluk (unvocalized) *clearness (of utterance)' IV 3. D oçaklığ (ocaklığ) P.N./A. fr. oçak, survives only(?) in SW Osm., where it has extended meanings. Xak. xı oçaklığ ev "a house with a fireplace” (al-kánun) Kaş. I 147. D oçaklık (ocaklık) A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. ocak; survives only(?) in SW Osm. where it has extended meanings. Xak. xı oçaklık yé:r “the place for a fireplace! (al-kánim); and one says oçaklık titiğ for any material for making a fireplace, clay and the like Kaş. I 150. Tris. V. ACGD oçaklan- (ocaklan-) Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. oçak. Xak. xi ev oçaklandı: “the house had a fireplace! (£dniün) Kaş. I 293 (oçaklanur, oçaklanma:k). D açığsa:- Hap. leg. ; Desid. Den.V. fr.1 açığ. Xak. xı er açığsa:dı: "the man longed for something sour” (a/-humüda) Kaş. I 302 (açığsa:r, açığsa:ma:k)), same phr. T 279, 25. D açığsı:- Hap. leg.; Simulative Den. V. fr. 1 açığ, quoted in a grammatical section; n.m.e. Xak. xı üzüm açığsı:dı: “the grapes turned sour (Aamuda), and the sourness increased at the expense of the sweetness' Kaş. I 282, 7. Dis. ECG igük 'fur-skin', hence later 'fur-coat'. Recorded in Vas. 231 (?xix. Uzb.) as içiK, survives in NC Kzx. işik. Xak. xı içük “any fur-skin ((farro) taken from a sable, sqirrel, and the like” Kaş. 7 69: Kom. xiv “a fur overcoat? içik CCG; Gr. F üjek 'written character, letter, syllable". The word has a Sogdian look and may have reached Turkish through that language, but seems ultimately to go back to Chinese tzü (Giles 12,324; Old Chinese (Pulleyblank) dzyiv), same meaning; the spelling varies greatly, the final sound is always Rdf or the equivalent, but in Uy£. the initial is more often u- than H-. Survives with much the same meanings in NE Tel, üzük R 7 1895; Tuv. üjük Pal. 428; NW Kaz. icik TT F 12, note A s: SW xx Anat, üzük SDD 1442. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud, bir ujek (sic) a "single letter" U HI 76, ız (i); ujek boşğurğalı bérürler “they teach them the alphabet” ditto 8o, 1; v ujek "the letter v' T T V 4, 5 (and other similar phr., see p. 12, note A s); in TT VII 41 (passim) uzik ( 'uJik) means “a Chinere character”, and in Suv. 27, zr: 272, 10, etc. usik (ujik) means "syllable”: Xak. xi ülük a/-Aicá' the alphabet" . and each letter (harf) of the alphabet is called üjük; hence onc says bu: ne: ülük ol “vhat is this letter? Kaş, 7 7:1: Kom. xiv ol sóznip uşuğın CCG; Gr. 267; prob. “the spelling of that word', not as there translated: Kip. xın al- qalam "a pen! üsük How. 23, 8. eçkü: generic term for 'goat', but in some languages, since there are special words, koçna:r (q.v.), etc, for "ram", specifically “female goat'.. 5.i.a.m.l.g. with wide variations in pronunciation; the earliest form was eçkü, and keçi: an Oğuz corruption which survives in the SW (Oğuz) languages, although eçki and isk survive in SW xx Anat. SDD sos, 799. Uyğ. vr ff. Civ. eçkü ötü “the gall of a goat' H 1 24; eçkü, esp. in the phr. eckü süti 'goat's milk' is common in H /T, (in a list of livestock) iki sağlık €çkü 'two milch goats USp. 36, 2; bukanı écküni (sic) 'cattle and goats! 68, 5: Xak. xı eçkü: al-'anz 'goat' Kag. 1 128; four o.o.: Çağ. xv ff. üçkü ("with -k-”) heçi Vel. 97 (quotn.), üçgğü (so spelt) buz *goat' San. 6sv. 4 (quotn.): Oğuz xı keçi: a/-mi'zá 'goats) Kaş. III 219: Xwar. xiv égkü Qutb 156 (içegü): Kom. xiv '(male) goat eçki CCI; Gr.: Kip.fYkm. xmi al-ma"z mutlaga(n) 'goat', generic term eckl: (sic), also called keçi: (sic) How. 15, 7: xiv,ecki: (cim) al-mi'zá' İd. 9; keçi: (with -ç-) al-mi'zà; and in Kip. eçki: (with -ç-” 79; al-má'iz ke:çi: (cim) Bul. 7, 13: xv al-ma"z ékgl (in margin eçki, keçi) Tuh. 11a. 4; xarrüb “carob bean' éske münüzi 14a. 11; ma"z 6şki 37b. ro, al-ma'iz keşi: Kav. 62, 1. D içgü: Conc. N. fr. iç-, originally quite neutrally *drink', usually in association with 1 a:ş “food”. S.i.a.m.l.g., except INC, but usually meaning “strong drink, intoxicant', or even “orgy”, by about xv1 became içki nearly everywhere. Uy. vi ff, Man.-A as icgü “food and drink! M III 13, zo (i): Bud. aş içğü PP 71, 7; U IV 38, 117: Civ. as icgü TT VH 24, 8 and 22; [gap] icgü TT 7 211: Xak. xr iggü: 'anything that is drunk' (ai-magrib) Kaş. I 128; xiu(?) Tef. icgü "drink” 127: xiv Muh. al-maşrüb i:cgü: (sic) Rif. 164; al-şarba “a drink' i:g$ü: Mel, 83, ro, Iüf. 189: Çağ. xv ff. içğü şurb swa. tacarru" 'drinking and imbibing' (with some implication of excess) San. 95v. 21 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv icgü “drink” Qutb 56. (çgüliçkü): Osm. xiv içğü et- "to carouse” TS 1I şış: xv icki eyleditto III 355. D icéek Dev. N. in -gek, connoting habitual action, fr. iç-: only in conjunction with ye:k *demon', q.v. Ye:k is the older word, and içğek was prob. coined to use in conjunction 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 69 
     
   
   
     TRIS. with it to describe another kind of demon; in some Bud. texts ye:k corresponds to Sanskrit yahşa and İçğek to b/rita, 'ghost' and the like. Türkü viri ff. Man. yekke icgekke Chuas. 144-5: Uy. vii ff. Bud. yek içgek TT V 10, 84; VI 131; common in VII, X; in VII 13 yek is yakga in l. 5 and icgek bAüta in l. ro, ye:k lgge:k V111O.09: Civ. yek lcgek 77 7 38. D üçgil Den. N./A. fr. üç, 'triangle, triangular". Survives in NC Kzx. üşkil 'triangle” and SW xx Anat. üçgül 'triangular; trefoil' SDD 1427. Uyğ. vin ff. ücgll Caf. 210, quoting two minor texts: Xak. xr ücgil al-say'u'l-mutallat that is a ting which has three sides (arkàn) Kaş. I 105: Kip. xv in a list of words of this form, including mutallaf, in Tuh. 62a. 3 İT. the text is corrupt, passing straight from ikiğül to besgül, but the form was no doubt ücgül. D ickin Hap. leg.; presumably Dev. N. in -İn (Intrans.) fr, içik-. Xak. xı içkin er al-raculu'lladi daxala mima'l-'aduww müstaslima(n) wa dmanühu, "a man who comes over from the enemy asking for peace and is granted asylum” Kaş. I 108. Dis. V. ECGD içik- Intrans. Den. V. fr. İç, “to submit to an enemy or foreign ruler”, Fairly common in Türkü, not noted after xı. Türkü vir (having revolted, they vvere unable to organize and establish themselves and ) yana: içikmiş 'submitted again” (to the Chinese) 7 E ro, II E 9; seven o.o.: Uyf. vir sipari: bodun içikdi: “half the people submitted” Su. E 6-7, three o.o.: Xak. xı er İçikti: iszaslama”l-racul fUl-harb wa daxala id”l-harbi”l-dxir ta”i"a(ı) "the man asked for peace in a war and obediently submitted to the other side” Kaş. I 192 (içike:r, içikme:k), eri: atı: icikti: “his men and horses asked us for peace' (istaslama Haynd) II 118, 16. D öçük- Emph. f. of óc-; pec. to Xak. Xak. xı er tını: öçükdi: “the man's voice failed (xafat) in battle, and his breathing was interrupted (inqata'a nafsuhu) because of a douche of cold water or a heavy blow' Kaş, I 192 (üclike:r, ócükme:k); same phr. JI 118, 15: KB (he went to sleep a little and 'then woke up again) öcükmiş kömür teg "like a dying ember” 3951. D ieger-. Trans, Den. V. fr. ic; "to hring (something Aec.) into (something 2Dat.); to subdue (an enemy)”, for the second meaning cf. İçik-. Not noted after xı. Türkü vir (I campaigned against the Basmil . . . gap) içgertim “1 subdued them" 77 E zs: UyB. vi” [gap] icgerip Su. N 7; an[t: ic]germedim S 4: vi ff. Bud. kiz berişip kelin icgerip “giving one another daughters in marriage and receiving daughters-in-law (from each other's families TT VI 311; Sanskrit anugrhniyaám “ve will favour, treat graciously' i:zge:re:lim VII 4.41; in IV 12, 53 tört ıçğermek ECG 25 represents 'the four smrtyupasthána 'the four things on which the mind should concentrate': Xak. xı ol atın evke: içğerdi: "he brought (adxala) the horse into the house": ol anı: begke: içgerdi: "he falsely accused (rcaşd) him to the beg” Kaş. I 227 (içğerür, icgerme:k). Tris. ECG D ige:gü: Den. N. fr. iç with the Collective Suff. -e:ğü:, cf. yüze:ğü, q.v. ; 'intestines, entrails", S.i.a.m.Lg. in a rather wide range of forms, both shorter, içeğ and the like, and with altered final vowel], e.g. NE içege. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. (when after death) içi içegüsi teşilser “his internal organs and intestines split” U III 78, 2-3; o.o. do. 43, 24; TT X 548: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. "entrails" içeğü R I 1520; Ligeti 155: Xak. xı İçe:gü: iem má tahüt "alayhil-dulü" "a word for what is enclosed by the ribs! Kaş. 7 137: Xwar. xin(?) Oğ. (a falcon was eating) İçegüsin “his entrails" 41; Kom. xiv “entrails” lceg CCTI; Gr.: Kap. xv müşrdn “intestines” İşeği Tuh. 33b. 7; the word also occurs in 23b. 7 where there is an omission in the MS.; it should read /abib 'physician' (otaçı, talaq 'bowels') icegi: Osm. XIV and xv İçeğgü “intestines” in several texts TTS II 514; IV 407. D üçe:gü: Collective f. of üc; "all three, three together”, S.i.a.m.l.g. except SW usually in abbreviated form with -£- elided. The forms with -len-/le attached, which appear from Çağ. onwards (San. 65r. 26) are Turco-Mong., the Mong. Collective Suff. -e'ülen having been substituted for -e:gü:. “Türkü vir (the Chinese, Oğuz, and Kitafi) bu üçegü: kavış(s)ar 'if these three assemble' T rz, üçeğü:n kavışıp sülelim “let us all three assemble and launch a campaign” T zr: Uyğ. vin ff. Civ. bu üçegü and biz ügegii is fairly common in USp. in contracts to which three persons are parties, e.g. 25, 9: Xak. xı. KB üçegü turur tüz “all three (legs of a stool) stand level” 802: Çağ. xv ff. ücegü ("with -8-”) ügtinci 'third' (sic, in error); üçevv tici “the three of them” V/el. 94; üçevv (spelt) sr tá “three together' San. 65r. 25 (quotn.): Xwar. xır(?) Oğ. üçegüsi “the three (persons named) together' 337, 338: Kom. xiv 'three together" üçöv CCG; Gr.: Kip. xvin a İist of Collective numerals ücew Tuh. 61b. ro. D iciglig Hap. leg.; if correctly read P.N./A. fr. a N.Ac. of 1g-. Uyğ. vir ff. Man. ötrü icigli[g] yaraşı sevigilg bolur 'thereupon it becomes fit to drink, palatable, and pleasant Wind. 250, 42-3. D icgerü: Directive f. of İç, properly an Adv. of motion 'inwards'; s.i.m.m.l.g., usually as a N./A. “the inside, interior', the -ğ- being elided in the SW and devoiced in most other languages. Türkü vir ff. Man. icgerü kirip “entering within (the tomb) M I s, 3: Uyğ. vir ff. Man. (gap) içkerü (sic) TT III 84: Bud. ötrü icgerü kapı éi(l)i(g)ke ötük bérdi 'thereupon (going) into (the palace) he 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 70 
     
   
   
     26 TRIS. presented a petition to his father the king” PP I5, 4-s: similar phr. 23, 2; içğerü balıkka kirgeysiz 'you will enter the town', 39, 8: Civ. (in a list of penalties, to the king a gold ingot, to the princes a silver ingot) İçğerü ağılıkka bir yastuk icgerü agilikka bir at 'to the court (or government?) treasury a yastuk [q.v.] and a horse' USp. 78, r4-15: xiv Chin.-Uyğ. Dict. 'within' içğeri R 7 1518; Ligeti iss: Çağ, xv ff. not listed, but in San. 96v. 19 tl. içkerrek andarintar "morc internal (quotn.); içkeriki andarüni “situated inside": Kom. xiv "within, among! içkeri CCI, Gr.: Kap. xv caiewa(n) “inside” iskeri; Tkm. işeri Tuh. tta, 10 a.0.0. D içgerülüğ P.N./A. fr. içğerü:, the word must have survived until fairly recently as SS. 47 lists içkevvilik (zodno error for rd) müşdhib “a gentleman-in-waiting on the Sultan” (with other synonyms). Uyğ., viri ff. Bud, içgerülüg edgü yemişiğ "the good fruit belonging to the palace” PP 72, 7. Tris. V. ECGD öçüktür- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of *ócük-, Intrans. Den. V. fr. 1 ö:ç, "There is no early record of such a verb but it survives, with phonetic variations, in NC. Kir, Kzx. R I 1306; and NW Kaz. R I 1873 (Xak.) xm(?) 4t. öçüktürme erni tilin “do not arouse feelings of revenge (or anger?) in men with your tongue' r39. D içükle:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. içük. Xak. xr ol to:nuj icükle:di: “he covered (a/saga) his garment with the fur (furw) of sahles, squirrels and the like” Kaş, 7. 305 (igükle:r, içükle:me:k). DF ülükle:- Den. V. fr. üjük (üfek). Survives in NE Tuv. ülükle- 'to read letter by letter” Pal. 428. Xak. xt (after üfük) hence one says bitig üjükle:dl: Aacá'l-hurüf doa”l-kitàb'he speltout the letters and the document" Kaş, 171,27; n.m.e. Dis. ACL VUD üçleç Lap. leg.; Conc. N. fr. üç with the rare suffix -lec. "l'he arrow presutnably had a trident-shaped head joined to the shaft by an iron collar. Xak. xı üçleç (/dm not vocalized) “a fextherless arrow (al-»u'rad) used for shooting hares'; tez Jua alda qudodn yudamm ra'suhá bi-hadida “it consists of three rods joined together witb a piece of iron” Kaş. I əs. D a:ghk (a:clık) A.N. fr. 1 a:ç, 'hunger, famine. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE; in SW (Oğuz) languages aclık (Tkm. a:clik). Xak. x1 a:çlık (sic) al-macá'a "extreme hunger! Kaş. I114: KB 2003 (1 8:5): xın(?) Tef. aclik (1) *hunger'; (2) 'covetousness' 6s: Xwar. xIV açlık 'hunger' Qutb 3; Nahe. 28, 8. D uçluğ (u:cluğ) P.N./A. fr. 1 u:ç, "pointed, sharp'. S.i.a.m.l.g. Uyğ. vitr ff. Bud. süvri ECG uçluğ trisul “a sharp-pointed trident" TM IV 255, 138. D iclig P.N./A. fr. ic; lit. “having an inside'. S.i.s. NE, NW, SW languages with various extended meanings. Uyg. vni ff. Bud. ol ok keçe iclig bolup 'becoming pregnant that very night” 7T” VII 26, 16; o.o., same meaning X 36; USp. roza, 3. D içlik A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. ig; survives in NE 'lTuv. iştik and SW Osm. içlik. Xak. xi içlik waliyatul-sarc the stuffing of a saddie” Kas. I 102; içlik bolsa: at yafri: mass "if the saddle is stuffed, the horse is not galled' 7 104, 25. D öçlüğ (ó:cló:g) P.N./A. fr. ö:ç, 'spiteful revengeful”. S.i.s, NE, NC, NW languages with phonetic changes. Uyğ. vur ff, Bud. óclóg (sic) kekllg “malicious and revengefuP” TT VHI N.8; a.o. Hücn-ts. 2095 (urundt). Xak. xı (after kek) hence one says öçlüğ kcklig kişi: sahibi 1-hiqd sea”l-ta”r “a spiteful and malicious man" Kaş. 77 283, 14; n.m.e. VUF ajlap (unvocalized) Hap. leg. As it comes between uldar and izdeD and is preceded by L, indicating the second consonant, its general form is certain; no doubt one of the numerous Iranian l-w. in Oğuz, sec Ören. Gülər xı ajfap a/-hirbd' “chameleon” Kaş, T 116. Dis. V. ACLD açıl- Pass. f. of 1 -aç-, lit. “to be opened', with various extended and metaph, meanings. S.ia.m..g. Uyğ. vir ff, Bud. könülleri açıldı “their minds were enlightened'(?) TT VI 303; in the Chinese date formula in Suv. 199, 19 Á'ai “to open, be opened' (Giles 5,794) is translated açılmak: Civ. tepri kapığı açıldı? “the gate of heaven was opened' TT I 144; açıl- (of a blocked ear) "to be unblocked' H I 57, 58, 59; (of a sore throat) "to be relieved” ditio 154; 2.0. H H 12, oo: Xak. xi kök açıldı: /afataha"l-amr “the thing opened" (sic); also used when taqagsa'ati'l-samá' "the sky cleared'; and one says könül açıldı: inşaraha Hşadr "the heart was gladdened” also used of anytbing that is opened aj. I 193 (açılu:r, nçılma:k), tüpürme:zinçe: açılmass “unless (the wind) blows, (the sky) does not clear” 7/ 71, 14: KB okisa açılğay “if you rcad, it wil! be explained' 358, 927; açıldı tanuk “gifts were presented' 5951 (for meaning cf. 2 açığ): xın(?) Tef. açıl- (of the sky) “to clear; (of a town) “to be conquered' 65: xiv Muh.(?) futiha acil- (cim) Rif. 130 (only): Çağ. xv ff. ngil- huşdda şudan “to be opened' San. 31r. 14 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv açıl- "to be opened' Qut 3; (of spring) “to begin" MN 86: Kom. xıv “to be opened" açıl- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv. acil- (cim) mfataha İd. 8; Bul. 33t.: Osm. xiv fF. açıl- “to be explained, disclosed', etc. TTS I2; 114: HHI 2. : D icil- Pass. f. of ig; “to- be drunk'. S.i.m.m.l.g. Xnk. xı su:v. icildi: “the water was drunk' 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 71 
     
   
   
     TRIS. V. ACM- ' 27 (şuriba) Kaş. 1 194 (içtlür, içilme:k): Çağ. xv ff. içil- Pass. f.; məişida şudan “to be drunk San. 96v. 7. D öçül- Pass. f. of öç- , “to be extinguished'. ''echnically ungrammatical, since ó€-, which has the same meaning and is also uscd in Hend. with alkin-, is Intrans. and should not have a Pass., but survives in NE "Tel, üçülR I 1554. Uy. vir ff, Bud. (if our sins) öçülmedi alkınmadı erser “have not been extinguished and vviped out" TT TV zo, note B 42, l. ro, similar phr. Sut. 164, 15. D içle:- Den. V. fr. İç: "to finc (a garment)'. Survives only(?) in NE Bar. etsle- £ 7 869; "Tuv. işte- Pai. 196. Xak. xı ol to:nuğ icte:di: ca'ala li'l-tawb bifana "he lined the garment' Kaş. I 286 (icle:r, içle:me:k). D» aglin- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of actl- and syn. w. it. Xak. xı kapuğ açlındı: “the door (etc.) opened” (infataha); an alternative form (luga) of açıl- Kaş. 7 256 (aclinur, aclinma:k). D içlen- Refl. f. of Icle:-; survives in NE Tuv. işter- (r) (of a house, etc.) “to be occupied'; (2) to be pregnant! Pal. 196, and has recently been revived, with a different meaning, in SW Rep. 'l'urkish. Xak. xı tarığ iclendi: in'agada habbatu'I-zar' 'the grains of the cereal crop swelled'; also used of any commodity of which the inner parts (2wasaf) are eaten when they are mature (mat'üm) Kaş. 1 257 üçlenür, Iclenme:k). D uçlan- Hap. leg., Refl. Den. V. fr. 1 u:ç. Xak. xı uçlandı: ne:p gara'l-5ay' da atraf “the thing became pointed” Kaş. 7 256 (uçlanur, uclanma:k). D üglen- Lap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. üç. Xak. xı üglendi: ne:p sdra'L-jay'! taláta "the thing turned into three”, e.g. one says İkl: ka:z üçlendi: tatallata'l-battán “the two ducks [sic, but read 'geese'] became three” Kaş, J 256 (üçlenür, üclenme:k). D açlış- Co-op. f. of açıl-, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı kapuğla:r açlışdı: infatahati'l-abwáb “the doors opened (together)'; also used of things that are locked (mungaliqa) Kaş. I 239 (açlışu:r, açlışma:k): Çağ. xvff. açılış(spelt) Co-op. f.; ba-ham wá gudan wa şihdftagi toa inbisát hardan “to be open, to expound, and to be glad, together” San. 31r. 17. Tris. ACL D lgle:$ü: Tlap. leg.; Conc. N. fr. icle:-. Uyğ. viuff. Civ. (the invalid) ya:ra:şı içla:ğu:la:r (sic, in error) üze: işle:miş ferror for İçle:miş) tonla:riğ kedmiş ere:k “must wearing clothes made (or lined?) with serviceable linings' TT VIII I.zo. Dis. ACM. D açım Hap. leg.; occurs in a rather difficult passage in K.B (see yör-) and scems to be a N.S.A. fr. aç-, it might mean "the amount revealed hy a single act of husking'. Xak. xı K.B (cat any kind of food and drink to satisty your stomach) kerek arpa yör tut todurğu açım “or husk barley and take enough husked barley to satisfy you” 4769. D içim N.S.A, fr. ic-; properly “a single drink, or act of drinking', as opposed to içğü 'drink'; survives in NE "Tuv. ijim “a single brew' (of tea, etc.) Pal. 187 and in SW, Uyğ. vil ff. Bud. (if we have consumed) yem içim “food and drink' (or “a meal ?, destined for a religious community) TT IV 6, 38: Xak. xr KB yem içimdin tatığ 'sweeter than food and drink' 4402; o.o. 4769, 6005: Xwar. xiv İçim "drink! Quib 56: Kip, xv in a miscellaneous list of verbs and Dev. N.s içim icti Tuh. 84r. 13. F üjme: 'mulberry'; the -]- suggests that it is an Iranian l-w. Survives only in SE "Türki, ücma (sic) Shaw 19; ücme/üjme BŞ 795, 8oo; ücme Jarring 329; Tar, üjüme R / rgo?7, sce üjmelen-, çüsüm. Xak. xi üjme: ai-tit 'mulberry', *with -]-" Kaş. I 130. VUF ajmuk *white alum'; the -]- suggests that it is an Iranian l.-w. Spelling uncertain; in the six occurrences here and in the Refl. Den. V. the hamza is vocalized three times with fatha and twice with kasra and is once unvocalized, while the mür carries damma twice here, and fatha four times in the verb; pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı ajmuk al-sabbu'l-abyad "white alum'. "The baldness of a bald man (gara'u'l-aqra') is described metaph. with the phr. ajmuk ta:z meaning that his head seems to be smeared (mulattax) with alum; *with -]-' Kaş. I 99. SF uçmak See ustmax. (D) içmek survives in NE Bar., Tob. *woollen, cr fur-lined gloves R I 1:523; SE Türki 'saddle-pad ' Sha: 31. "The last meaning, cf. İçlik, suggests a connection with iç, there may also be a connection with icük. Xak. xj içmek farwu'l-birgán 'sheepskin' Kaş. I 102: Çağ. xv ff. içmek pristin 'fur-garment' San. 96v. 26. Tris. V. ACMVUDF ajmuklan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. ajmuk, q.v. Xak. xi ta:z başı: ajmuklandı: “the head of the bald man, and his baldness, was ünhealthy” (or unsightly?, fasada); and one says yér a]muklandi: “there vvas an abundance of alum in the ground (etc.) Kaş. I 3:3 (ajmuklanur, ajmuk-lanma:k). D içmeklen- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. içmek, Xak. xı er içmeklendi: /abisa farte baragán "the man wore sheepskin (clothing)” , also for “to own sheepskin” Kaş. 7 313 içmeklenür, içmeklenme:k). DF üjmelen- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. üjme: ; vocalized üyümlen—no doubt in error, since the other words in the section, arpa:lan-, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 72 
     
   
   
     28 TRIS. V. ACMetc. are of the form here reconstructed. Xak, xı yığa:ç üjmelendi: “the tree had a crop of mulberries'(sdra , . . du tiit) Kag. 1 297 (üj melenür, üjmelentme:k), Dis. ACN F a:ju:n the Sogdian word "zn (djim) "life, living being', and the like, used as a Buddhist technical term to mean 'state of existence; one of a series of lives in. the process of birth, death, re-incarnation” ; was also used as a l.-w. with the same meaning in Turkish Bud, and Man. texts, On the adoption of Islam it came to be used as a translation of Ar. al-dunyd (this) world', as opposed to al-áxira “the next world', when dunyd was not itself used as a L-w. Survived in Çağ. until about xv and, although not traceable in Old Osm,, has recently been adopted in Rep. 'lurkish as acun under the false belief that it was a real "Turkish. word suitable to take the place of dunvd. Uyğ. vit ff. Man, közünür ajunta “in their present life” 77 77 16, 28; bés ajun “the five forms of existence! TT III 1, 31, 47, etc; Bud. közünür ajunda Su. 474, 20; bés ajun 77 IV 6, zo, ız, 33, and 38; bir otuz katın ajunlarda “in the twenty-one layers of worlds! Tig. 47b. 8; ópre ajundaka kiling 'deeds performed during a previous incarnation TT VIII F.15; and many o.o.; in TT VHI spelt ajun[a:sgunja:ssun. Xak.xt (described in the main entry as 'Cigil' but common in Xak. quotns.) ajun al-dunyà; hence bu: ajun al-dunya; ol ajun al-áxira; a Cigil word, "with -j-' Kaş, I 77; 16 o.o., usually translated a/-dunyá, but sometimes in verses, e.g. I 160, 5; 407, 27; 420, 6 al-zamán "time" (as the enemy of man): KB ajun “this world! is common, 63 (ét-) 8r, 125, 2)1, 1044, etc.: xiti(?). Tef. bu ajunfacun “this world' qo, 66: Ar. ajun '(this) world' is common: xiv Rbg. bu ajun R I s26: Muh. al-dunyd is called aju:ni in Türkistan and acu:n in "our country” Mel. 7, 13; Rif. 79; al-dunyá aju:n 44, 13; 137 (followed by bu: aju:n, ol gju:n): Gag. xv ff, acun (with -c-") ai-dunyd Vel. 9 (quotns. fr. Lutfi and Mir. Haydar, adding that in the MSS., esp. of Luffi, it is usually spelt ocun); ocun dumvd sea "dlim ("workl') San. 65v. 29 (quotn. Mir Haydar, followed in the same para. by üçün, with quotn.). As Nawd'i is not quoted, the word was probably obsolete in his time); XWwar. xiv ajun (this) world' (and ajunlu£ 'belonging to this world") Qutb 18; acun. MN 34 etc. (not in Nahc.). için: Hap. leg.; 'torch'; ?Chinese l-w.; cf. yula:, Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. İkileyü tamdurmiş erdi bilge biligliğ içınığ "he has kindled again the torch of wisdom' Hüen-ts. 1908-9. D için Instr. of iç used as an Adv.; 'inside, mutually, and later 'secretiv',. Survives in NE Tuv. Pal. 187; INC Kox, MM 418 and became obsolete in SW Osm. onlv recently, see Red. 291. Uyğ. vui ff. Man.-A (they curse and abuse one another) taki için yontuşu okisurlar 'and quarrel and shout at one another” M 1 9, 10-11: xiv Chin.-Uvg. Dict. 'inside' için £ 7 15321: Xak. xi için a Particle (Rarf) used to express bay 'between'; one says ola:r İçin é:tigdile:r taşdlahü fi má baynahum "they rcached a mutual understanding! Kaş. 176: KD yarasik tadular karisti için "the harmonious natural elements in man were in mutual conflict” 1053: Çağ. xv ff. için ara (with -c-") dar wast ta. dar miyána “in the middle, betwcen' Sar. 96v. 28 (quotns.): Osm. XIV to xvi (only) için "within, between themsclves, secretly! in several texts. 77TS I 364; II sis, HI 314; IV 408. D uga:n Pres. Particip. (in Western form, for uçğa:n) of uc- used as a Noun, 'sailing ship, or boat', Definitions of size vary; n.o.a.h.; cf. kayğık, kemi: Çağ. xv ft.(?) uçan (spelt) kaşti-yi buzurg "a large ship”, just as a medium sized (mütercassit) ship is called keme and a small (Rüçük) one kayık San. 65r. 24 (prob. an xvii. word, not Classical Çağ.): Kip. xt uça:n Auil safina dát candltayn "any ship with two sails" Kaş. I 122: xiv uçan al-safinatu'l-şağira "a small ship” İd. 9; Bul. 4, 14: xv safina (keme) rea”/-şağira uçan Tuh. 19a. 7 (cim every where). ügün one of the four primeval Turkish Postpositions (see K. Grenbech, Der türkische Sprachbau, Kopenhagen, 1936, p. 35), and one of the two never used as an Adv, After a noun *because of, for the sake of, for'; after a verb usually “because”, less often “in order to”. "The form of the verb to which it is attached varies, even within the same text, apparently without affecting the meaning, see m *G. ATG, para. gor. C.ia.p.a.l., consistently as üçün and the like; Yakut isin, Pek. 967 and Osm. Icünficin (from about xvi?) being comparatively recent aberrations. Türkü vru tepri: yarlikaduk üçüm ózim kutim bar üçü:n “because heaven so decreed, and because 1 myself enjoyed the favour of heaven” I S 9, II N 7; ant: ügu:n "because of that” 7 E 3; begleri: boduni: tüzsiz üçü:n "because their begs and common people were undisciplined' 7 E 6; II E 6; and many olo, in J, II, T., Ongin, and 1x., mostly with verbal forms in -duk/-dük, and always “because (of); viri ff Isi: Sagu:n İte:çük üçü:n biti:dim “1 wrote (this) for Isig Sanun (and?) ltecük' IrkB Colophon: Yen. erdemim üçün “because of my manly qualities' Mal. 29, 6; a.o.o.: Man. ne üçün why?" M İİİ 6, 7 (): Uy&amp;. vir ff. Man. anı üçün 'therefore' TT 116, 7; küseyür erti birkerü (read birğerü) künt[em]ek tı sizni kórgü üc[ün] “because they unanimously wished to see you daily(?) and continuously' TT III 96: Bud. üçün is very common, e.g. ne üçün PP 4, s: oğlı üçün “Tor the sake of his son” PP 8, 5;0.0. TT V 24,69(turgur-) and 7o(odgur-) etc : Civ. ön bitig yok bolinis üçün “because the original document has disappeared” U.Sp. 5, 3; temis ücün 'because they said' 21, 5; a.0.0.: O, Kir, ix ff, er erdemim üçün 'hecausc of my manly qualities! Afa/, 11, 9; 24, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 73 
     
   
   
     DIS. $ ctc. ; 2.0.0. Xak. xi üçün a Particle (fiarf) used to express aci (for) the sake (of); one says senip üçün keldim '[ came for your sake' (/7-aclik) Kaş. 1 76: KB ummat üçün "for the sake of the people” 40; yapluk üçün “because of error” 197; ukus birle kilmis üçün “because he had scted with understanding! 304; and many o.o.: xml(?) Tf. ücün 'for the sake of, because of' 342: At. Dad Íspahsalàr Beg üçün “for Dad Ispahsálàr Heg' 69: Çağ. xv fT. (after ocun, sce a:lu:n) üçün halima-i ta"lil, "a particle of cause', that is az birdy-i dn 'hecause of that”, also pronounced içün Sar. , 66r. r: Xwar. xi?) Oğ. anun üçün "ffherefore' 200-1; 3.0.0.; XIV üçün “because of”, etc. Qutb 202: MN 260, etc.: Kom. xiv “because of, for the sake of' ücün CCI, CCG; Gr. 269 (quotns.): Kap. xiii /i-acl üçün Hou. $4, zo (vvith several examples): xıv üçün (cim) acl İd. 9; Bul. 15,7 (ü:gü:n): xv şa” 'sake' üçün Tuh. 21a. r, 'alamatu'l-acl “mark of sake' üçün 89b. 13; li-acl üçün Kav. 33, 10. D üçünç Ordinal f. of üç, 'third'. 'T'he only form up to Kaş. inclusive; üçünçi which 5.i.a.m.l. except one or two in NE, with minor phonetic variations, first appears in KJ and then only metri gratia, "Türkü vırı üçünç 7 E 335 1 N 6: vir ff, üçümç IrkB. s and iş: Uyğ. vir ff. üçünç Man.-A M I1 12, 4 (ii); Man. TT İl 6, 28: Bud. PP 15, 6; Suv. 199, ız: Civ. common in H 1I and USp.: Xak xı. ücünç al-tálrt fi'l-"'adad third! Kaş. I 131; IH 448: KB. üçünçi 133, 789: xin(?) At, üçünç 35: xiv Muh. al-tálit ü:cuncl: (cim's) Mel. 82, 8; Rif. 187: Çağ. xvff. üçünc üçüncü Vel, 94; üçünc (so spelt) siyyum; ücünci sryynumin San. 66r. 3: Xwar. xui(?) Oğ. üçünçüsüke “to the third of them” 68: xiv üçünç Qutb 202: Kom. xiv ücünci CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv üçünçi (cim"s) İd. 8: XV, ditto Tuh. 61b. 2; üşinci Kav. 67, 13. Dis. V. ACND açın- Preliminary note. /n the early period the Refl. f?s of 1 aç- and açı:- would have been homophonous, and it is difficult to decide töhich form the early occurrences represent, but on balance they all seem to represent the former, If so the earliest occurrence of the latter is ina sidenote ( prob. in a SW hand) to Kip. XV ta'allama "to feel pain' awurun-( for ağrın-) Tuh. 95. 4 weith acin- in the margin. On the other hand, at the present day the only survival of the Refl. f. of 1 aç- seems to be NE Sag., Şor adın- (sic) “to open the mouth! ; acin- (seith a wide range of phonetic variations) “to feel pain, grief, anger, or compassion; to grudge; to be pitied', etc., tuhich s.a. iml. g., is clearly the Ref. f. of açı:-. D açın- Refl. f. of 1 ac-; the meaning in some of the passages below is linked with 7 of 2 açığ, 2 açığlığ and, partly, açıl-. Uyğ. viii ff. Man. evin barkin açınığlı [kü]digli klgi “people who look after and tend the ACR . 29 houses and property' (of kings, beg's and notables) Wind. 32-3: Bud. (the ox-herd took him to his house and) açındı 'tended him, or made him comfortable'; (he entrusted him to those in the house, saying) artuk edgü aciniplar 'tend him very well'; bir ay artuk acindi “he tended him for more than a month” PP 67, 6-68, 2; isiğ özünde artukrak açınu köyü közedü tutdun "you have kept him tending and watching over him more carefully than your own life" U IV 36, 81-3; ökünürmen bilinürmen açınurmen yadinurmen '[ repent, admit, disclose, and publish' (all my misdeeds) Suv. 137, 23: Civ. [gap] suvin açınmış kerek “you must treat . with water' I1 11 25, 65: Xak. xı beg erin açındı: al-amir akranıa wa na" "ama cundahu 'tbe beg showed regard and granted favours to his army (etc.); and one says er atın açındı: ahsana"l-racul li-farasihi qadim wa 'alaf “the man gave his horse barley and fodder'; and one says er ko:yin açındı: “the man pretended to open ( yaftalt) his bosom'; also used of a sick man or a child in the cradle when he throws off his hed-clothes (kagafa "an dütarihi) Kaş. I 199 (açınu:r, açınma:k): KB aginoccurs (1) without an Object, e.g. (may these my good qualities be useful to the king) açınsun “may he show favour” (and may my pains disappear) 468; (2) governing the Acc., e.g. tapuğsuz ağırlap açındım söni “although you were undutiful I honoured you and showed favour to vou' 646. ?E içan- this word is read four times in TT 7, but nowhere else, and translated 'to avoid, take care”, ''he text is, however, very badly written, and it may well be a misreading of 1nan- “to trust, rely on”, if not, it is perhaps an earlier form of işen-, same meaning. Uyğ. viii ff, Civ. (there is a deceitful official in the realm; he impedes your efforts) örki kişflerke içanğıl (?inanğıl) edremlig kisilerig ayağıl 'rely on(?) highly placed people, and honour virtuous people" T'T 7 65; in 196-7 and 214-15 the word is in coordination with saklan- “to protect oneself' instead of ayn:-, 4.0. 207. Tris. ACN DF a:Ju:ngt: N.Ag. fr. a:jun; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı KB ajuncika erdem kerek mir tümen anın tutsa élgün kéterse tuman “a world ruler must have countless good qualities, he must hold the realm by them and disperse the fog' 285; (if you desire a kingdom, be cautious, oh) ajunct kişi 446: xiv Muh. sáhibu'l-dunyá “lord of the vvorld” aju:ncgi: Mel. so, 4 (misvocalized oju:n(i:)); Rif. 145. Dis. ACR D uçar Aor. Particip. of uc- used as a N./A.; survives in NE, SE, and SW usually for 'a bird on the wing" but in NE Tel. R 7 723; Tuv. Pal. 418 only for 'waterfall' and in SW xx Anat. SDD 1411 with this additional meaning. Xak. xı KB (if he praises a horse) yügrür uçarığ yeter “it gallops and overtakes a bird 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 74 
     
   
   
     DIS. ie wing! 2401; uçarığ ucurmaz senis arın “your (hunting) birds do not let on the wing escape' $379. re: İç with Suff. -re:; used both as an within, inside! and as a Postposition »ting both motion into and rest within thing). Survives only(?) in SE and SW, cü virt igre: aşsız taşra: tonsiz "with od in their stomachs and no clothes on backs! / E 26, 11 E 21; Apa: Tarxan: içre: sav idmiş “he sent word üly to Apa Tarxan" T 34: vir ff. (the ; army went out hunting) sağı:r içre: keyi:k kirmiş: 'roedecr and antelopes ed rhe ring of beaters” Ir&amp;B 63: Man. rğan içre “inside the stipa' M I 6, 3: aruk ordu içre oluruğma Chinas. 14)yf. vun icre: ben bulğayı:n 'l will stir ternal trouble! Su. S 4: Xak. xi n.m.e., nine occurrences as postposition, e.g. İçrd: "in the cooking pot' / 223, 35: KB ak icre “in paradise! 3522 (evin): xu(?) ^P bu Buğra Xan ol vvaqtı içro "in ime of this Buğra Xan” 23: xin(?) 7ef. Tin “from inside'; içre Postposition 127: içre Postposition 8, 122, 486: Xwar. çre “in, within" Qutb s6: MN is, etc.; . 360, 13: Osm. xiv icre Postposition less often “into”, c..a.p. TT'S 1 364; II İH 355; IV 409. rug N.Ac. fr. uçur- ; 'causing to fiy” with əh, extensions, Pec. to Uyğ, Uyğ. vi ff. tuğ uçruğ töpö tartığda ulatı etiğ ikler üze 'with ornaments and adorns(?) such as flying rlags, hair ribbons and ke” U İT: 40, 107-8; (the Buddba who is) içruğlar él(HPigl “the king of perfume rings! U 11 87, 1 (1); a0. Stm. 490, 23. grer Hap. leg.; “thrce each”, prob. only a il error for üçer the regular Distributive of üç, of which there is no early occur, but possibly a longer form parallel to r. Uy. vii İT, Civ. üçrer 'three each? 32, 16. Dis. V. AGRgur- (a:Ccur-) Caus, f. of 2 a:g-; pec. to ; later replaced by aciktur- first noted "n. 32r. 25. Xak. xr ol ant: a:gurdt: ahu "he starved him” Kaş. 7 268 (a:çurur, "ma:k); bu aş ol kişini: açurğa:n food is quickly digested and quickly s a man hunery again! (sari'u'l-hadm wa 'I- icd"a) 1:56, 18; agrup özün 'starving elf” 2I 68, ə. ür- Caus. f. of İç-, "to give (someone somethinir /2cc,) to. drink', svith. some ded meanings. S.ia.m.lg., cf. içtür-. vun ff. Civ. tikta:k ya:ğ içürmiş :K "you must give him bitter oil to drink" VIII I 24 (tikta:K is a Sanskrit L-w.): xt ol anar su:v içürdi: agrabahu' ]-mae? nve him water (etc.) to drink! Kaş. I 177 ür, icürme:k); à:lü:m o:tin lcü:rdiü:m '[ made him drink (asqaytulii) a. deadly ACR potion! 7 47, 16; ölə, I 157, 10; 218 (içtür-): xu(?) K/T” (God. never. leaves. mankind hungry) yetürür icüriir "he gives them food and drink' s: xiv. Mid. saqd'I- má? su: i:gürMel. 27, 6 (Rif. tart-): Çağ. xv ff. içür(svith. -ç-”) Çans, £.; nmüşünkhdan "to give. to drink” San. 95r. 21: Xvvar. xi (T. içür- ditto “Ali aş: xiv iİçir-/içür- ditto Qutb 56: Kom. xiv. dcir- ditto (C; Gr. 16085 (quotn.): Kip. xir asqd lgir- Hon. 34, 6: xiv ditto 7d. 8: xv ditto. Tuh. sab, ro (cim, everywhere); asqá İsşir- Kav. 69, 2 D ucur- (aus. f. of ug-; "to make, or let (a bird etc.) fiy”, with some metaph. extensions. S.La.m.l.g. Uyğ. viu ff, iud. Sanskrit vahamána (read vàhayamana) 'driving, propelling' and the like uçu:ru TT VIIJ 4.32: Xak. xt ol kuş ucurdi: ufára'l-tayr “he made the bird fly”, and one says 01 ant: attin ucurdt: "he made him fall (asgatahu) off his horse' (etc.) Kaş. 1 176 (uçurur, ucurma:k); a.o.o, 7 156, 16 etc.: KB 5379 (uçar): xin(?) Tef. ugur“to make (dust) tly' 334: Çağ, xv İT. uçur(-di, etc.) at-, barifib et- “to throvv” , "ro throw something light to the winds' Fel. 0-6 (quotns.); ucur- (*with -ç-”) Caus. f. of uc-; bardnidan "to causc to fly; muxtafic sáxtan "to cause to quiver or twitch'; ma'düm hardan "to destroy" San. 63v. s (quotns.): Osm. xv ff. ucur- occurs with various meanings 77S I. 712; II 918; IV 774. D öçür- Caus. f. of öç-, “to extinguish' (a fire, etc.), with some metaph. extensions. S.1.a.m.].g. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. ot öçüri(?) 'extinguishing a fire” U Hİ 9, 4; nizvanılarığ . » öcCürüp 'suppressing the passions! TT IV 12, $60—7, 0.0. T'T VII 40, 71 (to extinguish debts); Ste. gö, 22 (to wipe out the evil deeds of others"): Civ. ógürgülük in a damaged passage // I] 29, 172: Xak. xi ol otuğ öçürdi: "he extinguished (a/fa'a) the fire", anın ópke:sin öçürdi: “he calmed (askana) his anger'; and one says ol anı: urup tni öçürdi: “he bent him until he reduced him to silence! (askata na'matahu) Kaş. I 176 (öçürür, ócürme:k); a.o. J 522, 4: KB bu erlik otın ócürmek üçün “in order to suppress this manly ardour” 3608 (and see 3609): xiu(?) Tef. öçür- “to extinguish' (a fire) 252: At. ol otni öçür 440: xiv Róg. bu otn öçürün R I 1287: Çağ. xvff. öçür- (-se, etc.) sóyündür- 'to extinguish' Vel. 95-6 (quotns.); öçür- (^with -ç-”) Caus. f. of. öç-, müntafv söxtan “to extinguish” San. 63v. 7 (quotns.) D içrüş- Tlap. leg.; Co-op. f. of içür-. Xak. xı ol mapa: su:v içrüşdi: “he helped me to give water to drink' (fi sagvi /-má'); also used for “to compete! Kaş. I 233 (igrüsü:r, içrüşme:k). D uçruş- Co-op. f. of ucur-; pec. to Kay. Xak. xr ol mana: kuş ucrusdi: “he helped me to make the bird Hy' ("af ifarafti”l-tayy), also used for “to compete” Kaş. 7 233 (ugruSu:r, ucrustna:k); erkek tişi: uçruşu:r   “then İ 529 D öç Xak. öçrü: with" used fire” 1 (F) ac Dus "The s be co word ükü:ş kork: yok“ from unluc (have enjoy D öçü and ti brack times Bas. Türk uluğ luk) blank Çağ, an u 19; İt D iç vvithir paintc xani cham! reki i Uyğ. MI orutu holde "situa" içrek (7) M D uç Xak. the E ucur: farti) D ax [rok 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 75 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. ACS- 31 nale and female (birds) mate” (1utazdáteac) 14. HT 138, 16. rüş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of öçür-. xı ol anip ópke:sin menip birle: 3dl: 'he helped (should be "competed | me to calm (fi taskin) his anger'; also for “to help in extinguishing (fi itfà') a Xaş, 1 233 (öçrüşü:r, öçrüşme:k). "ris. ACR "arBa See adğır. "ru:ğlu:ğ Hap. leg.; P.N./A, fr. İçruğ. vhole paragraph is very eryptic and may rrupt, but even if atlığ is inserted, the has no obvious meaning. Türkü viri if. j atlığ öğrünçü:n yok kovr atlığ inci: yok uçrü:ğlu:g(atlığ) kutuü:n f you have many titles you get no pleasure them; if you hase a reputation for being ky, you have no (reason to) fear; if you a reputation for being) . , . you do not the favour of heaven” [rA B 36. irğü: N.I. fr. ócür- ; lit. “an extinguisher' he like, but actually "horse blanket, sha', Survives in one form or another, somewith initial i- in NE (including Khak. 257), SE and NC R I 869, 1515, 1876. à vini ff. toku:z kat öçürğü:n topu: (sie, obviously corrupt, ?read toplağu:anca: teritzü:n 'pile(?) nine layers of ets on it and so make it sweat' IrkB şo: xv ff. ócergü (so spelt) fakaitü-yi zirin nder horsecloth or shabrack' Sar, 6sr. çirğü (so spelt) do, 96v. 17. re:ki: N./A.S. fr. igre:; lit. 'situated 1', but sometimes metaph. 'belonging to əyal court'. N.o.a.b. Türkü vii anta: 1: bodun “the people living therein' I S ON z; Tavğaç xağan(n)ın içreki: çiğ "the Chinese Emperor”s court r" £ S 12, İİ N 14: vii ff. Yen, Kara: cregl: (sic) ben 'I was Kara Xan's court berlain(?)' Mal. 37, r, Man. könül iç(gap) “in the mind” M III 19, 11 (ii): virt ff. Man.-A İçreki az “internal lust' 17, 8: Bud. (in a list of names) içreki çılar “the court officials! (lit. 'placers!) Pfahl. 23,24: Xak. xın(?) Tef. içreki ted in" 127: O. Kir. ix ff. Küç Kıyağan 1: Küç Kuyağun the court chamberlain' al. 4 (a balbal), similar name r1, 1. Tris. V. ACRursa:- Desid. f. of ugur-; pec. to Kaş. xr ol kuş ucursa:dt: "he wished to make ird fiy) Kaş. I 280, zo: ağır u:ni: sa:daım 'I wished to drive away (fsfaheavy sleep! 771 247, 23; n.r.e. Dis. ACS sik (n:cs1k) Hap. leg.; prob. Dev. N. psu. Simtilative f. of 2 seç-. Türkü viti (if once you are satished) a:çsık ömezsen 'you do not remember having been hungry' 1S8,II N 6. D uçsuz (u:csuz) Priv. N./A. fr. 1 u:c “having no tip, point, houndaries”, and the like, Survives in NW Kar. T., Kaz. R I 1339, 1732 and SW Osm. Uyf. viu ff, Bud. uqsuz kıdığsiz ülğüsüz 'boundless (Hend.) and immeasurable' (merits and good deeds) Suv. 584, 12. Dis. V. ACSD açsa:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of 1 aç-. Xak. xı er kapuğ açsa:dı: "the man wished to open (yaftali) the door'; also for opening anything else Kaş. 7 276 (agsa:r, agsa:ma:k). D içse:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of iç-. Xak. xı ol su:v içse:di: "he wished to drink (şur5) water (etc.)' Kaş, 7 276 (içse:r, içse:me:k). Dis. ACS D öçeş (öceş) Dev. N. in - 8, connoting mutual action” fr, 2 vöçe:- , “bet, wager'. Survives only (?) in SW xx Anat. öceş “the wish-bone of a fowl!' (often used for betting). The homophonous word öçeş, derived fr. 1 6:6, is not recorded ín earlier times, but survives, in one form or another in NE, SE, NC, SC meaning 'feud, quarrel'. Xak. xı öçeş al-muxátara "a bet, wager' Kaş. I 61. Dis. V. ACSD 1 açış- Co-op. f. of 1 a€-; survives in NE Khak. Bas. 37 and SE Türki Shat 3. Xak. xt ol mapa: kapuğ açışdı: "he helped me to open ( fi fath) the door'; also for "to compete' Kaş. 1 180 (açışu:r, acigma:k). D 2 açış- (? acış) Co-op. f. of açı- and almost synonymous with it in its literal and metaph. meanings except that this word tends to connote plural or group, rather than individual, action. Survives in NE Khak. Bas. 37; SE "Pürki Shaw 3; Tar. R I 1511; SW Osm,, etc, Xak. xt in a note on the use of the Suff. -Ş- to connote simultaneous action by members of a group and the like, sirke: açışdı: hamada”l-xatl ba'duhu fi ba'd "the whole of the vinegar was (or became) sour” Kaş. I 181, 16; n.m.e. Çağ. xv ff. acış- süznádh şudan zaxm tva ctráhat ki bd xárig büşad “to ache, of a sore or wound which irritátes' Sar. 31 v. 6 (quotns.). D içiş- Co-op. f. of ig-; “to drink together', etc. Survives in NE Khak. Bas. 66, 69 and SW Osm., "Tem. Xak, xı ol menin birle: sü:t içişdi: "he competed with me in drinking (fi şurb) milk'; also used for “to help” Kaş. I 181 (iglgü:r, içişme:k), to:n terni: içişdi: “the "garment (completely) absorbed (magafa) the sweat! [ 181, 18: Çağ. xv ff. içiş- Co-op. f.;bd-ham nüşidan "to drink together! San. 96v. 6: Kom. xiv İçiş- "to help (someone) to drink' CCG, Gr.: Osm. xiv İçiş- "to have a drinking cornpetition' 7TS II 516.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 76 
     
   
   
     32 D öçeş- Preliminary note. There are t:eo verbs of this form, the Recip. f.s of 1 and 2 üçe:respectively. The first seems to s.i.a.m.l.g. except NW and SW and the second only in SW, but it is not altvays easy to decide which verb is concerned since such meanings as ^to wrangle, argue! might come from either. D 1 öçeş- (öceş-) Recip. f. of 1 óce:-; "to be hostile to one another” and the like, Türkü vir t. Man. yaruk künler tüneriğ tünlerke utrunğalı öçeşğeli turdilar “the bright days arose to resist and fight with the dark nights' M HI aş, 9 (q): Uyğ. vin ff. Man. nizvanitar birle süDüşmek öçeşmek “to fight (Hend.) with the passions” M 7I 12, 13-14 (ii): Xak. xi KB öçeşme bu begler bile “do not enter into conflict with these begs” 4086; öçeşme bu dawlat bile sen yaraş "do not enter into conflict with fortune, come to terms with it 4299: Çağ. xv ff. öceş- (with -c-”, spelt and conjugated as ocaş-) körciş tea mü"drada hardan, the latter means "to oppose, resist; Rdmuş R. means “to dig, investigate” and is not appropriate; it may be a translation of Ar. baht; in Pe. baht hardan means “to argue, vvrangle, wager' which looks more like 2 öçeş- San. 64r. 23 (quotns,, the mis-spelling suggests that the author was not really familiar with the word): Kip. xiv Ádbara “to treat scornfully, try to overcome' İÇİş- (se, with cim; perhaps an error for öçeş-) Iul. 78r. D 2 öçeş- Recip. f. of 2 "öçe:- "to wager, or bet, with one another”, Türkü vrır ff. (bir IkInti;]si:tke: sav:n öçeşmişler “they argued (or wagered ?) with one another” (and one said “1 maintain that the stars have authority over everything! and the other said—rest lost) Toy. Hir. 1-3 (ETY 11 179): Xak, xi ol menip birle: öçeşdi: barani fi şay” “he bet with me about something ' Kaş. 7 181 (öçeşü:r, öçeşme:k): (after öçeş) same phr. translated xdfara ma"i fi şay” "he bet with me about sotnething” 7 61, g: xiv Muh.(?) rahana “to bet oxşa:- (sic, error for öçeş-) Rif. 109 (only): Kom. xiv “to bet” öçeş- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xv ráhana Oçeç- (sic, with cim”s) Tuh. 17b. 5. Dis. ACZ uçuz (ucuz) basically “not requiring effort, hence in the earliest period (of actions) “easy”, of persons "not worthy of respect', and of concrete objects “easy to get” and so 'cheap, worthless! Survives only(?) in NW uguzfucsuz RI 1328, 1339, 1729, 1732, 1738 and SW Az., Osm. ucuz: Tüm. ucrz 'cheap, despicable”, and the like. Türkü vir yuyka: erkell: toplağalı: uçuz ermiş “vhen a thing is thin, it is easy to crumple it up” T' 15; vrit ff. Man. (various things) közümde idi uçuz yenik boldi "have become quite worthless (Hend.) in my eyes” TT II 8, 44: Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. ucuz yenik TT IV ro, 16; U IJ 77, 18; 86, 35; eçim . . . ağırlığ bolğay. men tala ucuz bolğaymen “my elder brother . . . will - - ” .. * 33 * s EN Sə ə DIS. V. ACŞrespect PP 29, 4; ayağısız tot ucuz 'unworthy of honouir or respect! U 7177, 19; 86, 36; tot uçüz (of *words') U 1 / 8, 31-2; ol oğlan ógin emgetmedin uçuz tuğğay “that boy will be born easily without causing pain to his mother' TT VI 278; similar phr. VJI 27, ro and 13: Xak. xi üçüz ne:n “a cheap (raxiş) thing”? and anyone 'base and: despicable' (al-dalilu'l-muhán) is called uquz Kaş. I 54: KB bu tört ner uçuz tutma “do not regard these four things (fire, an enemy, illness, and wisdom) as unimportant” 308; 0.0. 540, gör, 1245, 1603, 6452: xui(?) 7vf. uguz(?) “despised” 334: 4f. üçüz 'cheap' 480: xiv «i-raxiş U:çu:z (cim) Mek 55, 12; Ruf. 153: Çağ. xv (f. ucuz arzán “cheap” San. 65v. 14. Xwar. xırı uguz “chcap” ' Ali 49 (once ucsuz): XIV ditto Qutb 195: Kom. 'worthless' üçüz CCI; Gr.: Kip. xut al-raxiş uçüz (cim) Hou. 27, 2: xiv ditto /d. 9; uguz bol- raxuga ma sahula "to be, become cheap, or easy” dito; (under €-z) cuz bol- (cim) hána “to become easy; to become contemptible, base! 43: xv raxiş uguz (sic) Tuh. 17a. o: Osm, xiv ucuz tut- “to despise' TT.S I 710. (Tris. ACZ D uçuzluk (ucuzluk) A.N. fr. uguz and surviving in the same languages; 'cheapness, disrespect', and the like, Xak. xi uquzluk al-ruxsa fi'l-as'ár 'cheapness of price” şuçüzlük al-madalla swa'l-sagár *vileness, vvocthlessness” Kaş. I 149: KB (do not go near a beg when he is angry; if you do) uçuzluk anuk 'humiliation awaits you” 783); a.o. 2118: xrn(2) Tef. uçüzlük (1) 'low prices”: (2) 'contempt, humiliation! 334: X war. xiv üçüzlük 'cheapness' Qutb 195. Tris. V. ACZD ucuzla:- (ucuzla:-) Den. V. fr. uguz; “to treat with disrespect', etc.; survives in. SW. Uy£. viu ff. Bud. Sanskrit svalábham növamanyeta “one should not disparage one's own gains” öz butunçı nen uçuzlağulu:k ermez TT VIII E.9; nomuğ uçuzladaçı 'treating the doctrine with disrespect' /Tüen-fs. 101; 0.0. do. 165; Sut. 136, ro (tota:-): Xak. xi beg anu uçuzla:dı: "The beg treated him with disrespect” (ahdnahu) Kaş. 1 3o1 (uçuzla:r, ucuzla:ma:k); (after ucuz) same phr. and translation 7 54, 21: KB Kklslg til ucuzlar "his tongue brings a man into disrespect” 163. D uçuzlan- (ucuzlan-) Refl. f. of uçuzla:-, survives in NW, SW. Xak. xı ol bu: ne:pni: uçuzlandı: "adda hadd”l-şay” raxiş “he reckoned that this thing was cheap! Kaş. 7 292 (uçuzlanur, ucuzlanma:k). Mon. AD 1 a:t (a:d) "name" originally perhaps clan, rather than personal, name (sce adaş), by extension “title” and "good name, reputation. S.i.a.m.l., SW Az., Osm. ad; "km. a:t (before vocalic suffixes a:d-). Türkü vu "Türkü afin “rs namo "Tümküi" 7 Fə (atan /7 Ec) --  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 77 
     
   
   
     MON. AD a:tığ 7: W 2; Ix. 1; [gap] a:t bértim “1 gave him the name (or title) of . . .' ZZ E 41; (wc gave him) xağan at “the title of xağan” 1 E zo (ati II E 17); atı: küsb "his good name and reputation” / E 25, IL E zı, İl E 22 and 36: vur ff. bir kisl: a:tı: "one man's name” Tun. İla. s (ETY II 94); atı: Tun. IV 6 (do. 96): a:ti:m do. rz: Yen. er atim “my name as an adult' (as opposed to a child) Mal. 38, 3: Uyğ. viii ff. Man.-A teprl atına “in the name of God” M 7 25, 2; atı eştilmiş küsl sorulmuiş “vhose name has been heard, and whose fame has been asked about” (in all quarters) MM I 26, 27-8: Bu edgü kü at PP 5, r, burxan atın “the Buddha"s name” U I 29, 16; at yol Suv. 444, 5 (Y0:1), many 0.0.: Civ. edgü at TT VII 29, ro, at yol ditto 37, 11; atıp kün TT I 43, 1456; birer atın meplzin sözlelim “ve will enumerate their names and physical appearances one by one” H İl 22, 16: O. Kir, ix ff, atım “my name is” (common beginning of an inscription) Mal. 1, 2, etc.; er atım ditto 2, 5, etc.; oğlan atım “my name as a child” 45, r; a.o.o.: Xak. xı a:t al-isn “name”, a:t a/-laqab “title”, hence one says beğ a:pa:r a:t bö:rdi: "the beg gave him a title” (a/gabahu) Kaş, I 78; HI 77, 17 (yodul-); 25o, r9 (ata:-); a.o.o.: KB bu at 6; a.0.0: xın(?) Tef. at “name” 62: At. ditto, common: xiv Mu. al-ism “name” a:d Mel. şo, s, at Rif. 145: Çağ. xv ff. at ism Vel 6 (quotn); at nöm “name” San. şor. 27 (quotn.): Xwar. xri(?) at (or ad) “name”, and at (or ad) koy- “to name” Oğ. common: xiv at 'name' Quib 14; MN 1,etc.; at bér- "to name” Nahc. 2, 16, etc.: Kom. xiv “name, noun' at, “to name” at takCCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv ad al-ism İd. 9: xv al-ism ad/fat Kan. 57, 17: Osm, xiv ff. ad in various phr., c.i.a.p. 775 13,4; I1 5,6; İT 3, 4: IV 4,5. 2 at 'horse'; nearly always with the implication of “riding horse'; cf. yıllkız, yunt; in a few modern languages at means 'gelding', as opposed to adğır 'stallion'. C.i.a.p.a.I. Türkü vur, vir ff: Uyğ. vi ff: O. Kar. ix ff. at “horse" is common: Xak. xr at al-faras *horse', bi-igbá'i'l-alif with back vowel! Kaş, I 34 (prov.); many o.o.: KB bu Aytoldiı etti kör at ton tolum 'Aytoldi put his horse, clothing and weapons in order” 474; a.0.0.: xut(?) Tef. at “horse” 62: xiv Muh. at-faras at/at Rif. 81, 170: Çağ. xv ff. at asb 'horse" Vel. 6; at “umüm asb 'generic term for horse; the name for one of the chess-men' San. 3or. 25: Xwar. xiv at '*horse' Quib 15; MN 69; Nahc. 408, 17 etc. : Kap, xır al-faras mutlaqa(n) 'generic term for horse' at How. 12, 6: xiv a:t (sic) al-faras İd. 15: xv faras at Tuh. 27b. 10; Kav. 17, 2; 31, 21; 61, 19. e:d acc. to Kaş. “a manufactured article", but this may arise fr. a supposed, but impossible, etymological connection with ét-; in practice the word gencrally means 'movable property, other than livestock! and most commonly occurs İn the phr. e:d tavar “movable proFal “33 perty and livestock", An early 1.-vv, in Mong. as ed (Hueniseh 47 (et in error): Kotv. 197, Haltod 45); as there is no trace of the word in "Furkish between x1 and xx the NE forms es/es (before vowels ez) R 1 870, 871; Khak. Bas. 57, 63; Tuv. et Pal. 589, 590 may be reborrowed fr. Mong. Uyğ. viu ff. Man. kaltı uz kişi uzlanğu ed bulmasar “ust as a eraftsman, if he cannot find raw material for his craft' M I 17, r: Bud. ed tavar U T 127,2; 29, 2; U II qo, 15; U III 80, 19; TT V 24, 55; VIII D.33; X 383; Suv. 135, 22; 195, 17 edler 'useful goods! Suv. 530, 2 (tayaklik): Civ. ed tavar TT I ro, VII oo.; el(l)ig yastukluğ, ednl 'goods to the value of fifty yastuks” U.Sp. öz, 7; (in a will) eyimni “my personal property' ditto 78, s (the only occurrence in this form): Xak. xı e:d Aull şay” maşnü" "any manufactured article”, e.g. brocade and the like; rta qad yuqşar fa-yugàl ed zva hadd aşahh “also pronounced ed with a short vowel, and this is more correct; and one says edgíi: ed 'good manufactured article'; e:d al-fálu'l-cayyid "good luck'; hence one says Iglig tutrugi: e:d bulurr “it is lucky for a sick man to make a will' (zeasiya); this is said to any Sick man to urge him to make a will Kaş. 1 79 (the second word seems to be merely the first in a metaph. meaning): KB tavğaç edi “Chinese merchandise! 68, artt1 ed “his property increased' 618. et 'flesh', including both '(living) Besh” and “(butchers”) meat'; occurs in various phr. of which the most important, etóz 'the human body" (lit. *flesh and spirit") is listed separately. S.i.a.m.l.g. (Türkü vri eti:da: in £N 11 is an error for tilda:)): Uyğ. vir ff. Man.(? -A) balik etin yemişler "they eat the flesh of fish”, M I 35, 16: Bud. et aşlığlar 'meat eaters' U II 6o, 2 (iii) ; 1t etin satğuçı 'sellers of dog's flesh TT IV 8, 58-9; etin kanin satar 'he sells their flesh and blood' PP 3, 4-5 (but the reading közünür et burxan in ir, 3 is an error for k. ajun b.); et yin see 1 yl:n: Civ. ylg etler 'raw meat” TT / 192; burun içinde et ónüp “the flesh in his nose swells' EZ I 141; et is "living flesh' in seven occurrences in H 7 and /T and 'meat' in six; o.o. USf. gr, s and 30; TT VII 25, 11:xiv Chin.-Uyğ. Dict. 'lesh' et R 1833; Ligeti 136: Xak. xı et bi-rgmámi'l-alif with front. vowel', ai-lahm “meat”, and “level ground' (al-sah/ müna"l-ard) is called et yer Kaş. I 35 (there is no other trace of the second meaning, “level” is normally tüz); nearly 100 o.0.: KB etipni yégey “he will eat your flesh' 194: xiv Muğ. al-lahm ét Mel. 6, 16; Rif. 78 (in a list of words containing €, some of which are not normally considered to contain €); 65, r1; 164: Röğ, et R 1835: Çağ. xv ff. ét et güşt ma"ndsına *meat? Vel. 43 (quotn.); ét güşt San. gsv. 8: Xwar. xui?) ylg et 'raw meat' Oğ. ro: Kom. xiv “flesh" et CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xim al-ahm et Hou. 15, 16 (see biş-, kesek): xiv et (^with front vowel) a/-laAtm fd. 7; Bul. 7, 15: Xv ditto Tu), 31b, 5; Kav. öz, 18. S id/id See yı:d. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 78 
     
   
   
     34 MON.AD it, “dog”, used in a number of phr., norinally to connote inferior quality, but in some for obscure reasons, e.g. it dirsegl "a stye in the eye” (lit. 'dog's elbow). The vowcl was a back one in Türkü and Xak. and still is in NE Tuv., Pal. 571, but is a front one elsewhere. S.i.a.m.lg. Türkü virr it yil "the Dog Year? (in the 12-year cycle) // S ro, viii ff. Man. 1t ürdüki “the barking of a dog” M 111 45, 1 (i): Uy£. viri ff. Bud. 1tnip U İT 31, 52 (in a list of obnoxious animals); a.o. 77” IV 8, 58 (et): Civ. 1t sütin 'dog's milk” H I 21; a.o.o. it yıl TT VII common; it burnica “the size of a rose-hip' (lit. 'dog's nose") 22,7: xiv Cliin.-Uyg. Dict. "dog" 1t R 1 1498, Ligeti 158: Xak. xi 1t al-kalb "dog” Kaş. I 35; many o.o. including tiğ (4 o.) 1tka: (3 o.): KB esrin tip “your hunting panther and your dog” 5379: XIV Muh. al-kalb l:t Mel. 72, 7, 81, 1; Rif. 174, 186: Çağ. xv ff. it kelb. Vel. 43; it sag 'dog' San. 95v. $ (quotn. and several phr.): Xwar. xiv it “dog” Qutb 62; MN 230; Nahc. 14, 16, etc.: Kom. xiv “dog” it CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xit a/-halb it Hou. ır, 8 (and see köpek): xiv ditto İq. 8; Bul. 10, 10: xv ditto Tuh. 30b. ro, Kav. 62, 4. u:d, etc, Preliminary note. There are seven basic words in this group of «ohich the original pronunciations can be firmly fixed as u:d, o:d, ot, ö:d, ö:d, öt, and ü:d, echich are not easy to heeb apart since in the early period -d tcas pronounced -t. There may also at one time have been a second *u:d 'sleep', see 1 u:. In some medieval languages uvut has become ut/fud and ugut u:t. u:d 'bovine, ox', without reference to sex, not 'bull', which was öküz or buka:, nor 'cow', which was ingek; almost syn. vr, sığır. lt early became the word for “ox” in the twelveanimal cycle, and lingered on in this meaning in the west long after it had become obsolete as a common noun. The entries in some Osm. dicts., Sami 208 (ot), Red. 242 (od), 249 (02), 255 (01) are muddled reminiscences of this. Survives as Uy, a common noun, in some NE, SE, and NC languages. Sporadic spellings with -d are errors. See Doerfer 11 584. Uyğ. vii ff. Man.-A (they kill and destroy) kentü sürüg uduğ koyanığ “oxen and sheep of their own herd” M 7 8, 8: Bud. yerin ud mayakı üze suvatip “moistcning its ground with ox-dung” U I 29, 6—7 (Suv. 519, 5); amari tinliğlar yunt ud cokar 'some men slaughter horses and cattle' PP 2, 8; o.o. do. 65, 2 and 6; Sur. 341, 22: Civ. (one kid, one horse) bir ud bir ingek “one ox, one cow' USp. 55, ro: ud yil "ox year” USp. 63, 1; roy, 1; TT VII (common): VHI P.34:ud in such phr. as ud ótl 'oxgall' is common in 17 7, I7: Xak. xı al-baqar "ox” is called u:d (M/S. wd) in Çigil and one says u:d (ed) yılı: for one of the twelve Turkish years Kaş, I 45; 0.0. in ordinary Xak. II 358 (al-taver 'bull', münret-), 77293, r and İH 364, iş (al-bagar, süs-), III 403 (al-taxr, müpre:-): KJ ud “the constellation "'aurus' 139; ud teg yatur “he lies down like an ox" 988; ud ingek öküz 'cattle, cows, and bulls' 5372: Caf. xv IT. uy (?, imále ile should indicate 0-) sığır 'ox' Vel, 122 (quotns.); (öd 'gall' and) “the Ox Year (sdi-: gate), which the people of [ran write as ud yil; this is an obvious error; they should write uy ytl, because it means “Ox Year”, and the Turks call “the ox” ('gáto) uy San. 66v. 14; uy (t) gör, either male or female (quotns.); (2) the name of the constellation Taurus (a/-tarer), (3) “Ox Year” (previous statement repeated) San. gor, 16: Xwar. xın(?) ud buzağları (sic) köp “it had many oxen and calves Oğ. 263; at ka:tır (MS. kagattr) ud 'horses, mules, and oxen' 273. 1 o:t (o:d) “fire”, normally lit., occasionally metaph. for 'anger'. Sometimes spelt oot in Uy£., ? to represent the long vowel or distinguish it fr. 2 ot, S.i.a.m.l.g., SW Az., Osm. od; Tkm. o:t (o:d . . . before vowels). Türkü vı biriki: boduniğ ot suv krlmadım “1 did not make the united people discordant” (lit. “fire and water) 7 E 27, IH E 22; 2.0. do. 37; 27 (borça:): Uyğ. vii ff. Chr. oot yalını birle *with a blaze of fire" U 18, rz: Bud. ot yalın TT V6,445;8,91;a.0. U 118, 27 (2 tamıt-), the word spelt od, odh, ot occurs severnl times in TT VIII: Civ. otka kómüp 'burying it in the fire” H 1 35;2.0.0.; oot TT I 19, etc.; oot yalını 123; 00t “the element of fire”, common in TT VII: xiv .Chin.-Uyğ. Dict. oot see çakıl-: Xak. xı o:t al/-ndr “fire” Kaş. I 43 (prov.); £ 164 (Öç-) and nearly 30 o.o., sometimes spelt ot: KB ot 'fire' as one of the elemcnts 143; 249 (ütül-); 375 (ÖÇç-), a.o.o.: xiu(?) Tef. ot “fire” 239; At. ditto, common: xiv Muh. al-nár o:d Mel, 17.6; 23, 2; Rif. 95; o:t 68, 17; 169: Çağ. xvfi. ot ati; 'fire' Vel. 86; ot “a generic term for fire” San. Gar. 1 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv ot “fire” Qufb 120: Kom. xiv ditto CCI, CCG, Gr.: Kip. xii al-nár o:t Hou. 8, 18; 17, 15: Xiv ditto /d. 15; ot Bul. 4, 11: Osm. xiv ff. od c.i.a.p. TTSS I 535-6; IH 714717; HI 531-3; IV 597-9. 2 ot 'grass, vegetation, usually that growing naturally as opposed to a cultivated crop (tarığ), the basic word and its derivatives soon acquired three special connotations:—(r) 'medicinal herb, remedy'; (2) 'useless vegetation, weeds'; (3) occasionally 'poisorrous herb, poison! (normally agu:); there seems to be a difference between ot em 'curative herbs' and ot yem (see 1 yem) but the two are often confused and may be identical. C.i.a.m.l.g. Türkü vii ff. yaş ot 'fresh grass” IrkB 17, 53: Man. (the five kinds of) otuğ ığaçığ 'vegetation and trees” Chnas. 318: Uyğ. viu ff. Chr. birök otaçı emçi erser ot yem alğay 'i£ he is a physician (Hend.) he will zccept the fragrant herbs and spices” U 1 7, 3-4 (but ot em 'curative herbs! must have been intended): Man.-A (however many physicians come) otin birle *with their curative herbs! M I 15, 7: Man. u iğaç ootlar (so spelt) 'shrubs, trees and vegetation! Mind. 7-8; otça TT II 17, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 79 
     
   
   
     MON. AD 35 77-9 (öpül-): Bud. oti yaşı yaş “its vegetation and fresh grass is fresh' T'T V 28, 124; ot em *curative herbs (Hend.)' Suv. 598, 2; ot yem TT X 326 (damaged): Civ. ankabuş curni ott "a remedy of assafoetida powder' H I 6, ot 'remedy' common in H İT, beş bağ ot 'five bales of hay" USSp. or, 10-11; occurs several times in TT VIII spelt odh and ot: xiv. Chin.-Uy$g. Dict. '(medicinal) herb” ot Liget! 88: Xak, xi ot a[-nabt 'vegetation', hence ot ündl: nabata'l-nabt “the vegetation sprang up'; Ot a word used for all kinds of "fodder' (cami'i'l-'alaf), hence atka: ot bö:rgil i'hfi'l-faras "feed the horse”, ot al-dawàd', 'remedy, medicine', hengrot içtim 'T drank the medicine' , . ., ot a/-summ 'poison', hence beg apa:r ot be:rdi: “the beg gave him poison to drink” Kaş. 1 35; ot yem /I7 s (see 1 yem), 12 0.0.: KB ot em kalmadı "no remedy (Hend.) remained (untried)' ro6r, (if he cultivates it) orar er térilgü oti “the man reaps the crop ready to be gathered' 1393; ot yem 975 (2 ap): xin(?) Tef. ot 'grass, vegetation' 239: xiv Muh. (in a note on the difference between o and ti) if pronounced o:t it is a Singular Noun meaning al-hajig awi'l-datoa? atoi'I-qayd(?) 'fresh vegetation or remedy or?” Mel. 2, 1; Rif. 78 (al-qayd has no appropriate meaning and may be corrupt): al-kadis “haystack' o:t &amp;ü:n 60, 5; 159 (prob. an error for ürtgü:n): Çağ. xv ff. ot yerde biten ot 'vegetation growing in the ground” Vel. 86: ot giydh wa 'alaf 'vegetation, fodder" San. 62r. 2; ot yem dawd'i wa ğadd"i 'drugs and provisions' San. 62v. 19 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv ot 'grass" Qutb 120: Kom. xiv (1) "vegetation, herbage'; (2) 'medicine'; (3) “ointment” ot CCI; Gr.: Kip. xir ai-hagig ot, which is also a/-dawá' Hou. 8, 18; (after o:ta:çı:) al-dawd' ost, al-'aqqádr 'drug, aromatic plant” yem 23, 10: xiv. 0:t nabdt İd. 8; of al-danıd" iş and Bul. $, 13; al-dirydq “medicine, antidote' o:£. Bul. 11, 6: Xv dawá' ot Tuh. 15b. ro: Osm. xiv ff. ot 'remedy', c.i.a.p., ot yem xvr (IV 613) translates Pe. aördz 'spices' and a syn. Ar. word TTS I sso; II 736; III 549; IV 612; xvii ot in Rümi, nüra 'depilatory' San. 62r. 3. O:d “time”, both as "a point in time” and “a period of time": ín astronomical termínology apparently “an bour'. Survives in NE Tel. öy R I 1172; Tuv. öy Pal. 319; SE Tar. öt R I 1259; SW xx Anat. öd DD 110r. See ódleg, kolu, Türkü vir ol ódke: "at that time” Z E 21; II E 18; antag ödke: "at a time like that” 7 E 40; 8.0. I N ro (By-) (note that bu Gódke: in 7 S I was corrected to bódke: in 77 N r), vri ff. Man. ol ödün “at that time” Chuas. I 6-7: Uyğ. vir ff. Chr. ol ödün U 7 5, 2: Man.-A üküş ódte berü “for a long time" M I rı, t7; ol ödke ır, 3; edgü ödke koluka “at a good time and moment” 26, zo: Man. ol ódün “at that time' TT 7I 6, 33: Bud. ol ódün PP 4, 2; ölgülük ódi “the time when he must die” U I7 28, 5; ötrü yaylı kişli tört öd bolur "then the four seasons, summer and winter (etc.) come into existence' (within each of the four seasons (öd) two periods (öd) are distinguished and eight first days (yapı kün) come into existence) TT VI 324-6; (in the fortunate earth-monkey year) üdrülmiş edgü ödke kutlug koluka 'at a chosen good time and an auspicious moment' Pfahl. 6, 1; (in the Türk "Türgeş country) ódi kolusi: tumliğ “their seasons are cold” ITüen-ts. 106; (since the seven planets cannot conceal themselves from them) öd kolular etiğin yaratmışlar ol “they have constructed instruments for (measuring) time” 132; öd kolu ermez “this is not the time (Hend.) (to speak at length) TT X 27; kimnin kurtulmakliğ ödin kolusın odğurak bilser “if he knows intimately the moment of anyone's liberation” 273-4: Civ. küntüz iki ödte 'twice daily” 77 II 8, 32; üküş ödün İsiğ “a recurring fever' ditto ro, 65; tünle tokuzunç ödte “in the ninth hour of the night" TT VII 9, 32-3; yunt ödinde - .« . siçğan ódinde “in the (Chinese style) double hour of the horse . . . of the mouse" do. 25, 23 and 25; o.o. TT I 3, USp. 70, 5; in the astronomical text TT VIII L. the word occurs several times spelt üz, there are other similar apparent mis-spellings in these texts due to a shift in the phonetic values of Bröhmi letters: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. “he four seasons” tört öd R I 1259; Ligeti 189: Xak. xı ö:d (spelt &amp;d in error) al-zamán "time", bi-sammati'l-wátw "with front. vowel Kaş. I 44; eleven o,o.: KB (God created) öd ödleğ “times and seasons' 3; many o.o.: xi1(?) Tef. öz (sic?) "time” 242; At. (the wise man knows) iş ödin “the time for action” 113: xiv Rbj. ö:d “time” R I 1259: Muh. al-waqt "time" 6:y Mel. 79, iş, Rif. 184. Y özt (6:4) “bile, gall; the spleen, the gailbladder'; both the liquid and the organs secreting it. As the spleen was supposed to be tbe organ connected with fear, and less often anger (usually associated with the lungs, see öpke:), the basic word and its derivatives sometimes connote cowardice and other emotions. S.iLa.m.lg.; SW Az,, Osm. öd, "km. ö:t (ö:d- before vowels). Türkü vri (because heaven and earth vvere in disorder and) ódlpe: küni: tegdük üçün yağı: bolt: "because envy entered their spleens they became hostile! TT £ 29 (an almost unique example of intervocalic -d- in Türkü): Uyğ. viii ff. Civ. öt in such phr. as ud ötl *ox-gall' is common in H 7 and /7, öt tamarı “the gallduct 7I 32, 11: Xak. xi öt af-marára “galV, aqall şamma minhu "the front enunciation of the vowel is less than that of it” (ie. the preceding entry ü:t) Kaş. 7 43 (the difference noted seems to be that between 6:- and ü:-): KB öt ağu 779 (see ağu:, reading uncertain): xiv Müh. (in a phonetic note on the difference between Ö and ü) “and if the damma of the kamza inclines (amalat) moderately to kasra its (Mel. 6:d, Rif. ö:t) meaning is al-marára Mel. 5, s, Rif. 78, al-marára ött 48, r, 142: Çağ. xv ff. öd zahr 'poison, bitterness' in Ar. marára San, 66v. 14: Kip. xur al-maröra 6:t Hou. 21, 18: xiv öt ditto İd. 8: xv ditto Tuh. 32b. 8; Kat. 61, ro: Osm. xiv ff. öd is noted 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 80 
     
   
   
     36 MON. AD in various idioms T TS 7 ss8; 1 742; İH ss4; IV 619. D 2 öt presumably Dev. N. in -t fr. à:-; seldom used by itself, usually in the phr. ót sav 'advice and counsel”, or in association. with 1 erig 'advice'. In TT VII spelt iit, cf. Ógüt. N.o.a.b. Türkü vii: ff. öğü:m öti:n alayın kanım savrn tiplayrn '| will accept my mother's advice and listen. to my father's words! //AB 58; Man, sizler olar savınça ötinçe yoriplar 'act in accordance with their advice and counscl' TT // 10, 77-8: Bud. bu ötleriğg savlarığ alıp 'deigning to accept this advice and counsel' U // 49, 31-2; Üt erig sce 1 erig: Xak. xı K.B öt sav 1356; öt sav eriğ 1548, 2617, 3984; tusulğaymu erki sapa ötlerim "will my advice really be of value to you?” sızı. ü:t (ü:d) "hole, aperture'. Kag.'s and Mus remarks point clearly to an initial ü:-, and the Oğuz form and long vowel to an original final -d. Survives only in NE öt Koib,, Sag. R I 1260; üt Alt., Sor, Tel. R 7 1862; Khak. Bas. 257; "luv. Pal. 435. Uyü. vur ff, Bud. İki burun üti "his two nasal apertures” TT VI 407: Civ. burun ütinde H II 16, 2 and ır, 2.0.0.; (if a mouse) bir ök üt kılsar “makes just one hole” (in a garinent) T'T VII 36, 7: Xak. xr ü:t al-taqb fi'l-etdár ava” 1-xaşab "a hole in a wall or piece of wood', bi-sjammati' I-wátw 'with a front vowel Kaş, I 43 (contrast phonctic note on 1 ö:t), 7 382, 18 (see 1 karak) and five o o: xiv Mw. in a phonctic note on the rounded vowels ü:t "the hole' (faqb) of the ear, or a needle or the like is distinguished in character from ut-, ot, and ó:t, but only by length from üt- Ae. 7, 2; Rif. 78; taqbu'l-tadd “the aperture in a nipple” emçe:k ü:ti: 141: Oğuz xt (in a phonetic note) similarly the ""urks call a/-qaqb ü:t and they the Oğuz) ü:d / 31, 22. Mon. V. AD*] ad- See adın, adir-, etc, *2 ad- See 2 adığ, adil-, etc. at- basically “to throw, to shoot', with a very wide range of extended and metaph. meanings. (Red. for examples lists 22). 'Therc is a wide variation in the cases of the direct and indirect object; the original usage seems to have been to put the object thrown in the 4cc., the target (if mentioned) in the Dat., and the weapon (if mentioned) in the /2/., another usage is to put the target in the Acc., and the weapon in the Jnstr., and another to mention only the weapon in the cc, In some phr., e.g. tan at- “of the dawn, to break” there is no stated Object; and in some languages at- has almost hecome an Aux. V. C.i.a.m.l.g.. Uyğ. vifi. Man.-A ağu Xormuzda teprlke atğaymen “1 will discharge poison at the god Hormuzd' M 7 19, 15-15; atmış ağusi “the poison which he had discharged' zo, r, taş alıp Zruşç burxanağ at(t)ılar “they took stones and threw them at Zoroaster the 20 Man.-utg. Frag. 400, 9-10; a.0. 401, Bud. ya kurup ok atip 'stringing a bow a shooting arrows! U I7 78, 31; okin atip 'shooting. with. arrovs” T7 IV 10, 12 (the two texts are strictly parallel): ya kurup ok atkalir 'stringing. his bow he constantly shoots arrows! T'T' ] 162: Xak. xı er ok atti: 'the man shot (raid) an arrow' (etc.); and one says tar attı: eğalaca"l-yubh "the dawn hroke'; and one says ol attı: ne:pni: "he threw. (faraha) the thing! Kaş. 1 170 (atar, atma:k), yaşın atip yaşnadı: “the lightning flashed' 7 236, 1; 7 403, 27 (karın), 1tka: uvut atsa: "if one instils discipline (dufi'a'lhayd”) in a dog” I 116, 4; about zo 0.0.: KB özün otka atma "do not throw yourself in the fire” (for the sake of this world) 1284; a.0.0.: xu(7). 7Tef. cüdüni otka atmak “to throw. the magician in the fire”, menl atsunlar “let them shoot me”? tap at- öz, /t. erni otka yüzin atğuçı tl ol “it is the tongue that throws a man's honour in the fire” 159: xiv Muh. ramá bi'l-nigib "to shoot an arrow' ok nt-, ramd ba'ida(») “to shoot a long distance ura:k (Rif. u:za:k) at- Mel. 26, 14; Rif. 109; al-ranıd (Rif. sva'l-hagf) “to shoot (and hit) atmak 34, 13; 120: Çağ. xv ff. at- at- biy-andáz ma'násima “to throw, shoot! Vel, 6 (quotn.); at- (1) andáxtan “to throw, shoot'; (2) tali" şudan “to dawn! in the sense of the dawn breaking (Iuli'-? subit), but in this sense 'dawn' must be mentioned San. 27v. 8 (quotns.): Xwar. xin(?) at- “to shoot', and in idioms Oğ. 112, ctc.: xiv at- "to throw'; ; (of dawn) “to hreak' Qutb facsimile 44v. 1, etc.; MN 149, etc.; Nahe. 17, 5 etc. : Kip. xur ramá nt- Hou. 34, 10: xiv nt- (*with back vowels") ramá İd. 7: xv at- in grammatical section Tuh. saa. s: ramd 'anr'l-qates 'to shoot from a bow! at- Kam, 74, 1 6:t- (6:4-) bas a long semantic history; it originally meant 'to organize, put in order” (a meaning surviving only(?) in NE Tuv. Pal. 576), then “to ornament, adorn' (cf. étig), then “to create” (as part of an organized plan), then by a gradual process of attenuation simply “to make”, and finally “to do”, "This attenuation occurred chiefly in the Western languages; the Eastern languages, perhaps for the colourful reason given by Kaş., rather avoided the word ne continued to use kil- for “to make, do. S.ia.m.l.g,, nearly always for "to make, do', but in most languages used chiefly to form compound verbs out of foreign, esp. Ar. nouns. "The consonant of this verb, unlike that of at-, is -d- before vowels in the SW (Ofuz) languages and this no doubt represents the earliest form. "The intervocalic -d- in the NE languages is not significant as it occurs universally, Türkü vii the word is common (over a dozen occurrences) usually in tbe phr. bodun ét- 'to organize a people (group of clans or trihes) into a realm (6:6), often with an implication of conquering them first; c.g. Suğdak bodun e€teyl:n teyin "saying ''I will organize the Sogdian people” ” (I crossed the Pearl River) 7 E 39; another phr. xa nu uy 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 81 
     
   
   
     MON is çeriğ €t- “to marshal troops in battle order", c.g. süpüs bolsar çeriğ eter erti: "when there was going to be a battle, he used to marshal the troops' /x. 9; the later meaning perhaps occurs in bark étgü:ci: bediz yaratığma bitig. tas étdi:ci “ornamenting the grave goods, having the painted decoration carried out, and ornamenting the memorial stone" /.N. 13; also occurs in the Hend. ét- yarat-; eg. Az bodun étip yaratip 'organizing the .Az people" / E 19; the proper name or title ^1 €tmiş “having organized a realm' first occurs in Ongrn 4: vir ff, eli:g etmi:ş men IrAB, 48; Man biz adruk adruk €tip yaratip nomka kiğürsüğ törö bar erti “there was a rule that we should organize (Hend.) various things and introduce them into the doctrine' CAuas. 228-9 (exact meaning obscure): Uyf. vii çeriğ, etdi Su. E 4; El etmiş (sic) N r: vin ff. Man.-A. (various gods) yérig teprig yaratğalı étgell anuntilar 'prepared themselves to organize (Hend.) heaven and earth” M 7 14, 4-5: Man. (like the servants of kings and 5egs who sweep and clean their dwellings and household goods and) éter tölteyür 'arrange them and provide them with cushions(?)' Wind. 35: Bud. ólutlük etlik etdimiz turğurdumuz erser yağışlığ tenrilik etdimiz erser “if we have organized and set up slaughterhouses and butcher's shops, and erected temples where libations are poured' TT IV 6, 45-6; o.o. VI 35; 290; VII 28, 35: Xak. (and Ofuz) xi tepri: meniy s:şım é:tti: aglaha'lláh amri “God put my affairs in order”, and in Oğuz they say ol yükünç é:tti: şa//d "he praved', and they (the Oğuz) use ö:tti: for anything that they do (fa"a/07), while the Turks say kıldı: for “make, do” ('amila) except that this word is in current use for 'copulation' (yacri 'alá'l-mucáma'a), so they avoid (hadi) it in favour of another, so as not to embarrass (yastahyi) the ladies by using it. And this word may be used mín bábrl-mital “in examples' (i.e. of compound verbs?) Kaş. I 171 (éte:r, €:tme:k); about zo o.o., all in compound verbs with onomatopoeics 2 bo:k, 1 cak, etc.: KB ét- is common for “to örganize, set in order” and the like; e.g. (opened the way to paradíse) ajun etğüke “for (the ruler) who sets the world in order” 63; (the earth seeks to adorn itself) körkin étip 'setting its form in order" (smartening itself up) 64; o.o. 146, 303, 474 (2 at) etc.: xnı(?) Tef. et- “to prepare (food); erect (a castle)” and in compound verbs 65: At. ét- is common, e.g. (r) but étip “making an idol'; (2) éter bolsar iİşni sanıp saknip ét "if you are performing a task, perform it after due reflection' 367; (3) in compound verbs, e.g. sabr ét “be patient! 349: xiv Muh. the texts of Mel. and Rif. differ widely; Mel, 16, 14 has eygüt:lük éderisen ta:puk étgemen “if you do good, I will serve you”, Rif. 94 has a similar phr. but with kil- for ét-; Mel. has a number of compound verbs with 6t-/€:t- in az, 12; 23, 2; 24, 2, etc.; most do not appear in Rif. which does, however, have talafa “"to perish” tas €:t- 1:06, salld wa . V. AD- 37 ta"ahbada “to pray! namüz ét- 1:11, and dayyaga “to constrict” da:r et- irr: Çağ. xv ff. ét- Vel. 41—7 lists various conjugational forms translating them ey/e- (edle:-) and sometimes adding fi'I “to make, do”, ét- ("with é-") hardan “to make, də” (also used in compound verbs) San. 93r. 15 (quotns.): Oğuz xı sec Xak.: Xwar. xri ét-/éd- "to make, do” "Ali 34: xiv €t- "to make" Qufb facs. sr. 18; in compound verbs MN, 44 etc.: Kom. xiv et- (r) “to do (something /cc., to sorneone Dat,), (z) in compound verbs CCI, CCG; Gr. 95 (quotns): Kip. xiv ét- fa'ala İd. 8; et-/ét- in compound verbs Bul. 3ov., aor., 53r., etc.: xv "aila ét- (and eyle-) Tuh. 26a. 7. 1:d- “to send (something cc"); and by extension “to allow to go, to release", in the early period also an Aux. V. with Gerund in -u:f-ü: connote completed action. As a basic verb survives in NE 1s-/1 R I 1385, 1409; Khak. 18-/fiz- Bas, 332; 'Tuv. 1d- Pal. 569; NC Kzx. 18- FI 1384 (not in MM); NW Kar. L., T. l:-fiy- R I 1409; Kom, 193; hut mostly replaced by later forms of the compound verb 1du: bér- like ibar-, é:ber-, €:ver-, yeber-, ylber- which s.i.a.m.].g. except perhaps SW. Türkü vii id- is fairly common; the -d- is assimilated before -S-, e.g. 1s(s)ar and -t- e.g. 1t(1:; normally "to send", e.g. arkış tirkiş 1s(S)ar “if you send envoys and missions” (to China) 7 S 8, İT N 6, less often “to abandon'; e.g. Türkü beğler Türkü a:tin 1t(t)t: 7 E 7, Il E ?; as Aux. V. xağanladuk xağanı:n yitürü: 1idmis “they completely lost the xağan whom they had made their ruler! 7 E 7; I1 E ?1 olo. 1 E 6; Il E 7 (acBin-), Ix. 19 (uvul-): vir ff. 1d mi:s “sent” IrkB ro: Man, tepri kücin öğrünçülügün tenri yeriperü 1dur “he sends divine strength and joy to the country of the gods! M IJI 17, 1-3 (ii); a.o. Chuas. 241; unitu itdi (si) “he completely forgot! Chuas. I 15: alkum ölürgey bir tirig 1dma£gaylar “they will kill them all and not leave one of them alive' TT II 6, 16-17: Uy&amp;. vir Kirkiz tapa: er 1d mis “he sent a man to the Kiriz! Su. E 10; a.0.0.: vii ff. Man.-A tepri yériperü ıdtı M ] r3, 20 ff: Bud. koptin sinar nom bildeciierke arkış [tir-] kiş 1diplar “send envoys and missions in every direction to those who know the doctrine' U III 29, 2-3; a.0.0. (common in this sense); saçların artlarinda 1dip "letting their hair down on their backs' U IV 8, 38; a.o.0.; in Hüen-ts. as an Aux. V. seems rather to connote humility, e.g. ayıtu 1dur biz *we venture to ask” 1826; a.0.0.: Civ. id- “to send” is common USp. o, 3; 24, 14 etc.: Xak. xr ol mana: at 1:dti: “he sent (ba'ata) me a horse'; and one says tepri: yala:vvaç t:dti: “God sent an envoy (or “prophet", arsala . . . rasala(n))' Kaş. 111 438 (:du:r, rdma:k); idu: bé:rip bosuttim atlaqtuhu h-yadhab "1 released him and let him go” I 216, ar: İİ 312, 24 (tonat-); and four o.0.: KB 1d- "to send” is common, 34, 93, etc.; 1dayin tése 1d kalı tutsa tut “if he says *I will release" him, if "hold" bold him” 750: xin(?) Tef. 1d- (occzsionally 1z-) (1) “to send”: (2) “to 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 82 
     
   
   
     38 MON. V. ADstretch. out' (a hand); 1du ber- "to release” 128-9: At. id- “to send” şr, 36, 79; sözüp boşlağ 1dma yığa tut tili “do not let words loose at random, keep a firm hold on your tongue' 135: Xiv Muh. arsala 1y- (or 1:-) Mel. 22, s, Mif. 102; şamara (? rcad gamaza) tea taraka,'to hurry (? to shrink from) and abandon" 1y- (or 1:-) 27, 11; 110: (Caf. xv ff. 1dis not listed; yiber- "to send” Vel. 412; San. 347v. zz): Xwar. xın İd- (sic ?) “Ah 47: xiv id- Quib 58, iy- $8, 1d- (sic) 205; (VU) iyMN 129; 1d- “to send” Nalic. 19, 8; 30, 16; 230, 16; 315, 2-3 etc.: Kom. xiv “to send; to admit(?) 1-/1y- CCI, CCG; Gr. 272: Kip. XIV 1- arsala, with a note saying that idi: is conjugated but idi: hama not except in the Perf. 7d. 7: xv arsala 1- Tuh, sa. 7. 1 it- “to push, or shove (sontething .4ece.), to push (it) over”, S.a.m.l.g.,, except perhaps NC and SC, where it seems to have been displaced by iter- a der. f. of recent formation. Xak. xı ol ahı: itti: yadaria/iu ma dafa'ahu bi-yadihi aw riclihi hatta asqatahu tlá'l-ard "he bumped against him and pushed him with his hands or feet so that he threw him to the ground' Kaş, I 171 (Ite:r, itme:k); (if the waves risc in my lake) ta:mığ ite:r translated “they beat on the walls of my castle as if they were going to shift it (vuzil/iliu) from its place and knock it down' (vadfa'uhu) Hİ 137, 5: Çağ. xv ff. ite sal- and 1t- both translated iti ver- Vel. 4273: 1t- (with 1-”) cizi-rà bà dasi zadan tea afgandan “to strike something with one's hands and knock it down' San. 93r. 16 (quotns.); ite sal- dast zadan tea pas afgandan 94r. 25 (quotn.): Kom. xiv ite ber- "to bump against” CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv it- dafa'a İd. 8: xv dafa'a it-fite bér- Tu. 16a. 2. S 2 it- "to stray'. Sec yit-. S3 it- “to smell'. See yidi-. E 4 it- “to make, do", Mistranscription of €:t-. *od- See oduğ, odğur-, odun-, etc. u:d- “to follow', with metaph. extensions “to conform to; (of a garment) to fit, and the like. "There is no doubt of the existence of this verb, which survives as uy- in SW Az., Osm., 'Tkm., and some NW languages, but the only forms noted in the early period are the Gerund udu: used as an Adv. sometimes meaning "then, thereafter' and, in Ka. the İnfin. udmak (sic?) used as a noun. Anotber form occurs in KB and more in Tef. Türkü vir Élterig xağan kazğanmasar udu: ben özim kazğanmasar "if Élterig Xağan had not striven to succeed, and I myself, following him, had not striven to succeed” (there would never have been a (Türkü) realm or people) T ss: vur ff. (the dawn broke) udu: “then” (the land got light) udu: 'then' (the sun rose) IrkB 26: Man. (the sacred king Bögü Xan— gap—) kamağ dindarlar udu atlantılar “all: the Elect rode behind him” TT 71 8, 65; Uyğ. viri (I said “vou are my people”) udu: kelip “come and follow me" Su. £ 2; (many of them went down the Selenga) ben Selene: keçe: udu: yorrdim “1 crossed the Selenga and marched following them' E 4; o.o. E 3 and 6: (vini ff. Civ.; the word has been erroneously read in USp. 77, 14, the correct reading scems to be biz bitigke uda kirmigce “as we were put on the register in our sleep' (i.e. without being informed about it): xıv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. "to follow' udu (mis-spelt udup) kel- R7 1702; Ligeti 273: Xak. x1 udu: halfa “behind, following'; hence one says men anın udu: keldim “1 came behind him” (halfahu); and men senin udu: bardim rqrafaytuha “1 followed you” Kaş, 7 87; udmak al-tábt'toa'l-şdhiri 'follower, servan 7 99; eren kamuğ artadı: neler udu: “mankind have been ruined, when they have coveted vvealth” (lammd tamat fi'l-amiwál) İH zy, 16; (God created the world) çığrı: udu: (MS. ud in error) tezginür 'and thereafter the firmament revolves” JI 303, 9; (the supposed form wuyin Brockelmann's and Atalay's Indices is an error for 2 uya:, see ka:b): KB udu: occurs in the phr. udu bar- s7r, 2710, etc. and udu €1k- 5444; (the begs are the leaders; wherever the leaders go) udula barır barça udmiş kişl “all the followers follov” $202 (for udula see udu:la:-): xin(?) Tef. (ud-)fuz-[uy- “to follow' (someone Dat.) 'occur in several conjugational forms” 321, 323: 4t. (God created night and day) udu (written wduu, misread udub) biri birke yorir öp sop-a “they follow one another in front and behind' ı4: Çağ. xv İT. uy- (-up) mutába'at et- “to follow" Vel. 124; Uy- mutcáfagat wea mütaba"at hardan “to conform; to follow" San. Sor. 19: Xwar. xiv uy- “to follow' Qutb 196: Kip. xiv uy- taba'a; uyğan al-tabi' fd. 26: xv taba'a uy- Tuh. 9b. q: £dcoa"a "to agree with(someonc)' uy- 24a. 9; sedfaqa "to conform' uy- 28b. 7: Osm. xv uy- “to follow' TTS I 735. ut- (r) “to win (something cc.) at gamhling'; (2) "to beat, defeat (someone, various cases)' (a) at gambling; (5) in battle, etc. S.i.a.m.l.g. nearly always in meaning (1), less often in 2(a), rarely in 2(b). Türkü vir ff. (a gambler) tokuzo:n boş kofi utml:ş "won ninety ownerless sheep” İrRB 29; (if a man wears a reddish white stone) kopka: utğay “he will beat everyone' (or *win everything'? at gambling) Toy, 18 (ETY II sg): Uyğ, Man.-A yeğedmek utmak boizun “may they have success and victory” M 7 28, 18; 29, 32-3; utmış(?) yégedmis vreştiller) “the victorious and successful angels" 27, r: Bud. (oh my daughter, by your wisdom) utdun yeğedtin “you have won and succeeded' (in an argument) U 77 21, 11-12; similar phr. (of a competition in unselfishness) U 717 46, 18; 69, zr, tórt tórlüg şımnu süsin utup yeğedip 'successfully conquering the army of four kinds of demons' TT IV ız, $$: 0.0. USp. 104, 21; Hüen-ts. 2062-3; TT X 80 and 252: Civ. utmak yégedmek T'T 7 2: Xak. xı ol ani: utti: qamarahu fi'l-la'ib wa ğayrihi "he beat him at gambling and other things” Kaş. 7 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 83 
     
   
   
     MON. 170 (uta:r, utma:k; verse); andag erig kim uta:r *who can beat (yaglib) a man like that?” I 200, 20; bizke: kelip ö:ç uta:r 'coming to us they wreak ( yagdi?) their vengeance' 11 103, 27: KB yağığ utğuçı 'conquering the enemy” 2141; same meaning 2641, 4883; sözümni utup 'trying to defeat my arguments! 4004: xn(?) Tef. ut- "to defeat' (in a contest of skill) 332: Xiv Muh. ğalaba fi'l-qimár u:t- Mel. 6, 18; Rif. ?8 (in a phonctic note on the rounded vowels, saying that this is the meaning in the normal Ar. pronunciation): Caf. xv ff, ut"to win! of a gambler Vel. 87 (quotn.); ut("with -u-") burdan qimdr wg giraw "to win at gambling or betting” San. 58v. 8 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv ut- 'to win', esp. 'to win (a game Acc.)' Qutb 201; MN 35: Kip. xii galaba utHou. 38, 8: xiv ut- qamara fd. 8, ut- zafara “to be victorious' 15; galaba wa zafara wa gadara bi-ma"nd rabaha (to overcome in the sense of gaining) ut- Bul. 67r.: xv zafara wa ğalaba ut- Tuh. zab. 1 (and 27a. 2): Osm. xiv ff, ut- 'to win', esp. at gambling; 'to acquire (something Zcc.) by conquest'; c.i.a.p. TTS I ?31; 1I 935; HI 718; IV 290; a pronunciation üt-, peculiar to Osm. and still surviving in xx Anat., SDD 1439, is recorded as early as xvi. VU üd- Hap. leg.; previous editors have read öd-, taking the word as connected with 2 öt, and translated it 'to give advice', but this is etymologically impossible; it seems in fact to be the basic verb of üdiğ 'sexual passion', q.v.; but the text may be corrupt. Cf. üdlen-. "Türkü vim ff. kara: üpğü:k yıl yaru:mazkan tedi: üdmep körmegp ürkittin “the black hoopoe, before the year became bright, said, "Do not get excited (?), do not look, you frightened me" ' IrkB zr (the double -tt- is unusual in Runic script, and the word may be an error for ürkitmen). 1 ót- the basic connotation is movement through or over; it is both Trans. and İntrans., in the latter case almost always with “time” of some sort as the Subject. If Trans. it can govern several cases, with different shades of meaning; with the Acc. it usually means 'to cross', e.g. a river, the movement being over rather than through; with the Dat. it means “to penetrate into (soinething)'; and with the .4bi. (and/or Loc.) “to pass right through (something)! and come out the other side. There are various metaph. meanings, e.E. "to pass over, forgive (sins, etc., 4522”, "to give up, renounce (something)'; and, if Intrans., (of the bowels) 'to be purged'; (of goods) “to move freely, be easily marketed". S.i.a.m.L.g.; in SW only Tkm, and Xx Anat. SDD 1120. Cf. üp-, 2 i:r-, kec-. Türkü vri T 3 (ölüt-): Uyğ. vrr ff. Dud. (they fall on sharp spits, and these) bütün etózlerinde (or -den?) arkuru turkuru ótüp üner 'pass right through their whole bodies and emerge (the other side)” TM IV 253, 57-8; (I wish to go home) nemen ütgeymü men “hovv shall I get through?” Hüen-1s. 27; (he loves the aged, V. AD- 39 he knows the wise) tak1 artukrak biligleri ötmiş(?) ol “and he has penetrated their superior wisdom' 125-6; SyOşip nomta ötmiş ol “he has become completely familiar with Hinayana doctrine! 1792-3: Sav söz ötmeyükçe “as no message (Hend.) has come through" 2040; in a list of devils in U 1J 61 ötmişiğ yedeçiler (12) which comes after “eaters of pus, tears, moisture, spittle, mucus, vornit', no doubt means 'eaters of faecal matter. Civ. tin buzğak ötür “the shortness of breath passes off” H I 164; kan ötüp edgü bolur “the bleeding ceases and he recovers' ditto 183-4; similar phr. H 17 8, 23; karın ótmez Isiglig 'suffering from constipation and fever” ditto 10, 57; karın ótmeser “if he is constipated' TT VII 22, 16: Xak. xı ok keyikten ötti: "the arrow passed through (zafada) the antelope' (etc.); also used of anything which passes through anything; and one says karrn ötti: utliqa l-batn wa maşd "the stomach was purged and suffered from diarrhoea! Kaş. I 17: (öte:r, ótme:k); (the stream) ta:BiB öte:r “passes through (yanfid) the mountain! 7 424, 17; sü:si: kalin kim óte:r fa-min katrati'l-cund lam akid a'buru 'and because of the density of his army 1 cannot contrive to pass through" (sic, not a lit. translation) 7 371, 2; I 473, s (kudruk; this might belong to 2 öt-): xiu(?) Tef. öt- (with 452) "to pass tbrough' (a place, or time) 251: xtv Mul. al-'ubür "to cross” ö:t- (- mak, in error); al-qat" (normally "to cut, sever", here perhaps “to separate from someone") ö:t- (- mak, in error) Rif. 122 (only); al-ishdl (Rif. al-insihdl) 'diarrhoea! ó:z ó:tmek Mel. 65, 2; Rif. 164 (both texts corrupt, Mel. has óze:tmek, Rif. ö:xe: öctmeh): Çağ. xv ff. öt- (-ti etc., "with ö-”) variously translated geç- “to cross”, gít"to gö”, farájíat et- and váz geç- "to give up, cede'; te'tir ve sirdyat “to spread, penetrate' Vel. 87-8 (quotns.); ót- (by implication "with ö-”) gudüştan "to pass, pass over, cross', etc. San, s8v. 5 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv balta tak1 ötmedi “and an axe could not cut through it” Nahe. 30, 2: Kom, xiv öte, as a Postposition, *through' CCG; Gr. 184 (quotns.): Kip. xv nafada öt- Tuh. 21b. 10; 37b. 2; manfüd ötüptür 34b. s: Osm. xiv ff. Ót- “to pass over, or through”, common in xiv and occurs sporadically till xvi1 TT.S I1 569; 11 759. 2 öt- basically (of a bird) “to sing'; hence metaph. of other animals or inanimate objects 'to emit some kind of sound'; never (of human beings) 'to sing', hut in SW 'to chatter, talk nonsense'. Survives only(?) in NE Tuv. etPal. $76 and SW Osm. öt-. Cf. sayra:-. Xak. xı tatlığ öter sanduvva:ç “the nightingale sings (yufrib . . . bi-ilhánihi) sweetly' I $29, 75 İİİ 178, 16; and four 0.0.; n.m.e.: KB ünin ótti keklik “the partridge sang his song” 76; o.o. 77, 78: xiv Muh. saca'a'l-tayr (of a bird) “to sing' ó:t- Mel. 78, note 8 (not in all MSS. or Rif.): Xvvar. xiv 6t- (of a bird) “to sing' Qutb 124: Osm. xvi Ot- (of a goat) “to bleat” TTS IV 631: xvii öt- ("with ö-”) in Rümi, xtodnandagi wa saráyidan "to sing', and 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 84 
     
   
   
     40 MON. V. ADmetaph. 5/-hüda-gi”i «a Jdj-xá'i “to talk nonsense, bahble' San. 58v. 6. üt- 'to singe'; rather rare and sometimes misspelt owing to a supposed connection with 1 0:t (e.g. ot- Red. 236). Survives only(?) in NC Kzx. üt- R 7 1863; üyt- 3141 481; NW Kaz. üt- 71343; SW xx Anat. üt- .SDD 1439. Xak. xt ol ba:şığ ütti: aşdfa sa ra J-ra's tea ahraqalın “he set fire to the hair of the head and burnt it off”, also used of other things Kaş, 7 171 (üte:r, ütme:k): xiv Auk. (in a phonetic note on the rounded vowels) 'and if vou do not pronounce the word with a sedrc (i.e. long i52) and join the hamza to the td” with a slight lengthening (ör-madd hafif) you have the 2nd Pers. Sing. Imperat. of ?/rdqu hğanam “to singe a shcep” Mel. 7, 3; Rif. 78: Çağ- xv ff. üt- (öa-işbd"-i damma ie. "with u-fü-”, but erroneouslv with back vowel) "to pass a flame rapidly over the head and hide of an animal or an ear of wheat to remove the hairs and the like” San. 58v. 9: Kom. xiv “to singe! ütCCG, Gr.: Kip. xiv üt- azdla bi-ndr ga'ra'l-fanani'l-mudká “to burn. off the hair of a slaughtered sheep! 1d. 8: xv şarercafa (misspelt, şazcafa) besar "to singe! üt- Tuh. 21b. 9. Dis. ADA ada: not noted later than Uyg., where it is often used in the Hend. ada: tuda:; the contexts indicate that it means 'danger' or the like; a l.-w. in Mong. as ada 'devil, evil spirit' (Kot. 64, Haltod 14), which reappears as a reborrowing in NE and NC R / 477 (ada), 557 (aza); not connected, or to be confused, with the Ar. l.-w. add, "injury, damage, pain”, and the like. Cf. adart-. Türkü viii ff, Man. uluf ada iyinç basınç bolğay "there will be great danger and persecutions (Hend.)” TT IJ 6, 15; a.o. az: UyÉ. vir ff. Man.-A ada tuda (MS. ziz, an easily corrected error) bizni ara yok “there are no dangers (Hend.) among us” M I 16, 1-2: Man. (may all men be saved) alp adalarintin “from their gricvous dangers! TT IH 168; alo. M I 31, 3-4 (): Bud. both ada and ada tuda are common; e.g. (when you go to sea) beş törlüğ ada bar “there are five kinds of danger” (sea monsters, rocks, demons, waves, winds) PP 17, 1; olo, PP 18, 5 etc.; U II şi, 5:64, 8: 73, 5 (ii); Tig. 48a. 7; b. 4; ig ağrığ ölüm ulatı ada tuda bolur “there are dangers (Hend.) like disease (Hend.), death, and so on” TT VI 232-3; o.0. V ro, 87 (öç-), VIII K.12 (a:da: tu:da: ig a:grag); O.6 (ig ağrığ a:da: tuda:), Kuan. rs, 86; ig a:da: TT VIII K.9; Civ. ada bolmaz 'there is no danger' H 118, 28; !gap] ada ig bolsar “if there isa dangerous ilİness” go, 160; both ada and ada tuda are common in 77 I and V7I. ata: 'father'; this word and ana: “mother” first appenr, instead of kar (q.v.) and 1 ö:g (q.v.) in Uyğ. Bud., but are still rare in that language C.i.a.m.I. Uyğ. vrir ff. Bud. badra kiz atası beğke inca tép tédi kapım uluğ él(Dig busuşluğ sakınçlığ bolmazun “the maiden Bhadra said to her father, the beg, “Let the great king my father not be sorrowful and anxious" ” U II zo, z ft; o.o. do. 25, 19) Hüen-ts. 120: Xak. xı ata: al-áb “father”, ata: sa:ğu:n a/-rabib 'physician' Kaş. I 86, and 403, 5 (sağun), ahout zo 0.0.: K B ata “father” 37, 110, 3784 (écl:) a.o.o, : xir Tef. ata 'father" 62: Ar. nta 'father' 291, 495: xiv Mult. abühu ata:sı: Mel. ır, 9; Rif. Bs (mis-spelt), al-áb ata: 49, 5; 143; al-cadd "grandfather” ulu:ğ ata: 49, $: 143; and other phr.: Çağ. xv ff. ata gidar 'father', and they call Şüfr sheikhs and ascctics (magdyiv-r şüfiya wa zuhdd) ata San. gov. 1; ata beğ/beğ “great father” and metaph. /3/£ sea rabbi-yi atwlád-i saldfin "a princes! tutor' gov. 2 (quotns. and note on the Atabeg dynasty): Xwar. xır ata "father “A2 36: xi(?) ditto. Of. 183, etc.: xiv ditto Qut? 15; Nahc. 14, 12: Kip. al-ab ata: Hou. 31, 19: xiv ata:fata: al-db İd. 8 (ata (sic) ddam *; may be a corruption of something like “the father of all mankind” Adam); al-'amm *paternal uncle” ata: karında:ş, a[-'amma ata: kız karında:ş Bul. 9, 3 (there is a gap in the MS. where nata: should be): xv dö ata Tuh. 3b. 11; biynin ata:sr: “the bey's father* Kav. 27, $, n.0. aq, 16: Osm. xiv ff. ata 20: c.La.p. TTS 7 si, 4164; İTİ 45; IV 48-9. atı: "the son of one's younger brother or of one's own son”, that is '(junior) nephew' or *grandson'; cf. €çi: (and see Gronbech, op cit. therein) and yégen. L.-w. w. the same mcaning in Mong. as ari (one of the very few "Turkish terms of relationship so borrowed). Survives only in NE Sariğ Yuğ. ış, ati 'grand-child; small child”, Türkü vir (after him his younger brother became xa£an) oğlu: atı: xağan bolmis erinç “hiş son and grandson became xagan' I E ş, H E ş, Kül Tégin att:si: Yoluğ Tegin biti:dim “1 Yolug Tégin, Kül 'l'égin's nephew, wrote (this inscription) I SE, [Bilge: Xalğan atı:sı: Yoluğ Tégin II SW (as Y. T. was the atı: of both of these brothers, he must have been the son of a vounger brother, and could not have been the grandson of cither): vil ff, Ati: Öz Apa: "Tutuk proper name? Tur. IV 6-7 (ETY II 96; atı: might here mean “his name is”): Uyğ. Ix yegenimin atimin kórtim amtı: óltim “I saw my daughters! (and vounger sisters' ?) daughters and my sons' (and younger brothers'?) sons, and now I have died' Suci 8. E t:du: a word read in Kaş. I 110, ro, and translated 'trouble, distress” by Brockelmann with a query and by Atalay without one. It occurs in a verse, Kaş.”s translation of which is too frce to help, spoken by a man in a Jovers' quarrel, aydı: senlp u:du:, emğek telim 1:du: (or 1:dü), yumşar katığ u:du:, köplüm sapa: yüğrük. The first u:du: is the Gerund of ud- and the second is 1 udu: 'sand-dune'. "The word after telim might be the Gerund of ud- used in a slightly different meaning as a 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 85 
     
   
   
     DIS Postposition meaning "after", or it might be the Gerund of rd- although that verb has no obviously appropriate meaning. In any event it cannot be a noun. İt must mean something like “He said, |"I went].following you, and after(?) many sufferings, the hard sand-bank "o softened, and my heart hastened to you”. 1 idi: properly "master, owner', hut in Moslem texts often “the Lord” (God). "Vhe phonetic history of this word is exceptionally complicated. The original form must have been 141:, but the syn. word iğe/iyefi-e is so old that 5ts independent existence chnnot be completely excluded. It seems, however, more probable that this is merely a Sec. f. with an unusual vowel change in the final. 'The position is complicated by the existence of a syn. Mong. word ecre(4) which is as old as the xiu SH (Haenisch 42), and looks like a Turkish loanword. İdi: could have become ic? in Mong., but iğe/iye could hardly have become ece, so if the two words are identical the word must have been borrowed before the vocalic change took place and later altered to conform with it. It survives in a wide range of Sec. f.s, which are not always easy to identify NE e: T 657; 1: 1407; le 1411; Khak. €: Bas, 334; 'l'uv. e: Pal. 591: SE "Var, ege R 1.694; "Türki iga Shaw; ege BS; ige Jarring: NC Kir, ei, ege Kzx.lye MM, Simit.: SC Uzb. eğa: NW Kaz. iye R I 1434, 1578; Kk., Nogay iye; Kum. es: SW Az. yiye; Osm. is; 'Tkm. eye; xx Anat, eye, iye, ez, llas sometimes been mistaken for 2 idi: the existence of which was not at first realized. See JDoerfer Il 636. "Türkü (vtri only 2 idi: occurs); vri ff, (the fat horse's mouth has become hard) idi:si: umaz "its master is powerless (to control it)” ZrkB 6s: Uyğ. vitr ff. Bud. bus: idisi tirti kuvrağı "the community of Tirthakas who own (ie. receive) alms" USp. 103, 19-20:— the normal Uyg, forms are ide, iye, /-e, different MSS. of T T VI having different forms in the same passage; ezrwalarnir i-esi 'oh Lord of of tbe Brahmas' U I 23, ro, ol él ulus iyesi "the master of that realm and country" Suv. 90, 15; yér suv iyesi 460, 4; ev iyesi (v.l. igesi, i- esi) “master of the house” TT V1 6s, 346, ev igesi VII 28, 17; ev iye:si VIII O.8: Xak. xt İdi: al-sayvid wa'l-maxwlá 'lord, master", hence one says idim ne: t€:r “vhat does my master say ?'; and God (allàh ta'álá) is called idi:; they say idimiz yarlığı: amr rabbind "Our Lord's commands! Kaş. 7 87; four o.o.: KH idi: is common; (r) of God, e.g. idim “my Lord” 124, etc.; (2) in the same usages as Arabic a/-şöhib 'owner, possessor c.g. ay dawlat idisi “Oh fortunate one” şsr: xu(?) KBVP ulugluk idisi “Lord of greatness” 2; ay yér kök idisi "Oh Lord of earth and heaven” 3: xırı(?) Tef. 1:si: (? iyisi) “his master” (that is his elder brother) 121; idisi 122: At, idi (r) “Lord”, (2) 'owner! is common: xiv. Muh, (in a passage on pronunciation) "they call al-şöhib i:di: in 'T'urkestan and 1:yi: (MSS. in error £:ti?) in our country” Mel. 7, 11; Rif. 79; al-şdhib wa'[-malik idi: (spelt 1:41) 44, 9; . ADA 41 137: Rbg. idi “Lord (God) R J 1508: Çağ. xv ff. the position is cornplicated; Vel. qo has eye (sic) şöhib (quotn.); San. s7r. 1 adds, after Ayü, "and, spelt iye, salrib'; this word is not, however, entered under atf maksür. ma'a'l-và, but iyele- and iyelen- are— //e/ 68 has igesi (with - 8-7) translated şdhibi (quotn.) and San. 108v. 2 has ige ("with -&amp;-') málik wa sáhib (same quotn.)— San. 97r. 13, under a single entry has idi xudà wa xudáwand "the Lord; master” with a quotn. fr. Nàyir, édi “vas”, and xi "its smell', and also 97r. 18 idi küt translated sd/nb-: sa'adat "lord of felicity' (a false etymology of1duk kut): Xwar. xit idi “Lord, master” “Ali 11, 47; iye şı, xiv idi ditto Qutb 56; ev idileri Nahe. 107, 1; idi “Lord (God) 249, 4; 251, 2: Bulğar xiv the sound d does not occur in the language of most of the Turks but it does occur in Bulğar in idi: al-rabb İd. 9 (also in adak, udu-): Kip. xiv (after aya: "with back vowels") mwa'I-málik tea'l-sáhib 27 (presumably eye:): xv málik tea sdhib iye Tuh. 35a. 12 (and 9oa. 7): Osm. xiv ff. eye (sometimes mistranscribed aya) and, less often, lye “master, owner' is noted in over a dozen xiV to xvi texts TS I 287; IJ 41; İİİ 274; the synonymous word is is c.i.a.p., sometimes as İs and isleri 777 582, but usually with the Poss. Suff. as issi 7 388; 77 546; II7 381; IV 437; the two words occur side by side in "aql iyesi fikret issi (xiv, 717 382). 2 idi: Intensifying Adv., criginally used only to qualify Neg. verbs and expressions, mcaning (not) “at all” and the like; later more generally to qualify any Adj., meaning “very, extremely”. Not noted later than Xak. unless NC Kir. ndi 'very', e.g. indi kara 'pitch black” is a reminiscence. Repiaced in the West in the medieval period by igen (possiblv an Old Oğuz word) as shown below. This, too, is now obsolete. "Türkü vir (1 campaigned in all kinds of country). Ötüken yışda: yég idi: yok ermiş “there was no better (place). at all than the Ötüken mountain forest” 7 S 4 I N 3); (my ancestors campaigned as far as the ” Kadirkan mountain forest to the east and the Iron Gate to the west) ekl:r ara: idi: oksiz kök Türkü ança: oluru:r ermiş 'between the two tbe original(?) "Türkü lived thus with no tribal organization(?) at all” ] E 2-3, I1 E 4: "Türkü slr bodun yeri:nte: idi: yorrmazu:n usar idi: yok kisalım “on no account let the "Türkü sir(?) people move out of their own territory, if possible let us completelv wipe them out” T' ir; (up to that time the Türkü people) tegmís idi: yok ermiş had never at all reached' (the Iron Gate, etc.) T 47; idi yok erteci: erti: 'there would positively not have been” T 60: vur ff, Man. idi sevmezmen *] do not at all like” (living the life of an ordinary man) T T II 8, 42; idi uçuz yénik 3, 44 (uçuz): Uy£. virt ff. Bud. idi yok is fairly common TT IV 6, əş, 12, 56 (see 1 yo:k); VI 54 (v..), 247, etc.: Xak. xı KB (under$tanding and wisdom) idi edgü nen “are very good things” xış, 453; idi artuk erdem “very great virtue' 281; idi ters “very 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 86 
     
   
   
     42 DIS. ADA perverse! 491; and many o.o. (the word does not occur in Kaj.): (Xwar. xiv İDen “very” Qutb 60; inen üküş 'very many" Nahc. 6, 5; 231, 10; a.o.o.: Kom. xiv “very” ipen CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv inen (sic) cidda(s) "very” İd. 24; (in one MS.) ipen (spelt ingen) körklü: fi haddihi malih "extremely beautiful” 25: Osm. xiv ff. ipen, and sometimes ipende, “very” common up to xvir, noted once in xix TTS 1 366; Il 518; 111 357-8; İV 410). S itl 'sharp'.. See yitig. S oda See ota:ğ. VU 1 udu: pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı udu: al-akama "mound, heap'; hence a/-Ratib “a sanddune” is called kum udu:; and a town in Arğu is called Udu: Kent Kaş. 7 87; a.o, 110, 11 (1du:). S 2 udu: See ud-. E 3 udu: See 1 u: (Xak.). Dis. ADAD ata:- (a:da:-) Den. V. fr. 1 a:t (a:d); primarily "to call out (someone's Zcc.) name; to call out to (someone Acc. or Dat.); to cali (someone Dat. or ecc. something, twnsuffixed case) , later in extended meanings, esp. to nominate (someone cc.) to a post; to betroth (ie. name someone as prospective husband or wife); to dedicate (something Aec.) to God or some sacred place”, from this finally developed “to promise (something).' S.i.a.m.l.g. in SW Osm. ada:-, Tkm. n:da:-. Uyğ. vin ff, Chr. méni atasar “if he calls out to me, calls my name" M III 48, 2 (v); mapa atayu 'calling out to me" do. 49, 6-7: Man.-A (the unhappy people because of their sufferings) atayurlar 'call out names' (and curse one another) M 7 o, 8: Man. sizni atayu 'calling out your names! T'T III 97: Bud. anı temin edgü ógli atın (mistranscribed 6z-e) atağalı teğimliğ bolur “t is seemly to call him immediately by the name of "'well-disposed" " U IV 46, 57-8; anı adaş böşük atın atağalı teğimsiz bolur “it is not scemly to call him by the name of "kinsman or relation by marriage" ” do. 64-5; o.o. Suv. r9o, 12; Hüen-ts. 305; Civ. atiy atayu kut ktv özin keltl 'on calling your name divine favour (Hend.) came of its own accord” TT I r16: Xak. xı ol anar a:t ata:dı: /aqqabahu bi-laqab "he gave him a title”, also used for samrtáhu bi'sm “he gave him a name” Kaş. İİ 250 (ata:r, ata:ma:k): KB (for this reason) atım Aytoldi tép atadı “he named me Aytoldi' 748: biligsiz kişiğ bllge yılkı atar “a wise man calls an ignorant one “animal” ” 985: xin(?) KBPP Cinli$lar Adabu'l-mulük atadilar “the Chinese called (the Kutadğu: Bilig) “the education of kings" ” t9: Tef. ata- “to call (someone cc. or Dat. something unsuffixed case or Acc.) atamuş vvaqt “a predetermined time 63: xiv Muh.(?) sammd ata:- Rif. r10 (only): Çağ. xv ff. ata- (-di etc.) (1) ata-, adla-, ad koy- "to name”: (2) ada-, ya"ni námzád (sic) eyle- “to betroth' Vel. 6-7 (quotns.); ata:- (1) mömidan "to name”, (2) námzad hardan, in Ar. xafha “to betroth” San. 28r. 19 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv ata- “to name” Quib 15: Kip. XV sammá (atla- and) ada- Tw. 20a. 6: Osm. xiv and xv ada(once mis-spelt adi-) “to name; to dedicate! in three texts. T TS 13, 4: HH ş. E idi:- error (-v- misread as -1-) for evdi:-, q.v.; "to collect, gather up”. Pec. to Uyg. "The statement in TT V 34, note Bgo, that there is a Dev. N. idiş fr. this V. in Kaş. is an error; see Kaş, 111 62, footnote. Uyğ. vii ft. Bud. (just as a man who has hands, if he reaches a jewel island) köpül éyin ertini evdigeli (drgeli) uyur "can pick up jewels to his heart's content” (but if he has no hands) ötrü ertini evdiyü (idivi) umadin kuru£g kalr 'then remains frustrated because he cannot pick up jewels' TT V 26, 91-3; evdidiler (ididiler) yığdılar “picked up and collected' Suv. 627, 17; 642, 4. D 1 ota:- Den. V. fr. 1 o:t, survives only(?) in NE 'l'uv. oda- Pal. 299; the alternative form otla:-, first noted in Çağ. xv ff. as otla- San. 61r. 27 survives in NE "Tuv. otta- Paf. 314; SW Osin. odia-. Yağma:-, Yemek xi ol otun ota:dı: igta/d bi?l-nör wea. ahraqa”l-hatab "he warmed himself at the fire and burnt firewood'; this is a rare word but used ín these dialects Kaş. I1/ 252 (ota:r, ota:ma:k). D 2 ota:- Den. V. fr. 2 ot; has developed two meanings; (1) “to cut grass, efc.', in modern times usually more specifically “to pull up weeds'; (2) 'to treat with medicinal herbs'. S.i.a.m.l.g., usually in the first sense; in SW only in "Tkm, and xx Anat. SDD 1095; cf. otla:-. Uyğ. vir ff. Man.-A (and however many physicians come with their remedies) anı otayu umağay “they will be unable to treat him (successfully)! M I r5, 7: Civ. ota"to treat (a patient)! H II 26, 84 and 93: Xak. xı ol tarif ota:di: sarnaqa'I-zar', toa huma an yaqta" şirndqahu kayla yufsidahu "he cut the grain (crop), that is cut the crop so that it should not spoil'; also used of plough-land (al-hart) when the ears (of corn) are cut off (huşidat”l-rü”üs) Kaş, ?II 250 (ota:r, ota:ma:k): KB (oh ignorant man, go and) igipni ota “have your disease treated' 158; otağıl dürü birle 'treat him with drugs" 5244: XitI(?) Tef. ota- “to weed' 239: Oğuz xı (after 1 ota:-) and one says in Oğuz emçi: apar ot ota:dı: ol-jabib 'alacahu bi'l-dawd* "the: physician treated him with medicine Kaş. IJI 252 (ota:r, ota:zma:k). D udi:- unusual Den. V. fr. 1 u: q.v; basically "to sleep”, with several metaph. meanings; the earliest (of blood, mülk, etc.) “to clot, curdle, coagulate' must have existed in Xak., see udit-, udis-, etc. ; later (of a limb) "to become numb', (in colloquial English “to go to sleep”): also, more generally, "to becorne negligent or slothful”, S.i.a.m.lg. usually meaning “to clot, curdle'; “to sleep” only in 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 87 
     
   
   
     DIS. NE and SW (elsewhere displaced in this meaning by der. f.s like uykula-). It is sometimes possible to be confused between der. f.s of this verb and those of *od-, which has the opposite meaning “to be avvake", Türkü vri (for the sake of the "Türkü people) tün udimadim küntüz olurmadim “1 did not sleep by night or rest by day” 7 E 27, HH E 22; tün udimati; küntüz olurmatı: 'withou! sleeping at night or sitting down during the day' $1-2; vin ff. udi:ğmağ odğu: ru: yatığlı:ğ turğuru: yorryu:irmen “Cİ: go about waking the sleepers and rousing those who are lving down' IrkB go: Uyğ. vir ff, Man. TT HI 160 (1 u:): Bud. az udin “sleep a little” PP ss, 5; udryu yatmış ogult “his son who lay asleep! U III 64,1; yap udiyur erken Sus, 620, 16-17: Civ. (he must drink the medicine and) udığu ol H 7 zo, udtyu umasar ]] 8, 41: Xak. xı er udi:di: “the man (etc.) slept” (dma) Kaş, 1I] 259 (udur, udizma:k); KB (God does not walk about or lie down or) udimaz 17; many o.o.: xir1. Tef. udi-, uzi-, uyu- “to sleep! 321, 322, 324: XIV Muh. na'asa "to doze” u:y- (?u:xyu-) Mel. 31, 15; Rif. 116; al-na'ás uxsyumak 37, 3; 123; nüma U:yUu- 41, 7; UyU:- 131; 5náma u:di:(sic) irs (only): Çağ. xv fk uyu-(-p) uyuVel. 124 (quotn.); uyu- (spelt) xwáb kardan 'to sleep', also called uykula- Sar gor. 2 (quotns.), uy- (in the same entry as o:y-) zaxm bastan wa möst bastan "to form a scab; to coagulate” Sor, 18: Xwar. xil uy- (or uyu-?) “o sleep” "2/7 29: xin(?) (he pitched his tent and) sük bolup uyu turdi 'settled down quietly to sleep' Of. r36: xiv udi-, Uuyi-, uyu- “to sleep! Quib 195, 197; hiç udimassen "you never sleep! Nahc. 289, 9; "Aqtinıp udimakı “the sleep of a wise man” (is better than the wakefulness of a fool) 423, 4: Kom. xiv 'to sleep' uyu- CCI, CCG; Gr. 264 (quotns.): Kip. xı máma mina'l-nawm utyl:- Hot. 44, r: Bulgar. xiv udu- xdma and in other languages uyu- İz, o (sce 1 idi:): Kip. xiv uyi- nàma, and in the 'lurkistáni language (r/c) udi-, as we said above İd. 26: xv xadara (of a limb) “to go numb' uyuTuh. 15a. 9. 6te:- (6de:-) basically "to carry out an obligation”, hence (1) "to carry out one's obligations to God', e.g. by offering prayer nt proper times; (2) 'to carry out one's obligations to superiors' by giving what is due to them; (3) “to pay a debt”, Survives in some SE, SC (üta-), NW, and SW languages; Az., Osm. üde-, Tkm. ö:de-, Uyğ. vin ff. Man. (these wicked men) üç yavlak yolta öz ötek öteyür * repay, their debts (stetaph.) in the three evil ways! TT II 16, 22-4; ötek berim ötemekleri erser “as for their paying their debts (Hend.)' ditto 17, 85-7: Xak, xr ol annm alımın öte:di: gadá daynahu "he paid his debt to him”, (in a verse) tenrl:ğerü: tapğin öte:r “he performs his duty to God” Kaş. III 252 (öte:r, öte:me:k): KB muni şukrı emdi neteğ öteyin “hov, can I now give (adequate) thanks for this?” 390; similar ADC 43 phr. ro33: tapınsa öter beg tapuğçı haqqın “if a servant is obedient, his master gives him his due” 597; a.o.o. of haqq öte1478, 1560, 1593, etc.: xii(?) Tef. 6de-[6te'to pay (a debt); to perform one's duty (to God)" 242, 251: xiv Muh. addá'l-dayn “to pay a debt” borc ö:de- Mel. 22, 4 (Rif. 102 bo:rc bér-); frrqadd"l-dayn "to settle a debt bo:rc ö:de:- 23, 8; Ö:te:- 104: Çağ. xv ff. öte- ida hardan "to pay (a debt), fulfil (a duty)' San. Sir, ro: Xwar. xii öte- “to pay” ' Alí. 49: xut(?) kök teprike men ötedim 'I have given what was due to high heaven” Og. 75: xiv (whoever borrows money and fails) borcini ötemekke “to repay his debt' Nahc. 409, 15: Kip. xiv atcfá “to pay a debt' ö:de- Bul. 30ov.: xv awfá öte- Tuh. sb. 11; mafd ditto. öte38b. 8: Osm. xvir óde- (and ödeş-) in Rümi, idd hardan, also metaph. mühdfdt "(o give) compensation, recompense' Saz. 66v. 13. üti:- Hap. leg.; the connection of this word with üt- is obvious, but cannot be explained morphologically; Kaş. clearly distinguished between the two verbs, and regarded ütüg as derived from ütl:-, not üt-. Xak. xr ol to:nuğ üti:di: ahraqa zi'bira'l-tawb bi-hadida wa mallasahu "he ironed the nap of the garment with an iron and pressed it flat' Kaş. HI 252 (üti:r, ütlzme:k). Dis. ADC D ataç Dim. f. in -ç fr. ata:; “little, i.e. dear, father'; in the first two passages below the word has been read as a proper name, Taçam, but this is almost certainly an error. Türkü vi bilğe: atacrm yoğin koriğinni: ko[ridi]m *my wise, dear father, I held your funeral feast and enclosed(?) your grave plot' Ongin 12; the word has also been restored in line 1 of the Supplementary Inscr.: viti ff. Yen. amtı: ataçırmıka: adrındım (?read adrıldım) 'I have now been parted from my dear father” Mal. 32, 14: Xak. xı ataç oğuz:l şabi mutaşayyix ha'annahu abi'l-qawm “a boy who behaves like an old man, as if he was the father of the clan” Kaş. / sz. VU eteç Hap. leg.; neither this nor the A.N. (Conc. N.) are vocalized in the MS., but as the Suff. of the latter is -llk the vowels must he front ones. Xak. xı eteç al-mardah, va hiya'l-hufratu'llati yal'ab fihá'[- sibyán bi'l-cavex “he target for throwing things, that is the hole in which children throw when playing the nut game' Kaj. I 52. D etçi: N.Ag. f. et; 'butcher'; this svord was read at(1 by Arat in KB, but the context strongly suggests that this is an error; atçı: is otherwise unknown, and etçi: n.o.a.b. Xak. xı KB (I1 dreamt that 1 was climbing a staircase and) başında bir etçi mana suv bérür “at the head of it a butcher gave me vvater to drink' (I drank it down and then flew off to heaven) 6035; (in the interpretation) ol etcl turur kör atalığlarığ atasız kılığlı ay 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 88 
     
   
   
     44 DIS. kilki arif ; ol etçi turur kör étilmislerig buzuğli yorıitmağlı canh tiriğ “that butcher, oh. virtuous man, is the one who makes those who have fathers fatherless; that butcher is the man. who destroys what has been set in order and does not leave mortals alive! 6053-6: xiv. Mult (?) qaşşdb etel: (cim) Rif. 157 (only): Kip. xri af-cazzár "butcher" etçi: Hou. 23, 21; al-lahlıdın. “mmcat-seller” etçi: so, 20. D udçı: N.Ag. fr. u:d, *'ox-herd'; survives as uycifuycu in NE R 1 1604 and NC Kir. Uyğ. vur ff. Bud. xan udçisi “the king's ox-herd” PP 65, 1; uğçı er 66, 3. D otçı: Sce ota:çız, Tris. ADC D ota:çı: Dev. N.Ag. fr. 2 ota:- ; “physician”, L.-w. in Mong. as oftaftlotoet (Kow. 383. Haltod 79), which is prob. the origin of NE "Tüv, oducu Pal. 300; otherwise survives onlv(?) in SW xx Anat. otacıfotçu SDD 1094-5. Uyğ. vit ff. Chr. otaçı emçi U 1 5, 3 (2 0t): Man.-A otaçı 'physician' M I 15,6 Bud. bütün balıktakı otaçılar “all the physicians in the town' U III 41, 5; a.o. Suv. şor, 5: Civ. otaçılar baxsilar 'physicians and religious teachers! 77 11 8, 25: xiv Chin. Uyğ. Dict. 'physician' otçı R 7 1119; Ligeti 189: Xak. xi (after 2 ot ai-da:á') hence al-tabib "physician” is called ota:çı: Kaş 1 35,8; I 299, 22 (enüçle:-): KB otaçı terildi “the physicians assembled' 1657; 0.0. 1065, 2109, 4631: xiv Mwuh. al-tabib o:ta:çı: (cim) Mel. 58, 6; Rif. 156: (Çağ. xv ff. otaçı yaylaq “summer station”, otaçı Xitay the name of an Özbeg clan (0rüğ) San. 62r. 8; otoçi in the Mongolian language means gikastaband 'bonesetter” 62v. 7; the first entry seems to be an attempt to explain the first word of the clan name, in this context it may have meant 'pastoralist' ; the last entry is the "Turkish word reborrowed from Mong): Xwar. xiv otaçı 'physician' Qutb 120: Kom. xiv. 'physician' otaçı CCG; Gr.: Kip. xni al-fabib o:ta:gu Hou. 23, 9: xiv Ofct: (one MS. ofaçı:, cim) al-tabib İd. 15: xv Tuh. 23b. 7 (sce içe:gü:): Osm. xiv ff. otaçı (perhaps sometimes to be rcad otc1) occurs in severa] texts down to xvi, TTS I sso; II 736; III 549; IV 613; xvtit otc ("with -ç-”) rabib wa carrah, ('surgeon') in Pe. bizigk San. 62v. 11. VUD eteçlik Hap. leg.; A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. etec, q.v. Xak. xı eteclik a/-mascedi'u'lladi yuhfar fih?l-mardah lt'l-lu'bi'l-catoz “the place in which the target for throwing things is dug for the nut game” Kaş. £ t5r. D otaçılık A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. ota:çı:ş n.o.n.b, UyB. vim ff. Man. -A Mrdaspnt teprilernip otaçılıkı “the place of healing of the Mardáspent geds” M 1 27, 33: Osm. xiv ff. otacihk (or otçilik?) “medical treatment! in Un yay EONUKA axi Qux Rer "RUE QU E mes FR oum ADC Dis. ADD adut basically “a handful', but sometimes used for “the palm of the hand", which is properly aya:, had a very unusual phonetic history, under the influence of the -u- the -d- becamc -v-f-w- instead of -y-, and, perhaps as compensation, the -t became -Ç as early as xi (CB), S.iaam.l.g. in a wide variety of forms, one NE Tuv. adis, Pa/, 42, very archaic; some much abraded NE auts, o:s, o:ş, u:ş 7t 7 81, 1138, 1149, 1772; SE Tar. o: RI 11:133; NC Kir. u:ç, Kzx. ut8S; elsewhere usually avuüç or the like. Uyğ. vıuff. Bud. ayaga aş bermiş adutça suv tuttnış 'giving a palmful of food or holding a handful of water! Suv. 168, 23; Sanskrit müştind "with a handful' a:dut (spelt a:tudh) üze: [gap] T T VIII C.14: Xak. xı adut a/-hafna "a handful; one says bi:r adut ne:p “a handful of something', that is what will fill the palm (miPici-kaff) Kaş, 1 sö, awut dialect form (/uji) of adut for "handful” 7 82: KE ukussuz kişi bir avuçça tetik “a man without understanding is only a trifle intelligent! 297: Xtt(?) Tef. avvuç “handful” 36: Çağ. xvff. avvuç kaff-i dast “the palm of the hand" San. 53v. 2 (quotn.); in a Qasida in the Vienna MS. of KB, Malov Pamyatniki drevnetyurkskoi bistmennosti 34z ff. bir avuç yalka 'as trifling wages' (God gave man a soul) 27: Xwar. xiv avuç "handful” Qatb 16: Kom. xiv. ouç (? for ovvuç) "handful” CCZ, Gr.: Kip. xiv al-hafna avvuç (civ) Bul. 9, 13: xv qabda wa hafna 'handful' awug (cim) Tuh. 28b. rr, qabşa ditto 3ob. 9; rdlatul-haff wa'l-qabga ayda(n) 'palm of the hand", also 'handful' avvç (sic, cim) Kav. 61, 2: Osm. xiv ff. avuç 'palm of the hand” in several texts TS 1 54; II 69; IV 289; xvirt avuc oyun, in Rimi, a kind of gambling game (qiimiir) which consists in taking some things in one hand and asking “odd or even”, If the other guesses wrong he loses San. 53v. 3. Dis. V. ADDD atat- (atad-) Hap. leg.; Den, V. in -ad-, Intrans., fr, 2 at, Xak. xı ta:y atattı: "the foal grew to maturity (tafarrasa), that is was reckoned to be a horse' ; (prov.) ta:y atatsa: at tinu:r ogu:l eredse: ata: tinu:r “vhen the foal grows to maturity, the horse has a rest; when the son grows to maturity the father has a rest” Kaş, 1 206 (verse; no Aor. or Infin.). D eded- lap. lcg. (?) ; Den. V. in -ed-, Intrans., fr. e:d; “to thrive! or the like. Uy£. vin f. Man. (plants and trees come into existence) kolupaları ulğadurededür ögirer "their young shoots grow, thrive, and rejoice' Wind. 249, 8—9. (D) etet- Hap. leg. Xak. xı ol anı: etetti: awqga'ahu fi muqásáti'l-milma "he put him in a serious difficulty! Kaş, 7 207 (ete:tür (sic) ; etetme:k). D étit- (édit-) Caus. f. of é:t-, N.o.a.b., cf. dGttiir- Tİvöi sirri ürdİn anta- átitctHm “T "had 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 89 
     
   
   
     DIs. my throne set up there" Şu, £ 8; ao. S ro (örgi:n). D udit- Caus. f, of udi:- , lit. “to put (someone Acc.) to sleep! ; with various metaph. meanings like “to extinguish (a fire); to make (milk) curdle". S.i.a.m.l.g., usually as uyut-, but NE Koib., Kaç., Sag., Sor uzut- I 1770; Khak. ditto; Tuv. udut-. Uy£. vii ff. Civ. igligig uditmis kergek 'you must put the sick man to sleep! H1 II 33, 222: Xak. xi ol meni: uditti: andmani “he put me to sleep'; and one says ol yuğrut udittü: rawwaba'l-rá'ib "he curdled the yoğurt”, and ope says ol uditma: uditti: cabbana'l-cubunn "he made the curd cheese'; and one says ol ot uditti: "he extinguished (atfa"a) the fire" Kaş. I 207 (no Aor. or Infin); bu ot ol kisi:ni: uditğa:n “this drug always puts (people) to sleep' (yurgid) I 154, 20: K.B otug suv uditsa yana tirlümez “if water extinguishes the fire it cannot come to life again” 2396; (carelessness) uditur kişiğ 'puts a man to slcep' 5267; 0.0. 2373, 5266, 5448: xiv Muh. (nüma uyu:-); nawwama ğayrahu u:yu:t- Mel, 41, 7; uyu:t- Rif. 131: Çağ. xv ff. uyut- xwádbándan “to put to sleep” San. gor. 21 (quotn,): Kom. xiv uyut- “to let (someone) sleep! CCG; Gr.: Kip. xn nawteama ğayrahu u:yit- Tou. 44, 1: XV (zaqada yat-) raqqada [? tea ratewaba omitted] 'I-Iaban "to put to sleep, [and to curdle?] milk" uyut- Tuh. 17a. 11-12: Osm. xvi uyut(-y- written with Rdf)“to curdle (milk)', in one text T'T'S III 725. Tris. ADD D uditma: Pass. Dev. N. fr. udit-, Pec. to Kaş, Xak. xı uditmna: al-cubunnu'l-rafb *imoist curd cheese! Kaş. 1 143; 2.0. I 208, 3 (udit-). Tris. V. ADDD adutla:- Den. V. fr. adut. Like that word s.i.2.m.l.g. in a wide range of Sec. f.s, often meaning 'to grasp, or squeeze, in the palm of the hand”. Xak. xı ol yarma:k adutla:dı: hafana'l-raculu'l-dirham fi kaffihi "the man took a handful of money'; also used for Barafa'l-má' fi yadihi “to scoop up water with one's hands! Kaş. I 299 (adutla:r, adutla:ma:k): Çağ. xv ft. awucla- (so spelt) ba-haff-t dast giriftan "to take in the palm of the hand” San, sar. 11 (quotn.). Dis. ADĞ adak originally rather indefinitely “leg, foot'; in some contexts one meaning seems to be required to the exclusion of the other, in others vice versa. Became a l.-w. in Mong. as adak (Kot, 68, Haftod 15) but apparently only in the metaph. meanings 'the foot (of a mountain) the end, or mouth (of a river); end; final'. S.i.a. nil. g., usually as ayak or the like, in its original meaning, but in some languages adak was reborrowed fr. Mong. with the meanings current in that language. Türkü vir: Türkü bodun adak kamşatdı: “the Türkü people let their feet vvaver” (and began to panic) / N 7; ADG 45 same phr. but kamsat(t)i: /T E şo: vin f. Man. (seeing with our eyes . . . touching with our hands) adakin yorip “valking with our legs! Chuas. 314; (his clothing) bastan (sic) adak(k)a tegi “from head to foot' M 7 s, 13: Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-A. (as the eye is dear) adakka 'to the legs' (and the hand to the mouth) M 1 əş, 5; a.o. 17, 19 (1 u:ç): Man. baştın berü adakka tegi "from head to foot (perhaps metaph. “from beginning to end") M I 30, 24-5: Bud. eligin adakin beklep *binding him hand and foot' PP 63, 5; (of a bull) tórt adakın "his four legs' do. 65, 5; 0.0. U II 24, 2; U IH 35, 10; TT VIII (several): Civ. adak ağrığka em “a remedy for a pain in the legs! H1 137; a.o. TT I 198 (apam); (in certain circumstances) Bulmışka ton etük adak baş bérmezmen “1 shall give Bulmiş no clothing or footwear at all” ÜSp. 51, 7 (adak baş seems to be attached ungrammatically to the previous words); o.o. H 1I 30, 189; TT VII 21, 4; 25, 4: XIV. Chin.-Uyg. Dict. "his foot! adakı Ligeti 125: Xak. xı adak al-ricl "leg, foot' Kaş, I 65; ayak al-gadam 'foot' dialect form (luga) of adak 7 84; in the Chapter on phonetics 1 32, 31T. it is said that the Çigil and other (genuine) Turks cal alrii| adak and some Kipçak, the Yeme:k, Suwa:r, Bulğa:r, and other peoples stretching to al-Rüs and al-Rüm call it azak, and (by implication) the Yağma:, Tuxsi:, (other) Kıpçak, Yaba:ku, Tata:r, Ka:y, Cumul and Oğuz ayak, about 4o o.o. of adak, usually al-ricl or al-gadam, nearly always spelt ada:k: xın(?) At. (by fate the thorn pierces) adakka 'thefoot'455; Tef.adakfayak "leg, foot' 40, 44: xiv Rbg. adag (mis-spelt adag) *foot' R 1 478; Muh. al-ricl aya:ğ Mel. 48, 6, aya:k Rif. 142; in the phonetic passage Mel. 7, 9-11; Rif. 79 (which is corrupt and should be restored as follows) it is said that the T'urkistanis call a/-ga'b "leg' ada:ğ/ada:k and the Turks of our country aya:B/aya:k: Çağ. xv ft. ayag/ayak bay 'foot' Vel. 39; ayağ/fayak pa San. s7r. $ (quotn.); adak (sic) "a wooden object (ci?bi) like a cart which they make for children, so that they may be put into them and learn to walk' 33r. 29 (no doubt the Mong. L-w. reborrowed): Xwar. xin ayak 'foot “Ali 13: xın(?) adakl ud adaki teg “his legs were .like an ox's legs” Of. 12;a.0.0.: xiv adak leg, foot” Qutb 3; ayak do. 6; adak MN 106; ayak do. 115, etc.; (he walked looking at) adakına “his feet' NaAc. 237, ız: Kip. xit (after a list of parts of the leg) macmi'u'l-ricl “the leg as a whole' aya:k How. 21, 9; XIV adak aj-ricl in Bulğar, elsewhere pronounced ayak ld. 9 (cf. 1 1di:, udt:-): xv al-ricl aya: Kav. 61, 9: ricl ayak Tuh. 16b. 8: Osm. xiv. ff. ayak in numerous phr. and idioms TTS I 54-7; II 71-5; Iİ 48-51; IV 51-6. 1 adığ “bear” (animal). S.i.a.m.l.g. in various forms, usually ayı/ayu, cf. Shcherbak, p. 130; sometimes also with metaph. rneanings like *the constellation of the Great Bear', and, in Osm. “a clumsy fellow'. Cf. 2 apa:. "The Mong. equivalent ófege is mentioned, as such, in 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 90 
     
   
   
     46 DIS. ADĞ San. 62r. 19 but does not seem to have been used as a l-w. in Turkish. Türkü vr ff. adığlı: topuszli: "a bear and a boar” IrkB 6: Uyf. xiv. Chin.-Uyg.. Dict. 'bear' adığ Ligeti 125: Xak. xı adığ al-dubb “bear” Kaş. 1 63 (prov., which also occurs in 7 332, 12): (KB adığlayu 'like a bear” 2311): xiv MuA. al-dubb ayuğ/ayu Mel. 72, 4: ayığ Rif. 174: Çağ. xv ff. ayığ/ayık “the animal called ayı” Vel. 39-40 (quotns.), ayığ/ayık xirs “hear”, in Ar. dubb San. 57v. 7 (quotn.): Oğuz, Kip., Yağma: xı ayığ al-dubb, dialect form (lua) of adığ Xaş. I 84: Xwar. xır(?) (the infant Oguz's) kógüzü aduğ kógüzü teg 'chest was like a bear's chest' Og. 13-14; a.0.0.: Kom. xiv "bear" ayu CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiv ayu al-dubb İd. 26; Bul. 10, 13: xv ditto. Tuh. 15b. 3; Kav, özb. 6. D 2 adi? Dev. N./A.S fr. 2 *ad-, which survived as ay- 'to make (someone) sober' in SW Osm. TTS II 82; IH $4; originally lit. 'sober', that is not drunk; later sometimes metaph. 'sober-minded, sensible'. S.i.a.m.l.g, usually as ayık or the like, except SE, SC where it has been displaced by Pe. huşydr. Xak. xı adığ al-şdhi mina'l-sukr 'sober (free) from intoxication'; hence one says esrük adığ 'drunk and sober' Kaş. 7 63: xi(?) Tef. aduğ 'cautious' 41: xiv Mwuh. al-şdhi ay1kf ayuk Mel. 55, ış in Rif. 152 ta'l-liázim "and resolute' is added and the word mis-spelt “aşık Çağ, xv ff. ayık huşyar 'sober' Vel. 39; ayığ/ayık Augydr San. 57v. 10: (Xwar. xiv ayığlık 'sobriety' Quib 6): Kip. xın al-şdhi (opposite to “drunk" esrü:k) ayık Hou. 26, 15: xiv ayuk al-;dhi İd. 26: xv sáhi ayık Tuh. 22b. 4; 47b. ız: Osm.xiv ff. ayığ/ayık 'sober' in several texts T TS 11 78; IV sz. S aduk See ağduk. D 1duk Dev. Pass. N./A.S. fr. :d- ; lit. “sent”, but used only in the sense of 'sent, i.e. dedicated, to God”, hence 'sacred' in a more general sense; the phr. 1duk kut 'the sacred favour of heaven' was early adopted as a royal title by sorne tribes; in course of time its origin was forgotten, and in San. it is spelt idi kut and given a false etymology (see 1 idl;). Survives in various forms, iyik, rk, (zik, etc. in NE, NC, and SW xx Anat. SDD 777, 1098. Türkü vırı (the Türkü divinity on high thus set in order) türkü ıduk yéri: s8uvı: “the sacred Türkü territory” I E 10, I1 E 10; 1duk yer suv II E 3s; T 38: 1duk Ötüken yış "the sacred Ütüken mountain forest” I E 23 (H E iş), Basmıl 1duk(k)ut “the Iduk küt of the Basmıl” H1 E 25: 1duk bag a place name 11 E zs: Uyğ. viri 1duk bag kédlnte: “vest of Iduk Baş" Su. E 9: vii ff. Man. 1duk kapimiz "our sacred father' T T III 18, zo, o.o. do. 57, 108; él(l)igimiz 1duk kut “our king the Iduk kut” M HI 35, 9, 14 and 19; 1duk órgin “the sacred throne! do. 35, 18: Bid, 1duk 'sacred' is fnirly common, Sut. 349, 3; 447, 15; USp. aş, 8: Civ. USp. ao and 41 are documents of a late period addressed to İduk kut teprikenlmiz: O. Kir. ix fF. öz yerim 1duk yerim “my. own land, my sacred land" Mal. 42, 1: Xak. xı 1duk Aul şay” mübdrah 'anything blessed'; its origin is that any animal which is set free (yusayyab) is called 1duk; its back is not loaded nor its udders milked nor its fleece shorn because of a vow incumbent on its owner: tduk ta:B al-cabalu'l-mánm'ul-tawil "an inaccessible long mountain! Kaş, 165: KB 1duk küt “the blessed favour of heaven” (not as n title) is fairly common, 343, 354, 1335, etc.; 1duk also occurs in other contexts, e.g. of begllk 1960: xiv MuA.(?) al-qadd wa'l-qadr *destiny, fate” ıyı:k Rif. 189. ?D ota:ğ (?oda:B) originally "a small temporary building”. S.ia.m.lg., the idea of temporariness prevailing in NE and SE, and smallness elsewhere. Morphologically a Dev. N. in - it, possibly fr. 1 ota:- with the connotation of a place to light a fire in (see Muğ. below). The Osm. form oda suggests a connection with 1 ota:- and so 1 o:t (o:d). See Doerfer II 489. Xak. xı otn:ğkn: öpkele:p süke: sö:zle:me:dük (sic, ?read só:zle:me:di: ğadiba 'alá'l-agránihi fi'l-xayma fa-md takallama ba'dahu ma'a'l-cund "he got angry with his neighbours in the tent and thereafter did not talk to the army" Kaş. III 208, 13; n.m.e.: KB (he became acquainted with people and) otağ tutti özke 'took a small house for himself” 499; étse otağı işi “if he puts his domestic affairs in order” 2562: xiv. Rb. (if you leave Joseph) otağda “in the tent” R I 1104: Muh. al-matogid 'fireplace' o:ta:B Mel. 76, 10; Rif. 180 (there may be a small omission here, o:ca:j translating al-matoqid and some Ar, word to be translated by 0o:ta:$); Çağ. xv ff. otağ/otak sardy-i nigiman 'dwelling house” abbreviated in RWmi to oda San. 62r. 8: Xwar. xi otağ “tent” "A/7 12; xiv ditto Qutb 120: Kip. xiv otak is used for al-xayma “tent” and al-watan fi'l-barriya "a place where onc lives in the desert”, they say otakın kanı: ayna manziluk "where do you live?” İd. ış: Osm. xiv ff. otag/otak (possibly taken from some cognate language) occurs at all periods with the specific meaning of a "tent belonging to a distinguished person" TTS I 551; İİ 737; III 550; IV 613: oda (sometimes in xiv odağ II 716) meaning more vaguely “tent, dwelling, is also cornmon J 535; IJ 715-16; (but most of the occurrences of oda in TTS are the Dat. of 1 o:t (o:d)): xviii oda (spelt both with final alif and final ha) in Rümi, abbreviation and corruption of otağ xdna tea sardy “house, dwelling' San. 66v. tş (quotn.). D udik N./A.S. fr. udt- "sleepy, asleep. N.o.a.b.; in the medieval period displaced by uyku (a contraction of *udrfu: or the like) which occurs in Xwar., Cag., IKKom., Kip., and Osm. fr. xir onwards and s.i.a.m.1.g. Not to be confused with oduğ which has exactly the opposite meaning. Uyf. vitr ff. Man.:A katflanap kim ürke udukun saklunmakan erepler bu bir odgurugh dinkuti tenrike 'strive to keep yourselves from long sleep for this one God of the. mafesty of the 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 91 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. ADĞ- 0047 faith who rouses (men)! M 111 9, 6-8: Bud. Sanskrit stydnamiddhamca "inertia and apathy' udik (spelt uix) u yeme TT VIII Aş, (another danger is this) talım balık uduk erken saklamadin tusar alkunı kemi birle sipürür "you may inadvertentiy bump into a predatory fish (Sanskrit makara) when itis asleep, and it will swallow everyone including the ship" PP ız, 1: Xak. xı al-raculu'l-twasnán, "a slecpy man? is called udtk er Kaş. I 65: KB negü ol igi emdi udkup neteg *how is your illness, and how are you sleeping ? 1069 (the two best MSS. read uykup and this may be the right reading). / D oduğ (odoğ) N./A.S. fr. *od-; 'awake, alert. Apparently survives only in NE Tuv. oduğ. There must have been an alternative form “odğak which survives, perhaps in Xwar. xiv oyağ Quib 115; Nahc. 15, 9 and certainly in SC Uzb. uyğok, Uyğ. vr ff. Bud. Sanskrit jdgarato “for the man who is awake' odoğ (spelt otog) ermekte: éyen 77 VIII E.24-5 (damaged); Sanskrit pratijágareta “et him be awake' odof (spelt odhauh) erkülük ol do. E.41: Xak. xı oduğ er a/-raculu” l-yaqzdn "a man who is wide awake'; and they call a man with an alert mind (a/-raculu'l-mutayyaqizu'l-qalb) oduğ kópüllüg er, that is “an intelligent man” (ai-raculu'l-fatin) Kaş. 1 63: KB sak tur oduğ “stand up alert and wakeful' 1452; a.o. 2354: xii(?) Tef. odağ “vakeful” 233. D udu£ N. A. fr. u:d-, 'obedience, respectful service”, or the like. N.o.a.b. in the Hend. tapığ uduğ. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (then for seven days the prince) lular tapağın uduğın aşadı 'enjoyed the service and obedience of the dragons' PP şo, 4-5; tapağın udugin egsütmeser 'if he does not diminish his service and obedience' U I7 15, 12-13; ötledi erigledi tapığ uduğ krlğuka “he advised and exhorted them to give service and obedience" TT V/7 14,3; 0.0. UI 26,ı, U IV 48, 76. D odğuç N.I. fr. 1 o:t (o:d). Survives only(?) in S.E. Türki otkaç “dry shavings, etc. sold ready packed for kindling material”, Sar 17. Xak. xı odğuç al-gu'[a müna”l-ndr "a firebrand” Kaş. I 95; otuğ odğuç birle: öçürme:8 "you cannot put out a fire with kindling material” I 177, 5; 8.0. 7 248, 6 (evrig-); in the last two occurrences mis-spelt odğur. D atğa:k Hap. leg.; Dev. N. fr. at- but with no close semantic connection; as according to Birochelmann, para. $2a., this suffix is particularly used for plant names, the second may be the original meaning and the others metaph. extensions, Xak. xı atğa:k al-sufár tea'l-qawlanc “bile, colic'; and a plant (naót) with yellow flowers is called at$a:k; used metaph. for any face which is yellow with grief (/sfarra mina'[-]ruzn) Kaş. I 118. D atka:ğ Dev. N. fr. *atka:-; used to translate the Bud. (and later Man.) technical term vikalpa 'attachment (to this world)'; a l.-w. with the same meaning in Mong. (Kow. 62, and, with altered meanings, Haltod 56). Survives only(?) in NE Tel. R 1 464; Tuv. Pal. yı atkak “the barb of a fish-book; the gilis of a fish”. Uyğ. vir ff. Man. (you have turned mankind away from evil deeds and) yafşınmış ilinmiş atkağtin "from the attachments which fasten and tie them (to this world) TT 111 27-8. VU utğun Hap. leg. Xak. xı utğun “a broad strap on the left side of the saddle to which the buckle (halga) of the girth is fastened and secured with its tongue' Kaş. 7 107. adğır “stallion”. A very early (First Period) l.-w. in Mong. as acirğa. S.i.a.m.l.g., usually as ayğır or the like, see .Shcherbak, p. 87. Acırğa is listed in San. 32v. s specifically as a Mong. word meaning nar 'male' that is fahl “stallion” , the latter word was corrupted to fucl *horse-radish' in some intermediate autbority, and the word with that meaning appears in some later authorities ŞS. 5; R I 510; Samf zz, etc. See Doerfer 11 648. Türkü vur ak adğırığ "a white stallion' 7 E (35), 36: viri ff. öğürl:ne: kutlu:ğ adğır men “İ am a stallion fortunate in his stud' Jk B s6: Uy. vir ff. Civ. adğırnış sipirin alıp “take the sinew of a stallion' H 7 76: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. “stallion" ayğır R I ıs, Ligeti 127: Xak. xı adgir fahlu'l-xayl, 'stallion' Kaş. I 95; many o.o.: KB adğır is mentioned as the name of a star, possibly Sirius, in 5676, 6220: xın(?) Tef. adğır 'stallion' 40: xtv Mu. al-hişdn "stallion" ayğır Mel. 69, ız, Rif. 170; al-fargadán, 'B and y in Ursa Minor” ak ayğır 79, 10; 184: Çağ. xv ft. ayğır fahil-i nar "stallion" San. 57r. 28: Oğuz xı (in an Oğuz proverb) ayğır fah! Kaş. III 122, 16: Xvvar. xıı(?) ayğır “stallion”. Oğ. 373, and o.o. of ak ayğır: Kip. xın al-fahl ayğır Hou. 12, 6: xiv ayğır al-hişdn. İd. 27; al-gi'rá'l-yamániya. “Sirius” ak ayğır Bul. 2, 14, Xv al-fahl ayğır Kav. 61, zo, hişdn ayğır Tuh. 13a. 3. Dis. V. ADGD atik- (adik-) Intrans. Den. V. fr. 1 a:t (a:d) lit. “to be named”, but usually “to have a (good or bad) reputation'. Survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. adik-/atik- “to have a good, or bad, reputation SDD 71, 124: Xak. xi KB atıkmiş isiz ölse “if a notorious sinner dies” 246; similar phr. 928: Çağ. xvff. atığıp adlanub “named” Val. 6: atık- námátwardan wea məşhür şudan “to have a name, be famous” Sam. 3or. 11 (quotns.). *atka:- See atka:6ğ, atkan-. D atkan- Refi. f. of *atka:-; a Bud. (and hence Man.) technical term for “to be attached" (to this world). N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. Man. (gap) ilkiteberü atkanıp “being attached (to this world) from the beginning! TT IH 43: Bud. (they enter the five states of existence and) bés ajun ol tép atkanmazlar yapşınmazlar “and so far as the five states of 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 92 
     
   
   
     48 D1iS. V. ADGexistence are concerned they are not attached, and do not cling to them” 77 VI, p. 82, note 462, 1. 5; 2.0.0. in the same note; Sut. 595, 7. S utğan- See uvtan-. D atğar- Trans. Den. V. fr. 2 at; "to help (somcone /1cc.) to mount a horse”, Survives with the same and extended meanings like “to see off (an honoured guest)! as atkar- in NE Leb., Tel. R 7 464; NC Kir. Xak. xı ol meni atğardı: “he helped me to mount ("ald rüküb) the horse (etc.); and made me mount' (arkabani) Kaş, I 225 (atğarur, atğarma:k): xın(?) Tef. (Pharaoh) cerig atğardı “made his troops mount 63. (?D) odğar- prima facie a Den. V. in -ğar-, but there is no trace of *od; “to recognize (someone Zcc.)'. Survives, with much the same meanings, as oyğor- in NE Tel. R 7 971, and NC Kir, and uyğar- in Kzx. Xak. xı ol anı: ké:din odğardı: 'arafahu ba"d tafahhur wa mudda 'he recognized him after a moment of reflection" Kaş. / 225 (odğarur, odğarma:k), D otğar- Trans. Den. V. fr. 2 ot, "to pasture (an animal Aec.), to drive (it) out to pasture'. Survives in NE otkar-fottar- R I ırıı, 1115; Khak, otxar- Bas, 132; and SW (all) otar-. Xak, xı ol at otğardı: ra'á l-faras "he pastured the horse (etc.)' Kaş. I 225 (otğarur, otğarma:k): xin(?) Tef. otğar- “to pasture' 239: Osm. xiv ff. otar- “to pasture' and occasionally, fr. xvir onwards, 'to poison'; c.La.p. TTS I 552; 11 738; IH 550; IV 614. D odğur- Caus, f. of *od-; “to wake (someone zlcc.)'. Survives only in NE uskar-/uskur- R 7 1747-8; Khak. usxur- Bas. 252 and SW Osm, uyar-; Tkm. oyar-. Other languages use some form of *odBat- (Caus. Den. V. fr. oduğ) which first appears as oyğat-(/oyat-) in Xwar. xiv Quib 115; Çağ, xv ff. San. gov, 26; Kip. xv. Tuh. 6a. 5. Türkü vı ff, ZrFkB. zo (udi:-): Uy£. vir ff. Man.-A kataflanturdi saklanturdi odğurdi "he made them strive and be vigilant and woke them” M I ış, 4-5; özütleriğ odğuruğli "rousing the souls! do. 26, 12; a.0. M Hİ 9, 8 (udik): Bud. kópülgermek basa basa (sc) odğurdaçı üçün "because he rouses the thinking process more and more” TT V 24, 70: Xak. xı ol meni odğurdi: avqazani mina'l-manaini “he aroused me from sleep Kaş. I 223 (odBurur, odğurma:k), about a dozen 0.0. mainly as examples of conjugation; ol meni: oyğurdi: “he woke me”, dialect form (/uğa) of odğurdı: 7 269 (oyğurur, oyğurma:k): K B (the warning of time) méni odğuru bérdi 'roused me” 5690; a.0. 6637. Tris. ADG D ata:kı: Den. N. fr. ata:; pec. to Kaş. Xak. xi ata:kr ya abati "fatherP: kalima istitdf "a respectful word' Kaş, I 136; -ki: a suflix expressing respect ('atf) attached to terms of relationsbip (asmá'u'l-qarába); hence one says afa:kız ya ubbayy (and. ana:kı: yd umayma) HI ziz. D uduğçu: lIlap. leg.(?); N.Ag. fr. uduğ. Uy. vir ff, Bud. men tapağçın uduğçun bolayın men “let me become your obedient servant (Hend.)' U 111 83, 9 D atkağlığ P.N./A. fr, atka:ğ. Survives in NE Tuv. atkaktiğ “barbed” (hook, etc.) Pa, 71. Uyğ. vin ff, Man, atkağlığ fışaylığ məepiler 'pleasures of the senses which attach (men to this world TT 777 121. D adaklığ P.N./A. fr. adak; “having legs, or fcet'; usually with a qualifying word “having (so many) fect', etc. In one form or another s.i.a.m.l.g. Türkü vrrr ff. Man. (if I have offended against) eki adaklığ kişike 'twolegged human beings” (or four-legged (tört butluğ) animals) Chuas. 8o: O. Kir, ix ff. tört adakchig» yılkını sekiz adaklığ barımım “my four-footed livestock and my eight-footed goods" Mal. ro, 10; şseklz adaklığ barim do. ır, 3; 42, 6 (the reference is perhaps to eight-wheeled wagons or eightstrutted tents): Xak. xr adaklığ ne:p şay” dö rici "a thing possessing legs' Kaş, 1 147: KB kamuğ üç adaklığ 'everything with three legs' (is stable) 8oz, 804: xiv Mtuh. dasvátu'l-arba'a 'four-legged (animals)! dó:rd aya:ğlu: Mel. 45, 6; Rif. 138 (second word corrupt). D adakhk A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. adak. Survives in SW Osm. ayaklik 'stilt; anything used as a foot or leg'. Xak. xr adaklık a/-xagabu'llati yutaxxad minhd suqu'l-'arig fi'l-kuritm. wood used to make vine-trellises in vineyards! Kaş. I 149. D adığlığ P.N./A. fr. 1 adığ, 'possessing, or full of, bears. In one form or another s.i.m.m.l.g. Xak. xı adığlığ ta:ğ “a mountain with many bears' (dibaba) Kaş. I 147. D 1dukluk Hap. leg.; A.N. (conc. N.) fr. iduk, Türkü vir ff. (a cow . . . gave birth to a white dappled bull-calf) 1duklu:k yara:ğay 'it will be suitable as (an animal for) dedication to heaven” rk B 41. D oduğluk A.N./fr. oduğ, “vakefulness, alertness'. Survives only (?) in NW Kaz. uyawlnk. Xak. xı oduğluk ai-tayaqquz fi l-umür 'alertness in affairs! Kaş, 1 149: KB oduğluk bu saklikni ógdi eren “men praise tbis alertness and watchfulness' 442; 0.0. 440 (?spurious), 2353: Xwar. xiv tünle oyağlık kılmaklık "kecping watch at night” Nac. 313, 7. D udukluk liap. leg.?; A.N. fr. uduk (udik). Xak. Xl udukluk (mis-spelt with -d-) gaflatu'lI-insàn 'ani'l-gay! wa tanádtoum. "anhu 'a man's negligence and inertia regarding something' Kaş. J 149. D atkançsız Tlap. leg.; a dubious word which occurs as a v.l. of alkınçsiz un Uyf. vii ff. Bud. TT VI 362, and is prob. only a seribal error for that word, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 93 
     
   
   
     TRIS. V. ADĞ- 49 D atkangu: N./A.S. fr. atkan-; 'attachment (to this world)'; practically syn. w. atka:g. N.o.a.b. Uy£. viii ff. Bud. altı kaçığlarnın altı atkanğularnın ezükin igidin “the deceitfulness and falseness of the six objects of sensual perception arid the six attachments (to this world)' Suv. 371, 7 fE.; olo. U II 10, 19, and 25 (mis-spelt and mistranslated), 77 VI 189 (v.L). D atkanguluksuz Priv. N./A. fr. an A.N. of atkanğu:. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vri ft. Bud, atkanğulüksuz yokuğ blidiler uktiülar “they knew and understood the nothjngness (Sanskrit $unyatd) which is free from attachment (to this world) TT VI 462 (and see note thereon); a.o, Suv. 6o, 8 (1 bo:d), D odğuratı: Adverb in -ti:; as this Suff. is attached only to N./A.s, the word is presumably der. fr. odğurak, q.v.; the connotation is that the intellect is aroused, so that the conscious action of the mind etc. is stimulated ; the best translation is therefore 'rousingly, vividly'. Hitherto transcribed wufguratt and translated “completely", but neither form nor meaning are etymologically justified, N.o.a.b. Uy£f. vir ff. Man. (damaged passage) odğurat: belğüllüğ) körtgürü bérdi “he demonstrated . . . so that it became vividly manifest" M III 26, 11 (i): Bud. (then applying his mind to thé matter) odğuratı ukar “he vividly understands! U IJ 9, rz: odğuratı belğülüğ TT VI 296; (my good sons, listen carefully) odğuratı nomlayu béreyin “1 will preach rousingly to you' do. 383. D adğıra:k Dim. f. of adir; properly “a young stallion'. Survives in NE Alt., Leb. ayğırak R I r6, 17; Bar. ayBrak do. 17; NC Kir. ayğırak do. 16, in this meaning. Kaj.'s meaning is otherwise unknown. Xak. x1 adğıra:k al-a"şam | mina'l-wu'ül, wa huma bi-manzilati'l-kabg. li'l-siyáh “the white-footed antelope'; it is in the same relation (to the doc) as the ram to the nannygoat Kaş. I 144. D odğurak N./A.S. fr. odğur-, sómetimes used as an Adv,, cf. odğuratı, q.v.; the two words appcar as alternative readings in the MSS. of TT VT. Basically the meaning must be "rousing” or the like; applied both to human actions (preaching, etc.) and human sensations (perception, feeling, etc.), in the latter case perhaps best translated 'vividly, convincingly', or the like. Pec. to Uyğ, Hitherto transcribed utfurak, or more recently otğurak, and translated “completely", but these seem to be errors. Uy£. viri ff. Man. (thus long and continuously you have wrought great benefits; by virtue of your good deeds) odğurak burxan [kutin bultupuz?] “you have convincingly [attained the blessed status of?) Prophet! TT III 105: Bud. (then after reflection) odğurak tuydum "I vividly perceived' U II s, 16 and 4, etc. (tuy-); (my dear son hear) meninp odğurak sözlemiş savımın “my rousing words' U III 82, 11-12; o.o, U 1 34, 18; U İİİ 8o, 25; Tig. sob: 6 (see note); TT VI 279 (see note for 0.0.); Hiüen-ts. 318; 2084: Civ. odğura:k (spelt offura:k) çıvşa:ğun şor ya:ğlağ kuru:£ a:şla:r 'startlingly acid, salt, oily, and dry foods' TT VIII L19. D adfirlik A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. adğır. S.i.a.m.l.g., except? INW usually as ayğırlık meaning: “the behaviour of a stallion". Türkü vini ff. (the beg visited his horses; his white mare had just foaled) altu:n tuyu:ğlu:ğ adğırlık yara:ğay "the golden-hoofed stud will flourish” IrkB 5. Tris. V. ADGD adakla:- Den. V, fr. adak, S.i.a.m.l.g. as ayakla-, etc. with a wide range of meanings, “to fit legs (to furniture); to trample on; to wade; to give (someone) a leg up on to a horse; to measure in paces', etc. Xak. xr ol anı: adakla:dı: "he struck him on the leg' ('alá riclihi) Kaş. 1 304 (adakla:r, adakla:ma:k). D(S) adukla:- Den. V. fr. aduk (ağduk). Pec. to Kaş. Xak, xr ol anı: adukla:dı: istatrafahu li-katwnihi machül “he found him strange because he vvasi unknown to him” Kaş. I 3o4 (adukla:r, adukla:ma:k), körüp sü:ni: adukla:dı: translated nazala 'alayhi Baflata(n) ta"accaba minhu vwa'statrafa “he stopped suddenly before it, and was astonished by it, and found it strange' III 339, 19 (mis-spelt agikla:di:; the translation should be 'when he saw the army, he was astonished"). D udikla:- Den. V. fr. udik; “to be sleepy, drowsy', as opposed to udx- "to sleep, go to sleep'; later in languages in which udti:became obsolete it took the meaning of that verb. S.i.a.m.l.g., except NW?, often in much abbreviated forms like uxla-, ukta-. Uyğ. vit ff. Civ. (his stomach swells) ba:şı teğzinür udrkla:r "he is dizzy and drowsy' TT VIII L8: Xak. xı yağı: begdin udikla:di: al-'aduswwa axadathu sina min hudüri'l-amir 'the enemy were drowsy and unaware of the presence of the 5eg” Kaş. III 339, 18; meri udikladim wasantu 'I was drowsy' III 349, 3 (2.0.0. in a conjugational para.); n.m.e.: xi?) Tef. ukla- “to sleep” 325: Kip. xv náma “to sleep' uyukla- Tu. 37a. 5. D adaklan- Refl. f. of adakla:-; 'to have legs; to stand, or move on one's feet”, Survives in NE Khak, azaxtan-: NC Kzx. ayaktanSC, NW, SW ayaklan-. Xak. xi adaklandı: ne: “the thing possessed legs' (ricl); prov. alım ke:ç kalsa: adaklanur “if a debt remains unpaid for a long time, it acquires legs' (ricl); that is the creditor sends to ask for it Kaş. I 293 (ada:klanur, ada:klanma:k— sic). D atakımsın- Hap. leg.; occurs in a very late Uy£. text in a prov. in which it is parallel to beğimsin-, also Hap. leg.; morphologically Refl. £. of a Simulative Den. V. fr. a Dev. N.S.A. in -m; but the parallel form suggests that both words were feit to be Den. V.s in -msin-, If so, the word must be regarded as 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 94 
     
   
   
     50 TRIS. V. ADGa Den. V. fr. atak a Dev. N. fr. ata:- meaning “reputation” and the like, which s.i.a.m.l.g. but is first noted only in Cag. xv ff. adak Vel. 11; San. 33v. 1. UyÉ. viri ff. Civ. atakımsınmayuk atığ bulsar “if a man who is not accustomed to being famous gets a reputation” (he defecates on every mountain pass) TT VII 42, s. D adğırlan- Refl. Den. V. fr. adğır. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. ayğırlan- “to become, or behave like, a stallion'. Xak. xı ta:y adğırlandı: fa'ala'l-muhr fi"la”l-fahl “the colt performed the functions of a stallion'; also used of mares when they acquire (şdrat dawdt) a stallion Kaş. 1 313 (adğırlanur, adğırlanma:k): Osm. xvi ayğırlan- (of a colt) “to become a stallion” T'T'S 77 77. Dis. EDG etek originally “the skirt' (of a garment); hence “the edge” (of a skirt) and metaph. “the edge” (e.g. of a plain, the shore, etc.). S.i.a.m.l.g. Xak. xı etek al-dayl "skirt” Kaş. 7 68: KB kara tün kötürmiş etekin örü “the black night lifted its skirts! 3952: xiv Muh. al-dayl é:tek Mel. 66, 15; ete:k Rif. 166: Çağ. xv ff. etek gaftán eteki düman ma"nasina “the skirt of a robe” Vel. 47; etek dáman, and metaph. dámana-i küh wa kanára-i sahrá “the skirts of a mountain, the edge of a plain” Sar. 95v. 7 (quotn): Xwar. xiv etek “hem” Qutb 535; (the child) senin etekipde ulalğay *will grow up under your care” Nae, 178, rz: Kip. xii al-dayl etek Hou. ış, 1: xiv ditto İd. 8: xv ditto Tuh. 15b. 7: Osm. xiv ff. etek 'skirts; edge” in one or two typical contexts TTS 4 284; II 406. étig (édig) Dev. N. fr. ét- (éd-); like that verb it has more than one meaning. Survives only(?) in NE Tel. edü: 'act, action” R I 860; "Tuv. ediğ 'correction, rectification” Pal. 576; SW xx Anat. edi 'performances, events; method of construction' (and other meanings) SDD sos. Uy£. vir ff. Bud. étig, by itself, normally means “ornament” e.g. etózindeki étigleri barca yapkira turur 'all the ornaments on her body tinkled, jingled' U II 24, s: a.o. do. 4o, 108 (uçruğ), Suv. 71, 19; but in Hüen-ts. 132 (6:d) “machine”—etığ yaratig, too, normally means “ornament” e.g. (baths, perfumes) Sanskrit vibhüsana “personal ornaments' étég yara:tığ TT VIII D.13; Sanskrit bharanabhüşana “adornments and ornaments! ditto, do. 38-9; (you appear) €tiğin yaratığın etinmiş yaratınmış 'adorned (Hend.) with ornaments (Hend.) TT X 476; but has other meanings; etöz ulatiédiz etmiş étig yaratığ tüşmek kamılmak tüblüg tétir “all created things, the body and so on, which have been exalted are said to be destined by nature to fall and lie on the ground' U IJI 33, 14-16; in two phr. in TT VI the meaning is less certain, ne tórlüg étig yaratığ bar erser .. . éter ertiler 133-4; and étig yaratığ kılğalı sakinsar 452-3 possibly *whatever the undertaking was, they undertook it" (without consulting soothsayers and astrologers), and 'if you contemplate some undertaking' (you must first recite this scripture), but they might mean "whatever (manufactured) article they made,, etc.: Civ. altun étig élgipde tutğaysen 'you will hold a gold ornament in your hand” TT VII 3o, 9; taş tört uluğnış étigi *the external ornaments of the four great ones" do. 41, 17-18:—étüg (sic) tilek bulğulukı sarp “it is difficult to achieve one's undertakings or desires! T'T 7 221-2 (perhaps an error for ötüğ): Xak. xı KB etig is fairly common in the phr. étig étin- 'to attend to one's business, carry out one's undertakings" 462, 475, and étig kil- 258, 6091, etc., and occasionally occurs by itself with the same meaning, e.g. 777. etük (edük) normally a professionally made *boot' (cf. çaruk), the meaning 'slipper' seems to be pec. to SW. S.i.a.m.l.g.; in SVV Osm., "Tkm, edik. Uyğ. viu ff. Civ. TT VII 42, 1 (uldap); USp. sı, 7 (adak): Xak. xi etük a/-xuff “boot” Kaş. 1 68; 100.0. same translation, in III 283,9 (siğza:-) mis-spelt etik: xin(?) Tef. etük 'boot' 86: xiv Muğ. al-xuff €:dük Mel. 65, 10; etü:k Rif. 167: Çağ. xv ff. ötük (with -k”) ayağa gelen edik Vel. go (quotn.); ötük kaf; wa müza 'shoe, boot” San. 62v. 13 (quotn.): Kom. xiv “boot” etik CCI; Gr.: Kip. xii a/-xuff etü:k Hou. 19, 4: xiv etik al-xuff, wa huwa turkiya; Tkm. edük /d. 8:xv al-xuff etik Kav. 64, 2; étik Tuh. 14b. 5: Osm. xiv ff. edük is the only form down to xvi, thereafter edik gradually displaces it; in the early period the meaning is clearly "boot, top-boot' ; it is impossible to say when it came to mean 'shoe, slipper' TTS I 253; İl 359; III 236; IV 275. D ötek (ódek) Dev. N. fr. óte:- (óde:-); survives in SW Osm. ódek 'indemnity, compensation”. Uyğ. vırı ff. Man.-A (then the unfortunate human beings) kentü körmiş ötekin emğekin "because of the retribution(?) and sufferings which they have experienced' M I 9, 7-8: Man. TT II 16, 23; 17, 85 (öte:-): Bud. ötek bérimig “obligations” TT VII 40, 72-3; 8.0. Suv. 6, 17 (Ötekle:-): (Xak.) xiv Muh. cizd wa add 'repayment, payment! ó:te:k Mel. 44, 16; Rif. 138: Çağ. xv ff. ötek add San. 62r. 11: Osm. xiv ff. ódek 'debt, compensation, penalty'; c.i.a.p. TTS I 557; H 742; 111 553; IV 618: xvii ödek ('w. -K”) in Rümi add wa guzariş 'payment, a sum paid'; metaph. mucázát 'compensation' San. 66v. 17. VUD üdiğ Dev. N. fr. üd-; 'passion, sexual desire'. N.o.a.b., Xak. xı üdl:ğ (sic; ?error) hayacánu'l-gasoq. wa'l-'igq "intensity of passion and love” Kaş. I 69; üdig al-sawq ilà'l-mahbüb awwi'l-watan 'passion for one's beloved or one's home” /7 311, 25 (komit-) 4 o.o. translated. al-;sawg: KB üdiglerim uçsun “may my passions fly away' 6300: xiv Muh.(?) tasvaccu'u'l-'isq “the pangs of love” üyig Rif. 144 (only): Xwar. xiv üdüg 'passion' Qutb 121. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 95 
     
   
   
     DIS. EDG 51 D 1 ötüğ N./A. Ac. fr. 1 öt-, vv. various meanings. Survives in NE Kumd. edü:, Tel. ödü: R I 860, 1279; Khak. ötiğ Bas. 138, 'sharp, pointed', and perhaps SW xx Anat. Otük (so many) 'times' SDD 1120. Xak. xi ötüğ ai-hayda 'diarrhoea'; hence one says apa:r ötüğ tutti: “he was seized with diarrhoea” Kaş. I 68: Çağ. xv ff. ötük ('w. -k”) geçmiş "past” Vel. go (dubious, not in San.). D 2 ótüg 'request, memorial to a superior", etc.; cf. ötün-. N.o.a.b., but a l.-w. in Pe. as ótüh, see Doerfer 11 $74. Etymologically obscure. Doerfer points out fhat the V. fr. which it is derived is a l.-w. in Mong. as öyi(for *óti-), 'to report, propose', etc. w. Dev. N.s ógig, öyül (Haenisch 120, Kow. 541, etc.). İt is possible that there was a "Turkish V. óti:or Ötü:-, now lost, fr. which this word and ötün- were derived. Alternatively it might be taken as a Dev. N. fr. 1 öt-, distinguished both phonetically and semantically fr. ótek. Türkü vir yalavaçı edgü: savı: ötüği: kelmez 'no envoys, friendly messages, or memorials come from them” II E 39: vil ff. IrkB 19 (1 ağan): Man. alkışımız ötüğümüz “our praises and prayers" Chuas. 216: Uy£. viri ff. Man.-A taki üküş tórlüg muntağ ötüğler ótüngey “and he will pray many such prayers! M I 11, 1-2: Bud. burxanka inça tép ótüg ótündi 'he humbly addressed the Buddha in these terms” U II 16, 21-2; same phr. TT VI oi12, 364, 377; o.o. PP 15, 5 (içğerü:), Hüen-ts. 247, 310 (üksürüg): Civ. Tuğluk Temürke bağçılarnıp ótüg “the memorial of the vine-growers to Tuğluk Temür USp. 22, 38, meninp ótüg bitiğim “my memorial in writing! do. 45, 13: ötüğ savka yorima “do not accede to requests' .TT 1 35: Xak. x1 ötüğ al-qişşa wa'l-hacatu'llati turfa' ild'l-sultán, wa aşluhu hikáyatu'l-şay" "a memorial and request submitted to a Sultan, originally a narrative about the matter" Kaş. I 68; I 199, 18 (ötün-): KB ótüg ötnümezmen 791; (if a poor man, widow, or orphan) qışşa bérse ötüğ anı barça tiplap ötünse ötüğ “presents a request or memorial (to the Chief Minister), let him listen to everything and present the memorial (to the king)” 2498: xın(?) Tef. ötüğ "request, prayer” 251: Çağ. xv ff. ötüğ zömdr-i abwáb-i wagá'i' wa sargudaşt "a book of narratives of events and happenings' Sar. 62v. 13 (translation doubtful, Persian quotn. fr. Wagsaf): Kip. xii al-qişşa ötüğ wa huzoa garhu'I-hál “that is an exposition of circumstances' Hou. 23, 7. D ütüg Dev. Conc. N. fr. üt-, “flat iron'; hence Russian nutyug; survives in NW Kaz. ütük; Kk. ütik; Kum. itiv; Nog. iytüv: SW .Az., Osm. ütü, Tkm. ütük: the forms with -k possibly influenced by Russian. See Doerfer 11 420. Xak.xr ütüg hadida ha”l-mitydn tuhmd fa-yuhraq bihd zi'biru'l- tawb li-yatamalaş "an iron implement like a trowel which is heated, so that the: nap of a garment may be rubbed with it to flatten it' Kag. 7 68. edgü: “good” in every sense of the word, (of people) 'morally good'; (of things) 'qualitatively good, serviceable'; (of fortune, etc.) “good”. Older than the more orless synonymous yaxşı:, q.v. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SC, but rare in NE (only? Tuv. eki) and SE. Modern forms vary ezgi, izgl, eyl, iyi, etc. Türkü vit: edgü: bilge: kişl:ğ “good, wise men" 7 S 6, II N 4; edğü: ağı: bérü:r "they give goodl treasures! / S 7, I1 N 5; a.o.0.: viti ff. edet: 'good', and yavlak or yaviz 'bad' are the terms used to classify the omens in IrkB; Man. edgüg anığağ “good and evil” Chuas. Il 27-8; edgü kilinçliığ 'doers of good” Chuas. 70: Uyğ. vi ff. Man. edğü “good” is common TT III 38, etc.: Bud. edğü “good”, usually in a moral sense is very common, edgü öğli “having good thoughts” is a common laudatory phr. U I 17, 6; PP 4, 2 and passim; TT VIII B.2; O.10, etc.: Civ. edgü “good” qualifying a remedy, the state of a patient, etc., common in H 7 and IJ; edgü bor “good wine! USp. 71, 4; a.o.o.: Xak. xi edgü: ai-hasan "good” of anything Kaş. I 114 (verse); about zo o.o. translated hasan and xàyr "good": KB edgü common: xm(?) At. edéü common; Tef. edgü, eyğü common, ezğü once(?) 7o, 72: xiv Rbg. édgü R 7 844, 899: Muh. al-cayyid “good” is pronounced edigü: (so read) in Turkistan and eyğü: in our country Mel. 7, 10; Rif. 79; al-gálih 'virtuous', upright! eygü: (-$- marked) 54, rs (vil. eyyü:), 152: Xwar. xır edgü/eygü “AH ro: xiv edgü Quib 19; edgü (v.l. eygü) MN 39, etc.; edgü Nahc. 2, 15 and passim: Kom. xiv “good” eygi/egl (? for eyi) CCI, CCG; Gr. 85 (quotns.): Kip. xırr al-cayyid eygi: Hou. 25, 10: XIV eyğü xayr (MS. xayyir 'generous, fine”) İd. 27; (key cayyid) in Kip. eygü do. 86: xv xayr eygi (in margin eyi) Tuh. 142. 9: Osm. xiv ff. eyğü once in xiv TTS I 287; eyü fr. xiv to xviii 7 290; III 278; IV 322; eyi fr. xv onwards JII 275; iyi (?éyl) ditto I 396; iyü (?éyü) in xvi IV 447. : D ödki: Hap. leg.?; N./A.S. fr. ö:d. Türkü vir ff. Man. üç ödki nomuğ “the doctrine relating to the three times” (past, present, future) Chuas. 159. (D) ötki: the form is certain but morphologically obscure; semantically connected with öte:-. Survives in SW xx Anat. ötkü same meaning SDD 1120. Çigil xı ötki: al-'iwad “equivalent exchange” ; one says bu atka: ötki: be:rdim “1 gave an equivalent (in exchange) for this horse” Kaş. I 128. D ötğek Dev. N. fr. 1 ót-; cf. 1 ótüg; the basic meaning seems to be 'diarrhoea' or the like; survives in this meaning in NE Tel,, Kumd. ótkók; Sag.; Sor öttek R I 1269, 1294. The Kom. entry is quite clear, but the word seems to be confused with a later word for 'cough', cf. NW Kk. cótel-; Nog. yötkir“to cough'. Uyğ. vitr ff, Civ. kan ötğek *diarrhoea with bleeding” H 7 83 (the remedy, a daily draught of an infusion of mulberries 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 96 
     
   
   
     52 DIS and raisins, is consistent with such a translation): Kom. xiv 'cough' ótkek CCG; Gr. D ötgünç Dev. N. fr. ótgün-, q.v.; survives only (?) in. SW xx Anat, ódgónc, ödgüç, ötküç “story, narrative! SSDD 1101, 1120. Xak. xı ótgünc a/-/i&amp;áya "a story”, hence one says ótgünc ötgündüu: “he told a story” Kaş, I 161: K B (there are two kinds of good men; one is hereditarily (anadin tugup) good, and acts uprightly because he is good) takı biri edgü kör ótgünc bolur, isizke katılsa ol isiz bolur “and one is good (only) by imitation; if he consorts with wicked men he becomes wicked' 874; similar phr, regarding wicked men 877. Dis. V. EDG D edik- Intrans. Den. V. fr. e:d; "to thrive, prosper, succeed”, and the like, N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. Dud. (thus if a man has not faith) ol kişi edikü umaz “than man cannot prosper” TT V 26, r18: Civ. (the strength of ancient kings will not he beneficial (tusulmay) and the methods of modern sages) edikmeğey *will not succeed' TT / 107; o.o. 76, 118, 147 (ağzan-): Xak. xi KB isizlik edikmez nece edlese 'wickedness does not prosper however hard it works! 347: Xiv Muh.(?) cdda "to be excellent! edi:k- Rif. 107 (only). : D etik- Hap. leg.; Intrans. Den. V fr. et. Xak. xı ofla: etikti: tarabbala” l-şabi tva kabura "the boy put on flesh and grew bigger” Kaş. 1 192 (etike:r, etikme:k). (D) ötğün- (ötgön-) presumabiy Reft. Den. V. fr. 2 ótüg; Kaş”s etymology of ötün-, q.v., though implausible, confirms the connection; Ar, fağd has the same double meaning "to narrate” and “to imitate'; the basic meaning in both cases may be “to tell (a story) vvith illustrative gestures'. Survives in NE Şor, Sag. ókten-; Tel. öktön- R 1/7 1i1i82-3; Khak. öktin- "to imitate”, SW Osm., "Tkm. öykün- ditto. Xak. xı ol mapa: ótgündi: hakáni fi amri ara báráni "he imitated (Hend.) ne in my affairs'; prov. karğa: ka:zka: ötğünse: butr: sınur “if a crow imitates ()dhd) a goose (Kaş., as usual, 'duck") its legs sre broken” Kaş. / 234 (ötğünü:r, ötğünme:k); ötğünç ötğündi: hakd hikdya "he told a story” / 161, 9: K.B (whoever reads this writing to-day, knows it well) anar ötğünür andın edgü kelir “and imitates it (i.e. acts in conformity with it) and from that good comes" 259; ukuş ótgünür kör biliğ bildürür 'understanding expounds and knowledge makes known' 398: Çağ, xv ff. ótken- (with -k-”, -İp, -di) óykin- ve faglid eyle- “to imitate'; Oykün- ve benze- "to resemble! Vel, 89, gö (quotns.); ötğen- (spelt, “vith -g&amp;-") faglid hardan, Firdği translated it sabaqat kardan "to take the lead' and. Táàlí'-i. Haratei názidan "to give oneself airs'; both were wrong San. 6or. zo (quotns.): Xwar. xır óykun- “to imitate" “Ali sı: Osm. xıv ff. öykün- (once in xv .EDG öyken-) c.La.p. T TS I 571; JI 761; İTİ 570; IV 633; xvin óykün- (spelt) in Rrmi, taglid kardan, in Çağ. ótgen- San. zr. 14. D edger- 'l'rans. Den, V. fr. e:d; survives only (?) in NW Har. L. etker- £ 7844. Xak. xı ol klcig só:züg edgerdi: “he hcard the trivial (a/-xasis) statement, exaggerated its importance nnd acted on it” (tea habbarahu fca. “amila bihi), this V. is usually used in the negative form (machüdata(1)); one snys ol anın só:zin edgermedi: ma'htafala bihaldmihi ca má báláhu "he did not think much of his statement and paid no attention to him'; and one says ol yavuz ne:pnl: edgerdi: “he repaired (as/aha) the damaged article! Kaş. 7 227 (edğerür, edderme:k); eddermedip ok ata:r 'they discharge arrows paying no attention to the danger (lit. 'death') from them" Ud yubáli bi'l-masct fihi) 1237,27; ed$ermedip idá lam yuhdar "anhu $a. turika mühmala(n) “if you do not bevvare of him (an enemy) and disregard him” /7 29, 13. D ötgür- Caus. f. of 1 öt-, "to cause to pass through”, with various metaph. meanings. S.i.s.m.l.g. (not SC, SW); ef, 2 ötür-. Uyğ. vi ff. Bud, ótgür- in Hiüen-is., note 2104, 2 (arğu:) means “to let (water) pass into (a lake)”, otherwise it is used only of mental processes, and has been translated “to get to the bottom (of a problem), understand it thoroughly', and “to explain” (something to others); both meanings seem to occur; in TT VI 162-88 ótgürü usar occurs six times and must mean “if he can thoroughly understand' (something Acc.), bilgeler alku muni bilmez ukmaz ótgürü umazlar 'wise men do not know or understand and cannot get to the bottom of all this” do. 211; but in do. 146-9 (if good men. and women rcad and preach this scripture for the sake of all mankind) teri yórügün uktursar ötğürser (and understand the very deep doctrine of the root) the central phr. must mean 'and make them understand and penetrate its deep significance! in 74, 1 ff. (the prince interrogated certain wise men) kim yeme ótgürü umadilar 'who were, however, unable to explain'; and see ötgürü:: Xak. xı ötrüm karın ötgürdi: a/-müshil atlaga'l-batn "the purge loosened the bowels'; and one says of evke: bitig ütgürdi: “he got a letter through (anfada) to his home”, also used of getting anything through something (anfada şay “an şay”) Kaş. İ 226 (ötğürür, ótgürme:k). Çağ. xv ff. ótker(with -k-', -di, etc.) gegür- "to cause to pass through", firáfat etdir- “to cause to abandon'; atar etdir- "to cause to make an impression" Vel. 88 (quotns.); (6tgüz- (-ip) geytir- do. 89 seems to be nn error for ótgür- but might be a Sec. f.); ótger- (spelt) Cnus. f., gudaranidan "to cause to pass through” Sam. sov. r (quotns.): Kip. xv naffada “to transmit, send through” ötğer- 7uh. ssa, 7; (ötker- translating sa"ala “to cough' in do. 208. 9 and 'atasa "to sneeze” in 26a. $ is the different and later word referred to under ötgek). 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 97 
     
   
   
     ''RIS. Tris. EDG (D) ite:ğü: Hap. leg.; prima facie a Dev. N. in -gü:, but there is no trace of *ite:-. Xak. xı dte:gü: a/-xaşabatı”llati yurkab "alayhd falahı”l-tdhün “the beam:on which the upper millstone is mounted'; it is raised if coarse flour is wanted and lowered if fine flour and the like are wanted' Kaş. T 137. D etükçi: (edükçi:) N.Ag. fr. etük; 'bootmaker'. S.i.a.m.l.g.: in SW Osm., Tkm. edikçi. Xak. xı (in a grammatical section; etük means 'boot' and) etükçi: al-xaffáf *bootmaker' Kaş. 11 49, 5; n.m.e': KB (in a list of craftsmen, blacksmith, decorator, bowmaker, etc.) etükçi 4458: Kom. xiv 'bootmaker! etikci CCI; Gr. D ötekçi: N.Ag. fr. ötek. N.o.a.b. Türkü vi ff. Man. öteğçi bérimgi biz “ve are debtors (Hend.) Chuas. 309 (mistranslated; the meaning clearly is *we have not carried out our religious obligations): Uyğ. virt ff. Civ. USp. ss, 27 (ortuk). D ötüğçi: N.Ag. fr. 2 ótüg. N.o.a.b. Türkü virt ff. (in a prov.) unitma:z ötü:ğçi: "an intercessor who does not forget” Tun. III A.g-10 (ETY II gs): UyÉ. vir ff. Bud. ötüğçi bolu teginürbiz “ve venture to be petitioners” (to all the Buddhas) Swv. 159. 17: Xak. xi ótüggl: safi' //a”l-malik "an intercessor with the king” Kaş. II 144 (tutun-); n.m.e.: KB mazülim ödinde ötüğçileriğ körü alsa “in times of injustice (the Chief Minister) should sce and receive petitioners' (or “intercessors”?) 2499; ötüğçi kereksiz munadsa özüm “if I am a petitioner and distressed unnecessarily' (he listens to my words without interrupting) 3767: xiv Muh.(?) 'áridu'l-halám "a petitioner! ó:tü:ggi: Rif. 156 (only). D edgü:ti: Adv. fr. edgü:, N.o.a.b. Türkü vi bu savimin edgü:ti: eşi:d “listen carefully to these words of mine” I S 2: yelme: karğu: edéü:ti: urğul 'organize reconnoitring patrols and signal towers efficiently! T 34: vi ff. katığtı: ba: edgüti: ba: 'fasten it firmly and well IrkB 14 edgü:ti: ötü:n . . . edgü:ti: yalvar 'pray fervently . . . plead fervently' do. rg, edéü:ti: sakrznmt:g “she thought carefully! do. 42: Man. edéütl tüketi alkanmadimiz erser 'if we have not praised (God) properly and comprehensively” Chuas. 212; 0.0. 257, 285: Uyğ. vrff, Bud. esitip edgüti kópülgerdl "he heard and carefully considered” Suv. 596, 23: Civ. edgüti kesip *cutting it up finely” H İT 18, 68. D etekliğ P.N./A. fr. etek, “having a skirt" (and later a hem, etc.) S.is.m.l Xak. xi eteklid (with -g') to:n al-tawb ida cu'ila maxəşüf bi'l-dayl "a garment provided with a skirt' Kag. I 152. . D eteklik A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. etek. S.i.s.m.l. in NW and SW. Xak. xı eteklik bö:z kirbás mu'add li-yutaxxad. minhu'l-dayl "linen designated to make a skirt” Kaş. I 152. EDG 53 D etigliğ (édiglig) P.N./A. fr. étig; with various meanings derived fr. that word. Türkü vri ff. Man. (the Hearers) tonlar yumsak inçge étiglig [y]aratiBhg tilemez kolmaz “do not desire or ask for clothes that are soft, fine, and ornamented (1TTend.)” M II əə, 3-5 (i): Bud. tükel étiglig közünü körklüğ burxan “the completely adorned mirror-shaped Buddha” TT VI 4ro— 411; o.o. TT VIII A.35; 1.17 (yiviglig)— kanyu tınlığ étiglig yaratığlığ iş küdüg kent ulus ev bark étgeli yaratğalı sakınç sakınsar 'whoever contemplates organizational or constructive work (Hend.), (that is organizing) a town or country or (making) a house and household goods! TT VI 79-80— in some passages, e.g. Sut. 262, 24 ff. (see TT VI note 386) it corresponds to Chinese yu wei (Giles 13,376. 12,521) which translates the Bud. technical term samsirta "active, creative, functioning, productive, causative, subject to cause, condition, or dependence', contrast etiğsiz, q.v.; nomluğ etözleri étigli$ nom ermez üçün “because the dharmakdyas are not active (or “moving”, Chinese sing (Giles 4,624)) dharmas Suv. 62, 6: Xak. xı KB (a man like this attains his desires; in both worlds) étiglig işi “his work is constructive" 331; similar phr. 345; étiglig az edgü üküşte kör-ü “a small well-organized (army), see, is better than a mob” 2340; asığ kılmadı sü étiglig tolum 'an army and well-organized armaments brought no advantage' 4830 (or ?read étigHk 'equipment"); étiglig sarayığ buzuğli ölüm “death which destroys the wellequipped (or 'ornamented'?) palace” r180: xu?) At. bu étiglig erke azad öz kul ol “compared to a man who behaves like this (even) the free man himself is a slave" 344. D etüklük A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. etük. S.i.s.m.]. Xak. xı etüklük sağrı: zarğab mu'add li-yutaxxad minhu'l-xuff "eather designated to make boots” Kaş. T 152. VUD üdiğgliğ P.N./A. fr. üdig. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı KB (the nightingale sang in the flower garden) üdiglig eşitti “he heard it with passionate longing! 5972: xiv Muh.(?) al-"dşiq “lover” ü:ylglig Rif. 144 (only). D ötüglüğ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. 2 ötüğ. Xak. xi ótüglüg kigi: 'a man who has a request (dii hdca) to make to the Sultan” Kaş. I 152. D edgü:lük A.N. fr. edğü:, 'goodness, benevolence, kindness” andthelike.S.i.m.m.l.g. with the same phonetic changes as edgü:. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. edgülük işimke basutçı bolunlar “be a helper to my deeds of benevolence” U III 14, t5 (ii); similar phr. USp. 43, 7; 100, 3; edğülük Sumeru tağ "a Mount Sumeru of benevolence” do. roza. 26: Civ. kişi ara edgülük yolun alp “your way of benevolence among men is difficult” TT I 160: Xak. xı edgü:lü:kü:g . . . kil afisin "do good deeds” Kaş. I 44, 2; edgü:lüküğ kórmedip “before he sees the good” (a/-xayr) I 420, 6; 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 98 
     
   
   
     54 TRIS. bakkıl apa:r edgü:lükün 'look on him benevolentiy” (bi'l-ihsán) 1 129, 5; five 0.0. ; n.m.e.: KB kamuğ edgülük kil 'do all kinds of good" (by deed and word) 230, many o.o.: xm?) A, (the Prophet compared this world to a cultivated field, labour in it and) tarı edgülük "plant good deeds! 192; two 0.0. ; Tef, edgülük “good deeds" 70: X war. xiv ditto. Qutb. 19; Nahc. so, $, ctc. D ötgğürü: Gerund of ötğür- connoting thoroughness or completeness. It is described in v. G. ATC para. 280 as a Postposition after the Loc. or AÖ/, meaning "because of”, but it often occurs in other contexts, and even in this context does not scem to have this meaning. Pec. to Uy. Uyğ. vr ff. Bud, negüde ötğürü karımak ölmek törüyür 'why exactly do old age and death come about?" U İl 5, 14; (the dead man's corpse begins to stink and his parents) ótgürü . . . tezerler 'incontinently run away' U III 43, 21; (the evil spirits) ótgürü artukrak bulğanıp “being all the more thoroughly confused' U IV 8, 35; (from time immemorial) ótgürü bu künki künke tegi 'right down to thc present day” TT VI ois; bu üçeğünüp kavışmakındın ötgürü ötrü köliğe belgürer 'precisely because these three unite a shadow then appears” Sut. 52, 18-20; a.0.0.: Civ. (if he is satisfied, he may keep it himself, if not) adın kişike ótgürü satsun “he may sell it outright to a third party” USSf. 13, 11; a stock phr. in contracts 30, 15; 56, 16; 57, 12; ÖT, TI, etc. D ótgürgü: Dev. N. (Conc. N.) in -gü: fr. ótgür-. Pec. to H I1; prima facie it should mean 'aperient, purge', but is used more generally for “remedy”. Uyğ. viri ff. Civ. bu orunlarda ünmiş kartlarka (or kartlarnin) ótgürgüsin sözlelim “let us describe the remedv for ulcers which come up in these places! H 1I 8, 6-7, 14 and ər, a.o. do. 8, 28. D étipsiz (édipsiz), Priv. N./A. fr. etig, Bud. technical term opposite to étiglig, normaliy used to translate Chinese tou teet (Giles 12,753 12,521) which translates Sanskrit asam&amp;rta "not subject to cause, condition, or dependence; out of time; inactive; supramundane'; see TT VI, note 386. Pec. to Uy. Uyğ. viuff. Bud. tayşın etiğsiz buldukmaz terlp yörüğin "the profound definition of the Mahayana as not subject to condition and unattainable' TT VI 386; etiğsiz mepülük taluyda “in the ocean of supra-mundane joy' Suv. 354, 7; a.0. do. 647, 5 (agat-). Tris. V. EDGD ötekle:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. ötek, Uyğ. vut ff. Bud. (when the time has come) ötük (sc) bérim óteklegülük 'to repay debts' (Hend.) Suv. 6, 17-18. D eteklen- Refl. Den. V. fr. etek. N.o.a.b.; the basic form is first noted in Çağ. (Vel. 47; EDG Sas. gsr. 12) and simi m.l;g; Xak. xr toin eteklendi: “the garment had a skirt! (dayl) Kaş. I 294 (eteklenür, eteklenme:k): Çağ. xv ff. eteklen- Reft, f. (1) (of a fire) "to be fanned with the skirts! (driman); (2) "to be made into a skirt! San. 9sv. 4. D etüklen- (edüklen-) Refl. Den. V. fr. etük. Pec. to Kaş, Xak. xi er etüklendi: "the man owned hoots! Kaş, / 294 (etüklenür, etüklenme:k), a.o. 7I] 348, ız. D ed£üles- Recip. Den. V. fr. edgü: N.o.a.b. Uyf. vini ff. Bud. edéülegmisnip utlisin sevinçin “the reward and joy of benefiting one another” U 7V 46, 56: Xak. xi KB katılğıl bularni bile edéüles 'associate with these people (the 'u/amá) and henefit one another' 4354. D ótgürüg- Recip. f. of ótgür-. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı ótgürüsdi: Kaş. / 232, 19 (ötrüş-): Çağ. xvfl. ötğeriş- Co-op. f; "to pass (something) througb (gudardnidan) together' San. 6or. 18 (quotn.). Dis. ADL D ötül Hap. leg.; Dev. N. fr. 1 ót-; a rather dubious word. Uyğ. viii fT. Civ. (a remedy for chronic fever and) yél tózlüg ötül *windy(?) diarrhoea! H II 10, 54 (hut see yél). uth: syn. vv, and usually used to translate Chinese pao (Giles 8,731) 'requital, recompense, reward', that is something given or received in return for something done. Not noted later than Uyg. and possibly foreign. "The first vowel is fixed by utlisiz in TT V1. Türkü vır ff. Man. (the five pure gods) kim yégedmek edgü utli (spelt 727) elidrler who bring the good rewards for success! M III 6, 2-3 (ii): Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A (whoever endures sufferings for the sake of the body will find that) anın utlisi "the recompense for that' (is death and dissolution) M 1/I rr, 12 (ii); 0.0. do. 11, 16 (ii); rz, 6 (0): Man. [gap] utlt sevinc [gap] TT IJI v7 (sce below): Bud. edgü kilinç utlis: “the reward for good deeds' Kan. 218; similar phr. U Sp. 106, 51; edgü kilincipnin tüşin utlisin “the fruit and reward for your good deeds” U I 27, 15 (and see utli, p. 59); similar phr. TT .X 220; men incip utlr bildeçi bolu teğinürmen ren utl; bilmedeçi ermezmen “İl venture to know my obligations in this matter, I am not one who does not know his obligations! U 77 41, 13-14; utli sevinç and sevinç utli “the reward and pleasure' (of doing good, etc.) U IV 46, 38, 52, 56 (edgü:les-), 63: 48, 78. D 1 a:tlığ (a:dlığ) P.N./A. fr. 1 a:t; properly “named”, and often so used after a proper name or title; but more often “having a (good) name, famous, distinguished”, C.i.a.p.a.l.; SW Az.; Osm. adlı, "Tkm, a:tlı, Türkü vir ff. a:tlt: yüzlü:g otu:z er 'thirty notables! (Hend.) Tun. IV 8 (ETY II 99); IrkB 36 (uçru:ğlu:6): Man. (princesses, high ministers) ulug atlığlar "great notables” TT 71 8,64; atlığ yüzlüğ 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 99 
     
   
   
     D18S. begler M III 10, 3 0): Uyğ. vt (because of the wickedness of "Tay Bilge "l'otok and) bir eki: atlığ yavlakın üçün "because of the wickedness of one or two notables” Su. E s: viit ff. Man.-A ayağlağ tapağlağ (so read) atlağ tenri "his honoured, respected, and famous holiness” (followed by proper name) M 127, 2: Bud. atlığ yüzlüg PP 12, 5:20, 3; U Il ış, 18; Kuan. 136, 138; TT VII 40, 75 (v.L.); atli$ yolluğ 'famous and fortunate' TT V 26, 103; atlığ 'famous' U /7 36, 47; Naranda atlığ lu kanı “the dragon king named Naranda' PP şo, 5s; oo. of atlığ “named” Suv. 99, 14; TT IV 6,26; TT VII passim: Civ. ayığ atlığ with a bad reputation' TT VII ız, 8; atlığ 'named' common in TT I, VII, USp., H HI. Xak. xi (after 1 a:t) hence "the head of a clan” (kabiru'I-gatom) is called atlığ Kaş. İ 79, 2; n.m.e.: KB bir atlığ kişi “a distinguished person” sor: xm?) Tef. adlu/atlığ “named” 39, 63: xiv Muh. al-musammd "named" a:dlig Mel, şo, 7; al-muhtaşam 'distinguished' atlığ Rif. 145: Çağ. xv ff. atlığ/atlık »zàámdár “famous” Vel. 7 (quotn.); atlığ ... . (2) they say fulün atlığ that is "named (matosüm) so-and-so'; (3) metaph. námdár toa maşhür 'famous' San. 3ov. 22 (quotns.: Xwar. xiv atlığ/atlı "named” Qutb 15; Nahe. 3, 3 etc.: Osm. xv adiu *famous' (once) T T.S 11 6. D 2 atlığ P.N.//A. fr. 2 at; 'horseman, mounted'. C.ia.p.s.], Türkü vur TTavlğaç ath süsi: “the Chinese army of cavalry” /7 S 1; eki: ülügi: atlığ erti: 'two-thirds of them were mounted” (and one-third on foot) T 4; bir atlığ “one horseman' T 24: vir ff. a:la: atlığ "with a dappled horse” IrkB 2; 8,0.0.: Xak. xr atlığ er al-raculu'L-fáris "a mounted mar” Kaş. 7 97; five o.o.: xiv Muh. atlığ bi-faras 'mounted' Rif. 77; al-fáris atluğ Rif. 146, 153: Çağ. xv ff. atlığ/atlık atlı suwár ma"ndsina "horseman” Vel. 7; atlığ (r) suwür San. 30v. 21 (quotn.): Xwar. xtv atlığ/atlı (sic) “möunted” Qut rs: Kom. xiv “cavalry-man” atlu CCI; Gr.: Kip. xii al-fáris atlu: Hou. 26, 14; dü faras atlu: sr, zo, fáris atlu: ss, ro: xiv atlu: al-fáris ay dü'l-faras İd. ış: xv fáris atlı Tuh. 27b. ro: Osm. xiv both atlı and atlu are noted TT. 1l 67; IV şo. D ıtlığ P.N./A. fr. ıt. S.i.s.m.l. with front vowels. Xak. x1 ttliğ ev "a house owning a dog (kalb) Kaş. 1 98. D udluk A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. u:d, which sug'gests an original meaning of “a joint of beef, but in practice 'thigh' of any man or beast. Survives only(?) in SW Osm., Tkm. uyluk; cf. 1 bu:t, Türkü vri (of a horse) udlukin 8i:yU: “breaking its thigh-bone” 7 E 36: Uyğ. virt ff. Civ. (on the 29th day of the month the soul is situated) udlukta belte “in the thigh and waist) TT VII zr, ro: Xak. x? udluk mustaglag 'agmi'l-dirá' “the thick part of the bone of. the foreleg” Kaş, I 98: xiv Muh.(?) “azmı” l-faxd 'thighbone' uyiuk (misvocalized ADL 55 izlik) Rif. 142 (only): Çağ. xv ff. uyluk (spelt 'with u-") rán 'thigh', in Ar. faxd San. 92v. 17 D 1 otluğ (o:dluğ) P.N./A. fr. 1 o:t. S.i. m.m. Lg.; in SW Az., Osm, odlu, Tkm. o:tli, Uyğ. virt ff. Bud, otluğ çakir tilğen “a fiery cahra wheel' TT V 6, 43, otluğ irğağ 'a fiery hook' do. rz, 118: Çağ. xv ff. otluğ/otluk dtişin "fery" Vel. 91; otluğ/otluk dtigin wa dtijnák ditto San. 62r. 26 (quotn.). D 2 otluğ P.N./A. fr. 2 ot. S.i.m.m.l.g., in SW Osm. otlu; 'Tkm. otli; but note that in Osm. 'poisonous', a meaning belonging to this word is also pronounced odlu owing to some confusion with 1 otlug. Xak. xı otluğ ta:ğ cabal mufşib "a mountain covered with vegetation” Kaş. I 98. D otluk A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. 2 ot, S.i.m.m.lg.; in NC “manger”, elsewhere usually *pasture'. In some languages there is a homophonous A.N. fr. 1 o:t meaning “a strike-a-light” and the like. The text of the MS. of Kaş. is as shown below; the printed text has atluk and odluk in error; but the Ar£u form is peculiar and some confusion with udluk may have occurred. Xak. xi otluk al-óri fi lugatihim 'manger' in one of their dialects Kaş. I 98: Arğu : xı odluk mabaytu'l-bagar mina'l-árí "a place where cattle spend the night', (derived) from “manger” Kaş. 1 98. Çağ. xv ff. otluğ lotluk makdni ki giydh wa 'alaf dágta bágad 'a place that has much grass and fodder' San. 62t. 25. D edliğ P.N./A. fr. e:d; “possessing property; having value, useful, convenient'. Survives only(?) in NI Koib., Sag. éstig “having property, rich” R 7 885; Khak. istiğ 'convenient, comfortable, sympathetic'. Uyğ. vim ff. Civ. edli$ sanlığ bolup yorimakip (?sarp) 'if you have property and treasure(?) your course is ( ?difficult) TT” 7 84 (the editors suggest reading azliğ sanliğ and translating 'distinguished' but (1) edlig is quite clear in the text; (2) sanlığ, q.v., does not have this meaning except in SW; san here is prob. a Sec. f. of sap for tsar, q.v.): Xak. xt edlig ne:p kul? şay” yuntafa' bihi "anything which can be used to advantage” Xaş. I 103. D etliğ P.N./A. fr et; 'fleshy, fat”, S.i.m.m.l.g. Xak. xı (after etlik) and a corpulent man (al-raculu'l-daxm) is called etllg kişi:, with a -ğ and a man who owns meat (al-lahm) is also called etliğ kigl: Xaş. 7 101: xitt(?) Tef. etlig “corporeal" 86. D etlik A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. et. Survives only (?) in NW Kaz. itlik; SW xx Anat. etlik SDD sss fat stock”. Uyğ. vitr ff. Bud. TT IV 6, 45 (6:t-): Xak. xr etlik mölaqa H-lahm “a meat hook'; and a sheep prepared for slaughter is called etllk ko:y that is 'sheep for meat" (sdt lahm) Kaş. I yor. D ödleg Dev. N. fr. *ódle:- Den. V. fr. ö:d. "There is no obvious differenee in meaning between ö:d and ódleg in Xak.; Kaş. translates 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 100 
     
   
   
     s6 DIS. ADL both a/-zamán 'time'. Elsewhere ódleg consistently means 'noon, midday'. Survives only (?) in SW Osm. ógle (öyle) 'noon'; Tkm. öyle 'afternoon'. Xak. xi ódle$ a/-zamán “me” Kaş. I 102 (verse); ten o.0., usuallv in the context of time taking its revenge: KB törütti xalüyıq öd ódleg bu kün '(God) created living beings, time (Hend.), and today” 3; (a child «hen born) mindi ódleg atı “möunts the. horse. of time” 1:388; kectl Odleg kün ay "time, days, and months passed' 5950; 0.0. 1582-4-6: xiv Rbg. özleğ namáàza "the midday prayer! R 7 1304 (quotns.): Muh. al-zuhr. 'mid-day' ó:yle: Mel. 8o, 3; Rif. 184: Çağ, xv ff. öyle eagt-i zulir San. 92v. 19: Oğuz xı öyle: af-zuhr Kaş. 1 113: Kip. xı the Kipgzak make the -y- -z- and say özle: Kaş, 1 113 Xwar. xiv ertedin ódlegke tegl . . ödleğdin keçeke “from dawn to midday . « « from midday to night” Nahe. 210, 11; ödleğ namazi do. 3o, r: Kip. xui al-zuhr (düş, also called) öyle:n Hou. 26, 15: xiv teaqtu [-zwhr öylen (mis-spelt eylen) Bul. 13,13. D ötlük llap. leg.; A.N. fr. 2 öt, Xak. xr ötlük a/-'7za 'advice, admonition'; and ówüt is also used for a/-'iza, its original form was öğüt Kaş. 7 102. D ü:tlüğ (ü:dlüg) P.N./A. fr. ü:t, 'pierced, perforated”, Survives only(?) in NE Khak. üttiğ Das. 257; Tuv. üttüg Pal. 43s. Xak. xı (under yinçü:) ü:tlüg yincü: a/-hohoal-möğqüb "a pierced pearl! Xaş. Hİ 30, 17; n.m.e.: Kom, xiv 'pierced! ütlü CCG; Gr. PU(D) ótlüm Hap. leg.; morphologically a N.S.A. but ?of what; the translation is coneetural, Uyg. vin ff. Bud. (if you call on the Kuan-gi-im Buddha, burning incense before the. holy. Buddha and) ötlüm ótlüm tegzindürü 'continuously(?) turning (the praver whecl)'! USSp. 102b. 22. Dis, V. ADLD adil- Pass. f. of 2 *ad-, sec 2 adiğ, properly 'to sober up, recover from drunkenness”, more generally, "to recover consciousness”, Survives as aytl- in NE. R I 34, 221; hak. and SVV Az,, Osm., Tkm. Xak, xr esrük adıldı: afága l-sakrán — sea I-mugmaá — 'alayhit *the drunk man, and the man who had fainted, recovered consciousness! Kaş, I 194 (adilur, adılma:k): KB (do not let good fortune intoxicate you) adildukta “vhen you come to your senses' (your eves will fill with tears) 6:137; a.0. 6142: Çağ. xvffT. ayıl- /iuşyir gudan "to come to one's senses', in Rizmi ayınSan. ssr. zo (quotns.): Kip. xiv ayil- sahá min sakra wca bar”a min marça "to come to one's senses from drunkenness and recover from an illness! 7g. 26: xv şahd ayıl- Tuh. 22b. 12. D atıl- Pass. f. of at-; "to be thrown, shot”, etc. S.i.m.m.l.g. ; with a wide range of meanings in Osm. Xak. xı ok atıldı: "the arrow vvas shot", and one says çeçe:k ağzı: atıldı: tafattaratil-camá'a “he bud burst open, 5 also used of any blossom or flower (zahra 1wa natcr), and of anything that opens without disintegrating (imfaraca min ğayr baynuüna) Kaş. I 193 (atilur, atılma:k): Çağ. xv fi. atilandüxta şudan “to be thrown! San. 28r. 17: Xwnr. xiv atil- "to be thrown; (of an arrow) to be shot" Qurö 16: Kip. xv Aamaza (?rcad humiza “to he repelled'; the verb has several other meanings) atıl- TuA. 38a. 1. D étil- (édil-); Pass. f. of é:it- with the same range of imneanings as é:t-, S.i.a.m.lg. but usually only to form compound V.s w. N.s, generally foreign. Uyğ. vtn ff. Man.-A Ttepirilik étilmis “a ternple was built Man.uig. Frag. 401, 13; 4.0. M 1 8, 11-12 (0D): Bud, (crops) bışarlar étilür 'ripen and mature" TT VI 327: Civ. yıl ay étilü elgipde kirdl 'years and months in due order(?) came into your hands' T'7 I 127: Xak. xı (after itil-) and one says oğla:n etildi: tara"ra"a”l-şabi wa tazahhafa the boy grew up (Hend.) Kaş. 7193 (étilü:r,étilme:k); buerolétilge:n sapılğaeri (mis-spelt sayelifacm) hada l-racul xarüc svalic fi l-umür "this man is always busily engaged in afTairs” , étilge:n (?; alif unvocalized, perhaps a different word) “a disease of horses in which boils (ğudad) brcak out and then heal up), called. xn ('farcy") in Pe.; menin r:şım edgü:lükün etilğe:n (si) ol amri abada(w) ansalih bi"l-xayr “my: affairs are. always ept in good order" 7 rs8, o.o. I 53, 18 (uğur), 7 442, 7 (I1 209, 21): KB isi barça etlür “his affairs arc all well organized' 429; 0.0. 497, 6os6 (etçi:): Qai. xv (f. étil- (with €-”) harda şudan "to be done” ($a? 94r. 17 (quotn. illustrating compound verb): Kom. XIV “to be made, created! etil- CCG; Gr.: Osm. xiv edil- “to be raped, violated” (and “to be done”) T TS I 253. D 1dil- Pass. f. of t&amp;d-. Survives only(?) in NW Kar, 1, iyil- "to be sent" 2 7 1435; Kom, 193. Uy. vir ff, Bud. Sanskrit. praszabdhi 'confidence, trust' (here 7“entrusted”) tilma:k1 bolor TT VIII 4.26 (-t- often represents -d- in these texts); Xak. xı tutğun idilda: ut/iqa'l-asir ica I-mugayyad the prisoner (Hend., etc.) was released! Kaş, 7 194 (1diur, idima:k): xin(?) Tef. idit- “to be sent! 128, D itil- Pass. f. of it-; “to be pushed, upset", etc, S.i.s.m.]. Xak. xi Itildi: ne: “the thing was pushed' (dufií'a) Kaş. I 193 (itilü:r, itilme:k); 17 139, ro (itin-): xııı(?) Tf. itül(of a bird) 'to hover in the air (without moving the wings) 127 (seems to belong here): Çağ. xv ff, itil- (with i-' afganda şudan voa məafqüd sudan “to be thrown down; to be lost, missing! Sarı. gər, 17 (the second meaning may be connected with yit-, q.v., which is not noted in Çağ.). D odul- Hap. leg.?; Pass. f. of Yod- , “to wake up” (Intrans.). Xak. x1 KB (See, my son (oğul, rhyme), in what a state I am, look at me and) odul “vake up” 1215. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 101 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. ADL 57 D udul- Pass. f. of u:d-; "to be followed, conformed with', etc. Survives only(?) in SW Osm., Tkm. uyul-. Xak. xi KB udula in 5202 (U:d-) seems to be a Ger. of this verb: Caf. xv ff. uyul- Pass. f. ... . (3) muwáfagat harda şudan “to be followed, conformed with' San. 89v. 23. VUD otul- (?mis-spelling of otal-) Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of 2 ota:-, Xak. xı tarif. otuldi: qufi'a giryáfu'[-zar', wva huma hull nabt yu'tibuhu fa-yufsiduhu "the weeds, that is any plant which they destroy and get rid of in the standing corn, were cut” Kaş. 1 193 (otulur, otulma:k). D ötel- (ödel-) Pass. f. of óte:-. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı ol bu: ışta: öteldi: ta'anná fi hadı”l-amr wa márasa'l-sidda “he worked hard at this matter and exerted his strength' Kaş. 7 193 (ötelür, ótelme:k; an odd meaning, but must belong here): KB senindin ötelsün mana: söz taki “let a statement be submitted from you to me and” (a statement from me to you) 2670: xıı1(?) Tef. kaçan ödelse iş *when the task is ordained” 242; ötelmesde öndin sana anip vvahı “before his (Gahriel”s) inspiration is conveyed to you” 251 : Çağ. xv ff. ötelPass. f.; add şudan "to be paid” San. 6rr. 24 (quotn.). D ütül- Pass. f. of üt-, “to he singed, scorched; (of grain) to be parehed”. Survives in NC Kzx. üytil-, NW Kaz. ötel-, SW Osm., "km. ütül-. Xak. xı ko:y başı: ütüldi: “the sheep”s head (etc.) was singed” (rehriqa) Kaş. I 193 (ütülür, ütülme:k:) K isizlik ot olot küyürgen bolur yolında keçiğ yok ütülgen bolur “vvickedness is a fire; fire constantly burns (people); there is no means of getting along the road, it is constantly being scorched” 249 (Arat reads ótülgen, but this word is not recorded and makes no sense). D edle:- Den. V. fr. e:d; in the early period "to turn (something cc.) into something useful”, hence, e.g. “to cultivate (a garden, etc.)', and also “to deem (something .4cc.) to be useful' hence "to esteem (someone)'. Later it came to mean simply 'to make, create', and finally, like é:t-, it came to be little more than an Aux, V., used to form compound V.s w. N.s, usually foreign. In this sense it seems to have been regarded as more graceful than é:t-. Survives as eyle- in SE Türki, Shaw 37, BŞ. 807, Jarring 4o (also in its earlier sense); N Kaz.; SW Osm., Tkm. Uyğ. vir fi, Civ. (in a text about a vineyard, 'I will give a rent of 6o measures of wine") tonuz yıl edlemişke “for cultivating it during the Swine Year" USp. 6, 5; edlegücl bir erklük kişi “a responsible person to cultivate (the vineyard)” do. 21, 5; bağnı edlep “cultivating the vineyards” do. 22, 41; bağlarımıznı eylep (sic) do. 22, 47-8 (a xiv text): Xak. xı ol edle:di: ne:pni: şana"a”l-şay” 'arada(n) “he made use of the thing” Kaş. 7 286 (edle:r, edle:di:); tavar ücün teprl: edlemedip 'for the sake of money not respecting God” (Id yubdli mina'lláh) I 86, 2; edğü: savığ edlese: “if a man esteems (or values, rabbá) good advice' HI 155, 4: KB elig ursa begler kimi edlese 'if the 5egs stretch out their hands and esteem someone' r630; a.o. 347 (edik-): xm(?) At. tiken edlegen er 'a man who cultivates thorn bushes' (does not get grapes from them) 376; Tef. edle-fédle- “to cultivate' 7o, 123: ÇAĞ. xv ff. eyle-(-y, etc.) evle- Vel. 37-8; eylehardan "to make, do" San. 56r. 7 (quotns. containing compound V.s): Xwar. xırı eyle- “to make, do” 'Ali 26: xiv éyle- ditto MN 36: Kap. xtu "amala “to make, do” eyle:- Hou. 33, 15 (in compound verb ar, 18): xtv ditto İd. 26: xv ditto Tuh. 26a. 7 (in compound verb 15b. 13): Osm. xiv ff. eyle- 'to construct (an artifact, etc.); to appoint (an official)” noted down to xvı 773 7 288; İİİ 276; IV 321. D etle:- Hap. leg.?; Den. V. fr. et. Xak. xı ol ko:yif$ etle:di: ca'ala'l-dt lahma(n) “he fattened(?) the sheep' Kaş. 7 284 (etle:r, etle:me:k). D 1tla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. it, Xak. xı ol anı: ıtla:dı: sabbahu wa ahdnahu wa 'addahu min cumlati'l-kildb “he reviled and scorned him and reckoned him to belong to the dog family' Kaş. 1 285 (utla:r, 1tla:ma:k). D udla:- Hap. leg., perhaps used only in Ger.; Den. V. fr. u:d. Xak. xı KB yedi arzu ni'mat özüm udlayu 'my soul devoured desirable things and luxuries like an ox' 5635. D otla:- Den. V. fr. 2 ot. S.i.a.m.l.g., usually for "to graze, browse'. Cf. 2 ota-, the parallel Den. V. fr. 1 o:t is not noted before xv; see 1 ota:- Xak. xı at otla:dı: “the horse grazed' (""talafa) Kaş. 1 285 (verse; otla:r, otla:ma:k): xin(?) Tef. otia- “to graze” 239: xiv Rb. ditto R I 1113 (quotns); Mu, dáwd “to treat medically! o:tla:- Mel. 26, 3; otla:- Rif. 108; tabba wa "alaca ditto Rif. 111 (only): Çağ. xv ff. otla- çaridan “to graze” San. 61ir. 28 (quotns.): Kıp. xiv otla- ra'à "to graze' Id. 8: (Kom. xiv 'to treat medically' otala-; 'a hay ficld' otalamak CCI; Gr: Osm. xiv otala“to treat medically! in two texts T'T'S 7 551, but, in Kel., Zaj. reads otla-). VUD ódle:- Pec. to KB; if thus read Den. V. fr. Ö:d, but perhaps the basic form of üdlen-, q.v. Xak. x1 &amp; kalı él(l)ig ödlep tilese seni "if the king desires you, choosing his time (?, or passionately)” 1504; a.o. 1588 (sic in best MSS.). D ötle:- Den. V. fr. 2 öt, “to advise (someone Dat., rarely Acc.) to do (something Dat.)'. N.o.a.b. Türkü vir: inime: oğluma: ança: ötledim “1 gave my younger brothers and sons the following advice” Ongin 11: vir ff. Man. ol kamağ bodunka edgü kılınç kılmakka turkaru ötleyür tavratur katığlanturur “(the king) continuously advises all the people to do good deeds and urges them on and makes them exert themselves! T'T JJ ro, 88-90: Uy£viri ff. Bud. biz kendüke edgüke ótleyürbiz 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 102 
     
   
   
     58 DIS. V. "ve advise him todo good” PP zo, 7-8; ayığ ögli tépinig ötlep "advising Prince Papamkara” do. 35, $, Sanskrit samddöbayati (translated 'causes to give”, ?error) ótle:di (spelt ütle:tz) TT VIII (2.6: o.o. Hüen-fs. 179, 2113— [yum]sak savin ötleyü erig(leyü] 'advising (Hend3 him with mild words! U //7 15, 11; o.o. of ótle:- erigle:- U 772 89, 18-19; TT VII 14, 3 (uduğ), 4o, 86; Suv. 597, 6-7 (ya:ğliğ): Xak.xi KB sapa ötler "hc advises you” 2204, 5713: meni ótlegil “advise me” 5128. D edlet- Caus. f. of edle:-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xi of tawa:rin (sic) edletti: amara bi-iylah md kána muhmal min mülihi “he ordered that any part of his property that had been neglected should be put in order" Kaş. 7 264 (edletür, edietme:k): xıır(?) 7ef. eyletür bezelürler "They are ornamented' (with gold bracelets) 72: Çağ. xvff. eylet- Caus. f; Rundnidan "to order to he made or done” San. s6v. 7. D etlet- Hap. leg.?; Caus. f. of etle:-, Xak. xı ol ko:y etletti: emara hatta cu'ilati'l-át lahm "he ordered that the sheep should be fattened(?)' Kaş. I 264 (etletür, etletme:k). D udlat- Hap. leg.; apparently abbreviated Caus. f, of udu:la:- cf. udlaş-, Xak, xı ol oflin mapa: udlattı: atba'a. sealadahu. xalfi “he sent his son after me” Kaş. 7 264 (udlatur, udlatma:k). D edlel- Hap. leg.; Pass, f. of edle:-. Xak. xı edleldi: ne: ugltha'l-gay' "the thing was put in order": also used when anything is inspected (or examined, uwftugida) Kaş. 1 295 (edlelükr, edlelme:k). D etlel- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of etle:-. Xak. xi ko:y etleldi: eu'ila' l-ganam lahm 'the sheep was fattened(?)”, also used of other (animals) Kaş. I 295 (etlelü:r, etlelme:k). D atlan- Refl. Den. V. fr. 2 at; it is not certain whether atla-, a verb which first appears in Xvvar, xın(?) Og. and occurs in other medieval and most modern languages, is connected with 2 at; it seems to mean “to set out, march against' (in Og.) and more usually 'to stride' cf. Osm. adim “a step, pace', and so prob. has some other origin. S.i.a.m.l.g., in INE usually altan-. Türkü vırı ff. Man. TT II 8, 63 (u:d-): Xak. xı er atlandı: “the man rode (rakibay Kaş. I 255 (atlanur, atlanma:k), ol at atlandı: “he rode a horse! 7 285 (erroneously inserted between otla:- and the illustrative verse, in whieh atlanu:r occurs); two o.o.: XIV Muh.(?) 'I hope our beg will not ride today” beğimi:z bu: kü:n atla:nma:su:n Rif. 93-4 (only); Çağ. xv ff, atlan-.sutwvár şudan “to ride! San. 29v. 28 (quotns.; not described as Refl. f. of atla:-): Oğuz xı ol ta:ğka: atlandı: ga'ida'l-cabal "he climbed the mountain', also used of climbing (fi su'üd) anything Kaş. I 256 (atlanur, atlanma:k): Xwar. xiv atlan- “to ride” Qutb 15: Kom. xiv. "to ride” atlan- CCI; Gr.: Kap. xiv atlan- rakiba ay ittaxada faras "to ride, that ADLis take a horse! /4. 15: Osm, xiv ff. atlan"to ride; to mount'; c.ta.p. TT S 1 sə, 1167; İİ 46; IV so. D edlen- Eefl, f. of edle:- ; not noted later than xXvr. Xak. xi edlendi: ne:p urtuxtda l- gov" "arada(n) (MS. in error ğarada(n)) wa lam yutrak mühməla(ı) 'the thing was made use of and not left on one side” as, for example, a fur coat is made from a skin or boots from a piece of felt Kaş. 7 257 (edlenür, edlenme:k): Osm. xiv-xvr eylen- 'to he constructed', or as Aux, V, in three or four texts TTS 7 288; I 413; IV. 321 (in Osm, the word is normally a Scc. f. of eglen-). D etlen- Refl. f. of etle:- ; survives only(?) in NE Khak. itten- Has. 65, satne meaning. Xak. xr oğul etlendi: zaratğala "l-sabi "he boy put on flesh'; also used of anything that gets fat (samina) after being lean Kaş. I 256 (etlenür, etlenme:k), D itlin- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. ot itil-. Xak, xı ta:ş ftlindi: "the stone (etc.) was pushed on one side” (fndafa'a); also used of a child when it begins to crawl (tazahhafa) ; hence one says menin yü:zdin itiin ufrub "anni “get out of my sight'; this is said in n fit of anger (al-fadab) Kaş, I 256 (itlinür, itlinme:k). D o:tlan- (o:dlan-) Refl. Den. V. fr. 1 ot; sce 1 ota:-, Survives only(?) in SW Az., Osm. odlan-: Tkm. o:tlan- “to blaze up (lit, or metaph. in anger); to be burnt', etc. Xak. xı at o:tlandı: s/tahaba"l-faras carya(n) "the horse went at a fiery pace'; similarly one says er o:tlandı: itahaba'l-racul. gadaba(n) “the man blazed with anger' Kaş. I 297 (o:tlanur, o:tlanma:k; in a special section for verbs with initial long vowels): Çağ. xv ff. otlan- Refl. f. dtiş dargiriftan “to catch fire” San, 61 v. 17A. VUD üdlen- apparently Refl. Den. V. fr. *üd, a noun cognate to üd- q.v. ; see also öğle:-. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. öz köpülümin üdlenip sevinçlenip "being excited and delighted in my own mind" Hiüen-ts. 215: Xak. xı yilki: üdlendi: dabi'ati'l-datwább. wwa'gtahati'l-fuhil “the mares were on beat and the stallions excited' Kaş. 7 257 (üdlenür, üdlenme:k). D atlaş- Recip. Den. V. fr. 2 at. Survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. atlaş- (of two men) “to ride on the same horse' SDD 125; Çağ. atlas- Co-op. f. 'to bustle about and jump together! San. 29v. 19 is prob. not connected, see atlan-. Xak. xı (in a grammatical section) oyna:dım atlasu: la'ibtu voa. ca'altu'l-xatar fihi'l-faras “1 gambled and made the stake on it à horse! Kaş. II 114, 23; similar phr. IJ 226, 5;n.m.e. D edles- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of edle:-. Xak. xı olar bi:r iİkindüini: edleşdi: “they esteemed (or respected, fafagqada , . . hurma) one another” Kaş. 7 239 (edleşür, edleşme:k). D itliş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. itil-. Xak, xi itlişdi: ne: indafa'at'l-agyá' “the things 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 103 
     
   
   
     DIS were pushed together' Aag. 7 rao (itligü:r, itlişme:k), D udlas- Hap. leg.; abbreviated Recip. f. of udu:la:- cf. udlat-. Xak. xı ivik bi:r bi:rke: udlaşdı: majatr'l-zibá^ xilfata(n) "the female gazclles walked one behind the other (in a line)” Kaş. 7 239 (udlaşu:r, udlaşma:k). D ütleş- (üdleş-) Recip. Den. V. fr. üt. Survives only(?) in NW Kaz. ütles- (of a needle) "to pass through (something)' R 7 1867. Xak. xı ütleşdi: ne:p rntagabatil-agyá'! (MS. in error in/aqabat) “the things were picrced' Ka; I 238 (ütleşü:r, ütlegnfe:k); wa /rádà fi'l-nahb "and this(is said) in regard to plundering'; and one says alpla:r ütlesdi: talahamatı” -abtal toa tacádalü "the warriors smote one another and fought (ütleşü:r, ütlesme:k; “and one says” usually: introduces a new V.; this V. was prob, itlig-, misvocalized; this would suit the translation better, but in that case İtliş- was entered twice vv. two different meanings). Tris. ADL D adalığ P.N./A. fr. ada:; n.o.a.h. Uyğ. vi ff. Man. adalığ orunlartın ozğuluk 'in order to escape from dangerous places! 77717 139 Bud. ol taluy suvi ertlpü korkinçiğ adalığ ol “that ocean is extremely terrible and dangerous' PP 26, 4-6: Civ. adalığ evinde “in your house which is exposed to danger! T7 VII 30, 1. D atalığ P.N./A. fr. ata:; 'baving a father. S.i.s.m.l. Xak. xi K B 6055 (etci:). D atalık A.N. (and later Conc. NN.) fr. ata:; 'the position or duties, of a father; somcone in the position of a father, e.g. tutor or stepfather". S.i.m.m.l.g. Xak. xı KB (if your father is dead, I will be a father to you) atalik kılayın 'I will perform the duties of a father 1552: Caf. xv ff. atatığ/atağlığ atalik Vel. 8 (quotn.; in Sar. gov. 12 tbe second form is said to be an error); atalığ (r) ubuwat “fatherhood' (quotn.); (2) the name of a hereditary office in ''urkistan and Xwarazm San. gov, ış: Kom. xiv 'stepfather' atalıx CCG; Gr. D utlı:lığ P.N./A. fr. utl n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vini ff. Civ. (your sons and people are lucky; your elder sisters and sisters-in-law are joyful) kurişı (?Sec. f. of kunçuy) kiz utliliğ “your wives(?) and daughters are grateful(?) TTI 150. D uthi:siz Priv. N./A. fr. utli:; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vri ff. Bud, Sanskrit akrtajilatayd 'owing to ingratitude” utlısız bolma:kı üze: TT VIII D.14; a.o. U IV 40, 184-5 (sevinçsiz). Tris. V. ADLD ada:la:- Den. V. fr. ada:; existence doubtful, the word quoted might be merely the Plur. of ada: but see adalan-. Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. (if one cuts out a garment on an unlucky day) ol ton birlen ök adalar 'it is dangerous (or . ADM — 89 "there are dangers") with that garment! TT VH 38, 10-11. (D) 1dala:- 'to give up, renounce (something Acc.)., rare and prob. pec. to Uyg. where it usuallv occurs in Hend. with 1 tit-, q.v. Morphologically obscure; perhaps, like udu:la:- Den. V. fr. a Gerund *1da: (not known otherwise); perhaps survives in NE "Tuv. 1dala- “to send, dispatch' Pal. 563. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. isiğ öz yeme ıdalap adınağunı ölürmeyin “1 will give up my own life (but) not kill others" U III 4, 2-3; same phr. do. 57, 2 (); 71, 27; U IV 22, 274; 40, 187—bu üçeğüde birisin birisin tltgülük 1dalağuluk kezigi "the order for giving up (Hend.) these three things one by one” TT V 26, 107-8; amtı bu kizi$ munda ok titeyin idalayin “1 will renounce (Hend.) this maiden here and now' TT X 343 (see note for several 0.0. of tit- 1dala-). D udu:la:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. 2 udu: Ger. of u:d-, cf. udlat-, udlaş-. Xak. xı ol anı: udu:la:dı: itfaba'ahu ma"qtafdhu “he followed (Hend.) him” Kaş. I 308 (udu:la:r, udu:la:ma:k). S otala:- See otla:-. D adalan- Hap. leg. and rather dubious; Refl. of adala:- q.v. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. (various misfortunes happen) ol kapığ tonur andağ adalanur 'the door is closed, thus one is in danger TT VI 234 (a v.l. only, some MSS. omit the phr. and others read arıdağ adrilur *thus one is parted (from one's family)'). D atlandur- Caus. f. of atlan- “to mount (someone), give (someone) a horse to ride'. S.i.am.l.g. Uy£. viri ff. Bud. (gap) taşğaru Hincüke atlandurdi “they mounted (the prince) for a pleasure excursion outside (the city PP r, 1: (Xak.) xır ff. Tef. atlandur“to mount (cavalrymen) 63: Çağ. xv ff. atlandur- Caus. f. suwar hardan "to mount (someone)' San. 3or. 8 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv atlandur- ditto Qutb 15: Osm. xiv ff. atlandir- ditto in several texts TTS II 66; III 46; IV so. Dis. ADM D atım N.S.A. fr. at-, s.i.a.m.l.g. except SE, usually for “a single shot; the distance covered by one arrow shot', the implication of the Xak. meaning is that a marksman does not need more than one shot at his target. Cf. oktam. Xak. xı atım er al-raculu'l-hádiq fi ramyi'l-mugár[1s “an expert archer, marksman” Kaş. I 75; yazma:s atım al-rámi là yuxfi' “an archer who never misses! İİİ 59, 13; 379, zr: KB alp atım “a tough marksman” 2043; 0.0. 1949, 4046, 5911; Çağ. xv ff. atım they say ok atımı “the distance of a bow-shot', in Ar. Ealwatu'l-sahm San. 31r. r. D 1dma: Hap. leg.; Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. 1d-. Xak. xı 1dma: yılkı: al-sd'íba. mina'l-hayatán “an animal which is allowed to go free" Kaş. I 129 (see 1duk). 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 104 
     
   
   
     6o DIS. ADM D udmak 'servant',. Sec u:d-. etmek/ótmek the oldest of three similar words for 'bread', the others being epmek, q.v, and ekmek, noted in NC, NW, and SW and prob. a recent Sec. f. due to a supposed connection with ek-. Ötmek scems to be the earlier of the two forms. Although -mek is normally an Infinitive Suff. it is not possible to connect the word semantically with any verb, and it should be noted that Xaş. in his main entry spells it with -mek, not -me:k. Survives with initial ó- (occasionally ü-) in some NE languages, R / 1275, 1868, and NW Kar. T., and with initial e- or 1- (?é-) in other NE languages, NC, NW, and SW. Uyğ. vir f... Man.-A bir ötmekep “one of your loaves of bread' M III 12, 5 (i); xiv Chin.-Uyg.. Dict. 'bread' ötmek R T 1275; Ligeti 190: Xak. xı etmek ai-xubz "bread" Kaş. 1 102; 26 o.0. of etme:k and three of ótme:k: KB tuz etmekni ken tut “have a libera! supplv of salt and bread' 1328: xin(3) Tef. etmek/ötmek “bread” 86, zgi1: xiv Muh. al-xubz etmek (? unvocalized) Mel. 66, 2; Rif. 165: Çağ. xv ff. ötmek ezmek ... nàn ma' nádsina Vel. go, ötmek ndn bi rawfan "bread. without fat” San. 62r. 29: Xvvar, xil ötmek 'bread' “A// 46: xiv étmek/ótmek Qutb 53, 124; etmek Nahc. 301, q: Kom, xiv etmek/ötmek CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xil al-xubz etmek (unvocalized) Hou. 15, 19; etmek (sic) şo, zo: xiv etmek al-xubz İd. 7; al-nayda "a kind of wheat cake” kara: etmek Bul. 8, 15: XV xubx etmek Aav. 44, 14; 62, 17; Ótmek Tr. 14a. ro: Osm. xiv ff. etmek "bread” ş c.ia.p. 77S 722845; 11406; 141 270; IV. 314; xvitr. etmek (spelt) the. Rimi word for ndn, 'bread', in Çağ. ötmek San, 30v. 25. Tris. V. ADMD etmeklen- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den, V. fr. etmek. Xak. xı er etmeklendi: Katura xubzu'l-racul ya"ni atrá “the man's bread was abundant, that is he was rich” Kaş. I 314 (etmeklenür, etmeklenme:k). D udmaklan- llap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. udmak (u:d-). Xak. xı er udmaklandi: şara I-racul. dà taba" sca. şakiri "the man had (many) servants and retainers” Kaş. 7 313 (udmaklanur, udmaklanma:k). Dis. ADN atan “a gelded camel”, a l.-w. in Mong. as atanatay (Kow. 6o, Haltod 13). S.i.m.m.l.g. Xak. xı atan aí-xagi müna”l-ibil “a gelded camel Kaş, I 75 (prov.): xiv Ah, (under *camels') al-xagt atan Rif. 172 (Mel. 7o, 10 axta, a Pe. L-w.): Kip. xiv atan (misvocalized afin) al-camalu'l-xasi ld. 15. D adın Intrans. Dev. N/A. fr. 1 *ad- ; “other, another'. Common down to xtv but not traced later; almost syn. vv. adruk, öni:, ózge:; later displaced, usually by Pe. digar. Uyğ. vir ff. Man.-A adin yérll$ er “a man from ^nether eesinfmo” M T aa. ro: Man. adın tümğe köpüfler "other simple minds! 777 H7 164: Bud. adın is common, e.g. adin ağılık “another treasure' P? 7, 3-4; adın bir toyun “another monk! U 111 35, 19: Civ. adın kişi "a third party", see ötğürü:, adın adın köz ağrığı "various eye discases” /7 I1 18, 6o: Çiğil (Xak,) xı adın Harf bi-ma'nà ğayr an 1ndeclinable meaning “other” Kaş, 1 76; 1 98, zo (adruk): 3 o.o. in Xak. texts: KD yaramaz senipdin adınka bu at “this name is not fitting for anyane other than '"l'hee' 6; on adin iki ay 'ten and another two months' 132; 0.0. 1781, etc.: xp(?) KBVP adinlar éver “others hasten' 47: xit(?) 4t. anda adın "other rhan that” 116; three 0o.0.; Te. adın “other” 40: xiv Rhbg. adın “other” R I 490: Xwar. xiv ditto Quib 4. E etin This word is read in M İİİ 45, 5 (1) in a description of paradise; “the barking of dogs, the call of birds', all confusing tiresome evil . noises are not heard in the land; korkırçığ etin olar ara yok”, Henning in Asia Major VII 122 suggested as an alternative Itin 'pushing”, but the obvious amendment is ün, almost the same outline in Uyğ. script. The passage then means 'there are no terrifying sounds among them”, D otun (o:ddun) Den. N. fr. 1 o:t. S.ha.m.lg.: NE Khak. odıp: SW Az., Osm. odun? "Tkm. o:dun: elsewhere otun, See Docrfer 11 585. Cf. cava:r. Uyğ. viir ff. Bud, kurug otun “dry firewood' U II 8, 26; do. o, 28 (ötrü): Civ. üç bağ otun "three bundles of firewood' Up. 91, 12: Xak. xi otun a/-pafab 'firewood' Kaş. I 134; 1 67, 3 (uvSak), nearly 20 o.0., spelt otu:g twice and o:tup once: xii(?) Tef. otun/otun 'firewood' 24o: xiv Muh. al-hatab o:dun Mel. 78, 8; Rif. 182: Çağ. xv ff. otun ditto R 7 1106 (quotn. fr Babur; not in San.): Ktp. xi af-hafab o:dun Hou. 17, 16: xiv otun a/-hatab İd. iş, Bul, 4, 11: xv ditto Tu. 13a. 8. VU utum "wicked, shamoeless, vile'; not noted after xur unless SW xx Anat. utun “calamity, misfortune' SDD 1423 is a survival. Uyğ. vri f£. Bud. tün nizvanılar “the evil passions! U 77 77, 15; utun yavız “vicked and evi) U II] 17, 11; o.o. do. 20, 3; 42, 31; utun savlığ “Toul-mouthed" TT VI ris: Xak. xı utu:n al-zagih sea”l-la”im 'shameless, vile Kaş, I 123, ütü al-eeagifhiul-safih “vicked, insolent', in antithesis to tüzü:n “good” in prov. 7 414, 13: KB utun "wicked, shameless' is common 121, 341, 1670, 1923, etc, : xirr(?) At, utun “vicked” 108, 261. D ötnü: abbreviated Ger. of *óten- Refl. f. of öte:-. Survives in SE "Türki ótne '(temporary) loan! Share 18; Yarring 220 (also in phr. ötne bér-). Xak. xı ötnü: harf yusta'mal Ji l-girád "an Indeclinable used with respect to loans'; one says men yarma:k ótnü bé:rdim “Iİ gave the money as a loan' (garda(»)) Kaş, I 130. D u:tanç N./A.S. fr. utan- (uvtan-); shame; shameful?, and the like, Survives only in SW  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 105 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. Osm., "Vkm. utangc. Xak. xi al-nmmundiya toa İ-ma"öyir mina'l-umtür, 'something calamitous and disgraceful' is called u:tanç (misvocalized u:tung) 1:8; its origin is from uvut al-hayd “shame" Kaş. 1 131: Oğuz xı utanç (2d' carries both farla and damma) liş al-amru' lladi yustahyá mürhu "a thing of which one is ashamed' 777 448. D ótenc/ótünc Preliminary note. The difference between these fwo words, Dev. N.s fr. *óten-(Óden-), Refl. f. of öte:-, tohich survives only in SW Az., Osm. óden-, and ótünresembles that between ötek arid 2 ötüğ. Only the first exists in Kaş. and the vocalization of the second syllable there is uncertain; in the first occurrence the votel sign might be either fatha or damma, in the second it is missing, and in the third definitely damma; but in any event by the medieval period the svord had definitely become ötünç, it survives in SW Ax. ödeniş, Osm.,Tkm. ödünç. The second, after its appearance in Türhü, is not noted until its reappeance in SC Uzb. üting: NW Kaz. ütiniç R 1 1864; Kk.ötiniş: SW Tam,ötünç all meaning 'request' and the like. D ötenç/l ötünç (ödenç) Dev. N. in -ç fr. *Dten- (öden-), 'loan, debt', and the like. Xak. xı ötünç (?; see above) a/-qard “a loan'; one says men apa:r yarma:k ötünç (7) bé:rdim agradtuhu'l-dirham'l1lent him money” Kaş. I 131: Xiv Muh. al-dayn “debt” ödünç Mel, 83, 5; öctünç Rif. 188: Caf. xv ff. ötünç (mis-spelt ótnüg, and misplaced) ödünç qard ma'ndsina Vcl. 121; ödünc (spelt) qard wa dayn San. 66v. so: Oğuz xı ötünç al-qard, one says men apa:r yarma:k ötünç bé:rdim a"taytuhu İ-dirham qarda(n) 'I gave him the money as a loan” Kaş. III 448: Kom. xiv “oan” ötünç CCI; Gr. 185 (quotn): Kip. xit iqtarada "to borrow' ödünç al- Hou. 36, 18: xtv af-qard özdinç Bul, 6, 3. D 2 ötünç Dev. N. in -ç fr. ötün-. Türkü vı xağanılm ben özüm) bilge: Tonukuk ötüntük ötünçimin eşidü: berti: “my xağan deigned to hear the representations which I myself, tbe Counsellor "Tonukuk, submitted to him” T ış. Dis. V. ADND a:tan- (a:dan-) Refl, f. of ata:-; generally used in Pass. sense, “to be named, called; to be famous'. Survives in NE; SE; SC Uzb. (atan- not otan-);, SW Az., Osm. adan-. "Türkü vn ff. (when he goes home) özl: a:tanmi:ş "he himself is famous” IrkB 55: Uyf£. vri ff. Bud. atanmış künde translates a Chinese phr. meaning 'on a day on which one is nominated to a higher office” TT VI 435: (three months are the spring period; three months are called (tétir) the summer period) üg aylar atanur küz ódler tép 'three months are named the autumn period” Sus, $89, 11ız: Xak, xı KB kim edgü atansa kişi ADN- 61 "whoever is called a good man" 253; yori ud atanma “go, do not (let yourself) be called an ox” 1599; a.0. 6454: xitI(?) At, (be upright, act uprightly) atan köni “get a reputation for being upright! 16s (the metre requires the pronunciation. a:tan): Tef. atan- “to be named” 63: Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 15: Kip. xiv adan- fasammd “to be named” İd. 9: xv ditto atan-/adan- Tuh. 9b. 4. D 1 adin- Refl. f. of 2 *ad- (see 2 adığ), “to sober up, recover from drunkenness'; practically syn. with adil-. Survives as ayın- and the like in some SE, NW, and SW languages. Türkü vr ff. Man. ol tüzün er esrüki adıntı "that good man's drunkenness passed off” M I 6, zo—: UyB. vur ff. Bud. (they wander about like drunken men) adinu umatın "being unable to sober up” TT VI 215-16 (v.l.; most MSS. have onulu): Xak. , KB bir ança adın 'sober up a little! 2374: Osm. xvirr ayın- (spelt), in Rumi, same as (Cag. ayıl- huşyar şudan “to come to one's senses” San. şöv. 24 (quotn. Fudtili). D 2adin- n.o. b; in the Hend.adın- mupadwhich is directly parallel to the phr. adınçiğ munpadınçığ (see adınçiğ), and must mean something like “to be surprised and disturbed"; it might be a Refl. f. of 1 *ad-. Uyğ. vırı ff. Bud. (then the supreme god Indra, hearing these words and) ertipü adinu rmupadu “being extremely surprised and disturbed! U II 31, 47; 2.0. Suv. 16, 18. D atin- Refl, f. of at-; survives only(?) in NE Khak. &amp;tin- “to shoot oneself” Bas. 35; T'uv. attın- “to be shot” Pal. 73: NW Kaz. atin“to swing oneself in a swing'. See Itin-. Xak. xı ol ok atındı: "he pretended to shoot (varmi) an arrow without actually shooting it” Kaş. I 199 (atınu:r, atınma:k). D €tin- (édin-) Refl, f. of €:t- ; with the same range of meanings as 6:t-. S.i.m.m.l.g.ş in SW edin-. Türkü vi: (they became hostile to China but) étinu: yaratu:nu: umaduk “because they could not organize (Hend.) themselves! 7 E 10, I1 E 9. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. Sanskrit mandanavidhau 'according to the rules for ornamenting (the body)" éténmek yaratınmaklığ törösinde: TT VIII D.8: ağuluğ yılanın etözlerin étinlp yaratinip *ornamenting (Hend.) their bodies with poisonous snakes! U 1V 8, 12-13; o.o, Hüen-ts. 230 (timen-); 519 (time:-): Xak. xı kışka: etin ista"idd b”l-şitd” 'prepare yourself for the vvinter” Kaş. 182, 13; n.m.e.: KB (in spring tbe earth) etindi kolı kaşı "adorns its arms and eyebrovvs” 69; 0.0. 462, 475 (étlg): xn(?) KBVP (it explains) neğü teg étinpii hila 'how to prepare strategems” 45; o.o0. 46: Osm. xiv edin- “to make for oncself” T'T.S 7 253. D itin- Refl. f. of it- , s.i.s.m.l. See itinçu:, itindi:. Xak. xi ol na:ru: itindi: (MS. etindi:) tazahhafa ila dálika'l-cánib "he set off in that direction'; also used when tadahraca'l-şay” bi-quwwa gayrihi “a thing is moved by 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 106 
     
   
   
     62 DÍS. V. ADNsome external force' Kaş. ] 1:99 (itinu:r (altered in second hand to et-), itin-me:k (in MS. et-); (as a result of these scribal errors and the substitution of -ma:2 for -me:k in the printed text, hitherto. transcribed. afmm-); (in a grammatical para.) er itindi: tazahhafa'l-racul, alternative form (luga fili) itildi: I7 139, 7S utan- See uvtan-. D udin- Refl, f. of udi-; survives only(?) in Osm. uyun- 'to sleep quietly, go to sleep'. Xak. xi o:t udindr — xamadat”l-nör na tafi'at “the fire died down and went out”, and one says yula: uğindi: “the lamp (etc.) went out” (fafi"a), and once says anın kuti: udindi: taf”a cadduhu "his good luck died away' Kaş. I zoo (udinur, udinma:k; this must be the right spelling but the ddl is usually marked with damma or left unmarked); (if you strike a light in a hurry) udinu:r yula: “the lamp goes out” (yantafi') İH 26, 2: KB avincir küvençin udınğay (-n- undotted, Arat erroneously restores -t-) u teg “your joy and pride will fade away like sleep' 1424; udinmig otuğ 4412; udinur bu ot 4694. D odun- (odon-) Refl. f. of *od-; "to wake up (Intrans.)'. Survives only in NE Tuv. odun-. In the medieval period displaced by *odgan(Refl. Den. V. fr. oduğ) which first appeared in (Xak.) xin(?) Tef. oyan-/oyğan-/ozan234, and is noted as oyan- in xiv 4/uh., oyğanin Çağ. xv ff. and Xwar. xım “AH 47; xiv Qutb 1:5, and as oyan- (sometimes spelt uyan-) in Xwnr. xtv Qutb 196; Kom. xiv; Kip. xiit Hou. 35, 16; xiv İd. 26; xv Tuh. 52.9; 6a. s and Osm. fr. xiv onwards; cf. odğur-. Türkü vir ff, Man. M I 6, zı (u:): Uyğ. virt ff. Bud, Sanskrit. suprabuddham: | prabudhyante "they wake up completely! uz odonma:kin odonorlar TT VIII E.36 and 40; 3.0. Suv. 16, 15: Xak. xı er odundi: istayqaza'l-racul min mandmihi “the man woke from his sleep! Kaş. / zoo (odunur, odunma:k, followed by udin- and then verse illustrating odun-): KB odungil ay kökçin "wake up, greybeard! 376: odunmiş kişi "a man who has woken up' 1398; 0.0. 1523, 3951, 4963: xiu(?) At. odun 'wake up! ır. D udun- Refl. f. of u:d-; 'follow, obey', and the like, Always(?) used in association with tapın-. N.o.n.b. Türkü vır ff. Man. iğid nomka uduntumuz tapıntımız erser “if we have followed and worshipped false doctrines” Chuas. 148-9: Uyf. vri ff. Bud. ayamak ağırlamak tapınmak udunmak kilip 'respecting, honouring, worshipping, and obeving' U 11 40, 105; tapin- udun- is very common in T'T' VT and VII; the Bud. texts in USp.; Kuan, etc, D *óten- (öden-) See ötnü:, ótenc. D ötün- a Refl. f. cognate to 2 ötüğ, q.v.; "to submit a statement or request to a superior; to request, pray'; with preceding Ger. in -u:/-ü: sometimes hardly more than “to venture to", Survives, usually for “to request”, in NC Kir. ötün-, Kzx. ótin-: SC Uzb. ütin-: NW Kaz. üten-/ütin- Kk. ótin-: SW Tkm. ótün-. Türkü viri xağanıma: ötüntim ança: ötüntim 'I made reprentations to my xağan, this is what İ represented' T rz, 0.0. do. 14, 15 (ötünç), 25; Ongin 8: vin ff. edgü:ti: ótü:n “pray well' /rkB 19; kul savi: begi:perü: ötü:nü:r “the slave addresses his master” do. $4 (in both cases with parallel clauses containing yalvar-): Man. the refram at the end of each section of Chuas. is ökünürrnen yazukda boşunu ötünürmen 'I repent and beg to be freed from sin”, yükünü ötüntiler “they ventured to pray' TT II ro, 81; sevinç ótüntller'they prayed for(their) favour' do, 83: Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-A M 1 11,2(26tüg): Man. ötünü tekinürmen'[ venture to ask” TT IX54:Chr. ógrek alkış ótündller “they presented their praises” U 7 6, 15-16; a.o. do. 6, 12-13 (2 agi): Bud. inça tép ótündl “this is what he represented' PP 4, 7; 5, 3 etc. ; U III 35, 32; 0.0. U II 16, 21-2 ctc, (2 ötüğ), U II 79, 52; TT IV 4, 14, etc.: Xak. xr ol xa:nka: ötüğ ötündi: rofa'a'l-gissa rld'l-malik "he submitted a petition to the king (etc.)'; its origin is Ótgündi: haká ka-mà sanı"a "he spoke as. he had heard' Kaş. I 199 (ötünü:r, ótünme:k); ötnür yaşı: tapu£ “presents (yuAdi) his duty afresh” 7 376, 12: KB ötündüm munu 'I represented this” 85; ötünse sözüm “if he presents my statement” 529; 0.0. 791 (2 ötüğ), etc.: xın(?) At. aya til törüt madh ótüngil kanı “oh tongue! compose praises and present them, pray! 4r: "ef. ötün- “to pray” zsr: xiv Muh. “arada “to present, submit östün- Rif. 112 (Mel. 29, 1 mis-spelt): Çağ. xv ff. ötüniltimds hardan “to request! San. 61v. 17: Xwar. xır ötün- “to pray, represent 47) 46: XIV ditto Qutb 125. D adna:- Intr. Den. V. fr. adın, “to become different, to change”, later with extended meanings, 'to change colour or flavour, to putrefy', etc. S.i.m.m.l.g. in various forms, usually aynı-, Xak. xi yé:r adna:dı: tagayyarati'l-ard “the land (etc) changed” Kaş, I 288 (adna:r, adna:ma:k): xiu(?) Tef. aynaditto 72: xiv Abg. adna- "to change for the worse; (of meat) to putrefy” R 7 491 (quotns.); Muh. 0) tağayyara İatonuhu “his colour changed” adnartı: (sic, perhaps adna:ttı: intended) Rif. 106 (only): Çağ. xv İT. aynı(mis-spelt eyni-) mutafayyaru' [-hàl şudan “to be changed in condition', also called çaş- and şaş- (mis-spelt reg-, şeş-) San. 56v. 7 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv ayna- “to change (Intrans.) Qutb 6: Kom. xiv “to change charactet" aynı- CCG; Gr. 32 (quotn.). . D adnat- Caus. f. of adna:-, “to change, alter (something)”. Survives in same languages as adna:-. Xak. xı er ndnatfı: tagayyara'(-racul 'ammá hana 'alayhi "the man changed what was on him'; also used of anything that changes what isonit Kaş. I 266 (adnatur, adnatrna:k; sic in MS., not -me:k as in printed text): Çağ.   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 107 
     
   
   
     DIS. xv ff. ayhit- (mis-spelt eyrzit-) Caus. f.; muxbat wa mutagayyaru'l-hál süxtan "to disturb(?), to alter the condition (of something) San. 56v. 23: Xwar. xiv aynat- “to change (Trans.)” Qutb 6. Tris. ADN D atingu: Hap. leg.; Pass. N./A.S. fr. atın-. Xak. xı atınçu: ne:p al-say'u'l-matruh "a thing which is thrown away, discarded” Kaş. I 133. D tdincu: Hap. leg.; Pass. N./A.S. fr. *1dinRefl. f. of r:d-; cf. ıdma:, Xak. xi 1dingu: sac sa'ru'l-raculi'lladi arsala. baKla'l-awl wa kadalika h-ğayrihi "hair which a man lets loose after it has been confined(?)'; also used of other things; and al-sá'iba mina'l-hayawán "an animal which is allowed to go free” is called 1dingu: yılkı: Kaş. 1 133. D itinçü: Hap. leg.; Pass. N./A.S. fr. itin-; cf. itindi:; Xak. xı itinçü: ne:p al-say'u'l-madfü' "a thing which is pushed” Kaş. I 133. D adınçığ/adınsığ Den. N./A. fr. adın. The two words, n.o.a.b., seem to be synonymous and to mean “different” with various shades of meaning 'special, exceptional, various'; used to translate Middle Iranian vizZid 'chosen, elect',see 77 111, note18. Türkü vriradingrg bark . . . adınçı:ğ bediz “special grave goods ... special decoration” (for a tomb) 7 S 12, II N 14: Uyğ. vir ff. Man. adınçığ iduk kapımız “our elect holy father” TT III 18; iki y(e)ğirmi tórlüg adınçığ munadınçığ belğü körtğürdi “he showed twelve special and disturbing signs” M IJI 39, 1-3 (i); adıncığ amrak (gap) “my special beloved(?)' M II8, 3: adınçığ türkçe bagik “another (or “a special”) Turkish hymn' do. ro, 1 (ii): Bud. tep adınçığ erteni yincü “various jewels and pearls! PP 34, 1; o.o. of ter adinçığ do. 71, 5; Kuan 149 (see 2 tep); adınçığ edgü 'specially good” U JV 44, 31; adınçlğ munadınçığ TT V zo, 9; adınçığ 1duk xağan xan (sic) süsi “the army of the elect holy rule TT VII 40, 123-4—Kişide adınsığ “different from (other) men(?)” U Sp. 105b. 7; teprim yarlığın ağınsığ kılmağaymen 'I will do nothing different from my god's commands' do. 106a. 41-3; birök muni: ukmadin adınsığrak adira tutsar 'if, because they do not understand this, they take things for entirely different() TT VI 195: Xak. xı KB erende adınsığ kigide öni “exceptional among men and different from ordinary people” 562; adınsığ bolur barça kilkm sözün “your whole character and language become different” 718; a.o. 777. E adunçsuz in Chuas. I 35 is an error; the correct reading is boşunçsuz, q.v. D itindi: Hap. leg.; Pass. N./A.S. fr. itin-; cf. itinçü:. Xak. xı itindi: ne: al-say'u'i-madfü', "a thing which is pushed” Kaş. 1 140. D adna:ğu: (adına:ğu:) Den. N./A. fr. adın, “other people, others”, N.o.a.b. Uyğ.vırff.Bud. ADR 63 adınağunı ölürmeyin “1 vvill not kill other PE U HI 4, 3; (1 will first seek the right road, and then become a guide) adnağuka “to others” U II s, 13; o.o. U 11 78, 31; 87, 49; TT IV 8, 69 and 72; 10, 10 and 13: Xak. xi KB (do not load your own heavy burdens) adna:Bu:ka “a/d ğayrik "on other people”, (do not starve yourself and satiate) adna:ğu:nı: ğayrah "other people” Kaş. III 68, 1-2; n.m.e. D atanlığ Hap. leg.?, P.N./A. fr. atan. Xak. xı atanlığ er “a man who owns a gelded camel” (ba'ir xaşi) Kaş. 1 148. D otupluk (o:ddupluk) A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. otup; *woodpile' and the like. S.i.s.m.l.g.; in SW Osm. odunluk, Tkm. o:dunlik. Xak. xi otupluk al-muhtatab “voodpile” Kaş. I 162. VUD utunluk A.N. fr. utu:n; “vileness, wickedness'. Pec. to K.B but therein common; syn, with isizlik. Xak. xı KB utunluk kilur bussa kilki siliğ “if a man of good character loses his temper, he behaves wickedly' 335; 0.0. 931, 1155, 2078, 2653, 3780, etc. S adınsığ See adınçığ. Tris. V. ADND uduntur- Hap. leg.?, Caus. f. of udun-. Uyğ. vini ff. Bud. tapintururlar udunturarJar 'they make them worship and obey' (demons) TT VI 266. D otupla:- (o:ddupla:-) Dev. V. fr. otup; "to gather firewood' and the like. S.i.s.m.l. in NE. Uyğ. vri ff. Man. (gap) otuplayu 'collecting firewood' (gap) M 111 28, 2 (iii) (the context confirms this meaning). D atanlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. atan, Xak. xi er atanlandı: "the man owned a gelded camel' (ba'ir xaşi) Kaş. 1 295 (atanJanur, atanlanma:k). Dis. ADR eder “saddle”. S.i.a.m.].g., usually as eyer but also NE ezer, e:r; SE Türki iger; NC e:r; SC Uzb. egar. Xak. xı eder al-sarc *addle' Kaş. II 224, 25 (2 kökleş-), 4 similar o.o.; n.m.e.: xiv Muh. al-sarc eyer Mel. 71, 8; Rif. 173: al-ğaşiya “saddle-housing” eyer ya:pugt: 71, 12 (Rif. 173 uses this phr. to translate al-namraqa tca”l-namöriq 'saddle-pad, saddlepads' (?stc; text has al-ma'rifa sva l-namázin)): Çağ. xv ff. éger ("with -&amp;-") eyer zin ma' násina “saddle” Vel, 68 (quotn.); éger (spelt) ziz, in Ar. sarc San. 108v. 12 (quotn.): Xwar. xtv eyer 'saddle' Qutb 49; eder ditto Nahc. 53, 2: Kip. xin al-sarc eyer Hou. 14, 1: xiv ditto İd. 26: xv ditto Tuh. 19b. 3; sarcu'l-faras eyer Kav. 64, 3, 77, 2: Osm. xiv ff. eyer 'saddle'; c.i.a.p. in phr. TTS II 411; İİİ 274; IV 319. D adrı: Dev. N./A. fr. adir-; 'forked, a forked object'. S.i.a.m.l.g., usually as ayri, but in NE also azrafazr1 R 7 578; Khak. azir; Tuv. adir, Ayru: in Kaş., see below, is 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 108 
     
   
   
     64 cognate but has a different meaning. Xak. xı adrı: al-midrá "a pitchfork', that is (an implement) with which wheat-stalks are tossed (yudrd) to vvinnov them; and anything with two branches (/ahn gu'batdn) is called adri: hence a man is called adrı: butluğ, that is mtnfaricul-faxdayn "having divergent legs! Kaş. 1 126; adrı: yığa:ç şacara lihd şu"batan "a forked tree” 77 331, 21; 8.0. 71 22, 26 (tul-); (misplaced between otra: and adrı:, perhaps an incorporated side-note) ayru: harf wa ma'ndhu in lam an Indeclinable meaning “if not", hence one says muni: tilemese:sen ayru: ne: kerek 'if you do not want this”, fa-má dà tabtagi “then what do you want?' 7 126: KB bu kursi adakı üç adr: turur “this stool has three divergent legs” 771: Caf. xv ff, ayru (spelt) cidda(n) wa münfaşil “extremely", and 'separated' (Sam. 7r. i8 (quotn.), ayrı (with -1) (1) cidda(m) wa munfasil, also pronounced ayru, (2) dü şdxa 'a forked piece of wood', which they put on the necks of criminals; (3) sutur-i dü kühán "a twohumped camel' do. 57r. 23: Kom. xiv 'forked' ayrı CCG; Gr. 32 (quotn.): Kip. xiv ayrı: al-şa"b (sic) wa [-wddi "a side valley(?); a valley': ayru: (vocalized oyuru) al-wádi İd. 27; al-şa"b toa l-wádi ayrı: Bul. 3, 10: xv ğayr “other” (özğe, ayruk) ayrı (ayrik(?) and başka) Tuh. 89b. r3: Osm. xiv ayru 'parting, separation TTS I 62; IV öz, xv “other, different II 85. S otra: See ortu:. D utru: abbreviated Ger. of *utur- used as Adv. or l'ostposition (see v. G, ATG para. 289) meaning 'opposite, facing, against”, with or without an implication of opposition or hostility. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SC and SW. Not to be confused with ötrü, Türkü vırı ff. utru: eki: aylığ kişi: oğlun soku:şmi:ş *] met a two-month-old child” 7rkB 2; utru: yerde: oğrı: soku:şu:p “a thicf met him" do, 16; (a falcon went hunting water-birds; a predatory eagle) utru: . . . kopu:pan barmi:ş "rose to meet him" do. 43: Man. yüzümüz utru “facing us" (there are great difficulties) TT II 6, 6: UyB. vin ben otru: yorr:d[(im] 'I went to meet him" Su. S 3: virt ff. Bud. (then his younger brother . . .) Kilimbi yek utru bardı "advanced against the demon Hidimba' U II 26, 17; él(l)ig begke utru yoriyu keldi "came to meet the king' U III 63, 6-7; (gods, men, demons, whoever they may be) anın utru turdaçı yok “there is no one who can stand up against him” U IV 22, 283; a.o. (obscure) Hiien-ts. 2005-6: Civ, utru kel- 'to come to meet' TT I 96, 112, 175; utrunda . . . keldl "came to meet you” do. 113; Bu-sin tağı uturu borlukin “his vineyard facing the Bu-sın mountain” U Sp. 2, 4: Xak. xi utru: qubdla hull şay” 'opposite, or facing, anything'; one says ol mana: utru: keldi: cd'a. bi-qubalati “he came to meet me” Kaş. I 126; seven o.o. with similar meaning: K B (neither behind, in front, to the right nor the left, belo:w, above nor) utru orun 'facing' r8; DIS. ADR (the moon) yasik birle utru 'in opposition (in the astronomica) sense) to the sun” 137; keldi utru 193; many o.o.: xiti(?) A£ ne iş utru kelse "whatever work comes your way' 369; Tef. utru kel- and such phr. as anlarm utruda “in front of them” 333 (and sec ötrü): Çağ. xvff. utru karşı 'opposite' Vel. gr (quotns.), utru miqábil £a. bar-d bar 'opposite, facing' Sar, 62r. 12 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv utrufuturu “in order to mect (someone); facing (something Dat.)' Qutb zor: Kom. xtv 'opposite, against utru (once spelt ortu) is common CCI; CCG; Gr. 267 (quotns.). D ótrü/ótürü (the latter rare) Ger. of 2 ötürused as Adv. or Postposition (see v. G. ATG, para. 281). As an Adv. begins the sentence and means 'then, thereupon'; as a Postposition folows the .4b. (and Loc.?) and means 'because of, following on'. Survives only in SW Az. ötrü, Osm. ötürü, Tkm. ötri (with Abil.) “because of, concerning'. Not to be confused with utru:. Türkil vrir anta: ötrü: *thereupon' (or 'therefore'?) T 12, 16: vr ff. Man. nede ötrü 'why?' Chnuas. 165, 170; bég törlüğ savdan ötrü “because of (or “by means of”) five kinds of speeches! M III 20, 8 (ii) (mis-spelt sfru); mca. aydukta ötrü “because (the king) had thus spoken' T'T II 8, 53; anta ötrü do. ro, 86—ötrü 'then, tbercupon” do. 8, $5 and 56: Uy£. viri anta: ötrü: Şa, S s: vin ff. Man.-À böş teprilerde ötrü (spelt stru) "because of (or through the intervention of?) the five gods” M 7 8, rg (and 9, 1-2); anta ötrü (spelt utru) do. 9, 3: Chr. ötrü (starting sentence) “then, thereupon' U 16, g, 8, 8, ro, 4: Bud, nizyanılığ otugda ötrü “because of the fucl provided by the passions" U II 9, 28-g—ötrü (in TT VIII C.3 ötrü, do. /1.8 ótró; occasionally ötürü) and anda ötrü are very common: Civ. (starting a sentence) ö:trök (?crasis of Otró ök) “thereupon” TT VIII 1.7: (Xak.) xi(?) At. nepdin ötrü “for the sake of material things” 167; bu bir *aybdin ötrü “because of this single fault' 363: Tef. andın ötrü 'thereupon" 333 (listed as utru); Xwar, xiv ötrü (1) 'thereupon'; Q (with A52) 'after, because of” Qrtb 124: Kip. xv şa”n "for the sake of, because of" ötri (and ilçün) Tuh. 21a. 11 (and, only ötri, 89b. r). D adırt Dev. N, fr. adir- ; 'distinction, difference' (between things Gen). Survives only(?) in SW Osm. ayirt. See adirtla:-, *üdürt. Uyf. vin ff. Man, [gap] adirtin. ukittipiz 'you have explained the difference between 1.” TT IH 118; Bud. (since it is fully elucidated in an extensive commentary in the Weishih-lun, he has not elucidated here) on törlüg edgülernin üç tórlüg tétrü çınğaru sakınmak kolulamaknın adirt “the difference between the ten kinds of good things and the three kinds of deep and searching meditation (Hend.) T'T V əz, 21: Civ. gap) ayığlı savipmi ağdır yok “there is no difference between your [good and] bad speeches! TT I81. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 109 
     
   
   
     DIS adurt 'cheek-pouch'; judging by the analogy of adut, q.v., there is little doubt that this was the original form of avurt, but this form occurs only in one damaged passage. S.i.m.m.l.g. as avurt, a'urt, ort, urt, and the like, Uyğ. vrir ff. Man. (as the poison takes hold) ad[urtà erni yérüp “his cheekpouches and lips split' (his chin and throat decay) TT Hl 16, 14-15: Çağ. xv ff. awurt puri-yi dahan “mouthful”, in Ar. şidq San. 53v. $ (quotn.): Kip. xır al-car"a míina'l-má'! wa ğayrihi “a mouthful of water', etc., oğurt (perhaps miscopying of ovurt) ITou. 38, 18 (after tacarra"a oğurtla:-): xv şidq 'gheck-pouch' owurt Tuh. zob. 7: Osm. x nvurt in various phr. in several texts T! T'S II 70; JH 47; IV 51. D *üdürt Dev. N. fr. üdür- ; cf. adirt. Not itself recorded but see üdürtlüg, Füdürtle:-. 'These words occur in association with similar der. forms of adirt, and the two words must have had comparable meanings, this one *choice, selection", and the like. D adrık Conc. N. fr. adir-; morphologically parallel with adruk but semantically distinct, although some modern forms of the two words are identical; "a grass with divergent (adir-) creeping rhizomes; couch-grass', and the like. Survives in SE "Türki acrikK 'dhub-grass' Shaw 3, 'couch-grass' BŞ 4; SW Osm. ayrik “couch-grass", 'l'he form with -c- suggests a reborrowing fr. Mong., but the word is not traccable as a l.-w. in Mong. See er I 424. Xak. xı adrik 'a plant (zabt) called al-ti “Cynodan daetylon" in Ar. Kaş. 1 98: Çağ, xv ff. acrığ (so spelt) riga-z göydh-t xuşk "the fibre of a dry plant', also called çayır (not an ancient word) Sar. 32r. 20 (quotn.): Oğuz xr ayrik a/-ril; it is a useful (ná'?m) plant; the "Turks call it adrik and the Oğuz change it (-d-) into -y- Kaş. 1 113: Osm. xvin ayruk (spelt) . . . (3) in Rumi the name of a plant which is extremely tender and moist and fattens the cattle that eat it, called in Pe. fariz/ faris *'perennial meadow grass' San. 57r. 20. D adruk Pass. N./A.8. fr. adır-, cf. adrik; basically “divided, separated', hence usually “different, other”, and esp. 'different from, strperíior to (others)'; in comparisons the vvord compared with it is in the ec. in Türkü vir ff... Man, the. Loc. (unless this is a misreading of the 4451) in Uyğ. Bud. and the Abl. elsewhere. S.i.a.m.Lg. except SC; in NE &amp;yrik, azrik, azirik; Khak, azirix; 'Tuv. adırık, elsewhere ayrik.. Cf. adın, önli:, Ozge: Türkü vini. Man. (we do not do what is) teprí yarlığın adruk “different from (i.c. contrary to) God's eommands' T'T 11 6, s; adruk adruk “various (things)! CAuas. 228 (ét-): Uy£. virff. Bud. adruk uzlar "various craftsmen” PP 2, s, adruk adruk do. 2, 7; Sut. 118, 6 (2 tap), 328, 6 a.0.0.— kişide adruk begrek er "a morc distinguished person, superior to (ordinary) people” PP 66, 4-5; alku sigunlarda keyiklerde adrukrak 'superior to all (other) maral deer 8641126 . ADR 65 and stags” U IV 34, 61 —(as for being brought together. by contact) kópül kópüldekller birle bürtüşüp yég adruk tıltağlarka tuş kilür üçün “it is because the mind, when it comes inta contact with what is in the mind, encounters better and superior influences! TT V 24, 71-2; o.o. of yeğ adruk do. 26, 82; TT VII 4o, 135: Xak. xı adruk Aalíma toa ma"nöhd ğayr a word meaning 'other', in Oğuz (sic); the "Purks use adin for "other" (prov.) Kaş. I 98 (this is obviously a muddle; the Oğuz form was ayruk, see below): KB kişide kişi adruki bar telim bu adruk biliğdin ayur bu tilim 'among men there are many who are superior to (other) men; from this superior knowledge my tongue speaks” zor: xın(?) Tef. ayruk 'another'; ayruk ayruk "different" 45: xiv Muh.. bi-ğayr amirihim 'excluding their chief” beğinden ayru:k Mel. 18, 8; Rif. 97; ğayr wa ayda(n) "other, and likewisc' ayruk Hif. 188 (only; the preceding entry al-indlih 'owner! ayruk is an inexplicable error): Çağ. xv fT. ayruk (spelt) (1) bigdna 'strange, stranger'; (2) digar 'other', which they also call dağı and daxi San. s7r. 19: Oğuz xı ayruk lua bi-ma"nd ğayr Kaş. I 113: Xvvar. xi ayrık/ayrı “other” “A/F 12: Kip. xı ğayr ayru:k; ğayrak senden ayruk Tİau, $4, 13 ff. (with other examples): xiv ayruk gayr İd. 27: xv mufarrag 'divided' ayrık (perhaps for adrik) Twh. 34b. 12; Tnafrüq 'separated' ayrlk (sz, with Ràf) do. 48b. ro, ld tarci" "not returning, non-recurrent (?)' ayruk do. 39a. r, gob. r, Zayr ayruk .. ayrik 89b. 13 (and see adrı:): Osm. xiv to xvi (only) ayruğ/ayruk, occasionally ayrık (1) 'other, another'; (2) (usually with Neg. verb) 'again! TT'S 161; I1 82; III 54; IV 60 (common). (D) otruğ 'island'; too old to be a Dev. N. fr 2 otur- 'to sit', as has been suggested, since this form did not evolve fr. olur- until the medieval period; possibly a Den. V. fr. 1 otur-, with the connotation of something cut off from the mainland. Survives in various forms in one or two NE languages and NW Kaz. utrasv, A Dim. f.(?) otraç was current in Kom. and Kip. (/d., Bul, Tuh.), and survives in NW Kar. T., Kore, 442. Most SC, NW, and SW languages use some form of atağ/adağ first noted in Muh. and also noted in Kom. and Kip. (/d., Bul, Tuh.), which it is difficult to connect morphologically with this word. Uy. viii ff. Bud. otrug “island” PP 33, 7; 36, 6; TT V 26, gr, and 94; Suv 211, 19 and 22 (spelt oturuğ), Hüen-ts. 1915; Kuan. 20-1 (erğü): Xak. xı otruğ ai-cazira “island” Kaş, 1 97. etrek Hap. leg. Oğuz xı etrek a/-Aşqar müna”l-rical (of a man) red-haired' Kaş. 7 101. ?D idriğ Hap. leg.; possibly an earlier form of 2 irig; morphologically a Dev. N. in -£, but there is no tracc of Fidir-. Arğu: xridrig al-şay"ul-xaşin "anything hard”, originally irig Kaş. 7 102. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 110 
     
   
   
     66 DIS. ADR D üdreg Hap. leg.; Dev. N./A. fr. üdre:-. Xak. xı üdreg ne:p ku// şay” rd"i", teca Initca'l-zd'id ba"da”l-qilla 'anything thriving, that is which increases after being scarce” Kaş. I 103. D ótrük originally 'crafty, wily'; later 'untruthful, a lie'; presumably Dev. N./A. fr. 2 ötür- but hard to connect semantically. Survives only(?) in NC Kir, Kzx. ötrük/ ötürük. Cf. ipid, ezük, yalBa:n. Oğuz xı ötrük a/-muhtdal 'crafty, wily' Kaş, I 101 (verse): Çağ. xv ff. ötrük (*with -k”) yalan söz "a lie! Vel. go, ötrük darug “he” San. 62r. 14: Kip. xin ai-kadib "a lie' ötrük (also yala:n) Hou. 27, 4 (and see ezük): kadaba “to lie (ötüğle:-(?) also) ótrük sóyle:- (also yala:n söyle:-) do. 36, a: xiv ötrük al-kadió İd. 8. S edrem See erdem, D edrim Den. N. fr. eder; 'saddle-pad'. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. eyrim (often spelt eğrim). Xak, xi md tahta'l-hanwayi'l-sarc mina l-cánibayn "that which is beneath the saddle-tree on both sides” is called edrim:, it is (made of) leather and felt Kaş. I 107: xiv Muh. mixaddatu'l-sarc 'saddle-pad' éyrim Me. 71, 12; Rif. 173; al-cadya ditto. eyrim keçesi: Mel. 78, note 2: Çağ, xv ff. eyrim namad-zin 'saddle-pad'; also called terlik, Nasiri translated it “vhirlpool” Saw. 57r. 27 (whirlpool' is eğrim): Osm. xv ff. eyrim 'saddle-pad' c.i.a.p. T'T.S 7 289; II 414; III 278; İV 321; xviii égrim , . . and, in. Rümi "the pad which they put below a saddle' Sar, 109r. 7. D üdrüm N.S.A. fr. üdür-; 'a single choice; one specially chosen' N.o,a.b. Xak., xr üdrüm xivdru'l-agyá! “the choicest of things” Kag. 1107: KB basa Förüq erdl kişi üdrümi "then there was Farüq, the choicest of men” 53; 0.0. 50, 279, 417, 900, 1689 (habitually rhymes with küdrüm, q.v.). D ötrüm N.S.A. fr. 2 ötür-: 'purgative medicine, purge'. N.o.a.b. Cf. ótürük. Xak. xi ötrüm a/-derod”ı”l-müshil "a purgative medicine'; and a/-şubrum 'spurge, Euphorbia', (a plant with milky sap) is called süt ótrüm; and this is close to the Ar. Kaş. 1 107 (meaning of last clause obscure): KB (another said) ötrüm icürgü kerek “ve must give him a purge to drink' 1059. PU otran Hap. leg.; a dubious word entered, out of alphabetical order, between ürkün and Icgin. xı otran al-sardtwil 'trousers'. 1 heard this in Yağmn: Kaş. 7 108. D adrış Dev. N. fr. adır-, 'parting, parting place”. Survives as ayrış/ayırış onlv(?) in SE Türki BS 12 and NC Kir, Xak. xı ndrış ra's kull tariqayn "the starting point of any two roads' Kaş. 1 96. D üdrüş Hap. leg., Dev. N. fr. üdür-. Xak. xt üdrüş a-mauxdyara bayna”l-aşyd” "a choice between things” Kaş. I 96. Dis. V. ADRD adir- Caus. f. of 1 *ad-; basically “to separate (two things Aec., or something ec., from something else 451)'; hence “to distinguish (between things Acc.) and even "to single out, prefer (something); ef. üdür-, q.v. Became a |-w. in Mong. as ajira- "to part from (people), return home" (Haenisch a) with further developments of meaning (Kot, 124, Haltod 26). S.1.a.m.l.g., usually as ayır-, but NE Khak. azir- ; Tuv. adir-; in NC Kir, Kzx. acira- 'to part from (people)', reborrowed fr. Mong. also occurs. In some texts it is difficult to distinguish between the Perf., etc. of adir- and adirt-, q.v. "Türkü vri ff. Yen. altı: yaşımta: kap adırdım bilinmedim üç écime: ayıta: adirdim (the last word is prob. an error for adrildim) "at the age of six I was parted from my father and did not get to know him; I said farewell(?) and was parted from my three elder brothers! Mal. 32, 16; Man. (in order to release the five gods and) yarukuğ karağ adırğalı "to separate the light and darkness”" Chuas. g-ro: Uyğ. vin ff. Man. ózüg yadığ adırtınız "you separated yourself and strangers” TT III 168; kaltı kişi bu munça savığ adıru bilmeser ukmasar “yst as a man does not know and understand hovv to distinguish betvveen sayings like these” M I 18, 3 (1): Bud. Isiğ özlerinte adirdimiz erser 'if we have separated (living beings) from their lives' TT IV 8, 63; similar phr. do. 16, 13, and 14; (relying on) edgüsin ayığin adira bilmekke 'ability to distinguish between its good and evil" Stc. 297, 9; (ineditating and thinking) adara ukar "he understands how to distinguish" U II 9, 2; TT VI 195 (adınçığ), alkuda adrumis *more distinguished than all others" Hüen-ts. 1902 (dubious, perhaps an error for üdrümiş): Civ. in contracts for the sale of land, USp. 13, 107, ro8, and rog adir- occurs in stock phr. like bu borlukniyp sıçısı ópdüni yerke Karatemürnip borluk adırır "the boundaries of this vineyard; on the east Karatemür's vineyard delimits it” 13, 7; (in a document about slaves of different owners who had married without permission) adırmatın 'without parting them” do. 73, 7: Xak. xı ol edgüni: yavia:ktan adırdı: axtára'l-xayr. mina'l-sarr ta mayyazahu "he preferred the good to the bad and distinguished between them' (adirur, adirma:k, mis-spelt -me:k); in a prov. etli: tirpakli: adırma:s “the flesh and the nail are not (ie. cannot be) separated” (id yufarraq) Kaş. 1 177 (and see üdür-); (I sought wisdom and chose a wise teacher) ózümni adırdım mayyazstu nafsi min bayna'[-nás 'l set myself apart from other pcople' 1] 228, 14: KB adirsa üdürse seçe bilse öz “if a man singles out, selects and can pick' (the right people) 329; üdürdi adırdı kötürdi meni “he selected, singled out and raised me" 385; adirğan yarağlığ yarağsız kişiğ “distinguishing between useful and useless people” 2236; o.o. 797, 3534: xırı(?) Tef. adir-/ayur- (sic) “to part, separate (something Aec., from some— À— a! r. ——— ıı  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 111 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. thing A51/.)" qo, 46: Çağ. xv ff. ayır- (spelt) "Trans. (lit. Caus.) V.; creedd hardan “to part”, also pronounced ayr- Sar. s4v. 11 (quotns.): Xvvar. adir- “to separate' Quib 4; (go and suckle your child and) kaçan kim sütdin adirsap 'when you cease to suckle him” Nahe. 349, 4: Kom. xiv ayır-/ayr- “to separate, to distinguish. between! CCI, CCG; Gr. 33 (quotn.): Kip. xiv ayır- farraqa, "to part, separate' /d. 27: xv ditto. Tu. 28a. rr: Osm. XIV ff. from the earliest times two forms ayirand ir- existed side by side, meaning (r) "to separate (two things, or one frorn another), (2) “to split (something into ,two)'; (3) "to distinguish, single out, choosé'; (4) "to withdraw, relense (someone fr. something) ; ayiris not listed in T'T/$ but occurs in a xiv quotn. (7 355) when it rhymes with 1r-; 1roccurs in all periods down to xix, I 355; Hİ 503; İİİ 345; IV 397, and survives in xx Anat. SDD 774, but is hardly mentioned in XIX dicts, D attur- Caus. f. of at-; with a range of meanings similar to those of at-. S.i.m.m.l.g. Xak. xı ol ok atturdt: "he ordered (sorneone) to shoot (bi-ramy) an arrow, and he shot it": also when he tells him to throw away (afrahahu) something, and he throws it away Kaş, I 217 (atturur, atturma:k): xıı(?) Tef. atdur- "to order to throw' 63: Çağ, xv ff. attur- Caus. f andaázándan "to order to throw, or shoot San. 28r. 18. éder- "to pursue', primarily in the sense of chasing game or pursuing an enemy; hence more vaguely “to follow'. Survives only(?) in NE 'Tuv. eder-; NW Knz., Nog. iyer-: there is a NE Khak. Caus. f. izert-. 'Türkii vii ff. Man. muyfak sığunuğ uvu[tsuz billig üçün éderür ermiş “the maral doe was pursuing the maral stag for sexual rcasons' M I 35, 5-7: Uyğ. vii fL Bud. [gap] éyin éderip *following his wishes! U II 40, ro, a.o. Suv. 16, 7: Xak. xi men anı: ederdim igtafaytuhu — wa'ttaba'tu. itrahu '1 followed him and followed his tracks! Kaş, I 178 (ede:rur, ederme:k; vocalization chaotic, fatha apparently changed to or from darma and also kasra on the a/if); bu rt ol keyikni: ederge:n “this dog habitually chases (tildb) wild game”, also used of a man who habitually demands his rights (yaflub haqqahu) 1 157; edergell: idà xaracta li-taşid Af you go to hunt' I 447, 6; 0.0. HI 11, 4; III 228, iz (6derdim falabtu), K.B (this world is like a shadow) ederse kacar “if you chase it, it flees' 1409; (if your enemy flees, be satisfied) ederme udu “do not chase after him” 2395; o.o. 3536, 3970, 4301: xıı(?) At. biligliğ biliğni edergen bolur “the wise man constantly pursues wisdom' ros; Tef. éder-[ézer- ditto 122: Xwar. xiv éyer"to hunt Qutb. 58: Kip. xv taba'a "to follow' éyer- Tuh. voa. 8. D éttür- Caus. f. of é:t-; with a range of meanings similar to those of 6:t-, S.ia.m.l.g. In Kaş. included in a section for verbs with short initial vowels, which perhaps indicates ADR- 67 that the initial alıf mahsür yd was intended to represent é-, Cf. etit-. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. étdürdimiz 'if we have had constructed'; v.l. for etdimiz in TT IV 6, 46 (6t-): Xak. x1 ol menin r:şı:m é:ttürdi: “he gave orders for putting my affair in order" (bi-irláh amri); and one says ol etük é:ttürdi: "he gave orders for the repair (öf-iylah) of his boot' Kaş, 1 217 (éttürür, €:ttürme:k): xın Tef. aş etdürdl “he had food prepared' 86: Çağ. xv ff. éttürCaus. f.; ba-digari kundnidan “to make someone else make, or do (something)' San. 94r. 22. VU(D) i:ttür- Hap. leg.; between ö:tür- and a:gur- in a section for verbs with long initial vowels; prima facie a Caus. f. in -tür-, but there ís no verb *i:t- with an appropriate meaning; 'to twist, spin' is normally egir-, q.v., which cannot be connected with this word. Xak. xı ol anar bilik i:ttürdi: aftalahu'l-fatila "he made him twist (or spin?) the wick'; also used for anything that is twisted (or spun?) Kaş. 7 267 (İ:ttürür, İ:ttürme:k). S otar- See otgar-. VU 1 otur- Hap. leg, but see otrul-, otruş-. Certainly vvith back vovvels and, if otruğ, q.v., is etymologically connected, with 0-. Xak. xı ol saç oturdi: gagsa'l-sa'r wa'l-Iawb wa nmahwahu "he cut hair", (cut out) clothes and the like Kaş. I :76 (oturur, oturma:k, sic in MS.). S 2 otur- See olur-, *utur- (?utir-) “to meet'; sürvives only in the Ger, utru:, q.v.; the basis of utrun-, utruş-. Became an early [.-w. in Mong. as uçira- "to meet” (Haenisch 157) a form presupposing a "Turkish *utir-. This Mong. verb was subsequently reborrovved as uçra- San, 64v. 11 and s.i.m.m.l.g. as uçra-, ucura-. üdür- “to choose (one of several Zcc.); to part, separate, scatter (things, etc. Acc.), to separate (something ec., fr. something Abl), with or without Opi, see v. G. /AT'G para. 279. Practically syn. vv, adir- (Kaş. uses the same range of words to translate both) and perhaps an 'attenuated' form of it. Survives only(?) in NE Khak. üzür-, same meaning, which fixes the first vowel as ü-, not ó- as normally used to transcribe this verb and its der. f.s. Cf. also sec-. Uy B. vin ff. Man. beş ajuntaki ünlığlarığ biligsiz bi[ligtin] ópl üdürtüpüz 'you separated the mortals in the five states of existence from ignorance! TT III 31-2: Xak. xı ol üdürdi: (so read) ne:pni: ixtdra”l-şay” “he choose the thing” Kaş. 7 177 (üdürür, üdürme:k, follows the entry of adır- and erroneously vocalized edir- in all 3 places); bu: er ol tegme: ne:pni: üdürğe:n “this man is constantly making a choice between things” (yaxayyir bayna'l-agyá^) I 157; (Budrac returned and) alpa:ğutın üdürdi: ixtára abtdlahu 'chose his (best) warriors! 7 144, 8; alp erenni: üdürdürn “1 scattered ( farragtu) (the enemies') warriors! (and twisted their 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 112 
     
   
   
     68 DIS. V. ADRnecks) 7 370, 21; (treat your comrade well and) adın üdürme: “do not choose (/à taxtár) another” /// ir, 3; bógü:ni: üdürdüm “I choose (ixfdrtu) a wise (teacher)” //7 228, 13 (cf. adır-): KB bu iki bedütür üdürmiş kuluğ "these two things make a chosen servant great" 152; kayusin tilese üdürgil birin 'choosc one of them whichever you wish" 244;0.0. 148, 327, 329 (adir-), 2342 (futğa:k), 3534: xın1(?) Tef. üdür- "to choose; to prefer 242 (ödür-), 321 (udur-): Xwar. xiv üdür- "to choose! Qutb 121 (ödür-), 195 (udur-), 202 (üdür-), aranızda bir kaçnı üdrür) “pick out one or two of yourselves" Nate. 365, 13; a.o. 282, 11: Tkm, xır (after a list of Kip. meaninys) ür- (vocalized ewr-) intaxaba'l-gay" mina l-asyá' "to pick one thing out of several" IHou. 36, 1: Osm., xiv (PU) ür- "to choose, pick out”, 3 quotns. fr. one text TTS 7 747. D ötür-, etc. Preliminary note. There are three early verbs of this form, and in. some modern languages verbs of similar form which are Sec. f.s of other verbs like öltür- , it is not always easy to identify the original forms of some of these verbs. D 1 ó:tür- Tlap. leg.?; Caus. f, of ö:-, Xak. xr ol mana: sö:z ö:türdi: dakara li'l-kalám “he reminded me of the statement (etc.)' Kaş. I 267 (ötürür, ó:türme:k). D 2 ötür- Caus. f. of 1 ót- ; with a range of meanings similar to those of 1 ót-; cf, ötğürwhich is more or less synonymous. Survives in NE Kac,, Koib., Sag. as üttür- R 7 1868; Khak. óttir-; in NW Kaz. as ötür-, in SW 'T km. and in xx Anat. as ötür- SD r121 and perhaps üttür- 1439. Xak. xı ol ta:m ótürdi; "he pierced. (fagaba) the wall Kaş, I 176 (ötürür, ötürme:k): Caf. xv!L ötür(s pelt) Caus. f.; gudaránidan "to cause to pass through”, abbreviation of ótger- San. sov. 14 (quotn.; pointing out that Fe. 79 gave the same quotn. with the mis-spelling öfüz-): Kip. xtv ötür - faqaba İd. 8: xv naffada "to transmit, send through" öttür- Tuh. sab, 11: Osm. xiv göğsün ötürdi “he sighed deeply, i.e. forced (the breath) through his chest" TTS 7 s7o. D 3 ötür-/öttür- Caus. f. of 2 öt-. Survives only(?) in 8W Osm. öttür-, similar meaning. Xak. xı ol sıbızğu: (misvocalized) ötürdi: şayyaha br'l-mizmár "he played the flute” Kaş. 1176 (ötürür, ötürme:k), sıbızğu: öttürdi:, same translation; also used of anything from which a sound comes as the result of your action (hadata minhul-şiyöh bi-f'lih) 1 217 (öttürür, öttürme:k). üdre:- "to increase, multiply, flourish', and the like. Survives only(?) in 8W Osm. üre-, same meaning. Xak. xri üdre:di: ne:p Aafura ray"u"l-şay” 'the yield of the thing increased" Kaş. 1273(üdre:r, üdre:me:k): K B(attable— stretch out vour right hand and pronounce the name of God) yégü üdregey “your food supplies «ill increase" 4597. D adart- Caus. f. of *adar-, Intrans. Den. V. f. ada. N.o.a.b, "Türkü virt ff. (if you wenr a clear blue stonc) yat kişi: a:da:rtu: (sic) um a:Z "a stranger cannot endanger you” Tov. 23-4 (ETY lI s8), similar phr. do. 29 (ağu:1uğ): Uyf. vurffi Bud. Sur. 73-4 describes the ten stages through which virtuous beings pass on their way to perfection, in each. of which they remove obstacles and dangers which 'endanger' certain things ( Dat.) eg. belğüğ öçürmekke adartdaçı tıdığ adalarığ “he obstacles and dangers which endanger the suppression of visible signs'. D adirt- Caus. f. of adir- and practically syn. w. it. In some forms difficult to distinguish fr. adir-; both the early occurrences might belong to adir-. Survives, with the same phonetic changes in most of the same languages as adır-, Türkü viui tf. Yen, Mal. 28, s (inilgü:): Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. bilge biligdin adrutagi (?rcad ad(ı)rttaçı) 'distinguished bv wisdom! TT EV 24, öz und 75: (Xak.) xiv Muh. in Mel. 38, 65; Hif. 125 ayırtmak is used to translate a word spelt a/-infad “to (cause to) pierce through, transmit! (cf. 2 ötür-) in Mel. and al-ittigád "to burn' in Rif.; neither meaning seems appropriate and some words mny have fallen out between the Ar. and Turkish entry. Anfaga does not occur in Muh., ittaqada i$. (correctly). translated yalına- (cf. adrıl-). D üdret- Caus. f. of üdre:-. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. üret-, same meaning. Xak, xi ol tava:riğ üdretti: ftammara'l-mál ca nammáhu “he: increased (11end.) the property" Kaş. T 261 (üdretür, üdretmetk). D adril- Pass, f. of adir-; 'to be separated, patted; to break away from (someone Ab, occasionally Əri)”, S.iaam.lg, w. the same phonetic changes as adtr-. Türkü vin "Türkü bodun xani:n bulmayin tavğaçda: növılti: “the "Türkü people, because they had no xan of their own, broke away from China” T 2; kap yorip Élterig Xağanka: adrilmaduk yagilmaduk tegri: Bilge: Xağanda: adrılmalım “ust as father marched and did not break away from Elteriş Xağan or misbehave, let us not break away from the holy Bilge Xafan' Orngin 11: vi ff. Yen. bağım bodunimka: adriltim 'I was parted from my clan and people (by death)” Mal. 27, 7; 0.0. do. 27, 3, 28, 2(9), 3 (7), 6 (adrilu: bardı:), 9; 29, 3; cf. O, Kir.: Man. yaruk tenrilerde adrılti "he was separated from the gods of light” Chuas. 1 16, yarukh karalı kalti adrılğay 'how will the light and darkness be scparated?' do, 170-1: UyB. viri ff. Man.-A sizinte adraltukda berü “since being parted from yoxu” MT 10,5 : Man. adrilmalum “may we not be parted” MH 8, 17 (i): Bud. amrak yeme adrılur “İrtends, too, are parted' PP 78, şı O, Far. ix ff. adriltim ^I have been parted from' (my wifc, children, people, etc. Dat., less often 452) occurs in nearly every funerary inscription; cf. "ürkü vir ff. Yen.: Xak. xı yo:l adrıldı: zafarraqo”l-tariqdn the two roads  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 113 
     
   
   
     TRIS. parted'; also used of two friends (alifayn), or two tceth (simuayn) which have a gap (tazdyal) between them Kaş. / 247 (adrilur, adrılma:k): KB adrilurmen senipdin '[ am parting from you” 1276: xtn(?) Tef, adrıl-, adrul-, azrıl-, ayrıl- “to be separated, parted (from /8/.)” 42, 43, 45; xiv Muh. al-infirdd 'to seclude oneself, be isolated" ayrılmak Mel. 37, 8; Rif. 123: Çağ. xv ff. ayrıl- (s6e/t) Pass. f.; cudd şudan “to be parted' San. s4v. 28 (quotn.): Xwar. xiii ayrulam bizler “et us part” “AF 28: xiv adril- “part” Qutb 4; ayril- do. 6; MN 371; oğul kizlaridin xatunlaridin adribp 'partjng with their sons, daughters, and wives' Naht, 256, 10; a.o. 271, 8: Kip. xiu fáraqa “to forsake” ayrılHou. 42, 21: xiv ayırla- (sic) tafarraqa İd. 27: xv faraga (ayır- and) ayırla- Tuh. 28a. ir (perhaps a Sec. f., not scribal error). VUD otrul- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of 1 otur-. Xak. xı saç otruldi: “the hair (etc.) was cut” (quşşa) Kaş. 1 246 (otrulur, otrulma:k). D üdrül- Pass. f. of üdür-, “to be picked out, chosen, set apart, Survives only(?) in NE Khak. üzüril-, Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-À tüzü üdrülmiş arığ dindarlar “all the picked pure Elect” M 7 28, 16: Man. 77 Iii 31-2 (ópl): Bud. yok çığay bolmaklhk tiltafindin ópi üdrülür “he is separated from the cause of being poor and destitute" T'T V 22, 40-1; 0.0. Pfahl. 6, 1 (6:4), U 11 42, 8 (mis-spelt ótrüf-); Suv. 166, 7; 618, 4: Xak. xı üdrüldi: ne: xuyyíra'l-say! ma muyyiza “the thing was picked out and set apart'; also when a detachment and its men are set apart on one side (iniidzati'l-fi'a tva. ricdluhu cdniba(n)) onc says anın ere:ril: üdrüldi: imidza ricàluhu cániba(n) "his men were set on one side” Kay. 7 "247 (üdrülür, üdrülme:k). D ötrül- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of 3 ötür-. Xak. xı sıbızğu: ötrüldi: “the flute was played' (şayyiha) Kaş. I 246 (ötrülür, ötrülme:k). D utrun- Refl. f. of *utur-; “to oppose, resist, approach' (someone Dat.) N.o.a.b. Türkü vul ff. Man. M İİİ 19, 9 (i) (1 öçeş): Uyğ. virff. Bud. uluğka utrundum totadim öznedim erser “if I have opposed, disparaged or rebelled against the great one” U II 77, 17; 2.0. do. 86, 34; (the five kinds of sin called) utrunmak 'opposition, rebellion" (Chinese texts ni, same meaning (Giles 8,227)) Suv. 134, 16: Civ. sana utrundaçı kişiler “the people who oppose you" TT I şo: Xak. xi ol mapa: utrundt: gdteamani “he opposed me'; and one says yél yığa:çka utrundi: isfaqbalat”l-rihu”l-şacava "the wind blew against the tree' Kaş. 1 251 (utrunur, utrunma:k). D adrış- Recip. f. of adır-, “to part from one another” and the like; usually Intrans., occasionally Trans. S.i.a.m.l.g., vv. the same phonetic changes as adir-, Xak. x1 ola:r i:kl: adrışdı: tafdaraqa”l-rafiqün wa. tazáyalà “the two comrades parted and went separate ways'; in a verse yö:rde: kopa: adrışu:r (the flowers) ADR 69 'spring from the ground and open' (yanfaric) Kaş. [ 233 (adrışu:r, adrigma:k)—ola:r Ikki: ayrışdı: 'azáyaló £a tofarraqd, luğa Jil-dàl "alternative. form. with. -d-' 7 270 (ayrışu:r, ayrışma:k, prob. Oğuz): Çağ. xv ff. ayrış- (-di) ayril- Vel. 41 (quotn.) (San. 55v. 2 spells this word ayrılış- az ham cudád şudan “to be parted from one another', with two quotns, one the same as Vel.'s). VUD otrus- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of 1 otur-, Xak. xı ol mana: kesme: otruşdı: “he helped me to cut (fi cazz) the forelock'; also used of anything of which the excess quantity is cut off with scissors (yugta' ziyddatuhu br'l-miqrád) Kaş. 1 233 (otruşu:r, otruşma:k). D utrus- Recip. f. of *utur-; "to oppose one another; to meet onc another”, Survives only (?) in NE Tel. uduraş- R 7 1714 and forms like uçraş- (San. 64v. 28) which are reborrowings fr. Mong. Xak. xı ol anar utrusdi: qdáwamahu fi amr "he opposed him over something”, and one says ol mana: utruşdi: codcahani “he confronted me” Kaş. I 232 (utruşu:r, utruşma:k), okta:ğalı: utruşu:r “each of them vvas on the point of shooting the other with an arrow' (kdda . . . an yarmi... bi-sahm) II 97, 16. D üdres- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of üdre:- with the connotation of cumulative action. Xak. xı keye:şli:ğ bili: üdresü:r al-tadbir ida hana mulaqqaha(n) bi'l-gürá yazddd — kull yanım husnuhu "when knowledge is fertilized by counsel, its goodness increases every day' Kaş. 1 232, 4; n.m.e. D üdrüs- Co-op. f. of üdür-. Survives only in NE Khak. üzüriş-. Xak. xı ol mana: tavva:r (sic) üdrüşdi: "he helped me to choose (ald taxyir) the wares (etc.)” , also used for competing Kaş. / 234(üdrüşü:r,üdrüşme:k). D ötrüş- Hap. leg.(?); Recip., etc. form of 2 ótür-; cf. ótpürüg-. Xak. xı ola:r bir bi:rke: biti&amp; ötruşdi: “each of them got a letter through (anfada . . . al-kitáb) to his comrade'; its origin (agluhu) is ötğürüşdi:: also used for helping and competing in getting anything through (fi tanfid hull say') Kaş. 1 232 (ötrüşür, ötrüşme:k). Tris. ADR PUD otura: N.o.a.b.; meaning clear, etymology doubtful, perhaps best explained as a Dev. N. fr. 1 otur-, Uyğ. vrit ff. Civ. (in a prescription for a sore throat) bir sunça budani tüz otura yarip oturasin azkiya oyup oy kilip 'split a liquorice root about an inch long into (two) equal parts; hollow one part out a little making a hole in it” (and insert various drugs) H I 146-7; a.o. do. 152. D ötürü: See ötrü:. PUD fterçi Hap. leg.; inexplicable in this spelling; perhaps to be read as édercl Dev. N.Ag. fr. éder-, 'hunter'. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (in 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 114 
     
   
   
     70 TRIS. ADR a list of men regarded as disreputable because they take life) (butchers, poultry keepers, swineherds, fishermen, hunters, trappers, fowlers) iterçi(?) (killers of flying and creeping things) TT IV 8, 57. (See çıvğaçı:.) D adırtıklığ lap. leg.; occurs in Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. in TT VIII G.67 translating a lost Sanskrit word. Presumably P.N./A. fr. a Dev. N. in -k fr. adirt- and more or less synonymous with adırtlığ. D adırtlığ P.N./A. fr. adırt, “possessing discrimination, able to discriminate; distinguishable; detailed'. N.o.a.b. UyB. vitr ff. Man.-A ücódkiadirtlag üdürtlüg yörüglüg tirig uz "a living soul able to discriminate and choose (between good and evil) and provide explanations in the three times' M I 26, 16-17: Bud. anı bizipe adırtlığ yarlıkazun “et him commüunicate it to us in detail” U III 68, 25; ay emdl adırtlığ sózlegil “speak to us now (and explain) in detail” USp. 105b. 8; a.o. TT VI 383 (açuk). D üdürtlüg Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. *üdürt; “able to choose” Uyg. vii ff. Man.-A M I 26, 15-17 (adırtlığ). D adirtsiz Priv. N./A. fr. adirt; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. menlg yürekimte lslg özümte adırtsız könülın olurğil “sit with thoughts inseparable from my heart and soul” U IH 83, 5-7; (they had a form and body) kamağ yalaşuklarda adirtsiz “indistinguishable from (those of) all men” TT VI 356 (with adruksiz v.l. for adirtsiz). D utruki: N./A.S. fr. utru:. Survives only(?) in NE Tuv.udurğu “front” (teeth). Xak.xıK2 kişi utruki aşka sunma eliğ “do not stretch out your hand to food in front of other people” 4130; 0.0. 2716, 4598: xin(?) Tef. yüzi utrukini "vhat is in front of his face” 333. D adruksuz Hap. leg. (?); Priv. N./A. fr. adruk; 'indistinguishable'; synonymous with adirtsiz, q.v. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud, TT VI 356. D ötürük Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. 2 ötür-, *diarrhoea, suffering from diarrhoca'; cf. 1 ötüğ, ótrüm; morpbologically identical, but semantically quite distinct, fr. ötrük. Survives, vv, the same meaning, only in SW xx Anat, ötrük, ötürek, ötürü, ótürük SDD 1120-1, Uyf. viri ff, Civ. ötürük “diarrhoea” H 1 2; ötürke (?error for ötürükke or ötüğke) em "a remedy for diarrhoca” do. 190. D ederliğ P.N./A. fr. eder; s.i.a.m.l.g. with the same phonetic changes as eder. Xak. xr (after ederlik) and with -ğ (ic. ederlig) şöhibu Hsarc 'owning a saddle! Kaş. I 151. D ederlik A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. eder; 'saddletree”, S.i.s.m.l.g. Xak. xı ederlik “the piece of wood (a/-xaşab) on which the saddle is placed' Kaş. I 151. S edremliğ See erdemlig. D üdründi: Pass. N./A.S. fr. Refl. f. of üdür-; 'chosen, choice, select”. Survives only(?) in SW Osm, öründüyöründi Red. 247. Xak, xı üdründl: ne: “a choice (al-muxtör) thing) Kaş. I 145: KH bayat kullarında ep üdründüsi “the choicest of the servants of God” 2598: xin(?) KBPP yalavaçlarda üdründüsi “the choicest of the Prophets” 6: Xwar. xiv tenrinin üdründi kuh “the chosen servant of God” Nate. 90, 12; xalayıqlarnın mallarının üdründüsi “the choicest of the people's pronerty" do. 250, 4: Osm. xiv ff. öründü (sic?) "chosen, select", c.i.,a.p. down to xvir TTS 1 747; ll 955; 111 733; İV Ros: xvii öründü (spelt) in Rümi, intixdb 'choosing, choice! San. 71v. 22. D utrunuk llap. leg.; Pass. N./A.S. fr. utrun-, Uyjf. vir ff. Civ. (gap) a:y te:pri ya:rokin utrunuk €rtürmiş ke:re:k “he must spend his time exposed to the moonlight" TT VHI I.18. Tris. V. ATfRD adirtla:- Den. V. fr. adirt; 'to distinguish between (two things ee.) with various extended meanings later. Survives only(?) in NW Kar. artla- R I 316; Krim ayırtla- R 7 32; and SW Osm. ayirtla-. Considering the constant parallelism between adir- and üdürand their respective der. f.s, a parallel form *üdürtle:- must have existed but only its SW Osm. form üyürtle- seems to be noted. It still survives in Rep. Turkish as öğürtle(öyürtle-) but in xx Anat. where the recorded forms are örtle- SDD r, r16; üyükle-, üyütle- r, 447; üBürtie- 1707; ügütle- 1708, initial ü- prevails. Uyğ. viir ff. Bud. Sanskrit vicayo 'investigation' nom a:tırtla:ma:k TT VIII A.21; Sanskrit bhinnegu “in the divided' a:itirtla:mnigla:rda: do. F.4 (in tbese texts -t- prob. pronounced -d-); edğü ayığ kılınçığ adırtlağalı uyur “he can distinguish between good and bad deeds' U III 5, 12-13; (svisdom) edgüll ayığlı nomlarığ çınğarıp adırtlap “investigating good and bad doctrines and distinguishing between them" TT V 24, 76; a.o. Suv. 302, iz: Civ. ot küyürdl altunu£ adırtlağuluk belgü bar "there is an indication of refining fire-smelted gold” TT I 70-1: (Xak.) xiv Muh.(?) ixtára “to choose' (özle:-, in margin of one MS.) üyürtle- Mel. zz, 3 (perhaps a SW gloss): Çağ. xv İT. ayirtla- (spelt) az ham cudd hardan “to separate from one another”, and metaph. tafrig wa tamyix-t nik u bad “to distinguish and discriminate between good and bad" San. ssr. 6: Osm. xiv ff. ayirtla- 'to choose, select; refine (metal); investigate (a matter), settle (u dispute); weed, clean (a fteld)" c.i.a.p. T TS 7 58; II 78; III 52; IV 58; once (xiv) ayıtlaİ sg (?mis-spelling)--üyürtle-, sometimes spelt ügürtle- "to pick out, choose, select”, in all periods 7 742; II 949; III 727; IV 801: xvırı üyürtle- intíxáb “to choose! San. 92r. 13. D *üdürtle:- See adirtla:-.    
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 115 
     
   
   
     TRIS. D ederle:- Den. V. fr. edet; 'to saddle (a horse, etc. Aec.)'. S.i.a.m.l.g. w. same phonetic changes as eder. Xak. xr er at ederle:dl: “the man saddled (asraca) the horse' Kaş, / 300 (ederle:r, ederle:me:k): xiv Muh. asraca'l-dábba eyerle:- Mel, 22, 7; Rif. 103 (in margin ederle:-); . . . ísráchá “to saddle it” eyerlemek (spelt -ma in error) Mel. 39, 4; Rif. 126: Xwar. xin eyerle- ditto ' Ali ss: xiv ederle- ditto Qutb 18: Kip. xirr asraca min isrdcvl-faras eyerle:- (misvocalized) Hou. 36, 14: xiv eyerle- asraca İd. 26: xv ditto Kav. 37, 1; Tuh. 56b. 1 and 3. D utru:lan- Rcfl. Den, V, fr.Aatru:, Survives only(?) in NE Khak., 'l'uv. udurlan-, but the basic and Recip. f.s s.i.s.m.lg. Xak. xr ol agar utru:landı: vwácahahu “he confronted him” Kaş. I 296 (utrulanur, utrulanma:k, sic). Dis. ADS D atsız (a:d8ız) Priv. N./A. fr. 1 a:t; 'nameless', used particularly in the phr. atsiz erpe:k 'nameless (i.e. ring) finger'. S.i.a.m.l.g. In some contexts, e.g. the Proper Name Atsiz, it is hard to decide whether this is the xvord concerned or the parallel Priv. N./A. fr. 2 at "horseless” (first noted in Kip. xtıt Hou. 52, 3). Uyğ. vurfi Bud. TT V 8, ss (ictirti:): (Xak.) xiv Muh. al-banşar "the ring finger! atsız Mel. 47, 12 (mis-spelt ana:s:); Rif. 141 (mis-spelt afa:sı:): Çağ. xv ff. atsız bi-ndm 'nameless' (San, 3ov. 15 (with a note on the P.N. Atsız): Kip. xın al-banşar adsız parmak (54) Hou. 20, 15: xiv a(şız parmak (ba) ditto İd. 12 (after orta: parmak): xv al-banşar adsız parmak (bá) Kav. 61, 4: Osm. xv-xvi adsız “of evil repute' in three texts TTS 14; IV 4. D edsiz Hap. leg.; Priv. N./A. fr. ed. Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A (just as craftsmen (uzlar) cannot use) edsiz nep 'an unserviceable thing' (i.e. as a raw material) M T 16, 14. D etsiz Priv. N./A. fr. et; 'fleshless, lean'. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. Xak. xi KB (if you sec the face of a shameless man) etsiz söpük 'it is a bone with no flesh on it" 2206: Çağ. xv ft. in San. 3ov. etsiz bi-fugt 'fleshless mentioned as an alternative form of the I.N. Atsız, D otsuz Priv. N./A, fr. 2 ot; “vithout grass or vegetation'. S.i.s.m.l. Türkü vri ff. otsu:z suvsu:z kaltı: uyun *how can I get on without grass or water?' IrkB 4s: Üyğ. vin ff. Civ, otsuz [gap] TT VII 17, 7. D ödsüz Priv. N./A. fr. ö:d, 'timeless; untimely, premature'. N.o.a.b. Türkü vırr ff. Man. (if you lawlessly sin) ödsüzke “against the Timeless One” (i.e. Zurvan) TT II 6, 8: Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. ödsüz kolusuz ölmez "he does not die prematurely (Hend.) TT VI 348-9: Xak. xı KB kişi ödsüz ölmez 2288; (death) busugdin çıkar teg çıkar ódsüzün 'comes unexpectedly, like (someone) coming out of an ambush' 4826, ADS n Dis. V. ADSD atsa:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of at-. Xak. xi 01 ok atsa:di: 'he wished to shoot (ramy) an arrow' Kaş. 1 275 (atsa:r, atsa:ma:k). D etse:- Hap. leg.; Desid. Den. V. fr. et. Xak. xı er etse:di: garima' l-racul ild l-lahm "the man craved for meat! Kaş. T 27$ (etse:r, etse:me:k). D idsa:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of 1:d-. Xak. xi ol kuülin mapa: 1dsa:di: “he wished to send (yab'at) his slave to me' Kaş. I 276 (1dsa:r, 1dsa:ma:k). : D itse:- lIap. leg.; Desid. f. of it-. Xak. xt ol ta:şığ itse:di: “he wished to move(yudah-ric) the stone" Kaş, 7276 (tse:r, Itserme:k), D ötse:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of 1 6t-. Xak, xı ol ü:ttin ötse:di: “he wished to get out (yaxruc) of the hole'; also used of (wishing to) pass through anything (fi nufüd min kull gay") Kaş. I 276 (ötse:r, otse:me:k). D etset- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of etse:-, Xak. xı ol meni: etsetti: agramani 1la”1-lahm sea şahhdni "he made me crave for meat and whetted my appetite! Kaş. I 262 (etsetür, etsetme:k). D utsuk- Emphatic Pass. f. of ut-; 'to be defeated by (someone 2az.), to lose at gambling". N.o.a.b. Uyğ. virrff. Man. bu yok tózlüg ópke nızvanı éyin utsukup “being overcome by this passion of anger rooted in nothingness" TT II ız, 80-3: Bud. adinlarka utsukmaksiz 'unconquerable by others" U 77 51,6; 0.0. U II 58, 3 (2); Hüen-ts. 1802: Xuk. xı ol yarma:kın utsukti: gzmira daráhim fi'l-la'ib “he lost his money at gambling'; also of losing other things; prov. (utsuka:r yuğlab “he is defeated" Kaş. / 242 (utsuka:r, utsukma:k). 'Tris. ADS D udisik Intrans. Dev. N. fr. udt:-; 'sleep'. N.o.a.b. Türkü vırr (when I heard this news) tün udısı:kım kelmedi: 'sleep did not come to me at night” T rz same phr. but with udisikim 7' 22. C ata:sa:ğu:n 'physician'; compound of ata: “father” and sa:ğu:n a title(?). N.o.a.b. Xak. xı (after ata:) ata:sa:ğu:n a/-tabib 'physician' Kaş. 1 86, s; (after sağun) “and the Turkish physician (al-tabibu'l-turki) is called ata:sağun I 403, 5. D adasiz Priv. N./A. fr. ada:; 'free from danger, in safety'. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Man.A igsizin adasızın turalım “may we remain free from illness and danger” M 728, 27; Man. (ad)asızın tudasızın “free from danger M III 36, 2 (ii) (and M I 31, 1 (i): Bud. adasız uzun yasamak “a long life free from danger TT VII 4o, 129; adasız tudasiz PP 33, 6; Suv. 192, r, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 116 
     
   
   
     72 TRIS. D atasız Priv. N./A. fr. ata:; 'fatherless'. N.o.a.b. but prob. s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xi K B 6055 (etçi:). D idi:siz Priv. N/A. fr. 1 idi:; “vithout a master; ownerless'. Survives only(?) in NC Kir. e:siz, Kzx. iyesiz, and SW Osm. where it is now spelt ıssız. Türkü vri (may the country which our ancestors held) idisiz kalmazu:n (v. bolmazu:n) “not remain (v.l. become) ownerless' 7 E ig, H E 16; 7 E zo, II E 17: Osm. xiv and xv isiz/isiz 'ownerless, desolate” in several texts; also A.N.s isizlik and ısızlık T T'S I 390; /7 sag, III 384. Dis. ADS D adas/addas N. of Assn. fr. 1 a:t (a:d). Abdülkadir İnan in Türk Dili, Belleten 3rd Series, No 1, pp. 41 ff. argued that the original meaning was 'friend, comrade', and that 'namesake' was a later, secondary meaning. 'This is etymologically impossible, but the meaning 'comrade' is so prevalent in the early period as to suggest that in this context 1 a:t meant “clan (rather than personal) name”, so that addas meant primarily 'fellow clansman'; cf. kadas. S.i.a.m.l.g. See Doerfer 11 437. "Türkü vı ff. Man. yavlak €ş tuş adaş kadaş “evil comrades (Hend.) and kinsmen (Hend.)” Chuas. 197-8: Uyğ. vil ff, Bud. Sanskrit. sahdyatd 'comradeship' és a:daş bolma:k TT VIII B.4; és adaş “comrades” is the term used for the hare, the monkey, and the beaver in the Hare Jàátaka, U JV 44ff., 'kinsman' would not here be strictly appropriate; on p. 46 adaş occurs twice, sz and 66, once in adaş öş öz, once in eş adaş 69; and twice in adaş böşük (q.v.) 55 and 64, while és appears once by itself, 48 and once in és tuş sg, in all cases except adaş böşük the obvious meaning is “comrade” or the like: O. Kir. ix ff. Mal. 11, 8 (andlığ): Xak. xi adaş a/-xidn "friend, comrade, contemporary' Kaş. I 61: KB adaş koldaş erdes tutundi kalın “he acquired a crowd of friends and comrades (double Hend.)” 1697; o.o. 317, 502, 524, 2276, 3485, 4542, often in association with kadas: xıin(?) Tef. attaş 'namesake' 62 (II at): xiv Afüuh.(?) müdhid sva müscdxi “ally, brother” aya:ş (error for ata:ş or ada:ş) Rif. 145 (only): Çağ. xv ff. adaş hamnám 'namesake' San. 33r. 23 (quotns.): X war. xiv adaş 'friend' Qerb 3: Kom. xiv. “namesake” ataş CCG; Gr. D atış N.Ac. fr. at-. S.i.s.m.l. Xak. xr atış al-murdmat "throwing, or shooting, at one another” (also a masculine P.N.) Kaş. I 60: Çağ. xv ff. atış tutuş syn. w. atar tutar San. 3ov. 26 (quotn.; the latter, not an early phr., is translated in 30v. 8 “an exchange of abuse and blows; military science; the art of war"). idis “cup, vessel', and the like. Survives as idis in some NE languages, including Khak. and Tuv.; NC Kir. and SC Uzb. Türkü vr ff. uzu:nto:nlu:ğ idi:gi:Én. ayakı:n kodu:pan barmi:ş “a woman left behind her her ADS cup and bowl and went away' IrkB 42 a.0.0.: Uyf. vii ff. Bud. (the minds, thoughts, and bodies of mankind) burxanlarni) nom idişi tétir “arc called the vessels of the doctrine of the Buddhas' TT VI 200-1; kara idis (so read) éligipde kótürüp 'carrying a black cup in your hand” U Sp. iosb. 4; a.o. Suv. 28, ro: Civ. altun küzeç erser ornağlığ idis ol 'as for the gold jug, it is a vessel on a solid base' TT 7 189: Xak. xr idis (sic) al-qadah “cup” Kaş. 1 61 (and see Oğuz), 1vrik idis tizildr: “the pitcher and cups (al-aqdáh) were arranged! 7/7 131, 22; a.o. III 232, 27 (tolu:; in both these places. spelt dig): xiv Rbg. idis “cup” R 7 8sg (quotns): Muh. atáfu'l-bayt "household goods, utensils” 1:yiş Mel. 68, 11; Rif. 168: Çağ. xv fL. idiş zarf 'cup!. Vel. 61 (quotn.); İdiş zurüf wa aai 'cups and vessels' Sam. 97r. 16 (quotn.): Yağma:, Tuxsr, Yeme:k, Oğuz xı idis (sic) is used (in these languages) for kull qidr at) tator ate ind" “any earthenware pot or small vessel or vase' Kaş. I 161: Xwar. xiv idis (sic) “cup” Qutb 57. 2 D itis N.Ac. fr. it-. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. and xx Anat. SDD Sor. Xak. xı itiş al-mudáfa'a bayna” tnayn bi'l-yad "of two people, pushing one another with their hands' Kaş. I 61.. D ödüş Hap. leg.; Den. N. fr. ö:d, the context suggests a meaning of 'a period of 24 hours'. Türkü vir tünli: künli: yeti: ödüşke: suvsız keçdim '[ made mv way without water for a period of seven days and nights' II SE. D ötüş N.Ac. fr. 1 öt-. Survives in SC Uzb. ütiş, and perhaps, somewhat distorted, in some NE languages. Uy£f. vit ff. Civ. (the root of his tongue, his throat, his lungs, his gullet) su:v özl ö:tüş (spelt ódz;) a:lta:çı ta:marla:rı “his internal passages lit. “veins”” which allow the passage of water and (other) liquids' TT VII Ti: Xak. xi ötüş (bi-igmámi'l-alif 'with front vowels") used when boys sit in a circle, and one of them bumps (yuqammis) against the boy next to him and says ötüş ötüş, that is "add 'anka'l-qams ild man fi canbih "pass on the bump to the boy next to you” Kaş. 7 6o (listed as a noun, but prob. Imperat. of the Recip. f. of 1 ót-). Dis. V. ADSD adış- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of 1 *ad-. Xak. xı er ada:kt: adışdı: fafrica'l-racul bi-riclayhi “the man straddled his legs” also used of any things which are separated (infaraca) one from the other Kaş. 7 181 (adisu:r, adışma:k). D atış- Recip. f. of at- ; with a range of meanings similar to those of at-. Xak. xr ol menip birle: ok atışdı: “he competed with me in shooting (fi'l-ramy) arrows'; also used of throwing (/? tarh) something Kaş. I: 18o (atisur, atışma:k): Çağ. xv ff. atış- Recip. £. andáxtan "to throw or shoot, stones, arrows,   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 117 
     
   
   
     DIS. or spears at one another” San. 28r. 16: Osm. XIV atış- “to sboot (arrows) at one another” TTS I sz. D etiş- (édig-) Recip. f. of 6:t- , «ith a range of meanings similar to those of é:t-. Survives in NE Khak. idis- Has. $6 and SW Osm. edis-. Xak. xı ola:r için ö:tişdi:le:r taşdlahü fimd baynahum "they reached a settlement on matters of mutual interest” Kaş. I 76, 6 (için), n.m.e.: Çağ, xv ff. €tiş- (with 6-) Recip. f.; bà yak-digar hari hardan "to do something together! San. 94r. 21. D 1disg- Recip. f. of t:d-; n.odt.b, Xak. xı ol mapa: ertüt ıdışdı: /ddani wa inni ayda(n) ahdaytuhu şay" “he gave me a present and 1, too, gave him something'; also used of anything when you compete with sorneone else in giving it (fi mqihi) Kaş. I 182 (idişu:r, 1disma:k): Kip. xv elçi keleci iyişip 'sending envoys and messengers to one another' "Golden Horde letter dated” A.D. 1428 4, 6, 14 2.0.0. (Kurat, Altın Ordu, Kirim ve Türhistan Hanlarına Ait Yarlık te. Bitikler, İstanbul, 1940, p. 8). D itis- Recip. f. of it-; "to push one another”, hence later “to quarrcl'. S.1,s.m.l. Xak. xi ol ant birle: 1tigdi: dafa'a ma'ahu ;he pushed against him”, also used of helping or competing in pushing somcthing (fi mudáfa'a şay)) Kaş, I 180 (itişü:r, itişme:k): Çağ. xv ff. itiş(with i- 2) Recip. f.; ham-digar-rá bd dast afgandan “to knock one another down with the hands' San. 94r. 2t. D udiş- C-op., ctc. £. of udsi-, S152 m.l.g. as uyuş- (NE Khak. uzus-) except SE, where uyuş- (Şarring 322) is a Sec. f. of uruş-. Xak, xı ol menin birle: udişdi: bárani fi'l-nawm ayyuna amwam “he competed with me in slecping ta see which of us slept best”, and one says ada:k udigdu xadirati'l-ríicl “the leg went to sleep, became numb'; and one says yuğrut udisdi: £arawwaba'l-laban da xatara “the milk (yoğurt) curdled and clotted” Kaş. 7 181 (udisu:r, udişma:k): Osm. xvi ff. uyuş- "to clot, coagulate' in several texts TTS II gaz, III 724: xvi uyus- (spelt, with -mek in error) in Rümi, afsurda gudan-i xün dar “udu "of blood, to clot in a limb", hence they say .. uyuş- pd xuftan 'of a leg, to ga to sleep', Ar. xadira San. gar. 12. D udus- Recip. f. of u:d- ; survives as Uyuş'to come to a mutual understanding, unite" in SE Türki: NC Kir. and SW Osm. 'l'he only supposed early occurrence is dubious, see udusur-, Çağ. xv ff. uyuş- Recip. f.; hücüm kardan wa mütdba"at-i yak-digar "amüdan “to crowd together and follow one another" Sar. 89v. zo: Osm. xvi uyug- "to reach a mutual understanding! T 7S 7/7 724. D utus- Recip. f. of ut-. Survives in NW Kaz. utuş- R 7 1325 and SW xx Anat. uduş- SƏD 1413. Xak. x1 ol menip birle: yarma:k utugdl qg4marani wa xataroni fpl-dirham ADZ 73 'he gambled and betted with me for money (etc.)” Kaş, I 18o (utuşur, utuşma:k). D ötüş- Recip. f. of 1 öt-. See ötüş. Tris. ADŞ D idişçi: N.Ag. fr. fdiş. N.o.a.b. Xak. xr KB (the steward must supervise) idisci töşekçi yeme aşçıka “the cupbearer, bedmaker, and cook' 2557; a.0. 4047. D adaşlık A.N. fr. adaş. Survives in SVV Osm. adaşlık "having the same name” Sami 25. Xak, xı adaşlık a/-şaddqa 'friendship' Kaş. I 149; a.0. İ 149, 3 (translated a/mutadda' friendship). D idişliğ P.N./A. fr. idiş. Survives in NE Khak. idistig. Xak. xı K idişlig suvuğ “the water in the cup” 6045, 6057, 6060, 6062. Tris. V. ADSD uduşur- Caus. f. of uduş-. N.o.a.b. The word concerned has hitherto been misunderstood; ""homsen connected it with utru: and translated it "in the encounter'; Atalay derived it directly from uduş- wbich is morphologically difficult; Malov followed him. But to take it as a Ger. of the Caus. f. of udug- gives it exactly the right sense. As such, the word is Hap. leg. but the parallel Caus. f. in -tursurvives as uyuştir- in SC Uzb. and prob. elsewhere. Türkü vir: bir eri£ oku:n urti: eki: eriğ udusuru: sancti: “he shot one man with an arrow and speared two men sending them onc after the other' 7 E 36; similar phr. 1Nz. Dis, ADZ atız survives meaning “a small field” and the like in SE Türki atsz Sam 3; étiz BS 581; Tar. etiz R 7 843: NC Kzx. atız R I 46o. Became a First Period l-w. in Mong. as atar "uncultivated ground”. Xak. xi atiz kull şutba mína'l ard bayna'l-'arimayn "any strip of land between two dykes” Xaş. I 54. édiz/édi:z 'high, lofty'. Survives in NE 'Tel., Tub. e:s R 7 87o: SE Türki igiz Sla: 37; egiz/igiz Jarring 123; NC Kir. egiz Cf. yüksek, Uyğ. viuirff. Bud. yüksek édiz orunluktin “from his lofty (Hend.) throne' PP 61, 5; (a fire) 6diz küyer örtenür 'blazes (ITend.) high” U 77 8, 27; o.o. U III 33, 14 (étig); Hüen-ts. 2091; Suv. 620, 16 (kaltk): Civ. (earth mounted on earth) édiz bolti “hecame high” . . . édiz turur "is high' TT I 46—7: Xak. xı ediz kulf murtafi" "anything high” of land, etc.: ediz ta:ğ cabal müm" “an inaccessible mountain' Kaş. I 55; edi:z a/-murtafi', of anything 7 122: KB ay sirrka yakın ay kópülke ediz "oh (God) near to the secret and high above the mind' 20; (if the moon is full and) ağsa ediz 'rises high” 733; ediz 'arg “the lofty throne' 4776: xin(?) 4: ediz 'lofty' 60, 76; sımaktın edizrek 'higher than Arcturus” 49: xiv Rbg. édiz 'high' R 7 859 (described as Çağ.): Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 19. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 118 
     
   
   
     74 DIS. C etöz (often written as two words et öz, but not declined separately) lit. 'flesh spirit', but used as a technical term in Bud. (and Man.) scriptures for 'a live body' as opposed to a corpse or a spirit; very common in early texts, but not adopted for Moslem terminology and not surviving later than about xiv. Uy£. viti ff. Man. etóz ertimlikin sakınıp 'meditating on the transitoriness of the body' TT III 137: Bud. bu suyluğ etözde ozalım “may we escape from this sinful body” PP şı, 8, etöz kodup adın alunka barsar “if he lays dovvn this body and goes to another state of existence" U III 43, 12; numerous o.o., U IV 28, ro, Suv. 446, 15; 613, 19: TT VIII (spelt etóz, e:tóz, etüz, e:tüz), etc.: Civ. [map] ka:yınturup icse:r etózke: [gap] “if one boils . . . and drinks it, [it is good?] for the body' TT VIII M.30; o.o. H II 24, 53, and 61: Xak. xı KB (anger and bad temper are bad for a man; with these two) tutçı emper etóz "the body is in constant pain” 332; 0.0. 990 (yavrıt-), 99r, 1194, 1438, etc, (common):. xi(7). At. see ] ö:z: xiv Muh.(?) al-nafs “the self(?)” etó:z Rif. 139 (only, see 1 ö:z): Kom. xiv söz etiz (sic) bolup turur 'the word became flesh' CCG; Gr. uduz “the itch' and other skin diseases. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. uyuz. Cf. kotur, Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. TT VI 443 (órmen): Xak. xr uduz a/-carab 'itch, scab” Kaş. I 54 (prov.); six 0.o., in three udu:z: xiv Muh.(?) al-carab (kotur, v.İ. in one MS.) u:yuz Mel.65, 1: Cap. xv ff. uyuz (spelt) 'illat-i carab “a disease, itch” San. 92v. 27. ottuz (ottoz) 'thirty'. For the double -ttwhicb was the original pronunciation but is seldom written, see Clauson, "Phe Turkish Numerals', RAS, April 1959. S.i.a.m.l.g., usually as otuz, Türkü vir (Kül Tegin in that battle) otu:z yaşayu:r ertl: “vas thirty years of age” I N 2; otuz 1I E 28; Iİ S 2: Uyğ. viri ff. Man. otuz M III 25, 4 (v); TT 111 18, page number: Bud. otuz is commonin TT VII: Civ. otoz, consistently so spelt, is common in TT VIII (and USp.): Xak. xı (in a Section headed bàb fa'"l) ottuz yarma:k talátüna dirham 'thirtv silver coins (etc.)'. "his word is alsp used for 'three'; 1 heard them say at (VU) Kinüt in Yağma: ottuz içelim meaning "let us have three drinks', although the word means 'thirty'; and in my presence they drank three times three (verse) Kaş. / 142: xiti(?) Tef. otuz 'thirty' 240: xiv AMuh. talátüna otu:z Mel. 82, 4; Rif. 187: Çağ. xv ff. otuz “the number thirty” San. 62v. ro (quotn.) (this is not one of the numerals with double consonants discussed in zov. 9 ff): Kom. xiv “thirty” otuz CCG; Gr.: Kap. xim. talátin otuz IIou. 22, 10: xiv ditto İd. 15; Bul. 12, 12; Xv ditto Kar. 39, 5; 65, 8; Tuh. 6ob. g. Dis. V. ADZPUD atız- N.o.a.b.: “to play” (a musical instrument): as the first letter in one place looks like a- and in the other é-/i-/1- its origin ADZ is doubtful, but perhaps a Caus. f. of é:tis the likeliest. Uyğ. viti ff. Bud. (bring me a lute and) eligim atızu(?) ağzım yırlayu öz igideyin “1 will support myself by playing it with my hand and singing with my mouth' PP 7o, 1-2; ellgl kopuz atızu(?) ağzı yirlayu olurdi *he sat, his hand playing the lute and his mouth singing' do. 71, 1-2. D uduz- Caus. f. of u:d-; “to lead, or conduct (someone Zcc.). N.o.a.b. Türkü vir yeti: yüz kişi:g uduzığma: uluğu: şad erti: “their chief, who led the yoo men, was a şad” T 5; kóplüpce: uduz 'lead them as you think best” T rş: Uyf. vii ff. Chr. (an angel appeared and) uduzup andin 'leading them from there” U I 9, 7: Bud. uduzup 'leading him” PP 64, 2; 70, 4; 0.0. U 11 33, 9; U HI 16, zo: yércileyür uduzur erdi "he guided and led” Hüen-ts. 1938. D utuz- Caus. f. in -Z- (cf. atiz-) fr. ut-. Survives only in SW xx Anat, utuz-/ütüzSDD 1423, 1440. Like the later Caus. fs, utğuz- first noted in Çağ. Vel. 92; Sam. 60v. 11 and surviving in SE, SC, and utturfirst noted in Kip. Bul. 67r. 7 and surviving in NE, NW, and SW xx Anat. ütür-, it has the unusual Caus. meaning of 'to allow others to beat oncself, to lose'. Türkü vir ff. (a gambler) oğli:n kisi:si:n utu:zmaduk “did not lose his son and wife' IrkB 29 (and see ut-): Uyğ. viu ff. Bud. Sanskrit ganábáriharena "by losing the community" kuvra:ğığ utuzma:k üze: TT VIII C.s: Çağ, xv ff. utuz- (and utkuz-, -di, etc.) utul-, ya'rí yenil-, elinde olanın aldır- "to be beaten, to lose what you have in hand” Vel. g2 (San. sov. 18 erroneously corrected utuz- in one quotn. to otur- "to sit”): Kip. xv xasira "to lose" Tuh. 15a. 2. Tris. ADZ D édizlik A.N. fr. édiz. N.o.a.b. Xak. xi edizlik ai-irtifà' “height, elevation' Kaş. I 152: KB edizlik tiledi süzük càn turuğ *his pure soul sought the heavenly height as his resting place" rşzr: xiv Röğ.(?) edizlik (spelt édiz/ik) R I 859 (listed as Çağ. but prob. Rbg.). DC etözlüğ P.N./A. fr. etóz. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vii &amp;. Man. üküş ftörlüğl özütlüğ etözlük (sic in error) [gap] “many kinds of deccased and still living(?) . . ” M III 36, 7 (iii) (M I şı, 6 (i): Xak. xi KB etözlüğ kişike kereki bu ol “this is what a human being needs' 1023. D otuza:r (ottuza:r) Distributive f. of ottuz; 'thirty each, thirty at a time”, Survives in SW Osm. Uyğ- vır ff. Civ. (beginning with that sign of the zodiac) otuza:r sa:n bér 'give them thirty numbers(?) each' TT VIII L.20; otuzar tenbln sücügni bir kap “a wine skin containing thirty £enbin of wine" USp. 10, 8. Tris. V. ADZD atızla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. atiz. Xak. xı er yérin atızla:dı: ftraxada”l-racul fi  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 119 
     
   
   
     MON. AG 35 ardihi dibár wa musannát li'l-zirà'a “the man made irrigation ditches and dikes on his land to cultivate it” Kaş. 7 gor (atizla:r, atızla:ma:k). D uduzla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. uduz, Xak. xı ol anı: uduzla:dı: dátodhu mina l-carab “he cured him of the itch' Kaş. 7 3o1 (uduzla:r, uduzla:ma:k). D atızlan- Ilap. leg.; Refi. f. of atizla:-. Xak. xı y€:r atızlandı: cu'ilati'l-ard müşdrdt "the land was made salcable' (i.e. provided with ditches and dikes). Kaş. 7 292 (the Aor. and Infin. were originally e$ózlenür, etözlenme:k, and the -me:k was altered 1o -ma:k, this is prob. a case of haplography, the Aor, and Infin. of atizlan- and a sentence illustrating etózlen- (not recorded elsewhere) having been omitted by the scribe). D édizlen- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. ödiz. Xak. xı ol ta:ğnı: edizlendi: "adda /-cabal mönü" (asil “he reckoned that the mountain was inaccessible and high" Keş. I 292 (edizlenür, edizlenme:k). Mon. AG D 1 a:ğ “the space between the legs, crotch'; hence also “the gusset in a pair of trousers”, Survives in the latter meaning only(?) in NW Krım aw R 1 66 and SW xx Anat. ağ SDD 72, 1601. Uyğ. vini ff. Civ. (if a pregnant woman cannot give birth, you must burn kisirin seed) ağı arası arasında 'in the space between her legs! H 1 23; 2.0. TT VII 26, 9-10 (içton): Xak. xı a:ğ al-masdfatı”llati bayna"l-faxdayn "the space between the thighs'; and one says yü:z at menip ağdın keçti: “a hundred horses have passed between my thighs! ; tea /ntoa bi-manzilati l-fitr bayna'l-igbi'ayn “and it is of the same order(?) as the space between two fingers” Kaş. 1 80: KB 6536 (arkun): Kip. xr a:ğ sarcu'l-saráteil “the gusset of a pair of trousers' İd. 16: Osm. XV Ar. "ayfaq ditto ağ TT.S 7 376 (s.v. im (üm)). D 2 a:ğ “net”, more particularly hunting or fish net. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SE, SC usually as ağ or aw. Cf. to:r. Xak. xı KB (the third is disease) tiriglik ağı “a net for (catching) life” 307; (tbe body is a dangerous enemy) kamuğ yerde yadmış tuzakı ağı “it has spread its snares and nets everyvvhere” 3637; a.0. 4224: xiv Muh.(?) al-sgabaka “net” ağ (altan, unvocalized, and prob. corrupt follows) Rif. 160 (only): Çağ. xvff. ağ döm wa şibdh 'nets' San. 43v. 12 (quotn, in Rimi): Xwar. xiv ağ “net” Qutb 4; Kom. xiv “net, fish-net” ağ CCT; aw CCG, Gr.: Kip. xii al-şabaka ağ Hou. 10, 18: xiv n:ğ af-şabaka li'l-samak 'fish-net İd. 16; al-sabaka &amp;:&amp; Bul. s, 2: xv ditto aw Tuh. 20b. rr: Osm. xiv av 'spider's web' TTS I 53: xvi ağ ditto 77 7; IV 8. 1 s:k 'white' originally as the colour of an animal's coat as opposed to the more general word ürüp, q.v., later “vhite” in all senses. C.i.a.p.a.l. It occurs, often with a metaph. meaning in numerous phr. of which, eg., San., T TS, and R give long lists. See Doerfer II 5o4. Türkü vir ak adgir “a white stallion' 1 E 35, 36; ak at "a white horse' 7 E 4o; ak *white horse' 1 N ə, 3, 5, 6, 9: vir ff. Ek bési: “his white mare' IrkB ş, a:k at do. 19: Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. ak kışıp az “your white winters are rare TT I 159 (the only such occurrence noted in Uyğ., while ürüp is common). Xak., Oğuz xt s:k in Oğuz al-abyad min hull şay “vhitc" of anything; and among the Turks it is used in relation to the colour of a horse( fi siyáti'l-xayl), and one says &amp;:k at al-farasu'l-aghab “a white horse” (and two place-names Á:k Sa:y, A:k Tere:k) Kaş. I 81; ak buht örlenüp »yartafz'w'!-muzn "a rain cloud rises' 7 258, 2; kerip tuta:r ak tort (the clouds) "spread their net over the sky”, that is a rain cloud IJI 39, 13: xın(?) Tef. ak 'white, transparent! 47: XIV Muh. al-abyad a:k Mel. 68, 2; Rif. 168; a.o. (adğır): Çağ. xv ff. ak öy çadır “tent” Vel. 24 (quotns.); ağ/ak safid “vhite” Sar. 43v. 14; 45r. 21 and numerous phr., ağ being the preferred form: Oğuz xı see Xak.; a:k saka:l er al-raculu'l-agyab “a grey-bearded man” Kaş. I 8y: Xvvar. xin ağ "white! 'Ali rz: xin(?) ak koyun “a white sheep” Oğ. 363; ak sakalluğ do. 3:2; ap ak 'quite vvhite" 231, 343: XIV Bk 'white, whiteness' Qutb o, (akrak "'whiter' Naher. 57, 7); Kom. xiv *white' ak/ax CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xm al-abyad ak Hou. 31, 2: xiv ditto İd. 17 (and phr.); Bul. 2, 15 (phr.): xv ditto Tu. 4a. 1 etc.; to emphasize white (/7 ta'kidi'l-abyad) they say appak, originally ap ak Kas. s, 7; a.o. $$, 18: Osm. xiv ff. ağ and ak both occur in xiv; ağ survives until xvi and thereafter only in popular verse 7773 7 s fT., I1 6 f.; HI 4 ft; IV 12. F 2 ak 'hateful'. Hap. leg.; Pelliot considered this to be an idiomatic use of 1 a:k, pointing out that Chinese par *white' (Grles 8,556) has a similar meaning in some contexts; but it seems more reasonable to suppose that it is a l.-w. fr. Chinese zeu (Ancient Chinese "dk) “to hate, hateful' (Gies 12,779). Cf. akla:-. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. ayığ kılınçlığ ak oğlun “his wicked hateful son” PP 62, 5. Yığ “veeping, sobbing', the base of ığla:-, Q.v.; not noted in the early period, but survives in NE Sor 1 R I 351; Khak. 1:; Tuv. r: (only with Poss. Suff. r:sı:), NC Kir. iy. Tk *hiccough'; an onomatopocic, possibly but proh. not identical with *1$. Survives only(?) in NC Kir, and SW Osm, Sam. 244 (only) Cf. 1hla:-. Xak. xr 1k “the hiccough (al-rabw) which rises from the chest when cold water is drunk and bread eaten on the top of it”, hence one says anı: ik tutti: axadahu'l-rabso “he was seized with hiccoughs” Kaş. 7 37. J oğ, 'disengaged, idle'; not noted before xiv but cf. ağla:-. Survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. SDD 1085 (also with a phr. relating to a mill), Anat. uğu do. 1414 and or do. 1091 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 120 
     
   
   
     76 MON. AG are synonymous, Kip. xiv oğ adlı fariğ "frec, disengaged'; one says bey oğmudur “is the chief disengaged ( fi I-xalica)?' ; and teyirmen oğmudur “is the mill disengaged (xd/rya) ? İd. 16: xv xalta (yawlak; in margin) oğ Tuh, 14b. 7. S 2086 See 10: u:ğ "a tent rib, wooden strut forming part of the framework of a tent of the yurt type”: sometimes confused with 1 ok, see Çağ. below. Survives in NC Kzx. u:k, same meaning, R I 1606 (not in MM), and possibly NE Şor uğ “yar” R 11617 and SW Osm. huğ “a hut made of reeds or rushes' T'T'S I 346; Red. 2174. See Doerfer 1| 602. Cf. uyuğluğ. Xak. xi u:ğ hull dil min adla'rl-xibá^ fi a"laha 'a rib in the upper part of a tent” Kaş. 1 48: Çağ. xv fT. uğ çuübld-yd fateháni-yf aldçuq "the upper ribs of a tent" San. 76v. 15 (quotn.); the same entry is made in 77v. 17 after the second meaning of 1 ok: Kip. xiv u:ğ 'rid min 'idáni'l-xarkáti lati. tuğras fi qubbatihd "once of the beams of a tent which are fixed in its roof” İd. 16. 1 ok 'arrow', Owing to the use of arrows for various ritual and ceremonial purposes it came to be used at a very early date ín the sense of “suh-trihe” (and as such forms part of such tribal names as On ok) and also of 'a lot' in casting lots. O:k (so spelt) 'a share of an inheritance', noted in Kaş. is, no doubt, another special sense of this word. Later it came, like kk, to mean "a long piece of wood', usually round in section, like an axle, rolling-pin, and the like, and so tended to be confused with u:ğ. S.ha.m.l, See Doerfer 11 605-6. Türkü viti oku:n ürtu: “he hit with an arrow! I E 33, 36; On ok the tribal name of the Western "'ürkü occurs several times in /, I7, T: Uy£. viti ff. Man.-A ok ya altı 'took bows and arrows! Man.-uig. Frag. 401, 7: Bud. (1 will cause excruciating pain to that demon) vacırlığ okın tuşğuru tokip 'smiting him and causing him to mect a raqjra-like arrow' U II 26, 14; okin ursukmiş kişi teg “like a man struck by an arrow' Srv. 623, 17; a.c. do. 621, 8-9; o.o. TT IV 1o, 12; U İİ 78, 31: Civ. TT I 162 (at-): Xak, xr ok al-sahm 'arrow'; Ok: cá'izatu'l-bayt “the cross-beam of n house”, hence one says ev oki: sa/rmiu'l-bayt "the main beam (lit. arrow) of a house”, ok yila:ni "the adder (al-af'à) which throws itself at a man" (also FİT 29, 27); ok al-qur'atu' Hati yugsam bihd”l-ard sca l-anstba'! "the lots which are used in dividing up land and shares (of anything)” Kaş, I 37; €:k al-nasib. minu'l-mirdt “a share of an inheritance'; ana:r bi:r o:k teğdi: "one share of the inheritance came to him” 7 48; about 6o o.o.: KB bodum erdi Ok teg “my body was as (straight as) an arrow' 371, 1009; bolur ok yaçt “he becomes an archer' 4046; xıu(?) Ar, büter ok basr “an arrow wound heals” 140; ya okun 228: Tef. Ok 'arrow; share, portion' 235: xiv Mif (?) al-nuggáb “arrovvs" o:k (with 0-") Rif. 76, 175 (only): Çağ. xv ff. ok (r) tir 'arrow! (quotn.); (2) metaph. cabha-yi diráz hi bálá-vi 'tmárat-rá ba-dün büşand “the long heams which cover the roof of a building on thc outside' (quotn.; the refce. to u:ğ follows): Xwar. xti ok “arrovv” ' Ali 15: xi(?) (they fought) ok birle "with arrows! (swords and spears) Og. 160; 2.0.0.; XIV OK “arrov”” Qutb 117; MN gi, etc.: Kom. xiv ox “arrov” CCG; (rl: Kip. al-nugsáb ok Hou. 13, 16: xiv özk ditto İd, 17: xv ditto ok Kam, 64, 1; Tuh. 36h. 5: Osm. xiv ff, 0X 'arrow' in several texts down to xvi TTS 1 536; II 720; III 536; xiv ok birak“to cast lots' 7 537. 2 ok/ük enclitic particle, the vowel quality of which conforms to that of the word to which it is attached, and to which it adds emphasis. Attached to Personal and Demonstrative Pronouns it means ('I', etc.) "and no other”, in a context of time it means 'exactly (then) and not carlier or later'. S.ia.m.l.g. except SE, where it is now obsolete, and SW where it was apparently never used, Türkü viir özüm ök “1 myself" T 6; ben ök ertim “it was me (and no one else)” (that was his Counsellor and Field-Marshal) T 7; üküş ök óOlürti: "he killed very many” 7” 7: Uyf. vrir ff. Man. ol ok o:t tepri: “that same Fire God” M 1 zo, 14: Bud. ok is common, esp. after bu and ol; anda ok 'immediately thereupon' U II zo, 2; témin ók 'immediately' see t€:min: Xak. xı ok harf ta'kid fi'l-f'l a particle adding emphasis to a verb; hence one says barğıl ok idhabanna "go", ok arf yughabu'l-hal a particle accompanying expressions of time'; hence one says baya: ok keldim ataytu qabi hádihrl-sá'a hagíqata(n) “1 really did come a short time ago'; and one says amdı: ok aydım qrifı sd"ata”idi 'l said this very moment” Kaş. I 37; no, I 71, 16 (özük): KHB ok/ók are common, c.g. bayat ok 9o; uluğluk ok-a (-a metri gratia) ssz: xit(?) At. men ök 9o; (fine brocades are scarce) ucuzi böz ök “tt is just cotton cloth that is common" 48o: Tef. ol ok, etc. 235, 243: Çağ. xv ff. ok /taemán 'exactly' Vel. 109; 0k . . . (3) hamdndam tea fi l-fazor 'immediately, instantly' (quotn.); (4) Aamdn 'exactly' (quotn.); ($) hanı "also” (quotn.) Sa). 77v. 17; Vel. rog also translates OK xaqd “for spot cash” as opposed to sesiya "on credit", San. 77v. 23 quotes the verse differently, eliminating the supposed ok, and says that this and other translations by other authors are errors: Xwar. xiv ok as Suff. is common “AZ 16: xiv ditto Quib rr? (always Ok never ók); MN 75; özi yök (sic) tüsti 'fell off of its own accord' Naltc. 104, 10; alımlar ok 233, 4; özi Ök 355, rz) a.0.0.: Kem. xiv ok/ox emphatic particles CCI, CCG; Gr. 178 (quotns.):; (Kip. xv the Kip. verbal suffix -ğaş/ğeş (-Bac/-Bec) corresponds to ok fi'/-/ugatiI- Turk, as in emdi ok, anda ok, kündüz ok, kece ok Tu. 753. 13 ft). Mon. V. AGA:É- Preliminary note. A:ğ- “zo rise (from somerohere Abl.); to climb (something Dat.) is a inan ML. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 121 
     
   
   
     MON. V. AG- 77 common in the early period but seems to survive only in some meanings of NC Kir. o:-: SW Osm. a- “fo rise, evaporate', etc. and Thm. B:ğ- (inter alia) zo climb (over); to overflow; to exceed (a stated period). Kaş. gives a:ğ- in the same para. a meaning twhich cannot be connected with "to rise', is, as such, unrecorded elsewhere, and is entered here as 2 a:ğ-. In modern times there is a verb aB- meaning (e.g. of a horse's load, or a patr of scales) 'to lean over to one side” and the like, «which, though not recorded earlier, is very common in modern times appearing as SE Türhi aB- Shaw rr D$ 7, Jarring 14; NC Kir. 0:- (some meanings) Yud. 593; Kzx. avv- R 167, MM so, SC Uzb. oğ-, NW Kaz. aw-RIÓz; SW Osn. XVII ff. ağ- l'US 12 and 53 (s.v. avril-); 11 r3; xx Anat. a$- SDD 1603; av- do. 130; Tkm. nığ-. In some languages the sword also means “to faint! and has other cognate meanings. İt is difficult to connect this modern svord sith "to rise, but it might have arisen from Kag.'s second meaning. See akOsm. XIV and ağımçsız, zehich is also connected with this modern meaning. | a:ğ- “to rise (from somewhere 7155); to climb (up something Dat.)'. Türkü vin (gap) yışka: ağdı: 'climbed the . . . mountain forest” H E 37: vin ff. yaylağ tağıma: ağıpan “climbing the mountain where ] spend the summer” JrkB öz: Uyf. vinff. Man.-A tamudan yokaru ağdukta “after climbing up from hell” M I 13, is: Man. ağmak énmek alunlarığ kórglttipiz “you have shown the rising and descending states of existence' TT” JII 58; (he put the souls in a balance) t[arazu]g ağfsar1 “if the (pan of the) balance rises' M II iz, 10: Bud. TT IV 6,20 (tapil-): Civ. ağıp kelir soğık suv “the rising cold water' TT I roq: Xak. xı ol ta:ğka adi: şa"ida” Hcabal "he climbed the mountain'; and one says bulit a:ğdi: saga'atr'l-sahaba "the cloud rose” Kaş, 1 173 (a:ğa:r, a:ğma:k), and over a dozen o.o. mainly in grammatical examples with ta:ğka:, and often spelt ağ-: K B ağ- is common, both with an Indirect Object, e.g. tórke afar “he rises to a place of honour' r66:, and without, e.g. ukusun afar ol 'he rises by (possessing) understanding! 289; o.o. 731 (yoka:ru:), 733 (édizlik), 903, 1049 (ön-), etc.: xiu(?) Tef. ağ- “to climb', etc. 36: xiv Mu. s;a' ida ma raqd "to climb, ascend' ağ- Mel. 28, r, Hif. 111: Caf. xv ff. ağ- bala raftan wea "urüc kardan “to rise, ascend” San. 42r. 9g (quotns.): Xwar. xiv ağ- “to rise, climb' Qutb 4: Kip. xiv n:B- sa'ída ld. aş, Bul. şsv.: Osm. xiv ff. ağ- “to rise”, esp. in the phr. &amp;óge ağ"to ascend to heaven'; c.is.p. T7S I rr, H 12; IIl 7; IV 8. 2 a:B- see Preliminary note. Xak. xı (after 1 a:ğ-) and they say anip yü:zi: a:ğdı: tağayyara lawnuhu “his colour changed” Kaş, 1 175; ölüm körüp yüzi: ağdı: (sic) Ja-lammá | laqá'l-mazot. hatma(a) şahaba İaunuhu wa tağayyara wachuhu 'when he met death inauspiciously, his colour became wan and his face changed” 7/7 327, 18; a.o, 1 65, 9 (ağduk). ak- primarily “to flow" of any kind of liquid frorn tears to rivers, In Uy. Bud. it and its derivatives, akığlığ, akığsız, are used in a very technical sense to translate Sanskrit srüand its derivatives. Later it was used for the movement of raiding parties and ín some modern languages for 'to float', esp. downstream. S.r.a.m.l.g. as ak- with some traces of a Sec. f. ık- (see Kom.). Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. (tears) aktı 'llowed' U ET 66, s (ii); akmaz akitmaz lit. “not flowing or causing to flow, for Sanskrit andsrava TT VI 136 (and note): Civ. suv akar 'water flows! TT VII 29, 13; üküs telim yas aksar 'if the eyes water copiously' HI 1 65; yiri) aka 'running with pus' H 7126,85: Xak. xi su:v akdr: sdla'l-má' “the water (ctc.) flowed'; and one says yağı: akdı: cá'at kaotá'ibul-'aduww "enemy raiding detachments came (pouring in) Kaş. 1 1:68 (aka:r, akma:k); about 16 o.o. in one meaning or the other: KB akar suv 669; aka kelsü arzü “may what vou desire come in abundance' 943; a.0.0.: xin(?) Tef. ak- “to flow' 47: xiv Muh. al-idára “to raid' akmak Mel. 34, 7; Rif. 119; ağdra ak- 104 (only); al-caryán "to flow' akmak 34, ır, 119; card ak- 107 (only); al-imá'u'l-cári aka:r su: 76, 17; 180: Çağ. xvíf. ak-/akil- (spelt) rawán $udan-i ab "of water, to flow' San. 44r. 25 (quotns.): Xwar. xur ak- (of blood, etc.) “to flow! ' Ali 35: xiv ditto Qutb 9; MN əsi, etc.; (two canals) üsikür akar 'flow in the open” (and two) örtüğlüğ akar 'flow underground” Nahc. $7, s, kafirlarnı akip bulun kilip “raiding the infidels and taking prisoners" 161, 4: Kom. xiv ax- "to flov” CCG; Gr. 30 (quotn.); 1x- “to float with the strcam” CCG; Gr. 272 (quotn): Kip. xiu al-md”u"l-cdri aka:r su: Hou. 7, 3: xw ak- sáía İd. 17; akdilar carı? li'l-fàra "they streamed out on a raid” do. 18; al-nahr “river” (inter alia) akar Bul. 4, iş: xv sala ak- Tuh. 20a. 8: Osm. xiv ff. ax- (xiv and xv only) / ak- c.ia.p. in a wide range of meanings 7735 I 14; İİ iz, 18, 21; 111 9; İV iz, the meaning “to lean to one side” (I, II) belongs to (2) a:ğ-. S iğ- pec. to H İİ, prob. a Sec. f. or mistranscription of yığ-. Uyğ. vut ff. Civ. (if blood flows (ünser) rub honey on various parts of the head and) kan ığ$ay “t will coagulate the blood' H 7I 39, 4 and 7; o.o. do. 18 and 19. S ik- See ak-. S oğ- See uv-. Uk- “to understand (something 4cc.):, hence in some modern languages “to find out; to hear”, Survives in NE, SE, NC.; an early l-w. in Mong. as uka- (Haenisch 160, Kom. 257) In some forms, esp. in unvocalized texts, liable to be confused with okt:-. In the 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 122 
     
   
   
     78 MON. V. AGearly period often in the Hend. bil- uk-. "Türkü vur ff. Man. bilmetin ukmatın "because (we) do not know or uünderstand” Chuas. 132: Uyf. vin ff. Man. M I 18, 4 (i) (adir-): Bud. uk- is common, e.g. tetrü ukar "he completely understands' U I7 7, 6; o.o. do.8,22;9,12; 11, 13; TT V 26,96; VİİO.i, PP 68, s—bil- uk- U HI 35,22; TT IV 4, 11; VI331:Civ.15 bolmişin uka yarlikap 'deigning to understand what has occurred” USp. 88, 11: Xak. xr er t:gin ukdt: dálika'l-racul fatana amrahu “that man understood his business” Kaş. 1 168 (uka:r, ukma:k); three 0.0.: KB uk- “to understand' is common, esp. for “to understand what has been said”, e.g. él(l)ig aydı uktum “the king said "1 understand" ' 7145 0.0. 135, 282, 657, 660, 680, etc.: xıı1(?) At. egit uk muni 'hear and understand this' 62; a.0.0.: Tef. uk- ditto 324: xiv MuR. "arafa wa. "alima "to know' u:k- Rif. 112: Xwar. xui(?) ukğuluk tüzün bir er "an understanding and gentle man” Og. 3r4 (reading doubtful): xiv uk- 'to understand' Qutb 117 (ok-); 199 (uk-): Kip. xiv ukfahima “to understand' 1d. 17. Dis. AGA ağı: from xr onwards consistently translated 'silk brocade' and the like; earlier contexts suggest the meaning “treasure", and cf. after, afrlik; “silk brocade', as the main component of early Turkish treasures, may, however, have been the original meaning. N.o.a.b. The word ağ/ağı prob. used only in such phr. as ağı kurdu 'caterpillar' noted in Osm. xvi TTS II 9 and surviving in xx Anat. SDD 74, 76, 78, 131, 1602 prob. has nothing to do with 'silk' (worm); it seems to be a Sec. f. of afu: Cf. bargin. Türkü vin ağı: occurs ş times in / S 5-7, 1I N 4-s, and several times elsewhere in the context of gifts given by the Cbinese to tbe ''urks; in 1, S 5, IN 4 it summarizes a list of sucb gifts 'gold, silver', and two words prob. meaning silken fabrics of some kind, so prob. means 'treasure'; in a list of booty in 7' 48 sarığ altu:n ürün kümüş kız koduz egri: teve: ağı: 'vellow gold, white silver, girls, femmes soles, humped camels' ... it looks more like 'brocade'; in other occurrences it could be either, but 'treasure' is more probable: viti ff. Man. [gap katılğlanmaz incip ağı bulur? yeme [ne tlörlüğ ağı barım elğinerü kelser esirğenü kısğanu tutmaz kizlemez "he makes no efforts but still acquires treasures; and whatever treasures and property come into his hands he does not retain and hide them in miserliness and greed' M IIl 21, 1-4 (i) (here, esp. in the Hend., "treasure! must be the meaning): Uyğ. vri ff. Man. ağı baram M I ış, 4-5; III 11, 20; 13, 6-7 (1): Bud. ağı barım U II 76, 2; PP 7, 6 and 9; o, 2; TT VI ror, 233, 266; Tig. 192. 4: Civ. ağı barım TT VII 34, 3: Xak. xı ağı: al-dibác "silk brocade” Kaş. 7 89; (do not rejoice) altun kümüş bulnupan ağı: tava:r idd wacadta . . . fidda ma dahab wa dibác 'if vou acquire gold and silver and silk brocade” // rş3a, 8 (but tava:r (untranslated) suggests 'treasure' would be better): KB ağı çuz ağır boldi “silk brocades (Elend.) are valuable” 902; acti ağı kaznakı "he opened his treasury” (and distributed many things to the poor) 1034; çığayka üledi kümüş ham ağı “he distributed silver and treasure (or silk brocade?) to the poor' 1564; ağı cuz 1426, 4773, 5367: xin(?) Tef. altun kümüş ağu (sic) barçın ('brocade) 39: xiv Muh.(?) al-tatcbu'l-ibrisami 'silken clothing” ağı: Rif. 167 (only): Kip. xiv ağı: “a kind of silk” (al-harir) İd. 17: Osm. xiv (when a boy grows up he must marry, and you must give him) ağı atlas at katir “brocade, damask, a borse, and amule' TTS I 7; bağışladı altun kızıl u ağı “he gave red gold and brocade” 77 9. aki: 'generous, openhanded'. TT VI $7, note 4 suggests that this is a Dev. N. in -1: fr. ak-, which is possible but improbable. Survives only(?) in NE Bar. ağu: R I 172; SW Osm. axı "a member of a charitable religious order”, It has been suggested that the latter is der. fr. Ar. ax 'brother', but this is improbable, see aki:lık, See Doerfer II 435. Uyğ. vini ff. Bud. bust: bérgeli ak: tinliğlar az 'generous people who gives alms are scarce! TT VI 4: Xak. xr akı: al-cateád 'generous'; hence “a ripe walnut' (al-cawzu'l-farik) is called akt: yağa:k “that is a generous walnut! Kaş. 7 go (presumably because it is split open like a hand): KB akı ken eliğ 'generous and openhanded” 43, 55; 0.0. 104, 257, 948, etc.: xrn(?) At. axı 'generous', always so spelt in Ar. script is common: Xvvar. xiv aki 'generous' Qutb 10: Kip. xit. al-karim 'generous' aki: (opposite to “mean” cokma:r(?)) 7Iou. 26, 2: xiv. ağı: ditto /d. 17: Osm. xiv axi (used by wife to husband); xvi (used by father to son) TTS II y. 1 ağu: 'poison'. S.i.a.m.l.g., often contracted to 0:, Uz, etc.; see ağız, Uyğ. vii f£. Man.-A sizlerde almış ağu “the poison received from you” M I 19, 15-16; zo, 1 (at-): Man. ağusı küçedip “the poison in him taking strong hold of him” (or “making him violent” ?) TT İl 16, 13: Bud. (there is a poisonous snake) ağu tını “his poisonous breath' PP 38, 4: Civ. ağu 'poison' H II 6, 9; 30, 170: Xak. xı ağu: al-samm 'poison' Kaş. I 89; a.o. III 339, zi: KB ağu kildi “it has poisoned' (my food) 370; (begs when they are angry) bolur öt ağu “are gall and poison' 779 (better reading than ot 'fire'?); ağu boldi “he is poisoned' 4655; a.o. 3913 (1 açığ): xın(?) At. içi pur ağu “its inside is full of poison' 214; Tef. ağu 'poison' 39: Çağ. xv fI. ağu zahr 'poison' San. 44r. B (quotn.): Xwar. xiv ağu 'poison' Qutb s, Nac. 33, 11: Kap. xiii al-murr 'bitterness' . . . also ağu: a/-samm so used by analogy because of its bitterness Hou. 27, 10: xiv Ağu: al-samm İd. 17; awu: ditto, do. 26; ditto ağu: Bul. 11, 6: Xv samm awu in Tkm. ağu Tuh. 19b. 2. 2 ağu: in Uyğ. viri ff. Man. [gap] közlüğler kóplüg ağu teg butluğlar “having . . . eyes, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 123 
     
   
   
     DIS. AGC 79 and legs like abundant . . .' TT /X 85 can hardly mean 'poison', but its actual meaning and etymology are obscure. Dis V. AGAokı:- Preliminary note, The two verbs of this form are obviously distinet but the pronunciation of the second is obscure. Al-háfu'l-rakika is Kag.'s term for 'voiced k', ie. $, and it is possible that he meant that the second verb was originally, or alternatively öğl-. This is supported by some later forms. 1 oki:- originally “to call out sloud', hence "to summon (someone 4ec.)”, “to recite or read aloud”, and finally simply "to read” which is the normal modern meaning, S.ia.m.lg. except NE. (Türkü viri okığlı: kelti: has been read after a gap in IJ E 28, but hardly fits the context, the true reading is probably something like (uts]u:kifli: kelti:): Uyğ. vir ff. Man. bu emig iki kata okiyu tegintim 'I have ventured to recite this spell(?) three times' M I 29, 13-15; 0.0. dö. 30, 17, 26, 6 and 7; okiyurlar “they call on” (the Wind God) Wind. 249, 18: Bud. toyu:nla:rığ okip 'summoning the monks' TT VIII Hi, inisin okıyu “calling for his younger brother” PP 58, 3; okumak törüsin “the ceremony of invoking' (gods, demons, etc.) TT V ro, 114; o.0, USp. 103, 13; Suv. 447, 16, etc.: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. "read the book" bitiğ oki R I 1008; Ligeti 186: Xak. x1 ol meni: oki:di: da'áni "he summoned me”, and one says er bitiğ oki:di: "the man read (qara'a) the book" Kaş. I1] 254 (oktr, okizma:k); alo, II 333, s (sekrit-): KB siliğ kiz okir teg köpül bermişin "as a pure maiden calls the man to whom she has given her heart” 75; (if a generous man dies) atı tirlg tép okı “call out that his name lives' 257; bu kün kím okisa 'whoever reads (the book) today” 259; o.o. 319, 719, 3535: xin(?) At. okiğli kişi “the man who reads (my book)” 44; 3 o.o.: Tef. oki- “to call out; to read” 235: xiv Muh.(9) qara”a ok1- Rif. 114 (only); ai-qirá'a o:krimak 124: Çağ. xvíT. oku- xwándan 'to recite, invoke, read” San. 77r. 12 (quotns.): Xwar. xti oku- “to call out” ' Ali 29: xiv oki-/foku"to call out, recite” Quib 18; MN şo, etc.: Kip. xitt qara"a oki:- Hou. 33, 13: xiy Oki:qara"a, and in Kipgak (si) oğu:- ld. i7; qara'a Oku- Bul, 72r.: xv ditto Kav. 9, 14 3.0.0.; Tuh. 308. 2 8.0.0.: Osm. xiv ff. oki(xiv only) /oku- “to call, summon", etc.; c.i.a.p. TTS 1 $358; 21 723; 1/1 537; IV 603. PU 2 okı:- "to belch, vornit'. Survives in NE Tel. oki- 77 7 994; Tuv. oğu- and SW xx Anat, ögü- SDD 1104. Xak. x1 er oki:di: "the man vomited' (/agayya'a); swa hadd rikkatu'l-káf (see Preliminary note) Kaş. IJI 254 (Okur, okima:k), Kip. xiv ökl- (so spelt; v.l. öğü-, so spelt) £aqayya"a İd. 18. Dis. AGC S a&amp;u] See ağuz. iBac (12:6) originally 'tree', in Uvg. esp. in the phr. 1: iğaç 'shrubs and trees'; hence "wood (generally), a piece of wood'. At least fr. x1 onwards the word was also used for a large unit of linear measurement, conventionally a parasang of 4 or 5 miles, perhaps originally a time-distance measure like "an hour's journey'; it is hard to see any semantic connection between the two meanings. The phonetic history, too, like tbat of ığla:-, q.v., is complicated. Before x1 the form was consistently iğaç but in Xak. became yığaç with a prostbetic y-, which survives only in SC Uzb. yoğoç 'wood' (for 'tree' Persian daraxt is used) and Quv., yavdgyivdg (yavaş, yivásy) Ash. IV 16:1, 297. İn all other modern language groups the form is ağaç, with variations of the -ç in NE, NC. Türkü vir €intan iğaç kelürüp 'bringing logs of sandal-wood' JJ S 11; at yete: yadagm ığaç tutunu: agtu:rum “1 made the men climb on foot leading their horses and holding on to the trees! T 25: viri ff. çıntan ıiğaç üze: olu:ru:pan 'sitting on a sandal-wood tree” IrkB 4; o.0. meaning 'tree' do. 14, 56: Man. böş tórlüg ot ığaç "the five kinds of vegetables and trees! Chuas. 59, 317; 118a€ M İİ 14, 12 0): Uyğ. Man.-A (just as fire) ığaçda ünüp iğaçağ örteyür “arises from wood and burns wood' M 1 7, 2; 1182€ do. 8, 19; 13, 8: Man. 1 ığaç M İl ız, 5: Bud. 1 iğaç Suv. 621, 5; 1&amp;8 'drum-stick' Suv. 375, 7; üzün sıruk ığaç başında "on the top of a long pole' USp. 104, 12-13; 0.0. TT VI 323; Pfahl, 8, ro: Civ. küzki ığaç yapkusi “the rustle of trees in autumn" TT I 134; iğaç “vood” as one of the five elements, and metaph. for the planet Jupiter TT VII 1, 32, and 79 (spelt yığaç): ro, 6; kara kaç 1fac kasikin "the bark of a black kaç tree' H 1 26: Xak. x1 yığaç al-xagab *wood'; yığaç dakaru'l-racul "a man's penis”, yığaç af-farsax mina"l-ard "a parasang of ground' ; hence one says bl:r yığaç yö:r "one parasang of ground'; yığaç a/-şacar "a tree”, hence one says üzür yığaçı: şacarı”l-'inab'a vine' and yağa:k yığa:çı: sacaru'l-cawz "a nut tree'; yığa:ç with -a:- is the better spelling (acıvad) Kaş. 111 8; yığa:ç alternative form (luda) of yığaç LII 28; and nearly 120 0.0.: KB (green ccvers) kurirnis yığaçlar “the dry trees' 70; yömişsiz yığaç "a tree without fruit' 2455: xu?) 46. yemişsiz yığaç 323, 324; T». ağaç/yağaç/yığaç (1) 'tree'; (2) '"beam'; (3) 'parasang' 37, 132, 133: X1v Muh.(?) naccár 'carpenter' 1f$a:€ (unvocalized) yoncr Rif. 158 (only); a/-"aşd "a stick, staff' iğa:ç 173; al-farsax iğa:ç 178: Çağ. xv fl, yığaç if a man stands at a particular place and two men stand one on each side of him so that they can hear him when he shouts, they call three times this distance (cg martaba bu miqdörm) yığaç (quotns.); and also banná argün . . . kam ma'násina "a builder's cubit” (about 30 inches) (quotn.) Vel. 413 (the latter is an error, the versé describes 12,000 karí as a yığaç): yığaç (r) fb 'wood'; (2) farsáng “parasang” Sar, 350v. 3 (quotns.): Xwar. xim yığaç “tree” “Ali ag: xi(?) iğaç (once spelt yığaç) 'tree* 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 124 
     
   
   
     8o DIS. AGC is common Og.: xiv ağaç/yığaç 'tree, parasang” Qutb 4, go, Nahc. 24, 2; 186, 13: Kom. xiv ağaç 'tree; wood, beam, column, (saddle)tree CCI, CCG; Gr. 28 (quotns): Kip. xın al-jacara tea'l-xagab tva'l-'agá ağa:ç Hou. 7, 10: XIV afa a/-"aşa tca”İ-şacar, one says alma: ağaçı: "apple tree! d. 17: xv. al-'agá ağaş Kav. 31, 7; 39, 8: al-şacar ağaş: as in alma: ağa:şı:, and aga:s a/-xaşab do. 59, 3; carid "a defoliated palm-branch' agas Tuh. rib, 10; xajab ditto 14b. 1; 'asá ditto 25b. 3: Osm. xiv ff. ağaç "tree; stick, blow from a stick' and twice (xiv and XVI) 'parasang'; cia.p. TTS 15; 11 7; HI 4-5; IV s. D okgr N.Ag. fr. 1 ok; 'arrow-maker; archer'. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. Xak. xı okçt: a/-nabbdl *arrow-maker! Kaş. II 199, 3 (kóndger-); n.m.e.: KB yadağ okçı tuşrup sen ópdün yüğgür 'concentrate your infantry bowmen, and ride out in front yourself” 2370 (or read tüşrüp “make your bowmen dismount); (in a list of craftsmen) okçı: 'arrow-maker' 4458: xiv Muh.(?) naşdşibi “arrovv-maker” o:ket:. Rif. 157 (only): Xwar. xiv okgi “archer” Qutb 117: Kom. xiv arrowmaker' oxçı CCI; Gr.: Kip. xii a/-naşşdbi oket; and also a/-rdmi birl-nuşşüb 'archer' Hou. 214, 7. Tris. AGC D ağıçı: N.Ag. fr. ağı:ş an official title the exact significance of which is discussed by Caferoğlu in TM IV 20; 'treasurer' or the like. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vi ff. Bud. ağıçı uluğu "the chief treasurer” PP 7, 7; ağıçı do. 9, 7 and 8; ro, 8: Civ. tsançı ağıçılar almazun “let the granary-keepers and treasurers not take” USp. 88, 4o; Koço balık ağıçı “the town treasurer of Koço” do. 115, 19: Xak. xi ağtıçı: xázinu'l-dibàc "the keeper of the silk brocades” Kaş. 1 136, (after ağı:) hence a/-xdzin is called ağı:çı: because he keeps it (/-hifzinr iyydhu) I 89, 20: KB (in a list of officials) ağıçı 2494; bitiğ bilse sakış ağıçı bolur “if (a young man) can read and keep accounts, he becomes a treasurer” 4048. D ığaççı: N.Ag. fr. iğaç, 'carpenter, woodworker', etc. Survives in NE Tuv. 1yaşçı NC Kir. lığaççı, Kzx. ağaşşı. Uyğ. xır ff. Bud. Sanskrit vardhakinah “carpenters” 1$accıla:r (sic) TT VIII A.12; iğaççı Pfahl. 24, 3 and 4: (Xak.) xiri(?) Tef. yağacçı/yığaççı 'carpenter' 132, 156. D okt:ci: N.Ag. fr. oki:- S.i,s.m.l, usually as okuci. Xak. xi KB okiçi ol erdi bayattın sapa 'he was a preacher (sent) from God to you” 36: Kip. xv (in grammatical examples) okuci/okucu not translated but alternating with yazugct so presumably 'reader' Tuh. 8oa. 6 and 7; b. 4. D sığaçlık A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. ığaç. S.i.s.m.l, as afaglik. Xak. xr yığaçlık al-magcara 'copse, plantation'; also dáru'l-xajab "a vvood-store” Kaş. III sı. D ağulluğ Hap. ley.; P.N./A. fr. ağul/ağuz. Xak. xı ağulluğ “(a man) who owns biestings” (Hbda”) Kaş. I 146. "ris. V. AGCD sığaçlan- Retl. Den. V. fr. 1$ac. S.i.s.m.l, usually as ağaçlan- , the basic form *15acla:also survives with a rather wider range of meanings. Xak. xi ye:r yığaçlandı: agcarati'l-ard 'the ground was covered with trees", that is there were many trees on it Kaş. III 113 (yığaçlanu:r, yığaçlanma:k): Osm. «xv ağaçlan- “to be beaten with a stick! T'T'S 77 7. Dis. AGD ugut 'yeast'. Survives in NE Şor R I 1619: SE Türki Shaw 24; NC Kir.ş and, with a slightly different meaning, in SW xx Anat. uğut, uhut, uğunt SDD i415. Xak. xı uğut a word for 'yeast' (xamir) used in making beer (al-mizz). It is various vegetable drugs (adwiva) which are collected and mixed with (specially) grown barley; the whole is then kneaded, cut into pieces the size of a nut and dried. Then wheat and barley are boiled, and the yeast is broken up, and an amount the size of a nut is sprinkled on each (lot of) wheat. The boiled wheat is then folded over and put on a clean thing (say) to ferment for three days. "Then it is picked up and put in a jar and left to ferment in it for (another) ten days. 'Then water is put on it and later strained. "This is wheat wine' (şardbı”l-hinta) Kaş. I so. D afduk prob., as Kag. suggests, N./A. S. fr. 2 a:ğ-, although there is little semantic connection. Survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. ağdık 'fault, defect; useless, bad; excessively heavy” SDD 73, unless NE Sor adik “veakminded, confused' is also a survival. The original meaning scems to have been 'stranger, foreigner". Uyğ. vir ff. Man.A mana ağduk karı betkeçi “to me, the foreign old scribe” M I 28, 19; same phr. (damaged) do. zı, title, men ağduk bét[kecl] M III 43, 12-13 (v. le Coq, perhaps rightly, took this to be a Proper Name): Xak. xı ağduk kişi: al-raculu'l-daxilu'lladi ld yu'raf man huma "a stranger whose identity is unknown'; adğuk alternative metathesized form Kaş. I 99; aduk ne: al-;ay'u'l-machil "an unknown thing”, its origin is ağduk meaning mutağayyir mutanahhir 'altered, changed”, derived from the expression ani) mepzi: ağdı: fagayyara lawnuhu "his colour changed”, with the -Éeliminated as an abbreviation 7 65: Osm. xiv to xvi ağduk “changed: damaged, imperfect; inopportune' in several texts T'T'S 16; I1 8; Ill 5; IV 6. ; D oktam Hap. leg.; N.S.A. fr. okta:-. Cf. atım. Xak. xı bir oktam yö:r qadar ramya mina'l-ard "a space the length of a bowshot Kaş. I 107. Dis. V. AGDD ağıt- Caus. f. of 1 a:ğ-. N.o.a.b. Cf. ağtur-. Türkü vri (the 'l'ürkü people were in 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 125 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. AGD- 8 a bad way) oza: kelmiş süsi:n Kül Tégin ağıtıp “Kül "Tegin roused (that part of) their army which had escaped” 7 N 7, parallel passage // E 3o-r, (his horse fell) yana: ağıtıp 'making it get up again” Ix. 19 (sic on stone, not ağılıb as in, printed text): vir ff. Man. biliğimizni köpülümüzni bu tórt tórlüg tenrilerde ağıtdımız erser “if we have exaited our knowledge and minds above these four kinds of gods" Chuas. 184-7: Xak. XI Ol ani: ta:ğka: ağıttı: “he made him clirab (as"adahu) the mountain (etc.)'; and one says teprl: bulit ağıttı: “God made a cloud rise' (anga'a . . . sahdba) Kaş. I,212 (agitur, ağıtma:k), bu: keyik ol fiij ta:ğka: ağıtğa:n “this wild game is constantly making the dog climb (yuga" id) the mountain' 7 155: KB (Why do you grieve? Why these lamentations? God's summons has come.) sığıtnı afit “Avvay with lamentations” 1233 (an inappropriate use of the word, but perhaps the only rhyme for sığıt). D akıt- Caus, f. of ak-; “to make (liquid, etc.) flow; to send out (a party, etc.) to raid'. S.i.a.m.l.g., except SC, as akit-/afat- in both meanings. Cf, aktur-, Türkü vii Kül Tegin beg başlayu: akıt(t)ımız "we sent out a raiding party under the command of Kül "Tegin and the begs” 1 N 8 (hitherto misread); tün akıtdımız 'we sent out a raiding party by night" T 35: Uyf. vir ff. Man. buyanlığ taluy öğüz akitip 'causing an ocean of virtues to flow ' TT III 163: Bud. kan ógüz akıtar (sic) “they cause rivers of blood to flow' PP. 3,4; a.0. TT VI 136 (ak-). Xak. xi tepri: akın akıttı: “God made the stream flow' (asdla"1-sayl), and one says ol Ssu:v akitti: “he poured out (acrd) the water; and one says beg akınçı: akittr “the beg sent a raiding party (ba'ata . . . sariya) against the enemy” Kaş, I 212 (akitur, akitma:k); bu: ta:ğ ol tavra:k akin nkitğa:n translated 'this mountain is quick at making the rain run away' (sari'w'l-isála iPl-matar) 1 156: KB akıtsa suvuğ yerde “if you pour water on the ground” 973; (we must open a vein and) akıtğu kanı 'bleed him” ros8, a.o. 1160 (akin): xr(?») KBVP xazina tolulap akıtğu kerek “you must fill (your) treasury and pour it out” 51: xi(?) Tef. akit- "to pour out” 47: Xwar. xiv ditto Quib 10; Nahc. 68, 17. PU ?S oğat- n.o.a.b.; in Syriac script, so the -É- is certain. In Muséon XXXVI, p. 45 Bang equated this word with SE Tar. oxat"to awaken' R 1 1004, hut that is unlikely since the original form of the latter, Fodğat-, could hardiy have lost the -d- so early. İt is more likely that it is a Sec. f. of okit or ukit-. Uyğ. viti ff. Man, oğatıp kelmiş blznl teg tinhglarka evangelyon nom ertinig nomlap kottupuz 'having come to make people like us recite (or 'understand') it(?) you have exhaustively taught the precious doctrine of the gospel' TT III 62-3: Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. (you will certainly be reborn) oğatmatın [ses?]metin *without invoking(?) or . . .' (the Buddhas) Suv. 24, 20. D okit- Caus. f. of okt:-; “to make (someone Acc. or Dat.) recite or read (something Zce.)'. S.i.a.m.I.g. usually as okut- and meaning “to teach”, Uy£&amp;. viri ff. Bud. kim kayu tinliğ bu nom bitiğiğ . . . okisar okitsar 'whoever recites this scripture or has it recited" TT VI şı-z, o.o. do. 68 (TT VIII O.9); TT VII ız, ro, 28, 3; Suc. 478, 19: Xak. xr ol mapa: bitig okitti: “he made me read (agra'ani) the hook (etc.)'! Kaş. 1 212 (okitur, Okitma:k); bu bitiğ ol kigi:ni: okitga:n 'this book, because of its length, makes a man read a lot' (hatira(n) mda yuqri') 1 156: KB (whoever was intelligent) okitt1 anı “he had him summoned' 416; (if a servant makes a mistake) okıtğu kerek "you must have him summoned' 641: Çağ. xv (f. okut- Caus, f.; xeodndndan “to cause to read, or recite” San. 77v. 7: Kom. xiv “to teach” oBut- CCI; Gr.: Kap. xv agra'a okut- Kav. 69, 10; 75, 13; istaqra'a okut- Tuh, 4b. 8. D ukit- Caus. f. of uk-. N.o.a.b. Cf. uktur-. Uyğ. viu ff. Man. öz tözlerin ukittip *explaining their nature and origin” T7 111 30: Bud. ukitur "he explains” TT VIII 4.16 and 17; 0.0. do. 4.30, H.1 and 2; these are the only texts in which okit- and ukit- are distinguished; it may have been misread elsewhere. D okta:- Den. V. fr 1 ok. Survives only in NE Khak., Tuv. and NC Kir,, Kzx., usually “to load (a weapon); to cock (a rifle). The normal modern form is okla-. Xak. xr keyik kellgi: bolsa: okta: ida Rana sagt hudüri'l-pahbg fa'rmihi "when the wild game comes, shoot it” Kaş. 7 26, 16: a.o. H1 97, 16 (utrug-); n.m.e. D oktat- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of okta:-, Xak. xı beg anı: oktattı: “the beg ordered him to shoot an arrow' (armdhu bi”l-nabl) Kaş. I 26o (oktatur, oktatma:k). S ağtıl- See ağtarıl-. D ağtın- Refl. f. of ağıt-. N.o.a.b. Uy. virt ff, Bud, Sanskrit yanam áruhya “having mounted a chariot kölökke: ağtınıp TT VIII 4.37; (in order that the flames of hell may not rise to meet me) örtlüğ yérlerde taki ağtınmazkan “and in order that I may not be made to climb into fiery places! U 27 78, 42-3; 8.0. Suv. 601, 23. ağtar-/axtar- apparently both Intrans. “to turn, or roll, over” (rare) and Trans. “to turn, or roll, (something Acc.) over”, with some extended meanings like “to translate (a book etc. cc.) from (one language bL) into (another -ça/-çe)” , more or less syn. with evir-, esp. in the last meaning. "he second syllable, always -tar-, excludes the possibility that this is a Caus. f. Also partly syn. with ağna:-, but unlikely to be connected with it etymologically. As regards the velar, Kaş. is prob. right in saying that ağtar- was the original form, though he habitually uses axtar-, sce his remarks on sigit; the Uyg. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 126 
     
   
   
     82 DIS, V. AGDscript is too ambiguous to make the Uyjt. form certain. S.i.a.m.l.g., sometimes much distorted, e.g. NE apdar-/apnar-/apar-; NC, NW awdar- as well as more regular forms, aktar-/axtar- in the same groups. Uyf. viui ff. Bud. axtaru topdaru teğzinürler "they revolve rolling about (Hend.)' U II 4, ro ff. ; (Kitsi Samtso translated (evirmiş) this work from Indian into Chinese, and then Sigku Sali Tutup) tavğaç tilintin. ikileyu türk tilinca axtarmış “in the second place translated. it from Chincse into “Turkish” U I 14, 5-7; similar phr. USp. 94, 8-9; Sus. 33, 19: Xak. xr er ta:şığ axtardı: “the man turned over (ga/laba) the stone”, and one says tüpl: yığa:çığ axtardı: “the gale knocked over (asqata) the tree”: also used of anything that turns over (galaba) anything; the -xis altered from -ğ- as in Arabic xattàr| Baddár and ximdriğimdr, and one says ol y€:r axtardı: 'azaga'l-ard wa — karabahá, "he dug the ground and turned it over” Kay. I 219 (axtarur, axtarma:k); basti; ölüm axtaru: sara'ahu'l-matt "death laid him low' I 516, 4: same quotn. but aétaru: JI 74, 14: xiv Mwh. al-mayl "to lean over” axtamak (unvocalized, perhaps error for axtarmak) Mel. 37, 2; Rif. 122 (mála is translated emit-): Çağ. xvff. axtar- tafahhus kardan “to examine, search (something) Sam. 32v. 8 (quotns.): Kip. xiv aktar- qalaba İd. ız, galabajqallaba axtur- (sic) Bul. 73v.: xv qalaba aktar- Kat. 74, 17; Tuh. 29b. 15: Osm. xiv ff. aktar-/axtar-/akdar- (the last two rare) "to turn over, overthrow' c.i.a.p. TT'S I 15; H 21; HE 11; IV 13. D ağtur- Caus. f. of 1 a:ğ-. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. ağdır-, Tkm. aığdır- vvith rather different meanings. Cf. ağıt-. Türkü viu. T 25 (iğaç): Uyg. vir ff, Man.-A xormuzda tepriğ tamudan yokaru ağturdi üntürdi “he raised (Hend.) the God Hormuzd from hell” M I 13, 18-20; tapda érte uluğ yaylıkka ağturmişin “that he made (his disciples) go up to the summer room (i.e. lecture hall) early in the morning” Zfüen-ts. 1966-7: Xak. xin(?) Tef. ağdur- “to raise" 37: Osm. xiv ff. ağdur- (later a&amp;dir-) "to lift, raise; c.ia.p. TTS I 6; II 8; III 5; IV s. D aktur- Caus. f. of ak-; 'to pour out, cause to flow', S.i.s.m.]l., but rarer than akit-. Uyğ. vrit ff, Civ. [gap] aktursar “if one pours out . ..' (on a Horse Day, it is unlucky) T'T VII 39, 7: Xak. xı ol su:v akturdr amara bi“tasyili"H md” tva üsdlatihi “he ordered that the water should be poured out”? (verse) akturur kö:züm yula:k tusil 'ayni "uyüna”l-miydh "my eye pour out fountains of water' Kaş. I 222 (akturur, akturma:k); same verse III 17, 9: xın(?) Tef. akdur- “to pour out” 47: Çağ. xv ff. aktur-(-dun)/akız-(-dı) a&amp;it- Vel. 25 (quotn.); akiz-/aktur- (spelt) Caus. f.; rateán hardan 'to pour out” Sas. 44v. 25 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv aktur- ditto Qutb. ro, Nahc. 242, 14. D uktur- Caus. f. of uk-; “to make (someone Dat.) understand (something Zcc.); to explain (it to him)”. Survives in SE Türki: NC Kir. Cf. ukit-. Uy. vir ff, Bud, adınağuka biltürmedin ukturmadin 'without lettíng others know or understand" TT VI 35s (v.L.); a.0. do, 147-8 (Ótgür-): Xak. xr ol mapa: anim só:zin ukturdiı: "he explained to me (afhamani) his words (etc.)' Kaş. I 223 (ukturur, ukturma:k): KB yayığ dunyğ kilkin sana ukturur "it explains the charncter of this fickle world to you” 398; o.o. 510, 796, etc.: xın(?) Tef. uktur- "to explain! 325: xiv Mui. (?) a"lama tva "arrafa "to communicate, make known' uktu:r- Rif. 103; “arrafa ğayrahn u:ktur- riz (only): Xwar. xiv uktur- “to explain! Quib 117 (oktur-): Ktp. xiv ukturfahhama İd. ış. D oktaş- Recip. f. of okta:-. Survives only(?) in NC Kır. oktos- "to make a sudden movement, e.g. of a horse, to shy'. Xak. xr ol anıp birle: oktaştı: translated. ramdhu bi'l-sahm “he shot an arrow at him” (error for rámáhu "he competed in shooting; also used for gára'ahu "he drew lots with him” Kaş. I 231 (oktaşur, oktasma:k). Tris. AGD D okatei: Hap. leg.; possibly a scribal error for Oktgi, q.v.; if not, an abbrevintion, metri gratia, of *okidaci: N./A. fr. oki:-, Xak. xt KB mni 1dti él(l)ig okitçi sapa “the king sent me to you to summon you” 3488. "ris, V. AGDD ağtarıl-/axtarıl- Pass, f. of aétar-/axtarsurvives in most of the same languages with the same phonetic changes. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. kemi axtarılur “the ship is overturned” PP 18, 3, axtarılu tondarılu 'rolling over and over (Hend.)' Suv. t33, 21; 6or, rr-rz: Civ. (the cold water which rises in the well) axtariu yanturu yoridi "has been turned over and goes back” TT I 105: Xak. xı er ağtıldı: the man was knocked down' (guri'a); its original form was ağtarıldı: Kaş. I 246 (ağtılur, ağtılma:k): xiv Muğ. inqalaba “to be overturned' axtarıl- Me. zo, 10; Rif. 104: Çağ. xvft. axtarıl- zafahhus şudan “to be searched” San. 32v. 26: Osm. xiv, xv axtarıl-/aktarıl- fakdarıl- “to be overturned, turned away' in several texts TS 7 15; HH 19; HI 11; IV 13. D okatsa:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of okit-, Xak. xt ol bitiğ okitsa:di: “he wished to have the book read” (yugri'a'l-kitáb); also used of wishing to summon (yad') someone Kaş, I 302 (okıtsa:r, okitsa:ma:k). Dis. AGG D akığ Dev. N./A.Ac. fr. ak-; 'flow, flowing; liquid'. Survives as ağığ in NE Leb., Sor R I 154 and ağu: in NE Alt, Tel.; NC Kzx., NW Kaz. RI 172. Similar forms with final -k in some languages seem rather to represent  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 127 
     
   
   
     DIS. AÓL 83 Ar. "aqiq "a ravine worn by a stream'. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (in a list of demons who are foul feeders, between those that eat ylrip “pus” and those that eat 801 'moisture, juice", yar 'spittle', and leşip “mucus”) akığ aşllğlar 'eaters of serum'(?) U JI 65, 19; 66, 42; in technical Buddhist terminology akığ (more particularly in its der. f.s akığlığ, akığsız) translates Sanskrit srava (Chinese lou, Giles 7,360) lit. 'flowing', metaph. “restlessness, impcrmanence' TT VI, note 157-61; (mortals) alku akığların alkıp 'suppressing all their restlessnesses” Suv. 185, 20-1; az ulati nızvanılarığ akığlarığ “the , passions and restlessnesses, lust and so on” Ü HI 88, 4-5: Civ. [gap] a:kağ yolla:rda: “in the (internal) vessels (that carry) liquids” 77 VIII 1.7 (prob. the gullet, intestines, etc., not the veins). VU?F oxa:k Hap. leg.; prob. an Iranian(?) L-w. Xak. xi oxn:k "uşdra faliqi'I-migmig yuşrab “the juice of split apricots', used as a beverage Kaş. I 122. D okığ Dev: N. fr. oku-. Survives, usually as oku: and the like in NC Kir., Kzx., and some NW and SW languages. Uyf. vir ff. Civ. emdi bu künde ken bu korçularka okığlar ayıtlar 1dmazun USp. 45, 8-9; this document is confused and largely unintelligible; korcu here is prob. a Mong. l.-w., lit. *bowman', a kind of minor official (Z/aevisch 67); ayıtlar Hap. leg. if correctly read, should mean 'questionnaire'; 'now from this day onwards he must not send summonses and questionnaires to these Korgus'. uğuk some form of leg-wear, prob. “felt gaiters or leggings'. 'lhe contracted form noted by San. survives as uk 'felt stocking' in all NE dialects, There is another Sec. f. uyuk in NC Kzx: NW Kaz. R 7 1518 (only): SW xx Anat. (refugees) SDD 1424. The entry in Uyğ. xiv Chin.-Uyjg. Dict. wa 'felt stockings" (Giles 12,434) uguk R I 1735; Ligeti 273 can hardly be an error for this work. Xak. xı uğuk al-curmüq 'gaiters, leggings! Kaş. I 67: Çağ. xvff. uğ . . . (2) müza ki az büst-i pagmdár ba-düzand 'boots made of leather with the wool on it” San. 76v. 18. D ukuğ N.Ac. fr. uk-, “understanding”. Survives only(?) in NC Kir. uğu: Cf. ukus, which is the normal word in KB. Xak. xı KB apar bérdl erdem bilig öğ ukuğ '(God) gave him (i.e. man) manly virtues, knowledge, intelligence, and understanding" 148. Dis. V. AĞĞD ağuk- Pass. Den. V. fr. au: Survives only(?) in NE Khak. o:x-, Tuv. o:k- “to be poisoned”, Uyğ. viu ff. Man. az nizvanika ağukup “being poisoned by the passion of lust' TT II] 28: Bud. yelvikip ağukup öltürgell sakınsar “if he plans to kill him by sorcery or poison' Kuan. 184; ödsüz ölüm yelvikmek ağukmak “to die prematurely by sorcery or poison' Sut. 472, 15; o.o, (without yélvik-) Suv. 593, 17; USp. 102a. 7: Xak. xr er ağuktı: "the man was poisoned' (summa); this is Pass. (lazim) Kaş. I 191 (ağuka:r, ağukma:k): Çağ. xvff. ağukmasmüm şudan “to be poisoned” Sar. 43v. 10. Tris. AĞĞ D akığlığ P.N./A. fr. akığ in its technical translates Sanskrit sdrava 'imBud. sense; permanent, restless. Uyf$. vin ff. Bud. TT VI, note 157-61, several examples; Suv. 354, 5 (oxşatığsız). D akığsız Priv. N./A. fr. akığ in its technical Bud. sense; translates Sanskrit anásrava 'stable, permanent, not restless. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. TT VI, note 157-61, several examples. Dis. AGL ağıl originally 'an enclosure for livestock; cattle-pen, sheep-fold'; thence 'a settlement or group of tents' associated with such an enclosure. An early, ?First Period, l.-w. in Mong. as ayil (Haenisch 11, Kow. 3), and in Russian (fr. a NW language) as aul, Sutvives as ağıl in SE Türki, Sham 11; SC Uzb. (oğıl) and SW Az. Osm., Tkm. (a:ğıl) and as awl in some NC and NVV languages. The form ayıl in some NE and NC languages is a reborrowing fr. Mong. See Doerfer II ,593. Türkü vii ff, ağılınta: yilki: p bolzu:n “may you getlivestock in your pens” /rk.2 47: Uyğ.ıx (I was a rich man) ağılım on yilkim sansız erti:'I had ten pens and innumerable livestock" Suci s: Xak. xı ağıl marbadu'l-fanam 'sheepfold'; and in Oğuz ratwtu'l-fanam 'sheep's dung', because the two are closely connected, just as in Ar. both 'rain' and 'clouds' are called sad Kaş. 1 ?3: afrlda: (sic) oğla:k tuğsa: “if a kid is born in the fold' 7 65, 21: xi(?) Tef. ağıl “sheep-fold” 37: xiv. Muh.(?) marbadu'l-janam ağıl Rif. 179 (only): Çağ, xv ff. ağıl (r) hála-i máh "a halo round the moon" (2) muhawteata “enclosure”, which they make for cattle to sleep in; also used in Pe. San, 44r. 19; awul (spelt) "a place in which nomadic tribes (1/46) collect and settle down'; a corruption of Ar. Aatcili "a small enclosure, yard" San. 53v. 7 (no doubt an xviri, not a Çağ. word, the etymology is absurd): Oğuz xı see Xak.: Kip. xiv ağıl a/-hazira Fara. D haziratu L-ğanam ko:yun ağlı: (sic) İd. 16: Osm. xıiv ff, ağılfağul 'sheep-fold' in xiv TTS I 6, 13; “halo” in all periods in ay ağılı I 55; II 72; III 5, 49; IV 6, sı, 373 (gün ağılı). oğul 'offspring, child', originally of either sex, but with a strong implication of 'male child”, by itself it can mean 'son', but not 'daughter'; in the Plur. it might mean 'sons and daughters”, but oğul kız would be the more normal expression. One of the very few Turkish words forming a Plur. in -n. Thus oğla:n was originally the Plur. and understood as such, but this fact was later forgotten and oğul camie to mean 'son', and oğla:n 'boy' and 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 128 
     
   
   
     84 DIS. AGL later 'servant! or 'bodyguard' (the origin of German Uhlan); the timing of these changes has not yet been worked out. Both words s.a ml, with various phonetic changes. See Doerfer İl 498, şoz. Türkü vitr various suffixed forms oğlim, oğli:, etc. are common in /, II, T, etc.: oğlanım, clearly Plur., 7S :, IN iş L.N r, oğlamnınızda: Plur. 7 SE; aio. I E s, İT EE s (atış), vii ff. oğli: /rkB. iş, etc., (a gambler staked) oğlanı:n kisi:si:n "his sons (or children) and his vife” do. 29; oğlanım inga: bili:jler 'my sons, know this” do. Postscript: Yen. oğlı: Mal. 30, 2 etc.; sü teni: yeti: bip oğlan erti: do. 26, 8 must mean 'the strength of the army was 7,000 young men” (sic, mof "sons”), on ay eltdi: öğüm oğlan tuğdim “1 was born a boy (nof Plur.) whom his mother had carried for ten months” doe. 29, 5: Man. Xormuzta tepri oğlanı beş tepri “the five gods, the sons (Plur.) of the god Hormuzd' C/tuas. 1 8; a.o. do. 33: Uyü. viii eki: oflima: “to my two sons! Su. FE 7: 1x oğlanım "oh my sons' Suci 9 (ağlımın in do. 6 is a misreading of bağladim) vur ff Man.-A kalti oğul oğlan ergüsinte erürçe 'just as a child comes to maturity (2 ér-) in the womb' (lit. “place for children”) M 7 rq, 12-14; (and the magicians) oğul kız bérü umağaylar 'will not be able to give him sons and daughters! do. rs, To: Man, alku tmliğ oğlanının “of all] the children of men” 77 JII 19: Chr. amrak oğlanlarım (sic) “my dear sons” U 7 5, 4: teprl oğlı "the son of God” do. 7, 1; oğlan kızlar “boys and girls” (belovv the age of tvvo) do. 10, 2: Bud. oğul, oğli, etc. “boy, son” are common TT VII, VIII; PP i11, 6 etc., tınlığ oğlanıpa TT VII qo, 1432; in TT V 12, 127 (a fairly late text) tepridem kız azu teprl oğlanı teg körkle oğlan “a child as beautiful as a divine girl or a son of God' oğlan is clearly Sing.: Civ. oğlun kisip ülüglüg ol “your children and wives are fortunate T'T 7 154-5; kişi oğlr óg(k)e kelmez “children do not come to their mother” do. 216; kiçiğ oğlan “a small boy (Sing.)' do. 161; TT VII 27, 8, kenç oğlan 'a young boy” TT Vİ 23, 3; H 1I 12, 87: xiv Uyg.-Chin. Dict. "son, boy” oğul Ligeti 186: O. Kir. IX ff. olim, oğli are common; oğlanım Mal. 1, 1 etc. is clearly Plur. but oğlan atım do. 45, 1 seems to mean "my name as a boy”: Xak. xi oğul a/-ibn “son”, and £ayru'l-ibn mina l-sibyan "boys who are not (a man's) sons' arc called oğul, hence one says bu oğul ne: téir “vhat: does this boy (al-sabi) say?'; za yucma" ..... “ald gayri'l-qiyás and it forms the irregular Plur. oğlan but oğulla:r is also permissible as Plur.; this is like the word eren for al-rici! “men”, ta qad yuwahhad kildhumá, and both of them are used in the Sing. Kaş. 1 74; about 7o o.o. of oğul and şo of oğla:n: KB oğul normally “son” is common, 110, 186, 187, etc.; kiclg oğlarırğ “a small boy” 293, 1097, etc.; atın tutti mindi bir oğları bile “he took his horse and rode off with one page' 4970: xın(?) 4t. Mahmüd oğlr 496; Tef. oğul “son”, Plur. oğullar, oğlan “child, boy”, also? Collective Plur. 231: xiv. Muh. al-nasl tca'l-duriya 'offspring' o:ğul Rif. 143; al-şabi oğlan 85: Çağ. xv ff. oğul farzand 'son' San. 77r. 6; oğlan (speit) pisar tea farzand “boy, son" and metaph. 'beardless böy", and they call the sons of tbe Monpol Xans oğlan just as Persian princes arc called mirzd and Rümi princes su/fdn; oğlan agi cundbidastar “castoreum”, beaver's — glands, called in Turkish kunduz do. 76v. 24: Arğu xı oğla: (sie) al-fatd 'vouth' Kag. I 129: Xvvar. xin(?) oğul “son”, Plur. oğullar common in Og.: xiv oğlan “boy” Qutb 114; oğul 'son MN is: Kom. xiv “son” oğul CCT; oğul/ovul Plur. oğlanlar (CCG; Cr. 1:73 (many suffixcd forms): Kip. xin al-sabi owla:n also called ofla:n; a/-ri// “child” kenç oğla:n, a/-radi" "foster cbild' ağuz oğla:n /7on. 24, 20; al-tralad 'son' oğul do. 32, 2: xiv Oğul al-ibn, in Kipcak (sic) owul İd. 16; oğla:n al-ğuldm "boy, page” do. 16; al-ibn oğlan/oğul Bul. 9. 2: xv oğlum ibni Kav. ış, 20; ofilt: do. 44, 12; 59, 12; tealad owul, in Tkm. oğul Tuh. 38a. 8; al-gabi olan and (Tkm.) oğlan do. 78b. 6: Osm. xiv ff. oğul “son”, mainly in phr. T'T'S 7 536; İH 535; IV 601; oğlan “son, child (male or female)” by itself and in phr. 77 717 fT., 7/7 533 fi: IV s9off.; xvii oğul ot1 in. Rr, badrancbüya *mountain balm” San. 77r. 6 VU ujfl: Hap. leg. Xak. xi uğlr: al-hinzáb *parsnip'; it is a white sweet-flavoured rootvegetable (cazar) grown in the city of Kashgar and eaten Kaş. 7 129. D ağla:k N./A.S. fr. 1 ağla:-, q.v.; almost always of places 'uninhabited, remote, lonely'. S.i.a.m.l.g. with phonctic variations. It seems prob. that SW Osm. aylak, which cannot otherwise be explained, is a Sec. f. of this word. Uyğ. viirff. Bud. ağlak yérte “in a lonely place” U 7/7 63, ro: Xak. xr ağla:k y&amp;r al-mawdi'u'lladi là anis bihi “a place where one has no companions! Kaş, 7 119; ye:rl: takı: agla:k soa ina" döliha arduhum qafr "and in addition their land is desert” 7 468, 8, a.o. II aös, 19 (ağlat-): xiv Muh. al-nágis 'deficient, lacking' ağla:k Me/. 82, 15; Rif. 188: Xwar. xiv ağlak “deserted, solitary; bashfuP” Qutb 4: Kom. xiv “desert” avlak CCG, Gr.: Kip. xiv oğlak (sic; one MS. ağlak) al-xdli 'uninhabited' /d. 17: aylak maccdn ay bild şay “free, that is without (paying) anything! do. 27 (prob. Tkm.): xv xala 'solitude, a remote place" yawlak (sic) Tuh. 14b. 7; göb, 9 (and see 1 oğ): Osm. xv ff. aylak (1) "out of work, unemployed'; (2) “free, gratis'; c.i.a.p. T TS 7 60; 11 81; İTİ sa, IV 60: xviii aylak in Rümi muft "free, gratis', in Pe. also raygán, in Ar. maccán San. $7v. 1 (in SW xx Anat. ağlak "lonely, ininbabited' SDD 76; aylak “alone, only; free, pratis; idle, unemployed; one who works for his keep without wages' do. 139). D oğla:k Dim. f. of oğul, 'kid, young goat' without any connotation of a particular age, contrast çepiş, in some modern languages metaph. for “boy”, S.i.a.m.l.g. with various A NEHME TUERI EMEN 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 129 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. phonetic changes, see Shcherbak, p. 119. Uyğ. vit ff. Civ. (in a İist of animals) oğlak USp. 55, 10: Xak.xı oğla:k a/-cady 'kid' Kaş. 1 119 (prov.); oğla:k ay 'kid month", the first month of spring; uluğ oğla:k ay “the following month, because the kid then grows bigger I 347, 26 ff; eight o.o.: KB oflak “the constellation Capricorn' 141: xiv Rb. ditto (copied from KB) R 7 1022; Muh.(?) al-cady oğla:k Rif. 172 (only): Çağ. xv ff. oğlağ/ oğlak "a kid (Pruzgala) four months old”, also the name of “Capricorn” (burc-i-cady) San. 76v. 24: Xwar. xiv oğlak 'kid' Qutb. 114: Kom. xiv 'kid' oğulak CCI; Gr.; ulax CCG, Gr.: Kom, xim al-cafly oğalak (sic?) Hou. 15, 9: xiv oğlak a/-"andq "kid” İd. 16; o:ak (sic, under alif làm but? owlak intended) waladu'l-fazál “young gazelle' do. 21; (under yavla:k) and in the Kitáb Beylik al-cady is yowlak, it has already been said that it is oğlak do. 99; al-cady oğlak Bul. 7, 13: XV saxla 'kid' awlak (in margin in ?5W hand oğlak) Tu. 19b. 2. D okluğ P.N./A. fr. 1 ok; lit. “possessing arrows', Survives in NE Khak. uxtiğ, "uv, oktuğ (of a gun) 'cocked'; NW Kaz. ukli possessing. arrows'; SW Osm., Tkm. oklu ditto., but normally used only in the phr. oklu kirpi 'porcupine". Xak. xı (after kirpi:, q.v.) and al-duldul "the porcupine' is called okluğ kirpi: Xaş. T 415: Kip. xv Tu. 29a. 7 (see kirpi:). D okluk A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. 1 ok; 'quiver'. Survives in NC Kir. and SW Osm. Xak. xı okluk al-kindna 'quiver' Kaş, I 100. D oğla:n See oğul, Dis. V. AĞLD okil- Pass. f. of okt:- , normally only “to be read”. S.is.m.]; others use okin- in this sensc. Xak. xi bitiğ okıldı: "the book was read” (quri'a) Kaş. I 197 (okilur, okilma:k): Çağ. xv ff. okul- (-di) okun- Vel. 108; okulPass. f.; xwánda şudan “to be read, recited' San. 77v. 5 (quotns.). D ukul- Pass. f. of uk-; 'to be understood'. Survives as uğul- in somc NE languages and NC Kir, Xak. xi bu söz ukuldi: “this remark was understood” ('urifa) Kaş. I 197 (ukulur, ukulma:k): KB ukuldi bu söz 1017; o.o. 2251, 5987. D 1 ağla:- Tlap. leg., but sec agla:k, ağlat-, "to be deserted, abandoned”, and the like. Morphologically a Den. V. connected not with 1, 2 a:ğ, but with medieval 1 oğ, there are traces of a connection between ağla:k, q.v., and that word, but there is no good evidence that this verb and its der. f.s ever started with o-. Xak. xı ağlayu: Xaş. İTİ 258, 16 (yurt), n.m.e. S 2 ağla:- Sec ığla:-. DF akla:- Den. V. fr. 2 ak, q.v. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. -vrri ff, Bud. (my father and mother AGL- . 85 loved (sever) my elder brother the prince and) möni aklayur erti 'hated me" PP 29, r: Civ. (his mouth gets dry; when he drinks water he is not satisfied) a:şağ a:kla:r “he hates (the sight of) food" TT VIII L2. D ığla:- Den. V. fr. *15$; “to weep'. "The phonetic history of this verb is very similar to that of ığaç, q.v.; the original form was certainly ığla:-, but a form with prosthetic yevolved in Uyg. and was an alternative form in Xak. S.i.a.m.l.g. usually as iğla-, yığla- or a Sec. or metathesized form of one of them, but in NE there are some forms with initial aor rounded. vowels and the SW form ağla:(Tkm. a:ğla-) prohably emerged as early as xiv. UyB. vit ff. Man. ot suv kuti iğlayur “the majesty of fire and water weeps' M II 12, 4: Bud. iğladım PP 5, 6; iğlayu 4, r and 7; 5, 2; 10, 6; yığlayu (sic?) ro, 5; YAŞI tókülü ığlayu 'weeping with streaming tears USp. 106, 47; yığlayu six[tayu] “veeping and sobbing' U Zİ 17, 3; bağrın yatıp yığlayu yalvara 'lying on their bellies weeping and pleading" TT IV 4, 13; yaşlığ kózin yığlayu 'weeping with tear-filled eyes” TT X 297: Xak. xi oğla: ığla:dı: "the boy wept' (baká); alternative form (/uğa) of yiğla:dı: Kaş. I 286 (ıiğla:r, i1jla:ma:k); oğla:n yığla:dı: same translation II]. 309 (yığla:r, yığla:ma:k, verse); five 0.0. of yığla:-: KB üküş yığladı rızı, 1149; a.o.o.: XIV Rbg. iğla- (?sic, unvocalized) R I 177; Muh.(?) bahd iğla:- (?sic, unvocalized) Rif. 105 (only); al-bakd' 1$1amak (ditto) 121: Caf. yığla- girya hardan “to weep' Sam. 350r. 8 (quotns.): Xvvar. xur ağla- ditto “Ali 29, etc.; yığla- do. 40, 49: xi(?) iğlasa Oğ. 61: xiv yığla- Qutb go, iğla- do. 205; yığladınız Nahe. 103, 8: Kom. “to weep' ığla- CCI; iğla-fila- CCG; Gr. 272: Kap. xut bakà 1ğla:- (unvocalized) Hou. 36, tö: xiv 1Bla- baká wa futiha'l-hamza turkmáni ''km. agla- Jd. r6: xv baká yığla- Kav. 17, 14; ör, 14; ağla- do. 38, 6; baká yığla- (in margin yıla-) Tul. 8b. 1; náha wa bahd “to weep and wail' zar zar yila-, in Tkm.yığlado. 35b. 3. VUD rhla:- Hap. leg., the a/;f is unvocalized, but it seems reasonable to suppose that this is a Den. V. fr. Fıh, an alternative form of 1k, q.v., same meaning. Xak. xi (in a note on exclamations ending in *quiescent' Ad”) radical (al-aşli) ha” is not found in the purc (samím) 'l'urkish language except in the expression er ihla:dı: axada”l-racıla”l-rabto the. man. was seized with hiccoughs', in which this (ih) is an onomatopoeic for the sound which rises from the chest (and also in the word ühi: *owl', q.v.) Kaş. HI 118, 21; n m.e. D ağlat- Caus. f. of 1 ağla:-. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı ol kişi:ni: ağlattı: “he sent away (ab'ada) the people from himself, If-yaxlusca'l-marád lahnu, so that the grazing land might be empty for him" Kaş. I 265 (ağlatur, aglatma:k); (in a grammatical para.) ol ye-riğ ağlattı: axlá'l-makán "he emptied the area”: its origin 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 130 
     
   
   
     86 DIS. V. AGLs ağla:k ye:r makán xáli "an empty, uninhabited area' İT 365, 13. : D rğlat- Caus. f. of 1$1a:-; “to make (someone cc.) veep”, S.i.a.m.l.g. with the same phonetic changes. Xak. x1 ol anı: yığlattı: abkáhu “he made him weep' Kaş, /İT 355 (yığlatu:r, yığlatma:k): KB, 3505, 4096 (kültür-): Çağ. xv ff. yığlat- Caus. f. girydnidan "to cause to weep' San. 3sor. az: Kip. xiv iğlat- abad İd. 16. VU?8 uflit- Hap. leg.; the spelling is certain, since it lies between ağlat- and avlat-, but the meaning is identical with that of ükllt-, q.v., and this must be either a dialect form or one of Kaj.'s rate mistakes”, Xak. xı ol tawa:rin (sic) uBlitti: kattara mölahu wa. tanimara “he increased (Hend.) his property” Kaş. I 265 (uğlrtur, uéIitma:k). D aklış- Co-op. f. of akil- (see ak- Çağ.) Pass. f. of ak- but without any Pass. connotation. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı teğme: yipa:ktin bo:dun aklıştı: izdahama 'l-nàs min kull awb "the people crowded together from every direction'; sea kadálika'l-miyáh idá tasáyalat min küll facc also used of waters when they flow togetber from every ravine Kaş. I 241 (aklışu:r, akligma:k); a.o. 7 88, 1 (ori). D iğlaş- Co-op. f. of iğla:- ; to weep together'. S.i.s.m.l.g. with the same phonetic variations. Uy£f. viii ff. Bud. (the two brothers) iğlaştı ötrü sığtaştılar “vept and sobbed together' PP $3, 1: Xak. xi oğlan iğlaştı: bakatı”l-sibydn “the boys wept (together); alternative form (fuga) of yığlaş- Kaş. I 240 (ığlaşur, iBlagma:k); (in a grammatical para.) kişi: barca: yığlaşdı: “the people all wept (together)' 111 322, 2; n.m.e. of yığlaş-: Caf. xv ff. yığlaş- Co-op. f.; bd yah-digar girya hardan "to weep together' San. 350r. 23. Tris. AGL ?F iki:la:ç Hap. leg.; prob., like the few other words ending in -la:ç, a 1.-w. Xak. xi iki:la:ç al-farasu'I-rá'i u'l-cavcád "a spirited swift horse' Kaş. I 139 (prove. and verse). D oğulçuk Dim. f. of oğul, *vomb'. N.o.a.b. Similar words meaning *womb; fish's roe” but with different suffixes appeared in the medieval period, and still survive; oğulduk first noted m Kom. xiv (ovuldux) and Kip. xv Tw. 7b. 1 and oğulduruk first noted in Osm. xvr. Xak. xı oğulçuk ralimi'I-mar'a “the womb! Kaş. I 149: Xiti(?) Tef. ditto 232. D ağı:lık A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. ağı:: 'treasury'. In Buddhist technical termin :logy translates Chinese ts'ang (see tsan) which itself translates Sanskrit garbha "treasure! and the like. N.o.a.b. Uy. vni ff, Man.-A M III ri, 3 (ii) (barımlık): Man. yéti ağılık nomlarığ nomlat(t)iptz "you have preached the doctrine of the seven treasuries' (or “seven precious doctrines” assuming ağz/ıR is a mis-spelling of ağılığ) TT III 73-4: Bud. yer agilila ... kök kalık fağılıkı) names of two Bodhisattvas “Ksitiyarbha, | Akásagarbha! U I1 18, 4-5; ağılıktakı ağı barim 'treasures and property in the treasury! PP 7, 5-6; ağılıkım tsapim “my treasury and granary” U / 29, 2; olo, U II 47, 17; Suv. 270, 4; TT VI common; TT VH 41,28; Civ. USp. 78, 14-15 (icgeru:). D akı:lık A.N. fr. aki; 'generosity'. Survives only(?) in NE Bar. ağu:luk, same meaning R 7173 and SW Osm. axilik now “a community of axis! (sce aki) Xak. xı kodgil mana: akrlik bolsun mapa: ayağ-a: translated. da'ni hatta acüd fa-yakün laqabi catvád “permit me to be gencrous and may my title be "generous" ” Kaş. I1 172, 11; n.m.e.: KB akilik “generosity” (and other virtues are manifest in the good man) 934: xin(?) At, akihk (axirk in the Arabic script MSS.) 'generosity' 230, 232, 233 (€8-), etc.: Osm. XVI Ar, al-samaha "to be generous! cömerdlik ve axilik etmek T'T'S II r? (this entry proves that Osm. axi is akt: and not derived fr. Ar. ax 'brother"). D ağu:luğ P.N./A. fr. ağu:, 'poisonous'. S..s.m.lg. w. various phonetic cbanges. "Türkü vim ff. ağu:lu:ğ kurt kopu:z adartu: urna:z 'poisonous worms and insects cannot endanger you' Toy. 28-9 (ETY II 59): Man. ekl ağuluğ yol “the two poisonous roads' Chuas. 125: Uyğ. vin ff. Man. (they were saved . . ,) akuluğ (si) yılkıta 'ífrom a poisonous animal (reincarnation)” 77 III 26: Bud. ağuluğ yılan “a poisonous snake" PP 38, 3; U IV 8, 12 (étin-); o.o. PP 39, 6, U HI 31, 53: Civ. ağuluğ “polsonous" H. H 8, so: Çağ. xv tf. ağuluk zzhirnák “boisonous” San. 44r. 10. D oğulluğ P.N./A, fr. oğul, "having a son, or child", S.i.s.m.l.g. Xak. xr KB oğulluğ ata bolsa “if a father has children” 1221: xiu(?) Tef. oğulluk (sic) ditto 232. D oğulluk A.N. (and Conc. N.) fr. oğul, *adoption; an adopted son”, Survives in some NW and all SW languages. Uyf. viri ff. Civ. Turmis atlığ oğlumnı Sutpakka . . oğulluk bérdlm “1 have given my son named "Purmış to Sutpak as an adopted son” USp. 98, 2-4. D oğla:ğu: “genrliy nurtured, delicate! and the like; presumably Dev. N./A. fr. “oğla:- Den. V. fr. oğul, N.o.a.b. Uyf. vir ff, Bud. (she walks with a gliding motion) yumşak oğlağu adakın on her soft, delicate feet! U II 24, 2; men yeme oğlağun öğrenmiş kenç kicig "and Tam a young girl gently brought up” U 7/7 82, 16; oğlağu ünin ündeyü 'speaking with a gentle voice” U IV 14, 142; 0.0. U Hİ 7, 21; 17, 14; 44, 3; Xak, xı oğla:ğu: a/-muna"am woa'I-murabbà fi ni'ma 'pampered, brought up in luxury' ; hence “great ladies” (ai-xatsodtin) are called oğla:ğu: ka:tu:n Kaş. 7 138: K B (the raven's call is like) oğlağu kız üni "a delicate girl's voice” 77; kimin oğlağu bolsa oğlu 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 131 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. kızi "the man whose children are pampered' (will regret it) 1223. VUD oğulmuk Hap. leg.; apparently Den. N. fr. oğul but vv. no obvious semantic connection, Xak. xr oğulmuk ul xagaba mustawiya fi qiwàámi'l-'arida "any straight timber in the supports of a rafter” Kaş. I 149. D oğlanlığ Hap. leg.? ; P.N./A. fr. oğlan (oğul). The A.N. oğlanlık 'boyhood', "the time of youth' is noted in SW Osm. fr. xiv onwards 7 TS I $36, etc. and in xv meaning "infantile convulsions' 1/7 719. Uy. viu ff. Civ. ur1 oğlanlığ evçi “a vvaman who has (borne) a male child" H II 18, 65. D oğla:nsığ Hap, leg.; N./A. fr. ofla:n (oğul). Xak. (in a note on the Suff. -sığ) bu karı: ol oğla:nsığ add şayx yugbih xuluquhu xuluqa”l-şibydn “the habits of this old man are like the habits of a child” Kaş. III 128, 21; n.m.e, Tris, V. AGLD akı:la:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. akı:, Xak. xi ol meni: akı:la:dı: naşabani ild”l-cüd "he attributed generosity to me” Kaş. I 310 (akı:la:r, akila:ma:k). D ağu:la:- Den. V. fr. ağu::, "to poison (someone or something Ace.) Survives only (?) in SW Osm. ağıla-. Xak. xı ol aşın ağu:la:dı: “he poisoned (samıma) his food (ete. Kaş. I 310 (ağu:la:r, afu:la:ma:k). Dis. AGM D ağım N.S.A. fr. 1 a:&amp;-; lit. “a single act of rising or climbing'. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. for 'ascent; instep”, Xak. xı bir ağım yé:r şa"üd mina'l-ard qadr má yug ad daf 'ata(n) "alayhd “a rise in the ground of a size which can be climbed all at once” Kaş. 1 75. D akim N.S.A. fr, ak-; lit. “a single act of flowing'. S.i.s.m.l.g. usually for 'stream, current”. Xak. xı bl:r akım su:v mü” qadr mà yasil marrata(n) "the amount of water that flows once" Kaş. I] 75: Kom. xiv axım "stream” CCG; Gr, Dis. AĞN I ağan Hap. leg.; the para. concerned is most obscure; Thomsen translated tbe word *penance' as a pure guess, suggesting a connection with ağan- in U II 87, öz, this is a simple misreading of afna:-, which could be a Den. V. fr. this word; if so, it might mean “prostration or the like, Orkun's translation 'seclusion', based on a supposed connection with 1 agla:- is morphologically improbable. Türkü vri ff. ak at karşısi:n üç bolu:ğta: talu:1a:pan ağanka: ötü:ğke idmi:s "a white horse choosing his adversary in the three states öf existence(?) sent him to prostration(?) and prayer(?)” IrkB 19. E 2 ağan Hap. leg.; there is no doubt that Kaş. was misled by the resemblance to the AGN- 87 Ar. word and that this is a mis-spelling and mistranslation of ağın which is not listed in Kaş. Xak. xr ağan er al-raculu 'l-adann 'a man who speaks through his nose'; tra hödihi teáfaqati'l-'arabiya. lafza(n) wa. ma'na(n) "this agrees with Ar. in sound and meaning" Kaş. 1 77 (see 2 ağna:-), ağın 'dumb'. Survives only(?) in NE xix Küer. ağın 'stammering" R / ıss. Uyü. viri ff. Chr. (blind) ağın 'dumb' (lame, one armed, etc.) M Hİ aş, 3: Xak. xı KB (if a man gocs to a strange country) kelin teg bolur er ağın teg tilt “he becomes as (shy as) a bride, and his tongue as if dumb” 494; (why do you say nothing) ağın teg bolup “as if you had become dumb?' 775; 0.0. 1016, 1027, 6118, 6452: xiv. Rog. ağın 'dumb' R I 155; Muh.(?) al-abkam 'dumb! ağın Rif. 150 (only). D akin Conc. N. fr. ak-; basically 'stream, current”, : metaph. "a marauding raid', S.i.a.m.lg. in one or both meanings. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. Sanskrit rasa (N.) 'fluid, liquid' akin TT VIII D.3s: Xak. xt akin al-sayl *strearn' ; and al-atiy "a sudden rush of water' is called munduz akin; and this word is used metaph. (yusta'ár) for al-katibatu'l“-müuğira layla(n) “a detachment which raids by night”, so one says akınçı: keldi: “the raiding party bas come”, sd”fla ka'l-sayli'l-atiy 'pouring in like a sudden rush of water' Kaş. 1 77; KB kózde akıttı akin “let loose a flood of tears' 1160: Kip. xin al-ifara "a raid” akin Hou. 14, 9; Şur mina'l-idara akin ét do. 42, 15: xiv akin a/-cary li'l-ifára "rushing out for a raid' İd. 18: xv tayyár "strong current, wave' akin Tuh. 8b. ro, sayl (akmak and) aktn do. 19.2 7: Osm. xiv akin 'raid' in various phr. TTS I 14; II 20; IV 12: xvir akın in Rümi, ğörat wa láxt 'raid, invasion! San. 45v. 8. D uğa:n “God”, etc. See u:-. Dis. V. AGNE ağan- See ağna:- Uyg. D okin- Refl. f. of okt:-. S.i.a.m.l.g. usually in a Pass. sense, Xak. xı bitiğ okindi: “the book was read” (quri'a); and one says ol bitig okındı: “he pretended to read the book without actually reading it", the -n- was changed from -1- Kaş. I 202 (okinur, okınma:k): Osm. xiv ff. okun- (once xv oxun-) “to be called, summoned' in several texts 7 TS 1 537; 11 723; III 538; IV 603. S uğun- See uvun-. D ukun- Refl f. of uk-. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. bilinip ukunup 'recognizing (Hend., his sins)” Suv. 140, 1 and tr, ?D 1 agna:- perhaps Den. V. fr. 1 ağan, "to roll on one's back', esp. of a horse or other animal. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv, some phonetic changes Uyğ. vitrff. Bud. (he wept and sobbed) balıkça ağnayu “rolling about (on the ground) like a fish” PP 58, 7; öz arığsızında 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 132 
     
   
   
     88 DIS. V. AGNağnayu “rolling in his own filth' U //T 35, zo, 0.0. U 11 87, 62 (mistranscribed agan-); U TT 42, 27; Suv. 60r, 12; US. 97, 5-6; ror, 8: Xak. xı at ağna:dı: tamarrağa”l-faras fi'l-türdb 'the horse rolled in the dust (etc.) Kaş. 1 389 (ağna:r, ağna:ma:k): KD sığun muyğak ağnar "the maral deer and doc roll on their backs! 79; (you are an ignorant (metaph.) maral deer) ağınap yor-a “gö and roll on your back” 6613: Çağ. xv IT. ağna- har xdk ğaltidan “to roll on the ground', in Ar. mardğa San. 43r. 22: Xwar. xiv ağna- “to roll on one's back” Qutb 4; Nahc. 318, 16-17: Kip. xır tamarraga l-faras at a&amp;nndt: (misvocalized 15adi:); used of horses, mules, and donkeys Hou. 13, 2: xiv ağna- famarrağa la. 16: xv ditto awna- (in margin Tkm. ağna-) Tuh. ga 6: Osm. xiv ff, ağna- ditto; c.i.a.p. TTS 1 is, Hl 14; HI 8, IV 9. D 2 afiína:- Den, V. fr. ağın, “to be tonguetied, dumb", Survives only(?) in NE Küer. afinna- "to stammer' R 7 156. Xak. xı and one says er ağna:dı: ta"/a"a”l-lisdnu" H-racul rea naqada 'alayhi “the man. was tongue-tied (Hend.Y ; wa aşlıhu mina'l-gunna “its origin is from speaking through the nose” Kaş. ] 289 (ağna:r, ağna:ma:k, sce 2 ağan). D 1 ağnat- Caus. f. of 1 ağna:-, “to make (a horse, etc.) roll on its back", S.i.m.m.İ.g. Xak, xr ol atın topra:kka: ağnattı: marraga farasahu fi'l-turáb "he made his horse roll on its back in the dust (etc.)! Kaş, 7 267 (2 ağnatfollows): Çağ. xv ff. ağnat- Caus. f.; bar xdk ğaltdnidan "to cause to roll on the ground"; Ar. tamriğ San. 43v. g: Osm. xvi ff, ağnatditto, in two texts TTS I 12; JH 14. D 2 afinat- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of 2 ağna:-. Xak. xı (after 1 ağnat-) yaga:k anu) tilin ağnattı: aklu'l-catz. tahala lisinahu hatta şdra ka'annaltu aratta 'eating the nut impeded his tongue so that it was as if he stammered' Kaş. 1 267 (ağnatur, ağnatma:k). Tris. AGN D akınçı: N.Ag. fr. akin; “a raider, raiding party.” Survives onls(?) in SW Osm., where it was used as late as the 1914—:8 War for "lightly armed irregular troops, Xak, xt akınçu: (sic, in error under influence of preceding word avımçu:) a/-sariva "a raiding party which goes by night and attacks the enemy” Kaş. 1 134; akınçı: / 77 (akin), 7 212 (akit-); Osm. xvir akinçı (in Rümi, see akin) jfáratkar wa taxt hRunanda raider, marauder” San. 45v. 8. D uğança See u:-. D afinesiz pec. to Uyğ. As pointed out in U I, p. ss this word is used to translate the Chinese phr. pu ut (Giles 9,456. 12,183) which — translates Sanskrit — avirreartádniva “indomitable, unshakeable'. It seems therefore to be a Priv. N/A. fr. *afinc Dev. N. fr. the Retl. f. of 2 a:ğ- in its medieval meaning (see BiÉ- Preliminary note). It could be transcribed as akınçsiz and taken as more or less syn. with akığsız, but this is less probable. Uyğ. vun ff. Man, ağınçsız kópül "an unshakceable, mind” TT JII 18: Bud. Suv. 488, 13; Pfahl. 6, 4 (evrilincsiz). D akındı: Intrans. Dev, N./A. fr. Refl. f. of ak- ; flowing, running! (water, etc.) ; 'astream', S.is.m.lg. Xak. xi akindt: su:v. af-má'w'T“seal 'running water' Kaş, 1 140: Çağ. xv ff. akindi syn. with akış (not pre-Çağ.) meaning cirydi-i ab “a flow of water! San. 45v. 8 D ağınğaç See satu:, Dis. AGR ağır basically 'heavy' in the physical sense; hence metaph. in two contrary meanings:—(1) laudatory (a) 'important, distinguished and (5) (of full weight" hence) 'valuable, sincere'; (2) peyorative “burdensome, grievous; painful'. C.t.a.m.l.g, w. phonetic changes, Türkü vrit bunca: ağır törö:ğ “such important tribal laws! II E 2; (gap) ağır taşığ “heavy stone" (or 'important memorial stone'?) I] S rs: Uyf. viri ff. Man.-A (this work was begun with great joy and finished) agir sevincin 'with overwhelming happiness! M 7 25, 5; similar phr. but ağır küsügün 'with overwhelming desire' do. 28, 22; ağır ağruş körür “he suffers grievous pain” M IJI 31, 5 (iii): Man. ağır ağruş TT IJ 17, 56: Chr. bu taş ertipü afir turur 'this stone is exceedingly heavy' U I 8, 4-5: Bud. ağır aya:ğığ 'profound respect! TT VIII E.s; ağar (sic) ayağın U IV ız, 100; ertipü agar (sic) U İT 37, 34; afar (sc) tsuy irinçüleri 'grievous sins (Hend.)' TT IV 4,0; olo, Stt. 4, 17 (ifle:-); 96, 22; 132, 12; USb. 97, 21; 101, 21; TT VII (common): Civ. aBirigke "a serious illness' USp. 78, 2; ağır kunka teğzün: “let him be subjected to severe punishment” do. t15, 20; similar phr. do. 116, 17; a.o. TT VIII I.12 (çıvşa:ğu:): Xak. xi ağır a/-fagil 'heavy' of anything; and a man who is honoured (mukram) by the people or the chief is called afirlt: kigi:; and one says tepri: meni: ağırla:dı: “God made me honoured' (a&amp;ramani), and when part of the night (Adr mita l-layl) has passed, one says afrr (sic) ada:k amruldiı: "the heavy (a/- tagila) foot has come to rest” (sakana), meaning that it has reached its destination after a slow journey; ağı:r (si) ne:p al-şay”ı”l-gali fi'l-taman. 'a highly-priced thing” Kaş, 7 52; o.o. I 99, 26 (agruk); III 247, 26 (uz): K B (by speech man) ağır kıldı öz “has made himself respected" 210; uçuz tutmasunı ağır tutsunu “let them not hold you worthless, let them hold you in respect” 540; 0.0. 'respected' 9oo, ro28; 'valuable' 902; 'important' 9oo, 003: xin(?) Tef. ağır 'heavy, important, respected” 37: xiv Müuüh. al-taqil 'heavy' (opp. to 'light yünül) ağır Mel. 54, 9; Rif. 151; tagilu'l-sam" "hard of hearing! ağır ku:la:klığ 139 (only): Çağ. xvf. ağır sangin wa fagil "hcavy” (Hend.) Sar. 44r. ro (qguotn.): Xwar. xm ağırınçn 'according to their weight" “4£ 22; 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 133 
     
   
   
     DIS xiv ağır “heavy” MN 149; 'massive' (army) Nahc. 27, 12 etc.: Kom. “heavy, weight; honour' ağır CCI; Gr.: Kip. xin. al-taqil (opp. to “light” yüpül, ye:yni) ağır Hou. 27, 16: xiv ağır al-taqil İd. 16: ağır (?sie, vertical kasra) al-samin 'corpulent' do. 17: xv al-taqil ağır Kav. 64, 17; ditto awur; Tkm. ağır Tuh. 11a. r: Osm. xiv ff. ağır in several meanings; c.i.a.p. 77S 17,8; I1 9, ro, İİİ 6; IV 6, 7. F akur 'stable'; early L-w. fr. Pe. axeur. S.i.s.m.l. in various forms, sometimes recognized as a l.-w. and sometimes not; in modern times usually means 'mangtr' rather than 'stable'; See sıp. Xak. xı (in the introductory Chap.) akur al-igfabl "stable" Kaş. 1 7, 7; n.m.e.: KB akur “stable” 5369, 5370: xiv Muh. al-mi"laf *manger' a:xurfa:xu:r Mel. 726, 8, axur Rif. 179. PF ığar n.o.a.b. v. G. ATG, p. 309 suggests that this is Sogdian vy'r and prob. means "strong Türkü vr iğar élligde: ığar xağanlığda: yeğ kiltim 'I made them better than those who had a strong(?) realm and a strong(?) xağan” I E 29, II E 24; iğar oğlanıpızda: “among your strong(?) sons' 7 SE. VU?F oğar pec. to Kaş. In spite of the difference in, vocalization it seems likely that this is an Ar. 1.-vv., perhaps received through Pe. where it is also a l-w. Xak, xı oğar at al-farasu'l-agarr "a horse with a white blaze on its forehead'; this word agrees with the Ar. in sound and meaning except that in Ar. the alif carries a fafha and in Turkish a damma Kaş, I 53; a.o. 1 335 (bol). VU oğur Hap. leg. Although this is described as Oğuz, the A.N. oğurluk, q.v., appears in a Xak. verse. It is entered between the Xak. and Oğuz translations of uğur and is possibly a special meaning of that word, but there is no obvious semantic connection. Oğuz xr oğur al-'iwád "exchange", one says atka: oğur aldım 'I received (something) in exchange for the horse” Kaş. 7 53. uğur semantically rather indefinite; seems to connote both 'time' and 'cause'; in some contexts it is hard to say which is uppermost. “Time” seems to have evolved into “the right time, an auspicious time', and thence into "good fortune! the meaning uppermost today in the word and its der. f.s. Very common in the early period, but survives only(?) in SW Az., Osm., 'Tkm. (and Krım R 7 1010). Has been fairly consistently transcribed oğur, but TT VIII has uğur and this is the modern pronunciation. See Doerfer II 6o4. UYyğ. viri ff. Chr. ol uğurka “for that reason” (the Magi still worship fire) U 7 o, 3: Man.-A (after a list of names) él(f)entük erksintük ufurinta “at the time when (the persons named) were ruling and exercising authority" M I 27, ro: Man. az nizvani ufrinta *because of the passion of lust' TT II 16, 20: Bud. Sanskrit ekadd “once upon a time” . AGR . 89 birer uğurda: TT VIII C6; alku uğurla:r üze: "on all occasions' do. G.8: el(Denü erksinü yarlıkayur uğurda P/aA. 22, 3) 0.0. meaning “time, occasion' U I1 4, 4; 5, 11; T T IV 12, 48; V 8, 71 and 76; 26, 107; nizvanilar uğrınta “because of (or under the influence of) passions! TT IV 4, 11; nızvanılar küçinte mıdık uğrınta “by the compulsion of passions and because we are laymen” de. s, 21; yana bu nom erteni uğrınta yanırtı kertğünç tuğar “and because of this precious doctrine faith is born anew' TT V 22, 29-30: Civ. ig ağriğ uğrınta “in times of illness (Hend.)' TT I 16; uğrınta is common, and ufripa occurs once (zo, 12) in H II meaning either “in times of” or "because of”: O. Kir. ix ff. elim uğrınta “for the sake of(?) my realm' Mal. to, 8 (a chaotic inscription, but these words seem clear): Xak. xr uğur aí-waqt “time”, one says ne: uğurda: keldi:p "at what time did you come 7”, uğur a/-darcla (here) "reign”, hence one says beg uğrında: menip şım e:tildi: solaha amri fi darlat”l-amir “my affairs vvere kept in good order in the reign of the beg”, uğur al-imkán ma:l-furşa fi'l-gay' “possibility, opportunity for something'; hence one says bu: ı:ş uğurluğ boldr: şara háda'l-amr fi imkdnihi wa furşatihi "this affair became possible and opportune' Kag. I 53 (paras. on oğur and uğur in Oğuz follow); and about zo o.o. meaning “time, occasion, the right time” (wagt or zamdn): KB (a prudent man) iş uğrın bllür 'knows the right time to work' 2192: xın(?) Tef. ol uğurda “ar that time; at that very moment” 232 (oğur): Çağ. xv ff. uğur (1) samt :wa maqşadi ki ba-dn taraf lataccuh wa rü kunand “a direction towards which one turns and goes'; (2) barakat wa sa"ddat *blessedness and happiness' San. 76v. 27; Oğuz xı uğur al-xayr wa'l-baraka 'good fortune, blessedness'; hence one says to a traveller yo:l uğur bolsu:n “may your journey be fortunate and blessed'; this word is used only in regard to a journey ( fi háli'l-safar) Kaş. I 53: Osm. xiv ff. uğur 'direction; objective; journey! noted in several texts T'T/S I1 716-17; İİ 921; HI 722; İV 778, but in some quotations this is not the meaning, e.g. (7) kadırğa tamám bir yıl uğura gitti, denizden mü'adá nesne görmediler “the galley vvent out for a period of a vvhole year, but they savv nothing except the sea”. akru: 'gently, quietly', and the like; often doubled. From the earliest period a longer form akuru: occurs and fr. x1 forms with -n attached. None of the morphological analyses of this word which have been suggested, e.g. in Brockelmann, para. 104, are plausible, and it seems to be a basic word, the form with attached -n being perhaps an Instr. S.i.m.m.l.g. usually with attached -n and sometimes metathesized as in SW. Uyğ. vrir ff. Bud. akuru akuru manın yoriyur “she walks at a quiet pace' U II 24, 2; alo. U III 72, iy: Civ. ot akuru akuru [gap] “let the fire [burn] gently". H II 18, 56: Xak. xi akru: Indeclinable (harf) 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 134 
     
   
   
     go DIS meaning 'gentle, slow' (ruwayd); one. says akru: akru: taraffaq rutcayda(n) 'he gentle" Kaş. I 114; (if you love property which you have acquired, love it) akrun (sic) in moderation" HI 361, 2: KB (Ay toldi) olturdi akru siliğ “sat down quietly and modestly' 956; turup çıktr akru "he got up and went out Quietly' 1604; o.0. 3,957; 6,0617: xiu(?) Tef. akru “quiet, quietly! 48: xiv. ATuh, "ald mall 'slowlv, gentlv' akru:njaxru:n. Mel. 8, 8; akru:/axru: Rif. 80: Xwar. xiw akru *quietly, peacefully' Qutb 9; akrun do. 10; arkun do. rr, (I have a loud voice) hiç akru sözleyü bilmezmen "1 cannot speak quietly" Nahe. 371, 14; akrun 'quietly'! do. 383, 7: Korn. xiv 'slowly, quietly' akrin/arkun CCT, Gr.: Ktp. xiv arkun rifqa(n) 'gently'; one says arkun arkun kelür "he comes gently' İd, I1: XV fa'anni 'slowly' akrın/arkun Kar. 77, 8; mahla(n) akrın Tu. gob. 7: Osm. xiv ff. arkimn/arkun/arxun 'gently, slowly; sometimes doubled; c.ia.p. TT'S I 40; II 55; III 38; IV 39-40. oğrı: 'thief'; the Instr. case ofrin meaning “furtively" also occurs, esp. in SW, and has somctimes been regarded (falsely) as a separate word. S.i.a.m.l.g. with some phonetic variations. See Doerfer IY 497. Türkü vr ff. IrkB 16 (utru:): UyB. virirff. Man, ol üç ofrilar “those three thieves” TT II 16, 18: Bud. oğrı kelip “a thief coming! PP 58, s: Civ. oğrı bolur "he will become a thief' TT VII 37, 7; USp. 42, 6: xiv Chin.-Uvg.. Dict. "thief” oğrı Ligeti 185: Xak, xi oğri: al-ligg 'thief'; and one says bu: rie: anın ogri: ol "this thing is inferior (düna) to that”, originally oğırı: but abbreviated like Ar. ibillibl and udun|udn Kaş. I 126; oğri: tuza:k “a trap buried in the ground' 7 38o, ış, İT 234, 3; 13 0.0. meaning 'thicf': K B oğrı “thief” 513, 1737, 2861: xın(?) Tef, ditto 231: xiv Muh.(?) sarrdq 'thief' o:ğrı: Rif. 156 (only): Çağ. xv ff. oğrı duzd 'thief' San. 76v. 24: Xwar. xiv oğrı “thief” Quib. 114; Nahc. 409, 15: Kom. xiv. “thief” oğrı CCI; oğur CCG; *furtively' ovrun CCG; Gr.: Kip xur al-ligg oğrı: Hou. əş, 8: xiv ditto İd. 16: xv al-sárig oğrı Kav. 74, 18; harömi 'thief' owru; Tkm. oğru Tuh. 12b, 9: Osm. xiv ff. oğru 'thief? and oğrun 'furtively'; c.i.a.p. TTS I 714-15; II 919; 920; III 699, 701; IV 775-7 (spelt uğru, uğrun). D ağrığ N./A.S. fr. agrr-/agru:-; “pain, painful'; hence 'a painful disease', esp. in the Hend. ig ağrığ. S.i.a.m.l.g., in some difficult to distinguish fr. ağruk. Uyğ. viu ff. Bud. ağrığ usually "pain, suffering pain", less often “iliness” and 1&amp; ağrığ "illness! are fairly common; ağruğ bolti “he became ill” PP 68, 3; 0.0. of ağrığ Suc. 585, 16; USp. 6o, Ib. 13; lg ağrığ TT VIJ 40, 56, etc.; VIII Ka; Suv. 587, 2: Civ. both ağrığ and ig ağrığ are fairly common: Xak. xı ağrı ğ a/-waca* fi'i-cumla “pain” in general”, then pain in any organ (or limb, 'udte) is described by it Kaş, 7 98: KB baş ağrığ 'headache' 421, 1883: xi(?) Tef. ağrığ “pain” (esp. birth pangs) 38: . AGR xiv. Muh.(?) al-1:aca' ağruğ Rif. 163 (only): Çağ. xv İT. ağrığ dard u ranc 'pain' ; also used for ranciş "indignation”, ağrı abbreviation of ağrığ Sar. 43v. 27: Xwar. xiv ağrığ “pain, illness! Quih. 5; baş ağriğı Nahc. 167, 2: Kom. xiv “ili, illness" ağrık/ağrıx/ağırıx CGCG; Gr.: Kip. xii al-waca! a&amp;ry: How. 32, 20: xiv ditto ner (?a:r!) and ağrımak Bu/, TO, 1: XV darham (Persian Ll-w.) 'suffering, afflicted' awr1; Tkm. ağrı (and yarmak, akça, which are translations of diram) Tuh. 15b. 9: Osm. xiv ff. ağrı "pain, sorrow' in two texts and afrik 'painful' in one. TTS 7 12; İT 14; IV 9. D afruk intrans. Conc. N. fr. agri:-/afru:-; "a heavy object, heavy baggage', and the like, Survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. ağrık/avruk SDD 77, 130, 1603. Sce Doerfer 1I 496. Xak. xı ağruk al/-faqal ma” l-matd” 'heavy baggage and household goods'; hence one says ağır ağruk kayu:da: kaldı: ayna turika"l-himl ma"l-taqal *where have the loads and heavy baggage been left?” Kaş. 7 99: Çağ. xv ff. ağruk ahmál ma atqa! San. 43v. 27: Kip. xiv ağruk al- tagal ld. 17: xv awruk (untranslated) is the root of awur- (ağrı:-) Tu. 84. 6. D uğra:ğ Den. V. fr. uğra:-. Survives only (?) in Osm. Hed. 256; SDD 1084, 1413 oğrak, uğrak “a halting point on a journey". Xak. xı ufira:g a/-qaşd tea'l-'asima “sim, purpose, intention! Kaş. 7 118; uğrağım kendü: yira:k "my goal (sga'toi) is distant” 17/ 29, 4; yandı: erinç uğrağı: /a”allahu raca'a min 'axmihi "he has perhaps turned back from his intention” III 65, rz, amp uğra:ğı: kör "see his purpose' (qasdahu) III 317, 4. D oğruğ Conc. N. fr. oğur-. Survives only (?) in NE Tuv, o:ruğ “a cliff at the mouth of a river”, oeruk (r) 'collar-bone'; (2) 'broken' (e.g. branch) Pal. 3og. Xak. xı oğruğ (mis-spelt ojrug) sünpü:ki: oi-fahga "the first vertebra in the neck”: oğruğ (sic) ciz'w'l-wádi "a bend in a valley'; one says ta:ğ ogrufi: mungata'u'l-cabal “a vertical end of a mountain Kaş, I 98; ovruiB mafsil. kull 'azmi(n) (a joint in any limb") rca cix! Rull cabal sva mungata'ulm ; alternative form (/uga) of oğru:ğ, ovru:ğ al-fahqa; in all three cases oğru:ğ is more correct (agtoab) 7 118; özi: küyi: OBrugt (mis-spelt oğrağı:) translated vca fi batni'l-ecóádi "and (he himself is) in the bottom of the valley” III 65, 14. : ukruk "a lasso on the end of a pole'. Survives in NE Bar. ukruk transíated by Russian ukruchina R 1 1613; SE Tar. okuruk R 7 997; NC Kir. ukuruk; an early 1.-w. in Mong. as uğurka (Haenisch 160, Kot. 366). See Doerfer Iİ soz. Xak. xr ukruk a/-wahaq 'lasso' Kaş. I 100 (prov.); similar prov. 711 215, 17: Rap. “the lasso (2/-rabga) used to catch horses out at pasture! ukruk Hoz. 13, 11: xiv ukruk "the rope (al-habl) used to catch a running horse” 7d. 17: Osm. xv ukruk “lasso” TTS II 722; ukruğ I]! 537; xvi ukruk 7 538 (all mis-spelt okru£&amp;).  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 135 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. AGR- 91 D akrun See akru:. D' ori See oğrı:. D ağruş N./A.S. fr. ağrı:- /fağru:- "pain and the like. Survives only(?) in SE Türki ağrış von Le Coq, Sprichmörter und Liede von Turfan, Leipzig/Berlin 1910, p. 81. Uyg. viri ff. Man.-A M III 31, 5 (iii) (ağır): Man. TT II 17, ş6 (ağır): Bud. ağruş serinmekip “your endurance of pain” U III ər, 4 (i); ağruş törösin “the law of pain” TT X soo. Dis. V. AGRogur- Hap. leg., but cf. of rug, which fixes the initial o-, oğrul-, and oğruş-. Xak. xı er süpük oBurdr fabbaga'l-raculu'l-'azm wa fasalahu "the man detached and disjointed the bone”, Kaş. 1 178 (oğurur, oğurma:k). D ağrı:-/ağru:- Den. V. fr. agir; lit. "to be, or become, heavy” but usually “to be in pain or painful; in Kaş. and Muh. the two meanings seem to be allocated to the tvvo forms, but after that ağru:- disappeared, except, under the influence of the -w-, in awru-. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. some phonetic changes. For the semantic differences between &amp;€r-, ağrı:- and siz(s1zla:-) see act-. Türkü vii uluğ oğlım afrip yok bolca: *when my eldest son fell ill and died” JJ S 9: Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. a:ğrıyur “is (or becomes) ill” TT VIII G.11; başım ertipü ağrıp “my head aches violently' U 7/7 37. 2: Civ. yanı adakı ağrıyur “his sides and legs ache! TT VI 25, 2; boğuz tamak ar ağrımakığ 'pains in the throat and palate' H I1 12 (ar is prob. only a false start for ağrımakığ), ağrı:- “to be painful' is common in H II: Xak. xı ağru:dı: ne: “the thing was heavy” (takula); and one says iğlik ağru:dı: tahula”l-marid wa danifa “the illness was severe and critical! (ağru:r, ağru:ma:k), anıp başı: ağrı:dı: şuddfa ra'suhu “he had a splitting headache'; also used of pain (toaca") in any vvound or organ, and also of other pains (al-atıcd”) Kaş. İ 273 (ağrır, agrima:k; prov.): KB igi ağrudı “his iliness became serious! rrrs5; yüküm ağrudı “my burden has become heavy” 5692: xiv Muh.(?) tatdqala "to be heavy' ağru:- Rif. 106 (only; mis-spelt ağru:r-), ta'allama “to be painful' ağrı- do. 105; fawacca'a ditto ağrı:- do. 106: Çağ. xv ff. ağrı- (spelt) (r) 5a-dard ámadan 'to be in pain”: (2) rancidan "to be vexed, angry' San. 42v. 9 (quotns.): Xvvar. xiv ağrı- 'to ache, be painful' Qutb 5; Nahc. 139, 2: Kom. xiv “to be painful” ağrı-/ağır- CCI; Gr.; Kap. xiv. ağrı- ta'allama İd. 16; al-waca' (a:t and) ağrımak Bul. 10, 1: xv faqula awur-; Tkm. ağır- Tuh. r1a. 6. uğra:- Den. V. fr. uğur, and like it semantically rather indefinite. In Uyg. it is nearly always constructed with a Ger. in -ğalı:/ğell:, and means “to intend to (do something)', occasionally with the Dat. with the same meaning; the Ger. uğra:yu hovvever seems to mean 'especially, particularly' (see discussion and further examples in TT V, p. 33, note B86). In Xak. it usually takes the Dat. and means “to go purposefully (to someone or to do something). In Rbg., as well as the earlier usages, the meaning 'to meet (someone Dat.) first appears; this is the normal modern meaning. Survives in SE "Türki Sha; 11; NE Kar. Krim R I ror8 and SW Osm., Tkm. The Osm. spelling oğra- in R, Red., and Sami is irregular, 'Tkm. and Rep. Turkish have uğra-. Üyğ. vır ff. Bud. başın bıçğalı u[$ra]d1 “he intended to cut off his head” (U 7 43, 13-14); U IV 10, 49-50; negü iş işlegeli uğrasar 'whatever work he intends to do” U II 23, 26; similar phr. U 171 rı, 15 (ii); 48, zo, Suv. 475, 16; 600, 16;— [gap] a:zkıya: ugra:yu:r biz “ve plan . ... only a little: TT VIII A.17;—ufrayu tüz 'particularly correct” TT V 26, 86: Civ. ögüz ertgell uğradın '(if) you intend to cross a river TT 3s—uğramış iş bütmez "your plans fail” do. 75, 176; neğü işke uğrasa büter *whatever he plans to do succeeds” TT VII 28, 28: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. chuan “especially, particularly' (Giles 2,702) uğrayu TT V, p. 33, note B86: Xak. x1 beg apar uğra:dı: qaşadahı l-amir "the beg moved tovvards (or against) him”, also used of any intention (qaşd) Kaş. I 274 (uğra:r, uğra:ma:k; verse); öpkem kelip uğradım “becoming angry I advanced on him” (qaşadtu ilà'l-'aduww) 1 125, 12; many o.o., used as Conjugational examples translated qaşada: KB sapa keldim uğrap 'I came to you intentionall' şgr, takı bolmaz erse yağı uğrasa “but if nevertheless the enemy advances on you” (and wishes to fight) 2364— kalı étseler aş sapa uğrayu “if they prepare food especially for you” 4583: xın(1) Tef. uğra-, with -ğalı or Dat”. "to intend, determine” 23r (oğra-): xiv Rbg. (see Schinkewitz, Rabghuzis Syntax, para. 147; refces. to facsimile of B. M. MS. in K. Grenbech, Rabghusi, Narrationes de Prophetis) uğra- (a) with -Balu-geli, Cibra”il kelip toprak alğalu uğradı “Gabriel came and intended to take some earth” 5v. r4-rs; Şölihni öltürgeli uğradılar erse 'when they intended (or decided) to kill Şalih” 36r. 8; (b) with Dat. of Dev. N. yankuğa uğradı "he intended to return” 236r. 21; (c) with Dat. of Common N. Mekkege uğradırlar “they set out for Mecca" 224r. r3; Kaçan Adam Havvvvüğa uğradı erse “vhen Adam met Eve” 7v. 19: Xwar. xiv uğra- (a) with Dat. of Infin. “to intend, try” Qutb 114 (ofra-); (b) “to arrive! 19s (uğra-): Kip. xv Tuh. 22b. 7 has şadafa usradi wa uğradı, this is clearly corrupt and shouíd read sadafa 'to turn away from' asur(not an old word); şdadafa “to meet (by chance) uğra-: Osm. xiv ff. uğra- (1) “to meet, come upon (someone or something Dat.)'; (2) “to avoid meeting (someone, etc. /42/.)”, (3) "to attack (someone Dat.)'; c.ia.p. TTS ] 712; lI 918; III 697; IV 774: xviit uğra- (and uğraş-) in Rümi, düçör şudan "to meet', in Ar. müuşddafa) (quotn.); and in muhduardt-i atrah-t Rum “Rümi colloquial” 'ubür “to pass  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 136 
     
   
   
     92 DIS. V. AGRby” as in the phr. fulàn köynin üzerinden uğradım"1 passed by that village” Sar. 76v. ız. okra:- (of a horse) “to whinny', particularly when asking for food; contrast kişne:- “to neigh'. S.i.s m.l.g. Xak. xi at okra:dr: Thamhama'l-faras — 'inda'l-isti'laf/ 'the — horse whinnied asking for food” Kaş. 7 275 (okra:r, okra:ma:k): Çağ. xv ff. okra- dhasta dhasta sadd hardan asb dar talab-i 'alaf "of a horse to make a gentle sound asking for forage', in Ar. tahamhum San. 77v. 13: Osm. xiv-xvt okra- “to whinny' in several texts T TS 1537; II 722; III 537; IV 602. D ağrıt- Caus. f. of ağrı:-/ağru:- ; "to cause pain (usually physical, less often mental) to (someone Zcc.). S.ia.m.lg. Türkü vir ff. Man. Chuas. 56-7; 89-90 (açıt-): Uyğ. viri ff. Civ. başın ağrıtur “it makes his head ache' TT VII 24, 21; o.o. do. 24, 23; 25, 2 and 3: Xak. xı ol anı: ağrıttı: awwca'ahu "he inflicted pain on him” Kaş. 7 261 (ağrıtur, ağrıtma:k): xı(?) Tef. baş ağrıt- 39: Çağ. xv ff. ağrıt- Caus. f. (i) ba-dard áwardan “to cause pain”, (2) rancánidan "to vex or anger San. 43r. 3: Xwar. xiv baş ağrıt- Quib s: Kip. xiv (after ağrı-) in the Caus. f., ağrıtturlater abbreviated to ağrıt- /4. 16. D uğrat- Caus. f. of uğra:-. Survives only (?) in NW Krım, SW Osm., Tkm. “to cause to mect'. Xak. xı ol meni: ı:şka: uğratti: aqsadani ild amr "he made me intend an affair Kaş. I 261 (uğratur, uğratma:k). D uğral- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of uğra:- used Impersonally (unusual). Xak. xi ol yé:rke: uğraldı: qugidat tilku'-diyár “it was intended to (go to) that place" Kaş. / 247 (uğralur, uğralma:k). D oğrul- Pass. f. of oğur-. Pec. to Xaş. Xak. xı süpü:k ofruldr fusila'l-'asm wa tubbiqa "the bone was disjointed and detached” , in a verse erpekleri: oğrulu:r yarı faşı:/ agábi'uhu min. siddati'l-bard “his fingers are split by the intensity of the cold” Kaş. 7 247 (oğrulur, oğrulma:k). D ağrın- Refl. f. of ağrı:-/ağru:-, "to suffer pain” and the like. Survives only(?) in NC Kir. o:run- and SW xx Anat. ağrın- (to be offended”") SDD 757. Uyğ. virff. Bud. ağırınmak (sc) münremek inciklamak *complaining of pain, shouting and groaning' (are heard) Suv. iz, 21-2. Xak. xi bazlığ ağrındı: tarcacca"a"l-carih “the wounded man (etc.) suffered pain from his wounds' Kaş. 7 252 (ağrınur, ağrınma:k). D ağrış- Co-op. f. of ağrı:-. Survives only(?) in NE Sag. ağraş- R I 173. Xak. xı ola:r bu: ışka: ağrıştı:la:r zazcacca"ü li-hádà'l-amr “they suffered together because of this affair" Kaş. I1 235 (ağrışu:r, ağrışma:k). D uğraş- Recip. f. of uğra:-. Survives only (?) in NW Kar. Krim, and SW Osm,, usually meaning “to fight one another”, Xak. xı ikki: yağı: uğraşdı: "the two. enemies. advanced on (qaşada) one another”, also used of others Kaş. I 234 (uğraşur, uğraşma:k), (in a verse about summer and winter) utğa:lımat uğraşu:r 'each of them wishes to conquer (yaglib) the other and overcome him in the dispute! (yaqmur) 7 170, zo: Osm. xiv-xvi uğraş- (r) “to mcet'; (2) “to fight one another in several texts. TT'S 1 713; // 918; III 698; IV 775: xvin sce uğra:-. D okras- Co-op. f. of okra:-. Survives only (?) in SE 'l'ürki Sharm 19. Xak. xi yund kamuğ okrasdt: talamhamati 'I-xavl li'l-'alaf 'the horses whinnied together for forage (ctc.)' Kaş. I 235 (okraşu:r, okraşma:k, verse). D oğruş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of oğur- Xak. xı ol mapa: süpü:k oğruşti: “he helped me to detach the bone and disjoint it” ( fi tatbiq'l-'azm toa faşlihi), also used for competing Kaş. / 235 (oğruşu:r, oğruşma:k). Tris. AĞR S akuru Sec akru:. D ağırçak “spindle whorl'; later used for other objects of similar shape like *millstone', *the knob on the top of a tent', and the like. In spite of the great variety of spellings, there can be little doubt that this is a Conc. N. fr. ağır, although the alternation c/S is well established for the Suff. -çın/-şın it is otherwise unknown for -çak, this is more prob. than the alternative possibility that it is a Dim. f., although that form is rather more common. S.i.a.m.l.g. in a wide variety of forms, usually urcik/urcuk and the like, and perhaps even NE Tuv. e:rgrg Pal. 592. Türkü(?) kadirik ağırçak graffito on a spindle whorl found on Olohon Island, Lake Baikal, date quite uncertain, the area is that of the Üc Kurikan tribe; kadirik is prob. a Proper Name ET Y JI] 158: Xak. xr afirsuk (the ğayı carries both kasra and damma) frlkatu'l-migzal 'spindle yvhorb Kaş, 7 149: xiv Müh.(?) (among spinner's implements) (VU) ai-tagála “vveight”, i.e. 'whorl' a&amp;ircuk Rif, 162 (only): Kom. xiv vurcik “spindle” (sic?) CCG; Gr.: Kip. xit al-tagálatu'llati | li'l-migzal 'spindle | whorl ağırşak (sim unvocalized) Hou. 17, 7: xiv afurcuk a/-şafranc twa'l-nard 'chess and draughts(men); ağurşak faqdlatıcl-miğzal, and anything that resembles it is called ağurşak İ4. 16: xv faqdla awurguk; in margin Tkm. ağırçak Tuh. 11a. 1: Osm. xvi ff. ağırşak “spindle whorl' in two texts TTS II 11; HI 7. PUD oğurğa: 'backbone'. Almost the only stable elements about this word in modern languages are the meaning, the initial o- and the -r-. "The last syllable varies between -i$a and -ka (in the Uyğ. text it might be either) but -ğa: is more probable. If so, it might be a Dev. N. fr. oğur-, bearing the same relation morphologically to oğruğ as, say, bile: to bilig. "This is the likeliest explanation; but  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 137 
     
   
   
     TRIS. V. AGR- . 93 the only early occurrence of the word is in a late Bud. 'Tantric text, possibly xim or xiv, and it might be a Turkish l.-w. in Mong. (oğurğa would be the form assumed by oğruğ in Mong., cf. uğurha for ukruk) reborrowed in the Mong. form; there does not, however, appear to be any trace of such a Mony. word. S.i.a.m.l.g. in a wide variety of forms; in some -m-, -n-, -p-, orzero take the place of the first -6- and in others a -t- is inserted. after the -r-, producing such forms as NC Kir, omurtka, Kzx. omirtka, and SW Az. onurğa, Osm. omurğa, 'Tkm. onurğa. UYyğ. vı ff. Bud, (in a passage about the association of certaif mystical letters with parts of the body; 'if they have an internal position the channels through which they emit light outwards are as follows: if it starts from the earth-whecl') süsğün oğurğasıntın üner “it emerges from the backbone of the(?)”. TT VII 41, 26-7: Xwaür. xiv menim opurkam sinar 'my backbone is broken' Nahc. 275, 9: Kip. silsilatu'l-zahr "backbone, spine' oğuntaka: (so spelt, ?error for oğurtka) Kav. 60, 17; silsilatu'l-zahr orutka, Tkm. orutğa Tuh. 18b. 12; 'acüz harima “old woman' (MS. here omits the Turkish translation and the next Arabic word 'acz “back, buttocks”) orutka do. zab, s: Osm. xiv ff. onurğa (with sağır min) '"backbone'; C.i.a.p. TTS I şay, İT 733; Ill 546; IV 610: xvii (in the alf madmüm-hdf Chapter) oğurğa (spelt, with Rdf-z 'acami, i.e. -8-) muhrahá-yi buşt “backbone” San. Bor, r (obviously a Rümi word with sağır ntín misunderstood). D ağrığlığ P.N./A. fr. ağrığ , 'suffering from pain or ilIness', esp. chronic illness. S.i.s.m.l.g. often much distorted, e.g. NE Khak. íre:lig; NC Kir. o:rulu:, Uyğ. vii ff. Bud, neçe iglig kemlig ağrığlığ tikiglig anar yakın kelserler 'however many sick (Hend.) and suffering (Hend.) people approach him” Suv. 585, 13-15: Civ. i$lig ópedti ağrığlığ katindi 'the sick man has recovered, and the man in pain regained his strength' 77 VII şo, 14-15: Kip. xv mawcit' "in pain” awrukli (in margin, in SW(?) hand ağrılı/ağrıklı) Tuh. 333. 11. D ağrığsız Priv. N./A. fr. ağrığ, “free from pain”. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vini ff. Bud. Suv. 191, 23 (igsiz). D ağırlığ P.N./A. fr. ağır, lit. “having weight'; usually metaph. for 'enjoying honour and respect' sometimes “pregnant” or, more vaguely 'valuable'. Survives only(?) in NE Kaç., Koib., Sag. R I 305; Khak. Bas. ız a:rlığ 'heavy; expensive; precious; distinguished, respected'; NW Kaz. avvrlı/avırlı *heavy, pregnant'. Uyğ. virt ff, Man. [gap; ?the branches] bokuklanur ağırlığ bolur 'form buds and become heavy (with blossom) Wind. 249, 10: Bud. (if he brings the jewel) ağırlığ bolğay “he will become respected' PP 29, 3: Xak. xı ağırlığ er "a man who is honoured (mrukram) among the people" Kaş. T 146; tu:tárl konu:k ağı:rlı:ğ akrimi'I-dayf 'honour the guest' İ 45, 21; a.o. / 52, 29 ağır): xii(?) KBVP (he adorned it) ağırhé biligler bile “vvith wise saws deserving respect' 10. D ağırlık A.N. (and Conc. N.) fr. ağır, in the early period usually metaph., 'honour, respect” , in modern languages with a wide range of meanings, “vveight, difficulty; heavy baggage', and in Osm. 'wedding gifts from the bridegroom to the bride”, S.i.a.m.l.g. except SE(?), often much distorted. Xak. xr kılğıl anar ağırlık akrimhum 'honour them" Xaş. I 114, 17; n.m.e.: KB (God gave him) ağırlık üküş “much honour' 44; o.o. 147, 763, 845, 6039, etc.: xııı(?) Tef. ağırlık 'honour, respect 38: Xwar. xiv ağırlık “furniture” Nahe. 433, 1 (sınuk): Osm. xiv ff. agirlik occurs with a wide range of meanings TTS I 8; II 10; İİ 6; IV 7. D uğurluğ P.N./A. fr. uğur, originally "feasible, opportune', now 'auspicious, fortunate'. Survives only in NW Krım R I 1013 and SW. Xak. xı uğurluğ ı:ş al-amru'lladi vaqa'a fi imkdnihi "a matter which is feasible' Kaş. I 146; a.o. 7 $3 (uğur): KB tapın öz uğurluğ bağırsaklıkın “serve me with timely sympathy” 595; (in the spurious, later, verse after 476 uğurluğ safar seems to mean “an auspicious journey"): Çağ. xv ff. uğurluk sáhib-i maymanat 'fortunate, prosperous” San. 76v. 29: Kip. xiv uğurlu: gö yumn 'fortunate' d. 17. VUD 1 o£gurluk Hap. leg.; A.N. fr. 1 oğur. Although that word is described as Oguz this one occurs in a Xak. verse. Xak. xi ertüt alıp anutğıl (MS. in error anunfil) edgü: tavar oğurluk “if you receive a gift', fa-a'idd lahá "imad hasan "then prepare a good return gift Kaş. I 114, 19; n.m.e. S 2 oğurluk See oğrı:lık. D oğrı:lık A.N. fr. oğrı:, 'robbery, thievishness”, and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE(?), often in the metathesized form oğurluk Xak. xı Kaş, İl 208 (cikriş-), n.m.e: KB ofrilik “thievishness” 5768: Çağ. xvff. oğurluk duzdi 'thievishness' San. 76v. 29 (quotn.): Osm. xıvff. oğruluk/oğurluk “robbery, thievishness', in several texts; in some it is impossible to determine which form is intended TTS I 7o5; İH 70:1; İV 777 (all mis-spelt ug-). S ağırşak/ağırşuk See ağırçak. D uğra:yu: See uğra:-. Tris. V. AĞRD ufraklat- Hap. leg.; Caus. Den. V. fr. *ujfrak (cf. uBra:$); presumably “to choose an opportune moment', or possibly 'to appoint a rendezvous'. Hitherto read, unconvincingly, as two words. Türkü vırı (I said, “if we go by that road, it will be possible”, I thought and made a representation to my xağarr. 1 set the  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 138 
     
   
   
     94 TRIS. V. AGRarmy in motion. 1 said, "make the men mount their horses'. I crossed the Ak Termel and) ufraklatdim 'chose a favourable moment (and making them go on horseback beat down the snow) T 24-5. D afruklan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. ağruk. Xak. xı ol bu: r:şığ ağruklandı: istatqala hádá'l-amr "he considered this business burdensome'; also used of a burden (al-himl) when one considers it heavy ('addahu taqil) Kaş. I 313 (ağruklanur, ağruklanma:k). D ağrıkan- Refl, f. of *a&amp;rika:- which seems to be an abbreviated Den. V. fr. ağrığ cf. yarlika:- (for *yarligka:-). N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viii. ff. Bud. (babbling and) ağrıkanıp “complaining of pain' Suv. 17, 23: Xak. xi er ağrıkandı: soaká'l-racul. aeac"ahu "the. man complained of his pain” Kaş. ! 312 (ağrıkanur, ağrıkanma:k). D ağırla:- Den. V. fr. agir; originally “to honour, respect, reverence”, in Uyg. usually in the Hend. aya:- agirla:-; with some other meanings in modern languages. Survives in several NE languages as a:rla- ; Tuv. a:rta-; NC Kir. o:rdo-, Kzx. awirla-; SW Az. ağırla- (ağırra- R I 159), Osm. ağırla-. Türkü vu ff. Man. ağırlap ayan tapın "honour (Hend.) and serve! TT II 10, 79: Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. sever taplayur ayayur ağırlayurlar “they love him, are pleased vvith him, and honour (Hend.) him” TT V ro, 112; o.o. of Hend. U 1I 4o, 104-5 (udun-), USp. 106, 10; TT VI 112, 132, 144; not in Hend. do: 35: Xak. xı tepri: meni: ağırla:dı: “God made me honoured” (a&amp;ramani); also used of anyone who honours (or makes honoured, akrama) someone else Kaş. I 3oo (ağırla:r, ağırJa:ma:k); 7 53 (ağır), and four o.o.: KB kişiğ til ağırlar “the tongue makes a man respected” 163; o.o. 389, 577, etc.: X11(?) KBVP ağırla- "to honour! 61, 63: xin(?) Tef. ditto 38: xiv. Rbg. ditto R 7 159; Muh.(?) akrama ağırla:- Rif. 104 (only); a/-ikram ağırlamak 123: Çağ. xv ff. ağırla- sangin dágtan 'to consider heavy'; and metaph. ta'zim hardan "to honour! San. 43r. 4 (quotns.) Xwar. xin ağırla- “to honour! ' Ali 39: xiv ditto Quib s, Nahc. 8, ir, etc.: Kom. xiv ditto CCI, CCG; avurla- CCG, Gr.: Kip. xim ihtarama mino”l-ihtirdm li-jayrik "to respect, reverence someone” ağırla:- Flou. 37, 14: xiv ağırla- fszatqala bi-ma"nd ihtarama wa akrama İd. 16: xv haraba (error for qarraba to reverence”) ağırla- Kav. 17, 8, akrama avurla- Tuh. sa. 10. D oğurla:-/oğrı:la:- Den. V. fr. oğrı:, “to steal”. Oddly enough, while oğur is a rare Sec. f. of oğrı: oğurla:- seems to be the oldest form of this verb, so much so that Kaş. was inclined to confuse it with uğurla:-. S.i.a.m.l.g. in a wide variety of forms. Uy£. vur ff. Bud. adnafunuy tavarin oğurladımız erser “if we have stolen other people's property! U I1 8s, 21-2; TT IV 8, 69: Xak. xı ol ne:p ofri:la:di: "he stole (saraqa) the thing'; and the common people pronounce it bi-tashin" l-ra” (i.e. as oğurla:-), va. hutea'l-xata', but this is a mistake (oBurla:r,ofurla:mn:k, sic) Kaş. 1 316; (after uğurlna:-) hence one says er ta wa:r oğurla:di: “the man stole (saraqa) the goods', because he waited for an opportunity and a (convenient) time; there is another way of looking at it (teach) and that is to suppose that oğrı: "thief! is the nominal base (ism mazcdü"), that this word is compounded from it, and that the -1- was elided (turihat . . taxfifa(n)), and this is more probable (a'cab), but both theories are acceptable (hasan) 1 300 (verse with occurrences of oğurla:- and uğurla:- rhyming): xiv Rbg. oğu:rla- “to steal' R 7 rorz, Muh.(?) saraqa oğurla:- (?, unvocalized) Rif. 110 (only); al-saraqa oğurlamak (ditto) 123: Çağ. xv oğurla- duzdidan “to steal' San. 76r. 9 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 1145; Nahc. 301, 12: Kip. xii saraga oğurla:- How. 35, 6: Xiv ditto /d. 16; Bul, 48v.: xv ditto Kav. 74, 18: Osm. xivíf. oğurla-/oğrula- “to steal'; c.i.a.p:ş it is often impossible to decide which is intended T'TSS I 714; II 919; III 7oo; IV 776 (mis-spelt ug-). D uğurla:- Den. V. fr. uğur. Survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. uğurla- “to see (a guest) off”. Xak. xi er rsgin uğurla:dı: trtagaba' l-raculu'l-amr. wa fa'alahu fi waqtihi wa imkánihi "the man put off the business and did it when it was timely and feasible” Kaş. 7 3oo (ufurla:r, uğurla:ma:k, followed by oğurla:-, q.v.). D oğrı:la:- See ofurla:-. , D ağırlal- Hap. leg., Pass. f. of ağırla:-. In III 344 Kaş., discussing the Pass. f. of verbs ending in -la:-, gives as an example er ağırlaldı: “the man. was honoured” (Aroma), and goes on to say that ağırlan- is also permissible (cáza) but that the former is commoner (akiaru'l-isti'mál). — Experience, however, shows that the contraty is the case. D ağırlan- Refl. f. of ağırla:-. S.i.s.m.l.g. w. some phonetic changes, usually for “to be heavy; to feel ill or depressed', and in SW Osm. “to be discreet, dignified'! Xak. xr er ağırlandı: “the man. was honoured” (ukrima), the -n- being substituted (mubdala) for -1-; and one says ol bu: atnı: ağırlandı: "he reckoned that this horse was valuable” (dii); also used for 'to reckon something to be heavy” (zaqil) Kaş. I 291 (ağırlanur, ağırlanma:k), a.o. JI] 344 (agirlal-): xin(?) Tef. afirlanmis "honoured, respected" 38. VUD oğurlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. oğur. Oğuz xı (in the same para. as uğur1an-) and one says at oğurlandı: “urorcida”/-farasu'l-matehüb “the horse which was given was given in exchange” Kaş. I. 292 (oğurlanur, oğurlanma:k). D uğurlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of uğurla:-. Xak. xr uğurlandı: ne:p hàána teagtu'l-gay'  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 139 
     
   
   
        TRIS. V. AĞS- . 95 “the (favourable) moment for the thing has arrived": and one says yo:l uğurlandı: "the journey was fortunate” (mubárak) Kaş. I 292 (uğurlanur, uğurlanma:k, followed by oğurlan-, the remark “in Oğuz" may also apply to the second sentence above). D uğramsın- Hlap. leg.; given in Kaş. III 322, 11 as an example of the Refl, Simulative Suff. -msin-; ol sapa: uğramsındı: “he pretended to advance on you (yaqşıduka) but did not actually do so” n.m.e. Dis. AĞS / D axsa:k N./A.S. fr. axsa:-, "lame S.i.a.m.l.g., usually as aksak but askak in some NE and SE languages. Sami 44 says that in Osm. aksak, the older word, has the general meaning 'lame' and topal (not an old word) *with one leg injured or shorter than the other”. See Doerfer H sır. Uyğ. vir ff. Chr. (in that man's house there shall be no-one blind, dumb) axsak colok (sic?) 'lame, onearmed” (bald or diseased) M /TT aş, 4: Xak. xı axsa:k al-a'rac 'lame' Kaş. I 119; (after boxsuk) and al-a'rac wa'l-a'sam "lame and paralysed' is called axsa:k (VU) boxsak "ald tariqi”l-tiba" *as a yingle” Kaş. I 465, 28: xın(?) Tef. ağsak 'lame' 39: xiv Rbg. axsak “lame” R I 138; Muh.(?) al-a"rac axsa:k Rif. 142 (only): Çağ. xvff. aksağ/aksak lang "lame” San. 45r. 28 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv aksak “lame” Quib ro: Kom. xiv. "lame' ağsax(?) CCI; Gr. 39: Kip. xiv akşak al-a"rac İd. 17: xv ditto. Kav. 6o, 9; Tuh. 42. 11. axsum “drunk”, and more specifically “fighting drunk'. A 1.-vv. in Mong. as aksum (Koto. 135), ağsum (Haltod 9) 'stubborn, bad-tempered'. Yakut axsım (of a horse) “vvild, fiery, sprightly' Pek. 209 is more likely to be a Mong. l-w. than a "Turkish survival, Otherwise n.o.a.b., but see 2)oerfer I1] so. Xak. xi axsun er al-raculu'l-mu'arbid fi sukrihi "a man who is quarrelsome in his cups'; alternative form (luda) of axsum Kaş. 1 116; (n.m.e. of axsum, it should have been entered between ötrüm and axşam in / 106-7, but the MS. is clearly corrupt at this point, endik being entered between aştal and ötrüm): Çağ. xvff. axsum b5admast "drünk” Vel. 11 (quotn); aksum pöşimarn *repentant' do. 25 (quotn. in which it actually means “drunk”), axsum badmast also pronounced aksum San. 33r. 1:9 (quotn.), aksum badmast also pronounced axsum (same quotn. as Vel); the Rümi authors (i.e. Vel.) and Táli'-i Harami (mis)translated aksum “repentant” do. 45v. 2. D oksiz Priv. N/A. fr. 1 ok, S.is.m.l.g. "The passage below has been much discussed and mistranslated, 2 idi: having been taken to be 1 idi:, it seems clear that in it 1 ok has the . metaph. meaning “sub-tribe”, "The identity of the following word can only be conjectured; the best guess perhaps is that it is 1 kók  'origin, lineage', but no solution is likely to receive general acceptance. Türkü virt ekl:n ara: idi: oksız kök türkü ança: oluru:r ermiş “betvveen the two (extreme geographical points) the "Pürkü, whose lincage( ?) is completely without division into sub-tribes(?) dwelt thus' 7 E 2-3, II E 4. Dis. V. AGSD ağsa:- Hap. leg.; Desid. £F. of 1 a:$-. Xak. xı ol ta:ğka: ağsa:dı: “he wished to climb (şu"üd) the mountain” Kaş. I 277 (ağsa:r, ağsa:ma:k). axsa:- “to limp, be lame'. S.i.a.m.l.g. usually as aksa- in some NE and SE languages aska-. Xak. xı at axsa:dr “the horse (etc.) was lame” ('arica) Kaş. 1276 (axsa:r, axsa:ma:k): xiv Muh.(?) 'arica akşa:- Rif. 112 (only); al-"arac axşamak 122: Kip. xiv akşazala'a "to limp” İd. 16; zala'a ma 'arica aksaBul. 6or.: Osm. xv ff. axsa- “to be lame', once in xv, afsa- in several texts fr. xvi onwards TT İİ 15; III 9; IV 10. D uksa:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of uk-. Xak. xı er sö:züğ uksa:di: “the man wished to understand (ya/tin) what was said” Kaş. 1 277 (uksa:r, uksa:ma:k). D axsat- Caus. f. of axsa:-, “to lame (someone //cc.). Survives in the same way as axsa:-. Xak. xı ol anı: axsattı: 'arracahu “he lamed him” Kaş. 1 262 (axsatur, axsatma:k). VU(D) oxsin- Refl. Simulative Den. V. fr. *ox an unrecorded Exclamation. Pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı ol kılmış ı:şına: oxsındı: “he re£retted (nadima) what he had done” Kaş. 1 253 (oxsinu:r, oxsınma:k), üküş sevinç bolsa: katığ oxsunu:r (sic) “if a man takes pleasure in something, yaştadd hammuhu fi dálika he is extremely anxious for fear of (losing) it' 717 373, 19. D axsur- See asur-. Tris. AGS E aksırak in a damaged passage, Uyğ. vii Şu, E 8 Ramstedt read anda: aksırak ordu: órgin anda: étitdim and translated it 'I set up my distinguished(?) court and palace there'. In his note thereon he suggests the alternative reading kasar kuridin; this is no doubt right, the meaning is “I had my throne set up there to the west of Kasar”, D afusuz Priv. N./A. fr. ağu:, n.o.a.b. Uy$. vinff. Civ. öÖ:ğre:nte:ki yu:lta:kı yu:lakta:kı su:vla:r a:ğusuz a:rığ [gap] "waters in brooks, springs and small springs free from poison and pure” TT VIII Lış. Tris. V. AĞSD axsumla:- Den. V. fr. axsum; “to become intoxicated, get (fighting) drunk”. N.o.a.b. San. also records Caus., Refl. and Co-op. f.s. Xak. xı KB yà esrük tutuş kilgá axsumlagay “or he will start a drunken quarrel and  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 140 
     
   
   
     96 TRIS. V. AGS get intoxicated” 4586; uluğlukka esrüp kim axsumlasa 'whoever gets drunk for power 6140: Caf. xv ff. axsumla- badmasti hardan “to be intoxicated' ; also pronounced aksumlaSan. 32v. 27. Dis. AGS D ağış N.Ac. fr. 1 a:ğ-, 'ascent, rise". N.o.a.b. Xak. xı ağış a/-şa"ıd 'rise, ascent” Kaş. 161: KB ağışka eniş ol "a fall (follows) a rise' 1087; o.o. 903, 905, 6039: Kip. xv the translation of sa'üd in Tuh. 22a. 1, nağaş enes, is corrupt; in the margin in a SW(?) hand are yokuş and a/-hadara eniş, the text prob. originally had sa'üd ağış wa dadduhu (and its opposite is”) eniş. uğuş in the early period a population unit smaller than a tribe, or a clan (1 bo:d) but larger than a single unitary family, 'extended family”, or, less precisely, “family” , from this it came to mean 'a generation” or "degree of relationship” (one clear case in TT VI), and later "a junior member of the family, grandchild" (properly ati:). The initial u- is fixed by spellings in TT VIIJ. Survives as oğuş *grandchild' in SW Osm. Red. 258 (only) and xx Anat. SDD 1085. Türkü vri: (listen to me, all you my younger brothers, sons) biriki: uğuşım bodunim “my united family and my people” I S r, HJ. N 1; (if one man offended, they destroyed) uğuşı: boduni: beşükine: tegi: “his family and people right down to (infants in) the cradle” I S 6, II N 4; (we surrounded and killed at Tona: Tegin s funeral) Topra: bir ufus alpağu: on erig “one family of Tonra: ten fighting men” I N 7; (ditto) Topra: yılpağu:tı: (sic) bir uğuşığ "one family of Tonra: fighting men” II E 31; Basmil Iduk(k)ut u&amp;usum bodunim erti: “the Basmil (and their) [dukkut were my family and people" IJ E 25: Uyğ. vir ft Man. kamığ tınlığ uğuşı “all the families of mankind” TT III as and ira: Bud. Sanskrit svavarjako bhavati "he becomes one who abandons his family” uğuş (very faint, apparently ukuz) topta:rğuluk bolur TT VHI A.ş, Sanskrit kula 'family' tóz u:ğu:ş (spelt às u:hu:j) do. D.27; in U II 34-6 it occurs several times, translating (1) Chinese shen 'body' (Giles 9,813) in asur1 ugusinta “the (corporate) body of Asuras' 34, 18; (2) Chinese cira "family" (Giles 1,139) in bayağutlar uğuşınta “in a family of rich men” 36, 37; (3) Chinese sing 'extended family, clan” (Giles 4,599) in the phr. tóz Ufus aş, 29 and 30; a.o. of this phr. PP 67, 1 (belğürt-): (I am a heretic) uğuşımdın tarığımdın berü “by heredity” Züen-ts. 291; (all will be well) yéttinc uğuşka tegi 'up to the seventh generation” (or “degree of relationship) TT VI 300-1; o.o. U II 44, 27; 68, 4 (i): Xak. xı uğuş al-"aşira Kaş. İ 61; 0.0., same translation, £ 81, 1; 114, 16; II 83, 21; 103, 25; the contexts make it clear that the meaning is “extended family” or “clan”: xııı(?) Tef. uğuş “tribe” (in the context of the tvvelve tribes of Israel) 233 (oğuş): xiv Rbğ. ufus 'grandson' R1] 1620 (quotn.): Çağ. xv ff. ufus nabira tea ahfád “grandson” San. 77r. 6. D ukuş N.Ac. fr. uk-; 'understanding'. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı ukus al-fifna 'understanding' Kaş. 1 62: KB ukus 'understanding' is common, and often associated with bilig 'knowledge” and. öğ "intelligence" (cf. ukuğ) 151, 161, 904, 1417, 1542, etc.: xti() K BI'P ukusg 55, 61, 73: Xtti(?) Ar. üküş hüs 'understanding” (Hend.) 22, 47; Te/. ukus idileri "those who have understanding! 325. D oxşa:ğ N./A.S. fr. 1 oxga:-; 'resembling, resemblance”, Less common than oxşa:ş (not noted before xiv) but survives in NC Kir. okşo:, NW Kar. L. uxşa, Vaz. oxşavv, SW xx Anat. okşak .SDD 1087, all meaning 'resemblance', Xak. xı oxşa:ğ af-şabih 'resembling'; hence one says anın oxşa:ğı: şabihuhu "his double” Kaş, I ::18: KB 16 (menzeğ). ?F axşam “evening". Prob. a l-w. from Sogdian *'yi^m (Persian şö), cf. Sogdian 'yfp “night”, (Persian gab.) S.1.a.m.Lg., but rare in NE wherc ipir “dusk”, q.v., is usually used in this sense. Xak. xı axşam zeaqft”l-mağrib 'sunset time, evening” Kaş. I 107: xiv Müh. (?) al-'igd' 'nightfall' axşam Rif. 184 (only): Çağ. xv ff. akgam sam "evening” San. 45v. 6 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv akşam ditto MN zo, Kip. xır a/-mağrib akşa:m Hou. 28, 16: xiv ditto axşam Bul. 13, 13; xv ditto Twuh. 352. ro, Osm. xiv ff. axşam c.La.p. TTS I 13; II 18; 1H ro, IV 11. Dis. V. AGSD ağış- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of 1 a:ğ-. Xak. xı ol menin birle: ta:ğka: ağışdı: “he competed with me in climbing (fi su'üid) the mountain'; and one says ol menin birle: bir altu:nda: ağışdı: galdi fi'l-si'r bi-dindr “he tried to make me raise the price by a dirdr”, and one says begle:r bi:r ikindi: birle: ağışdı: "the begs dashed (tadaffa'at) at one another” Kaş. 7 18« (ağışu:r, ağışmıa:k). D akış- Co-op. f. of ak-, “to flow together, or into one another”, Survives only(?) in NW Kar, Krim and SW. Xak. xı suvla:r akışdiı: 'the waters flowed together (fasdyalat) from every direction” Kaş. 1 186 (verse, Aor. and Infin. omitted): Kip. xiv akig- tacárá tlá ciha "to flow together in one direction' /d. 17: Osm. xiv akış- (of people) “to assemble! T'TS I 14. D okig- Recip./Co-op. f. of oki:-; “to call to one another; to read, or recite, together', and the like. S.i.m.m.l.g. Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A M I 9, 1o-11 (için): Bud. bir ikintike okisip “calling to one another” Hüen-ts. 192-3: Xak. xı ola:r bi:r ikindi: birle: okıştı:la:r “they called (da'à) one another” , and one says ol menir birle: bitiğ okışdı: "he competed with me in reading the book”, also used for *helping' Kag. 7 186 (okişu:r, okişma:kK)) o.o. okiS- dad I 359, 15; okus- da'á/tadá'á 1:83, 5: II 103, 25: Çağ. xv ff. okuş- Co-op. f.ş p———————— MÀ Les 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 141 
     
   
   
     TRIS. bd yak-digar xwándan “to read, or recite, together! San. 77v. 4: Osm. xv ff. kardaş okuş- “to adopt one another as brothers' in several xv and one xvt text 7 7S 7 539; 11 724; III 412, 538. D ukuş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of uk-. Xak. xı ola:r bu: işığ ukuştizla:r “they (all) understood ( fatinu) this business” Kaş. 7 186 (ukuşu:rla:r, ukusma:k). D oxşa:- Preliminary note. There are ttveo phonetically indistinguishable verbs of this form, meaning respectively “to resemble" and “to caress'. Kaş. adds a third meaning, “(of £ horse) to sleep'. This svas used only in certain dialects and may be a much distorted der. f. of udı:-, if so, it had an initial u-. 1 oxşa:- “to resemble (someone or something Dat). Siam.lg. w. several phonetic changes including metatheses as in NE oşko-. Cf. bepze:- and yanza:-. Türkü vri ff. Man. M III 18,6 (ii) (yöle:ş-): UyÉ. vin ff. Man.-A apar oxşayur erti “they were like that” M I 14, 15: Man. apar oxsayir Wind. 250, 50: Xak. xı (after 2 oxşa:-) and one says bit ne: bi:rke: oxşa:dı: “one thing resembled (sábaha) another” Kaş. 1 282 (oxşa:r, oxşa:ma:k): KB anar oxşadı 746: xın(?) Tef. oxsa-/oğşa- “to resemble” 233, 240: XIV Rbj. oxşa- ditto R I 1005 (quotn.); Muh.(?) aşbaha “to resemble" oxşa:- Rif. 103 (only), al-şibh oxşamak 122: Çağ. xv ff. oxşa-(-r) benze- Vel. 97 (quotn.), oxşa- (1) şabih wa mánand şudan "to resemble” San. 66r. 7 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv ditto Quib 195 (uxja-); MN 121, etc.: Kom. “to resemble; to get accustomed to (something) okşa-/oşka-/ o:şa-(?) CCI; ovsa- CCG; Gr. 278 (quotns.): Kıp. xv in a para. on equivalents for Ar. ha- "like, okşa- and bepze- are quoted as equivalent Turkish verbs Kav. 28, 9 fiş in a parallel passage in Tuh. 44b.—45a. the forms are okşa-/oşa- and menze-: Osm. xv ff. oxşa“to resemble! in four texts T TS 1 537; II 721. 2 oxşa:- “to fondle, caress (someone Zcc.); to soothe (a child). Survives only(?) in some NE languages (w. phonetic changes) and SW Osm. Xak. xi men anı: oxşa:dım /dfaftuhu sua lá'abtuhu wa huta nahmo má tundgil-mar'a bi-waladihá “1 fondled and caressed him', that is as a woman soothes her child Kaş. İ 282 (oxşa:r, oxsa:ma:k; prov., verse; followed by 1 oxşa:-): Çağ. xvff oxşa:- (2) kasi-rd biráyi dilcü"i tawsif kardan wa sitüdan “to commend and praise someone in order to comfort him” Sam. 66r. 7 (quotns.): Kom. xiv “to fondle” uvşa- CCG: Gr. 268: Kip. xiv okşanáfád'l-walad wa dallalahu “to soothe and quieten a child” /d. 17: Osm. xiv ff. oxşa"to cherish, caress'; fairly common 7 TS 1 536; II 521; HI 536; IV 602. VU uxga:- Hap. leg. Yeme:k, Yaba:ku: and most of the nomadic tribes (aktar ahli'l-wabar) xı (after 1 oxşn:-) and they say at uxşa:dı: 8041125 E AGS náma'l-xayl “the horse slept'; this word is peculiar (hássa) to horses, and is not used of anything else Kaş. I 282. 97 D oxşat- Caus. f. of 1 oxşa:-, “to compare (someone Zcc.) to (someone Dat.)'. S.i.s.m.l.g. Xak. xı ol meni: ata:ma: oxşattı: “he compared me (sabbaltani) to my father” Kaş. I 262 (oxşatur, oxşatma:k): Çağ. xv ff. oxşatCaus. f.; taşbih oa mánand hardan "to compare" San. 66r. 9 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv oxşat- ditto Qutb 196 (uxşat-): Kom. xiv “to accustom (someone to something) oksat- CCI; Gr. 178 (quotn.). Tris. AGS D oxşa:tı: Dev. N./A.(?) fr. oxşat-, n.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud, uluğ sal sógütke oxşatı "like a great £d/a tree” (Vatica robusta, Sanskrit L-w.) U H 35, 31-3; 0.9. Suv. 354, t, etc.; TT VIII I.16. D oxşatğuluksuz Priv. N./A. fr. Gerundive of oxşat-: n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vur ff. Bud. oxsatğuluksuz yöleştürgülüksüz arığ süzük ÖD “an incomparable (Hend.) pure (Hend.) colour” Swv. 45, 374. D oxşatığsız Hap. leg.; apparently Priv. N./A. fr. a Dev. N. of “oxşat- Caus. f. of 2 oxşa:- ; “free from the compulsion to caress'; the Chinese original means merely 'I wish to cross the sea of sásrava suffering' (see akığlığ). Uyğ. viu ff. Bud. oxşatığsız bolayın akığlığ emğgekliğ taluydın kut kolurmen keçeyin “et me not be compelled to caress(?) the impermanent painful sea; 1 beg that I may cross' Suv. 354, 5-6. D oxşa:ğu: Hap. leg.; Conc. N. fr. 2 oxşa:-. Xak. xı oxşa:ğu: al-luba 'plaything, pet; used as a nickname (yulaqqab) for a woman Kaş. 1 138. D uğuşluğ P.N./A. fr. uğuş. N.o.a.b. Uy£. vin: ff. Bud. Bodisavt uğuşluğ “belonging to the family of the Bodhisattvas' Radloff, Kuan-şi-im Pusar, St. Petersburg, 1911; 72, 38; (the king is) tepridem uğuşluğ "of divine lineage! TT X 494; a.o. USp. 102, 28-9: Xak. xi uğuşluğ er al-raculu'lladi lahu "aşira “a man who belongs to a (well-known) family, or clan” Kaş. I 146. D ukuşluğ P.N./A. fr. ukuş. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı ukuşluğ er al-raculu'l-fatin "a man with understanding! Kaş. £ 147: KB ukuşluğ is common, usually in association with biliglig and in antithesis to ukugsuz and biligsiz 155, 199, 904, 1946, 2189, etc.: xu(?) KBVP ız: xiv. Muh. (?) al-'ágil *understanding, intelligent' uku:şluğ Rif. 152 (only): Xwar. xiv ukuslu£ ditto Quib 199. D oxşançığ Hap. leg.; Dev. N./A. fr. Refl. f. of 2 oxga:-. Xak. xı (in a prov., “a nestling before it is fledged, looks repulsive) 1t bala:sı: oxşançığ "a puppy looks like a toy” (bi-manzila lu'ba fi riöyatihi) Kaş, HI 232, 15 n.m.e. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 142 
     
   
   
     98 TRIS. AGS D ukuşsuz Priv. N./A. fr. ukuş, "without understanding”. N.o.a.b. Xak. xi KB ukuşSuz is common, usually in association with biligsiz; sce ukuşluğ 199, 297 (adut) etc.: xi(?) KBVP zo: xin(?) At. 458. Tris. V. AGSD uğuşlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. ufus. Xak. xi er uğuşlandı: tal/razzaba'l-racul wa sára dá ahl tea "aşira "the man joined up and acquired (membership of) a people and clan” Kaş. 1 293 (uğuşlanur, uğuşlanma:k). Dis. AĞZ ağız "the mouth” in an anatomical sense, hence “the mouth (of a river)” or any sort of aperture; and in some modern languages *what the mouth says, a claim or representation”. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. phonetic changes; used in many phr. and idioms, see, e.g., R 1 179-82. Türkü viri ff. semi:z at ağzı: katığ boltu: “the fat horse's mouth became hard” İrRB 65; a.o. 27 (emsi:-): Man. üç ağzın “three (commandments must be obeyed) vvith the mouth” Chuas. 193: Uy. viii ff. Man.-A neteg yeme elig ağazka sevük erür “and just as the hand is dear to the mouth” M 1 23,6: Man. ağızınta sizni öğe alkayu 'praising (Hend.) you with their mouths! TT 777 97; (keep the commandment) ağız arığın ermek “that the mouth should be pure” do. r4o: Bud. ağız 'mouth' (anatomical) is common PP 7o, 1; 71, 1; U III 36, 21; 37, 30; U IV 22, 296, etc.: Civ. ağız (TT VİT I2 and 3 a:ğız) (anatomical) is common in H T and İT: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. kuan k'o “the mouth of a pass” (Giles 6,368; 6,174) tağnın ağızı R 7 167; Ligeti 126: Xak. xı ağız "the mouth' (fiia) of a river, the mouth (fam) of a viineskin, jar, or. well; ağız "the mouth'( fam) of a man or any animal Kaş. I ss (prov); 14 o.o.: KB kizil ağzı (the partridge's) 'red bill' 76; (bow your neck to fate but) kóni tut ağız “keep your mouth upright! 1431; a.o. 2687: xin(?) At. 155, 162; Tef. 37: xıv al-fam ağız Mel. 47, 1; Rif. 140: Çağ. xv fl. ağz dahan 'mouth' San. 44t. 2; ağız do. 16: Xwar. xiv ağız “mouth” MN 116, etc.: Kom. xiv “mouth” ağız/ağz CCI; ağız/ avuz CCG; Gr. 3o: Kip,/Tkm. xiv ağız al-fam; in Kap. a'iz (sic) İd. 17: xv al-fam ağız Kav. 60, 13; avvz Tuh. 27b. 4: Osm. xıv ff. ağız “mouth”, and in various idioms; c.i.a.p. TTS I 9-10; II 11-12; İİİ 7,9; IV 7. 10-11. ağul/ağuz 'biestings, colostrum, the first milk produced after parturition”, Kag.'s preference for ağu), not noted elsewhere, is inexplicable. S.i.a.m.l.g., often much distorted. See Doerfer II sor. Xak. xra£uj with -] a/-//ba” 'biestings'; it may also be pronounced with -z Kaş. I s: xın(?) Tef. oğuz (sic) igi “mastitis” 231: xiv Muh, al-liba” ağuz Mel. 66, 7; Rif. 16s: Çağ. xv ff. ağuz (spelt) şir-i ğalizi “the thick milk vvhich is yielded for three or four days after parturition”, called fala or farşa in Pe. and liba' in Ar. San. 44r. 9: Xwar. xu(?) (drinking) oğuznı (sic) 'the bicstings” (from his mother's breast) Og. o: Kip. xim Hou. 24, 21 (oğul): xiv ((TFkm.) ağuz al-liba'; and in Kip. with -w- for -ğ- fd. 17; awuz (misvocalized ) al-liba' do. 25; al-liba” awuz Bul. 8, 3: al-infaha 'rennet' awuz do. 8, 17: xv laban 'milk' (inter alia) awuz Tuh. 31b. 13: Osm. xiv ff. ağuz 'biestings' in several texts TTS I 13; II 16; IV 10. Dis. V. AGZD ağzan- Refl. Den. V. fr. ağız, “to utter and the like. Survives in NE Khak. axsan-: NC Kir. o:zan-,. Cf, ağızlan-. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. bu yetiğen sutur ertiniğ ağzanıp "reciting this precious sütra of the Great Bear" TT VII 4o, 120: Civ. ağzanmış savın edikti “the words which you uttered have succeeded” TT I 147. Tris. AGZ D ağızlığ P.N./A. fr. ağız , “having, or belonging to, the mouth'.. S.i.s.m.l.g. with phonetic variations. Uy£. vr ff. Bud. ağızlığ yolindin akmış “it has flowed out by way of the mouth' USp. 102a. 31-2. Tris. V. AGZD ağızla:- Den. V. fr. ağız, with various meanings. Survives in NE Khak. a:sta- Bas. ız, Tel. u:sta- R JI 1750; SW Osm. agizla-.. Xak. xı ol arıknı: ağızla:dı: ittaxada li'l-nahr füha “he constructed a mouth for the canal'; and one says 01 kulin ağızla:dı: "he hit his slave in the mouth' ('ald fam) Kaş. I 302 (ağizla:r, ağızla:ma:k). : D ağızlan- Refl. f. of afizla:-; with various meanings. Survives in NE Khak. a:stan-/ u:stan- “to curse' Bas, 12, 252; NC Kir. o:zdan- "to have a mouth like (something)'. Cf. ağzan-. Uyğ.vrır ff. Man.-A ağazlanmış boltı uluğ öğrünçün “it was recited with great joy' M I 25, 3. Mon. EG 1 1:8 "illness, disease'. Common in the early period, in Uyğ. usually in various Hends., but survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. ig SDD 781, iy 802 (both rare). Uyğ. vırı ff. Bud. Sanskrit dbüdhüt vyutthita "having recovered from an illness! i:gindin önpe:tti TT VIII 4.22; bu igni tózin yiltzin “the root cause (Hend.) of this illness U IJI 41, 7 (i)—ig afğrığ see ağrığ—iğ toğa see toğa—iğ Kkégen see kégen—ig kem see kem; (all kinds of) ig a:da: 'illness and danger' (will disappear) TT VIII K.9: Civ. ig (by itself) TT İ azo, 221; VIII M.23; USp. 78, 2; H I 164; H II common—dg ağrığ TT İ ıı, etc-—iğ kem TT VII 38, 5: Xak. xı 1:ğ al-marad "illness! Kaş. I 48; Hİ 224, 28 (toja:); 1 438, 11 (tal-); s o.o.: KB iğ 'illness' is common r56, 157, 749, 1054 ff, etc. ——İğ kem 1057: xin(?) Ar, 163, 253, 310; Tef. ig "illness; pain” 121, 231 (ağuz): Çağ. xv ff. ig (spelt) (2) marad-i nd  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 143 
     
   
   
       DIS. V. EG- 99 Xtuj “an unpleasant disease! Sam. 108r. 29 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv ig 'illness' Quib 57; Nahc. 87, 3—iğ "Hat do. 333, 13: Kip. al-'illa "an illness! ylg Hou. 32, 20; bajada "to be hateful” (sic?) yiğ kör- do. 36, 7: xiv ig (*with -&amp;') a/-dd” “illness” fd. 19. S? 2 1iğ See ik. İ:k 'spindle, distaff”, later it came, like 1 ok, to be used for similar objects like 'pivot (of a mill), axle' and the like. Survives in several NE languages as İ:k R 1 1415; SE Türki iyik Shaw 40 (only): NC Kir, İyik: SC Uzb. ik: SW Az. ly; Osm. ig/iy; Tkne: ik. Xak. xı kk al-migzal 'spindle'; alternative form (lu£a) of yl:k İT 48; the same entry is repeated in 1 85, 19 between öyük and oyun, presumably inserted by a scribe who thought ti was iyik; (after yl:g) yi:k br'I-háfi'l-gulba. “vüth -k', *spindle'; alternative form of i:K, this alternation is like that in Ar. a/ma"ilyalma"i and alandüdiyalandüd III 144: xiv Müh. al-miğzal yl:ğ Mel. 64, 1; (VU) iyi:k Rif. 162 (the only vowel marked is kasra on the alif): Çağ. xv ff. 18 (*with -&amp;') (1) “an instrument (Zlati) with which they spin thread”, in Pe. dük, in Ar. midzal San. 1o8r. 29: Xwar. xiv İK “spindle” Qutb 57: Kip. xit al-miğzal yik Hou. 17, 7: xiv 1g (with -&amp;') al-migzal h 19: XV ditto Tuh. 34a. 9. 1 6:8 “mother”, the oldest "Turkish word with this sense. Survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. öğefök SDD 1102, 1106, and in der. f.s like 1 öğsüz. Otherwise n.o.a.b.; replaced by ana: See 3 ö:ğ and 1 ka:p. Türkü vri öğüm Élbilge: xatunığ “my mother Elbilge: Xatun” 7 E ır, JI E 10; öğum xatun ulayu: öğlerim ekelerim (etc.) “my mother the Xatun and my (step)mothers, elder sisters” (etc.) 2 N 9; oo. 2 E25, I1 E20; 1 E 31: vir ff. ógi: kapr “his mother and father" IrkB 35; do. 58 (2 öt), a.0.0.; Yen. öğüm Mal. 28, 7; 29, $: Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A ógi kanı M İ ış, 1; öğ tepri: “the mother goddess” M I 13, 17; 2.0. M III 15, 15 (i): Bud. anıp öğ karinda “in his mother's womb' U.II 44, 28; öğ kaDp is common TT VIII D.7, 19; O.7; PP 11, 4 and 5, etc.; TT VI 278 (uçuz): a.o.o.: Civ. kişi oğli óg(k)e kelmez *the children of men do not come (back) to their mother” 77 I 216. D 2 ö:g N.Ac. fr. ö:-, "thought, meditation, reflection', and, by extension, the organ of thought, “the mind”, and the ability to think wisely, 'intelligence'; practically syn. with ukus and in KB often associated with it; in the early period sometimes in Hend. with köpül for “the mind”. Survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. ök “mind, intellect” SDD 1106. "Türkü vin ff. Man. (because evil demons) öğümüzni sakınçımıznı azğurdukın üçün “have led our thoughts (Hend.) astray” Chuas. I 18-19: Uyğ. vir ff. Man. ógin kópülin azıtıp "leading his mind (Hend.) astray” TT III 34: Bud. Sanskrit smrti “thought, memory” 0g TT VIII A.34; E.34; F.9; a.0. same meaning TT V zz, 16; 6g köpül Suv. 485, 3: Civ. öğünin köpülünin bulğayur 'itdisturbs your: mind (Hend.)' TT 1.63, öğünce “as you expect do. 120: Xak. xı ö:ğ al-'agl wa'l-fifna “intelligence, mind”, hence öğe: Kaş. 7 48; I 96 (2 ögsüz), a.o. 1 243, 19: KB öğ is common either by itself 25, 216, 217, 1995 (Ö8e:), etc., or in association with ukuğ r48 or ukuş ışr, etc.: xiv Muh. al-fahm wa'l-'agl “intelligence” 0:8 (-&amp; marked) Mel. 51, rs, Rif. 147; al-fahm (Rif. adds wa'l-xátir 'thought") ö:g 83, 7; 188 (mis-spelt 6:7): Xwar. xiv öğ “mind” Quib 121; Nahc. 431, 15-16: Kip. xii al-xáfir ö:ğ, with a kaf pronounced like a voiced (ma"qüda) qaf Hou. 21, 15: xiv Óg (with -ğ”) al-bál “mind”, öğin tutğul “make up your mind” (bálak) İd. 19: Osm. xiv ff. öğ "thought, mind” common until xvi TS I 558-9; I1 742-5; III 619, 620; IV 544-6. : ?S 3 ö:ğ “an animal which has reached maturity”, Kaş., who does not list 1 ö:ğ, includes this meaning in the same para. as 2 Ó:g in language vvhich suggests that he thought that it was an extended meaning of that word, but it seems rather to be a special meaning of 16:86. Xak. xı ö:gğ .. . also means “any animal which has reached maturity and grown up” (intagafa sinnuhu wa habura), hence a horse which has passed the age of four is called ó:g at Kaş. 1 48: Kip. xır (in a list of words used for sheep of various ages) ibn arba"a “four-year old” ö:ğ and those past this age are called óge: (sic, ?0:8) in Tkm. Hou. 15, 3. S 6k See 2 ok. Dis. V. EGef- “to bend (something Aec.) ; occasionally, with 'head' or 'neck' understood, 'to bow'. C.i.a.m.l.g. A syn. word enp-, included here, occurs so sporadically that it is not clear whether it is a Sec. f. of e&amp;- or an independent word, but, the Caus. f. epit-, so spelt in TT VIII, makes it clear that the occurrences in Uy£. are intended to represent en- and not, ds might otherwise have been supposed eeg-. En- survives in NE Alt, Tel. ep- R 7 710 Bar. ip- R I 431: NC Kir. ep-. Cf. egil-, egin. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. ik: suk epreklerni eğip 'bending the two index fingers' U JI 46, 71-2; lki yanar erpek epip ditto TT V 8, 57; üç erpek ayada en(g)ll . . . yanar erpek eğdü teg epe tutğiıl 'fold three fingers in the palm of the hand . . . bend the index finger in the shape of a curved knife' do. 12, 119-21: Xak. xı ol butak egdi: "he bent ('atafa) the bough' Kas. I 168 (ege:r, eğme:k), ta:ğığ ukrukin egme:s "you cannot bend (yuğarmi) a mountain with a lasso” 7 100, 18: KB yağı boynı eğdi “he bent the enemy”s necks" 101; (the enemy heard and) boyun eğgdiler *bowed their necks” 450; a.o.o.: xin?) Zt. egilmez köpülni akibk eger 'generosity bends the unbending mind” 233: xiv MuR. (?) tawá tdqayn “to fold iri two' eg- Rif. i12 (only): Çağ. xv ff. eyğen dür (sic, under a-y, but ?read ég(r)en dür) mayil tea muhabbat  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 144 
     
   
   
       160 DIS. V. EGeyledi "he bowed and showed love” Vel. 41 (quotn.); ég- (with -&amp;-") xam kardan "to bend” San. 106v. 29 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv ég- 'to bend' Qutb 57: Kom. xiv 'to bow' ep- (sic) CCG; Gr.: Kip. xii 'awvaca “to bend” egHou. 42, 10: xiv eg- (with -$-") ditto /d. 18: xv fatala "to twist! ey- Tuh. 28b. 6. ek- “to sow (seed cc.) in (the ground Dat.); to sow (a field Acc.). S.i.m.m.l.g. Xak. xr ol tarığ ekdi: öadara”l-zar" “he sowed the seed'; also used for 'to scatter' (darra) powder or drugs on something Xaş. I 168 (eke:r, ekme:k); 7 64, 1 (uruğ): KB negü ekse yerke yana ol ünür 'whatever a man sows in the ground later comes up” 1394: xiv. Rbg. €k- “to sow' R I 675 (quotn.); Mwuh. zara'a "to sov” ek- Mel. 26, 6; Rif. 110; al-zar" ekmek 34, 15; 120; Çağ. xv ff. ék- (-ti, etc., “vith -K-") ekin eh- Vel. 65 (quotns.), ék(with -k-”) kágtan "to sow' San, 106v. 29 (quotns.): Xwar. xii ék- “to sov” "AF 26: xiv ditto. Qutb 49: Kip. xin zara'a ek- Hou. 33, 20: XIV ditto İd, 18; Bul. 47r.: xv ditto Kav. 74, 3: Tuh. 18b. 1. 1 ö:ğ- "to praise'. Survives only(?) in SW Az. öy- , Osm. óg- and perhaps NI 'T'ob. üy- “to sing, recite” I 71800. Türkü vir ff. yultu:zu:ğ Ogpü:gli: er “a man who praises the stars” Toy. zv. 7-8 (ETY II 179): UyÉ. vii ff. Chr. ógmek alkış ötündiler “they offered praises (Hend.)' U 7 6, rs: Man. tan teprig öğelim “let us praise the Dawn God” M II 9, 4; sizni óge alkayu 'praising (Hend.) you' TT III goy, öğe yükünmiş buyanımız tüşinte “in return for the merit of our praise and worship' do. 169: Bud. öğe: ya:rlıka:dı “he deigned to praise TT VIII IT.9; o.o. U II 73, 5 0), USp. 89, 1—60gdüm alkadım '] praised (Hend.)” Sue. 135, 4-5; o.o. do. 517, 18; USp. ror, 15—U III 46, 13; TT X 146-7 (yiv-): Xak. xi ol meni: ó:gdi: madahani “he praised me” Kaş. 1 174 (ö:ğe:r, ö:ğme:k), in a para. on the difference between the Infin. Suff. -ma:k and -me:k, as an example of a verb containing al-káfu'l-rakika, -8-, ol meni: ógdi: (sic) 77 38, 14; o.o. 1 472, 11; 11 243, 7: KB öğ- “to praise! is common, 184, 242, 272, 930, etc.; Öğümez (crasis of öğü umaz) “cannot praise” 33: xıır(?) At. Óf- “to praise” is common, Tef. ditto 241: xiv. Rbg. ditto R I 1178 (quotn.), Muh. madaha ö:ğ- Mel. 31, 6, Rif. 115 (mis-spelt ö:r-): Çağ. xv ff. óg- (-er, -ti “vith -ğ-”) ög-, madh et- Vel. 109, 110 (quotn.); öğ(with -&amp;-") madh wu sitáyig hardan “to praise" San. 78r. 2 (quotns.): X war. xi ditto. Ali 36; xiv. Qutb. izi: Kom. xiv “to praise öğ-/öv- CCG, Gr.: Kip. xiv óg- (^with -6-”) madaha İd. 18. S 2 08- Sce ögl:-. ük- “to heap up, accumulate (something 4ce.)? "Vhis verb and its derivatives, üküş etc., have often been spelt with initial 6-, but the scriptions in TT VIIJ and modern forms make 7/- certain. Survives in NE Alt, Tel.  ü:- R 11798; Koib. Sag., Khak. üg- R I 1807, Bas. 253; NC Kır,, Kzx. üy- ; SC Uzb. uy-; NW Kaz. üy- R ] 1335; SW xx Anat. üySDD 1441. An irregular form with prosthetic y- occurs once in Xak., and more often in Uyg. (see ükmek). Cf. yığ-. Türkü vri (long gap) üktim /7 S 8 (uncertain, might be the end of a longer word): Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. occurs only in the Infin. ükmek, q.v.: O. Kar. ix ff. (in a badly preserved. inscription) uyur kadaşım ücün ükdim “1 heaped up (wealth) for my capable(?) kinsmen” Mal. 17, 2 (rather dubious): Xak. xı ol yarma:k ükdi: karetcama”/-dirdhini “he piled up money” (etc.) Kaş. I 168 (üke:r, ükme:k); biligni: yükermen (sic) acma"ıcl-fadl bi-karamihi “1 accumulate excellence (sic?) by His grace' I7 243, 8: xın(?) 4t. aya hukmin ajun tapa ükgüçi “oh inan who concentrates his judgements on this world' 449: Çağ. xv ff. ük(-er, etc., with -k-") cam' et-, yığ- "to collect, assemble' Vel. 109 (quotns.); ük- (sic?, in the same para. as 1 ö:ğ- without differentiated spelling) (2) cam" hardan San. 78r. 2 (quotns.) Dis. EGE eke: originally 'a close female relative older than oneself and younger than one's father', that is both junior (paternal) aunt' and 'elder sister', later only “elder sister'. Cf. eçe:, küküy, and baldız. Survives only(?) in NE Alt., Şor, "Tel, eye R I 720; SW xx Anat. eye, iyye SDD 563, 803. In the medieval period displaced by the syn. Mong. l.-w. eğeçi noted in Çağ. Vel. 25, 70; San. 108v. 9; Kom. CCT, Gr. and Kip. Hon. 32, 1 and sis.ml. A homophonous word eke, meaning “father, uncle, elder brother” occurs in several modern languages. (San, may be right in describing it as a corruption of the Mong. l.-w. akalağa 'elder brother”, in any event it is not an old 'Turkish word. See Doerfer 11 512. Türkü vr 7. N 9 (see 1 ö:gğ): Uyğ. vur ff. Bud. éci ini ka kadaş eke baldız birgerü 'elder and younger brothers, family, kinsmen, elder and younger sisters together! Suv. 554, 15: Civ. eker yen£er sevinçliğ ol “your elder sisters and sisters-in-law are jovful TT 7 155: Xak. xı eke: al-uxtu'l-kubrá "eller sister” Kaş. 1 go, I 86, 26 (eçe:), III 7 (yurç): xm(?) Tef. (Zikriya's wife and Maryam's mother were) eke baldız 72: xiv MuA.(?) (in a rather corrupt list of terms of relationship) al-'amma 'paternal aunt' ana: ege: (-G- marked). Rif. 144 (only): Çağ.(?) xv eke ('with -k-”) corruption of ağa 'elder brother”, among the Özbeg of Turan used idiomatically (musfalrh) for 'amma-i buzurg 'senior paternal aunt' (quotn. fr. Babur in latter sense) Sar. 45v. 14: Oğuz xı after eke: "and in Oğuz eze:” Kaş. I go (perhaps a corruption of eçe:): Kip. xiv ege: (*with -&amp;-") al-'amma İd. 18; eze: ditto do. 13: NV "amma eke (or ege?) Tuh. 25b. ro. S eki/éki Sec ékki:, ékki: 'two'. "VPhere is no doubt that the -kwas originally doubled, see Clauson, "The   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 145 
     
   
   
      DIS. V. EGE'Turkish Numerals', JR AS, 1959, p. 20; and the variations in spelling make it almost certain that the initial vowel was é-, but the early alphabets are so imperfect that it is impossible to follow the evolutions of sound. C.r.a.m.l.; -kk- is noted, usually as an alternative pronunciation, in some NE languages R 7 682, 1421; SE Türki 23Ş $88, Şarring 139; and some SC spellings; initial e- (or é-) occurs in some NE languages, NC Kir., Kzx., some SC, and most NW languages, the rest have i-. "Türkü vin eki: always in 7, 7], T: vin ff. eki: IrkB 2, 24; ékl: Tun. IV io, Yen. eki Mal. 31, 5; Man. eki five times and éki once in Chuas.: Uyğ. viii eki aKvays in Su. and II: viii ff. Man.-A eki M 1 1:2, 15; HI 16, 3 (ii): Man. eki (or iki?) TT IJI 159: Bud. TT VIII has iki, not €Ki in various der. f.s, and accordingly spellings in Uy£. script, which are quite uniform, should be transcribed iki: Civ. TT VIII has iki, not éki, four times; other texts always İki: O. Kir. ix ff. eki: Mal. 16, 1; 42, 5: Xak. xi the main entry, under the heading fa'/d, which implies -kk-, is ikki: (or €kki:?) a/-findn fi'l-adad 'two' Kaş, 1 131; about 7o olo, of ikki: and half a dozen each of iki: and i:ki:: xın(?) At. iki 3 times; Tef. İki 1253; xiv Muh. i:ki: Mel. 82, 4; Rif. 186, 187; ikki: 81, 7: Çağ, xv ff. iki: San. IOSv. rs, but in 20v. To it is stated that İkifikki is one of four numerals which may be spelt with either a single or double consonant: Xwar. xiv İki MN 2 etc, Nahc. passim: Kip. xin yeki: (?error for i:ki:) Hou. zə, 3: XIV iki: /d. 18; ikki: Bul. 12, ro: xv ikki about a dozen times in Tul. S iğe Sec 1 idi:. S iki:fikki: Sec ékki:, D öğe: Dev. N. fr. ö:-ç a high Turkish title, roughly equivalent to 'Counsellor'; in thc Moslem period displaced by Arabic l.-w. coazir. "Vhe transcription üge:, advocated by F. W. K. Müller in U II 93, is impossible for etymological reasons. N.o.a.b. See Doerfer II 614. Türkü vırı ff. öğe: P.N. or title Miran A.11, C.2 (ETY 1I 64, 66); Yen. (gap) él öğesi: 'counsellor of the realm' (part of a P.N.?) Mal. 26, 1; a.o.o.: Uyğ. ix Bağa: Tarkan Óge: P. N. Suci 3; this name also occurs in the //Va/rnamag (AKPAW, 1912) together with many other names containing Oge, él ógesi, etc. (see v. G. in Der Islam xxix, p. 61): vi ff. Man.-A él ógesl M III 34, 7; 43, 9: Bud. óge, él ógesi Pfahl. 10, 15,22, 3; 23, 17: Xak. xı óge: /aqab man kdna dd 'aql tQ sin mucarrab — fi'l-umür, | mina'l-stiqa, ba"da"l-tegin bi-daraca “the title given to a commoner who is intelligent, elderly and experienced in affairs, (next) in rank to the tégín; its origin is as follows (a story about Dü'lqarnayn, in which Öğe: is translated kahl “mature”) Kaş. I go, öğe: (-ğ- marked) is cited in 7 11, 18 as a noun in -e: (sic) der. fr. the phr. ö:di: ne:pni: "he understood the thing after he had thought about it”: (after 2 öğ) hence the title óge: is given to a man who is 1O1 “intelligent, understanding, and elderly' (a//agi bihi 'agl wa fitna wa hibarı”l-sinn) 1 48, 13; I 310, 23 (öğe:le:-), 7 356, 1 (tégit): KB bilge óge 'wise Counsellor' 1754; ne ed$ü turur bu kişike öğ-e, öği bolsa ötrü atağu öğe 'what a good thing a (trained) mind is for a man; if he has a (trained) mind he will be called ““Counsellor” ' 1995; a.0. 4240: XIV Muh.(?) sáhib ra'yi 'counsellor' ó:ge: (-8marked) Rif. 145 (only). ü:gi: 'owl'. S.i.a.m.l.g., occasionally with öor -k-. See Doerfer 11 612. Xak. xı ü:hi: a/-büm 'owl, but most "Turks pronounce it ü:gi: with a Adf, and this is more correct (aşahh) since -h- is not a Turkish sound Kaş. I 161; (there is no h in Turkish) "the owl' is called ü:hi:, but the correct form is u:gi: with a káf, which is the Kip. form (luğa) 1 9, 10: similar statements 7/7 118, 25; 238, ış: KB ügi teg usuz 'sleepless like an owl' 2314: xiv Muh. al-büm ü:gi: Rif. 176; (Mel. 73, 3 sa:ru: kuş): Çağ. xv ff. ügü (with -£-") “a bird like the sparrow-hawk (farg) which can see in the dark” Sar. 79v. 26 (quotn.): Kip. xı see Xak.: Kom. xtv 'owl' ügü CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiv ügü: (with -8-”) a/-büma İd. ış, al-bümatu'l-kabira "the great owl' ügü: Bul. 12, 1 (as opposed to aí-qubaysa “the small owl' VU çevvçen): xv büma ügü Tuh. 7b. 2: Osm. xiv. ff. ügi/ügü 'owl'; c.i.a.p. TTS I 742; II 948; Hİ 727; IV Sor. Dis. V. EGEége:- "to file (a metal object); metaph. “to grind (the teeth)". S.is.m.l; in others displaced by €gele- (*égegle:-) which is first noted in (Xak.) xiv Muh.(?) Rif. 108 and Kip. xiv. İd. 18: xv. Tuh. 8a. rr. Xak. xt ol biçe:k ége:di: “he filed (sahala) the knife (etc.) ; and one says buğra: tr:şın ége:di: "the camel stallion ground (gasafa) his teeth' Kaş. 111 254 (ége:r, ége:me:k): Kip. xv barada “to file” ege- Tuh. 8a. 11 (in margin, in second hand, égele-). PU ige:- Hap. leg., but sec iBen-, igi:s, iğeş-. Xak. xi ol anar İğe:di: haruna wa 'atá 'alayhi "he was obstinate and insolent to him” Kaş. III 255 (ige:r, ige:me:k). VU Óófk:- “to grind (grain /ec.), to pulverize (something)”. Survives only(?) in NE Alt, Tel. ökkö- R 7 1181; Sag. ü:-/üg- R 1 1798, 1807; Tuv. óge-: NC Kir. ük-; Kzx. üg-. In some other languages replaced by ögit-, q.v. Considering the diversity of modern forms the initial may have been ü-, but ö- is likelier. Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. suğun müpüzin yumşak ögüp 'grinding down a maral deer's horn finely! H İT 55: Xak. xı er buğda:y Ogi:di: 'the man ground ((ağana) the wheat (etc.)” Kaş. III 254 (öğl:r, ógi:me:k): Çağ. xv ff. óger (with -8-”) un ögüdür “he grinds flour' Vel. 109 (in same sentence as 1 ó:&amp;-; dubious, not in San.): Xwar. xiv (Fatima) teğirmen öğümekdin armis “vas vveary with turning the mill” Nac. 160, 16; 161, 1. m————9ÁÁ— M nm 9 ai 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 146 
     
   
   
     102 Diss. EGG D ekeç Hap. leg.; Dim. f. of eke:. Xak. xi ekec 'a small girl' (sagira) who displays inrehigence and makes herself, as it were, the (elder) sister of the clan (a/-qarom)” , this word is applied to her as a mark of respect ('alá sabil”l-“atf) Kaş. I 52. D iğçil N./A. of Addiction fr. 1 i:$; 'sickly, prone to constant illness'. N.o.a.b. Xak. xi (in a para. on -çıl/-çil) and “a man who is always sickly' (al-mimrád) is called 1:gçil Kaş. III 57, 4; n.m.e.: KB (the man who overeats) iğçil bolur 4672; a.o. 1058 (1 ka:n). Dis. EGD VU e€get “(maid) servant. In Kaş. both this word and its der. f.s carry both fatha and kasra on the alif. Survives only(?) in NE Sag. éget 'servant, retainer! R 7 697 and possibly in SW xx Anat. ekdiyekti 'servant DD 516, sış. Xak. xr. éget “any female servant (xddima) sent with a bride on her wedding night to wait on her” Kaş. 7 sı. PU egit Hap. leg.; alif unvocalized, but precedes öğüt, so prob. egit. Xak. xr egit “a drug smeared on the faces of children to ward off ulcers and the evil eye” (al-sa'fa wa'l-'ayn); it is medicinal herbs (adwiya) mixed with saffron and other things Kaş. I 51. igid “false, lying; a lie. N.o.a.b. Cf. ötrük, ezük, yalğa:n. Türkü vit azu: bu: savimda: igid barğu: "or is there anything false in these words of mine?” 7 S ro, I1 N 8: viri ff. Man. igid igidedimiz erser “if we have told lies” Chas. 99; igid Kişi “a liar" do. 101; igid nom “false doctrine! 128, 148: Uyğ. vin ff. Man. igid mitri “the false Mithra' M II s, 6 (ii): Bud. (the commandments of the Buddhas) ezük igid bolmaz 'are not false' USP. 106, 28-9; a.o. Suv. 371, 8 (atkangu:): Oğuz xı l:git a/-Radib "a he”, hence one says ipit sö:z "a false statement” Kaş. I s3. VUD ögit Dev. N. fr. ógi:-. Survives only in SE Tar. R I 1811; Türki Shaw 25; BŞ 795; jarring 294 üğüt 'grain cleaned ready for grinding. Xak. x1 öğit tahnu'l-burr wa gayrihi *ground wheat, etc.” Kaş. I sr. D ögüt 'advice, counsel, admonition' ; Dev. N. fr. 6:-. S.i.m.m.l.g., sometimes with initial ü-. Cf. 2 ö:t. Xak. xı ógüt a/-"iza “admonition, vvarning” Kaş. I 51; (ötlük a/-1za) and Övvüt is also used for ai-'iza, its origin is öğüt 7 102, 12; six o.o., mostly öğüt alğıl “take heed': KB ögüt v.l. for yanut 538, for bilig 1494: xın(?) Ar, ógüt öğretür “he conveys advice' 45: Çağ. xv ff. ögüt (with -8-”) band tea naşihat "advice and counsel” San. 79v; 25: Xvvar. xim?) ditto Oğ. 329: xiv ditto Qutb 121; Nahc. 281, 4; 311, 17: Kip. xiv 5güt (with -&amp;-') a/-naşiha hence ogüt berdi naşahahu ay a'jd'lLnagiha İd. 18: xv ra'y “advice” ówüt; Tkm, ógüt Tuh. 173. 8. . DIS. EGG PU?D eğgdi: Hap. leg.; alif unvocalized. Xak. xı egdi: a/-madbah 'slaughter house” Kaş. 1 125. D eğdü: “a curved knife'; Pass. Dev. N. fr. eğ-. Survives only(?) in NC Kir. iydi and SW xx Anat. egde/egdi SDD 5og. Uyğ. vitr ff. Bud. TT V 12, 120 (eg-): Xak. xi egdü: al-sikhinu'l-mu'agqafu'l-ra's “a knife with a curved upper part', used for hollowing out sword-scabbards and other things Kaş. 7 125: Osm. xvi egdi “a curved knife, in 4 Ar. and Pe. dicts. TT'S II 360; IV 277. D iktü: “a stall-fed animal”, unusual Dev. N. fr. igid- ; cf. iktüle:-. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. ekdi/ikdi; Tkm. ekdi “quiet, tame, docile; parasitical, fawning'; xx Anat. ekdi, ekti, ikti, etc. SDD 516, 519, 784. Xak. xt iktü: al-'alifa mina'l-hayawán “a stall-fed animal Kaş. I 114: Kom. xiv (of an animal) *tame' ikti CCI; Gr.: Osm. xvfíff. ekti/ ikdi/ikdü/ikti normally “parasite, hangeron”, once (xv) 'tame'; c..a.p. T'T'S 1258; II 366; 111 241; IV 285. D ógdi: 'praise'; Dev. N. fr. 1 ö:8-. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. (he deigned to praise them) ópi ópi ógdiler üze “vith all kinds of praises' TT VIII 1.8; a.o. do. H.10; Kiristirinty öğdisin kılğu ol “he must praise K.' USp. 44, 1: Xak. x11 515, 16 (kanit-); n.m.e.: KB isizke söğüş edğü öğdi bulur “for the wicked man a curse; the good man receives praise! 239; 0.0. 2,907, and several Chapter headings: xıı1(?) At. (my tongue tastes) anim öğdisin “his praise” 27; Tef. öğdi (and öğdül) 'praise' 241: xiv Mu. al-madh 'praise" ö:gdü: Mel. 83, 7; ó:&amp;di: Rif. 188. PU?D igdük Hap. leg.; perhaps Pass. Dev. N. fr. iğid-. Xak. xr iğdük “a substance looking like cheese (ka-/tay'ati'l-cubunn) made from fresh or curdled milk and eaten” Kaş. I 105. D óktem in KB, where it is first noted, clearly pejorative, “proud, boastful', and the like; in modern languages more often laudatory; N.S.A. fr. ökte:-. "The existence of this verb is tenuous; R 7 rı8ı lists ökte-, Cağ., "to encourage, put heart into (someone)', but it is not in any other Çağ. authority (possibly Rbğ.?) and R I 1183 Óktó-, same meaning, NC Kzx., but it is not in MM. Vel. 110 lists öktet (-ür) gönül bdrişan et- "to confuse, or disturb (someone's mind), not in San.; and CCI; Gr. lists a Kom. xiv verb öktün- (sic) "to offend, or grieve (someone)'. Oktem survives in NE Alt, Tel. óktóm 'profitable, advantageous! R 7 i184; Khak. óktem (of a horse) 'uncontrollable'; NC Kir. öktöm “strong, brave'; Kzx. öktem 'imperious, impetuous”, NW Kar. L. ektem; K. öktem 'proud, insolent” R 7 685, 1183; Kow. 242. "The Calcutta dict. lists a "Çağ. word Öktem 'violent, brave', reproduced in P. de C. vo, R I 1182, but not in Vel. or San. Xak. xı KB (if he likes someone, his faults becomé  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 147 
     
   
   
      DIS. virtues; if he does not like someone) erdem öktem bolur “his virtues become pride (or the like)! 534; bedük sózledi sóz bu óktem tilip “your boastful tongue has talked big” 672; İsiz Öktemiğ “the wicked boaster” $522; bodun öktemi “the (biggest) boaster of the people” 6:167; Kom. xiv 'proud' öktem CCG; Gr.: Kip. xv. faygi (mis-spelt faysi) 'boastful' öktem Tul. 27b. s. PU ögdir n.o.a.b. Its occurrence in the Hend. öğdir ançu suggests that it means 'reward' or the like. Perhaps a l.-w. ?lranian. Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-A üküş ógdirl[er] . . . altun öğdir bérser . . . öğdir börser “many rewards . . ., if he gives a reward in gold . . ., if he gives a . . . reward M III 45, 1—6 (iv) (a very fragmentary text); ikinti griwin öz sınlığ öğdir kim kentü ol tirig edgü sakıni(çllar 'secondly by the spirit the reward of his own body(?) which itself is living good thoughts' M I zə, 1-3 (i): Bud. U III 32, 14-16; 56, 8-10 (ançu:). D igdis Dev. N./A. fr. igid-; originally “an animal bred domestically'; hence, later, “cross-bred, hybrid'. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. igdic/igdis (in Rep. Turkish also idiç/ idis) which now means 'gelding'. A l.-w. in Pe. as ikdiş “hybrid”, which Red. lists as a Pe. l.-w. in Osm. The alternative final -Ç, which first appears in Sam. is inexplicable. See Doerfer 11 513. See iğdişçi:. Xak. xi (kapdas kuma: uru:r iğdiş örü: tarta:r translated — 'bani'l-'allát, half-brothers by different mothers fight violently with one anothet, because of the hatred between them, but öanı?l-axydf, half-brothers by different fathers, help one another because of the love between them” Kaş. III 382, ro (the obvious antithesis to kapdas is ógdes, and this is prob. the right reading here): KB men igdiş kuluy men tapuğçı senip 'I am your slave bred in your household(?), 1 am your servant 1554; taki yilkici igdis üklitsüni “and let the stock-breeder increase the number of cross-breds (or animals bred in captivity) 5590: xiv Muh. al-muswallad 'a child born of one brought up in the Moslem world' igdi:s Mel. sı, 10; Rif. 147: Çağ. xvff. igdic/Igdis “a horse with a sire of one breed (cins) and a dam of another”, and in Pe. igdiş means (1) fftişdl wa imtizdc-i dü çiz “the union and blending of two (different) things”, (2) mahbüb ma matlhib “loved and Sought after), and also “a horse of two strains' (tuxma) San. 108v. 28: Kip. xii (in a list of words for horses) al-igdig ma 'rüf * a familiar vvord” (i.e. a "Turkish word used in Ar.) Hou. 12, 9. . D öğdeş Hap. leg.; “having the same mother”: N. of Assn. fr. 1 ö:g. See igdig Xak. Cf. .kapdas. : Dis. V. EGDD ekit- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of ek-. Cf. 'ektür-. Xak. xı ol tarığ ekitti: abdara'l-badr “he had the seed sown'; also used for "to V. ECD103 sprinkle (darra) powder! Kaş. 1 212 (ekitür, ekitme:k). igid- "to feed (a person or animal Acc.)”. "The spelling is fixed by scriptions of this verb and İğidil- in TT VIII. N.o.a.b. Radloff misread it in badly-written passages in the Vienna MS. of KB as egit-, and it has recently been revived as egit- in Rep. "Turkish for “to educate', but this, too, is an error. Türkü vii (the Türkü people were hungry) ol yılkı:ğ air:p igit(t)im “1 took those cattle and fed them” /7 E 38, Türkü sir bodunuğ Oğuz bodunuğ igidü: oluru:r (Bilge Xağan) “rules feeding the fortunate(?) "Türkü people and the Oğuz people” T öz, artuk yılkı:ğ igit(t)i: “he fed more livestock' Ix. 25; seven o.o. in 7 and 77: vıri ff. Man. ançulayu kaltı él(Dig. oğlı teğiniğ avurtalar eliginte igidürce 'just as a king feeds his son the prince in the arms of foster-mothers' (that is 'gives the prince to foster-mothers to suckle') M III 14, 3 (iii): Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. Sanskrit nànyám nifrtya jiveta "he must not live by relying on others” nep adınlarka: taya:nıp öz iğidgülük ermez TT VIII E.8 (d represented by t and t by dh); anın öz igidür 'thereby maintains himself* PP 3, 5; takığu igidgüci 'poultrykeeper' TT IV 8, s6, o.o. PP 72,3; U I1 76, 4; USp. 88, 28; common in TT VI: Civ. Chinese ch'u "to feed, nourish” (Giles 2,659) igidmek in the names of two hexagrams TT I 159, 161, 205: Xak. x1 ol anı: igittl: rabbáhu "he reared him”, originally igidti: with the -d- assimilated to the -t- Kaş. 7 213 (igidür, iğidme:k): KB (of God) igidgen rz4, yok erdim tórütti igidti menl “1 did not exist, then He created and nourished me” 1097; a.o. 3549: XIV Muh. (among the titles of God) aí-rabb “lord” igidge:n Mel. 44, 11; Rif. 137 (-&amp;- marked, -d- for -d-): Xwar. xiv (of God) igitken Qutb 57. D ögit- Caus. f. of öği:-, properly “to have (corn) ground'; in the medieval period lost its Caus. meaning and came to mean simply 'to grind, crush', and the like. Survives only(?) in NE Alt. öyt-, Tel. üyt- “to crush, destroy" and SW Az. üyüt-; Osm. ógüt-/óvüt “to grind”. Xak. xı ol tarığ ógltti: athana'l-burr tea ğayrahu "he had the wheat (etc.) ground” Kaş, I 213 (öğitür, ógitme:k): xiv Muh. tahana “to grind' yögüt- (sic) Mel. 28, 7; Rif. 111: Çağ. xvff. ógüt- (with -$-") ard kardan 'to make into flour' Sar. 79v. 5: Kom. xiv övüt- “to wipe off” (sweat) CCG; Gr. 186 (quotn.): Kip. xit fahama un tart- and öğüt- Hou. 34, 1: xiv Ófüt- (with -ğ-”) tahana İd. 18; tahana (tégirt- and) öğlitBul. S8r.: xv fahana (tart-), Tkm. yógüt(sic; in margin in SW(?) hand ógüt-) Tu 24a. 8. D ögüt- Caus. f. of 1 ö:g-, like alkat-, q.v., noted only in the Particip. öğütmiİş 'praiseworthy, provoking the praise (of others)”. N.o.a.b. Cf. ögtür-. Türkü vri ff. Man. ol yaruk kızı öğütmiş öğ “the daughter of light, the praisevorthy mother” M III 15, 14 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 148 
     
   
   
     104 DIS. V. EGD(i): Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-A ógütmis alkatmış “a praiseworthy (Hend.)' (country) M 1 26, 24: Bud. ögitmişle:r a:ra:sinda: 'among the praiseworthy' TT VIII H.s, öğütmiş kişi TT VI 29; (the Buddha called) uluğ öğütmiş yégedmis bilge bilig "grcat, praiseworthy, triumphant wisdom' do. 419. Ökte:- Sec öktem. D iğdil- Hap. leg.; Pass, f. of iğid-, "to bc nourished, fed'. So spelt in Kaş., prob. correctly, cf. iğdük, iğdiş. Xak. xi ogul igdildi: 'the boy (etc.) was reared' (rupi) Kaş. I 246 (igdilür, igdilme:k). D öğdil- “to be praised”, presumably Pass. f. of ógüt-. Pec. to KB, hence Ögdülmiş (sic) the name one of the "principal characters in KB. Xak. x1 KB (the uses of the tongue are many, and the harm that it can do considerable) ara ógdilür til ara mir sögüş “at one time the tongue is praised, at another (receives) a thousand curses” 177; edğü tugi Ogdilür “good is constantly praised' 909. D eğtür- Caus. f. of eg-, q.v.; "to have (something Ace.) bent', etc.: Survives in NE Bar. ipdir- R / 1434: NC Kir. epdir-; iydir- ; Kzx. fdir-: NW Kar. Krm. egdir- and SW Osm., Tkm. egdir-. Xak. xı ol cóge:n egtürdi: "he gave orders for bending ('aff) the polo-stick'; and also for making anything lean (rmàla kull şay”) Kaş. 1 223 (eğtürür, eğtürme:k): Çağ. xv ff. égdür- (with -B-") xam farmüdan "to have (something) bent' San. 107r. zo: Osm. xv eydir- "to cause to bow(?)' in one text T'TS I 286. D ektür- Caus. f. of ek-; "to have (seed Zcc.) sown', and the like. S.is.m.lg. Cf. ekit-. Xak. xı ol tarığ ektürdi: abdara'l-badr "he had the seed sown'; also used of powder when it is ordered that it shall he sprinkled (mira bi-darrihi) Kaş. I 223 (ektürür, ektürme:k): Çağ. xv ff. éktür- Caus. f£; Rdrdnidan 'to order to cultivate' San. 107r. 20. D öğtür- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of 1 ó:g-. C£. öğüt-. Xak. xı ol meni: ógtürdi: /ramala'l-insán 'alà an yamdahani "he urged the man to praise me” Kaş. / 223 (öğtürür, ógtürme:k). D üktür- Caus. f. of ük-. Survives (same meaning) in NC Kzx. üydir-; NW Kaz. Xak. xı ol apar yarma:k üktürdi: kallafahu “ala takteim”l-dirham “he gave him the task of accumulating money” (etc.) Kaş. 7 223 (üktürür, üktürme:k). Tris. EGD D égetlig Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. éget. Xak. (after égetlik) “and the bride is called égetlig (that is 'possessing a personal maidservant); followed bv a para. explaining the difference between -k and -ğ in such pairs of words Kaş. I 150. D égetlik Hap. leg.; A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. éget, q.v. Xak. xı égetlik kara:ba:ş “the maidservant (a/-xddima) wno is chosen to be sent with the bride on the night of her vvedding” Kaş. I 150. D ógdi:lig P.N./A. fr. ógdi:; 'praised; praiseworthy'. N.o.a.b. Uyf. vi ff, Bud. (to dic holding firmly to the faith) ógdilig tétir “is called praisevvorthy” TT |/ 26, 111-2: Xak. xt KB (if you yourself are good) atın ógdilig “your narmc is praiscd' 240. D iğidsiz llap. leg.?; Priv. N./A. fr. igid. Uy£. vii ff. Bud. ezüksüz iğidsiz padak ol "it is a verse free from falsehoods and lies” U 7 35, 1 D ógdi:siz Lap. leg.?, Priv. N./A. fr. öğdi:. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. (to stay alive relying on the first two, i.c. an army and supplies) ógdisiz ol “is not praisevvorthy” TT V 26, r10-r. D igdişçi: N.Ag. fr. igdis; "stockbreeder”. Pec. to KB. Xak. xi KB, Chap. 59, verses 4430 İT. gives instructions for dealing with igdisciler whoare kamuğ yilkilarka bular başçılar 'supervisors of all the livestock'. Tris. V. EGDD iğide:- Den. V. fr. igid; “to le”, N.o.a.b. Türkü viu ff. Man. Chuas. 99 (igid); roo (andik-); 155 (artiz-). D igidil- Hap. leg.?; Pass. f. of igid, “to be fed, maintained”. Uy. viri ff. Bud. Sanskrit sutavad dhrto”bi "and maintained like a child” oğol tég igidilip yeme: TT VIII D.19-20 (-d- represented by -1-, cf. igid-). D éjgetle:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. éfet, q.v. Xak. xı ol kr:zin égetle:di: “he sent a maid-servant (xadíma) with his daughter to her husband's house” Kaş. 7 299 (égetle:r, égetle:me:k). D ögütle:- Den. V. fr. öğüt, 'to advise, admonish (someone Zcc.)'.. S.i.m.m.l.g. Xak. xi ol oğlın ógütle:di: za'aga ibnahu "he admonished his son” (etc.) Kaş. 7 299 (öğütle:r, öğütle:me:k): Xwar. xii ógütle- “to advise' "Ali 39: xiv ditto Qutb 122: Kip. xii vaşaha mina'l-nagh bpl-kalüm | £wa'l-'adl “to advise about speaking and honesty' ógütle:- (vocalized -git-) Hou. 37, 11: xv 'anufa wa naşaha "to upbraid, advise' öyütle- Tuh. 25b. 8 (in margin, “also with -ğ-”), nasgajta do. 37b. 2; láma “to blame, criticize' do. 39a. 3: Osm. xiv and xv ógütle- 'to advise' in several texts TTS II 747; III 557; IV 622. D iktü:le:- Den. V. fr. iktü:; 'to feed (a human being or animal Aec.), syn. with igid-, and so clearly connected with it etymologically. N.o.a.b. Uy£. vii ff. Bud. kentü ózümüzni iktüledimiz erser 'if we have fed ourselves' (by taking the lives of others) T'T IV 10, 11; U II 86, 47: Xnk. xı ol ko:y iktü:le:di: 'alafa'l-sát "he fed the sheep! (etc.) Kaş. I 317 (iktü:le:r, iktü:le:me:k): xrıı(?) Tef. ektile-/ ektüle- “to feed, maintain” 73: xiv Röğ.   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 149 
     
   
   
     TRIS. V. EGG105  (when the eaglets had grown up) et óktüledi (sic) "he fed them with meat' (and taught them to eat) R 7 1185. D *iktü:let- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of iktü:le:-, this word seems to occur in a very late Uyğ. Civ. document, which is probably inaccurately transcribed, and scems to contain several Ar. words. Uy£. viri ff. Civ. muruvvvvatliğ Aryadanığ bizin qüt (Ar.) ektiletip (sic?) 'giving the gracious Aryadana our food to eat" USp. 88, 23-4. D €getlen- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of égetle:-, Xak. xı kız égetlendi: “the bride had a maidservant who was sent with her" Kaş. I 291 (égetlenür, égetlenme:k). D iktü:len- Refl, f. of iktü:le:-; “to feed oneself'. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud, kentü özümin iktilendim (sic?) erser "if I have fed myself! U I7 78, 29-30 (the parallel texts have iktüledim): Osm. xv ektilen- “to play the parasite” in one text 7755 7 258. D ófitse:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of ögit-. Xak. xı ol tarığ öğgitse:di: famannd an yathani'l-burr bi-fi'l ğayrihi “he wished to have the wheat ground by someone else” Kaş. I 302 (öğitse:r, ógitse:me:k). Dis. EGG PU ekek Hap. lcg., unless mis-spelt in Kip. xv 'ayb 'shame' İlik Tuh. 24b. 4 there is no other trace of such a word, and /öm and kaf are sometimes confused with one another; cf. ekeklik. Xak. xı ekek işle:r al-mumisa mina”l-nisd “a prostitute” Kaş. I 78. PU?D öğek/öğük, the first apparently the Man.-A form of the second. A term of affection(?) of uncertain origin. "The suggestion in v. G. ATG, para. 57 that it is a Dim. f. of 1 ó:&amp; hardly fits the context of its being addressed to a son; the theory that it is a Dev. N. fr. öz- seems semantically more suitable. Uy£. viri ff. Man.-A yeme óg] kanı anta öğek sav sözleyü umağay “and his mother and father vvill not be able to spcak such understanding(?) words' (as to enlighten his mind) M I 15, 1-3: Bud. in PP $, 8, 6, 6, 9, 6) 16,3 specches addressed by the king to his son Édgü ógli tégin begin amrak ógükim and in do. 26, 3 the old man says to the king 'why are you sending your god-like, jewel-like ógüküpüzni to the land of dcath?' In these contexts it is clearly an alternative word for 'son', but 'sensible, understanding' hardly seems very appropriate. ükek originally 'box' or the like; hence metaph. “a wall tower' on a city wall, Arabic “burc, in certain contexts with the metaph. meanings of that word. Survives only(?) in NE Tuv. üğek “a small confined space, e.g. dog kennel, the interior of a covered cart, sentry box”, and NC Kir. ükók “a small box for carrying food”. Xak. xi ükek al-tàbüt wa'l-gundüq 'coffin, box”, ükek burc süri'l-madinati'[-mu'adda li'l-harb “a tower on a city wall built for military purposes' Kaş. I 78: KB on iki ükek 'the twelve signs of the zodiac” (Ar. burc) 138; €(Diğ boynı kilca ükekçe başı “a king with a neck as (thin as) a hair and a head as (thick as) a tower' (the understanding man does not trust him at all) 2154: xiv Rbg. on iki ükek R I 1193 (directly copied fr. KB); Muh. al-burc (here) “a sign of the zodiac! ü:ge:k Mel. 78, 17; Rif. 183 (-&amp;- marked). Tris. EGG D *ékkegü: Collective f. of €kki:, 'two together, both'. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SC, SW, often much abbreviated. İn some languages ike'ülen, also often much abbreviated, appears as well as, or instead of, this word. It carries a Mong. instead of a Turkish suffix, see Clauson, “The Turkish Numerals', 7R AS, 1959, p. 30. Türkü vi: ekegü: should prob. be read in İ N 3, see 2 éllig: Uy£. vii ff. Bud. tégin yerçi avıçğa birle ikegü kaldilar 'the prince and the old guide remained (alone) together' PP 35, 8; ikegtike “to both” (praise and blame) U İ71 73, 22; o.o. TT V 26, 108, and 110; Pfahl. 6, s: Civ. ol ikegüni bile(?) kavşur “add the two together TT VIII L.35; the word occurs about a dozen times in contracts, mostly late, in USp.: Xak. xi barnpla:r İki:gü: idhaba intumá "go the two of you” Kaş. İl 45, 3; n.m.e.: KB the word occurs several times, 331, 875, 1463, etc. the spelling varying between ikiğü and ikegü even in the same MS., ikigün/ikegün also occurs, e.g. yağuşmaz ikigün (v.l. ikegü) yolı yarşı ol “the roads of the two do not approach (one another) they diverge' 5311: xi(?) KBVP ikigün (v.l. ikegü) ajunda “in both worlds! 17: xin(?)) Tef. ikegüfikegün/ikigün “both” 123-4: Çağ. xv ff. ikeğü (with -k-, -8-”) ihtsi bile Vel. 66 (quotn.); ikew ditto 67 (quotn.); ikew di? tà “tvvo together' ikewke ba-har dü "to both” San. 108v. 23 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv ikeğü Qutb 58; ikegün Nahc. 331, 7; 388, 13. PUD ekeklik A.N. fr. ekek. Hap. leg., but Kip. xv mu'ayyib “shameful” ililüli Tuh. 34b. 2 may be a mis-spelling of the parallel P.N./A. ekeklig ; cf. ekek, Xak. xı ekeklik xala'atu'l-mar'a wa qihatuhd *wantonness and shamelessness in a woman' Kaş. 1 153. D ükekliğ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. ükek. Xak. xı “a wall which has towers (burtic) on it” is called ükeklig ta:m Kaş. 1 153. D ükeklik Hap. leg.; A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. ükek. Xak. xı ükeklik hu// xaşaba u'iddat li-yuttaxad minhd 'I-sundiüq "any piece of wood prepared for making it into a box” Kaş. I 153. D ikegün/ikigün See ékkegü:. Tris. V. EGGD ekekle:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. ekek, Xak. xı er ura:ğutnı: ekekle:di: sabba'l-raculu'l-mar'a wa masabahà ilá'l-fucár “the man NNNNuuuunuuuuunxuur,unnvəövxv97r-,——6x5Ğzx.——X“—h“üt—cpə"e€(P———ə---- BS. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 150 
     
   
   
       106 "TRIS. V. abused the woman and alleged that she committed fornication” Kaş. 1 306 (ekekle:r, ekekle:me:k). D ükekle:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. ükek. Xak. xı ol ta:mığ ükekle:di: “he placed towers (teada'a . . . bürüc) on the city wall'; also used for making boxes (sanddiq) of anything Kaş. I 307. Dis. EGL égil "common, ordinary, lower class' (person). N.o.a.b. but a l.-w. in Mong. as egel (sic), same meaning (Kot. 232, Haltod 37) Türkü viri ff. Man. ögil cokan kişilerke (gap) "to common ordinary people' (in antithesis to kings and xans) M III 11, 14 (i): Uyğ. vri (I punished the guilty notables but) kara: égil bodunığ yok kılmadım “1 did not destroy the ordinary, common people” Su. E 2: viti ff. Man. [ég]il çokan kişifleril M III 36, 11 (i): Bud. égil nomçı törüçi “an ordinary lower-class preacher and teacher” Kuan. 126-7, 128 (same text, partly corrupt U II ro, 9 and 10). D ükil, Pass. N./A.S. fr. ük-; “numerous”. N.o.a.b. Cf üküs, ükli:-, etc. Kip. xı ükil al-katir "many, numerous'; hence one says ükil kişi: “many people” Kaş. 7 74. D ögli: in the phr. edgü: öğli: and ayığ öğli: common in Uy£. vir ff. Bud., and esp. in PP has nothing to do with 'action', as suggested by Pelliot in PP, p. 226, but is the Ger. in -fli: of ö:- and means "thinking" (good, or evil). D iğlig P.N./A. fr. 1 ig; 'sick, ill”. Like 1 1:ğ now survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. igli, ığlı, igili, inli, and perhaps also ilek, iylek SDD 763, 782, 783, 785, 793, 803. Uy£. vrrt ff. Chr. (in a list of sufferers) Iglig toğalığ 'sick and diseased' M III 49, 4: Man. [gap] igligler [ga ] TT IH 85: Bud. Sanskrit. gláno “sick” alig erip TT VIII 4.24; 0.0. do. 4.18; əl 585, 13 (ağrığlığ): USp. 42, 19: Civ. iglig kişike “to the invalid' TT VIII M.35; o.o. H İl 33, 222 (udit-); TT VII 28, 39; 30, 14: Xak. xı iğliğ a/-marid "the sick man" Kaş. 1 79 (e:d); I 196 (uzal-); II 351 (yarpa:d-); n.m.e.: KB (all ignorant people are) iglig 157: xır(?) Tef. iglig (1) 'sick'; (2) 'severe' (punishment) rər: xiv. Muh. al-ma lil "weak, sickly' i:gli:g (so spelt) Mel. 64, 11; Rif. 163: Gag. xv ff. iglig dardnàk "ailing” San. 109r. 9 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv iglifiglig “il” Qutb. 57: Osm. xIV ff. iglü “İİİ” in one xiv text and one xvil Pe. dict. T TS II 520; IV 411. D iğlik A.N. fr. 1 ig; 'illness. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. isig iglik 'fever' TT VII 27 r: Civ. isig iglik H TI 8, 46: Xak. x11273 (ağrı:-/ağru:-, possibly to be read iglig). D ö:glüg P.N./A. fr. 2 6:8; “capable of thinking rationally and clearly, thoughtful”. Common in KB, often in antithesis to ö:ğsüz,  EGGotherwise n.o.a.b. Xak. xı K.B 463, 820, 1246, 1701, 1954, etc.: xiv Muh.(?) al-faşih 'lucid, intelligible! (opposite to 'dumb' afin); ö:glü:ğ (first -B&amp;- marked) v.l. ti:llug Rif. 150 (only). Dis. V. EGLD egil- Pass. f. of eg-; “to be bent, bowed; to bend (Intrans.)'. S.i.a.m.l.g., sometimes abbreviated to e:l- and the like. "There is a Sec. f. (? , see eg-) epil- in NE Tel, R 7 712. Cf. emit-. Xak. x1 yığa:ç egildl: mála' l-gugn “the branch (etc.) bent'; (in a prov.) kuruğ yığa:ç egilme:s 'dry wood (al-vagab) cannot be bent' (yan"afif) Kaş. I 198 (egilür, egilme:k); bu: butak ol egilğe:n “this branch is constantly bending” (yatamáyil) I 159, 1; 2.0. 7II 215, 17: KB kafil teg köni bod egildi kodt! “his body, (once) as straight as a whip, has bent down' 1055; 0.0. 1099, 4992: xili(?) At. 233 (eğ-): xtv Rbg. egil“to bend” R I zor (quotn.); Muh. ta'awwaca "to be bent” egil- Mel. 24, 8; Rif. 106: Çağ. xv ff. égil- (with -&amp;-") xam şudan “to be bent San. 107r. 18: Xwar. xiv egil- "to be bent, to bend” Quib rg, égil- do. 57: Kom. xiv “to be bent' il- (for i:1-, confused with il-) CCG; Gr. 105 (quotn.): Kip. xiv egil- (with -&amp;-") ta'atewaca İd. 18: xv müla eyil-, Tkm. egilTuh. 35b. 12; ta”ta”a “to stoop, crawl" epil(sie) 24a. 4. D ekil- Pass. f. of ek-; “to be sown (etc.)”. S.i.s.m.l.g. Xak. xı tarif ekildi: zuri'a'l-zar' “the seed was sown'; also used of anything that is sprinkled (durra) over something Kaş. 7 198 (ekilür, ekilme:k): Çağ. xv ff. ékil- ('with -k-' implied) kágta şudan “to be sown' San. 107r. 18: Xwar. xiv ékil- (of salt on a wound) *to be sprinkled' Qutb 57. D ögül- Pass. f. of 1 ó:&amp;-; “to be praised". Survives only(?) in SW Osm. ógül-/óvül-. Xak. xı er ögüldi: “the man was praised" (mudiha) Kaş. I 198 (öğülür, ógülme:k); erdem bile: óglelim natafáxar bi'l-manágib “let us glory in our merits! 77 343, 19: xırı(2) Tef. öğül- “to be praised' 242: Caf. xvff. ógül- sutüda şudan "to be praised" San. 78r. 26 (quotns.). : D ükül- Pass. f. of ük-, “to be heaped up, accumulated”. Survives in NE Koib., Sag.; Khak. ü:l- R I 1845; Bas. 257: NC Kir. Kzx. üyül-: NW Kaz. öyel- (This verb has been read in Türkü vri T 32, but the right reading is keli:r erser körü: kelü:r “if he comes, see him and bring him (to me)'?): Xak. xı topra:k üküldi: “the earth (etc.) was heaped up” (fakarotama) I 198 (ükülür, ükülme:k), teğme: çeçe:k üküldi: “all the flowers were heaped up” (tarákama) I 437, 4; II 285, s (in the latter inkataba *were collected”): KB ukuş ordusi ol nep üklü turur *understanding is its palace; things are collected there” 310 (cf. irkil-): Çağ. xv ff. ükülgen ('with -k-, -8-”) cam" olub, yığılğan fcollected, heaped ub” Vel, 109 (quotn.):     
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 151 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. EGLükül- (?sc, in same para. as öğül-) cam" şudan San. 78r. 26 (quotns.) D i£gle:- Den. V. fr. 1 i:g; “to be sick, ill”, the cause of illness, if mentioned, seems to be in the Dat. Survives only(?)lin SW xx Anat. igle-/lyle- SDD 783, 8o3: Uyğ. vir fT. Man.-A esen ermek iğlemek “to be vvell or ill” M İİİ 13, 16 (i); iglemekin ölmekin 'sickness and death” M 7 9, ş: Bud. ağır iğledi "he fell grievously ill” Suv. 4, 17; 0.0. do. 478, 17; U II s, 1; USp. 97, 12: Civ. borka iglemişin 'suffering from alcoholism' H H 32,26; o.o. TT VII 24, 17; 25, 26, etc.: Xak. xı er igle:di: maradq?l-racul "the man was ill” Kaş. I 287 (igle:r, iğle:me:k): KB kamuğ iglegen 'everyone who falls sick' 1108; a.o. 2109: xiv Muh.(?) tadá'afa 'to grow weak! igle- Rif. 106 (only): Xwar. xiv i$ igle- “to be ill” Qutb 57. S İkle:- See irkle:-. D ö:gle:- See ö:glen-, ö:gleş-. D ükli:- Den. V. fr. ükil, “to become larger, more plentiful, to increase (Intrans.)'. Survives only(?) in NE Şor üktü-, Tel. öktü- R I 1806, 1185. Uyğ. vii ff. Man. yarlıkançuçi köpülleri ükliyü “their merciful thoughts increasing! T T 111 133-4: Bud. edim tavarim üklizün “may my property (Hend.) increase' U I 29, 2; (just as a small fire, when fanned by the. wind) ükliyür bedüyür 'increases and grows bigger' (so the passions under the influence of lust) ükliyür aşılurlar “increase (Hend.) U II 9, 6-8; o.o; of ükli:- aşılTT IV 12, 44-5; Hüen-ts. 2075; Sanskrit buşta 'nourished, brought up” üklimis TT VIII D.35; Sanskrit vardhánte “ increase" ükliyür do. F.3: Civ. ed tavar ükliyür TT VII 28, 43; as. TT I 75 (yala:), Xak. ükli:di: ne:n zàáda'l-;ay' va namá “the thing incréased and grew' Kaş. I 287 (ükli:r, ükli:me:k)/ tavar kimin üklise: 7 362, 24; 8.0. translated kafura "to be abundant II 366, 6. i D iğlet- Caus. f. of iğle:- , 'to make (someone Acc.) ill”. Survives -only(?) in SW xx Anat: SDD 782. Xak. x1 bu: yérr anı: iğletti: “this place made him ill (axıradahu) because it did not suit him” Kaş. 7 266 (iğletür, igletme:k). $ iklet- See irklet-. : D' üklit- Caus. f. .of ükli-; “to increase (something cc). N.o.a.b. See uğlit-. Uyğ. vnirff. Bud. Sanskrit Alésavardhanà "increasing the passions! nizvanif üklitte:clle:r e:rür TT VIII A.14; üklitgülük go. 'E.6 (sipa:rkı:), aşdım üklittim 'I have increased (Hend.)” Suv. 136, 20; o.o. U IV zə, 276 (üklit- ag-); Suv. 29, r5: Xak. xr ol ne:gni: üklitti: kattara'màlahu wa tammara “he increased (Hend.) his property" Kaş. 1 264 (ükHtür, üklitme:k, mostly unvocalized); same phr. 7I 366, 6: KB 5890 (igdis). D'iglel- Hap. Leg.; Pass. f. of iğle:-: Xak. xi tégme: törlüğ Lg “igleldi: murida. kull * 107 naw' mina'l-marad 'every kind of illness was suffered” Kaş. I 296 (Iglelür, iğlelme:k). D iglen- Refl. f. of iğle:-. Survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. igilen- (of fruit) “to vvither” SDD 582. Xak.xı ura:ğut iglendi: axadati'l-mar'ata'l-falq "the woman was in travail'; also used when a man is slightly ill (marida galila(n) Kaş. I 259 (no Aor. or İnfin.): Kip. xv im'alla "to be ill” yiglen- (sic) Tuh. 6b. 1; tamárada “to be taken ill” (xastalan- ; in margin in SW(?) hand) iğlen- do. gb. ır. D ö:ğlen- Refl. f. of ö:gle:-, Den. V. fr. 26:g, which is noted only in Osm. xiv TTS I 559; II yaş, “to collect one's thoughts; to gain, or regain, the power to think', and the like. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. Sanskrit smrtásamprajüta “vvho has recovered his memory” ögle:nü bililpl TT VIII G.12; (he lay like a corpse on the ground) ür keç temin öğlendi “at long last he became fully conscious PP öz, 1; a.o. Sur. 619, 19 (ançada:): Xak. xı aruk er ö:ğlendi: acamma'l-ráculu'l-mu'yi “the exhausted man rested'; also used of a boy, idà kabura *when he grows up” (i.e. comes to years of discretion) Kaş. 1 298 (ö:ğlenür, ö:ğlenme:k), aruk er öğlendi: same translation, also used 1gd: fafima”l-şay" ba"d Babáwa bihi when one understands something after failing to understand it originally ó:glendi: / 259 (öğlenür, óglenme:k): KB tokışığ uzatsa yağı óglenür “if (you) prolong the battle, the enemy comes to his senses' 2366; ógellk tegir erse óglengü ol “if a man reaches the rank of Counsellor he must use his brains! 4141: Osm. xiv to xvi (only) óglen- “to come to one's senses” in s texts TT.S I 560; II 743; 111 sss, IV 620. D üklün- Heap. leg.; Refl. f. of ükül-, form fixed by rhymes avlanup and örlenüp. Xak. bir bir ü:ze: üklünüp (the clouds) “are piled (yatarákam) on one another” Kaş. 1 258, 3; n.m.e. D iğleş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of igle:-. Xak. xı yılkı: arığ iglesdi: maridat”l-daudbb “he cattle (etc.) were (all gravely) il” Kaş. 7 241 (igleşür, iglesme:k). S ikleş- See irkleş-. D ö:gğleş- Co-op. f. of Ö:ğle:-, “to” take courisel together'. N.o.a.b. Türkü vı ol üç xağan öğleşip “those three xağans took counsel together and” (said “let us converge on the Gold Mountain Forest”) ança: öğleşmiş "that is how they must have taken counsel together! T ro: Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. (in a series of terrible events) üç özüt öğleşür “three souls take counsel together” TT 1 zg (mistranslated). D üklüş- Hap. leg., Co-op. f. of ükül-. Xak. xı bi:r ne: bi:r üze: üklüşdi: “one thing was "piled (imkatába) on another”, for example: sand, or locüsts, on a reed-bed, or people in a crowd Kaş. ] 241 (üklüşü:r, üklüşme:k),  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 152 
     
   
   
     108 Tris. EGL D ögelik A.N. fr. óge:; “the office of Counsellor". Pec. to KB. Xak. xi KB (in a list of high offices) kayust ógelik tegir óg bulur 'some of them reach the office of Counsellor and acquire intelligence(?)' 4067; a.o. 4141 (6:8len-). Tris. V. EGLD eke:le:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. eke:, Xak. xı ol ani: eke:le:di: sapimàáhá uxt. kabira "he called her "elder sister" ' Kaş. 7 310 (eke:le:r, eke:le:me:k). D *ékki:le:- Den. V. fr. ékki:; lit. “to do something twice'; with some extended meanings. In some modern languages used as an ordinary verb, but in the early period only the Ger. ikileyü, sometimes abbreviated to iklle: is noted. 'There is no etymological connection between this verb and the TurcoMong. Collective Numeral ike'ülen (see ékkegü:) Survives in NE Tuv. iyile- Pal. 189; NW Kar. L. ekile- Kow. 182; (Kaz. İkilep only R 7 r419); SW Osm. Tkm. ikile-. Türkü vii ff. Man. ikileyu yapirti 'afresh' (Hend.) TT H ro, 84; Uyğ. vui ff. Man. ikileyü “for a second time” M 111 32, 4 (ii); Bud. ikileyü means not so much “for a second time” in the limited sense, as 'afresh, anew' in positive and '(ever) again' in negative sentences; ikileyü sizlerni kórüsmegeymen 'I shall never sce you again" PP 76, 3; ikileyü taki kilmazmen 'I will never again do' (wicked things) Suv. 138, 3-4; a.o. (positive) Hüen-ts. 1908(icin); ikileyü ücle[yü] "for the second and third time” U III 59 s (ii): Xak. xi bi:r tilkü: teri:si:n iki:le: soyma:s “you cannot skin onc fox twice' Kaş. III 244, zı: n.m.e.; KB yumulmadı yandru ikile kózi "his eyes did not close again” 5674: Çağ. xv ff, ikiley "on two occasions! Babur, Gibb Memorial Trust facsimile 61v. 14, glossed dü pára *two pieces; Kip. xiv. ikile- Cwith -k-") faná “to do (something) a second time' İd. 18: xv anna “to double” ikkile- Tuh. 62a. 2: Osm. xiv ff. ikile- "to repeat (a statement)” in one xiv text; ikiledin/ikileyin “for a second time, again; thereafter, next” in several xiv and xv texts TTS I 368; II 521; III 359; IV 412. Döğe:le:- Hap. lec. ; Den.V. fr. ó&amp;e: Xak.xr ol anı: öğe:le:di: /aqqabahu bi-laqab öğe: wa huma kabir fi'l-qawm "he gave him the title of óge:, that is "a great man in the tribe" ” Kaş. 1 310 (öğe:le:r, óge:le:me:k). D öğlentür- Caus. f. of öğlen-, n.o.a.b. Uy. vurff. Bud. óglentürgeli üçün “in order to revive” (the stranded fish) Sus. 601, 22. Dis. EGM D egim N.S.A. fr. eg-; lit. 'a single fold', but usually used metaph. For the Sec. f.s(?) with -D- see eg-. N.o.a.b.?, SW xx Anat. eğim/iğim SDD sır, 782 have quite TRIS. EGL different meanings. Uyğ. virr ff. Bud, bu dharani üç egim (written ekím; gap) “this magic spell, a threefold . . . TT VIII K.8; (because of the passions) üç enim (sic) sansardakı 'inherent in the threefold samsdra" U II 8, 24; similar phr. Suv. 133, 16; USp. roza, zo, ayığ kilinclarin epmintin . . . kizlegülük yaşurğuluk ermez “cannot be hidden (Hend.) . . . from the folds(?) of their evil deeds! Suc. 140, 19-21. D ekim Iap. leg.?; N.S.A. fr. ek-. Xak. xt bi:r ekim yé:r "the quantity of land which can be sown (yubdar) on a single occasion' Kaş. 173. D üküm N.S.A. fr. ük-, “a (single) heap". Survives in NW Kaz. óyem; SW xx Anat. ügüm SDD 1:7o7g. Xak. xi bir üküm yarma:k “a heap (küma) of coins'; the -m is altered (mubdala) from -n Kaş. I 75. D egme: Pass. N./A.S. fr. eg-. Survives only (?) in SW Osm. Xak. xregme: a/-tàq fi'l-bayt “the arch, or vault, in a house” Kaş. I rao: Çağ. xvíff. éáme (with -B-") egilbniy, hi kat olmuş 'bent, folded in two' Vel. 70; éáme xamida “bent, crooked' San. 109r. 11 (quotn.). D ükme: Pass. N./A.S. fr. ük-; 'heaped up”. Survives in NC Kzx. üyme cüyme bol- “to be heaped up”, and perhaps SW xx Anat. hügme “a hut made of reeds' SDD 758. Xak. xı ükme: topra:k "heaped up (al-mukatewanm) earth”, or anything else heaped up Kaş. 7 130. S ekmek See etmek, D ükmek Infin. of ük- used as a Noun. In Uyğ. sometimes used in this form in a lit. sense, but usually with a prosthctic y- (sce ük-) as a Bud. technical term translating Sanskrit skandha “heap, collection), and sambhöra “provision”. N.o.a.b, Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. telim (VU) kozluğ ükmekleriğ “many heaps of glowing embers'(?) TM IV 253, 47; (sorrow, anxiety, pain, frustration, constriction) uluğ emğgekliğ ükmek “a great accumulation of pains” U 7I 11, 7-8 (mistranslated); Sanskrit samsküra “mental discrimination' 5 ükme:kle:rig TT VIII 4.27 (-k- represented by -g-; this is a mistranslation, samskára is only one of the five s&amp;andAhas); a.o. USp. 89, 1 (ülgü:)—yükmek skandha is common in TT VI (the Sekis Yühmek Sütra), see the Preface, pp. 8-9 for further occurrences: Civ. (a tumour) kığ ükmek teg “like a dung-hill' H II 26, 84: (O. Kar. the word read as yükmek in Mal. ır, ro is kókmek, q.v); Xak. xi ükmek xurgu'l-mar'a “a woman's earring' made of gold or silver, wa Juewa'l-halqa “it is a ring”, it is by origin an infinitive (masdar); and anything heaped up (mukatowam) is called ükmek ; it, too, is by origin an Infinitive Kaş. T 105. Tris. EGM D ége:me: Pass. Dev. N. fr. ége:- with the connotation that the instrument is played with 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 153 
     
   
   
     DTS. EGN “109  a bow. Pec. to Kaş., the second entry misplaced among words of similar form with an initial consonant. Xak. xi ége:me: nam" müna”l-mazühir “a kind of stringed instrument” Kaş. 1 137; İ11 174. Tris. V. EGMD ükmeklen- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. ükmek. Xak. xi ura:ğut ükmeklendi: tagannafati'l-mar'a 1a tagarrajat “the woman wore earrings (Hend.)' Kaş. 1 314 (ükmeklenür, ükmeklenme:k). Dis. EGN ^ D egin Intrans. Conc. N. -in (Intrans.) fr. eg-; lit. something which bends”, but usually in an anatomical sense 'shoulder'. For the Sec. f.s(?) with -p- see eg-. S.i.a.m.l.g. often contracted to İ:n or much distorted, e.g. NE Küer. epne R I 715; Soy. (i.e. Tuv.) İkti do. 1422 (Pal. has egin, with Poss. Suff. ekti). Türkü viii ff. (in a series of enquiries about parts of a tent) egni: neteg edgü: 'How are its curved stays? "They are good.” IrkB 18: Uyğ. viu ff. Bud. bél yokaru kögüz eginke tegl . . . egin yokaru saç kıdığka tegi 'from the waist up to the chest and shoulders . « «4 from the shoulders up to the edge of the hair" TT V 4, 7—11; iki eginlerinde "on their two shoulders' do. 24, 49; saçlarin epinlerinde (sic) tüşürüp 'letting their hair fall over their shoulders” U IV 8, 12 (JI 39, 12); a.o. epin Sut. 36, 15; xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. chien 'shoulder' (Giles 1,625) epil R I 712; Ligeti 134: Xak. xı egin a/-katıf “shoulder”, (ekin follows here); egin kirbàás “a piece of cotton cloth' one and a half spans wide and four cubits long, bihi biyd"dt Suwár in which the goods sold by the Suwár (are wrapped?) Kaş. I 78 (the a/ıf of the second entry is unvocalized, but the word must be eğin in the sense of “a folded material”, which it has, with elaborations like “clothing”, in some modern languages); emğek eginde kalma:s "pain does not remain on the shoulders' (aktáf) I 110, 3: KB bu emğek nece boğzı eğni ücün 'how great is this pain for his throat and shoulders” 1738: xın(?) 7ef. egin 'shoulder' 69: xiv Mun. al-mankib "shoulder” égi:in Mel. 47, 8; Rif. 141; (under 'weaver's implements") al-tiráz *embroidery', egin 60, 10; 159: Çağ. xv ff. égn arka 'back' Vel. 64 (quotn.); égn/égin (both spelt) (r) sar-i dug wa katif "the (top of the) shoulder'; (2) metaph. bázü 'arm' San. 109r. 12 (quotns.); 109v. 7 (quotns.): Xwar. xni 6ğin “shoulder” “AZ 7, 46: xiv eğin Qutb 19; 'shoulder; sleeve” Nahe. 65, 16 etc.; égin Quib 49; Nahc. 57, 13: Kip. xır al-katif eyin; Tkm. egin Hou. 20, 9: xiv (Tkm.) egin (with -8-”) al-katif; Kip. eyin İd. ış: eyin al-katif do. 26: xv al-katif (sikin and also) eyin Kav. 6o, 17: Osm. xiv ff. egin 'shoulders, upper part of back”, c.ia.p. TTS I 254; II 360; İİİ 237; IV 278. D ekin Intrans. Conc. N. fr. ek-; "a standing crop, 8 crop grown from seed and not yet reaped', also 'sown land, land under a sown crop'; it is not always easy to determine which meaning is intended. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE? Uyğ. vini ff. Bud. yaş turkaru ekini bütmez “his fresh plantings consistently fail to produce acrop' TT VI 14: Civ. bu yérke ekin tutsa “if 1 get a crop off this land” USp. rr, 7, 66, 7; similar phr. do. ro, 6; ekin yerde “on the sown land” do. 29, 9: O. Kir. ix ff. this word should perhaps be read in three inscriptions, Mal. 3, 1; 44, 1, and the new inscription from Oust-Elégueste (Touva), published by Shcherbak in U 47, 3sB, 1963, p. 145. Mal. reads the word Aünim, but the photograph shows an 1 not ö in 3, 1; Shcherbak in his new edition makes the same correction in 44, TI, and although he reads £ in the new inscription, South side, the photograph shows i. 'The word is obviously not kin 'musk', and no known meaning of kün suits the context; ekin, if taken metaph. to mean 'progeny' might, but does not fit very well in the new inscription. 'The word may be a term of relationship, kin or ekin otherwise unknown. (1 have parted from you my wife and son) ekinim kadaşım ayıta: adrıltım “I have said farevvell(?) and parted from my progeny and kinsmen” Mal. 3, r, kadaşım ekinime: ayıta: adrıltım do. 44, 5 (Shcherbak 3), uri: kadaşım üç ekinim kız kadaşım üçy... (1ost) “my male kinsmen, my three progeny(?) my female kinsmen, three . . .” Oust-Elégueste, S.: (Xak.) xırr(?) Tef. yağaç ekin 'trees and standing crops' 72: xiv Abg. ekin tikin işi “the work of sowing and planting' R 7 698: Çağ. xv ff. ékin (with -k-') eki ya'ui mazra'a 'sown land” Vel. 65 (quotns.); ékin (spelt) kişt-u zar" 'sown land” San. 109r. 28 (quotns): Oğuz xı ekin a/-mazra'a Kaş. 1 78: Kap. xır al-zar" 'standing crop” ekin Hou. 9,9: xiv ditto İd. 18; Bul. 6, 15; xv mütlaq al-zar' “a general term for standing crop' ekin Kar. 63, 11; al-zar' ékin Tuh. 18a. r. PU öğen “a brook'; the contexts suggest that it wás something smaller than a river. Possibly survives in NE Leb., Tub. ö:n “the local name of the river Biya” R I 1214. Cf. öğren., N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. öğen ögüz suvi “the water of brooks and rivers! TT V 15, 16; 2.0. do. 28, 123 (sarğa:n): Civ. kuduğ kazsar bulak ógen kazsar 'if a man digs a well or clears a spring or brook” TT VII 29, 2; in documents in USp. relating to land it occurs several times in descriptions of boundaries, e.g. (PU) Sügü öğen üze '(bounded) by the Sügü(?) brook' 13, 3; a.o. do. 88, 45-6 (suvcl:). S ógin/ógün Sec. f. of ópin (ópi:) first noted in the Vienna MS. of KB where the other MSS. have önpin, 835, 5530; K BVP 26, 67, KBPP şı. Çağ. xvft. ógün ('with -g-") Şayri “other than, different from” Vel. 110 (quotn. Lufft); öğün gayr San. 8or. 6 (quotns. Nawaá'i). D ükün Intrans. Conc. N. fr. ük-, “a heap”. Survives only in NE ügün/ü:n, etc. Uyğ. EmEEEE———Àü— ssn—— tss Ge— M umi E a 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 154 
     
   
   
     110 virt ff. Düd. ağısı barımı . . . ükün kirür “his property and wealth comes in in heaps” (without any effort on his part) TT VI roz, tógóden hükün (sic) belğürmiş “from the millet a heap appeared” TT VIII K.ş, a.o. do. D.29 (töpörğe:) Xak. xı ükün any 'heap' (Rima) of coins, roses or other things; and hence 'heaped up (muctamı") earth” is called ükün topra:k Kaş. 7 78 (and sce üküm). igne: “needle", S.i.a.m.l.g. with a good many variant forms, but initial 1- everywhere except in SE Türki ylgne/yipne, which proves that the y- in some languages is secondary (cf. İğa:ç), as is also the -9- for -&amp;- which occurs in a few languages (cf. eğ-). Uyğ. viii Man. yanarı ol yipne (sic) yılan "her index finger is (like) a needle snake” M II rı, 21-2; a.o. Suv. 593, 15: Xak. xi yiğne: al-ibra “needle”, temen yiğne: a/-misalla "a large (packing) needle! Kaş. III 35; o.o. 1 403 (temen); I1 3 (sap-); II 120 (sapil-); IJ rşo (sapin-): xiv Muh. al-ibra yigne: (-8- marked) Mel. 69, 3: Rif. 159: Çağ. xvft. igne (spelt) süzan 'needle', in Ar. ibra San. 109r. 15: Xwar. xiv igne 'needle' Qutb 57: Kom. xiv 'needle' igine/ine CCI, CCG, Gr.: Kip. xır al-ibra yi:ne, Tkm. yiğne: Hou. 23, 12: Xiv (Tkm.) igne: 'al-ibra; Kip. ine: /d. 19: xv al-ibra igne: Kav. 64, 9; ibra ine Tuh. 4b. 12. D ekkinç regular Ordinal f. of ékki:, not so old as ékkinti:, q.v.; 'second'. Gradually displaced by longer form in -Çİ:, which first appears, metri gratia, in KB. S.i.a.m.l.g. with initial é-/e- and -kk- in the same languages as ekki:, Xak. xı ikinç al-tàni 'second' Kaş. I 131 (followed by statement of rules for forming Ordinals); ikinç ne:9 77] 449: KB ikinc 132; ikinçi 788: xii(?) At. ikinç ro, 152; Tef. ikinç 123 (s.v. iki): xiv Rbg. ikinç R I 1427: Muh. al-tüni ikinci: Mel. 82, 8; Rif. 187: Çağ. xv ff. ikinç (with -k-") ikinci Vel. 71; ikinc (spelt) duyum (quotn.); ikinci düyumin (quotn.) Sar. 109v. 8 (both Pe. words mean "second”): Xwar. xin(?) ikinçi Oğ. 67, 86: xiv ékingl Qutb 49 ikinç/ikinçi do. 58; ikinç Na. 2, 13, etc: Kom. xiv ekinçi CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv ikinci: a/-tani İd. 18: xv İkinci Kav. 67, 15; İkkinci Tuh. 61b. 2: Osm. xiv ff. ikinç once in xiv T'T'S I 521; otherwise ikinci, Döğünç N.Ac. fr. Ógün- 'self-praise'. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı öğünç (the -ğ- marked with three superscribed dots in the MS.) al-tamadduh *self-praise'; hence one says bu: i:şke: (sic) ne: öğünç kere:k “vhat need is there for self-praise in this matter?” 7 132; öğünç al-tamadduh III 449; KB öğünçke bolup er özin öldürür “out of vanity a man lets himself be killed” 2292 (cf. alpltk): Kom. xiv prae: ögğünç/öyğünç CCG;.Gr. D ökünç N.Ac. fr. ökün-, ' repentance' (for something that one has done), 'regret' (for something that has happened). Survives as ökünüç and the like in SE Türki Shato 26: NC Kir; Kzx.: NW Kk, Kaz. (ükenec); DIS. EGN Nog.: as regards Osm. Red. 263 lists a Pe, (sic) word evğenc (see Çağ. below). See Doerfer 11 610. O. Kir. ix ff. (I have departed this life) elim ökünçine “to the regret of my realm' Mal. 28, 8: Xak. xı ökünç al-hasra 'grief, regret'; one says ol telim ökünç ókündi: tahassara bi-hasrüt hatira “he greatly regretted” Kaş. 1 132; ökünç a/-hasra, one says ol apar ökünç kildi: ca"ala lahu hasra III 449: KB eve kilmig işler ökünçi yarın “one regrets the next day things done in a hurry" 587; o.o, 348, 363, 918, 1075, etc.: xiri(?) At, (keep your own secrets) sözüpdin özünke ökünç kelmesün “do not tell them and then regret it” 170; four o.o.: Çağ. xv ff. ökünç (spelt) nadümat ma bişmüni “repentance, regret'; in the Burhàn-: Qüti" atoganc, in the tazn ('shape') of şatranc is mentioned as a Pe. word with this meaning San. Sor. rı: Xwar. xi ökünç “repentance” “Al 46: xiv. ditto Qutb 122: Osm. xiv ókünc al- in one text seems to mean “to take revenge! TT.S I 562. Dis. V. EGND ekin- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of ek-. Xak. xr ol ö:zine: tarığ ekindi: infarada bi'l-zirá'a wa, badri'l-ard. li-nafsihi "he devoted himself to sowing land for himself "Kaş. 7 203 (ekinür, ekinme:k). PUD iğen- Refl f. of ige:-. Kaj's first meaning is normal; there is no obvious connection between it and the second which may be a mistranslation, see Osm. The meaning in I 104, 1 is entirely different and the text is perhaps corrupt; ige:le:nür fr. a Refl. Den. V. fr. ige: (1 idi:) would suit the context, but there is no evidence for ige: as a Sec. f. of 1: idi: in Xak. Xak. xı at iğendi: haruna”l-faraş "the horse. (etc.) was refractory: (or: restive); and one says kısra:k - iğendi: hamalati'l-ramaka filo tva. 'aliqat "the mare was pregnant (Hend.)! Kaş. I 203 (igenür, igenme:k); (later' he greatly regretted) 6:1 bolğali: igendi: /imà haruna 'inda' l-mugáliha toa camaha "an dálika "because he was obstinate about making peace and resisted it” 7 zoo, 19; ka:z kopsa: ördek Kó:lig ige:nü:r "when the goose flies off, the duck takes possession (tamallaka) of the lake” 7 104, r: Çağ. xv ff. ki ol kuyaş yüzlügni kórgen iğenür" bi-ixtiyar “for anyone seeing that sun-faced beauty involuntarily becomes restive” P. de C. 121 (it is uncertain where P. de C., who mistranslated it, found this verse; the verb is not mentioned by Vel, or San.):; Osm. RI 1425: quotes from Leh. Osm. a verb igen(obsolete) (of an animal giving birth) “to hold its breath and make violent efforts to expel the child;' this entry does not seem to occur in the edition of A.H. 1306. D ógün- Refl. f. of 1 ö:ğ- , “to praise oneself, boast'. Survives only(?) in SW Az. öyün-, Osm. ógün-/óvün- (Red. also quotes the forms öğen-/föyen-/öyün-), 'Tkm.' óvün-. Xak. xt ol ö:zin ögündi: "he praised (madaha) 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 155 
     
   
   
     TRIS. V. EGNhimself! Kaş. 7 203 (öğgünür, ógünme:k); and three o.o.: xiv MuA.(?) al-'acab "to be pleased with (something)'(?) ógünmek (unvocalized) Rif. 122 (only): Çağ. xv ff. öğün(spelt) mufüxarat wa mubdhüt wa xuud-rd sutüdan "to boast, brag, praise oneself! San. 78v. 3 (quotn.): Kom. xiv “to boast' övünmek CCG, Gr. ökün- (ökön-) “to repent, regret (something Dat.y. Survives in the same languages as Okünc. See ükün-. Türkü vii ff. Man. Chuas. passim; TT II 10, 81 (ötün-): Uyğ. virt ff. Chr. tép ökündiler “hey expressed their regret, saying. . .' U Fo, 3: Bud. ökönör yeme: “and repents' TT VIVA. 44; 0kün- ' to repent” constantly recurs, sometimes in isolation, sometimes in a string of verbs 'pray, beseech, admit (one's faults), clear oneself (of sin)”, etc., esp. in the long confessions of sin in TT IV and Suv. 133 ft, e.g. Suv. 137, 23 (acin-); 140, r and 11 (kakin-): Civ. köpülün küpüzüp ökünmeki üküş “the repentance öf your mind and heart are great” TT 1 82: Xak. xı ol ya:zukipa: ökündi: zahassara “ald danbihi wea nadima “he regretted his sins and repented”, also used of any repentance (nadáma) Kaş. I 203 (ökünür, ökünme:k), I i32, 16 (ökünç), I zoo, r8, öküngil ta"astaf 'regret (a loss) İTİ 361, 4: KB küsermen yiğitlikke óknür özüm 'I long for youth and regret its loss! 363; 0.0. 244, 919, 928, 1239, etc.: xir(?) At. (a wise man acts at the right time and) ökünmez kedin *does not regret later' 114; 0.0. 143, 144: XIV Rbg. ükünüp yığlaştılar “they were sorry and Wept together' R I 196: Muh. nadima öğün(-8: marked) Mel. 31, 14; Rif, 115; al-nadàma ókünmek Rif. 123 (only): Kip. xiv ókün(with -k-) tahassara wa talahhafa "to regret (Hend.)” İd. 18: xv ditto ekne- (sic, ?error; in margin ökün-) Tuh. ob. 3. : D ükün- Refl. f. of ük-; 'to bring together, concentrate (troops)”. This word prob. occurs in two passages in "Türkü where hitherto öhün- has been read. "The reading ókán in 7 E 23 (JI E 19), judging by the photographs and the context, is prob. an error for üçü:n. Türkü viu (the Kara: "Türgeş had revolted) antağ ödke: ükünüp Eül Teginiğ az eren ertü:rü 1t(t)imiz 'thereupon collecting” (our troops) vve sent Kül Tegin, providing him vvith a few men” 7 E 40; (the Oğuz fled and went into China) ükünüp süledim 'collecting (my troops) I started a campaign, /7 E 38. Tris. EGN 5 İkinçi: See ékkinc. D ökünçlüğ P.N./A. fr. ökünç,” “having, or causing regret or repentance'. : S.i.s.m.l.g. Xak. xı KB évé kılmış işler ökünçlüğ bolur 'hurried actions (later) cause regret” $56. D ökünçsiz Priv. N./A. fr. ókünc; 'impenitent, without regret'. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vur ff. Bud. esirğençsiz ökünçsiz köpülin 'with an unstinting, unregretting mind” Suv. 169, 1314: Xak. xi K B uzun yaşlığ edğü öküncsüz yorir "the long-lived good man lives without regrets" 348. D ekindi: Pass. N./A.S. fr. ekin-; 'sown, to be sown'. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. Xak. xı ekindi: tarif al-badru'l-mazrü' 'seed corn? Kaş. I 140. D *ékkinti: the oldest Ordinal f. of ekki:, and the only one to carry the Suff. -nti:, which is prob. the origin of the normal Suff. -n6; originally “second”, but when ekkinç appeared retained in the narrow meaning 'the second half of the day' or, even more narrowly, "the afternoon prayer'. S.i.s.m.l.g. in the last meaning. In Türkü certainly ended in -ti:, in Xak. in -di:, the Uyğ. form is uncertain owing to the ambiguity of the Uyğ. alphabets. See Doerfer 11 6so. Türkü vı ekinti: IN s; ekinti: I E 33; T 39; ékinti: II S 1 “second”: vin ff, eki:nti: 'second' JIrkB postscript; éki:nti: ditto Toyok HI 2r. ro, IV r. 2 (ETY II 179, 180): Man. ekinti Chuas. 81, 129, 179; M İİİ 16, ş (ii); ékInd Chuas. 34: Uyğ. vin eki:nti: “second” Su. N 9, E 5, W 4, 7; vii ff. Man.-A bir ekintike *with one another” M 7 9, 9; ékinti —.. M I zə, 1 (i); Man. ekinti Wind. 24 ékinti M III 32, 4 (iv): Bud. bir ikindişke (sic, in error) TT VIII G.18; ikindi do. H.3; ikindi: do. D.14; o.o. PP i?, 4; TT V 8, 75; 22, 23, etc.; TT VII common: Civ. ikindi (or ikinti?) common in H 1, Il, USp.: Xak. xi ikindi: ne:p “the second (al-tani) thing”, ikindi: meaqt saláti'l-'agr “the time of afternoon prayer” Kaş. I 140; bir ikindi: (three o. of ekindi:) “one another” is common: xiv Muh. al“aşr ikindi:n (sic) Mel. 8o, 4i ikindi: Rif. 184: Çağ. xv ff. ikindi toaqt-1 "aşr San. 109v. ir: Korn. xiv 'evening prayers' ekindü CCI; kinde CCG; Gr.: Tkm. xit al-'asr yekindü: (stc) Hou. '28, 16: Kip. xiv ikindi: (with -k-") al-'agr Jd. 18; ditto yekindü: Bul. 13, 13: xv "asr ikkindi Tuh. 25b. 4. D ögündi: Hap. leg.; Pass. N./A.S. fr. öğün-. Xak. xı ógündi: kişi: “a man praised (a/-mamdüh) by everyone” Kaş. I 140. E eki:nlig in the phr. eki:nlig isigti has been read in Türkü viri ZI N 11 in alist of precious objects, preceded by “gold, silver, silk brocade” and followed by “blood horses and stallions, black ermines, grey squirrels', and interpreted as the name of some kind of cereal for planting (P.N./A. fr. ekin). But the second word is eşğü:ti: (q.v.) 'brocade' and the first, no doubt, kinlig “musk-scented”. Tris. V. EGND ökündür- Caus. f. of ökün-. S.i.s.m.l.g. Xak. xi KB ókündürdi sózlep méni bu tilim 'this tongue of mine, when it has spoken has made me regret it' 3879.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 156 
     
   
   
     P nrc D odores edə Pu, 2 Acora d stunachTeki inl IOGr. zr (the lust ent 15 €oreect, "galiigale' is a corrupcon pus dn which is a L-w. fr. Chinese ac Hang q): (Kip. xiv egir (^with 6) 2.0. "black (a word specially used f horses); also pronounced eygir fd. i$, eerns to be a different word): Osm. xiv BH. Bir c.i.2.p., esp. in Ar, and Pe, dicts, transatinz af-iace and synonymous words TTS If öz, III 237; IV 279. gür “a hezl', esp. of horses, but also of other nimals; this meaning survives in some modem but it now usually means (Rs an dore stic ated; x irs Hock" up, eo (speit)'a four-j ns üge for i 4. Ta 19: Osna. ^ an animal) 'tame'; more xenerall sed to (sat məeənc or 77 TTS I 560; II 743; III s n ri "ub komi? ) i Cro! STU 2 II9: Xok, xi eári: iu e : r ehe T z dp Es at: af: o) arxuc 47, I4; Iqı -pouch' egri: (ditto, v.1. egdti, eózi), 47, 2; 140 (possibly corrupt, cf. adurt); al-mub5til "liar, rogue" eyri: (unvoculized) kişi: Rif. 133 (only): Çağ, xv i. eğri (with -$-) egi Vel, 69, — (spelt) (1) hac ta nürdst” *crooke d, not straight" (quotn.); (2) sazi “a musical instrument; in Pe. canh, in Ar. 5arbüt (quotns.); the Rümi author (NB, not Ve. here) quoted the last verse to illustrate the meaning duzd “thief”, the word can have this metaph. meaning , but not in this verse San. DOğr. r: Xwar. xiv eğri 'crooked, dr honest Qütb 10; 6ğri do. 49: Kom (arta); al- iid *chec! yacn and the ike, larer whirlpool. SYV Osm. egrek "whirlpool, pend' seems to be survival of this word; cf. eğrim, Uy, vici, Bud. kutruimak eğrikleriğ bağlarığ birtem amurtğur:daçi üçü "because salvation completely. allez zords and bonis (of ray (not xn Xak, Raus. ther re): cord transiazed “pun varn  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 157 
     
   
   
       pp nmrnilg., such fornis us diyrirnfirim, Nore that ini SW Osm. e&amp;cim is sometimes a Sec. f, of edrim, irkin. Xak, x: eğrim tayhamatu" see above) wa Rusa mustanga' uha "a whülpool in watert'; and also 'stagnant water' Kay, L toy: Çağ. xv iT. V/el. 69 (egrik); eyrüm suyun dóne döne aki; (a swirling tlow of water' (followed by translation, with quotns. of erdem mis-spelt in this wav) Vel ar: eyrüm “the twists and swirls (biç :a xam wa gardişi) which occur in the Row of waters and rivers” San. 37r. 2t (followed by a refce. to the mistoke in F^).     Dis. 9Éir- to surrou TO twis V. EGR   d so   this igi are ÜUruns. verbs one has no Qaus. connotarion. 3Vn uu auviz-.  Maui E s DHT T1          751575 vi CN TC       -mar aiu "man spun y .. one s; v kemimi: egivdi: adáral.; br'Lsafina 'the water spun the host round! (e re;r,egicme:k); aed one says ol meni: is egirdi: (unvocalized) "he induced me (acàsa to work Kaş. I 178 (the last sentence, althou it follows the Aor. Infin., must belong hi since it has nothing to do with the next ve alar-); tere: avıp egrelim nahdiq bi “adını "let us surround the enemy” JT 13, (mis-spelt alip) and 137, 17; bu: işle:r ol teli yıp egirge:n “this woman spirds a great de (Ratiraiu'l-Sazl) I 138, 7: XtH(?) At. egir       sionally used by itself, bur usually in ti Hend. ögir- sevin- “to refotce and be glad Türkü vir (when I asconded the throne, th Türkü people who thou were on rh pot of deach) “reyoiced an were glad! (ari eyes looke aüparda) JI EF züpre siy read egirip whic fnakzs no sense; Mas disüppeured in imuil break in the srone): vi if. Ögir- occus             D   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 158 
     
   
   
      114 DIS. V. EGRrejoiced and were glad' TT 77 8, 6o: Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-A ógirmek sevinmek bolzun M I 28, 13: Man. İVind. 249, 9 (eded-): Bud. öğir- by itself Suv. 152, 5; Pfahl.:23, 11 and 22; öğir- sevin- PP 53, 2; Suv. 151, 19; 153, 5; Hüen-ts. 226. ?D *ógre:- not itself noted, but the base of öğret-, öğren-, ógreyük, etc.; morphologically Den. V. fr. öğür but with no close semantic connection, but see ógren-. üğri:- "to rock (a cradle, or a child in a cradle, Acc.)' with some extended meanings. Survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. ügür-/ügrü- SDD 1429, 1707. Xak. xı ura:ğut beşik ügri:di: “the woman rocked (Aarrakat) the cradle'; also used fi man dassa'l-makr fi tamalluq ma" Şayriht "of someone who plays a trick on someone by flattering him”, one says ol anı: üğri:di: harraka mahdahu ka'annahu şabi “he rocked his cradle as if he vvas a child” Kaş. 7 275 (üğrl:r, üğri:me:k): KP avınç birle üğrir bu dunya seni “this world lulls you with kindness” 5266: Çağ. xv ff, ükri- (so spelt?) cumbidan gahudra tva amtdl-1dn “to rock a cradle, and the like” San. 79v. 5: Kip. xiv üğri:- (with -&amp;-") "to rock (Rarraka) a child's cradle to stop it from crying" İd. rg: Osm. XIV to xvi üğrü- “to rock” in several texts T T.S 1741; H 948; IV 800. D egirt- Caus. f. of egir-; “to order to besiege; to order to spin”. S.i.s.m.l.g., only in the latter tneaning. Xak. xı ol küpke: yip eğirtti: "he urged the maidservant to spin” ('alá'l-£azl); also used if one orders the encirclement of a castle (bi l-tahdiq hawwl hişar) in order to take it Kaş. III 428 (egirtü:r, egirtme:k): Osm. XIV to xvi €ğirt- “to invest, besiege (a castle), with no Caus. connotation, in several texts TTS I 254; II 362; III 238; IV 279. D öğret- Caus. f. of *ógre:-; “to teach (some: óne, Dat., something, cc.) S.i.a.m.l.g., in some abbreviated to ö:ret-, and the like; metathesized to órget- in SE Türki and ürgatin SC Uzb. Xak. x1 ol mapa: bilig ógretti: 'allamani'l-adab | wa'l-hikma "te taught. me culture and wisdom' (etc.) Kaş. 7 261 (öğretü:r, öğretme:k): KB kiçiğ erken öğret oğulka bilig "teach a boy wisdom when he is small” 1493; a.o. 1494: xim(?) At, öğüt öğretür “he conveys advice” 45, Tef. öğret"to teach” 241: Çağ. xv ff. örğet- (sic) Caus. f., ta"lim düdan aa "adat düdan "to teach, instruct, to accustom (someone to something)” San. 69v. 8 (quotns.): Kom. xiv “to teach” óvret- CCI, CCG; üret- CCG; Gr. 185 (quotns.): Kip. xır 'allama min ta'limi l-'ilm wa gayrihi “to teach, in the sense of teaching knowledge, etc.” ówret-; Tkm. öğret- Hou. 42, 6: xtv öğret- ("with -8-”) 'allama İd. 19: xv 'allama öğret- Kav. 78, 9: Osm. xiv öğret- "to accustom (someone to something)" in one text 77TS IV 620 (meaning “to teach” c.i.a.p). D üğrit- Caus. f. of ügri:-. Survives only(?)  in SW xx Anat. öğürt- “to trick', etc. SDD 1105. Xak. xı ol ann:r beşik ügritti: "he gave him the task of rocking (tahrik) the child's cradle! Kaş. I 26: (ügritür, ügritme:k). D eğril- Pass. f. of egir-; “to be besieged, etc.; to be spun'. Survives in NE Khak. fril-: NC Kır., Kzx. iyril- “to bespun'. In SW Az. eyril-; "Tkm. eğril- also mean “to be spun', but in Osm. &amp; Rep. “"urkish egril- is normally translated as “to be bent', iie. as syn. with egil-. Xak. xı kend egrildi: “the town was besieged” (or invested, hügirat); and one says yip egrildi: "the thread was spun” (£uzilat) Kaş. 1 248 (egrilür, egrilnie:k). D ügril- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of üğri:-, Xak. xı bé:sik üğrildi: “the cradle was rocked' (hurrika) Kaş. 1 248 (ügrilür, ügrilme:k). D eğgrin- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of egir-. Xak. xı ura:gut yip eğrindi: “the woman spun (ğazalat) thread for herself, or pretended to spin it without actually doing so” Kaş. 1 253 (egrinür, egrinme:k). S igren- See yigren-. D öğren- Ref. f. of *ógre:-; normally “to learn (something Acc.)”, with some wider meanings. In Uyğ. the meaning seems to be *to be brought up', which has a vague semantic connection with ógür. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. the same phonetic changes as ógret-. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. U III 82 16 (oğla:ğu:): Xak. xı ol bilig ógrendi: “he learnt (ta'allama) knowledge and wisdom' (etc.); verse; and one says er uzluk öğrendi: “the man learnt a handicraft (al-hirfa) Kaş. I 252 (öğrenür, ógrenme:k); 0.0. 1 385, 18 (bilig); TT i4o, 8: KB ayıttın eşittip yeme öğrenü “you have asked questions and heard (ansvvers) learning thereby” 1187; a.o. r68o: xiu(?) Tef. öğren- “to learn” 241: Çağ. xvff. örğen- (sc, “vith -8-”) ögren- Vel. 101; örğen- (spelt) (1) ta'lim giriftan "to receive instruction; (2) “adat Rardan "to become accustomed to (something)” San. 69r. 13: Xwar. xiv öğren- “to learn" Qutb 121; MN 359: Kip. xin ta"allama yövvren- (si, ?error for övvren-), also (?Tkm.) ógren- Hou. 39, 1: xiv Ö:ren- (sic under alif ra”, but ?error for Övvren-) ta"allama İd. 12; öğren- ('with -&amp;-") ta'allama ditto 19; ta'allama öğren- Bul. 36v.: xv ta'allama öğren- (with -£-'; misvocalized egren-) Kan. 77, 8; ta'allama ören- (or övvren-?) Tuh. ga. 13; 'alima wa "arafa “to know' (bil- ) óren(or ówren-?; tani-) do. 25b. ro: Osm. xv ff. ógren- (normally “to learn”) noted in several texts as meaning 'to become accus2 to (something)! 77S IJ 745; III 556; IV 620. D öğrün- Refl, f. of ógir-; survives in NE Kız,, Koib., Sag. ürin- R 7 1:834, Khak. örin- Bas. 136, 256. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. ógiründelçi) (sic) erklig (gap] “the joyful independent... U 11 63, s (i).    
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 159 
     
   
   
       TRIS.EGR D eğriş- Co-op., etc. f. of egir-. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı ol begke: kend eğgrişti: “he helped the beg to besiege the stronghold” ("a/d muhaşaratı”lLlhişn), and one says kiz ana:si: birle: yip egristi: "the girl competed with her mother in spinning' (fi-£a21); also used if she helps her Kaş. 1 236 (eğrişü:r, eğrişme:k), kökşin bulit örüşdi: kayğuk bolup egrişü:r “the grey clouds have risen (naga'at) and sway about in the air (famid 'alà'l-hawá') as a boat sways about in the water' 7 186, 12: Çağ. xv ff. ékerig- (sic?, spelt) Co-op. f.; büham gardidan “to revolve together' Saz. 108r. 8 (quotn.). : yr D ügris- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of ügri:-. Xak. xı ol apar bé:sik üğrişti: "he helped him to rock (fi tahrih) the cradle' Kaş. I 236 (ügrişu:r, ügrisme:k). Tris. EGR D ikirçgü: 'doubt, indecision”, and the like, no doubt ultimately derived fr. iki (ékki:) and morphologically a Dev. N./A. in - gü:, but there is no parallel for a Den. V. suffix -rç-. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. igercin/igercin (n xx Anat ikircik/fikircin” SDD 784). Türkü virt ff. Man. Ikircgü köpül “an undecided mind” M III 21, 3 (iii): Uy. vı ff. Man. TT HI 117 (uvşa:k): Bud. Sanskrit vicikitsá 'doubt bkiregü TT VIII 4.135; ikircgü sözikliğ bolur “becomes doubtful (Hend.)” Suv. 290, 17; in U I, p. 57 Jkircgü is given, without refce., as the translation of Chinese ; 'doubt' (Giles 5,423): Xak. xı İkirçğü:n rg amr mutaraddad bayn an yuf'al wa bayn an yutrak "a matter open to doubt whether it should be done or left alone'; one says könlüm ikirçgü:n boldi: “my mind was undecided (zaraddada) whether to do it or leave it alone” Kaş. 111 419. PUC eğri: teve: N.o.a.b.; obviously some kind of precious object. The word has hitherto been read with final -i: but certainly on two occasions and prob. the third it is -e:. 'Thomsen discussed it in Turcica (MSFO XXXVIL), pp. 68-9, and was inclined to think it meant some kind of textile or perhaps horse-furnishings, but the simplest course is to read it as two words egri: teve: and translate it “humped camels'. Türkü viri (because I led the Türkü people to various named places in the west they brought unlimited yellow gold, white silver, girls, women) egri: teve: ağı: 'humped camels and brocade (or treasure?)' T 48: O. Kir. ix ff. (I: went to the Chinese Emperor in my twentieth year, and because of my manly qualities and bravery İ acquired gold, silver) eğri: teve: elde: kişi: “humped camels and people for my realm” Mal. 11, 9; elde: kigi:m eğri tevém (sic?) tört butlığ(?) yılkım “people in my realm, my humped camels, my four (-legged ?) livestock” do. 46, 3. D Ogretig N.AAc. fr. öğret-: “teaching”. S.i.s.m.l.g. ww. phonetic changes. Uy£. viri ff. Budd..tórt.tórlüg yé&amp; üstünki ógretigler 115 “four kinds of better and superior teachings' Suv. 148, 20-1; 0.0. U III 54, 190 (U 1125,23); USp. 43, 2-3, Suv. 22, 10. VUD üfgrüge:n Hap. leg.; the only vowelsign is a damma over either the Aöf or the rü”, if so spelt perhaps a N./A. fr. üğrl:-. Xak. xı ügrüge:n “a plant of which the seeds are eaten by the Turkmaniya Karluk” Kaş. I 158. D ógürlüg P.N./A.fr. öğür, 'owning a flock or herd'. S.i.s.m.l, Xak. xı ögürlüğ er “a man who owns flocks (qafi") of sheep (etc.)'; and a stallion with mares (di ramak) is called öğurlüğ adğır Kaş. 1 152. D(S) ügürlüg Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. üğür (üyür). Xak. xı (after üğurlük) “and the owner of (millet) is called ügürlüg with -g' Kaş. I 152. : D(S) ügürlük A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. ügür (üyür). Xak. x1 ügürlük 'a place where millet (al-duxn) is grown' Kag. 1 152. D eğrilik A.N. fr eğri:, “crookedness”, both physical and moral. S.is.m.]. Xak. xı KB köni bardi keldi neçe egrilik “honesty has gone and all sorts of crookedness have come” 6475: xu?) At. (put on the garment of righteousness) egrilik kodup 'laying aside crookedness' 167: Çağ. xv égrilik “crookedness, not being straight! San. rogr. 7. VUD ügrümük Dev. N. (Conc. N.) fr. ügfri:-; 'something which is rocked'. Survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. öğrümük/üğrümük *a wooden handle on a cradle to rock it'. SDD 1103, 1429. Oğuz x1 (after teğirmek “camel litter" and the Oğuz call it ügürmek (sic) Kaş. I soy, 3: Kip. xiv ügrümük (with -8-”) al-mahd 'cradle', also called beşik, the difference is that beşik is a child's bed made of wood or iron, while üğrümük is a more general term for anything in which a baby is rocked (yuharrak), either a bed or anything p also used for 'see-saw' (arcühatu'l-gagtr) d. 19. D öğrünçlüğ P.N./A. fr. ógrünc, surviving only in the same languages; “oyful”. Sometimes spelt öğrünçülüğ. Türkü vı ff. (when he goes home he is famous and) öğrünçü:lü:ğ “oyful” IrkB 55: Man. ertipü ógrüncülüg boltumuz *we became very joyful' TT II 8, 54: Uy£. vin ff. Man.-A (may we become for ever) sevinçliğ ógrünclüg “happy and joyful' M 7 rr, 19-20; a.o. do. 7-8: Man. ógrincligin erelim “may we be joyful M II 16, 7-8: Bud. ögrönçlög TT VIII A.6; a.o. PP 46, 5; ógrünclüg sevinclig Suv. 15, 8: s3o, 7; öğrünçülüğg sevinçliğ U III ro, 7: Civ. öğrünçlüğ TT 7 12, 73, 142; öğrüncülüg sevinclig TT VII t4, ız etc. D *ékkirer 'two each'. N.o.a.b. The later form ikiger, first noted in Xwar. xut, Çağ. xv ff, and Kip. xv, s.i.s.m.l.g. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. tört öd icinte yana ikirer öd adrılur “in each of the four seasons again two periods  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 160 
     
   
   
     116 TRIS. arc distinguished” TT VI 325; İkirer ikirer aylarığ 'periods of two months each" St. 589, 16: Civ. Ikirer bakir 'two pennyweights each” H 1 9; o.o. in II II: Caf. xv ff. ikirer (spelt) dö tà 'two portions (each)! San. 109r. 23 (quotn.); ikişer dii tà do. 26. D öğreyük Ilap. leg.; Dev. N. fr. *ógre:-. For the meaning cf. Cag. and later meanings of öğret-, ógren-. Xak. xi öğreyük a/-'áda "habit, custom” Kaş. 7 159 (verse). Tris. V. EGRD öğretin- Refl. f. of öğret-, “to teach oneself (.4cc., something Loc.). N.o.a.b. Uy£. viri ff. Bud. Sanskrit. sikgáanusamso “the praise of teaching'(?) ógre:tinme:k asığlığ (or -Hk?) TT VIII 4.47; kop tórlüg edgülük işlerde etözümin öğretinürmen “Iİ am teaching myself (or accustoming myself to?) all kinds of acts of goodness” Up. 100, 3-4: edgü törülerde bışrunmadın öğretinmedin "without assimilating or teaching myself (or accustoming myself to?) good rules (of life)” Suv. 136, 18-19; o.o. TT V zo, 8; Suv. 22, 12. j D ógürlen- Refl. Den. V. fr. ógür; “to live in a herd'. Survives only in NE ó:rlenKhak.; "Puv. R I 1233 (Pal. 322 ó:rle-). Xak. xı yund ögürlendi: saárati'l-xayl daüt fahl ra'ila(n) “the horses lived in a herd with a stallion'; also used of any animals when they are in flocks (şara qut'án) Kaş. I 292 (öğürlenür, ógürlenme:k). D eğrimlen- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. egrim. Xak. xi su:v egrimlendi fsiadára'l-mà'. fi'l-manáqi' ma" fawarán toa. cary *the water revolved in the swamp with a swirling eddying motion” Kaş. 7 314 (eğrimlenür, egrimlenme:k). D ógrünclen- Hap. leg.?; Refl. Den. V. fr. ógrünc. Türkü vırı ff, Man. ötrü bir ékintike savlaşıp €ştrüşüp öğrünçülendi "then they enjoyed themselves talking to one another and making one another listen! TT II 8, 55-6. D öğründür- Caus. f. of ógrün-, surviving only in the same languages; 'to make (someone Acc.) reioice”, Uyğ. vr ff. Bud. sekiz otuz yultuzlar kuvrağın öğiründürdeçi (sic?) “vho makes the twenty-eight groups of stars (i.e. the lunar mansions) rejoice' U II 58, 4-5 (iii). PUD 1 epirse:- Hap. leg.; Desid. Den. V. fr. egir. Xak. xı er egirse:di: "the man wanted galingale to treat himself with it” (al-waec li-yutadáwá bihi) Kaş. 1 3oz (eğirse:r, eğirse:me:k). D 2 egirse:- Hap. leg.: Desid. f. of egir-; included in same para. as 1 eğirse:-. Xak. xı ura:ğut yip egirse:di: “the woman determined and desired to spin” (fagzil); and one says beg kend egirse:di: 'the beg determined EGR and desired to besicge the stronghold" (yuhàsira'l-hisn) Kaş. I 302 (egirse:r, egirse:me:k). Dis. EGS D egsük Intrans. N./A. S. fr. egsü- ; deficient, defective; deficiency, defect', and the like. The exact original pronunciation is now fixed by the amended O. Kir. text, but it is likely that the -£- was devoiced by the following -S- at a fairly early period. S.i.s.m.l.g. usually as eksik and the like. Türkü viri ff. Man. nece egsüg kerğek boltı erser 'whatever may have been deficient or stinted” C/ras. 289-90: O. Kir. ix ff. er erdem[im]de: egsükim yok 'there was no deficiency in my manly qualities' Mal. 44, 6 (re-edited by Shcherbak in Narody Azii i Afrihi, 1964, 4, p. 141): Xak. xı eğsük (or eksük?) “defectivc” (al-náqis) of anything; hence one says eğsük yarma:k “a defective coin” Kaş. I 105: xın(?) Tef. eksük 'deficient; a shortfall' (opposite to artuk “an excess) 72: xiv. Rbj. öksük “deficient” R I 1189 (quotn.; sic even in B.M. MS8.), Muh. al-naqişa 'deficiency' (opposite to a/-ziydda "excess” artuk) eksük (?öksük a/if not vocalized) Mel. 54, 16; Rif. 151; al-ndqiş eksük(?) 82, ış (Rif. 188 ağla:k): Çağ. xv ff, óksük (with -k-, -k'") eksik Vel. 111 (quotn.); öksük Ram ta andak 'deficient, small” San. 79v. 23 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv eksük 'imperfect, faulty”, etc. Qutb zo, Nahc. 38, ro, etc.: Kip. xır a/-ndqiş (opposite to a/-zd'id artuk) eksü:k ou. 28, 4: xiv eksük (*with -k-) a/-ndaqiş İd. 18: xv náqig eksik Tuh. 36b. 7, etc. D iğsiz Priv. N./A. fr. 1 1:8, 'free from disease'. N.o.n.b. Uyğ. vrir ff, Man.-A M T 28, 27 (adasız): Bud. igsiz ağrığsız “free from disease and pain” Sue. 191, 23 ff.; İğsiz kemsiz “free from disease” do. zo, IŞ. D ö:gsüz Preliminary note. 77e Priv. N..A.s of 1 and 2 ö:gğ are homophonous, and it is not always easy to determine suhich is meant; even Kaş. seems to have confused them, but 1 ó:gsüz is the commoner word. D 1 ögsüz (0:gsüz) Priv. N./A. fr. 1 ó:g; “motherless”, the normal word for 'orphan', since “fatherless” is seldom used; hence more generally, *helpless, destitute', e.g. in NE of a widow. S.ia.m.lg. except SE(?), usually with -£- devoiced. Türkü vir (Kül Tégin) öğsüz akrn binip “riding his white horse (called) Ögsüz” I N 9 (probably "orphan”, since a horse would hardly be called *witless"): vin ff, Yen. (1 was left fatherless at the age of five, and at the age of rg) öğsü:z bolu:p *became motherless! Mal. 45, 2: Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. ógsüz ógi kansız kanı siz boltupuz “you became the mother of the motherless and the father of the fatherless” PP 77, 6: Xak. xt öğsüz al-yatim 'orphan' . . . Kaş. 1 96 (and see 2 öğsüz): Kip. xii a/-yatim Óksü:s Hou. 32, 7: XV ditto öksüz Ty. 39a. 7: Osm. xvi öÖksiz (spelt) in Rümi, an expression for a child 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 161 
     
   
   
       TRIS. that is an orphan (yatim) with neither father nor mother San. 79v. 24. D 2 ögsüz (ó:gsüz) Priv. N./A. fr. 2 ö:g, “vvitless, incapable of rational thought”. N.o.a.b. Türkü viii ff. Man. ógsüz könülsüz bolt (sic, not heíti as in printed text) “became witless (Hend.)" Chuas. 1 13-14; biliğsiz öğsüz boltukumuz üçün "because we have become ignorant and vvitless” do. 7 20; öğsüz bolup M 7 6, 16: Uyğ. viu ff. Man.-A bu öğsüz etözde tuğdılar “they were born in this irrational body" M I 9, 2: Man. öğsüz könülsüz ertiler TT III 3o: Bud. (the demon Hidimba in his furyyöğsüz teg boltu 'became like a madman” U TT 25, 25; o.o. U II 76, 13; U IV 40, 171 (tal-): Civ. (just as madness, epilepsy, and demoniac seizure(?)) köpülüğ saçıp kodur öğsüz kilur 'disorder the intellect and make (a man) lunatic" H II 22, 27; (if the right eyebrow twitches he will be) öğsüz “vitless” (and if the left twitches he will be busu(ş)suz "free from anxiety") TT VII 34, rı: Xak. xı ógsüz . . . «a'l-hayrün 'confused, perplexed”, originally ö:gsüz, derived from ó:g al-'agl wa'l-fitna 'intelligence, mind” Kaş. 7 96: K (at the sight of death . . .) ukuşluğ ögi yitti öğsüz bolup “the understanding man's mind wanders and he becomes witless' 1378; (the words of the wise are) ógsüz közi “the eyes of the witless' 1246: xın(?) Tef. ógsiz/ógsüz *witless, unconscious” 242: xiv Muh. al-ablah “"brainless, stupid' (opposite to a/-daki "sagacious” t€:tik) ö:gsiz Mel. 54, ız, Rif. 151. Dis. V. EGSD eğse:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of eg-. Xak. xi men butak eğse:dim 'I determined and desired to bend (iriála) the branch” Kaş. 7 277 (eBse:r, eğse:me:k). eğsü:- “to be, or become, defective, deficient, lacking', and the like; for the spelling see eğsük. Survives in SE Türki ögsü- Jarring: NC Kir. öksü-, SW Osm. eksi-, the latter now obsolete and displaced by eksil-. Türkü vıuuff. Man. neçe eğsütümüz kergetimiz erser “if vve have been deficient or have stinted' CAuas. 202-3; 332-3: Uy£. viti ff. Bud. ada tuda kor ya:s eğsöme:z 'danger (Hend.) damage and loss do not diminish” TT VIII O.7 (VI 63); a.o. VI 205: Civ. asığın ayağın egsüdi "your advantage and honour have diminished, become lacking' TT I 58-9: Xak. xı egsü:di: (?eksü:di:) ne:p nagasga'l-jay' “the thing has become deficient Alaş. I 278 (egsü:r, egsü:me:k); kuzda: ka:r egsü:me:s 'snow is not lacking (Id yaxlü) on the northern slope of a mountain" (or fat on a sheep) 7 326, 3: KB eksü- (consistently spelt óksü- in the Vienna MS.) is common, e.g. (of the stars) kayusı yarukrak kayu eksüdi “some get brighter and some wane' 130; biligliğ kişinin savı eksümız akığlı süzük yul suvi eksümez “the words of a wise man are never lacking, and the water of a running clear spring never fails” 973; o.o.   EGS 117 734, 826, 1193, 1340, 2053: xim(?) Ar. (everything that waxes wanes) tükel eksiyür “vhat is complete becomes deficient! 199: xin(?) Tef. eksü- 'to diminish, become lacking' 72: Çağ. xv ff. öksü- (-p, etc.; 'with -k-”) eksilVel. 111 (quotns.); Öksü- (and óksül-) kam şudan "to be deficient! San. 79r. 7 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv eksi- 'to diminish, (of prices) to fall” Qutb zo, éksi- do. 49; €ğİs- (sic, metri gratia) MN ış: Osm. xiv ff. eksi- c.ia.p.; in the earlier period down to xvri-xvirr usually "rans. “to reduce, curtail', but also used as Intrans. TTS 1257; İİ 366; İİİ 241; IV 284. D öğse:- Hlap. leg.; Desid. f. of 1 ö:g-. Xak. xı ol meni: ógse:di: "he determined to praise me” qaralan Kaş. 1 277 (688se:r, ógse:me:k). D ükse:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of ük-. Xak. xr ol topra:k ükse:di: "he determined to heap up (taktiwim) earth” (grain, etc.) Kaş. 1 278 (ükse:r, ükse:me:k). D eğsüt- Caus. f. of eğsü:-, “to diminish, curtail, reduce. (something /2cc.)”. S.i.s.m.l. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. U 7I iş, 12-13 (uduğ): Civ. edéü kilinc yaratinmakin eğsütme "do not dimínish the performance of good deeds! TT I 212-13; kalanlığ yérni me bizke eğsütmedin “and without curtailing our land subject to land tax" US). 77, 12: (Xak.) xrı ff, Tef. eksüt- “to reduce” 73: xiv. Müh. anqaşa 'to reduce, curtail' eksü:tMel. 23: 8; Rif. 104: Çağ. xvff. öksütCaus. ; ham kardan 'to reduce, diminish" San. 2 29 (quotns.): Xvvar. xiv eksit- “to reduce! Qutb zo: Kom. xiv “to reduce, curtail' eksit- CCI, CCG; Gr. D eksil- (eğsül-) Pass. f. of egsü:- and synonymous with it; ; morphologically irregular, since egsü:- is Intrans. S.i.s.m.l. in NW and SW. 'The Xak. form is even more irregular. See (E) isilgü. Xak. xr eysildi: (so spelt in MS.) ne:p naqaşa”l-şay” "the thing was deficient, or defective! Kaş. I 270 (eysilür, eysilme:k): (KB in 826 the Vienna MS. has öksülmedi for eksümedi): (xırı(?) At. in 199 one MS. has eksilür for eksiyür): xiv Muh. naqaşa eksi:l- Mel. 32, 1; Rif. 116 (entered twice, once mis-spelt): Çağ. xv ff, öksül(-ür) eksil- Vel. 111; Sam. yor. 7 (eğsü: RE Xwar. xii eksilmeyin without diminution'. ' Ali 38: xiv eksil- Quib 20: Kip. xtv eksil(with -k-”) nagasa İd. 18; Bul. 83v: xv ditto Tuh. 37a. 9. Tris. EGS D eğsüklüğ P.N./A.fr. egsük; 'imperfect', usually in a moral sense. Survives only(?) in SW. Later forms of the corresponding A.N. egsüklük 'deficiency, lack', normally “moral deficiency' survive also in 'NW from Kom. xiv eksiklik “moral defect" CCG; Gr., onwards as well as in Osm. from the same date. Türkü viri ff. Man. epsüklüg yazukluğ biz *we are imperfect and sinful” Chuas. 308: Osm.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 162 
     
   
   
     118 xiv ff. eksikli c.i.a.p., nearly always in a moral sense TTS 1 257; 11 366; İTİ 240; IV 284; D eğsüksüz Priv. N./A. fr. egsük; 'complete, in full, without defect or deficiency'. Survives only in SW. Uyğ. virrff. Bud. elğsüksüz altı [gap] U TT 13, 3 (ii) (the reference is to 6,000 princesses, and the word might mean either “vithout any absentees” or “faultless”), 2.0. Sur. 429, 6 (yivit-): Civ. bóz eğsüksüz tükel sanap bérdim 'I have checked and handed over the cloth in full and without deficiency! USp. 56, 11; similar phr. do. toy, 8; 108, 8: Osm. xv eksisiz veririn “1 will give in full” T'T'S 7 257 (under eks?). Tris. V. EGSD öğsire:- Priv. Den. V. fr. 2 6:8. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viii ff, Bud. (the king descended from the throne) öğsiredi taldı 'became unconscious and fainted” PP ör, 6; o.o. Suv. 619, 18 (kamil-); 625, 12-13. : Dis. EGŞ D eği:ş Hap. leg.; Conc. N. fr. ége:-. Xak. xı €ğl:ş (alif unvocalized in MS.) sufiála kull mü yudüb mina'l-cawáhir "filings of any kind of smelted metal” Kaş. I 122. PUD igi:ş N./A.S. fr. iBe:-. In addition there are forms with rounded vowels which seem to be completely synonymous but are hard to explain morphologically. In Kaş. such a form with two long vowels is included, irregularly, in a section containing dissyllables with two short vowels. Survives in NC Kir eges *quarrel, dispute'; Kzx. éges ditto. R I 697 (MM notes only the cognate Recip. V. éges-) and SW xx Anat. öğeş ol- “to be at enmity" SDD 1102. Xak. xı İği:ş al-harün mina'lz-hayawán "an unruly, uncontrollable animal” Kaş. I 122; (after üküş, also irregularly spelt ü:kü:ş) and &amp;ull harum mina'l-hayawán is called (PU) ö:ğü:ş yılkı: 7 62: Osm. xvii (VU) öyüş, in Rumi, lacic wa xira "güsirrelsome, obstinate' San. 92v. 27. D üküs N./A.S. fr. ük-, q.v. Very common in the early period but surviving only(?) in SW xx Anat. öğüş “many” SDD 1105. Türkü vı ükü:ş Türkü bodun öltiğ "many of you ə people died” £ S 6, II N 5; nine o.o. in Z, I1, T, Ongin 7 spelt üküş/ ükü: S: vil ff. kb 36 (uçru:ğlu:ğ): Man. üküş tınlığığ “many mortals” Chuas. 110: Uyğ. vur üküşi: “many of them” Şu, E 4: viii ff. Man.-A üküs (sic) M 7 11, 17 and r, üküş do. 25, rr: Man. üküş telim tınliğlar “very many mortals' TT 7/1 21; telim üküş tnliglar do. 145; ed$ü kiling üküşrek kilmadim “1 have too often failed to do good deeds” M III 31, 1 (ii): Bud. üküş is so spelt five times in TT. VIII; it is common both by itself and in the Hends. telim üküş/üküş telim, erüş üküş, sansiz üküş, ülgüsüz üküş: Civ. (if the eye) üküş telim yaş aksar 'waters profusely” H 1 65; many o.o. in H II, TT I; Xakı xı Ü:kü:ş (stc, irregular iri section ''RIS. EGS of words with two short vowels) ne:p ali-kàtir mün kull şay” 'many', of anything Kaj. 1 62 (prov.); nine o.o. of üküs, one of ükü:s: KB (if a man has understanding) asğı üküş “he has many advantages” 160; 0.0. 44, 1034, 1112, etc.: x11(?) KBVP üküş 'ibrat alğıl 'accept many warnings' 76: xın(?) KBPP (Laud, honour, and) üküş ógdl “many praises! (to God) 1: At. üküş is common: Tef. üküş “many, much” (opposite to az "ittle") 338: xiv. Rbg. "limi üküs “his knowledge is great” R 7 1812: Muh. al-katir yüküş Mel. ss, 13; üküş, Rif. 153: Çağ. xvff. üküş bi-hadd 'unlimited' Vel. 111; üğlş (so spelt) bisyür tea faráwan 'numerous, abundant! San. 8or. 3: Xwar. xii üküş “many” "Ali sı: xiv. ditto Qutb. 122; MN oo, ctc.; Nahé. 24, 17 (yada:B); 232, 1 etc.: Kip. al-katir (köp and) üküş JJou. 25, 13: XIV üküş (with -k-”) al-katir İd. 18; a.o. do. 58 (köp): Osm. xiv ff. üküş “numerous, abundant', common but only down to xvi TTS I 561; II 746; III 557; IV 621 (ögüş everywhere); yüküs is noted in one or two xiv and XV texts and is mentioned in Sar. 8or. 5 as the Rumi spelling. D eksig N./A.S. in -£ fr. ekşi:- , 'sour, acid, tart”, as opposed to 1 acii$ "bitter; Survives only in SW Osm. eksi; displaced elsewhere by 1 açığ or L-w.s. Xak. xi eksig ull şay” muzz 'anything sour, acid', for example an acid pomegranate Kaş. 7 1:105; xiv Muh. hámid 'sour' (opposite to /rdso 'sweet' süçüğ) acığf/acı but in one or two MSS. ekşi: Mel. 54, 8; 66, 1; Rif. 151, 165; al-hirrif “pungent” eksi: Rif. 165 (only): Çağ. xv ff. ekşi (spelt) turş 'sour, acid', in Ar. hàmid San. 45v. 14: 'Tkm. xii al-hàmtid (parallel to “bitter” agr, and opposite to “svveet” Süçü:, ta:tlu:) ekşi: Hou. 27, 12; Kip. xv hümid éksi Tuh. 132. 11; rà'ib "curdled, clotted' ekçi (sie) do. 16b. ro, Ekşi is: also included in the equivalents of laban 'imilk' do. 31b. 10. . Dis. V. EGSD é$es- Co-op. f. of ége:-: Survives in NE Khak. iğes- "to help to file, or to saw (wood)'; NC Kir. eges- “to be filed'. Xak. xı ol mana: temür égesdi: “hc helped me to file (f7 sahl) the iron' (etc.) Kaş. 1187 (égesü:r, égesme:k). D egiş- Co-op. f. of eğ-. Survives only(?) in NE Alt., Tel, i:ş- “tö bend (Trans.)” R 11550; Bar. ipis- "to bend down (Intrans.); huddle up” do. 1432: SE Türki eniş- “to” bow' Şarring 42. Xak. ol mana: çöğe:n eğişdi: "he helped me to bend ( fi 'atf) the polo-stick'; also used for competing Kaş. I 187 (egisü:r, egişme:k): Çağ. xv ff: it is likely that this verb existed in Çağ, as €piş- “to be huddled up", P. de C. 142 lists it with this form and meaning, quoting Babur (fol. 194v:, ll. 6—7'of the Gibb Trust facsimile) (the snow. fell so boisterously till bedtimre) kini epişip olturup idim “that I just sat huddled up”. San: 117r. 29, using the same quotn. as evidence, listed the word as 1Diş-, immediately after 15ra-/ 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 163 
     
   
   
     DIS ipran- and translated it by the same word nálidan-i zár "to moan, groan'; but this seems to be merely a mistranslation based on a false etymology. D ekiş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of ek-. Xak. xr ol mapa: tarığ ekişdi: "he helped me to sow the seed' ("a/d badri'l-zar') , also used for competing Kaş. 7 187 (ekişü:r, ekişme:k). PUD 1 iğeş- Recip. f. of ige:-; “to quarrel” and the like. This is the best attested word in this group, surviving with much the same meaning in NC Kir, eğeş-, Kzx. eğes-, SW xx Anat. eges-, egiş-, ekeş-, eyeş-, iğaş-, iğeş-, üyeş-, SDD 510, 512, 517, 564, 781, 782, 803. The modern form suggests fairly definitely medial -B-, not -k-, and less definitely initial é- rather than i- Xak. xi ikki: buğra: igesdl: taşddama"l-fahlün wa t1'áddàá "the two camel stallions attacked and bit one another” Kaş. 7 187 (prov.; no Aor., or Infin., possibly regarded as a second meaning of éges- which it follows immediately). PU(D) 2 igeş- Hap. leg.; "to rely on one another”, Listed between 2 ógüg- and éges-. Clearly a Recip. f. but not semantically connected with any known verb, except that there is a faint connection with the third, unexplained, meaning of igen-. Xak. xı kişl:le:r ışta: bi:r bi:rike: iğeşdi:le:r “the people relied (irtaRala) on one another in the matter” Kaş. I 187 (1ğeşü:r, iğeşme:k). D 1 ögüş- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of 1 ö:g-. Xak. xı ikki: eren ögüşdi: “the two men praised one another” (tamádaha) Kaş. 1 187 (ögüşü:r, ögüşdi:). . , D 2 ögüş- Recip./Co-op. f. of öğl:-. Survives in NE Tuv. öğeş- “to rub one another” and the like; must also have sutvived fairly recently in SW Osm. since in a xvır-Xvılı Ar. dict. daras (of the teeth) “to be set on edge” is translated ekşi nesne çiğnemek ile diş öğüşmek “to grind one's teeth owing to biting something sour TTS I 736 (uyuşmah). "Türkü vri ff. toan kusu:p tirpakr öğü:şü:pen “the falcon's claws ground against one another” IrkB 44: Xak. xi ol mapa: tarıiğ ógüsdl: “he helped me to grind the corn' (fi tahnı”l-burr, etc.); also used for competing Kaş. I 187 (ögüşü:r, ógüsme:k). ekşi:- "to be sour, acid, tart”, no doubt an old word since ekşiğ occurs in Xak., but not noted before xv. S.i.s.m.l. in NW, SW. Çağ. xv ff. ekşi- (spelt) tur; şudan "to be acid, sour”, also used in Rümi San. 45v. 9. : Tris. EGŞ à D üküştl: Hap. leg.; Adv. fr. üküş. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. üküşti tapinzun “let him frequently worship! TT VI 268 (v.l.). ' PUD ükşürüğ Hap. leg.; the last letter is missing, but the meaning is fixed by the Chinese original and. a Dev, N./A, in -&amp; fr. . EGZ 119 *ükgür-, Caus. Co-op. f. of ük- seems the likeliest reading. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud.. bu üksürü[g] ótügümin bütürü yarlikazun 'may he deign to fulfil this repeated request of mine” Hüen-ts. 310—11. Tris. V. EGSD üküşle:- Den. V. fr. üküş. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı er tawa:rin üküşle:di: “the man reckoned that his property was abundant' (kafir) Kag. 1 303 (üküşle:r, üküşle:me:k) xiv Muğ. aktara "to increase (Trans.) make abundant' üküşle:Mel. 23, 6: Rif. 104. Dis. EGY öğe:y “related through one parent only; step(father, etc.)” S.i.a.m.Lg. vv. phonetic changes, e.g. NE ö:y/ü:y. See Doerfer 11 615. UYE. viii. ff. Civ. öğey anamız “our stepmother” USPp. 78, 8 (as corrected by Arat in JSFO 65, 62): Xak. xı öğe:y ata: al-rabb, 'stepfather'; al-rabib 'stepson' öğe:y oğul, a/-rabiba öğey krz Kaş. İ 123: Çağ. xv ff. öğey (spelt) ná-pidari wa nü-müdari wa nà-birádari 'stepfather, -mother, -brother” San. 79v. 9: Kip. xin ibnu'l-zavwca, *wife's son” öğe:y ofla:h; ibnu'l-zawc "husband's son”, ditto (mitluhui) Hou. 32, 6. Dis. EGZ D sekkiz 'twin', sometimes merely “a pair; Den. N.. fr. ékki: S.ia.m.lg. w. some phonetic changes. Early l-w. in Mong. as ikire (Kon, 317). See Doerfer IL 651. O. Kir. ix ff. ikizime: (7s/c) (1 was parted) “from my twin' Mal. 29, 2: Xak. xi ikkíz oğlam al-tamümün 'twins' Kaş. I 143: xiv Rbg. ikiz R I 70o2 (quotn.): Çağ. xvff. ikiz (spelt) taw'am San. 109r. 25 (quotn.): Kom. xiv *twin' eğiz CCG; Gr.: Kip. xri al-matelitd taw'ama(n) ylkiz za huma wagtu'l-'agr also “afternoon” Hou. 26, 5; al-“aşr yikiz, Tkri. yekindü: 28, 16 (no other trace of this meaning): xv tau'am ikkiz Tuh. ga. 3. . VU ögüz “river”, l-w. in Mong. as -fiyer (Kow. 553); but Kom. form suggests initial ö-. See Doerfer 11 613. N.o.a b. Türkü virt óguZz, less often ögü:z, standard word fór “river” in J, IJ T, Ix. 16: vin ff. toan öğü:z kust: “a falcon and a river bird” (went hunting together) IrkB 43: Uyğ. vir Ertiş ó[güzig] “the river Ertiş” Su. S 1: vii ff. Man. taluy ógüzteki balıklar “the fish in the sea” TT III go, a.o. do. 163: Bud. kan ógüz “a river of blood' PP 3, 4; Gang ögüz “the River Ganges! U II 15, 11; “the ocean' which the prince crossed in PP is alternatively described as taluy or taluy ögüz, o.o. TT V ış, 16 (ógen); Suv. 529, 3; USp. 89, rr: Civ. TT I 35 (uğra:-): xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. ho “river” (Giles 3,936) öğüz R I 1:811; Ligeti 189: Xak. xı ögüz kull toadi(n) cári(n) “any flowing river' like the Jayhün or the Euphrates; and when the Oğuz use this word they mean the river called the Wadi Banákat on which their towns (bilüduhum) are situated, and on tho 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 164 
     
   
   
     120 banks of which the nomads (ah/u'l-wabar) among them settle. Many rivers in the Turkish lands (diydr) are called by this name; and the town İki: Ó:gü:z (sic) is called after it because it is situated between the rivers 1la and Yafinç Kaş. 1 so, ! 438 (tadğu:n) and about ro o.o., occasionally spelt ógü:z: KB öğüzler keçer “he crosses rivers! 1735; negü ter egitgil ay bilgi óguz "hear what the man says whose knowledge is as (wide as) a river” 2243; 0.0. 3626, 4546: xııı(?) Tef. ógüz 'river' 335: Xwar. xini(?) köp mürenler köp öğüzler bar erdi “there were many streams (Mong. 1-vv.) and rivers” Oğ. zo: Kom. xiv. “river” ógüz (spelt oc/tus) CCT, Gr. F öküz (?ókóz) one of several terms for bovines, best translated 'ox', since it is more specific than u:d and sığır but not quite so specific as buka: “bull”. Became an earlv l.-w. in Mong. as Ahüker (Haenisch, p. 78)lüher Koto., p. 562) “ox”. S.i.m.m.l.g., but usually now meaning 'castrated bull, bullock', see Shcherbak, p. 98. Almost certainly borrowed from Tokharian , Prof. Werner Winter has told me that the source is more likely to be "Tokharian A than Tokharian B okso. "The A form has survived only as ofgap] in a much damaged text (Sieg and Siegling A 459b. r) but can be restored fairly confidently as: okós, which would have become ókez/ókóz in Standard Turkish and öker in thc Hr language from which the First Period Mong. loan-words were taken. Türkü vir ff. (a man fastened) eki: ökü:züğ 'two oxen' (to one yoke) Ir&amp;B 25; a.o, do. 37: Uyğ. vut ff. Man.-A M III 11, 9 (i) (ópün-): O. Kir. ix el(Dig óküzin “fifty oxen' Mal. ro, 9 (dubious reading, text chaotic): Xak. xı öküz a/-tater “bull” Kaş, I 59 (prov.); three o.o. spelt ökü:z: KB ud inğek öküz 'cattle, cows, and oxen' 5372: xiv. Rbğ. öküz “ox” R I 1200 (quotn.); Mu. al-tarer öküz (v.]. ökü:z/ö:kü:z) Mel. 71, 2; Rif. 172; al-taur "the constellation "l'aurus' ökküz 79, 5; öküz 183: Çağ. xv ff. öküz *awánil-kár "anent, business manager"(?) San. Sor. 2 (translation inexplicable): Kip. xii al-tawr öküz Hou. 14, 18: xw öküz ("with -k-") al-taser İd. 18; al-tateru'l-xasi Ca castrated bull' öküz (a/-farri”l-rayn "an entire bull' buğa:) Bul. 7, 8: xv al-tawr öküz (also buğa:) Kav. 62, 2; Tuh. 112. 2: Osm. xvii öküz gözi in Rmi a plant called gáto çaşma *ox-cye' in Pe. and 'aymu'l-bagar in Ar. San. Sor, 2. Tris. V. EGZ D öküzlen- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. öküz. Xak. xi er öküzlendi: “the man owned a bull” (:ater) Kaş. 1 293 (öküzlenür, ókuzlenme:k). Mon. AL al Preliminary note. There tcere certainly two ancient swords spelt asl, It is doubtful. svhether | there tas a third, probably al if genuine; see belosv. DIS. EGZ 1 a:l 'device, method of doing something” originally quite neutral and used for honourable as well as dishonourable devices and methods; later it became pejorative only and meant specifically 'deccit, guile, dirty trick. In the early period usually used in the Hend. al cevis or al altağ. Became a 1.-v. in Pe.; survives only(?) in SW Osm. al; 'Tkm. al. XIX Osm. lexicographers regarded it as foreign, Red. 159 describing it as Pe. and Sami 47 as a corruption of Ar. Jia, “better not used”. Sec Doerfer 1l 516. Türkü vr ff, yég&amp; a:hg bulu:şğalı: una:ma:du:klar “they did not agree on finding a good device! Toyok 1I zv. s-6 (ETY II 179): Uy£. vit fl. Man. al alta uzanmaklıkığ (or uzanmaklarig) taşkarıp 'putting out the skilful use of devices (Hend.)' TT 7/7 68; same phr. but üntürüp “promoting” do. 122; al çeviş M 111 44, 4 () (damaged): Bud. Sanskrit upaya “a bencficially expedient method' (of teaching, etc.) is translated by Chinese fang pren (Giles 3,435 9,187) and that phr. by al çeviş Kuar. 98, 99106, etc. (U 11 16, 22-3 and 24, etc.) and al altağ uzanmak Sur. 363, 20-1; al çeviş ayu berğeymen 'I will describe a method” (of ensuring that the birds do not cat the fruit) PP 25, 1; agar edgü kil&amp;uluk em yöründek al altağ bar “there is a remedy (IHIend) and device (Hend.) for making him do good” 77 IV, 14, note Arı, 8; al altağ üntürüp U 7/7 85, 9; olo, of al cevis TT VI zo (sec note), 26s and al altajs U 77 48, 15; $40. 9,9; 37, 8: Civ. (the strength of kings of old time will not be beneficial and) son futsi bilgenip alı "the methods of modern sages (Chinesc 1.-vv.) and wise men” (will not succeed) TT I 107; xiv Chin.-Uyğ. Dict. “trick” al aIdaf Lrgeti 128: Xak. xı a:l al-makr wa'l-xadi'a 'trick, subterfuge”, a:lın arsla:n tuta:r 'one can catch a lion by guile' (bI-hila; sec oyuk) Kaş, 1 81; 0.0. 7 63, 13 (al); /7 289, 22; İİİ 412, io (the last two the same prov. repeated): KB bütün çın turur hiç ali yok ukus 'understanding is perfect truth, there is no trick about it' 1863; ep aşnu yağıka kerek hila al “the first nccessity for (dealing with) an enemy is deceit and guile” 2356: xin(?) Tef. al 'deccit, guile" 48; xiv. Rbj. ditto R I 349 (quotns.): Çağ. xv ff. al... (3) xud"a sca makr San. 49r. 13 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv al 'trick, device! Qrutb 6: Kom. xiv “deccit” al CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv a:l al-hila İd. 20: Osm. xiv fT. al 'deceit, trickery'; c.La.p. TS 1 15; H 27; İİİ iz, IV ış. 2 a: “scarlet”, a l.-w. in Mong. (Kotc. 71; Haltod 16) for the colour of the (Chinese) scarlet ink with which thc rulers sealed documents; also borrowed in Russian as al1í, same meaning. S.is.m..; in SW 'Tkm. a:l. Cf. kizil See Doerfer, II. 517. Türkü virir ff. Man. al [gap] kedip 'putting on a scarlet (robe TT H 8, 67-8: Uy£. viu ff. Bud. (of a planet) al sarığ 'reddy yellow' TT VII ış, 5; a.0. Suv. 28, rs: Civ. USp. 79, 2 (y€:rliğ): xiv. Chin.-Uyğ. Dict. hung 'Chinese red” (Giles 5,270) al 7 349; Ligceti 128: Xak. xı a:l dibac 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 165 
     
   
   
     MON. AL nüranciyu” l-laron 'orange. coloured. brocade' from which the standards of kings are made and with which the saddles of their female relatives (or favourites? muqgarrabát) are covered ; and al-laconu'l-náranci 'orange colour" is also a:l Kaş. 1 81; a.o. III 162 (cüvit): KB bu hila bile kil yağı mehnzi al "by this guile make the enemy's face red" 2356 (cf. 1 a:l); 0.0. 67 (yipgin), 3709: xın(?) Af. al gül “a scarlet rose” 342: xiv. MwuA.(?) (in a list of colours of horses) ramddi 'ash coloured” al Rif. 171 (only; cf. Kip. some such. words as [oy; a/-aşqar) have prob. fallen out of the text, see ala:) Çağ. xv ff. al .. . (4) surx-i nim rang 'dull red” (quotn.); (5) muhr Y nigin-i pádigahün-t turk "the seal and signet of the Turkish emperors' which is impressed in red (surx) on firmáns and yarlıks (quotn. fr. Pe. ğazal of Wassàf; this meaning is peculiar to Pe. and not Turkish) San. 49r. 15; al tamğa same translation as (5) above do. 49v. 29 (quotn.): Xwar. xi(?) Oğuz Xan when born had al kózler Og. 6 (perhaps an error for ala kózler, a common phr.): xiv al 'scarlet, purple! Qutb 7; MN 6, etc.: Kom. xiv "bright red” al CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiii (in a list of colours of horses) al-aşqar “chestnut” al Hou. 13, 5 (al-ağbarı”l-ramádi 'dust or ash coloured' is translated Oy): xiv a:l (*with back vowel) al-farasu'l-agqaru']-máyil | ija'l-sufra “a horse that is chestnut tending towards yellow' İd. 20: xv aşqar al Tuh. 4b. s. 3 al if really an ancient word, meant “front, facing, prior position' but there is great doubt whether it was. İn the early period it occurs only with a 3rd Person Poss. Suff. in the Dat., Abl. and Loc. and these words might equally well be the same cases of alin, q.v. “The earliest authorities for the existence of al as such are Vel. and San., but in Cag., too, the word is attested only in suffixed oblique cases; it is possible that by this period a word al had been formed by a kind of falsc etymology fr. oblique cases of alin. It certainly seems to exist in some modern languages, but is still, except in Kaz., apparently used only in oblique cases. Such words are SE Türki ayl BS ro, Şarring 16; NC Kir, Kzx. alda, aldan, alia and similar forms in NW Kaz.; in NE the situation is complicated by the fact that alin when carrying suffixcs would become ald. "There is a parallel problem in the question whether there was an ancient word alt or whether this, too, is a back formation fr. altin, q.v., and there is a good deal of confusion between the modern forms of these two groups of words. 'The following is the relevant evidence regarding this word. Uyğ. viri ff. Man. (in a fragmentary text apparently containing a simile about a fish) f?sulv kod1 suv eyin barsar ol suvup adakı f(gapldağ bolsar uluğ kumka tursar suv kum alına [?i]linser “if (the fish) goes downstream along the water, and the end of the watercourse is blocked(?) and stops at a great sand dune, and if the water soaks into the front of the sand dune” (the fish is left high and dry) M 777 37, I21 1-5 (i): Civ. TT 1 129-3u is read beg tamğası elgipde ornağlığ orun anında "a beg's seal is in your hand, and a firm seat... .*; the last word is meaningless and the editors suggest an emendment to alında: (Xak.) xin(?) Tef. (do not punish me) bu káfirlar alında “in the presence of these infidels” 49: Çağ. xv fl. alnıda/alyıda ónünde ün the presence of, before" Vel. 27 (quotns. containing alyıda and alnıma), alı ör ve yan “front, side” do. 27 (quotn. containing anip alyıda), al (1) hudür 'presence' (Vel.s first quotn.); (2) pisani 'forchead' (quotn. beginning Navvö”i alına yazğannı “that which is written on Nawá'i's forehead'; the word here is clearly alın): Xwar. xın(?) bir köl arasında alındın bir ığaç kördi “he saw a tree in front of him in the middle of a lake” Oğ. 7r: Kom. xiv tepri allında “in the presence of God” and o.o. CCG; allındakı kaş “the front saddle-bow' CCI; Gr. 35 (quotns.): Kip. xiv quddüm “in front of” alı:nda: Bul. 14, 4. 1 €:l the basic, original meaning was “a political unit organized and ruled by an independent ruler'; the most convenient short term in English is 'realm'. In the early texts it usually occurs in association with other political terms, xağan the ruler of such a realm, bodun its people, tóró: the unwritten customary law under which it was administered by the ruler, ulus the gcographical area which is occupied and ófe: the chief administrative officer of the ruler. From Xak. onwards, but not apparently earlier, it developed some extended meanings. In particular it often seems to mean 'the community, the people of the realm', displacing bodun in this sense. As the 'Turks became involved in international politics it also began to have an international application and came to mean “organized international relations! from which the transition to 'peace', one of its modern meanings, was an easy one. İt is an open question whether “courtyard”, one of the meanings! given by Kaş., belongs to this word, but it is prob. merely a metaph. use meaning literally “the realm of the owner of the house”. The phr. usually spelt él kün in two words, which is first noted in K.B and seems to mean “people”, has given some trouble. The theory in /4. that kün here is 1 kün 'sun' is not at all plausible. "The most reasonable explanation is that the second syllable is the Collective Suff. -gün and that the spelling should be é:1&amp;ün in one word. S.i.a.m.l.g. as él/el/il meaning “country, province; people, community (esp. one's own people as opposed to foreigners) and, less often, 'peace'. See Doerfer I1 653. Türkü vii €1 tutsık yér ötüken yış ermiş “the Ótüken mountain forest was the place from which to control the realm' 7 S 4, 77 N 3; (if you stay there) bepğü: él tuta: olurtaçı: sen “you will sit (on the throne) holding the realm for ever” I S 8, II N 6; (because of fratricidal strife and internal disorder) Türkü bodun €lledük éli:n içğınu: idmış xağanladuk xağanı:n yitürü:ıdmış “the Türkü people let the realm 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 166 
     
   
   
     122 which they had organized collapse, and lost the xagan whom they had made xagan' / E 6—7, II E 7; Tavğaç xağanka: éli:n tóró:sin alı: bérmis “they consented to accept his realm (i.e. rule) and customary law from the Chinese emperor” 7 E 8, II E 8; (the Türkü people said) €lliğ bodun ertim élim amtı: kanı: kimke: €liğ kazğanu:rmen “ve were a people with a realm (of our own), where is our realm now? For whom arce we striving to obtain a realm?' 7 E o, İİ E 8; (the xağan) élig tutup tóró:g €tmiş 'controlled the realm and put the customary law in order” 7 E 3, I4 E 4; él yeme: él bolti: bodun yeme: bodun bolti: “the realm became an (independent) realm, and the people became an (independent) people” T 56; and many o.o.: viri ff. (a xan ascended the throne and fixed his capital) él: turmi:ş “his realm was stable! IrkB 28; éli:g étmi:s men 'I have organized the realm' do. 48: Man. sizin €lipiz TT II 6, ız, and rg: Yen. él (spelt 77) is fairly common, élipiz Mal. 26, 4; éllm 29, 7 and 8; a.0.0.; 26, 1 (Óge:) a.o.o.: Uyğ. viu él etmiş is one component in the title of the Xağan commemorated -in Su. (N 1) and most of his successors: vi ff. Man.-A élte xanta “in the realm and with the xan” M İTİ xo, 2 (1) (damaged); o.o. do. 34, 7; 43. 9 (68e:): Man. koptin sipar él uluşlarığ keztiniz “you have travelled through realms and countries in every direction” 77 III 60-1; éli&amp; bodulnuğ) M TT 5, 16: Chr. meninp elim içinde “in my (Herod's) realm” U 7 ro, r: Bud. Sanskrit atavrsamhsobha 'revolt of the forest dwellers' él (so spelt) u:tu:s. bu:lgamma:kı TT VIII 4.31; janapadà “the (common) people” él u:luş do. 4.42; ra/ydbhişeham iva “like the inauguration of a kingdom” él ornilığ a:bhisikig teg do. D.:7; balıkdın balıkka ulusdin uluşka éltin élke “from town to town, from country to country, from realm to realm' TT IV ro, 20-1; éli&amp; tóróg bulğadımız erser “if we have disturbed the realm and the customary lavvs” do. 10, 17; Pfahl. 10, 15, etc. (68e:), and many o.o.: Civ. él xan “the realm and its ruler' TT 7 (common), VII 3o, 15; and many o.o.: xiv Chin.-Uyğ. Dict. jén min 'mankind' (Giles 5,624; 7,908) élgün R 1803; Ligeti 156: O. Kir. 1X fl. él (so spelt) is common, e.g. in Proper Names El Toğan Tutuk Mal. r, 2; élimke elçi:si: ertim “1 was the envoy for my realm" do. 1, 2; tepri: élimke: evükmedim “1 could not remain in my sacred realm” do. 2, 2: Xak. xı él al-ceiláya 'realm, province', and the like; hence one says beğ é:l wilàvatu'l-amir— €:l al-find” "court-yard” hence one says kapuğ é:li: (not translated)—€:l ism yaqa' 'alá'l-xayl “a word used with reference to horses, because horses are the Turks” wings (canab), hence a groom (al-sá'is) is called €:1 başı: meaning (literally) “the head of a province' (al-sorlaya) but used for sá'isi'l-xayl—6:l al-sulh bayna'l-malikayn 'peace between two kings'; one says Lki: beg birle: éd boldi: ;2laha'l-amirün ma'a(n) “the two begs made peace with one another” Kaş. 7 48-9; él törü: yetilsün baglaha'l-wilàya “let the realm be set in order” MON. AL I 106, 9; alo, I1 25, 8 (kal-); and many o.o. of 6:1 al-twiláya--kÜ:q €:ldin kirse: törü: tüplüktin çıkar “if violence enters (the house) from the courtyard (a/-find”) customary law Eoes out of the smoke-hole' (or window, al-kutewa) III 120, 23: KB él 'realm' is common by itself 123, etc., and in association with törü 286, 822, etc.—- (three signs of the zodiac are fire, three water, three air, and three earth) ajun boldi él "the world becomes peaceful 143—81namis kişi bildi élgün işi “the experienced man knows the business of the people” 245—biligsizke törde orun bolsa kör bu tör élke sandı élig buldi tör "if an ignorant man has a seat in the place of honour, this place of honour is reckoned to be the courtyard, and the (real) place of honour finds the courtyard (as its site)” (and if a vvise man is given a seat in the courtyard, that courtyard is much superior to the seat of honour) 262-3; kopup çıktı élke "he rose and went out into the courtvard' 6213; a.o. 2553 (liv): xn(?) KBVP bu maşrıq élinde “in this eastern kingdom' rg, 29: xni?) KBPP masriq wilàyatinda kamuğ Türkistan éllerinde 13-4; Tef. él “country, people; town(?)' 74: xiv Rbğ. él aşasun yüz yaşasun “may his realm flourish and may he live a hundred years” R I 8o3 (cf. KB 123): Muh.(?) al-nöhiya wa'l-'amal "district, province! 6:1 Rif. 179 (only): Çağ. xv ff. él xalg “people” Vel. 72 (quotn.); él aA/ wa xalq ta gürüh “people, community” San. t 12v. s (quotn.); (under gün, so spelt) and él tva gün (sic, but ?read élgüri) is also used as a Hend. (ba-fariq-i muzáwaca) in the meaning of 'allies and auxiliaries' (a'wün ta ansár); él can be used by itseif, but gün cannot be used "by itself in this meaning San. 310r. 6 (P. de C. 133 quotes several passages fr. Bábur in which elğün means “people, retinue, subjects (of a ruler)”): Xwar. xin(?) élgün (spelt yilgün?) occurs ıq times in Oğ., e.g. (the monster) yılkılarnı elgünlerni yér érdi “used to eat cattle and people! 23: xiv él (1) 'kingdom, province'; (2) “people” Quib 49; (1) only MN 14: Kom. xiv. el *province' CCI; “people” CCG; Gr.: Kip. xin (after “hand” él) ma huwa'l-iglim voa. huma'l-silm daddu”l-harb also *province', and 'peace', as opposed to war Hou. 20, 17; (among the Proper Names) élbegl: amiru'l-iglim; élaldi: axada”l-balad "he captured the country” do. 29, 8—9: xiv él (mufaxxam, here *with é-, not i-") al-balad wa'l-sulh ld. ao; elğün a/-darcla 'government, realm', compound of él a/-ğalad and kün al-şams “sun”, used as an expression ("ibüra) for al-datela do. 22; al-salüm "pence” él Bul. 6, 9: xv xalq 1a 'álam “people, world' élgün TuA. 14a. 3; şulh él do. 22a. 9; "ülam €lğün also without (bt-isqdt) gün do. 24b. 3; al-xalq wa'l-'álam élgün, él uluş do. 85b. 9: Osm. xiv ff. él (spelt both e/ and 17) (1) “country, state, province'; (2) "people", esp. “other people”, (3) *peace, at peace, friendly' (as opposed to yağı “hostile”): c.i.a.p.; él&amp;ün occurs in several xiv and xv texts 773 | 370-5; l| 521-8; HI .360-6; IV 413-19. : ,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 167 
     
   
   
      MON.“AL S 2 élfel See elig. S 11 See yıl. VU İ:l pec. to Xak. Xak. xi kl kişi: ai-raculu'l-la'im “a vile, ignoble person”, 1:1 ku:ş al-raxama 'vulture' Kaş. 1 49; a.o. 1 331 (kuş): K B yana bir tili il "again there is one with an evil tongue' 342; kişide ili 1669; atı İl bolur “he gets an evil reputation! 4672. ol both (r) an indeclinable Demonstrative Adj. “that” as opposed to bu: “this”, (2) a declinable Demonstrative Pron. “that”, also used for the 3rd Pers. Pron. “he, she, it”, As a Pron. it was also used in the éarly period as the equivalent of the copula “is, are”, In this last case there are two usages: (a) subject (sometimes implied, not stated), predicate, ol, meaning that the subject is the same as, or has the quality described by, the predicate; (2) subject, 0l, meaning that the subject 'is that', often followed by a subordinate clause as in such phr. as ümid ol “my hope is (that . . J. C.i.a.p.a.].; in most the form is still ol, but in one or two the -İ has been elided, prob. comparatively recently (the only early occurrence, once in Türkü, is almost certainly a scribal error). Such forms are SE Türki o:, o, u Shaw, BS, Şarring, and SW Az., Osm. o. In one or two other languages, e.g. SW 'Tkm. o occurs as a colloquial form, beside the more formal ol. 'The oblique stem has been from the earliest period an-, and three cases anın, anta, antan are listed separately since they are used as Ados, but there seems to have been an alternative stem 1n- of which traces are to be found under ança: and aparu:, and in the early period the Plur. was ola:r. In one or two languages, esp. 3W Osm. this stem has been converted by false analogy to on-; the only early occurrence is listed under Xak., and there are sporadic cases of the elimination of -n- in the Plur., e.g. Çağ. alar, Türkü vıır olis normally an Adj. e.g. ol saviğ “that vvord” I S 3$, II N 6—barduk yerde: edgüg ol erinç “your (only) advantage in the places to which you went was presumably that' (your blood flowed like water, etc.); Ofuzi: yeme: tarkinc ol 'his Ofuz, too, are in a difficult mood” T zz, Bilge: 'Tofiukuk afığ ol “the Counsellor 'Tofiukuk is evil” T 34—anı: körüp “vvhen you see it” I S 13; anı: üçü:n "because of that” 7 E 3; IJ E 28, four o.o. of anı:ş vit ff. in [rkB every para. ends with the phr. edgü: (yaviz, etc.) ol “(the omen) is good (bad, etc.) , ol ta:şı:ğ “that stone” Toy. 16 (ETY 1I 58); (a blue-white stone) tir tözlü:g ol “has its:origin in “Mercury” do. 5-6: Man. ol ödün “at that time" Chuas. I 6-7—anın savın “his words' do. 137; anı üçün do. 305— edgüg anığağ kop tepri yaratmış ol “God was the creator of all good and evil” do. 7 28; a.o.o.: Uyğ. viii ol ay “that month” Su. E 6; ao. E 8—anı: do. S 6: vin ff. Man.-A bazğan kısğaç kim kentü ol ok temiren etilmiş ol “the hammer and tongs which are themselves constructed. from exactly that iron” M I 8, 10-12—àni M I iş, 7 (2 ota-):   123 Man. ol nomta “in that doctrine" TT III 63— apa yöründek (spelt -teg) kiltipiz “you made a remedy for hirn” do. 29; a.o. do. 122: yel tepri apar oxşayır “the wind god is like that” Wind so—kayu ol “vhat is that?” TT II 16, 36: Chr. o1 moğoçlar “those magi U 7 6, 4; 8.0.0.—Olarnt (sic) birle “vith them” do. 6, 6; yüküneyin apar 'I: will worship him” do. 6, 3-4; a.o.o.—bu bir yumğak tas ol “this is a lump of stone”, do. 8, $: Bud. ol as an Adj. is very common, e.g. ol bizin tsuy irinçlerimiz “those sins and: miserable (offences) of ours! TT IV 12, 44—0l and its oblique cases ant, anar, olar (sic) are common as Pron. e.g. ol yég bolğay “that will be better” do. ro, 25—ol taluy suvı ertipü korkınçığ adalığ ol “that ocean is very terrible and dangerous” PP 26, 4-6 a.o.o.: Civ. ol as Adj. and copula is common, and it and its oblique cases occur as Pron.s: Xak. xı ol harf yu'abbar bihi “an ma"nü huma “a particle used to express the meaning “he”: hence one says ol andağ aydı: “he spoke thus”—ol harf yukná bihi "an ma'nà dáka ayda(n) 'a particle also used as an Adjective in the meaning “that”, hence one says ol er "that man'—ol harf ta'kid yadxul fil-ismá' wa'l-af'ál "a particle giving emphasis used in association with nouns 'and verbs; hence one says ol menip oğlum ol "he is really (haqiqata(n)) my son”, and ol evke: barmı:ş ol “he has really gone to the house” Kaş. I 37; ol is very common in all three usages and so are the oblique cases anı, anın, apar/aparr, etc. and olar; see o:nu: K B ol in all three usages is common, e.g. orun ol tórütti “He created space” 19—01 edgü ödün “at the good time” 291—uluğluğ sapa ol “greatness is Youfs” 7; in some such cases Ol is used vvhere ba:r might be expected, e.g. on iki ükek ol bularda adın “there are tvvelve signs of the zodiac different from these” (the planets) r 38— the oblique forms of the Pron. are the same as in Kaş.: xi(?) KBVP ol elnin bögüsi “the sage of that realm” 2?—kim"ol 'who is he?” 35—uğan bir bayat ol “the Almighty is the one God” r; in yeme bu kitab ol idi ök "aziz “and this book is very precious' 9, the predicate for the first time comes after ol: xu1(?) KBPP ol is used as an Adj., but in sentences where ol might be expected as a copula turur is used instead; At. ol is common in. all three usages, the oblique cases, including olar are the same as in Kaş.ş Tef. ditto but anlar occurs as well as olar 53, 236, 325: xiv Muh. ğuna 0:1; humu anlarş düha ol Mel. 12; Rif. 86-7, and o.o.: Çağ. xv ff. ol ism-i işdra Demonstrative N./A. dn “that” San: 85v. 14 (quotn. Ol as Adj.); anlar igan, ánha, dn “they”, alar without -n- is also used: (quotn.); anı d-rd “him” (quotns.); anim ü but only in such phr. as anın deg “like him”, anın bile “vith him”, and as an Adj. (quotn.) San. şər, 8 f£.: Xwar. xın(?) ol is used only as an Adj. in Oğ., there are the usual obliqué cases including anuy (sic), anlar: xiv ol is common in all three usages Qutb 116; MN; Nahc. passim: Kom. xiv ol Adi. and. Pron, with a list of oblique cases, Dat: anar, afar;   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 168 
     
   
   
     124 MON. AL  aar, Plur. anlar, alar CCI, CCG, Gr. 175 (many quotns., no trace of ol as copula): Kip. xın daka here 'he' ol; nlá'ika “they” anla:r Hou. so, 13; other oblique cases do. 52, 9 ff.: xiv Ol /orca tea bi-ma"nd düha İd. zo, anlar humu tea ülü"ika do. 24; (under buncak) and olçak dáka'l-qadr “that amount” do. 89; hadáka oz Bul. 15, 2; and oblique cases anlar, etc.: xv düka ol Kav. 32, 20 (oblique cases anı:, ala:rnı: 32, 12; anr, alla:rnı: 49, 4); dálika ol 49, 9; ülá'ika ala:r 49, ro, dáka ol Tuh. 16b. r and many o.o.; oblique cases anip, apar, oni, opa, onlar: Osm. xiv ol as Adj. and Pron. together with olar and ol ok c.i.a.p. TTS I s39ff.; I1 724 fl.; III 538 ft: IV 604 fl.; oblique cases ani, anup, anlar, etc. are noted as late as xvii, 7 26 ff; I1 34 ff. ; III 22 f; IV 23 ff.; but onça for ança is as old as xv /// 545. u:1 "foundation, basis” (lit. and metaph.). Survives onlv(?) in SE "Türki ul "foundation, earth floor" Tarring 322. Xak. x1 u:l uss kull hö"il wa cidár "the foundation of any kind of wall (Hend.)'; hence one says ta:m uzl: “the foundation of the wall' Kaş. 7 48: KB sózin sözledi sózke ul tüb urup “he made his speech laying a foundation for his words' 506; o.o. (all metaph.) 819, 92r, 1772: xin(?) KBPP (this precious book has been built) tört uluğ ağır ul üze “on four great and important foundations' 29; Az. 81 (ur-), 341: xiv. Muh.(?) al-asás foundation” u:1 Raf. 178 (only): Xwar. xiv ul 'the sole of the foot" Qutb 197: Kip. xiv. (after 0l) also in the meaning of al-aşl *basis, origin” İd. zo: Osm. xIV ul "the foundations (of the mountains)” in one text 7 TS 1 540 (ol). özl “damp, moist'; with some extended meanings like "fresh” (not stale) in some modern languages. S.i.a.m.lg. in SE Türki as hól with a recently acquired prosthetic h- Shaw 188, BS 318, farring 122 (also yöl, yül); Tar. hól R Iİ 1798. Türkü vri ff. Man. kuruğ öl yer “dry and moist land” Cörmas. 58, 316: Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. kurug yérig suvayu öl yérig tarıyu “irrigating the dry land and cultivating the moist land” PP rı, 3-4: Civ. ö:1 (sc) TT VIII I1 (ötüş): xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. shih “damp, moist' (Giles 9,938) öl RI 1246; Ligeti 189: Xak. xı 6: ne: 'anything moist' (ratb) ; hence one says özl to:n “a moist garment” ş a word not known to the Oğuz Kaş. I 48; 2.0. 1 338, ri (çim): KB (God created) kuruğ ya ölüğ “dryness and moisture” 3726: xiv. Muh. al-ratb (ya:ş and) öl Mel. 54, 14; Rif. 151 (mis-spelt): Çağ. xv ff. öl (with ö-”) yaş nam ma'násina “moist”, also used for daryd “sea” Vel. 113 (quotns.); (after o1) . . . (2) (51 ratb wa. tar “moist” (quotn.); (3) metaph. dö tva daryd water, sea” (quotn.) San. 85v. 15: Xwar. xiv öl “moisture” Qutb 122: Kip. xiv (after öli:-) one says Öl dür rafiba mablül “it is moist'; and hence öli: ketmedi: “its moisture (rutfibatuhu) has not gone off” İd. zo, ibtalla "to be moist! özl ol- Bul 27r:.; balla "to moisten' 5:1 eyle-/ét- do. 35r.: Osm. xiv ff. Öl *moist! in one xiv and one xvr text T T'S 11 747; IV 622. Mon. V. ALal- "to take”, with all the shades of meaning of the English word, 'to seize, collect (a debt), receive, accept', and some others as well, such as "to take ofT” (a cap, saddle, etc.), “to marry” and (as an abbreviation of satğın al-) "to buy", S.La.m.l.g. The word is used in many idioms and compounds in which it is sometimes the second element. When it is the first in expressions like alıp bar- and alıp két"to take away', and alıp kel- “to fetch', the two words are often fused and assume forms like appar-, ekkit-, akkel-. Jarring 18-19 lists about 3o phr. beginning with a”ıp (alıp) in SE 'l'ürki. In compounds in which al- is the second element the meaning largely depends on the form of the first verb. In modern NE and NC languages a Ger. in -p is followed alternatively by al- or bér-, e.g. satıp al“to buy”, satıp bér- “to sell'. In such cases Pal. says that al- in NE Tuv. connotes action taken in one's own interest or for oneself. But, if the first element is a Ger. in -a:/-e:, al- has the same meaning as u:- “to be able”, In such expressions al-, like u:-, is usually, but not always, in the Neg. f.; phr. like kele almadi “he could not come” are common, but phr. like kele aldı “he was able to come” occur also. "The date when this idiom evolved is uncertain. 'The earliest languages in which it is traceable are Kom. and Çağ., but no examples have been noted in Xwar., Kıp., or any earlier language or in the SW languages. It has often been suggested, e.g. in R / 348, that the SVV Impossible f. barama- “to be unable to go” is n contraction of bara al- but this is an error, the second element is u:-, q.v. In the basic meaning “to take” the object is in the Acc., the source from which it is taken in the 4b, and the third-party beneficiary, if mentioned, in the Dat. "Türkü vir al- is common, usually “to capture (by military action)", e.g. (I killed their xağan and) élin anta: altım "thereupon took his realm' /I E 27; but ol savığ alıp 'accepting that statement (as true)” 7 S 7, I1 N 6, Tür[ges xafan] kızı:n ertipü: uluğ törün oğlıma: alı: bertim 'I took the daughter of the "Türgeş xağan (in marriage) for my son with great honour // N 10; ao. I E 8, IIT E8 (1 6:0): vir ff. öğü:m öti:n alayı:n “1 will accept my mother"s advice” [rkB 58; kaltı: yürü: ta:şığ alsar “if a man takes a white stone” Toy. 15 (ETY IJ 58): Man. anıp savin alıp Chuas. 137; a.0. 198: Yen. altı: yeği:rmi: yaşıma: almış kuncuyim “my wife whom 1 married at the age of sixteen” Mal, 48, 7: Uy8. vir al- “to capture” occurs four times in Şu. vini ff. Man.-A sizlerde almış ağu “the poison received from you" M I 19, 15: Man. alıp amtı 'now accept” (the worship of all men) TT III 3-4: Bud. al- (in TT VIII usually a:1-) “to take” is common, e.g. tavarin altimiz yupladımız erser “if we have taken and used their property” T'T IV 6, 44; maytrı  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 169 
     
   
   
      MON. AL burxanta burxan kutipa alkış alıp 'receiving from Maitreya Buddha praise for the blessed state of Buddhahood' TT IV 12, 51-2: Civ. al- is common for 'to receive' in contracts, e.g. Turi Baxşıdin yarım kap bor aldım *] have received half a skin of wine from Tur: Baxşı” USö. 1, 3-4; and for “to take" (e.g. a drug in compounding a remedy) in / 7 and II: Xak. xı ol alımın aldr: qabada daynahu "he collected the debt due to him", and one says beg €:l aldı: axada'l-amiru'l-wiláya "the beg captured the province' Kaş. 7 168 (alır, alma:k) and over 30 0.0. with various shades of meaning: KB al- “to take, yeceive', etc. is very common: xır(2) Ar, ditt; Tef. ditto 48: xiv Muh. axada al- Mal. 22, 2; Rif. 102 and several o.o.: Çağ. al- (-ğum, etc.) a/-; almay almaz, almazın, but in many passages it is also used with (another) word (bir lafzla) e.g. kila almay eyleyümezin, eyleyümedin, eyleyümez *without being able to do, is unable to do' Vel. 28-9 (quotn:); al- giriftan “to take” (quotn.); it is also a word which in conjunction with some words expresses a meaning not inherent in it(?) (lafzi ki ba ba'di kalimàt ifáda-i ma'nà ğayr mawdsu' lahu mi-kunad), e.g. ara (?ala) almak raredn giriftan “to be able to take”, bara almak tazodı raftan “to be able to go”: köpül almak 4//-cö”? hardan “to be satisfted”, satğun almak xaridan “to buy” San. 45v. 27 (quotns.): Xvvar. xrır al- "to take”, etc. “4/2 26: xırı(?) ditto, common Og.: xiv ditto Quib 7; MN 284, etc.; Nahc. 47,8 etc.: Kom. xiv al(Çar CCT; -ur CCG) “to take, to receive” CCI, CCG, “to marry”, (in Neg. f.) "to be unable to” CCG; Gr. 33 (many quotns): Kip. xim axada al- Hou. 39, 18: xiv ditto İd. 19; Bul. 20v.: Xv ditto Kan, 5,1; 8, 16; 77, 12 (al- “vith back vovvel”), al-, not translated, is used to illustrate conjugation in Tu. 40b. 2 ff.: Osm. xiv ff. al- in its ordinary meanings is not listed in TT.S but phr. and unusual meanings are quoted in 7 22; İT 29; III 17; IV 15. 11-/11- Preliminary note. There is some difficulty about the vocalization of these verbs. Kag. 1 169 says that there swere two: (1) 11-, Aor. ilur, totth a back vowel "to descend'; (2) 11-, Aor. iler, torfA a front vowel (of a thorn) "to catch (a garment, etc.) ; but the former is spelt weith a front votsel in KB (and the Caus. f. ildür- survives toith front vowels in NC), and the latter svith back vowels in Çağ.: in the latter language however some meanings are so close to those of al- as to suggest that M- here toas a Sec. f. of al-, just as in some languages there is a Sec. f. ik- of ak-, q.v. There is in fact no doubt that the second verb did have a front vowel. 11- “to descend (from something AD)". N.o.ab. The suggestion in Kaş. I 169 that én-, q.v., is a Sec. f. of this verb is phonetically impossible. Xak. xı er ta:ğdan kodr: ıldı: "the man descended (nazala) from the mountain' (etc.); Aor. 1lur, with a qanına on the lam, Inf. ilma:k fr'I-muzül Kaş. I 169; attin il inzil mina'l-faras 1 175, 8, 0.0. 1 175, 19; III   125 69, 2; 220, 14 (kodi:): KB kayu nen afar erse ilğü kerek 'anything which goes up must come down' 1086 (Vienna MS. éngü); 0.0. 746 (yokla:-), 4754 (iler glossed xurdtar şuda 'becomes smaller' in Vienna MS.). i1- (?i:1-) “to catch (something, with the hand, a hook, a noose, etc.)', and more commonly in modern languages "to hang (something Zcce., on to something Dat.) with some extended meanings esp. in SW. S$.i.a.m.l.g.; with long vowel in Yakut 1:1- Pek. gız and Tkm. i:lwhich may represent the original form. Uyğ. vir ff. Man. bodulmaklığ ilgü tübke sırılmışlarka “to those attached to the clinging (Hend.) root” TT III 52-3: Bud. Sanskrit ásajya 'clinging' ilip (spelt yip) TT VII F.5; kalın yekler tegirmileyü avlap İltiler erki “hordes of demons crowding round him seem to have got hold of him” U IV 20, 233; same phr. 18, 192: Xak. xı tike:n to:nuğ ildi: cadaba'l-sascku'l-tasob "the thorn caught on to the garment'; Aor. iler with a fatha on the làm; Infin. ilme:k fi'l-cadb Kaş. 1 169: Çağ. xv ff. 11 (-mak, etc.) flişdir- to 'hang on” (Trans.); ilrifat eyle- “to favour', etc. Vel. 74-5 (quotns.); 11- giriftan wa ba-nazar giriftan "to take, seize; to pay attention to” San. 109v. 14 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv İil- “to fasten, attach' Qutb 58: Kom. xiv il- “to hang, suspend' CCG, Gr.: Kip. xiv il- "a/laqa “to hang, suspend' İd. 19: xv ditto Tuh. 26a. 7: Osm. xiv ff. il- 'to fasten into, grip' (something Dat.) in several xiv to xvi texts 77S 7 376; II 531; IV 420. 1 ol- 'to be, or become, ripe, soft, fully or over-cooked”, Survives only in SW Krım R 7 1098 and Osm. İt is, however, doubtful whether in these languages it is now realized that this verb is by origin quite different from the much commoner 2 ol- (bol-). Xak. xi et bışıp oldi: fubixa'l-lahm hatta taharra”"a mina'l-tabx “the meat was boiled until it disintegrated'; also used of a garment when it, becomes threadbare and worn out (xaliga tva baliya) with long use Kaş. 1 169 (olur, olma:k): xiv Muh. (in the section on food) muhra' "over-cooked” o:Imis Mel. 6s, 12; Rif. 164: Kip. xiv istawá “to become ripe' o:l- Bul. 29r.: Osm. xiv ff. one or two of the numerous forms listed in T'T'$ seem to belong to this verb and not 2 ol-, including xiv olmaz waqtin “untimely” 7 541; oldaçı kişi “a mature man” İl 726; xv olmaz yere “İruitlessiy” 7/7 543, and perhaps one usage of ol- in 7 541. S 2 01- See bol-. öl- “to die” C.i.a.p.a.l. Türkü vir öl- “to die” is common, but is not used for persons of the: highest rank for whom Uc-, q.v., was used: viti ff. öl- “to die” JrkB 41, 57: Man. ditto Chuas. 23: Yen. ditto Mal. 26, s, etc.: Uyğ. viti ditto Sw. E 5, etc. ; Suci 8: viir ff. Man.-A ditto M 7 o, 5 etc.: Man. TT II 16, 17, etc.: Bud. ditto, very common: Civ. ditto H 7 102; USp. ız, 2 etc.: O, Kir. ix ff. ditto Mal. ro, ır, etc.: Xak. xr öl- translated mdta “to die”  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 170 
     
   
   
     126 MON. AL (once qutila “to be killed") occurs 9 times, once (Kaş. I 15, 1) spelt &amp;:1- ; Aor. ólü:r T 228, 14; n.m.e.: K B ól- "to die” is common: xri(?) At. ditto common; Tef. ditto 244: xiv Muh. máta öl- Mel. 31, 4; Rif. 115; a.o.o.: Çağ. xv ff. öler/ölür (*with ö- not ü-”) ölür, murda olur ma"ndsina Vel. 117 (quotn.), öl- murdan “to die” San. 8or. 17: Xvvar. xitt(?) ölerbiz (sic) *we are dying” Og. 79: xiv Öl- “to die” common Qutb 123; MN 281, etc.: Kom. xiv “to die” öl- CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xii al-matt ölmek Hou. 33, 4; máta öl- do. 43, 18: xiv öl- ("with front vowel") máta İd. zo, Bul. 81r.: xv ditto Kav. 9, 21; 78, 12; Tuh. 35b. 8. Dis. ALA a:la: lit. 'parti-coloured, dappled, mottled, spotted, blotchy'; hence metaph. “hypocritical, treacherous', and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g., Often in jingles like ala bula and as the first element in compound names for birds, animals, plants, etc. See Doerfer 11 518. Türkü vir ff. asla: (sic) atlı:ğ yol (or yul) tepri: men “1 am the god of the road (or “spring” ?) with a dappled horse” IrkB 2: Uyğ. vi ff. Civ. kayu kişinin eti ala bolsar “if a man's flesh becomes blotchy” , (a remedy is described) alası keter “the blotches disappear' H 7 48— 50; similar phr., different remedy TT VII 23, 4-5 (hardly 'leprous' as there translated, the remedies mentioned would be quite ineffective for leprosy): xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. mang 'variegated, parti-coloured' (Giles 7,659) ala Ligeti 128: Xak. xı a:la: (spelt a/a:, but in a section containing only words beginning with a:-) al-abraş mina'l-insán of a man, 'leprous'; and one says a:la: at al-arqat mina'l-xayl “a dappled horse'; and one says beg xa:nka: 3:la: boldi: xàálafa'l-amiru'l-malik wa xaraca 'alayhi wa wàáfaqa ma' 'aduwwihi “the beg. opposed the king, revolted against him, and came to terms with his enemies': a:la: (spelt ala:) the name of a summer station (mugfáf) near Fergana: a:la: (spelt ala:) yığa:ç ism matodi bi”l-tağr “the name of a place on the border” (between Moslem and pagan countries) Kaş. I 81; ala: (in a section for words with short initial vowels) al-abrag I 91 (prov., metaph. meaning); (who knows which ravens are the old ones?) kişi: ala:sin kim tapar mani'lladi ya"rif damö”ira”l-şudür who knows the secret thoughts in (men's) breasts?' 7 425, ız: xiri(?) Tef. ala “leper” 48: xiv Muh. (in a list of colours of horses) a/-ab/aq 'dappled' a:1 (sic) Muh. yo, 5; (çapar, in margin) a:l:a Rif. 171 (the text is obviously corrupt. here, see 2 a:l, çapar is a Pe. L-w.): Çağ. xv ff. ala (PU) luğa, ala (VU) bóke ('with -k-”) the names of two different water birds Vel. şo (the second is also mentioned in Sam., luğa is obviously corrupt perhaps for toğan, San. mentions such a bird but not as a water bird); ala (r) surx-i nim rang 'dull red” (error, confused with 2 a:1) just as in. Rim? çaşmi ht möyil-i muharrat(?) başad “an eye inclined. to be inflamed” is called ala gözlü, in this meaning the same as in Pe.; (2) anything ablag in general, and baraş "leprosy' in particular San, 49r. 23 (several expressions beginning with ala follow): Xwar. xiv ala (of a horse) *dappled' Quib 7; (of clothes) “parti-coloured” Nahe. ss, r: Kom. xiv 'dappled' ala CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiii (among the proper names) ala: ku:ş ;ayr ablaq “a speckled bird” Hou. 29, 7: xiv ala: ("with back vovvels”) ai-farasu'l-ablaq also called alaca: /d. zo: xv al-'aymwel-suhlà “a blood-shot eye” ala: kö:z Kav. 60, ız, ablaq ala: Tuh. 4a. 3; 4b. 5: Osm. xiv to xvii ala normally 'parti-coloured'; but sometimes 'treacherous' seems to be implied; in several texts 778 116; I1 22; İİ 14; İV 14. D ele: See 1 ele:-. S ile See birle:. D ili: Hap: leg.; Dev. N./A. fr. 11- lit. 'hanging loose'. Xak. xi ili: kapuğ “a closed (ğuluq) door which opens (yanfatih) without a key' Kaş. I 92. VU ula: perhaps survives in SW xx Anat. ula “a place, or clump of trees which serves as a boundary mark in the fields! SDD 1415; not connected vv. ula “mountain” in some NE, SE dialects which is a l.-w. fr. Mong. a'ula *mountain' (Haentsch ro, Kor, 32). Xak. x1 ula: “a mound (or: barrow, al-sutowa) which serves as a landmark ("alam) in the desert”, one says ula: bolsa: yo:l azma:s “if there is a landmark (iram) in the desert, the way is not lost” Kaş. 1 92. Dis. V. ALA1 ele:- “to keep calm, move gehtly' and the like; n.o.a.b. ; no longer recognized by Kaş, as an ordinary V. Uyf. vırı ff. Bud. (Ku Tao recovered from his trance and the people who had come to bury him all began to panic and run away; seeing this he said) elepler edgülerim “keep your heads, my good people” (why are you running away?) Suv. 5, 14: Xak. x1 ele: harf wa ma'nàhu ruwayd an Exclamation meaning 'gently, slowly'; one also says ele: ele:'gently, gently, and ele:gil w. - gil attached Kaş. I 92; a.o. 11I 26, 1 (2 évet). S z ele:- See elge:-. D élle:- Den. V. fr. 1 él; survives only(?) in NC Kir. elde- “to .be peaceably disposed'. Türkü vir 7 E 6-7, IL E 7 (1 €): O. Kir. ix ff. ta:ş yağı:ğ yağı:ladım él(edim “I fought foreign enemies and incorporated them in my realm' Mal. 45, 4: Osm. xiv élle- “to incorporate in one's realm' in two texts TTS I 371 (ile-); II 531 (ille-). ula:- “to repair (something broken Zcc.); to join (things Zec.) together; to join (something Acc.) to (something Dat.)'. S.i.a.m.l.g. The SE Tar. meaning “to twist together', RI 1678, seems rather to belong to 2 *ulr:-. See also ula:yu:. “Türkü (vri, this word has been erroneously read in / E 32 see ancu:la:-): vin ff. (I make good your broken things and)  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 171 
     
   
   
       MON. ALB i 127 üzüki:pi:n ula:yu:rmen "join together your torn things” IrkB 48 (see sap-): Uyğ. Man.-A kentü köpülin niğoşaklar üze bamaz ulamaz "he does not attach (Hend.) his own mind to the Hearers” M I1] əz, 12-13 (i): Bud. nom ulamaklığ edgüsi "his goodness in attaching the doctrine! (to his hearers) (was like that of Deva Bodhisattva) yarukin ulamaklığ edremi “his manliness in attaching its light” (to them) (was like that of Nügàrjuna Bodhisattva) — Hüen-ts. 1904-6: Xak. xi yip ula:dı: teagala'i-xayt "he joined together the cord' (etc.), and one says ol yağu:k ula:dı: maşala”l-rahim "be did good to the neighbours” (? an Ar. idifm) Kaş. III 255 (ula:r, ula:ma:k), ula:ğu: ne:n Aul] má yüşal bihi'l- şay” 'anything to which something is fastened”, e.g. a patch on a garment Kaş. I 136, 16: KB kayuka yağuşsa apar öz ular "it joins itself to whichever (planet) it approaches” 136; kögül bir bayatka uladim köni “1 have sincerely joined my mind to the One God” 4778; o.o. 460, 676, 961, 2008, 4790: xiu(?) At. ula 'join' (various qualities together) öz, biliglikke ózni ula 82; a.o.o.; (Tef. ulamaklik “union” or the like 225): xıv Muh.()) awsala "to join (something to something) u:la:- Rif. 105 (only): xv At. Postscript kóp élni kórürbiz Adib sózini bile bilmegendin ular ózini 'we see all people join themselves (to him) whether they know the Adib's words or not” 506: Çağ. xv ff. ula:- (and ulandir-, both spelt) Caus. f.; band hardan wa paywastan riştih wa. rismàn ba-cá'i 'to tie or join together cords or ropes at a place” San. Sır. rr (quotns.): Kom. xiv "to tie together, ioin” ula- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xi azogala min wagli'l-gay! bi'l-gay! u:1a:- Hou. 37, 21: xiv ula- amşala İd. 20: xv uaşala (yet-, yetgir-; in margin in second hand) ula- Tuh. 38b. 7: Osm. xiv ula- “to join, fasten' in three texts T'T'S 7 718; II 924. 1 uli:- basically (of a wolf) “to howl'; also used by extension for other animals and human beings. S.i.m.m.İ.g. vv. some variations (-a-/-u-) of the final vowel. Uyğ. vii: ff. Man. 1 iğaç kuti uliyur “the benevolent spirits of the shrubs and trees lament' M II 12, 5: Bud. (then the King, hearing these words) ulidi sığtadı 'howled and sobbed” PP ör, 4; similar phr. do. 77, 2-3; U İl go, 25: (of a cow whose calf is lost) ulıyu 'lowing plaintively” PP 77, 5$: Xak. xı böri: ult:di: “the vvolf howled' ('awá'); also used of a dog when it barks at night with a frightening bark (rabahe /ayla(n) nubah há'il); also of a man when he suffers acute pain and screams like the howl of a wolf (şühq ka-'uwüá'r'i-dí'b) Kaş. III 255 (prov.; ulrr, ulizma:k); bu uğur ol böri: ulu ğu: “this is the time when the wolves howl' 7 136, 18: KB töşekke kirip yatti muplug ulip "he went to bed and lay screaming with pain” 1056; 0.0. 1075, 1204, 1371, 1392, 1395, 1514, 5650, 6092, 6289 of persons, 2327 of a lion: xiv. Muh. nabaha'l-kalb | u:li:-.— (mis-spelt u:lan-) Mel. 31, 11; Rif. 115; nubáhu'l-halb' u:;limak 24 (only): Çağ. xv ff. ulu- ("with  u-'; and uluş-) nala kagidan sag wa sgagál spa amtdl-t án “to howl, of a dog, jackal, and the like” San. 82r. 16 (both words spelt with front vowels in error): Kip. xiv ulu- 'awd'l-kalb İd. 20: XV "atığ ulu- Tuh. 25b. 9; nabaha ulu- do. 37a. 8. VU 2 suli:- See ulit-, ulin-, etc. üle:- “to divide (something Aec.) into shares and distribute (them to people Dat.)'; the word implies both division and distribution. Survives only in one or two NE languages and SE Tar. R I 1849; elsewhere, like evle:-, it has been displaced by Caus. f.s of der. f.s of this verb. Uy£. viu ff. Man, rtnig ... üleyü yarlıkatınız . . . tınlığlarka “you have deigned to distribute the yevvels (of the doctrine called “good”) to (suffering) mortals' TT Ill 109-10: Bud. adinlarka ülemiş buyan küçinde “by virtue of the merit distributed to others” TT VII 4o, 122: Civ. (VU) çoknı ülep kitabimiz “our memorandum allocating the çok” (some kind of tax, Chinese? l.-w.) USp. 9, 4: Xak. xi ol yarma:k üle:di: farraqa”l-darahim "he divided and distributed the coins' (etc.) Kaş. I11 255 (üle:r, üle:me:k), (when you become a distinguished wise man in the tribe) bilgi:n ü:le: (sic) 'distribute your wisdom (to others) I sı, 16: KB çığayka üledi üküş ner tavar “he distributed many (useful) things and goods to the poor” r112; 0.0. 1034, I517, 1564 (agr): Xwar. xiv (if your drink is water, beware of drinking alone, the man that eats alone) yalğuz üler zár "has no one to share his misery with' (fol. 73v. 11). Qutb 197 (ula-): Kip. xiv üle- (with front vowels gasama “to divide up” İd. zo: xv qasama ülü- Tuh. 30a. s. : D ölH:- Intrans. Den. V. fr. ó:l; “to be moist, damp". N.o.a.b. The more normal Den. ölle- s.i.s.m.l. but as a Trans. V. "to moisten'.Xak.xı to:n öli:di: ibtalla 'l-tawb “the garment: was moist! Kaş. III 256 (prov.; öll:r, öll:-” me:k); a.o. 77 324, 9: xiv Muh. ibtalla 6lü-Mel. 21, 15; (tüvşe-, in margin) ó:li:- Rif. 102: Kip. xiv óli- ibtalla İd. zo: xv ditto ölü- Tu. sa. 7: Osm. xiv, xv ölü- “to be moist” in two texts TS 1 563; III 559. Mon. ALB alp basically “tough, resistant, hard to overcome”, originally applicable both to persons,. when the conventional translation 'brave' is reasonably accurate, and to inanimate objects. and even to abstract ideas like “danger”. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SE; in SW it became obsolete except as an element in Proper Names but was revived during xix. See Doerfer II 526. Türkü viu alp "brave” qualifying, or as a predicate with, er, kişi:, xağan 7 S 6, II.N 4; IE3,II E4;1 E 40; II N 7; T 10, 21,29, 49; Ongin 3, 12; alpı: erdemi: “his bravery and manliness” Ix. 4; o.o. do. 7 and rz, (Küli Cor was his Counsellor and army commander) nlpı: bökesi: erti: “his brave and strong warrior! do. 17—(when a thing is thin ic is easy   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 172 
     
   
   
     128 MON. ALB (see uçuz) to crumple it up, but) yuyka kalin bolsar toplağu:luk alp ermiş 'when the thin becomes thick it is a tough job to crumple it up” T 13; a.o. T ıq, (we came over the Altay mountain forest and across the Ertiş river) kelmisi: alp 'it was difficult to come' T 38: vin ff. alp 'brave' IrkB qo, 55; antağ alp men erdemli:g men 'I am so brave and manly' do. ro, Man. alp elmgekler?) 'grievous sufferings” TT II 6, 6: Yen. atsar alp ertipiz “you were powerful when shooting" Mal. 28, 2; alpin üçün erdemi:n üçün do. 31, 2; o.o. dubious: Uyğ. viit ff. Man. alp “difficult” TT III 19 (damaged); a.o. do. 169 (ada:): Bud. alp yérci suvçi “a tough guide and pilot' PP 25, 8; alp ada do. 38, 8; alp erdemliğ TT VI 347; (actions) alp kilÉuluk alp bütürgülük "hard to perform and hard to carry out” T T V zo, 8; a.o.o. qualifying persons and abstract ideas: Civ. alp after an İnfin. “it is difficult to” TT 7 78, 84; a.o. 160 (edgülük), Alp as a component in Proper Names Usp. 36, 1; 111, 4 etc.: O, Kir. ixff. Alp in P.N. Mal. 10, 5; 16, 1; er erdemim üçün alpun do. 11, 9 (dubious): Xak. xı alp al-şucd" “brave” Kaş. I 41 (prov. (see alçak), verse); / 238 (ütleş-) and many o.o. (i) as Adj. *brave'; (2) as Noun 'brave warrior'; (3) as a component in P.N.s like Topa: Alp Er and Alp Tégin: KB alp er 691; Topa Alp Er 277; a.o.o.: Xii(?) KBVP alp yürek 'stouthearted” şr: xin(?) Tef. alp 'brave' 49: XIV Muh. al-şuca" alp Mel. 13, 16; Rif. 89, 152; acdal (of a man) “tough” alp 18, 2; 96; mühdrib toa mübüriz '"warlike, aggressive” alp şo, 9 (Rif. 145 yağı:çl:): Çağ. xv ff. alp (spelt) pahlawàn wa bahadur “hero, warrior', Plur. alplar; alp arslan the name of a well-known emperor, meaning sir-i dilbar "heart-ravishing lion' San. 49v. 23: Xwar. xiv méni alp bahatur tésünler 'let them call me a brave warrior' Nalic. 405, 8: Kip. xim a/-şüçü" alp Hou. 26, a: xiv. alp: (spelt) a/-sucà* İd. 21: Osm. xiv to xv1 alp “brave”, in several texts; in two XVI dicts. described as "Tkm. T'TS I 22; II 30; III 17; IV 19. Dis. ALB D alplık A.N. fr. alp. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı KB uvutka bolup korklik alplik kilur “out of shame a coward performs brave deeds' 2292 (cf. ógüng): xin(?) Tef. (all the people of Mecca feared “Omar) anm alplıkındın "because of his toughness! 49: xiv Mu. al-şucü"a "bravery” alplik (spelt in error with -lih) Mel. 13, 16; Rif. 89: Osm. xiv alplik (r) “bravery”: (2) 'obstinacy, resistance to the will of God” in two texts T TS I 22. Dis. V. ALBVU alvir- Hap. leg.; the general shape of this word is fixed by its position between anğar(andğar-) and ótgür- ; it is not clear from the facsimile whether the Infin. was altered from -me:k to -ma:k or vice versa but the first is likelicr. Xak. xı ol anip yü:zipe: alvırdı: teataba. fi teachihi fi kalám ha”"annahu vyurid mugácaratahu "he jumped down his throat as if he wished to pick a quarrel with him” Kaş. 7 226 (alvıra:r, alvırma:k?). Tris. ALB D alpa:ğut Dev. N. fr. *alpa:- Den. V. fr. alp, "varrior”, L.-w. in Mong. albagut (Kor. 84) where it was falscly connected w. alban 'head tax' and used for 'subject, taxpayer', and the like; reborrowed in NE Tob. alpağıt: NW Kar. alpawt R 1 430-1; Tat. alpavit *householder, property owner'. Türkü vii I N 5, HH E şı (uğuş), the word, which should, by the context, be alpağu:tı:, was mis-spelt alpağu: in 7 and corrected to yilpağu:tı: (with front y-) in 77, but the yi- must be an error: Uyğ. vir ffl. Bud. ol Dantipah él(lig alku alpafuti birle “that king Dantipala, with all his fighting men” U IV. 34, 63-4: Alp Sapun Öge Alpağut occurs in a list of Proper Names in Pfahl. 23, 14: Xak. xı alpa:ğut al-nmubárizi'l-buhma “a brave vvarrior” in verse quoted, alpa:ğutin üdürdi: ixtára abtálahu 'chose his fighting men” Kaş. 7 144; alpagutin (sic) abtalahu II] 422, 10: xiv Rbg. Xalxan atliğ sucá'atli$ alpağut “a brave warrior called Xalxan' R 7 433: Kom. xiv. 'soldier' alpavvt CCG; Gr.: Kip. xv muxtall 'destitute, mentally disturbed' alpawut Tuh. 33b. 29 (prob. the "Turkish translation of muxtall and an Ar. word, perhaps mubáriz has fallen out of the MS. between these. two words). F ala:wa:n Hap. leg.; general shape fixed by inclusion under the heading afá'/; no doubt a foreign L-w., perhaps with prosthetic a-. Xak. xt ala:wa:n al-timsáli 'crocodile' Kaş. I 140. Tris. V. ALBD alpirkan- Refl. Den. V. fr. alp. Survives only(?) in NW Kaz. albırğan- “to occupy oneself with something out of boredom' £ 7 43s. Uy. vit ff. Bud. (if a woman who is pregnant) tuğuru umadin alpırkansar tözi tuğurmaz erser 'makes great efforts(?) because she cannot give birth, and still cannot bring forth her unborn child” Up. 102a. 4-5. Dis. ALC F alu:ç a fruit, prob. “the fruit of the Crataegus azarolus, Neapolitan medlar'; l.-w. cognate to Pe. alii “plum”. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. Xak. xı alu:ç barüd (sic, not al-barüd “cold”, as in printed text; Brockelmann may be right in suggesting that it is an error for barqtiq “apricot”) Kaş. 1 122: Kip. xiv algu: (sic; *with back vowels famar şacar fi bilàádil-turk şabih bi'l-zu'rür "a trec fruit in the Turkish country like the medlar' İq. zr: Osm. xvii aluc (spelt), in Rif, zu'rür-i cabali, in Pe. hühic “mountain medlar” San. şor. 27. D oliıç irregular Dim. f. of oğul, N.o.a.b. Karluk xı oliç JAarf tahannun wa ta'attuf 'alá']-banin “an affectionate (Hend.) exclamation to children” ş one says oligim burayya “my ——--—— — EA 2 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 173 
     
   
   
      TRIS. ALC dear child” Kaş, 7 52; a.o. /7 250, 4 (in a Xak. verse): xiv Muh. (in a list of titles, etc.) rn toulüdi l-malik "a king's son” ozli:ç Mel. şo, 4; Rif. 143. D alçı: N.Ag. fr. 1 a:1, N.o.a.b. Xak. xi KB yana alçı bolsa kizil tilkü teg “again if he is as crafty as a red fox” 2312; bu alçı ajun "this deceitful world' 5231: xiv Mu.(?) muhtàl “crafty” a:lçı: Rif. 157 (only). D elçi: N.Ag. fr. 1 él. Siamlg The modern meaning is 'ambassador, representative of government in foreign countries', and there is nothing in the early tÉxts to suggest that it ever had any other meaning, although in some Uyg. Civ. contracts it appears as a Proper Name. İt seems clear that in the early period it was not a hereditary title, but, like bilğe:, él öğe:si:, çavuş, etc., an appointment normally held bv a commoner and not a member of the royal family. Cf. yala:vaç. See Doerfer 11 656. Uyğ. virt ff. Man. the word occurs in two lists of high dignitaries, tepriken kuncuy [ta]rxan tégitler elçi bilgeler 'devout consorts, tarxans, princes, ambassadors, and counsellors” M 777 36, 5 (ii); tarxan kunçuylar tepriken tégitler [él ölğesi élci bilgeler M 177 34, 6-7: Bud. elçi bilgeler are mentioned in Kuar. 129-30 jn a long list of kinds of people, starting with Buddhas, Pratyekabuddhas, etc., they come between 'ordinary preachers' (see égil) and before brahmans, but the list does not seem to be in any logical order: Civ. one of the parties to the contract in Up. 28 was called Elçi and so were witnesses to do. 19 (, 9) and 34 ( 13); an Elçi tirl is mentioned in do. 4, 7: O. Kir. ix ff. atım El Toğan Tutuk ben, tepri: €limke: élci:si: ertim, altı: dry bodunka: beg ertim “ny name was El "Foğan 'Tutuk; ] was the ambassador for my sacred realm and beg of the Alt: Ba:ğ (see 1 ba:ğ) people” Mal. r, 2 (should be r, 1); Elçi: Çor Küç Bars Proper Name do. 14, 1: Xak. x1 K B (a monarch requires helpers and) ukuşlığ biliglig böğü élciler 'understanding, wise, sage ambassadors' 427 (sic?, but in K B 'ambassador' is normally yala:vaç): xır(?) Tef. €lci, €lçü 'ambassador, envoy” 76: xiv Muh. al-rasül 'envoy, ambassador” €elçi: Mel. 57, 12 (Rif. 156 savçı:): Çağ. xv ff. elçi rasül wa barid 'ambassador, messenger! Sar. 112V. 14 (quotns.): Xwar. xın(?) (Oğuz Xan send his commands to the four corners of the world, he wrote what he wished to make known and) élcilerike bérip yiberdi (or yıbardı) 'gave it to his ambassadors and sent it off” Oğ. 104-5: xiv €İçi 'envoy' (sent to collect tribute from subordinate rulers) Quib 49; Nahc. 77, ız: Kom. xiv “envoy” elçi CCT; Gr.: Kip. xii al-rasül éd: mugtaqg mina'l-sa'y fVİ-şulh "a compound word from endeavour for peace” Hou. 25, 6: xiv (after él) hence a/-rasülu”lladi yatlubu'l-sulh. “the ambassador who asks for peace' is called elçi: İd. zo: Xv baridi wa'l-sá'i *messenger, courrier' élci Tul. Sa, 1; rasül élgl 16b. 4. 8041125 mE —— Ug — ]n—— 'aoe!—— on LOLLCEEECEÉCSEB«ENISLSEEARAOLKLOALLELIIIEMÓSII| "X € s... UC F 129 D alçak 'gentle, mild, humble' in a laudatory sense; survives in this meaning in NE Alt., Tel. R 1 423: NC Kir.: NW Kaz. and SW "Ykm., but in SW Osm. and Knm it has (recently ?) acquired a pejorative meaning 'low (in stature or character), base, vile'. Prima facie a N./A.S. fr. alça-, but this verb is very poorly attested, occurring only in Osm. Red. 184, in a pejorative sense; the Pass. f. alçalis, however, better attested in recent Osm. dicts. In these circumstances it is possible that alça- is a back formation fr. alçak and that the latter is a Den. N. for an earlier *altcak der. fr. alt, but this depends on the question whether the latter, q.v., is an ancient word. See aşak, Xak. xı alçak al-halizu'l-zarif 'gentle, mild; graceful, polite! Kaş. 7 100: alp yağı:da: alçak çoğı:da: "a man's braveness is tested only in the presence of the enemy, and the mildness of a mild man is proved in a quarrel' (i£fmu'l-haltm yucarrab fi' l-cidál)1 41,11: K B(ofthe Prophet) tüzün erdi alcak kilinçi silig “he was good and humble and his conduct was pure” 43; 0.0. 703, 2231 (alçak amul 'gentle and peaceable”), 2295: xırı(?) Tef. alçax $ardanlari aşak bolup “their humble necks (Pe. l.-w.) were bowed down' şo: xiv Rbg. alçak amul tüzün kilik *humble, peaceable, and well-behaved' R 7 649 (amul): Çağ. xvff. alçak past wa dün wa Tüzil "humble, lowly' San. sor. rr: Kip. xv mutavwádi' 'gentle, meck' alşak Tuh. 33a. 1; (in a list of Advs. of position) aşak/alşak ái 'low' do. 73b. 11; (in a similar list; “high” yüksek, büyük) safi/ 'low' alşak, which also means zoafi "humble” Kas. 36, 8: Osm. xiv to xvi alçak (once xiv alşax) 'humble, mild” in several texts, alçak od “a gentle fire” (xv), alçağrak 'low-lying' (ground) (xvi) TTS I 17; JI 26, ao, TİT 14; IV 16. Tris. ALC ?F ala:gu: "tent, hut'. Later forms usually have final -k; this inconsistency suggests that it is a L-w. Survives vv. phonetic changes and nearly always with -k, usually meaning “a hut made out of branches of trees! in some NE languages (Tuv. alact); NC Kir.; several NW languages including Kar. and SW Osm. (with eight or nine slightly different forms in xx Anat. SDD 87, 89, 91, 93, 94, 95, 522, 523) See Doerfer İl s19. Üyğ. vin ff, Bud. Hariçandri tégin alaçu tususında (meaningless, ?amend to tuşında) yoriyur erken “vrhile he was walking about opposite(?) Prince Harichandra's tent” U 717 6, 1-2 (iii): Xak. xı ala:çu: al-fáza wa'l-fustát “a tent with two poles; a large tent made of coarse fabric" Kaş. I 136 (between üle:tü: and aba:çı:): Çağ. xv ft. alacuk (“vith -ç-”) the same as ağ öy, already mentioned, that is “a tent (xayma) which nomads (safrániginán) make from poles" (çübha) San. 49r. 1; a.o. 205r. 19 (1 ca:tir). Kom. xiv "hut” alacuk CCI; Gr. Osm. xivxvn alacuk/alaçuk specifically “a nomad's hut! in several texts 77S 7 16; 17 23; FİT 13; IV 14. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 174 
     
   
   
      130 'T RIS. VUF alu:çı:n Hap. leg.; no doubt a 1l.-w., prob. fr. Chinese with prosthetic a-. Xak. xı alu:çı:n zabt lahu anábib yu'kal "an edible plant with a knotted stem' Kaş. 7 138. Tris. V. ALCD?F ala:çu:lan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. ala:qu:. Xak. xi (in a grammatical section) er ala:çu:landı: ittaxada'l-raculu'l-fáza “the man procured a tent with two poles! Kaş. 7/7 205, 16. Mon. ALT alt as in the cases of 3 al and ast, there is grave doubt whether this is really an independent ancient word. İf it was it meant “the bottom, or lower surface (of something)'. It has been suggested that altin, astin, which is synonymous with it, and üstün, which is often used in antithesis to it, all carry the suffix -dun/-dün/-tun/-tün, etc., which is clearly recognizable in words like öpdün and kédin, and that these are crases of *alttin, *asttin, *üsttün. "This is probably correct, but it does involve assuming that alt and ast are in a class by themselves, and different from ic and 2 ta:ş which are the bases of comparable forms içtin and taştın but are also normal N./A.s, since they are used only in suffixed forms. lf this is correct, then alcak, q.v., can also be regarded as a crasis of *altcak and derived from this word. The only medicval forms of this word, always in suffixed form, are in Tef. Kom. and Kip. In modern languages there is some confusion between alt and 3 al, but suffixed forms of alt meaning *below' certainly occur in some NE, NW, and SW languages, and similar forms of ast with the same meaning in SE, NC, SC, and some NW languages. (Xak.) xui ff. Tef. altına, altında, altindin “beneath, from bencath” are noted after nouns under altın 49: Kom. xiv. altında 'subordinate to him” CCG;Gr. 36: Kip. xiii (in the grammatical part) “as for Ar. word faht "below, under", its root (aşluha) in Turkish is altı (with back -1-"), if vou wish to say tahtak you say altında:, tahtakum altınızda: (and other examples) Hou. s3, 8 fT.: xiv (under 'adverbs of position”) taht altında: Bul. 14, 4: xv (ditto) taht altı: Kav. 35, 6, taht alt Tuh. 8b. 10; 73b. 9 (followed by two examples with Suffs.) Mon. V. ALDélt- Sec €let-. Dis. ALD D olut Hap. leg.; Dev. N./A. fr. 1 ol- Xak. xı olut er “a mature, stout (al-kaAlu'l-tàrr) man” Kaş. 1 sə. D ölüt (ölöt) Dev. N. in -üt (here Caus.) fr. öl- , 'killing, murder”. In the medieval period became ölet, usually meaning 'epidemic; sudden death”. “This s.i.m. mlg., but ölür, vv. same meaning, survives in NE Alt., Tel. R I  ALC 1250. L.-w. in Pe., see Doerfer 11 6:8. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud, ólüt ölürmek karmapadığ 'the sin (Sanskrit l.-w.) of murder! U 7/1 4, 13-14; yinin ölüt ölürdimiz erser "if we have murdered a (living) body” TT IV 8, 68; olo. U IH 4, 6-12 (evril-): Xak. xi ólüt a/-qitàl “killing, murder! Kaş. 7 sz: xiv Muh.(?) al-cimdd “inanimate” (opposite. to al-hayteán 'animate! tinliğ) özle:t Rif. r38 (only): Çağ. xv ft. ólet 'pestilence, epidemic" (margi) San. 8sv. 20: Kip. xv fand 'annihilation' ölet Tu). 27b. 9: Osm. xiv ff. ölet 'epidemic death”, in several texts T T'S 1 s63, 11 748; IV 623. altı: 'six'; c.L.a.p.a.].; common in Türkü vir: Uyğ. virt, vit fT. Bud: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. Ligeti 128; O, Kir. ix f: Xak. xi and KB: xıır(?) Tef.: xiv Muh.: Çağ. xvff.: Xwar. Qutb, MN; Nahc.: Kom. xiv: Kip. xri-xv: Osm. xiv ff. D alta:ğ N.Ac. fr. alta:-; syn. w., and in Uyğ. apparently used only in Hend. w., 1 a:l; originally rather neutrally 'device, method of doing something'; later only pejoratively 'deceit, guile, dirty trick'. S.ia.m.lg., but rare in SE and in SW Osm. only in xx Anat., SDD 94; Tkm. a:ldav, Uyf. vri ff. Man. TT III 68, 122 (1 a:D): Bud. Suv. 363, 20-1, etc. (1 a:1): Çağ. xv ff. aldağ a/damah Vel. 26 (quotn. hilası çok ali wa aldağı köp), aldağ farib "deceit”, syn. vv. 1 a:l San. sor. 13 (Vel?s quotn. under 1 a:1): Xwar. xiv aldağ 'trick, deceit” Quib 7. VUD olduk Pass. N./A.S. fr. oldr:- Xak. xt olduk at “a horse (etc.) which is unshod' (a/-hafi) Kaş. 1 101: xui(?) Tef. MüsaA elig uzatdı yılan teg oldukrzii tutdi 'Moses stretched out his hand and grasped his (staff) as smooth as a snake' 236. D altmış 'sixty'; der. f. nltı: with the unusual suffix -miş, S.i.a.m.llir. including Quv. otmál/utmàl Ash. 711 333, but excluding the NE languages which have nltan and other crases of alti: 0:n, and Yakut alta uon Pek. 8r. Türkü vir ff. Yen. tokuz altmış er *fifty-nine men” Mal. 48, 3; 2.0. 26, ro: Uyğ. viit ff, Civ, altmış “sixty” TT VIHI L. 6, 7; USp. 6, 6; 57, 5; 74, 11; Yazdiğird eldi sanı üç yüz taki sekiz altmış “the year 358 in the era of Yazdigird” TT VII 9, 11-13: O. Kır. ıx ff. altmış yaşımda: “in my sixtieth year” Mal. 1, 1 (should be, 1, 2); altmış at bintim 'I rode sixty horses' (in the course of my life) do. 41, 9: Xak. xı KB (I have reached the age of fifty and) okir emdi altmış mapa kel teyü “sixty is now summoning me, saying "come!" ” 366; a.o.o. esp. in chapter headings: xın(?) Tef. altmış so: xiv Muh. sittün "sixty” altmış Mel. 81, 14; Rif. 187: Çağ. xv ff. altmış /arce-f lagkar hi ba-'unwán farh bágand "a detachment of troops which they place at the head (of the army)”, also the number 'sixty' San. sor. 3: Kip. xil sirin altmış Hou. 22, 13: XIV sittün altımış (sic) Bul. 12, 13: NV. ditto Kat. 39, 6, 65, 9: atmış (sic) Tuh. 69b. ro   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 175 
     
   
   
     DIS. ALD D aitin Adj. and Adv. of place and metaph. of time, prob. a crasis of *alttin der. fr. alt, q.v.; 'below, beneath, lower'. N.o.a.b. except for the dubious entry in Shatv 13 altın 'lower', not noted in any other SE "Türki authority. Not found in Türkü where asra:, q.v., is used instead. Uyğ. vin in a damaged passage (I crossed the Ertiş river opposite Arkar Başı:) er kamış altın . nta: s... p, perhaps to be restored as yanta: sallap "putting the men on rafts below the rceds” Su. S 1: vin ff. Chr. iki yaşda altın oğlan "boys below the age of two' U 7 ro, 1-2: (Arjuna took the girl in his arms and) söğüt altın éltü bardı “carried her to beneath the tree' UTI 25, 18; bu yer altın vajirli yerde “in the country of the vajra beneath this earth” TT V 6, 41; üstün tepri yeri altın tamu yeri "heaven above and hell belovv” do. 6, 27-8; o.o. of üstün . . . altın in antithesis Suv. 133, 16 and 20-1; 584, 4-5; TT VII qo, 11-12; Pfahl. 8, 7-8: Civ. üstün ceceglik . . . altın çeçeğlik “the upper flower-garden . . . the lower flowergarden! USp. 15, 5-6; a.o. TT VII 37, 6 and 8 (USp. 42, s and 7): xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. hsta 'below' (Giles 4,230) altın Ligeti 128: Xak. xı altın harf wa ma'náhu taht "an Adverb meaning "below" ” Kaş. J 109; a.o. I 108 (astın): KB bularda ep altın bu yalçık yorir “the lowest of these (planets) is the moon” 137; oğul mende altın mapa ne tep-e “my son is inferior (or subordinate?) to me; what is equal to me?” 186: xin(?) Tef. yüz karıdın altın 'deeper than roo cubits'; farmönı altın “under (Solomon”s) commands” 49 (and see alt): xiv Muh. (among *Adverbs of position”) al-asfal "lower" (opposite to al-a"la fhigher' üstün) altın Mel. 14, 10; Rif. go: Kom. xiv 'sword belt” altın kur CCG; Gr.: Kap. xut faht "below! (opposite to 'alà “upon” üsten/ü:züre:) altın Hou. 26, 20: Osm. xiv, xv altın "Jower' in two or three texts 77S 123; IH 18; IV 19. : altu:n “gold”. A very early L-w. in Mong. as altan (Haenisch 6, Kow. 85). S.i.a.m.l.g., usually as altın. Exceptionally in Yakut altan means “copper” Pek. 82. (See Doerfer 11 529. Türkü viru aftu: kümüş “gold and silver" £ S 5, IIN 3; IN 12; I SW; ILS 11; sarığ altu:n ürün kümüş 'yellow gold and white silver” T 48; altu:n yış “the Altay mountain forest” occurs several times in I, IJ, and T.; also a component in Proper Names: vu ff. altu:n órgi:n üze: “on a golden throne” IrkB 1; olo, do. 3, 5 (adğırlık), etc.; yüz altun '100 gold coins Toyohk IVr. 3-4 (ETY II 180); Altun Tay Sagun P.N. Tun. IV 5-6 (do. II 96): Uy&amp;. vir ff. Man.-A altun Aruğu (sic) ulus “the golden country of Arğu” M 126, 29; altun Arğu (sic) (?Talas] ulus do. 27, 5: Chr. altun 'gold' (and frankincense and myrrh) U I 6, ıq: Bud. Sanskrit suvarmavargo 'gold coloured' altun önlöğ TT VIII G.64; sarığ altun yip *yellow gold thread' PP 43, 2; bés yüz altun yartmak (for yarmak) 'soo gold coins” U III 68, 12; and many o.o.: Civ. 777 7o (adirtla:-) 131 xiv. Chin.-Uyg. Dict. chin 'gold' (Giles 2,032) altun / qır, Ligeti 129: O. Kir, ix fi, altu:n occurs several times; altu:n kümüşiğ Mal. ıı, 9; altu:n ke:ş “golden quiver' do. 25, 3: Xak. xı altu:n al-dahab 'gold' Kaş. 1 120; and 16 o.o.: K.B (wisdom is) altun taş “the gold ore' (in the brown earth) 213; o.o. 188, 946, etc.: xiu(?) Tef. altun kümüş, altun “a gold coin' şo: xiv Muğ. al-dahab altu:n Mel. 18, 15; 75, 6; Rif. 98, 178: Çağ. xv ff. altun [ilà “gold”, in Ar. dahab, in Pe. zar San. sor. 4 (quotn. and three phr.): Xwar. xin(?) altun kümüş Og. i8: a.o.o.: xiv altun “gold” Qutb 8: Kom. xiv 'gold' altun CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiii al-dahab altu:ni Hou. 31, 12; dinür “gold coin” altu:n do. 55, 11: xiv al-dahab altun Bul. 4, 8: xv dinàr altun Kat, 56, 21; dahab altın Tuh. 16a. 13. D uldap (?uldup) Den. N. fr. u:l; “the sole' (of a boot, etc.); the earliest form was perhaps uldun (see uldupluğ). S.i.a.m.l.g. as ultap with minor phonetic variations, in SW Tkm, and xx Anat. (SDD 1088) oltap and in NE Koib., Kaç., Sag., (R I 1699, 1700.) Khak. and 'Tuv. as uldup/ultup. Uy£. viir ff. Civ. the word appears as ulyak in TT VII 42, 1 a very late text prob. transcribed from an Arabic original, in which it was misread; (a manly man is equal to a jewel) erdemsiz kişi etük içindeki ultap (written ulyak) birle tüz ol *a man without manly qualities is equal to the sole in a boot”: Xak. xı uldan asfalu'l-xuff “the sole of a boot” Kaş. I 116 (prov.): Çağ. xv ff. ultan gön Teather” which is fastened to the sole of a boot or slipper Vel. 114 (quotn.); ultap (spelt) püsti 'a piece of leather which they sew onto the sole of a boot or shoe' (quotns.); it is also the word which the vulgar ('atwám) corrupt to uldap and use as a term of abuse (dugnám); just as they corrupt tabay to dabap and use that as a term of abuse San. 85v. 24 (see taban). D altınç Ordinal f. of alti:; 'sixth'; the only form recorded in the early period; the longer form altınçı: first appears in the Vienna MS. of KB, and si.a.m.lg. vv. minor phonetic changes. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. altınç TT V 24, 62; TT VII 40, 105, etc.: Civ. altınç common in TT VII and USp.: xiv Chin.-Uyg.. Dict. altınç R / 409; Ligeti 128: Xak. xiff. KB altınç and altınçı both occur in the list of chapters on pp. 8-10 of the Vienna MS. D oldruğ abbreviated Conc. N. fr. oldur(olur-); one of several words for “seat” derived fr. this verb and apparently pec. to KB. Xak. xı K B (you have prepared this ball) oldurğuka ne oldruğ yeri bu “to sit on; what kind of a seat is this?” 647; 0.0. 787, 2547, 2588. ?D ildrük prob. Pass. Dev. N. fr. ildür(iltür-); “the plant rue, Peganum harmala”. İ1rük is fully vocalized, but ildrük in /77 412 in a section containing dissyllables vvith first syllables ending in two consonants is completely unvocalized and in III 21, 22 the only vowel points are a fagdid and damma over 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 176 
     
   
   
     132 DIS the dál, which is presumably an error for a cazm over the dül and a damma over the rü”. N.o.a.b.; SW xx Anat. ilezik 'rue' is more likely to be a corruption of yü:ze:rllk, q.v., than of this word. "Fhe situation is further complicated by the fact that in //7 rz it is İldrük and not ilrük that is described as being in the language of Uc and Barsgan. Xak. xı ildrük a/-harmal “rue” Kaş. III 412; 8.0. III 12, 22 (yid1B) —Ug xi ilrük a/-harmal I 105. D oldrum abbreviated N.S.A. fr. oldur(olur-); lit. "a single act of sitting'; but actually “crippled, incapable of standing up”. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı oldrum (vocalized oldurum in the MS., but in a section containing dissyllables with the first syllable ending in two consonants) a/-muq"ad mina'l-nás "a crippled person” Kaş. III 412: xiv Rbg. (he saw that some were blind, some lame, some in pain) kimni olturum “some crippled' R 7 1091; Muh. (after “lame” axsak) al-mug'ad olturum Mel. 48, s, Rif. 142. Dis. V. ALDélet- (?élt) the basic meaning seems to be, physically 'to carry', but with several extended meanings like “to bring (something Acc.), to carry away (something dcc.) It is not clear whether the word was originally monosyllabic or dissyllabic, and, if the latter, whether the second vowel was -e- or -i-, but- on balance it was prob. originally élt-. S.i.a.m.l.g. with phonetic variations. Türkü vir yarıklığ kantan kelip yana: eltdi: süpüglig kantan kelip süre: eltdi: 'Whence came the man in armour, routed you and carried you off? Whence came the lancer, drove you and carried you off?” 7 E 23; 11 E 19; bu süg elt tédi: “he said, “take this army” ' T 32: vini ff. edgü: söz sav elti: keli:r “he comes bringing good tidings” IrkB 7, 11: Man. (gap) ölürgeli élitser 'if they bring (sheep) to slaughter them” M HI 33, 1 (ii); a.0. do. 6, 2-3 (ii) (utli:): Yen. on ay éltdi: öğüm oğlan tuğdım '[ was born a child, whom my mother had carried (in her womb) for ten months' Mal. 29, 5; same phr. muddled 28, 7: Uyğ. vir ff. Man. edéü nirvanka yakın €ittipiz "you have brought us near to the good nirvana! TT III 52: Chr. (why does our horse stand still unable to carry it?) élt&amp;eli umağay biz “ve shall be unable to carry it away' U 7 8, 7: Bud. Sanskrit neşyati “he will lead' éltkey (so spelt) TT VIII D.10; uhyate "is carricd, conveyed' eltür (sic) do. F.9; men sizlerni küçep élitmezmen 'I am not taking you (with me) by force” PP 32, 5-6; men yerçilep élitgeymen 'I will act as guide and take you (with me)' do. 60, 2; a.0.0., sometimes spelt élt- U II 25, 18 (altın), U III 16, zo, PP 52, 3, etc.; TT V ro, 85-6; zo, 3; Sus, 138, ro: Civ. (the Indian monk—gap—) éltü tavğaçka kelip “came to China bringing . . .' TT VII 14, 2: Xak. xı ol ka:ğu:n evke: €letti: dahaba bi'l-battix ila baytihi "he carried the melon off to his house' Kag. 7 214 (életür,  . ALD életme:k); ol keçişni: su:v életti: “the water carried away (adhaba bi-) that ford” 7 369, 24; eltip 'carrying away! 1/ 263, 2:1: KB életü mana acti dunyà sözin 'the world brought and explained its words to me" 82; busilik yavuz erke éltür biliğ "a bad temper deprives the wicked man of knowledge' 335 0.0. of élet- 3885, 3976, ctc.; of élt- 2267, 2492, etc.: xın(?) Tef, elt-/élt- “to bring', etc. 75: Çağ. xv tf. élt- (-ti, etc.) iler- Vel, 76 (quotns.); élt- burdan 'to carry', etc, San. rrir. 20 (quotns.): Xwar. xır élt- "to carry oft ' Ali 7, etc.: XIv élt- “to bring' Quib şo, élet- do. 58, MN 128; Nahc. 37, 5; 238, 6; 249, 9: Kip. xti rcaddá mina l-tawdiya [i'l-gay' ilà'l-makáni'[-musayyar. tlayhi “to send, in the Sense of sending something to the place to which it should be sent' elt-, eltü: ber(unvocalized) Hot. 44, 9: xiv zcadda élet- Bul. 88v.: xv ditto élt- Tük, 38b. s: Osm. xiv ilet- (sometimes in verse ilt-) 'to carry, to bring, to carry away'; c..a.p. T TS I 373; 11 525; 111 364; IV 417. D ulat- Caus. f. of ula:-; “to order (someone Dat.) to join (something 4cc., to something Dat.). S.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı ol yip u:latti: (sic) atosalahu. iyáhw'l-habl “he ordered him to tie the cord” Kaş. 1 213 (u:latur, ulatma:k; u-, not U:-, is correct, the section contains verbs with two short vowels). D 1 ulit- Caus. f. of 1 uli:- “to make (an animal or a person) howl, scream', and the like. Survives only(?) in NE Khak., NC Kir, Kzx. Xak. xı ol anı: urup u:litti: darabahu hattá a'sáhu "utcá'a'l-di'b. "he beat him until he made him howl like a svolf” Kaş. 1 213 (u:htur, ulitma:k, the u:- is an error, see ulat-); bu: er ol itin ulitğa:n "this man constantly makes his dog bark” (yunbrh kalbahu) I 156, 9: KB (the bad-tempered man) ulitur kişiğ söğse açsa tiliğ 'makes people scream when he opens his mouth and curses' 342; 0.0. 1463, 5521, 5738, 6264, 6369 (all of persons). VUD 2 ulit- lap. leg.; Caus. f. of 2 *uli:-. Apart from a possible survival of that V. in SE (see ula:-) this V. and ulin-, q.v., which is commoner, are the only representatives of this group of V.s. Xak. xi ol anın boymn u:litti: (sic) alca "unuqahu “he twisted his neck; also used of twisting anything else Kaş, 7 213 (u:litur, ulitma:k; the u:- is an error, see ulat-). D ület- Caus. f. of üle:- , "to have (something Acc.) divided and distributed (to people Dat.)'. Survives only(?) in NE Khak., Tuv. Xak. xt ol çığa:yka: yarma:k ületti: amara bi-tawzi' i'l-daráhim wa. tafrigihá "ala"l-fuqard” *he gave orders for the money to be divided and distributed to the poor” Kaş. 7 214 (ületür, ületme:k). D ölit- Caus. f. of óli:-; “to moisten, or wet (something cc.) Apparently survives only in NE 'Tuv. ót- and SW xx Anat. ülüt- SDD 1431. Other. similar. forms like NE Khak,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 177 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. ALDöllet- are Caus. £.s of ölle:- (see öl:-). Xak. xı ol to:n ólitti: "he wetted (balla) the garment” (etc) Kaş. I 214 (öltür, ölitme:k), 3.0. İT 324, 11: xiv Müh. balla ölüt- Mel. 24, 4; Rif. 105 (mis-spelt ó:t-): Çağ. xv ff. ölüt(spelt) tar hardan “to, wet, moisten” San. 84r. ız (quotn.): Kip. xin 5a//a ólit- Hou. 38, 10: Osm. xiv and xv Ölüt- “to wet' in several texts T TS 7 563; Il 749; IV 624. E ölüt- “to kill". This word has been erroneously read in Türkü viri T 3. The photographs, which are clear, show that the actual word in the inscription is ötmiş, but there is a small crack in the stone etween ö and t which has been taken for an /. The text reads (you abandoned your xagas and surrendered (to the Chinese). Because you surrendered) tepri: ötmiş erinç “Heaven, no doubt, abandoned you'. D alta:- Den. V. fr. 1 a:l; although 1 a:1 and alta:g, q.v., were originally neutral in meaning - and only later became pejorative, alta:always meant 'to deceive, trick, cheat (someone)”, with a few extended meanings like "to soothe (a child), to console' in some modern languages. S.ia.m.lg. See Doerfer II 533. Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. allığ cevislig kişiler altayu turur “resourceful (Hend.) men are constantly deceiving you” TT 7 26; yağı yavlak altayur “enemies and vvicked people deceive you” do. 39: xiv Chin.-Uyğ. Dict. “to deceive” alda- R 7 41:2 (only): Xak. xr ol yafrn:: alda:dı: xada'a'l-'aduziw bi-kayd wa makr 'he deccived the enemy by stratagems and tricks” Kaş. 1 273 (alda:r, alda:ma:k); aldap yana: kactimiz “ve escaped them again by tricks and deception! 7 472, 13: xın(?) Tef. alda- “to deceive, trick! 48: Çağ. xv ff. alda(spelt) farib düdan ditto San. 48r. 15 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 7; Nahc. qoz, 7: Kom. xiv ditto CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xim £arra mina'l-furür. bi'l-hila to deceive by tricks' alda:- Hou. 42, 17: xiv alda- (with back vowels") xada'a İd. 21: xv ditto Tuh. 14b. 7; gage “to cheat” in the meaning of al-xadi'a yalda- (sic) do. 27a. 10: Osm. xiv ff. alda"to deceive, trick” is common until xvii and occurs sporadically later TT J 18; 11 26; III 14; İV 16 (now replaced by aldat-). VU oldi:- “to go barefoot, unshod'; pec. to Kaş., but cf. olduk. Xak. xı at oldi:dt: hafiya'l-faras "the horse was unshod' Kaş. 7 273 (oldur, oldrma:k), izlik bolsa: er oldi:ma:s “if a man has shoes, he does not go barefoot” (là yahfà ricluhu) 1 104, 24. D éltin- Refl. f. of €let-. Survives only(?) in NW Kar. eltin- “to be carried, brought, sent” R I 826; Kom, 183. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. Sanskrit antimadehadhári “(a sage) who is wearing his last (human) body” en kenki etözöğ €ltinde:çi TT VIII A.48, uluğ arvışlar él(l)igin tutsarlar éltinserler 'if they grasp and carry (with them) the great king of spells! U 77 73, 5 (ii). 133 D altur- Caus. f. of al-; properly 'to order (someone Dat.) to take (something /Aec.)", but in some modern languages 'to allow (something Acc.) to be taken from oneself'. S.i.a.m.l.g. Cf. altuz-. Xak. xi men andan yarma:k alturdum “1 ordered that the money should be taken (5f-axd) from him” Kaş. I 223 (altururmen, alturma:k): Çağ. xv ff. aldur- Caus. f. giránidan wa giriftàr hardan "to order to take, to have (someone) made a prisoner” San. 46r. 22 (quotns.): Xwar. xit aldur- “to order to take” 'Ali 35: xiv ditto Qutb 7; “to have taken from one" Naltc. 325, 4: Osm. xiv ff, aldir-/aldur- in several texts TTS I 19; II 28. D ıldur-, iltur- Preliminary note. 7he same inconsislencies of vocalization occur in these two verbs as occur in - and 41-, but there is no clear evidence of the vocalization of the first in KB and the Çağ. form of the second looks like a Sec. f. of altur-. The Infin. of the first is apparently spelt -ma:k, later corrected to -me:k in the MS. of Kaş. VUD ıldur- Caus. f. of 1l-; “to order (someone //ec.) to descend (from somewhere 42/.): to bring (something Acc.) down'. Survives as ildir- in NC Kır., Kzx. Xak. xr ol ani: ta:ğdın ildurdi: “he ordered him to descend (anzalahu) from the mountain' ; also spelt with -n-, éndürdi: Kaş. | 224 (ildurur, ıldurma:k; see above): KB uluğ tağ başın yerke ildrür egip “the great mountain lowers its head to the ground bowing' 2647; in 1003 the Vienna MS. has ildrür for endrür. D iltür- Caus. f. of il-, “to order (someone Dat.) to hang up (something Aec.), with extended meanings like 'to fasten, hook, button' in some modern languages. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SE(?) Xak. xı ol mapa: keyik iltürdi: amarani bi-ta'liqi'l- sayd fi'l-hibála "he ordered me to hang the game up in a noose'; also used for hanging anything up Kaş. 7 224 (ütürür, iltürme:k): Çağ. xvff. ıldurCaus. f. band hardan voa giránidan “to tie up, to order to take” Sar. 110r. 7. D 1 oltur- Caus. f. of 1 ol- , "to cause to ripen or mature; to cook thoroughly'. Survives only in SW Osm. Xak.xı ol eşiç içre: etolturdi: harra'a'l-lahm fpl-qidr "he boiled the meat to rags in the cooking pot'; also used for wearing out (abla'a) clothing, etc. Kaş. I 223 (olturur, olturma:k): (Osm. xiv and xv the early occurrences of oltur- in 7TS I 541 are Caus. f.s of 2 ol- (bol-)). S 2 oltur- See olur-. D óldür-/óltür- Caus. f. of öl-, later than ölür-, q.v.; “to kill”. S.i.a.m.l.g. Xak. xr ol oğrunu: öldürdi: qatala”l-süriq wa amdtahu “he killed (Hend.) the thief' Kaş. I 224 (öldürür, öldürme:k), a.o. I 522, 7: KB 2292 (öğünç): ximm(?) Tef. öldür-/öltür- “to kill' 244-5: xiv Rh. 36r. 8 (uğra:-), Muh.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 178 
     
   
   
       134 DIS. V. qatala öldür- Mel. 13, 17; 30, 6; Rif. 89, 114; al-mumayyıit (an attribute of God) ó:Idürge:n 44, 10; 137: Çağ. xvff. óltür- (-di; imála ile i.e. with front vowels?) öldür- Vel. 117; öltür- Eəşfan "to kill” San. 82v. rs (quotns.): Xvvar. xmi öldür-/öltür- “to kill” "AZ 7, 24: xır(?) öldür- Oğ. 4o a.o.o.: xiv öltürQutb 123, MN 171, etc.: Kom. xiv “to kill” öldür-/öltür- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xur qatala öldür- Hou. 33, 18: xiv öltür- amáta İd. zo, qatala öldür- Bul. 75r.: xv ditto öltür- Ka. 75, 14; Tuh. 30a. 6; mümayyit öltürğen do. 3?r. 2. D éltis- Co-op. f. of élet-. Survives only(?) in NW Kaz. iltes-. Uyğ. vur ff Civ. kih[kr ter]Pis kişi birle éltiggüci “his character is difficult(?) and brings him into conflict(?) with others” TT VII 17,6-7; yat kişiler sapa yakın eltişmiş kişiler kópüli terip (ambiguous, probably) “the minds of people who bring strangers ncar to you are deep' do. 30, 10-11. D altuz- Caus. f. of al-, n.o.a.b. Cf. altur-. Türkü vr [gap] tutuzti: ekisin özi: altuzdi: “he ordered .. . to grasp, and himself ordered that both of them should be taken' I E 38 (here perhaps an Emphatic rather than a Caus. V.): Oğuz xı the Oğuz sometimes use -Z- instead of -r-, hence they say ol tava:r alduzdi: “his property was stolen and carried off' (Iririba . . . tva suliba; lit. “he let his property be taken”): its origin (as/i/i) is aldı: “he took? Kaş. II 87, 17 fL; n.m.e.: Kip. xiv altağu: alaksa: altindakin altuzur “if a group of six people disagree, that which is beneath them is taken from them” (yi''axxad. minhium; “lit. “they let . ... be taken”) İq. 22. Tris. ALD D ula:tı: prob. Ger. in -1: fr. ulat-; used in two vvays: (r) after one or more N.s or P.N.s, sometimes linked by -lı: .. . - It: or, less often, in the Loc., meaning “et cetera' (see v. GC. ATG, para. 287); (2) occasionally, prob. only in translations fr. other languages, as a Conjunction meaning 'and' (see do., para 415). N.o.a.b. Türkü vii ff. (we, persons of distinction, thirty in all have arrived) atı: Öz A:pa: Toto:k ula:ti: "one named Öz A:pa: Totok and the rest” Tun. IV 6-o (ETY II 96): Uyğ. vir ff. Man, üzte buzta ulati üküş telim nıizvandlar “the many (Hend.) passions of anger (1 Tend.), etc.” TT /1I 33; a.o. M III 36, 3 (0: Bud. koy lağzın ulatı tinliğlarığ "living creatures, sheep, pigs, etc.” PP 3, 2; öğli kanlı: ulatı 'mother and father, etc.” Sut. 554, 13; yüz mir tümen ulatı “a hundred, thousand, ten thousand, etc. times” T'T V 8, 67; many o.o.—yaruttunuz . . . ulatı .. sizine idi bilmeyük kalmadı “you have illuminated (the Maháyána and Hinayána) and (various scriptures) have not remained .unknown to you” Hiüen-ts. 1772-7; a.o. do. 1977: Civ. lodur ulatı 'Symplocus racemosa (Sanskrit /odhra), etc” H II 26, ror,  ALDVU?D üle:tü: “silk handkerchicf'; perhaps Dev. N. fr. ület- in the sense of a section of a large piece of silk fabric divided into cqual parts. Survives onlv(?) in SW xx Anat. nlatu a word for 'silk handkerchief” used by "Türkmen, SDD 192. Uyf. vur ff. Civ. ületü (front vowels) occurs twice in Fam. Arch.; bir ületü (purchased with one other article for 4 bahirs) l 55; üç ületü (purchased with two other articles for 6 bhahurs) L 144: Xak. xi üle:tü: “a piece of silk (gita harir) which a man keeps in his pocket to wipe his nose with' Kaş. I 136. PU?F élteber a title for a tribal ruler subordinate to a superior ruler. N.o.a.b. in Turkish texts, but very common in Chinese historical texts. transcribed c/reh (or ss) li fa (Giles 1,472 or 10,281 6,885 3,376). In spite of the dissimilarity of their modern pronunciátions, there is no reasonable doubt that Müller was right in making this identification in U 77 94. Prob. a l.-w., if not a compound of 1 é:l and the Aor. in -r of a verb which might have been *teb- or *tev- (but not the familiar tev- "to pierce”). See 2oerfer I] 655. "Türkü vin (Kül "Tegin captured) Az elteberig “the élteber of the Az” I N 3; Uyğur elteber 77 E 37: [Karluk eltleber // E 4o (restored from the context); bunça: bedizçim Toyğun elteber kelü:rti: “Toyğun, the élteber, brought all these decorators” 7 NE; a.o. Ix. 21: Uyğ. vt ben bl. . . elJteber Su. edge. PUDC e€lteberliğ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. élteber. Türkü vırı eki: elteberli$ bodun (gap) 'two tribes ruled by éltebers! II E 38. D ölütçi: N.Ag. fr. ölüt, 'one who deliberatciy takes life, mürderer, executioncr”. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vin ff. Chr. U 7, 17 (bukağulufen: Bud. (that beg, having become beg of the town) erte ked ölütçi boldı 'soon became very prone to taking life" Suv. 4, 9-10; (whoever for a long time) ölütçi bolsar “is a taker of life” U I11 4, 11; TT VI 89 (kisnçi:): Xak. xı (after ölüt) hence a/-gátil “a killer” is called ölütçi: Kaş. 1 52: KB 1737 (basımçıt) S altınçı: Sec altınç. D altınkı: N./A.S. fr. altın, 'situated belovv”, Both this and the later form altındakı, first noted in Kip. see altuz-, s.i.s.m.l, Uyğ. viri ff. Man. üstünki altınkı tepriler “the gods situated above and beneath (the earth)” TT III 169: Civ. altinkt TT VIII L.23, 43; üstünki altınkı tapladi “those above and beneath were pleased” TT 7 r28: (Xak.) ximu(?) Tef. altınğı/altınkı ditto so. D altunluğ P.N./A. fr. altum “possessing gold; golden; ornamented with gold”. Si.a.m.lg. Türkü vinff. Man. altunluğ örgin üze “on a golden throne? TT II B, 68: Uy£. vir ff. Man. altunluğ yincülüg kap yérte “in the land of gold and pearls' TT IJ ış, 8-10: Bud. altunluğ xua ceceg saçıp 'scattering golden-coloured flowers! U Sp. ror,    
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 179 
     
   
   
     DIS. ALG 135  10; a.n. do. 43, 10: (xiv. Chin.-Uyg. Dict. altunluk “gold brocade' Ligeti 129; R I 411): O. Kir. ix ff. Mal. 3, 2; ro, 5 (k€:ş): (Xak.) xiv Muh. dü dahab “possessing gold” altu:nluğ Mel, 6, 4; 10, 9; Hif. 77, 83: Çağ. xv ff. altunluğ zarbaft wa dibà-yi tila-baf 'cloth of gold; gold-woven brocade' Sam. sor. 9: Xvvar. xi(?) altunluğ belbağı "his goldornamented belt" Og. 33: xiv altunluğ “golden” Qutb 8. D ultupluğ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. ultup (uldap). Brahmi -t- often represents -d-, and the word should perhaps be so spelt. "The Sanskrit word translated by this is unintelligible, but it presumably means 'possessing boot-soles'. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. ultuplugla:r TT VII G.s7. eldiri: (?eldri:) basically either 'kid-' or "lamb-skin”. Survives only(?) in NW Kaz. ütir '"lamb-skin' R 7 1494. Xak. xı elri: al-badra wa hiya cildu'l-cady "a milk bucket that is a goat-skin”, also called eldiri: bi-ziyádatiI-dàl Kaş. I 127: xiv. Muh.(?) (in a list of clothing, ctc.) al-farwatu'l-camila "a fine fur' eltiriğ (?; unvocalized) Rif. 166 (only): Kom. xiv Tamb-skin” eltiri CCI; Gr. S olturum See oldrum. D altırar Hap. leg.; “six each”, the older Distributive f. of altı: cf. *ékkirer. The later form altışar survives in some NW and SW languages. Uyf. vir ff, Civ. altırar bözni köni berirbiz “ve undertake to give (back) six lengths of cloth each” USp. 34, 6-7. Tris. V. ALDD ölütle:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. ólüt. Xak. xı er ölütlezdi: cáda/a'[-racul hattd hada an yüqgi'u'l-mugátila "the man got so quarrelsome that he almost committed murder” Kaş. T 299 (ölütle:r, ölütle:me:k).. D altunlaş- Hap. leg., Recip. Den. V. fr. altu:n. Given as a grammatical example; prob. used only in the Ger. Xak. xı oyna:dim altunlasu: “1 gambled with him making gold the stake on it” (ca'altu'l-xatar fihi'l-dahab) Kag. II 114, 23. Mon. V. ALGalk- 'to use up, finish, come to the end of (something Acc.) ; hence sometimes “to destroy (something Zcc.)'. v. G. ATG, para. 160 suggests that this is an Emphatic f. of al-, but this is unlikely since there is no real semantic connection and no evidence that the Emphatic Suff. was -K- as well as -1k-.. Survives only (?) in SW xx Anat. alk- “to destroy” SDD 97. "Türkü vij kop alkdimiz 'we completed everything' (the tomb chamber, its ornamentation, and the memorial stone) 1 NE: Uyğ. viit ff. Bud. Sanskrit. frgnáksayasukha “the. pleasure of destroying lust' a:zığ a:lkma:klığ (gap) TT VIII G.21; samhşaydt "by complete destruction! alkma:kın go. 23; burxan şazının alkip 'destroying the Buddhist doctrine” [Tüen-ts. 315; 0.0. Suv. 185, 21 (aki); U III 66, 16; 88, 4—saking kilu alksar "when he has come to the end of meditating' TT V 6, ar: Xak. xr ol tawa:rin alktı: afná málahu “he dissipated all his property (etc.)” Kaş. III 419 (alka:r, alkma:k); alkti: meniyp ya:yımı: afná sayfi fi “ufla "he wasted my summer in idleness” /İ/T 188, 22: KB osallık méni alktı 'carelessness has ruined me” 1209: xiv Muh.(?) ahlaka wa a'dama "to destroy' alk- Rif. 107 (only). à Dis. ALG ?S aliii syn. w. aflığ, q.v., and perhaps a Sec. f. of it. In this meaning survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. aluk (of a man) 'bad' SDD 98. It is, however, possible that a word meaning “crazy, stupid, mad”, and the like, NE several dialects alığ R 7 373; Tel. alu: do. 387; Khak. alığ and SW Osm. alik is a survival of this word. See Doerfer II 53s. Kip., Oğuz xı alığ al-radi' min hull şay” “bad” of anything Kaş. I 64; also occurs in I 384, 6 in a verse (repeated in / 85, 5 with yavuz instead of alığ) (the men who reckoned it good fortune to have a guest have all disappeared) kaldi: alığ oyuk kórüp evni: yıka:r bagiya'lladin dü ra'awu'l-hayál naqadü axbiyatahum kaylá yanzil 'alayhi "but those who, when they see a mirage, strike their tents in order that (a guest) may not lodge with them, have remained'; alığ is not specifically translated but must have meant 'wicked' or the like: Xvvar. xiv alığ 'weak, inadequate! Qutb 8: Kıp. al-cabán “covvardiy" (opposite to 'brave' alp) alığ Hou. 26, 4: xiv alu: al-'áeiz “an ğarimihi *weaker than (or inferior to) his adversary'; bu: bundan alu: dur “this is inferior ("aciz) to that”, and for a'caz “more inferior” they say alurak İd. 22: Osm. xivff. alu “veak, inferior', often in contrast to ulu “great” or ye “better”, common in xtv and xv and occurs in xvı TTS 1 23; Il 31; İH 18, İV 19. D allığ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. 1:a:1, tresourceful”. Uyğ. viri ff. Civ. TT I 26 (alta:-). ?D alık/aluk, it is an open question how many etymologically different words of these forms there are and which of them can be explained as Pass. Dev. N./A.s fr. al-. This is obviously true of the word in KB, and possibly true of Kag.'s Oğuz meaning of alik. But it is less obviously true of Kaj.'s meaning of aluk, and rather improbable of the Kip. meaning. İt is difficult to connect NC Kir. alık “peak, summit' R 7 372 with any earlier meaning, but SW xx Anat. alik/aluk retains the second early Osm. meaning end has other meanings like *driftwood carried away by a flood' which clearly represent a Dev. N. fr. al-. See Doerfer 11 547. (O. Kir. ix ff. the word read aluk in Mal. 44, 2 is corrected to alp in Shcherbak's revised text): Xak. x1 KB tükel bilse bolmaz kiliklarini yeme alsa bolmaz alıklarını “it is impossible (for a servant) to understand completely (his master's) character, mmu————Ya——sn— M oer a 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 180 
     
   
   
       136 DIS. ALG or to accept his habits(?)' 4757 (for mcaning sec Osm.): Oğuz xr altk minqáru'l-tà'ir. “a bird”s beak” Kaş. 7 68, aluk er a/-raculı”ladla" (sic, not al-aşla" "bald” as in printed text) "a sturdy, powerful man” 7 67: Kip. xiv aluk 'uddatu'l-dábba ha"in mü kána "any kind of equipment (harness, etc.) for a horsce' İd. 21 (and alukla:- sarerod” l-'udda “to put harness, etc. (on a horse)”): Osm. xiv alik 'habits' and the like in one xıv text; (however just a strange ruler may be) alığın anlayinca él yikilur *the country is disorganized until it gets to understand his habits; alır ola cihanin alığını bilir ola zamanın kılığını “he will come to accept the habits of this world and to know the character of the (present) age” TT.S I 2o—alık xvi translates. a/-qurtdn “a thick felt put on a horse's back beneath the saddle' in one text /7 28. S ilığ See yılığ. D 1 ula:ğ Dev. N. fr. ula:-; lit. 'something joined on', and the like with various specific applications. Survives only(?) in NC Kir. ulo: *joining, attaching', and SW Osm. ulak “something within easy reach'. Cf. -sapığ. Uyğ. viii ff. Man.-A ulağ sapağda “in endless succession' M HI 13, 19 (ii): Bud. noted only in the Hend. ulağ sapığ which is common in TT VI, e.g. tuğa ölü ulağ sapığ “the endless succession of birth and death” or, o.o. 312, 345, 388, etc.; Suv. 61, 17: Xak. xr ula:ğ ruq'atu'l-tatcb. "a patch on a garment? Kaş. ] 122. ?D 2 ula:ğ a technical term for a horse used for carrying goods or riding, more particularly a horse for hire and a post horse. The specific meaning seems to be that it is one of a string of horses available for hire or use, and it may originally have meant a string of horses rather than a single animal, but if so this meaning became obsolete very early. İt is therefore prob. a Dev. N. fr. ula:-, etymologicaliy identical with 1 ula:ğ, but with a specialized meaning. An early l-w. in Mong. as m//a”aulağa (Haenisch 162, Kot. 394) 'posthorse, relay horse'. S.i.a.m.l.g. in a wide range of forms including such divergent ones as NC Kir. 11o:, ulo:, uno: See Doerfer 11 521. Uy£. vin ff. Civ. ulağ "transport horse let out on hire' is common in late contracts e.g. mapa Sarapucka Usunka bargu eşek ulağ kergek bolup “as I, Saranuç, needed donkeys and transport animals (or "donkeys for transport”) to go to Usun'. USp. 3 , 2-3; (1 gave one roll of cloth for) Mekilinp Kurçanın ulağka “Mekilin Kurça”s transport. animal(s)” (and fifteen rolls of cloth for) Kültürtey ulağ terike “the hire of Kültürtey”s transport animal(s)' do. 31, 9-13; 0.0. 38, 15; 39, 4; 91, zo: Xak. xı ula:ğ “any horse ( faras) wbich an express post-ridec (a/-barfdıc İ-müsri") takes by order of the amir (i.e. beg) and rides until he finds another” Kaş. 7 122; 1dBi1l meni: tokışğa: yövğil mapa: ula:ğ-a: “send me to the battle, tea a'ínni li-tu'fiyani faras yuballiğuni Ha”l-harb “and help me by giving me a horse  to carry me to the battle! 777 172, 12: Çağ. xv ff. ulağ/ulak a! “horse” Vel. 118 (quotn.); ulağ/ulak (r) markab-i sutvári "riding horse' (same quotn.); (2) bayk rca qaşid "a messenger, or courier' sent from one place to another; (3) har bi-ucrat 'unpaid labour'; the author of the Burhán-i qáti' included this as a Pe. word with the same meanings San. 85v. 21; Kip. xiv. ulak a/-5arid İd. 21: Osm. xiv fT, ulağ, more often ulak, once (xvi) in error uğlak, usually 'mounted messenger”, occasionally (xiv, xv) “post horse'; c.ia.p. TTS I 717; II 922; III yoz, IV 778. uluğ “big, great”, physically and metaph., including such usages as 'grand(father); eldest (son)'. Prob. a basic word and not a P.N./A in “luğ, since it has no semantic connection with uz and cannot be derived fr. u:-, C.i.a.m.l.g., but in SW, while uli is the standard word in "Tkm., it has been almost entirely displaced by bóyük (bedük) in Az. and büyük in Osm. See Doerfer 11 536. Türkü viii uluğ “great” (army, battle, ceremony) 7 E 28, 40; // N ro, E 34; uluğ olim “my eldest son” JJ S 9; (I myself have become old and) uluğ boltim 'senior, advanced in years” T 56; o.o. T' 5 (uduz-); Ix. 3: viri ff. ulu:ğ ev “a large residence” IrkB 9; Man. uluğ TT 11 6, 6 and 15, etc.; Yen. Mal, 29, 1; 38, 3 (both dubious): Uyğ. rx ulu:ğ ogu:lim. Suci ro, ulu:ğ 777 A 9; B 8 (ETY II 37): vin ff. Man. uluğ asığ tusu “great advantages (Hend.)” TT 7/7 105; a.0.0.: Bud. uluğ, spelt ulu:ğ in TT VIII A.17, is very common; uluğ erpek “thumb” 77 V 8, 56: Civ. uluğ is common: Xak. xı uluğ ai-kabir min kull şay” 'great' of anything Kag. 1 64; many o.d.; KB uluf is common: XiII(?) Ar, ditto; Te/, uluğ/ulu 326: xiv. Afuh. yatemu' l-qivamat 'tesurrection day” ulu:ğ kün Mel 44, :3; Rif. 137; Adam 'alayhi'i-salàm ulu:ğ ata: 45, r (Rif. agnu:ki: ata:); al-cadd 'grandfather' ulu:$ ata:; al-cadda ulu:ğ ana: 49, 4; 143-4; &amp;abiricl-qatem "chief of a tribe! ulu:ğ so, 6; 145; al-kabir uluğ ss, 13; 1953; fsmu”l-nahr “the name of a river' ulu: Su: 4, 20; 75: Caf. xv ff. uluğ/uluk buzurg wa "aşim “big, great” San. 86r. 29 (quotns.): Xwar. xir ulug/ulu "Ali ız: xin(?) uluğ common in O.ğ: xiv uluğ/fulu Quib 198; uluğ MN 1, eic.; Kom. xiv “great” ulu CCI, CCG; Gr. 265 (quotns.): Kip. xı al-ibhám “thumb” ulu: barmak Hou. 20, 14: xiv ulu: (with back vowels) al-kabir; ulu: anası: (sic) ummu'l-umm; ulu: azu: kibáru'l-adrás "big tooth, molar! İd. zo: xv ğabir ulu: Kav. 44, 17; 59, 20; Tuh. gob.3: Osm. xiv ff. uluğ occurs twice (7I, 7/1) and ulu several times TTS I 720-1; II 924; III 706; IV 782-3. 1 oluk (olok) basically “a hollowed-out tree trunk', hence 'trough, boat', and later 'gutter', etc. S.i.s.m.l.g., sometimes spelt olak. Xak. xı oluk şay” yungar min asl xagaba ha”l-ma"laf yubarrad fihi'l-'asir wa yusqd fihi'l-dábba "an object hollowed out of a tree trunk', e.g. a trough in which grape-juice is cooled, or  PNEU  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 181 
     
   
   
     DIS. cattle watered . . . oluk a/-zawraqu'l-sagir "a small (dug out) canoe'; its origin is from the previous word Kaş. 7 67-8: xiv Muh.(?) (among words rclating to buildings) a/-mizab *gutter' o:lu:k. Rif. 179 (only): Kip. xiv oluk al-mat'ab “a channel, water-course' in which water flows swiftly İd. 21; olak (sic) al-hawd "tank, basin” do. 22; al- haud alak (sic, in error) Bul, 3, 15: xv qaşla “a wooden bowl, or trough” olak (sic) Tuh. zob, 4: Osm. xv ff. (after uluğ/uluk) (3) in ARiümi nawdàn, “channel, gutter, spout' San. 86v. s. 2 oluk Hap. leg.; prob. a metaph. use of 1 oluk in the sense of soinetfang hollow. Cf. keris. Xak. xi oluk :minsacu'l-faras "a horse's withers' Kaş. I 68 (prov.). D 3 oluk Intrans. N./A.S. fr. 1 ol-. Possibly survives in NE Tel.; NC Mzx. uluk “useless, valueless” R 7 1:694; SW xx Anat. uluk "decaying, weak, idle”, etc. SDD 1417. Xak. xı oluk to:n al-tatwbu'l-xalaqu'l-bàlt “a shabby worn-out garment'; also used for anything worn out Kaş. 1 67. D alku: Gerund, used as N./A. fr. alk-, one of several early words for 'all, everyone, everything”, lit. 'something which has come to an N.o.a.b. Türkü vir ff. ançıp alku: kentü: ülügl: erkll:ğ ol 'thus everyone is master of his own fate” IrkB Postscript: Man. (if they find Hearers or merchants) alkunı ölürgey “they will kill them al TT JI 6, 16; edgü tóró edgü kılınç alku kılğay “they will all (follow) good customs and do good deeds” do. 6, 21: Uyf. vir ff. Man. alku anunmis bisrunmis nomlari£ “all the doctrines which they have prepared and assimilated' T 71 17, 61-3/65-7: Bud. alku is fairly common and occurs in three usages: (1) as a Noun in oblique cases, e.g. alkunı taplamadi teg “although he had disapproved of all (the others)” PP ış, z, alkuka berip “giving to cveryone'; o.o. U H 78, 39; U III 45, 18; (2) as an Adj. preceding the Noun qualified, e.g. alku iğleriğ önedtürdeçi 'curing all diseases” Suv. 595, 19-20; TT V qo, 8? (Öç-), a.o.0.; (3) as an Adj. following the Noun qualified, e.g. ne ker&amp;ekin alku tüketi bérlp “giving absolutely everything that is necessary! PP 28, 4; anı alku ökünürbiz bilinürbiz "vee repent and confess all those (sins). TT IV 8, 76; kişi alku ölür “all men dic' PP ış, 2; TT VIII O.ş (alko, same as VI 61); TT V 6, 26 and 38; a.o.o.: Civ. (early only?) su:vsa: İlk a:lko üç dos belküle:ri tüke:l közönür “all three basic (Sanskrit doşa) signs of thirst appear' TT VIII 1.9; a.o. do. 16 (suvsus). S ilki See 1 yılkı:, D alkığ “vide, broad'; well established in Uyğ., where it occurs only in the Hend. kép alkığ, otherwise known only in NE in a curious variety of forms; Karağas alhığ (sic); R I 353, etc., Bas. 23; Tuv. alğığ Pal. ss. Khak., Koib. allığ, Sor alığ, aldığ . ALĞ (137 Prima facie N./A.S. fr. alk-; the semantic connection is tenuous, but cf. alku:. There is a NE Khak., 'Tuv. verb alğı- “to expand, become broader', but this can hardly be as old as Uyğ., and may well be a late form of alkor even a back-formation fr. alkığ. Uyğ. viit ff. Man.-A (you will live in that country) képin alkığın mupsuzun “at your ease (Hend.), and carefree' M 771 30, 5-6 (i): Bud. (of a kingdom) Sanskrit vibulam 'broad, wide" kép a:lkığ TT VIII C.r, (of property) vistirna. ditto do. D.33; o.o. do. G.35; K.4; kép alkığ (of heaven, earth, a palace, etc.) is common in TT VI o7, 241, 243, etc.; a.o. X 26. D olğun N./A.S. fr. 1 ol-; 'ripe'. Survives only in SW Osm. and xx Anat. ulğun/ulkun SDD 1416-17. "The word is not fully vocalized in Kaş. and the Ar. translation corrupt, but its identity is certain. Xak. xı sedremiş olğun konak (mis-spelt koyak) qalla rab"(?) habbati'l-cáwars "the quantity(?) of grains of millet was small” Kaş. IJI 167, 7 (the second word must be a Nom. as the third is a Gen. but ra” (not fully vocalized) does not look right); n.m.e. D alkinc Dev. N. fr. alkin-; “coming to an end, annihilation', and the like. N.o.a.b., but cf. alkınçsız. The -u- is no doubt euphonic before a consonantal Suff. Uy£. vir ff. Bud. alkincuka tegi burxan urugi üzülmez “the seed (i.e. succession) of Buddhas will be unbroken until the end of time” TT VI 205; séziklig könülümüz alkınçuka tegi üzülzün 'may our doubts be utterly dispelled" do. 380-1. D alkış N.Ac. fr. alka:-, 'praise'; originally in the sense of praising "God, later also in ordinary human relations, where *blessíng' is sometimes the better translation. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SC where it has been displaced by the Mong. l.-w. maktov. Türkü vir ff, yaru:k ay tepri:ke: alkı:şta: “in praise of the bright moon god' Toy. Ir. 2-3 (ETY II 176): Man. alkışımız ötüğümüz “our praises and prayers” Chuas. 216; baçak alkış çaxşapat “fasting, praise, the commandments (l.-w.)' do. 330; a.o. de. 206 (alkan-): Uyğ. vir ff. Man.-A esengü alkış *well-being and praise' M I 27, 11 ft: Man. alkış paşık sózlegüg 'reciting praise and hymns (L-w.)) TT III 161: Chr. ógmek alkış ötündiler “they presented their praises (Hend.)'! U I 6, 15-16: Bud. burxan kutiga alkış alıp "receiving praise for the honourable state of (being a) Buddha” TT IV ız, 51-2; o.o. V ro, 109; Pfahl. 8, ır: Xak. xı alkış a/-fand” wa'l-du'à Toa dikr ayddi”l-racul aca 'add manqibihi 'praise, blessing, an account of the great deeds of a man and an enumeration of his virtues'; hence one says ol begke: alkış be:rdi: “he praised (afnd”) the beg, and yala:vvaçka: alkış bé:rgil 'bless (salli “ala) the Prophet" Kaş. 1 97; I 249, 5 (alkal-); 284, s (2 arka:-): KB kişi edgü atın kör alkış bulur “a man earns praise by his good reputation” 246? o.o. 76o, 1309: xın(?) Tef. öğdi alkış esenlik  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 182 
     
   
   
     138 DIS. ALĞ “praise, blessings, and good health" 49: xiv Muh. al-du'à aliis Mel. 39, 2; alkış Rif. 126; al-tarcab 'reward for good works' alğış (v.l. alkış) 44, 15 (muyan 138): Çağ. xv ff. alkış (spelt) du'a-yi xayr 'blessing' San. sor. 21: Kom. xiv 'blessing' alğış CCG; Gr.: Kap. xiv alkış al-?and', alkış kil-. ca'ala'l-taná? ya'ni atnd' İd. 22: xv da'/á alğış eyle- Kav. 18, 2 fTh., a/-tand” alkis (in margin alğış) Tuh. 10b. 11; du'à alkış do. 15b. 10: Osm. xiv ff. alkış 'praise' in several texts till xvit TTSIzii; 1129; Ill 17; IV 18 (it now means, more narrowly, 'applause, acclamation'). Dis. V. ALG?D alık- N.o.a.b.. Morphologically obscure; hardly to be derived from al-; if the basic meaning is 'to fester, turn septic', perhaps fr. 2 ail, lit. “to be inflamed”. Xak. xı er alıktı: la'uma'l-racul “the man was vile, miserly' ; and one says ba:ş alıktı: tanaffafa'l-curh. wa fasada "the wound festered and turned septic', also used of anything that turns septic owing to mishaps in menstruation or parturition or to running sores' (mazra hö"id azo nufasá anı cunub) Kaş. I 191 (verse; alika:r, alikma:k): K B (these things (bad temper, anger, etc.) are bad for a man) munt: kilsa yalpuk ahkar etöz “if a man does them, his body deteriorates' 337 (so read, with Vienna MS. against bilse . . tlikar in Fergana MS.). alka:- “to praise”, both in the religious and the ordinary sense; hence, more recently, 'to bless, pray for a blessing on (someone cc.)', cf. alkis. S.i.s.m.l. in NE, SE, NC; in SC and NW displaced by Mong. l.-w. makta- and in SW by Ar. nouns with et-. See 2 arka:-. Uyğ. vir ff, Man. ağızınta sizni öğe alkayu 'praising (Hend.) you with their mouths” TT III 97: Bud. kilmişların yeme tutup ógdüm alkadım erser “if I have accepted(?) and praised (Hend.) what they have done” Suv. 1:35, 4-5: Civ. TT I 170 (tüş-): Çağ. xv fT. alka-(-mış, etc.) a/kış etVel. 28 (quotn.); alka- (spelt) qu"d-yf xayr kardan “to bless” San. 48v. 7 (quotns.) D alkat- Caus. f. of alka:-. N.o.a.b.; apparentiy, like öğüt-, q.v., used only in the Particip. f. alkatmis 'praiseworthv, provoking praise; blessed'. Uyğ. viri ff. Man.A. (at an auspicious moment, on an auspicious day) yeme alkatmış ayka “in a blessed month” M I 26, 22-3; a.o. do. 24 (öğüt-): Man. alkatmış bés kat tepri yerinde “in the blessed five-fold heavens” TT III $9: Bud. alkatmış ıduk élig uluşuğ “the blessed, holy realm, and country” TT VII 40, 17. D olxut- Hap. leg. Der. f. olur- ; Kaş. is quite right in saying that it is completely irregular, but olğut- would be equally irregular. İt looks rather like an abbreviation of olğurt-, q.v. Xak. xı ol meni: olxutti: aclasani "he seated me”, originally with -ğ- olğuttu: /7-anna'l-fi'l [à yu"adda bi l-xd” albatta because a verb is certainly not made Causative with -X-', but is made Causative with -B-, e.g. odğur- “to wake', todğur- “to satiate'; in these the verb is made Causative vvith a -ğKaş. 1 260 (olxutur, olxutma:k). D ulğa:d- Intrans. Den. V. fr. uluğ: "to become big, or bigger; to grow up”. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SW, usually as ulğay-. Türkü viri ff. Yen. erl:n ulfa:t(t)um '1 grew up to manhood' Mal. 29, s (see élet-): Uyğ. viri ff. Man. H”ind. 249, o (eded-): Bud. edgü kutluğ tınlığlarnıp oğulanı (sic) ulğadsar "when the sons of good, divinely favoured mortals grow up” U /TT 8o, 27: Civ. bu kişinin uluğadu (sic) yaşı kelmişte edgü körür “vhen this man reaches the years of maturity he experiences good (fortune TT VII 28, 11-2: O, Kir. ix ff. bupu:suz ulga:t(tum "I grew up free from care' Mal. 7, 2: Xak. xı oğla:n ulğattı: “the boy grew up (kabura): originally ulğa:dtı: but assimilated Kaş. I. 263 (ulğatur, ul&amp;atma:k); (if a man exerts himself vvhen he is young) ulğa:du: sevnür yafrah fi Ribarihi “he is happy when he grows up) JI 268, zo, Hİ 87, 26; a.o. I 505, 4 (uluğluk): xiv Muh. kabura (Rif. and nüma "to grow up”) u:lğa:y- Mel. 3o, 13; Rif. 114: Çağ. xv ff. Vel. 115-16]ists threc conjugational forms of ulğay-, two of ulğan- and one of ulğat- (the last two errors) translating them büyü- and explaining that they mean reaching “middle age” (mertebe-i huhül) and sometimes “old age” (pirlik) with several quotns.; ulğay(spelt) (1) "azim tva buzurg şüdan "to become big, great”, (2) metaph., pir sa mu'ammar şudan “to become old, aged” San. 82r. 9 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv ulğay- “to become bigger' Quib 197: Korn. xiv sto grow' ulğayCCI; Gr.; Kip. xv(?) xayala “to be haughty' (biyi-, in the margin in second hand) ulğad-, "also with -k- instead of -B-' Tw. rab. rr. D alkal- Pass. f. of alka:-. Survives only(?) in NE Alt. alkal-; Sag. alğal- "to be blessed" R 1 389, 393. Xak. xı begke: alkış alkaldı: ufniya 'alá'l-amir wa "udda manáqibuhu "the beg was praised and his merits were enumerated” Kaş. 1 249 (alkalur, alkalma:k). D 1 alkan- Refl. f. of alka:-, but syn. vv. it. Survives only(?) in NE Tuv. alğan- “to call out invocations”, "Türkü vri ff. Man. künke tört alkış . . . alkansığ törö bar erti... alkanmadımız erser . . . alkanur erken "there was a rule that we should recite praises four times a day (to certain gods); if we have not recited them (properly or if) while reciting them (we have been inattentive)” CAuas. 206— 213: Uyf. vir ft. Man.-A bir ekintike karğanurlar alkanurlar "they curse and call down curses on one another! M I 9, 9-10; 8.0. do. 16-17 (cf. arka-). D 2 alkan- See alkin- Man.-A. D alkın- Refl. f. of alk- ; (r) “to use (something Acc.) up for one's own advantage'; (2) "to use oneself up, exhaust oneself'; (3) “to be used up, exhausted'. Survives, with some extensions of meaning only(?) in NC Kir., Kzx.;  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 183 
     
   
   
     TRIS. 'ALG (139  NW Kaz. RT ago and SW xx Anat. SDD 97. Türkü viri kop anta: alkıntığ arıltığ “you all exhausted yourselves and were wearied there” 1 S o, II N 7; alo. T 3: Uyf. vir ff. Man.-A (when a lamb or calf dies and is reborn as a lion- or wolf-cub) kentü sürüğ uduğ koyanuğ alkanur yok kilur “it consumes and annihilates its own flock of oxen and shecp” M 7 8, 7-9; éliti kelmiş azuki alkanmadı erser “if he has not consumed the food which he has brought" M 1I ro, o (ii): Man. amtika tegi yértincü alkınmazmu erti tınlığlar 'would not the world and mankind have perished before ngw?' TT III 65: Bud. ağı barim allinsar^'if the treasures (Hend.) are all usedup” PP? 7,9;9,2; TTIV zo, note B 42, ro (öçül-), TT V ro, 87 (öç-), (may our sins) arızun alkınzun “be washed out and put an end to” TT IV 12, 40; o.o. of artalkın- Suv. 132, 15; 138, 12 and ər, etc. (common); o.o. U 11 42, 35: 79, 53; U Ill 33, 13; Suv. 6oo, 6: Civ. kişi sözleser savı alkinur “f a man speaks, his words come to nothing” TT I 33; tepreser alkindip tepremeser yeğettip “if you move you exhaust yoursclf, if you do not you get better” do. 204-5: Xak. xı alkındı: ne:p “the thing was completly used up' (nafada bi-rummatihi), and one says er alkındı: "the man died and perished” (màta wa fana) Kaş. I 254 (alkınur, alkinma:k); tün kün keçe: alkinu:r ödlek bile: a:y al-dahr yanfad. wa'l-gahr yanfa bi-mudiyi"llayl wa'l-nahár "as the days and nights pass, time is consumed and the months elapse” 7 82, 14; (man is like an inflated bladder) ağzı: yazılıp alkinu:r ?d6”nfataha famuhu yafna'l- rih *when the mouth is opened, the air (in him) is exhausted' 7 195, 27: KB neçe terse dunyà tüker alkinur whatever this world accumulates comes to an end and is used up” r14; o.o. of tüke:- alktn- 189, 3782, 5265: xın(?) Tef. alkın- “to come to an end, perish' 49: xiv MuA.(?) al-"adm "to be destroyed' alkınmak Rif. 124 (only). D olğurt- “to seat (someone cc.); metaph., “to place (something 4cc., somewhere); to establish (something Zcc.). Morphologically obscure; prima facie Caus. f. in -t- of *olfur-, which is possibly a very early (pre-vii) form of olur-, q.v. N.o.a.b. See olxut-. Türkü viri arku:y karğu:ğ olğurtdim “1 established the watch tower of Arkuy (?place-name)' T 53 (the earlier explanation. ulğartdim “I enlarged” is morphologically impossible): virt ff. Man. tirazug içinte olğurtur “he places (the sinful souls) on the scales' (Iranian 1.-vv.) M II 12,9: Uy£. viri ff. Man, İçinte olğurtur M HI 29, 11 (i): Bud. ertenilig orunluk üze olğurt(t)ı "he seated him on a jewelled throne' PP 46, 2-3; yolda öni olğurt(t)ı "he seated him off the road' do. 66, 2-3 (sic?, and not 'facing the road' as Pelliot suggested); üskinte olğurtup 'seating him facing himself" Hüen-ts. 20. D alkaş(bless, etc.) one another”, NE Khak. alğaş- SE "Türki alkaş- Shaw Recip. f. of alka:-; 'to praise Survives only(?) in . 13 (only). Xak. xı ol menin birle: alkış alkaşdı: "he competed with me in praising' (fi'I-madh wa'[-taná'); also used of helping (to pred Kaş. I 237 (verse; alkaşu:r, alkagma:k D "m one another'. alğış- “to quarrel'. Recip. f. of alk-, “to destroy Survives only(?) in NE Tuv. Xak. xi bo:y (bi:r) İkki: bile: alkıştı: tafaná'[-qatorm. ba'duhum ba"d “the tribe destroyed one another", also used for competing in destroying (fi ifnà') something Kaş. 7 237 (alkışu:r, alkisma:k); a.o. İ 237, 23: Osm. xiv (then, wherever he indicates, the locusts all) ol araya alkışıp barır “go there and destroy (the crops)! TTS I 20. S ulğay- See ulga:d-. Tris. ALG D *alka:dr Hap. leg.; Dev. N. fr. alka:-; *praise'. Noted only in a metathesized form, but unmistakable owing to its association with ógdi. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. bo üç erdninin a:ğla:di öğtile:ri eştilme:di “the praise (Hend.) of these three precious things vvas not heard” TT VIII H.9-10o. D alkuğun Collection f. of alku:, “all toether”. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. alkuğun bir teg bilü yarlıkazunlar “may they deign to know, all together as one man' Suv. 137, 13-14; a.o. do. 15; listed, without refce., in U I s4 as translating Chinese Asi “all” (Giles 4,138). D uluğluk A.N. fr. uluğ, “greatness” both physically and in abstract and moral sense; 'seniority' and the like. S.ia.m.lg. Xak. xi uluğluk a/-kibriyd” wa'l- şaraf 'glory and honour'; hence one says uluğluk tenri:ke: “glory be to God”, ulugluk al-kibar fi'l-sinn *greatness of age, seniority” Kaş. I 150; uluğlu:kuğ bulsa: sen “if you attain high rank and distinction" (cah zca basta) I 64, 13; for example uluğluk a/-kibriyà' is derived from ulğa:dtı: kabura İ 505, 4; 0.0. 1 352, 17; II 91, 6: KB uluğluk sapa ol “glory belongs to Thee (Oh God) 7, sana tegse beğlik uluğluk ok-a “if the rank of beg and a high position come to you” 552: xı1(?) KBVP uluğluk idisi “the ord of Glory” 2: xın1(?) KBPP ditto 2; At. uluğluk several occurrences; Tef. uluğluk "greatness; seniority, old age” 327: Çağ. xv ff. uluğluğ/uluğluk buxurgi sva biri 'greatness; old age” Sar. 86v. 5: Xwar. xiv uluğluk ditto Qutb 198: Kom. XIV “greatness” ululuk CCI; Gr. S alkınçu See alkınç. D alkınçsız Priv. N./A. fr. alkınç, “inexhaustible, unlimited”, and the like. Pec. to Uyg. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (they poured out rice wine) alkınçsız “in unlimited quantities" Hüen-ts. 1943; alkınçsız kógüzlüg Bodisavt Alhşayamat? Bodhisattva Kuan. 59, etc.; TT VI common; TT VII 40, 13. m——————— p ns—9À eH a 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 184 
     
   
   
     140 'TRIS. D uluğsığ Simulative Den. N./A. fr. uluğ, 'vain, proud'. Pec. to KB. Xak. xi KB uluğsığ küvez . . . Kişi “a vain, proud man” 1706, uluğsığ bedük tutsa beğler köpül "if the begs cherish vain, ambitious thoughts” 2118: (xi(?) Tef. uluğsilik "pride, vainglory' 327). Tris. V. ALGD uluğla:- Den. V. fr. ulug; “to make, or consider (someone cc.) great; to respect (him)'. S.i.a.m.l.g., usually in the last sense. Xak. xı tepri: meni: uluğla:dı: “God gave me glory' (al-hibriyğ”), and one says beg meni: uluğla:dı: "the beg reckoned me to be great” (kabir); prov. uluğnı: uluğla:sa: kut bulu:r "if a man respects the aged (toaqqara”l-şayx Hi-sinnihi), he is lucky” Kaş. I 304 (uluğla:r, uluğla:ma:k): xın(?) Tef. kabbara “to magnify” uluğla:- 327: Kip. xiv ulula- teagqara İd, 20: Osm. xiv ff. ulula“to respect! in several texts, also (xv) "to put (someone) over (someone else, üzerine); to keep (the sacred month) holy' T'T'S I 720; II 925; Hİ 707; IV 782. D alkindur- Caus. f. of alkın-, “to bring to an end, to wipe out (sins). Pec. to Uyğ.? Uy£. vurff. Bud... . ayığ kilinçların ... arıttılar alkindurdilar erser “if they have washed out and wiped out . . their sins” Suv. 139, 10-12; 139, 23 ff. alakir- Pec. to Uyğ., where it is used only in Hend. with kikir-/kikirig-, q.v. Obviously, as pointed out in the note to TT .X 363, the origin of SW Osm. lakırdı “talk, chatter”, and meaning “to shout” or the like, prob. a quasionomatopoeic. Cf. alakırış- Uyğ. viri ff. (then King Dantipála and his suite went hunting and, seeing the soo maral deer, circled round them six times and) yavlak ünin kikirisu alakırdılar 'shouted (Hend.) with a loud voice” U IV 34, 67; similar phr. TT X 363. D alakırış- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of alakit-, q.v. Uyğ. vırı ff. (then innumerable demons surrounded King Castana and, in order to intimidate him) katığ ünin kıkrıştılar alakırıştılar “shouted (Hend.) vvith a loud voice" U IV 22, 295-6. D alığsa:- Desid. Den. V. fr. (2) ali Dev. N. fr. al- (not noted earlier than Çağ.): "to wish to take”, Survives in some NE languages. Xak. xi ol andin yarma:k aligsa:di: “he intended to take (qaşada an yaqbid) the money from him” Kaş. / 281, 18 (grammatical examplc), n.m.e. D uluğsa:- Hap. leg.; Desid. Den. V. fr. uluğ. Xak. xı er atta: uluğsa:dı: tamanná'l-racul fi'l-xayli'l-kabir "the man wanted the big one of the horses” , also anything else big Kaş. I 302 (uluğsa:r, uluğsa:ma:k). D uluğsın- Refl. Simulative Den. V. fr. ulu£; “to consider oneself great, or greater; to boast of one's greatness", Survives only(?) in ALG NC Kir. Xak. xın(?) At ol er kim uluğsındı men men tédi “rhe man who thinks himself important and says "I, I" ” (ncither created beings nor did the Creator love him) 271; 0.0. 283, 285; Tef. uluğsın-/uluğsun- 327: Xwar. xiv ol kul kim xanlüyiq üze uluğsınğay “the slave. who thinks himself better than ordinary people” Nac. 376, 11. Mon. ELG ilk “first” in order of time or space. No doubt, originally a Mon. but often, prob. for reasons of euphony, spelt ilki:. It is possible that in some early cases the latter word is a N./A.S. in -ki: i.e. ilk(k)i:, but there is no means of proving this. Survives in some NW languages and SW Az., Osm. ilk, Tkm. ilki, In the early period often combined with 1 ep, q.v. Türkü vrit (I campaigned against the Oğuz.) ilki: sü taşıkmış erti: “the first army had set out" (the second stayed at home) 7/ E 32; ilki: kün “on the first day” (. . . and on the second day) II S r: Man. ilki özün bu özün “in a previous self (i.e. incarnation) and in the present self” C/huas. 116-17: Uyf. viu ff. Man. ilki bögö él(I)lgler 'former wise kings' M HI 35, 17; llkite berü “from the beginning" TT III 43(atkan-); 116: Bud. ilki etözlerde “in former bodies' Suv. 134, 1; ilki tıltağ “the first cause” U II 5, 1: Civ. ilki ağuntakı “in previous incarnations! H İT 22, 13; İlk yer "the first land” (which I received) USSp. 55, 20: Xak. xı ilk “first” (atwal) of anything; one says İlk sen barğil “do you go first! Kaş. 7 43: xın(?) Tef. ilk/ilikHİki “first, former(ly)” 124: Çağ. xv ff. İlk (spelt) atoztal toa. ibtida” “first, beginning! Sar. rr3r. s (quotn.): Kom. xıv “March” ilyas ay, prob. a crasis of İlk yaz ay CCI; Gr. 119: Kom. xv atwical lk Tuh. 3b. 10; a.o, 62b. r (birinc): Osm. xiv ilk “at first” T'T.S II 530. Dis. ELG S elek See élgek. elig (?élig) “hand, forearm', with some extended meanings like 'finger's breadth' in some modern languages. For some obscure reason abbreviated to el in some languages in the medieval period; in some languages displaced by ko:l in the meaning “hand”. S.i.a.m.l.g. in a wide range of forms and meanings. Possibly to be spelt élig; see eliglig. Uy£. vini ff. Bud, Türkü vin Op Totok yurcrn yaraklığ eligin tutdı: "he grasped Wang 'Totok's brother-in-law with his armoured hand” 7 E 32; similar phr. do. 38: vri ff. xan eliği:n tutmi:ş “the xan grasped them with his hand” JrkB 63, kul: elgi:nte: əə idti: sent... by the hand of his servant” Toyoh IVr. 5-7 (ET Y 1I 180): Man. (we must keep three commandments with our mouths, three with our minds) üç elgin 'thrce with (our) hands' Chuas. 193-4; elgin sunup *reaching out with (our) hands” do. 314; M III 14, 3 (iii) (igid-): Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-A neteg kim elig ağazka sevük erür 'just as the 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 185 
     
   
   
     DIS. hand is dear to the mouth” M 7 23, 6-7: Chr. Xarodis xan elğinde “in the hands R. King Herod” U I 9, 12: Bud. bata:r éllg be:Igürdl "he showed an opened hand” TT VIII Kis, elgi ertinilig yip epirer “their hands spin a jewelled thread' PP 46, 2; do. 63, 5 (adak); 8.0.0. in PP—dliglerinde “in their hands" TT V 10, 103; 0.0. do. 22, 47; 24, 51, etc.: Civ. beg tamğası elgipde “a beg's seal is in your hands” T'T I 129 (a.0.0.); ellgde H 77 31, 189; éligde do. 32, 2; öz elgin bitiyü tegindim 'I ventured to write this with my own hand” USPp. 15, 17; similar phr. do. ss, 35: elig tartip 'shaking hanğs" (on a bargain) do. 87, 4-5: Xak. xı elig af-yad "hand, forearm'; “the right hand” (al-yumna) is called o:) elig, in Oğuz sa:ğ elig, and “the left hand” (al-yadu'l-yusrá) so:l elig in both Kaş. I 72; about 40 o.o., KB mupadmis yárlinde elig tut mapa “in my difficult position hold my hand” 29; many o.o.: xını(?) At. ellg is common; Tef. both el and eliğ “hand, arm” are common 74, 75: XIV Muh. al-yadu'l-yusrá so: €dliğ Mel. 7, 15; Rif. 79; al-yusrá ditto 141 (only); al-yadu'l-yumnd şa:ğ é:lig 141 (only); asir ca mustad'af “prisoner, reduced to submission' elig asra:kı: 147 (only): Çağ. xv ff. élik (with -k) el... dast ma'násina 'hand' Vel. 7o, n (quotn.); él bu dax: el demehdir dast ma'násina do. 72 (quotn.); él dast (quotn.) also called élig; a and élig are terms ("ibárat) for (the hand) from the fingers to the wrist, and kol for (the arm) from the fingers to the shoulder San. 112v. 3; élg (*with -&amp;') dast do. 113r. 4 (quotn.; only with vowel suffixes); €Hk (by implication *with €-”) dast (quotn.), also called él and élg do. ırar. 1o (both forms occur in quotns. fr. Naderi): Xwar. xn el *hand' Ali 8: xiv elig ditto Qutb zo, él, élig do. ag, ditto MN 2, etc.; elig Nahc. 231, 13; 257, 16; 289, ır: Kom, xiv “hand” el CCI, CCG; Gr. : Kap. xın (after a list of fingers, etc.) macmit uw l-yad “the whole hand” é:1 Hou. zo, 17: xiv el (*with front vowel") a/-yad İd. zo: xv al-yad (kol, also) el Kav. 61, 1; kaff “the palm of the hand” él (and aya) Tuh. "ob. 8; yad él do. 39a. 7: Osm. xiv ff. phr. containing el c.ia.p. TT.S I 259 fT., II 367 fT., III 242 fl.; IV 285 ff. 1 ellig “fifty”. Certainly with double -11- (see Clauson, op. cit., s.v. ékki:) and, in view of the O. Kir. spelling, with initial e-, not é-. C.i.a.m.l.g. with phonetic variations. Türkü viri el(Dig yil “for fifty years” 7 E 8; el(1)ig yaşıma: "in my fiftieth year” 77 S 7: el(I)igce: er tutdımız “ve captured about fifty men” T 42: vini ff, Man. el(l)ig kün “fifty days” Chuas. 245: Uyğ. virt el(D)ig yıl Su. N 4: vir ff. Bud. bir el(Diğ orunlarda “in the forty one places” Sus. 133, 17: Civ. elig (so spelt) 5 occurrences in TT VIII L.; el(l)ig in several page numbers in TT'S 7, in USp. seven occurrences of el(I)ig; él(l)ig in 8, s: O. Kir. ix ff. yüz el(1)iğ Mal. 9, 3; el(Dig öküzin “his fifty oxen” do. ro, 2; ek(k)i: el(l)ig yaşım do. 21,2; üç el(1)iğ yaşım do.. 22, 3; tokuz el(l)ig yaşda: do. 48, 3: Xak ELG xı (in the fa''u! section) ellig yarma:k 'fifty coins! (etc.) 7 143; el(1)jg karı: bó:zin "with fifty cubits of cloth' 7 117, s: KB ellig yaşım 365 (tagdid on làm in Fergana MS.): xın(?) Tef. up E 74- 5 (at least one taşdid): xiv. Rbğ. él(l)ig R 1I 8:7 (quotn.): Muh. xamisün 'fifty' elli: Mel. 81, 14; él(I)i:g Rif. 187: Çağ. xv ff. éllig (with taşdid and -&amp;') elli Vel. 71 (quotns.); éllig (*with /dm-i mugaddada') "hfty” San. 113r. (quotn.): Xwar. xı ellig/ellà ' Ai 12: xiv €llig Qutb 49; MN 96: Kip. xır xamsin elli: (with taşdıd) Hou. az, iz: XIV. ditto İd. 21; Bul. iz, 13: xv ditto "Kat. 39, 6, 65, 8; Tuh. 6ob. 9. D 2 élig P.N./A. fr. 1 él; originally lit. “having a realm', it soon came to mean “king”, perhaps at first to supply a word with this meaning for translations of Bud. and Man. scriptures. In Uyğ. Bud. it is often combined, or alternates, with xa:n, q.v. It then came to be spelt, and perhaps pronounced, élig with a singl -1-, and perhaps, at some uncertain later date, ilig. In Persian it suffered further changes, e.g. to ?/ek, but this was prob. never really a Turkish word. Apart from the refces. below, the only survivals seem to be in NC Kir. eldü “populated”, eldik (r) 'democrat'; (2) in phr. calpı eldik “embracing all the people" , and possibly ilik or ilik cilik 'neighbour'. See Doerfer 11 661. “Türkü yı éllig (spelt with two Vs) bodun ertim ' we were a people with a realm of our own' 1 E 9, II E 8, o.o. 1 E 15, II E 13 (élsiret-); / E 18 (ditto); 7 E 29, I1 E 24 (aÉar); eci:m xağan eli: kamşağ boltukrnta: bodun él(l)igi: ekigü: boltukı:nta: “because my uncle the xağan”s realm became insecure and the people and their ruler came to be at variance” 7 N 3: vir ff. Man. tepri él(l)ig TT 1I 6, 27, etc.; éll)ig xan do. ro, 88; M III 14, 3 (iii) (igid-): Yen. él()ig er Mal. 26, ro (dubious, text chaotic): Uy$&amp;. vii ff. Man.-A (our gracious father) edgü kılınçlığ él(l)igemez “our beneficent king” M 7 To, 3-4: Man. 61(D1g begler “5egs who have a realm of their own' Wind. 250, 31: Chr. él(1)ig xan Maşıxa teprike “to the divine king, the Messiah' U 7 6, 16-17; a.o. do. 7, 2: Bud. él(l)ig is used in three ways: (1) as an Adj. qualifying xan, etc., e. m €1(1)iğ xan Suv. 314, 5; él(l)ig beg um 7 (i); Sanskrit raşfram “kingdom” élég gö 7 dusi TT VII C.ı, (2) after Proper Names, usually representing Sanskrit rájá *king', e.g. Prasenajl élig (so spelt) TT VIII H.2; Mağayt(?) él(l)ig PP 4, 2; o.o. U II 22, 5 and 8; (3) by itself as a Noun, e.g. kanı él(l)ig “his father the king” PP 6, s: Civ. Kadir Bilge tepri él(l)ig kuti “his divine majesty Kadir Bilge” Up. 88, 2şa.o. TT VII 9, 11 (sa:n): O. Kir. ix ff. Mal. 15, 3 (2 uya:): Xak.xı K B Küntugdi1 él(1)ig 353; many o.o. xiu(? KBVP ditto 68: xin(?) KBPP ditto 31-2; Tef. Madina éllig kişiler “the people of the city of Medina" 75: Çağ. xv ff. eliğ or ilg a title used on coins, no date specified R 1 816; ilek (spelt) (1) a place-name; (2) the title of the pádisah of the town of Yağma (Pe. 141  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 186 
     
   
   
     142 quotn.) San. 113r. 6: Xwar. wiv éllig 'belonging to (what?, etc.) country” Qut? 49: Osm. xiv éllü “the people of a realm' in one text TT S II 531. elik survives only(?) in several NE languages R I 815, 1484. including Khak. and Tuv.; NC Kır., Kzx., and SW xx Anat. SDD 524; most authorities. translate it 'roe-buck', but some 'female wild goat'; the original meaning was almost certainly 'roe-buck', rather than "roe-deer” in general, Türkü vii ff. IrkB 63 (içre:): Xak. xı KB elik külmiz “the roebuck and his doe' 79: xiri(?) At. qada birle İlnür tuzakka elik “by fate the roe-buck is caught in the trap” 456: Kip. xim al-£azál "male gazelle” élik (Tkm. 1:vuk) Hou. 11, 6: xiv. elik a/-gazàl İd. 21. S ellik See eliglik, ?D elü:g (?eló:g) *mockery, ridicule'; prima facie a N.Ac. fr. *elü:-. An early l.-w. in Mong. as eleg (with Den. V. elegle-; Kow. 205-6, Haltod 47). "Vhe modern forms, NE elek R 7 811; elik do. 815; Khak. Bas. 334; NW Kar. elik R 7 815; Kore. 185; Kaz. elek do. 811 look more like reborrowings fr. Mong. than direct survivals. Xak. xı. elü:g al-suxriya 'mockery' Kaş. I 122. D ilig Dev. N. fr. il-; “attachment” and the like. N.o.a.b., but see iliglig. "There are several modern words of similar forms and some may be descended from this word, e.g. SW xx Anat. ilik ceken 'the cords that tie the ends of a camel's wooden collar together" SDD 7586. Uy£f. vin ff, Bud. ev barklığ iligig tutuğuğ 'attachments and ties to home and household goods' US). 105, 7-8. D ölüğ N./A.S. fr. öl-, 'dead; a dead person, corpse. S.ia.m.lg. w. phonetic variations. NW Kaz. distinguishes between üli 'dead', and ülik “corpse” R 7 1849 but this is unlikely to reflect an earlier antithesis between ölüğ and ölük, the word is consistently spelt ölüğ in those alphabets, Runic and Manichean, which distinguish &amp; and k. See Doerfer II 621. Türkü vii tiripi: . . . ölüği: “those of you who survived . . . those of you who died' 1 N 9 (yurt), viri ff. (a dappled cow gave birth to a dappled calf . . .) ólü:&amp;de: ozml:ş TAB 41; this could conceivably mean 'was saved from death”, but the phr. used for this in 13, 17, and 49 is ólü:mde: ozmi:s, and the form in 41 is prob. a scribal error: Man. ol ólügke katıldı “he had intercourse with that dead (woman)' M I 5, 7; olo, 5, 8; 6, 4: Yen. tirig ölüğ ara: 'between the living and the dead” should perhaps be read in Mal. 26, r: Uyğ. vii ff. Man.-A ólügüg tiriglügeli (sic, but ?error for tiriğlegeli) “raising the dead” M I 24, 27-8: Bud. ölüğ teg "like a dead man” PP 61, 7; a.0. 26, 7; ölüğ kergeksiz yıdığ etöz “a dead, useless, stinking body” TT VI 229; 0.0. 284, 289: Xak. xı özlüğ (sic) al-mayyit “dead” Kaş. I 72 (in a section containing words with two short vowels, the ö:- is an error); DIS. ELG nine o.o., spelt ölüğ, al-mayyit: KB ólügdin tiriğke kumaru söz ol “this is a legacy fróm the dead to the living! 270: xııı(?) Ar. ólüg "dead, dead man" 17, etc. , Tef. ditto 245: xiv Rbg. ditto R 1 1249: Çağ. xv tf. ölük ('with -k”) murda “dead” Vel. 114; ölük (?sic) murda San. 86v. s (quotn.): Xwar. xmi?) ólüg “dead man” Og. 286, etc., ölüğ barğu 'inanimate booty” (as opposed to tiriğ barğu) do. 170: xiv Ölüğ “corpse” Quib 123: Kom. xiv. "dead, a dead man” ölü CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xri a/-mayyit ölü Hou. 26, 4: xiv ditto İd. zo: xv mayyit ÖH Tuh. 33b. 4. D ülüg Dev. N. fr. üle:- ; “share, part”, (in the sense of one of several equal shares or parts); hence, metaph., 'destiny, fate'. Less common in modern times than the syn. word ülüş but survives in NE (several dialects) ülü: £ 7 1850; "Tuv. ülüg, and, with a wide range of meanings, SW xx Anat. ülü SDD r43o. Türkü vri T 4 (2 atlığ, yada:ğ), ülügl: (?sic, not ölüği:) ança: ermis erinç "his fate was presumably this' (he attacked the enemy alone and was killed) Ix. 23: vit ff. IrkB. Postscript (alku:): Uyğ. vir ff, Man.-A in a metaphorical prescription yeti ülüg . . . bir ülüg . . . iki ülüğ “seven parts of . . . one of... two of ...' M III 32, 4-9 (i): Bud. tégin kuti ülügl üçün “because it was the prince's fortune and destiny! PP 33, s, similar phr. do. 64, r: Xak. xı ü:lüg (bi-rgmámi'l-alif. *with ü-, not ó-) a/-naşib 'fate, destiny! Kaş. I 72 (the long ü:- is an error, see ölüğ), 7 62, 19 (ülüş): KB ülüg normally means “share”, less often “destiny”, sometimes it contains implications of both; etóz ülgi barça boğuzdın kirer “the body's share alwhys enters by the throat' (and the soul's by the ear) 991; bayat kimke bérse 'ináyat ülüg “the man to whom God gives His favour as his destiny' 1797; "0.0. 179, 271, 832, 1292, 1829, 3726, 4282, 6496: Kip. xiv ülü: (^with front vowels'; and ülüş) a/-naşib İd. zo: Osm. xiv to xvii ülü “share, part; destiny' in several texts 77S 7 743; ll 950; İİİ 728; IV 802. D ülgü: (1) as N.Ac. 'measuring, weighing'; (2) as Conc. N. 'weighing machine, pair of scales'; presumably Dev. N. fr.*ül-, since it cannot either morphologically or semantically be derived fr. üle:-. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SE, with a wide range of meanings, usually *model, pattern', in such applications as “boot-last”. See Doerfer 11 539. Uyf. vin ff. Bud. ol buyanlığ ükmeknin ülgüsin tepin ülgülegeli sanağalı bolğay “it will be possible to measure and estimate the measure (Hend.) of that accumulation of merit” USp. 89, 1-2; similar phr. do. 4 and 14; Suv. 136, 22; 0.0. Hüen-ts. 134 (batur-), 1834: Xak. xı ülgü: al-faymán (Pe. paymán) "a measure” Kaş, I 129: KB (in the signs of the zodiac) ülgü *Libra, the Scales', 140: xiv Rbg. ditto (in the passage quoted fr. KB) R I 1254: Çağ. xv ff. ülgü (spelt with ü-, -ğ-) (1) andáza *measure, measuring'; (2) burc-i mizàán 'Libra' San. Sör. 16. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 187 
     
   
   
     TRIS.  D velğek Conc. N. fr. élge:-; 'sieve' (for solids, as opposed to süzgü: 'strainer' for liquids). No doubt an old word, although there is no certain early occurrence . S.i.a.m.l.g. in a wide variety of forms, usually elek, élek, ilek. "The alternative modern word kalbur is a corruption of Persian girbál. See Doerfer II 537. (Xak.) xiv Muh. (among the cook's implements) a/-munxal 'sieve' éile:k Mel. 64, 7; wn ezle:ki: Rif. 163: Çağ. xv ff. élek parwizan 'sieve', in Ar. munxal San. 112v. 8 (quotn.); Kom. xiv 'sieve' elek CCI; Gr.: Kip. xır al-munxal ele:k (alif unvocalized) Hou. 17, 13: xiv elek: al-munxal; wa'l-hàf li'l-àla "the -k is (the Suff.for an implement" İd. 22: xv munxal elek Tuh. 34a. 10; 49a. 8. S elgin See yelgin, C? élgün See 1 él ülker “the constellation of the Pleiades'; Kaş. alone gives a second meaning, but since most 'Turkish star names are names of other objects (black bird”, *white stallion', etc.) used metaph. it is possible that this was the original meaning. S.i.a.m.l.g. usually as ülker and the like. Forms like ürker in some NC and SC languages are a fairly recent corruption. Uy£. vin ff. Civ. ülker yultuz “the 1i8th lunar station” TT VII sz, document "T. II D. 79, 1 (see Clauson, “Early "Turkish Astronomical "Terms”, UA7 XXXV D. 363): Xak. xı ülker al-turayyá 'Pleiades'; and in war “an ambush' (kayd) is called ülker çeriğ, it is operated as follows, yutakattabu'l-cund katà'ib kata'ib min kull ab “the army is broken up into detachments (posted) in various places', and when one detachment falls back (karrat) the others follow after it, and by this device qallamà yanhazim “(the enemy) is often routed" Kaş. I gs (ülker çeriğ thus means literally "an army made up of (a group of) detachments”, a good simile for a group of stars), ülker a/-furayyü IIl 40, r1 (yultuz): KB ülker savilmis başı “the Pleiades were declining' 4889, 6216: xiv Muh. al-turayyda ülger (-8marked) Mel. 79, 8; ü:lker Rif. 183: Çağ. xvff. ürker (si) nüm-i sitára-i parwin *Pleiades', in Ar. ?urayyá San. 71r. 19: X war. xiv ülker ditto Quib 123 (ölRer), 203: Ktp. xit al-turayyü ülker Hou. 5, s: xiv ditto İd. 22; Bul. 2, 14: xv ditto Tuh. 8b. 8: Osm. xiv ditto in one text TS 7 743 (as there pointed out ülger 'the face of a woven fabric' is a corruption of Persian r&amp;y kár). Dis. V. ELGélge:- “to sift (a solid substance Zcc.), pass (it) through a sieve'. S.i.a.m.l.g., often with -6elided; the variations (e-, é-, i-) in thc initial point to an original é-. Contrast süz- 'to strain (a liquid). Uyğ. vin ff. Civ. tevenin övkesin kutirip (error for kuritip) sokup elğep “dry, crush, and sift a camel's lung? H I 60; o.o. 77, rir, İnçğe elgep 'sift it finely H II 12, 13; 8.0.0.: Xak. xr ol uin elge:di: “he sifted (naxala) the flour' (etc.) ELG 143 Kaş. 1 284 (elğe:r, elge:me:k): xiv Muh. naxala €:le:- Mel. 31, 12 (mis-spelt €:/eR-), Rif. 115; naxlu'l-dagiq ele(mak in error) 37, 6; 123: Çağ. xv ft. éle- “to sift (bixtan wa élek Rardan) flour, etc. with a sieve', San. 110v. zo (quotn.): Kip. xırı naxala ele:- (unvocalized) Hou. 34, 2: xiv. ele- ('with front vowels') naxala İd. 22: xv naxala éle- Tuh. 37b. 4. D élget- Caus. f. of élge:-. S.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı ol u:n elgetti: (sic in MS.) anxala'l-dagiq "he had the flour sifted” Kaş. 7 264 (elgetür, elgetme:k). D élgel- Pass. f. of élge:-. Survives only in NE Khak. flgel- “to be sifted'; Kız. elgel“to shiver'; Koib. élgel- “to clatter' R 7 8:2; for these metaph. meanings cf. élgen- (Kom.). Xak. xı u:n elgeldi: “the flour (etc.) was sifted” Kaş. I 250 (elgelür, elğelme:k). D élgen- Refl. f. of €lge:-, also used as Pass. S.i.s.m..g. in NC, SW. Xak. xi ura:gut u:n elgendi: “the woman sifted flour for herself” Kaş. 1 255 (el&amp;enür, elgenme:k): Kom. XiV “to be frightened' (prob. lit. “to shiver”, cf. élgel-) elgen- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv elennuxila İd. 20. PU ilgün- Hap. leg.; perhaps an error for éléen- “to be shaken'. Uy$é. vur ff, Man. yeme kamağ üküş 1 ığaç otlar ol yel tepri küçin ilğünmekin tuğar “and all shrubs, trees, and plants come into existence by reason of the strength and shaking(?) of the wind god” Wind. 249, 6-8. D élges- Co-op. f. of élge:-. S.i.s.m.]. Xak. xı ol anar u:n elgesti: “he helped him to sift the flour'; also used for competing Kaş. 7 238 (elğeşü:r, elğeşme:k). Tris. ELG D öll:ge: Hap. leg.; Dev. N. fr. öli:-, presumably in the sense of something moist and Sticky. "The MS. is stained at this point and al-gart, which is not shown with this meaning in the dicts. is perhaps an error. Xak. xi öli:$e: nabtu'l-dibq teca. Inaca'l-5art "the plant which produces bird-lime” Kaş. 7 137. D elici: Hap. leg.; N.Ag. fr. eliğ, presumably “one who works with his hands”, but the passace may be corrupt. "The word so read in USSp. 57, 13 is an error for alımçı. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (I wil) explain a device for dealing with the matter; the birds and crows will not damage your fruit); ötrü yemişin eliğçi er élteyin “and then I will bring in your fruit as a labourer(?) PP 75, 4-5. D eliglig (?éliglig sce TT VIII) P.N./A. fr. elig; usualy preceded by qualifying Adj., “having . . . hands'. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. elli, Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. yumşa:k éliglig (sic) a:da:klığ e:rür “has soft hands and feet' “TT VIII G.58; (arms) uzun körkle éliglig *with long beautiful hands! Suv. 349, 2-3: Xak. xı Kaş. 1 336 (sal sul): Osm. xiv elli elinde “vith his own hands' TTS 77 373. EMMEEEE—————— s—À)nmse €i o, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 188 
     
   
   
      144 D eliğlik A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. elig; "xlove, gauntlet'. Survives only(?) in NE éltek, ellik, etc. R 7 824, 826, 1492; SW xx Anat. ellik, enlik, ennik S DD 525, 539. Xak. xi eliglik al-quffazdn "a pair of gloves or gauntlets' Kaş. 1 153: Kip. xiv. ellik al/- quffàz ; compounded of el “hand” and -lik a/-/áfuq "afama Ir. ud 'dád 'suffix designating (kinds of) equipment' İd. 21: Osm. xv and xvi ellik 'glove' in several texts. T'TS 1I 246; IV 290. D ültüglüg P.N./A. fr. ülüg; lit, “having a share, or destiny”, but normally “having a good destiny, fortunate. N.o.a.b. Türkü virt ff. Man. kutluğ ülüglüg él(l) xan “the divinely favoured fortunate king” TT II ro, 87-8: Uyğ. Man.-A ülüglüg kutluğ bodun biz M İİİ 29, 2 (iii): Bud. kutluğ ülüglüg (or vice versa) U /T 15, s, PP 21, 4; Suv. 474, 21: Civ. TT I 154-5 (oğul: Xak. xı bilig kişi: ara: ülüglüg ol “visdom is shared out (maqsiim) between people” Kaş. I s11, 25 (grammatical example); n.m.e. D ülgülüg P.N./A. fr. ülgü:; lit. “having measure', but normally 'suitable, appropriate, fitted to its task'. Survives in NE Khak., NC Kır., Kzx.; NW Kaz. R 11343; SW xx Anat, SDD 1430. Xak.xı KB birisi yalavaç till ülgülüg 'one is the envoy, whose tongue is fitted to his task” 2733; kilinçi kóni ol isi ülgülüg 'his acts are upright and his deeds appropriate! 1837; o.o. 2501, 6008: xiv Mu. (?) şay” matwzün “a thing which is of full weight, harmonious' and the like ü:lgu:lüg (first -6- marked) Rif. 188 (only). D ülgülencsiz Priv. N./A. fr. Dev. N. fr. Refl. f. of ülgüle:-; 'immeasurable, inestimable'. Pec. to Uvg., syn. vv, ülgüsüz. Uyğ. viniff. Bud. ülgülençsiz tenlençsiz buyan edgü kiılıncığ, 'inestimable and immeasurable merits and good deeds” Su, 151, 5-7; sinilar phr. do. 45, 2-3; 360, 11-12; ülğülençsiz üküş Hiien-ts. 2041 (1 us-). D ilgerü: (*ilkgerü:) abbreviated Directive f. of ilk; normally 'forwards' of space, and in the earliest period, when the cardinal points were fixed by facing east, 'eastwards'; later also sometimes of time, "earlier, preceding'. S.ia.m.lg. w. phonetic variations. Türkü viii İlğerü: is common and normally means 'eastwards', e.g. ilğerü: kün tuğsukda: “in the Fast” 7 E 8, I1 E 8: Uyğ. ix ilgerü: kün tuğsuk (gap) IJ] B 7 (ETY II 38): vir ff Man.-A yokaru kodi ilğerü kérü atı éstilmis 'whose name has been heard above, below, in front, and behind” M 7 26, 26-7: (Xak.) xırı(?) Tef. ilgerüfilerü 'forwards; before (of time)” 124: xiv Muh. qabl *before, in front” (of place) İslerü: Mel. 14, 11; Rif. go, tagaddama “to go forwards! lle:rü: két- (in margin) 24, 9 (only); al-waladu'l-atınval “eldest son” ile:rü: oğul 49, To (tun 144): Çağ. xv ff. ilgeri seri Vel. 77; ilgeri biş dadd-i bas “before, in front”, opposite to “after, behind” San. 1i13r. 2 (quotn): Xwar. xui?) ilerü ketdiler “they went  TRIS.  ELG forwards! Og. 215; i.0.0.: xiv ilgerü 'forwards' Qutb. 58: Kom. xiv. 'forwards, in front' ilgeri CCI, CCG; Gr. 106 (quotn.): Kip. quddàm "in front” (opposite to “behind” keru:) yülge:ri: (sic, in error) Hou. 26, 19: xiv Hgeri: a/-ateıval 1d. 21; (of time) qabl i:le:rü: Bu. 13, 10: xv (of place) quddám ilgeri (and ileyin) Kav. 35, 4; amüm "in front of” ilgerl Tu). 5a. 6; 73b. 7; Osm. xiv ff. ilerü (as latc as xvi) fileri (as early as xv) “before” both of time and place, and as Adj., Adv., and Postposition (with 445L.) and in phr.; c.ia.p. TTS 1 372-3; 11 524-5; 11 362-3; IV 415-17. D iligsiz Hap. leg.; Priv. N./A. fr. ilig. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. Sanskrit asayyamdnakdyena 'with a body not attached (to this world)' ili:znme:yü etöz üze: and iligsiz etöz üze: TT VIII 4.40. D ilkisiz Priv. N./A. fr. ilki:(ilk), lit. “having nothing before it". Pec. to Uyğ. Bud. Uyğ. vini ff. Bud. ilkisiz uzun sansardın berü “since the immermorially old, long chain of rebirths (Sanskrit sazsaára) began” Suv. 133, 12; similar phr. TT IV 4, 19; ilkisizdin berüki kılmış '(sins) committed from time immemorial' do. 14, 62; similar phr. do. 6, 23; 8, 53. D ülügsüz Priv. N./A. fr. ülüg; 'unfortunate, ill-fated”. N.o.a.b. Also occurs in some Bud. texts as a mis-spelling of ülgüsüz. Uyğ. vit ff. Bud. (therefore. the people of this world) kutsuz ülügsüz erür 'are unfortunate and ill-fated' TT VI 7; a.o. do. 8 (in both cases with v.l. ülgüsüz): Xak. xi K B (people without understanding) ülüğsüz turur “are ill-fated' 296. ? D ólgüsüz HE leg.(?); Priv. N./A. fr. *ólgü: N.Ac. fr. ól-; 'immortal'. Xak. xı KB (what is born dies, but words remain as a memorial) sözün edgü sözle özün ólgüsüz “speak good words and you vourself will be immortal" 180. D ülgüsüz Priv. N./A. fr. ülgü:; 'immeasurable, inestimable'. Survives only(?) in SW XX Anat. 'shapeless' SDD 143o. Cf. ülgülencsiz. Uyğ. vir ff. Man, ülküsüz (sic, in error) sansız tınlığlarka “to innumerable (Hend.) mortals” TT III 102: Bud. ülgüsüz sansız tınlığlarığ Suv. 267, 13-14; do. 584, 12-13 (uçsız), ülğüsüz üküş TT VII qo, 12; USp. 102b. 7; Suv. 31, 2; ülğüsüz (mis-spelt ülügsüiz) buyan edgü kihnc 'innumerable merits and good deeds! TT V 6, qo, 8, 7452.0. Suv. zr, 16 (kolusuz): (Xak.) xın(?) Tef. (we have mentioned a few here) üynt tafsiri ülgüsüz bolmasun tép 'in order that the interpretation of the verses may not be unduly prolix' (?, Borovkov translates *without illustrative examples', but this is improbable) 338 (s.v. ülgü). Tris. V. ELGD eligle:- (? éligle:-) Den. V. fr. ellg; “to handle, seize with the hand', and the like.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 189 
     
   
   
      DIS. ALM Survives in NE Tuv. iligle- “to measure in thumb's breadths'; SE Tar. ilikle- ditto R I 1485; and elle- “to handle', etc. in some NW and SW languages. Uyf. vil ff, Bud. bu bıçak éligleyü 'taking this knife in their hands! U IV 32, ?: Çağ. xv ff. élikle- ('with -k-”) ele götür- "to take up in one's hand" Vel. 71 (quotns.); éllkle- ba-dast áwardan eva dastgir kardan 'to take in one's hand, to seize' San. 112r. 15 (quotn.). D elüğle:- Den. V. fr. elü:g “to ridicule, mock'. In the MS. of Kaş. the lám is vocalized both with Rasra and damma. Survives in some NE languages as elekte-/elikte-; NC Kir., Kzx. elikte-; NW Kaz. elekle-; cf. elü:g. Xak. xi ol anı: elüğle:di: hazr”a bihi tva saxira minhu “he ridiculed and mocked him” Kaş. I 307 (verse; elüğle:r, elüğle:me:k): xu?) Tef. saxira elüğle- 76: xiv Muh. tatodqaha “to be impudent, insolent” é:rügle(?) Mel. 24, 13; Rif. 106 (seems to belong here, but the MSS. show a wide range of vocalization, é:rigle-, öriglü-, eyürkle-, üyergele-, dyergüle-): Kom. xiv "to mock” elikle- CCI, CCG, Gr.: Kip. xv a'ába “to put (someone) a élikle- Tu. şa. 13; 'ayyaba ditto 25b. 9. D ülgüle:- Den. V. fr. ülgü:; "to measure, estimate', etc. Survives only(?) in NC Kzx. ülgüló-, Tob. ülgüle- R 7 1:859. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud, USp. 89, 1-2; 4-5 (ülgü:): Xak. X1 KB (if you hide perfume, its smell makes it obvious) billig kizlese sen tiliğ ülgüler “if you hide wisdom, it gives measure to the tongue' 312; açayın sözümni sana ülgülep *] will reveal my speech to you measuring (my words)' 792; (in the year 462) bitiyü tükettim bu sóz ülgüle 'I finished writing this treatise, measuring (my words) 6495: xiv Muh.(?) al-wazn “to weigh' ülgü:lemek Rif. 126 (misspelt igiürlema:k, unvocalized; Mel. 39, 3 da:rtmak). D eligles- (? éligleg-); Recip. f. of eligle:-; "to grasp one another by the hands' and the like. Survives only(?) in SW Az., Osm., Tkm. elles-. Xak. xı KB (he and the king bade one another good-bye) eligleşti kaldi €1(1)iğ kadgura “they shook hands, and the king stayed there grieving' 5445: xın(?) Tef. eligles- 'to hold one another's hands' 75: Cağ. xv ff. élikles- Recip. f., bà yah-digar dastbüzi kardan wa dast áawardan "to engage in horse-play and grasp one another” San. 112v. 1: Osm. xv ff. elles (1) (in a friendly fashion) “to shake hands'; (2) (in a hostile fashion) “to grapple with one another'; in several texts TTS I 263; II 373; III 245; IV 289. D ölüğse:- Hap. leg.; Desid. Den. V. fr. Oólüg. Xak. xı er ölüğse:di: “the man wished he was dead” (an yahün mayyit) Kaş. I 303 (ólügse:r, ölüğse:me:k). Dis. ALL VU aal a respectful word fər “yes”, Pec. to Xak. Xak. xı lal harf soa ma'nàhu na'am; ' 145 ludatu'l-xàgüániya an Exclamation meaning "yes”, a word in the Xakani (here probably, more technically “court”) language; used in answering amirs (begs) and kings Kaş. İ 28: K B (at the end of an interview with the king) Hal tép turup çıktı Öğdülmiş-e “Ögdülmiş said “yes”, stood up and went out” 3946, 5027, 5668. ?E ülül Hap. leg. [n the text below both Is are marked as doubtful, and while ülül is a possible Dev. N. fr. *ül-, it seems more likely that the word should be read uyu ! gyu g, ülgügğ. Uyğ. vri ff. Bud. Sanskrit mátrakàri "a maker of measures! uyu lyu(?) lyu(?) g kıltaçı TT VIII 4.45. Dis. V. ALLD alıl- Pass. f. of al-; “to be taken, received”, etc. A rare word usually replaced by the Ref. f. alan-. Survives only(?) in NE Tel. R J 378. Uyğ. viu ff. Bud, Sanskrit bhrtà 'salaried, paid a wage' terke: a:lilmis TT VIII D.43: (Xak. xı KB 782 alilgil v.l. in Vienna MS. for alingil): xiv Muh. (in a section on the Pass. f.) axada aldı:, uxida alıldı: Rif. 129 (Mel alindi:). D ula:l- Pass. f. of ula:- , “to be joined (together), attached'. N.o.a.b. A quite different verb ulal- “to become big, or bigger' (now obsolete?) is noted in Çağ., Xwar., Kip., and Osm. fr. xır onwards; it is obviously ultimately derived fr. uluğ but is inexplicable morphologically. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. Sanskrit anubadhnáti "he fastens on” (sic Active,) éyin ula:lur TT VIII F.14; (let us now have recited) bu nomnup képürü ulalmış sü tıltağın "the widely attached preface (Chinese l-w.)—root of this scripture! Suv. 2, 4—5: (Xak.) xırr(?) Tef. (some say that) su'übu(n) şeherlerde ulalmış “the (sedentary) tribes are attached to (Borovkov “reside in”) towns' 325. Tris. ALL E élilig Hap. leg.; no doubt a mis-spelling of éllig perhaps due to overemphasis on the fact that the word contained two P”s. Uyğ. viri ff. Man. (you were born as a divine teacher) bar €liliğ kóg kalığ yüzinte “in the face of the sky over all realms” TT [II 129. Dis. ALM D alım N.S.A. fr. al-, lit. "a single act of taking, or receiving, in practice usually “a debt' (due to oneself), or “a tax” (taken by the government). S.i.m.m.l.g. vv. à wider range of meanings including “purchase”, See bérim. Uy$£. vin ff. Civ. (in alease: “if Igeta crop from the land and”) bérim alim kelse “if debits and credits arise' USSp. 11, 7-8; 19, 6-7; (66, 7-8); 0.0. do. 32, 2; 111, 5 (üzüş-), Xak. xı alım al-daynwu lladi "ala”l-insdn "a debt which is due to a man” Kaş, 7 75 (prov.); 1 43 (10:6); HI 252 (öte:-), alım bérim II 1:85, 2 (sagtur-); 214, 15 (satğaş-): I1] 288, 8 (satğa:-), a.o.o.: KB MU M onÜ—Á—n rns — əsv 7zıxçKxs0mrst-btcĞ.oo—xXV-—ox-——oxVXVx----——- ə. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 190 
     
   
   
     146 DIS. ALM  kayusı bérim teg kayusı alım “some of them are like a debt one owes, some like a debt owed to one” 309: Osm. xiv to xvi alim “a debt due to oneself' in several texts; alim satim 'buying and selling, commerce' once (xvi) TTS 1 20; HI 16; IV 17. D ulam N.S.A. fr. ula:-; lit. "a single act of attachment', in practice, rather indefinitely, 'continuous, lasting, permanent”. Survives in several NE languages R 7 1375, 1687; Khak., Tuv.; NC Kir.; SW xx Anat. SDD 1415, 1416. See Doerfer 11 522. Uyğ. vini ff. Civ. (my female slave named (PU) 'Tolat) men Kalımtunın kisidin ulam sfatip) almış *whom I Kalimmtu had bought irrevocably(?) from my wife! USp. $56, 4-s (a peculiar transaction, perhaps mistranslated), ulam yarlığ bértürü yarlıkayuk ermiş “he deigned to command that an irrevocable(?) order should be given” do. 88, 9: Xak. xı KB (present to His four worthy Companions innumerable greetings) kesüksüz tutaşı ulam “uninterrupted, constant, and continouns' 31; kesüksüz ulam ör, 1348; kiçiğ oğlanığ kör ukuşka ulam “see that the small boy is constantly attached to understanding! 203; (if medicines were effective against death) otaçı turu kalğay erdi ulam "the physician would be permanently in attendance” 1199; o.o. 3714, 5490: xi(?) KƏVP yeme ésleripe salam ham ulam “and also continuous grcetings to His Companions' 7: xın(?) At. (the wise man . . .) tirildi ulamsız ulamı bolup 'spends his life attached to those who have no (other) attachment'(?) (and dies leaving a good reputation) 239; Tef. ulam artukluk 'an addition attached'(?) 325: Xwar. xiv ulam 'continuous' (greetings; cf. KB 31) 116: (Kom. xiv ulam is used as a Postposn. with the Abl. meaning “by means of, through”, and the like; it is difficult to see how this meaning evolved CCG, Gr. 265(quotns.)). D ölüm N.S.A. fr. ól- ; a single act of dying, “death”. C.ia.p.a.]. Türkü vin ff. ölü:mde: ozmi:ş "he escaped death” IrkDB 13, 17, 49 (and see ölüğ): Uyğ. vir ff. Man.-A ölüm küni “the day of death” M I1 11, t1 (i): Man. ölüminte TT 7/1 ışo: Chr. ölüm teğinmişi *how he met his death” U 7 9, 11: Bud, ölüm yeri “the land of death” PP 16, 7; 26, 3; 29, 8: ölüm ödi “the time of death” U 71I 43, 28; a.o.o. Xak. xı ölüm al-matet “death” Kaş. I 75; a.o.o.: KB ölüm 1170 (1 acid), 295, 881, 1067, etc.: xir(?) At, ölümdin ön-e “before death” 12; Tef. ölüm 'death' 245: xiv Muh. al-mavct ölüm Mel. 45, 6; Rif. 138: Çağ. xv ff. ölüm (r) marg “death”, ((2) “the foam on camel's milk! is a corruption of Mong. öröme, same meaning (Kow. 584, Haltod 114)): Xwar. xiv ölüm “death” Qutb 123; MN 145, etc.: Kom. xiv ditto CC], CCG, Gr.: Kip. xiv ditto Bul. 5, 11: xv ditto Tuh. 33b. 4. ?F alma: “apple”, cf. almila:. The double form, and the fact that the apple is unlikely to have been native to the original "Turkish habitat, suggest that this is a 1.-w., possibly Indo-European. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE where Russian yabloko (a recent l.-w.) is used instead ; in SW Osm. but not Az., Tkm. pronounced elma. See almahk. (Xak.) xiv Muh. al-tuffáh 'apple' alma: Mel. s, 7; 6, 2; 78, 13; Rif. 77, 183: Oğuz xı alma: a/-tuffah, the Turks call it almıla: Kaş, 1 130: Xvvar, xiv alma 'apple' Qutb 8; MN 110: Kom. xiv ditto CCİ, Gr.: Kip. xin af-tuffáh. alma: Hou. 7, iş: xiv ditto fd. 22; a.o. do. 17 (18a): XV ditto Kav. sg, 3 (and see 1526); Tult. ga. 2: Osm. xiv ff. alma: “apple” in several texts TTS zı, Il 29. VU?D olma: "ir, pitcher'; morphologically Dev. N. fr. 1 ol-, but it is hard to see any semantic connection. N.o.a.b. Xak. xr olma: al-carra “iar, pitcher” Kaş. I 130; 0.0. I 375, 21 (kurug); // 234, 24 (kutrul-); IJI 182, 13 (sız-): xiv Muh. al-carra (mis-spelt acarra) o:lma: Mel. 6, 2; Rif. 77; al-qulla "earthenware jug, pitcher' o:lma: 170 (only). VUF almır used only in the Hend. az almır *overwhelming desire, lust”, corresponds to Sanskrit trsnd. Pec. to Uyg.; no doubt, like 2 &amp;:z, a l.-w., possibly Iranian but not Sogdian. Uyğ. viu ff. Bud. U TT 11, 15; 12, 16; : TT VI 71; olo, in do., p. 59 note 71. Tris. ALM D alımçı: N.Ag. fr. alını, 'creditor', with some implication of activity in the collection of debts; contrast alımlığ. Survives only(?) in NE Tel, alımçı 'debt collector R 7 385. Uyğ. vui ff. Bud. alımçılarım “my creditors? Suv. 10, 16; o.o. do. 8, 12; 18, 12: Civ. alımçılarim ma telim bolup “and as I have many creditors” USp. 32, 3; in do. 57, 13 in a list of persons who may not object to a sale, read bizn[ip] urlukumuz özlüğümüz alımçımız berimçimiz ağamız inimız *ovr progeny, blood relations(?), creditors, debtors, elder and younger brothers': Xak. xı alı:smçı: arsla:n b€:ri:mçi: sicfa:n “a creditor is (like) a lion, and a debtor (like) a mouse” Kaş. 1 75, 18; 409, 9; n.m.e. C €lımğa: See 1 imğa:. ?F almıla: “apple”, cf. alma. Pec. to Xak.; prob a l-w. Xak. xi almila: al-tuffáh *apple! Kaş. 1 138; o.o. I, 130, 11 (a1ma:); JI 311, 19; 111 272, 19. D alımlığ P.N./A. fr. alım, originally "creditor, one who is due to receive money”, . contrast alımçı:, Survives with the same meaning in various forms in NE R 7 385, including Khalk., and as alımlı 'capable, attractive! in SW Osm. and xx Anat. Xak. xi alımlığ er ai-raculu'l-dá'íin "creditor” Kaş. 7 148; a.o. / 240, 5 (üzlüş-). D almalık A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. alma:, "apple orchard'. Survives in its literal meaning in some NW and SW languages, but used as a place-name over a much wider area. Does not occur in any Turkish text before xv, and then | | :  “EUNNaamaas6qçanasl0dammm6zc6ce:1dlcxoxoxoı.“sə?sBs...-— 0000000000. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 191 
     
   
   
     DIS. ALN only as a place-name, but occurs as a placename in a Sogdian document found at Mount Mug in Fergana which can be firmly dated to the first quarter of vir, [t is unfortunately impossible to determine which of the various places with this name is referred to, but it must have been within reasonable distance of Fergana, and the name must be a legacy from the period when the Western Türkü ruled in this area. Türkü vir in a much damaged Sogdian document, Br, relating to the issue of various kinds of military equipment, quivers, weapons, etc. it is stated (l. 4) that 'dmdwké yof mr'z “the , assistant. to the governor of Almaluk' (Sdgdian d (Hebrew lamed) here used with its original value 7) received five weapons of an uncertain kind, M. N. Bogolyubov and O, I. Smirnova Sogdiiskre dokumenty s gory Mug; III, Khozyaistvennye dokumenty, Moscow, 1963, p. 44: Caf. xvff. almalığ “the name of a town in Turkistan two weeks journey from Beş Baliğ ...'; its literal meaning is sibistan “apple orchard” San. sor. 22. 7 D ólümlüg P.N./A. fr. ölüm , “mortal” in the sense of 'destined to die", S.i.m.m.l.g. in this sense, and, less often, “deathly, certain to kill”. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. Sanskrit Ralakramena “in the, course of time” ölölmllöğ kezik birle: a:zu üze: lit. “vith, or in, the eycle of mortality” (ie. repeated (births aid) deaths) TT VIII D. 28-9: Çağ. xv ff. ölümlüğ (or -k?) kuştani wa wücibu'l- qatl *destined to be killed, deserving death” Sar. 86v. 11A: Xwar. xiv ólümlüg 'mortal' Qutb 123: Kom. “mortal” ólümlüx CCG; Gr. D ulamsız Hap. leg. See ulam Af. Tris. V. ALMD alımsın- Refl. Simulative Den. V. fr. alım. Survives only(?) in NC Kir. alımsın"to be satisfied, satiated'. Xak. xr ol mendi:n yarma:k alımsındı: “he pretended to take (ard an. ya'xud) money from me” (but did not actually do so) Kaş, I 20, 13 (grammatical example); n.m.e. Dis. ALN 1 alap basic meaning uncertain; it seems to be “level open ground' with some implication that it is, in particular, 'an area of open level ground, a clearing, in a forest”. Survives in this meaning as alan in NW Kaz. RI 359; - SW Osm. and xx Anat. SDD 9o and 139 (aylan); in the last it also means “level open ground” in general. Tkm. alan now means 'hill, high ground'. See Doerfer II 544. Xak. xı alap yazı: al-qá'u'l-garqar "level soft ground'; it is a metathesis (qa/5) of ap1l “an open door Kaş. I 135 (the etymology is preposterous): Çağ. xv ft. alap (spelt) bulandihà . . . ki dar atraf-i nahrhd-yi şikasta bágad 'heights in the neighbourhood of broken (i.e. winding?) rivers' San. 49v. 17 (quotn.). 2 *alap See alapad-. 147 alın “orehead”, perhaps with some extended meanings. "The extent of these depends on the question whether various words in oblique cases are to be taken as derived fr. alin or fr. 3 al, q.v., with a Poss. Suff. Alın “forehead” survives only in SW Az., Osm., Tkm.; elsewhere it has been displaced by l.-w.s, usually Mong. maylay, less often Pe. pigina. Uyğ. vrr ff. Bud. alınka tamğakka yürekke teğürüp 'touching the forehead, the throat, and the (region of the) heart' (with the left ring-finger) TT V 16 note A 54, 6: Civ. biçin künde alinda bolur 'on the Monkey Day (the soul) is in the forehead' TT VII rg, ro, alın lakşanındın "from the sign (Sanskrit 1.-vv.) on the forehead” do. 41, 29: (if the eyes are weak and watery) balık ótin közke alınka sürtser “if one rubs fish's gall on the eyes and forehead” H I 155-6: 0.0. do. 157, 159: Xak. xı alın a/-cabha “the forehead'; alın al-hayd va'l-rukh “the convex parts and slopes' of any mountain Kaş. / 78, alın töpü: yaşardı: "the $ummits of the mountains (qulalı /-cibül) have become green with vegetatıon” JI 79, 18: KB açuk tut yüzümni yaruk tut alin “keep your face open and your forehead bright" 5222; a.o. 2371 (kirğil): xim?) At, (the world smiles and then) alın kaş çatar 'wrinkles its forehead and eyebrows' 205; Tef. alin “forehead” 49: xiv Muh. al-cabha alı:n Mel. 46, ır, Rif. 140: Kom. xiv 'forehead' alın CCI; Gr.: Kip. al-cabha alin. Hou. zo, 1: xiv ditto İd. 19: xv cabha (maylay; in margin) alın Tu. 11a. 12. ulun “a thin stick, or shoot”, hence “the shaft of an arrow'. Survives in SW xx Anat. ulun “the root of a wheat or barley plant" SDD 1417. 'The word is not recorded in early Cağ. dicts. but P. de C. somewhere found a word ulup “arrovv-shaft” which he entered twice, one starting alif-lám, etc. (p. 35) and once alıf sodo lam, etc., p. 80); these entries were much distorted in R I 388, 1852 and (ŞS. UYĞ. vit ff. Bud. yıltızların ulunların butikların yapırğakların "the roots, shoots, branches, and leaves” (of various flowering and fruit trees) Suv. 529, 7-9: Xak. xr ulun qidhw'l-nibál "the shaft of an arrow' Kaş. I 78. D ölep Dev. N. fr. óli:-; 'grass', esp. 'fresh growing grass'; hence, by extension 'a grassy meadow'. S.i.a.m.l.g.; in SW only . and xx Anat. There is, supposedly another ölep meaning “a wedding song” noted in San. 86r. 21 and surviving in NC Kir., Kzx., and SW Tkm., but this meaning prob. derives from the fact that the refrain (quoted in Sar. and Tkm.) is hay ólep hay ölep, which looks like a metaph. reference to the bride. See Doerfer II 620. Uyğ. viriff. Bud. bir kuruğ ólepde “in a dry meadow' Suv. 599, 13: 8.0. do. 31, 19: Çağ. xv ff. ölen muğlaq sabzazár 'meadow' in general Vel. 112 (quotn.); ölep (spelt) sabza ta sabzazár 'fresh vegetation, meadow' San. 86r. 19 (quotn.). D*ahnce See alınçlığ. D ilenç N.Ac. fr. ilen-; 'reproof, reproach'. Survives with the rather stronger meaning 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 192 
     
   
   
      148 DIS 'imprecation, curse' in SW Osm. Xak. xi ilenc ta"yir 'ala'l-mugir fi amr badà fihi xalal ra yihi "a reproach to an adviser on a matter in which the faultiness of his views has become apparent! 7 133; 1/1 450; (after ilen-) hence al-maláma “a reproof' is called ilenç 1204: KB 1610 (1 saril-); Osm. xiv to. xvi. flenç 'reproach' in several texts; /a"ana "to curse' ilenç et- (xvi) TTS I 371; // s24: İİİ 361; IV 415. D uling N./A.S. fr. ulin-; (of a road) “vinding, not straight. Pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı ulinc yo:l al-tariqu'l-multatoi wa. laysa. bi'l-mustawi "a road which is winding and not straight'; also used of anything winding Kaş. J 133; 111 450 (misvocalized). Dis. V. ALND alın- Refl. f. of al-; originally "to take for oneself”, with the same range of meanings as al-. S.i.a.m.l.g., usually in a Pass. sense. Uyğ. vui ff. Bud. teğinmek nomuğ ózke ahnip taking for oneself the doctrine (Sanskrit dharma) of perception” TT V 24, 74; a.o. USp. aş, 4: O. Kir. rx ff. beş yegirmi: yaşda: alınmışım kuncuyma: (I have been parted) 'from my wife whom I took (in marriagc) at the age of fifteen” Mal. ır, r: Xak. xı ol alımın alındı: infarada bi-qabd daynihi "he acted alone in collecting the debt due to him”, without the help of others Kaş. I 203 (alinur, alınma:k), similar phr. 77 159, 3) ol yarma:kın alındı: "he applied himself solely to collecting (istabadda bı-qabd) his money” I 22, r: KB yigitlik yava kilma asğın alın “do not waste youth, take its advantages for yourself” 360; o.o. 782, 1333, 4455: Xi (?) Ar. uluğluk mapa siz alınman tédi (God) said, *'greatness is mine, do not take it for yourself" ” 284; Tef. alın- "to be taken” 49: xiv Mu. uxida “to be taken” alın- Mel. 4o, 13 (Rif. alıl-): Çağ. xv ff. ahin- grriftár sudan "to be taken” San. 47r. 13: Kip. xiv alin - vida fd.21: Osm. xtv to xvr alın- "to be captivated, fascinated by (someone Dat.)' in several texts 77. I zo, İl 28; other meanings not listed in T'T'S. D éllen- Refl. f. of élle:-; 'to rule, exercise rule. N.o.a.b. Türkü vri ff. Man. eki yégirmi €l(I)enmek “the twelve rulers' M III 16, 6 (ii), zo, r4 (i): él(enmekim etöz mepnisi “my physical pleasure in being a ruler” TT II 8, 43; o.o. M HI 16, 9 (i); 19, 14 (erksin-): Uy. viii ff. Man.-A M I 27, 10 (uğur): Bud. altı tórlüg él(I)enür yıltızlar *the six kinds of ruling roots' (i.e. the sense organs) TT VI 189-90; (those devils) kentülerni üze él(I)enürler 'rule over themselves” do. 267-8: o.o. Pfahl. 22, 3 (uğur), Suv. 567, 6; Tig. rob. 8: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. kuei fu “to submit, return to allegiance” (Giles 6,419 3,726) ilinip, R 7 1486, may belong here and not to ilin-; the normal word with this meaning is Icgin- ; not listed in Ligeti. ilen- "to reproach, blame (someone Dat.)'. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. with the stronger . ALN meaning “to abuse, curse", Xak. xı ol apa:r ilendi: "he reproved him" ('ayyarahu) because he relied on him in his affairs, and the right course (al-xayr) turned out to be the opposite (to what he had advised) Kaş, 7 204 (ile:nür (s), ilenme:k, verse): KB kórüp bustum erse ilendi özüp 'when ] saw it and was angry, it was you who reproached me' 795; 0.0. 1204, 1206: Kip. xiv ilen- fasaxxafa toa lam yusta'mal minhu ma'nà saxifa. “to be thoroughly angry', not used in the (milder) meaning “to be displeased' İd. zo: Osm. xiv to xvi ilen- occurs in several texts; in XVI certainly 'to curse', earlier prob. nearer to this than to “to reprove” TTS I 372; // 524; III 362; IV 415. D ilin- Reft. f. (often used as Pass.) of 11- ; "te catch. oneself on (something Dat.); to be attached to (it Daz.) ; to be caught suspended, hung (on it Dar.) S.iaumlg. with some extended meanings. Türkü vii ff. (a crane) tuyma:tı:n tuzak(k)a: ili:znmk:g "inadvertently got caught in a trap” IrkB 61: Uyğ. viti ff. Man, ertimlig mepike ilinmişke “to the man who is attached to transitory pleasure' TT III şo, o.o. do. 128 (atkağ): M III 37, -s (ii) (3 al): Bud. Sanskrit asaja 'not attached! ili:nme:tin TT VIII 4.29; o.o. do. A.ao (iligsiz); D.8, 32; yilinmek (sic) yapşınmaklarığ '(worldly) attachments' U II 36, 36; similar phr. U IV 36, 96; TT X 479(?) yertinçüke artukrak ilinmis yapşınmış köpüllüğ erser “if he has a mind excessively attached (Hend.) to this world' Suv. 148, 15-16; o.o. do. 263, 1; 373, 14: Xak. xi tike:n to:nka: ilindi: "the thorn was caught (ta"allaqa) in the garment' (ilinür, ilinme:k, verse with ilindi: (misvocalized alrd::) usira “vas made prisoner"); and one says er yağı:ka: ilindi: (same misvocalization) “the man was made prisoner by the enemy", and keyik tuzakka: ilindi: “the wild animal was caught (ta"allaqa) in the trap” Kaş. I 204; tepri: karğa:ğına: ilinme: “do not come under (là tadxul fi) the curse of God” IJ 288, 14; ilinü:r yara"allaq III 358, 24: KB mapa kim ilinse tutarmen ani *whoever attaches himself to me I hold” 664; o.o. 1092, 4397: xili(?) At. 456 (elik): xiv Rig. ilin- “to be caught' (in the snares of the devil) R 7 1485 (quotn.): Cağ. xv ff. 1lin-. (sic) band-u giriftür sudan “to be bound, taken” the Rii author (i.e. Vel. 76) translated it "aciz şıudan "to become weak, incapable” but was mistaken San. 110r. 8 (quotns.; perhaps a Sec. f. of alin- q.v.): Kom. xiv 'to be caught (in a trap)' ilinCCG, Gr. 106 (quotn): Kip. xiv ilinta"allaqa İd. ış: xv inşabaka "to be entangled' ilin- Tuh. 6a. 11; ta'allaqa ilin- do 10a. 11: Osm. xiv to xvi ilin- “to be entangled in, attracted by, interested in (something)! in several texts 77 1 530. D ulan- (ula:n-) Refl, f. (often used as Pass.) of ula:-; "to be joined to (something Dat.)'. S.i.m.m.l.g. Xak. x1 ulandi: ne: “the thing was joined (/ttasala) to something! Kaş, 1 204  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 193 
     
   
   
       TRIS. V. ALN(ula:nur (sic), ulanma:k); (u:la:n in 7 64, 14 seems to be the Imperat. of this verb, but the verse does not scan and seems corrupt): KB bayat tapğıpa bu ulanmış özüm “this my soul has devoted itself to the service of God” 3696, muni kod yaruk çın ajunka ulan “abandon this (world) and join yourself to the bright true world' 5421; a.o. 4049: xiv Rbğ. ulan- (1) "to be joined to (something Dat.), to attain, reach. (something ee. or Dat.) R l1 1681 (quotns): Çağ. xvff. ulan-(-dı) u/aş- ve yetiş- "to reach, attain' Vel. 113 (quotn.), ulan- paywastan ta band-u paywand şudan "to be joined, tied together' San. 81v. 9 (quotn.): XVWar. xiv axiratka ulandı “he joined the hereafter! (i.e. died) Nahc. 6, 16: Kip. xiv the entries after ula:in İd. zo are confused and corrupt, but prob. the next two read ulan- ;ttagala ullan(Refl, Den. V. fr. u:l) ta'assala “to be rooted, founded', the scribe having got confused between various der. f.s of u:l and ula:- on the one hand and zoaşala and aşala on the other. D ulın- Ttefl. f. of uli:- “to be twisted, to writhe'. N.o.a.b. 'l'he second syllable in the MS. of Kaş. scems originally to have been unvocalized, but qarına was added later in two places; originally it was no doubt ulineverywhere. UyĞğ. vir ff. Bud. yincge belin ulinip tolğanıp 'twisting and writhing with her slim waist U II 24, r: Xak. xı ulndx: ne:p itawá'l-gay' wa dára “the thing twisted and turned', like a rope round a tree, and as a snake writhes and twists (tarta"iş wa taltami), and one says yo:l ulindi: "the road. twisted" Kaş. I 204 (ulinur, ulinma:k); JJ 241, ro (tolğan-): KB kayu kadğu birle ulınmış bolur "some become twisted with pain” 5243. D ulnat- Hap. leg.; Caus. Den. V. fr. ulun. Xak. xı ol okin ulnatti: amara bi-işlah qidh sahmihi hatta cu'ila nihs "he gave orders for the repair of the shaft of his arrow because it had a broken end" Kaş. 7 267 (ulnatur, ulnatma:k). Tris. ALN D ilinçü Dev. N. fr. ilin-; 'recreation' or the like. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. tastin ilincüke önmiş erdim 11 set out (from the city) for recreation PP s, 4; a.o. do. 1, 1 (atlandur-). D ulinciá Dev. N./A. fr. ulin-; 'twisting, tortuous. N.o.ab. Uyf. vini ff. Man. ulınçığ sansarta kaltımız “ve have remained in the tortuous cycle of rebirths” (Sanskrit samsára) TT III 46: ulinçiğ ajunlarintin kutkarip 'rescuing them from their tortuous (cycle of) rebirths” do. 119. D alınçlığ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. *alinc Dev. N. fr. alın-. Uy£. viri ff. Bud. Sanskrit labhobanişat "the secret doctrine of acquisition' bulunç alınçlığ tıltağ TT VIII E.5. D alınlığ P.N./A. fr. alin; usually preceded by a qualifying Adj., “having a . . . forehead'.   149 Survives only in SW. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. tüğmiş alınlığ 'with a frowning forehead' U H 59, 4 (iii): Xak. xr alınlığ er “a man with a large forehead” (di'l-cabhati'l-'azima) Kaş. I 148: xiv. Muh. “aridu”l-cabha *with a broad forehead” ya:si: alı:nlığ Mel. 46, rr, Rif. 140. D ulunluğ İTap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. ulun. Xak. xı ulunluğ er "a man who owns arrow-shafts' (dü gidàh I I-sihám) Kaş. I 148. D ölenliğ P.N./A. fr. ölen, 'grassy'. Survives in some NW languages, e.g. Kaz. ülenli R 7 1847. UYĞ. viri ff. Bud, xvvalığ ceceklig ölepliğ yer suv 'flowery (Hend.), grassy country” TT V 12, 123. VU?F ala:nır (aiif unvocalized but -p- certain) Hap. leg.; prob., like many names of animals, a l.-w., perhaps with prosthetic a-. PU alanğarat “a large rat” P. de C. ao (from an unknown source) seems to be a reminiscence of this word. Xak. xı ala:pir 'a thing of the rat (al-curdün) species; it is the jerboa (al-yarbü"), the Türkmen eat it” Kaş. I 161. Tris. V. ALND ilinçü:le:- Den. V. fr. ilinçü:, "to amuse oneself, take recreation”, or the like. Pec. to Uyğ. Uyğ. vir ff: Bud. (then the hero Arjüna) oynayu ilincüleyü olurdı “sat playing and amusing himself” (vvith the demon”s daughter) U 77 26, 6, uzatı mepün ilinçüleyin “may I long enjoy myself in joy' (in the ocean of supra-mundane (étigsiz) joy) Suv. 354, 7-8; a.o. U II 22, 28. D alapad- Intrans. Den. V. fr. 2 *alap; 'to become weak, to lose one's strength'. The form is correctly represented in TT V and confirmed by the Caus. f. alapadtur-, but elsewhere has been much mishandled by scribes and transcribers; written alapt- with the round -t- (Aramaic tau) it was written, or at any rate transcribed as alagu- in PP and alanurin Suv. "There is no carly trace of 2 alan but it scems to survive as alan, broadly speaking *confused, disconcerted, uncomfortable! in some NE languages R 7 357, Khak., Tuv.; | NC Kir, Kzx. and, in the phr. alan talan/ alan taran in SW Osm. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vini ff. Bud. anda yek icgek yok kim alapadmasar "then there is no demon (Hend.) who does not become weak' TT V ro, 97; (then exhaustion overcame the old man and) küçi alapadtı (transcribed alagud:) "his strength failed” PP 37, 2; kayu neçe açmak suvsamak emğekin alanadmış (transcribed alagurmak) koğşamış tınlığlar erser 'however many mortals there may be vveakened (Hend.) by the pains of hunger and thirst' Suz. 118, 4-6, kim bu alanadmış (alagurmi;) aç barsığ tirgür-gülük "which will revive this weakened hungry tigress' do. 610, 18; a.o. do. 117, 16. D alapadtur- Caus. f. of alapad-; 'to vveaken”. N.o.a.b. Türkü vir. Man. kamağağ alanadturur “it weakens all men” M Hİ vi, 12 (i); (the bright day) kararığ  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 194 
     
   
   
     150 tünüg alapadturdi 'has weakened the dark night” do. ış, rr (i): Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. the word occurs four times in a passage in TT V ro, 87-98 beginning alanadturğu sakınç “a meditation on weakening (demons) and ending uluğ alapadturgu iş büter “here ends the great work of wcakening'. D ilintür- Caus. f. of ilin-. Survives only(?) in NW Kar. T ilindir- "to entangle, catch in a snare” R I 1486; Kore. 193. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. Sanskrit kümagredhü "longing after sexual pleasure" ka:ma:dha:tuka ilintürte:çiler TT VIII A.14: Kom. xiv (of a trap) “to catch (someone Acc.) ilindir- CCG; Gr. 106 (quotn.). Dis. ALR ula:r “cock partridge'. Survives, always as ular, in NE Tuv. *wild turkey': SC Türki 'snow-pheasant Tezraogallus tibetanus' Shaw 26; also 'T. htmalayensis' do. 209; Jarring 323 (ulay/ular): NC Kir. 'pheasant, Tetraogallus; Kzx. “vild turkey", Uyğ. virt ff. Civ. ularnip méyisin “the brains of a partridge' H 1 63: Xak. xı ula:r a/-ya"qub “partridge” Kaş. II 22; İİ 213, 6 (Sikriş-): "KB ular kuş 75: xiv Muh.(?) al-qabc 'partridge' u:la:r Rif. 75 (only). S elri: See eldiri:. S ilrük See ildrük. Dis. V. ALRD alar- (ala:r-) Intrans. Den. V. fr. a:la:; *to become dappled or variegated, to change colour'. Survives w. some extended meanings in SE Türki Share ız: NC Kzx.; NW Kaz. and SW xx Anat. SDD gr. Cf. alart- Xak. xı talka: alardı: — talagewana'l-higrim — wa ğayruhu mina'l-timár "the unripe (and other) fruit changed colour'; and one says kişi: ylni: alardı: “the man's body (etc.) became leprous' (barisa); and anın kó:zi: alardı: “his eyes were dazzled' (bariqa) Kaş. 1 179 (ala:rur (sic), alarma:k). iler- acc. to Kaş. “to be dimly visible". Became a l.-w. in Mong. as £/ere- "to appear, become clearly visible' (Kore. 300, Haltod 67). NE Tel. iler- with the latter meaning, R I 148o, might be either a survival or a reborrowing fr. Mong. Cf. ilert-. Xak. xr menip kö:züme: ne:p ilerdi: :axayyala'l-şay fi 'ayni fi bu'd am zulma “the thing was dimly visible to my eyes in the distance or the dark”: (in verse) tağla:r başı: ilerdi: "the heads of the mountains were dimly visible” Kaş. I 179 (no Aor. or Infin.); I7 283, 3 (same verse). olur- (?olor-) “to sit”, with various extended meanings. The phonetics of this word are complicated. The Caus. f. olğurt- q.v. suggests that the original form was *olfur-, but there is no other trace of such a word. "The only form in Uv£g. and earlier languages is olur-, but this form survives only in NE Tuv. 'TRIS. V. ALNolur- and Yakut olor- Pek. 1819. In Xak. there are two forms oldur- and oltur- which are best explained as very early examples of the Turkish habit of dis-similating -1- to -Ld(cf. the pronunciation alda for allàh in some modern languages) "The form oltur- still survives in some modern languages, but in others the -1t- has been assimilated to -tt(some NE languages), -d- (other NE languages) or -t- (all SW languages and some others). "The verb originally meant “to sit), possibly with a distinction of meaning between “to sit down on (something Daf.) and “to bc seated. on (something Loc.). "The special application to rulers seems to have been pec. to the early period. Another shade of meaning is (of nomads) “to settle down, reside" (in a particular place); in some languages only of temporary settlement, permanent settlement being described by yat-. In some modern languages used as an Auxiliary Verb, preceded by a Ger. in -p, meaning 'to do (something) habitually, continuously, or frequently', but sometimes with a very tenuous meaning. Türkü vir olur- is very common in three distinct meanings; (1) “to sit down (for a rest)” I E əş, II E 22; T siz (udir-), (ə) "to take (one's) seat on the throne' xağan olurtim “1 took my seat as xağan” I S o, I1 N 7; a.o. I S8, II N 6 (1 €i) (3) “to settle down, take up residence' (temporarily, in a particular place Loc.) altu:n yışda: oluri 'settle down (for a time) in the Altay mountains! T 3: olurıp téyen tedi “he said, “stay where you are" ', T 34; 0.0. I S 4, ctc.: vili ff. a (bird) çıntan ığaç üze: olu:ru:pan 'perching on a sandal-wood tree” JrkB 4; xan olu:rupan “a Xan, taking his seat on the throne' (built himself a capital) do. 28; (a pail) küneşke: olu:ru:r “is sitting in the sunlight! do. 57; (a crane) uça: uma:tı:n olu:ru:r 'sits still, because it cannot fiy” do. 61: Man. (the king) altunluğ órgin üze olurdi 'took his seat on the golden throne” TT 17 8, 68; similar phr. do. 74; baçak olurup 'while sitting fasting' Chuas. 257; similar phr. do. 273, 281: Uyğ. vir yüz yıl oluru:p 'sitting on the throne for a hundred years” Şu. N 3; o.o. do. N ə, 4; W. a, E o: virrff. Man.-A men anta olurayın 'I will sit there” M I 33, 5; 8.0. do. 34, 9: Man. M II 11, 12-13 (tültür-): Bud. Sanskrit sthito niganno 'standing or sitting' turup olorop TT VIII B.16 (Sanskrit lost) birğe:rü yığlıp olororla:r e:rdi “they gathered together and sat down' do. C.12; (of a monk) olurdaçı “residing” (in a monastery) Hien-ts. 1767; o.o. U II 26, 6 (ilinçü:le:-); PP 65, 1; 71,2; TT V 8, 64; 12, 128; U III 28 13: Civ. olurur ev “the house where I reside” USp. 55, 24; a.o. TT I 120 (yurt): xiv. Chin.- Uyg. Dict. tso “to sit” (Giles 11,756) olur- Ligeti 187; R I 1087: Xak. x1 ol er olturdi: “that man (etc.) sat down' (calasa) Kaş. I 224 (prov.; olturur, olturma:k), munda: kalıp olturu: baqá 'indaná cális “he remained residing with us” 7 219, 25; kémi: içre: oldurup rakibná'l-safina "we sat in a boat! ZİT7 235, 11: KB "to sit” is consistently 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 195 
     
   
   
     DIS spelt oldur- 420, 577, 620-2, 765, 956, 5971, etc.: Xirt(?). Tef. oltur-/otur- “to sit, to remain stationary' 237, 240: xiv Muht.(?) qa"ada "to sit” oltur- Rif. riq: (only); al-qu'üd olturmak 124: Çağ. xvff. oltur-(-dı) otur- Vel. 117; oltur- ('with back vowels') nigastan 'tosit! San. 82v. rz: Xwar. xttrolturlotur- "AF 7, rz: xin(?) yalğuz olturur(or -d-?) érdi "she was sitting alone” Oğ. 56; 2.0.0.: Xiv Oltur-/otur- Qutb 116, 120; MN 88, etc.; taxt üze olturup 'sitting on the throne! Nahc. 204, 9; biznin olturğu yérlerimiz “the places where we reside” do. 304, 14: Kom. xiv 'to sit' oltur- GCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xır qa"ada oltur- Hou. 35, 9: xiv ditto d. 21; qa"ada tva calasa oltur- Bul. 71, 5: xv qa'ada oltur- Kas, (7, 1 and $), 36, 16; 75, 2; Oltur-/otur- Tuh. 29b. rr: Osm. xiv ff. otur- (only in phr.) is noted in several texts T'T'S I 553; II 739; IV 615. D ölür- (?ólór-) the earlier Caus. f. of öl“to kill”. Survives only in one or two NE languages R I 1250 and Tuv. Elsewhere displaced by öldür- in about xi. Türkü vur very common in /, JJ, T, ölür- being about three times as common as ölü:r-, but this may not be significant: vr ff. Man. ölür- occurs several times in Chuas.: Yen. (in my 39th year) tok(k)uz altmış er ölü:rmiş “1 killed 59 men” Mal. 48, 3: Uyğ. vin ff. Man. ölürtüm 'I have killed” TT IJ ış, 2; a.o. M I 18, s: Bud. ólórgóke TT VIII N.9; U IH 4, 3 (idala:-) PP 1, 6; 2, 2; 3, 3, and many o.o.: O. Kir. rx fF. yeti: bóri: ölürdim “1 killed seven wolves' Mal. 11, 10; o.o. Mal. 44, 3 (Shcherbak 44, 5); do. 49, 3. D alart- Caus. f. of alar-; used only in the restricted sense of “to make (the eyes) red with anger. The word “eyes” was normally expressed, but later omitted, the word then meaning “to look angrily'. Survives in this meaning only(?) in NC Kzx. Xak.xrol apa:r kó:zin alartti: /amaha ilayhi bi-başar büşir şazar "he glanced at him with the look of one whose eyes are red with anger” Kaş. III 428 (alartur, alartma:k): KB in 4845 the Vienna MS. reads alarttı for saçıttı, q.v.: Çağ. xv ff. alart- (spelt) gagm-rà az ğayz xira hardan “to make the eyes stare in anger ; but the verb cannot be used by itself, the word "eyes” must be expressed San. 47v. 8: Xwar. xiv ata anağa alartu baksa “if a man looks angrily at his father and mother” Nahe. 284, 17 ff.: Osm. xiv alardu bak- “to look angrily at (someone Dat.)' in one text TTS II 24. D ilert- Caus. f. of iler-. Apparently survives only(?) in NE Tel. ilert- “to disclose', R I 1481, but see iler-, Xak. xı ol anın kóá:zipe: bi:r ne: ilertti: awqa'a bi-başarihi xayál şay” "he put the faint outline of some“thing before his eyes” Kaş. IJI 428 (llertür, İlertme:k). D olurt- Caus. f. of olur- “to seat (someone Acc.) on (something Dat. or Loc.). Survives : with much the same range of meanings and . ALS işı phonetic changes as olur-. Cf. olxut-, olğurt-. Türkü vir özümin ol tepri: xağan olurtdı: “that same Heaven (xehich had helped my parents) seated me myself (on the throne) as xağan” I E. 26, II E 21: Çağ. xv ff. olturt- (spelt) Caus. f.; migjándan “to seat San. 83r. 29 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv oturt- 'to seat” Qutb 120: Kip. xiv olturt- (mis-spelt olturtut-) aq"ada "to seat! İd. 21: xv ditto olturt- Tuh. s4b. 8. D ölürt- Caus. f. of ólür-; “to have (someone, Acc.) killed". N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (the beg caled Ku Tao) bizni ölürtdi "had us killed” Suv. 7, 2-3; olo. do. 8, 11, etc. - Tris. ALR S ileri/ilerü See ilgerü:. D ularlığ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. ula:r. Xak. xı ularlığ ta:ğ "a mountain full of partridges" (ya'ágib) Kaş. I 148. D olursik Dev. N. fr. olur-; n.o.a.b. Türkü vitr (when I heard this news, sleep did not come to me by night and) küntüz olursikim kelmedi: 'rest did not come to me by day' T 12; a.o. T 22. ilersük 'waist-belt'. Survives only(?) in SW Anat. ilersik, ilersük, ilirsik SDD 785-7. Xak. xı ilersük /;kkatu'l-saráwil 'trouserbelt” Kaş. I 152: xiv Muh.(?) al-tikka izle:rsük (?, unvocalized) Rif. 167 (only): Kip. xv tikka İlersik Tu. ga. r: Osm. xv-xvı ilersik “trouser-belt” in several texts 77. IJ 526; IV 416. Dis. ALS S ulus See ulus. D óle:s vocalization dubious since it is listed, under -S, in a section containing N.s w. two short vowels. No doubt a Den. N/A. fr. özl, but -e:s does not seem to occur elsewhere as a Den, Suff. Pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı ö:le:s kö:z al-'aynwu'l-latifatu'l-rurtw "an eye with a kindly look”, like the eye of a drunkard (a/-sakrán) ; in a verse bulna:r meni: ó:le:s kö:z “this melting (a/-sakrd) eye captivates me” Kaş. I ş9. D ölsik second syllable unvocalized, but the obvious transcription is Ölsik rather than üleşik or other variants which have been suggested; if so, a Dev. N./A. fr. öl- meaning *dying, death”, or the like, N.o.a.b. Türkü viri (deceived by the honeyed words and luxurious treasures (of the Chinese) many of your "Türkü people died) Türkü bodun ölsikin "beörye: Çoğay yış tügültün (q.v.) yazı: 'konayin teser Türkü bodun ölsikiğ anta: afi kişi: ança: boşğu:ru:r ermiş “evil people saying, “you "Türkü people are dying, let us settle in the east in the Yin Shan mountains and the (PU) Tügültün(?) plain” seem 'thus to have advised the death of the Türkü people there” 7 S 6—, II N 5; Türkü bodu[n və , əlrip él tutsikipin bunta: urtim yanılıp 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 196 
     
   
   
     152 DIS ölsikipin yeme: bunta: urtim "oh Türkü people, 1 have set down here how vou maintained a realm when you (stood together?), and I have set down here how you died when you went astray' do. 10-11, do. 8. Dis. V. ALSD alsa:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of al-. Xak. xı ol at alsa:di: “he decided and desired to buy (yaşfari) a horse” Kaş. 1 278 (alsa:r, alsa:ma:k). : D ilsa:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of i1-. Xak. xi er ta:ğdın 1:]sa:d:: "the man decided to descend (vanzil) from the mountain. (ctc.)' Kaş. 1 278 (ilsa:r, 11sa:mack). , D ölse:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of öl-. Xak. xi ol er ölse:di: "that man decided to die (al-matot) and. wished to” Xaş. 1 278 (ölse:r, ölse:me:k). D alsik- Fmphatic Pass. f. of al-; “o be robbed of (something Zcc.). N.o.a.b. Xak. xı Ol tava:rın alsıktı: huriba málu'l-racul tea. suliba "the man's property was plundered and carried off by force' Kaş. 7 243 (alsika:r, alsıkma:k): K B (if he sees gold or silver, he covets it) idisi başın yer ya bas alsıkar "he devours the head of its owner or loses his own' 2726; similar phr. 4119: xiv Muh(?) al-mağyür 'coveted, grudged'(?) alsıkmış Rif. 148 (only). Tris. V. ALSD elsire:- ffap. leg.; riv. Den. V. fr. 1 ét. "Türkü vii élsiremis xağansıramış boduni£ “the people who were not organized in a realm and had no xağan” 1 E 13. D elsiret- Caus. f. of élsire:-; n.o.a.b. Türkü vir elligig elsiretmiş xağanlığığ xağansıratmış "put an end to the realm of those who had a realm and deposed the xağan of those who had a xagan' 1 E 16, II E 13; similar phr. 7 E 18. Dis. ALS D alış N.Ac. (connoting reciprocity) fr. al-; by itself, 'taking, receiving', and the like, but usually used in the phr. alış béris “buying and selling, commerce'. S.i.a.m.l.g. See Doerfer 1I 534, 539. UYĞ. viri ff. Civ. alış seems to bea generic term for “tax, levy"; (after a list of four specific taxes) negü me alis biz tilemez biz 'we will not demend (the four taxes named or) any kind of levy' USp. zr, 13; bileki alış béris tıltağında concerning our joint trading operations' do. rır, 3-4: Xak. xr alış fühatu"l-şirbi wa'l-ansibà'i “places for drawing water from water-holes and tanks'; (alis the name of a village); alış a/-mu'áxada bi'l-dayn iPl-ğarim “a claim on a debtor for what is owing'; hence one says alts (sic) bözri:ş 'receipt and payment of what is due' (haqq) Kaş. 162: KB (consort with merchants as they come and go) negü kolsa bergil alış ham . ALS béris “give them whatever they want in the way of receipts and payments' 4421. ulug has a curious history; originally it meant “country” in a geographical sense, as opposed to 1 €:1 (q.v.) with its political implications, but it began to be associated with the names of cities, and by xt in some languages it meant “city” rather than 'country'.. An early ].-w. in Mong., where it became ulus to comply with Mong. phonetics and acquired a political rather than a geographical sense. İt was originally used for the largest political unit known, the Mong. empire (see xır below), and when this was split into four between the four sons of Çingis it was used for each of these four parts, e.g. “the u/us of Çağatay”. "Then, since the Mongols thought more in terms of peoples than of territories, it came to mean 'a confederation of peoples (€:1)”, the peoples .being divided into “tribes” (aymağ), the tribes into 'clans' (boy), and these into families (uruğ). All these words, except perhaps the third, were "Turkish and the second, fourth, and fifth have a continuous history in Turkish, but the first had so completely lost its original meaning that when it was reintroduced into Turkish it appeared in its Mong. form ulus (not ulus) and with its Mong. meaning. Uluş seems to survive only in NW Kar. L. R 11697; in all other language groups (except NC where it is obsolete) it is ulus “nation, people, tribe', and the like. Türkü vir (in the list of foreign powers represented at Kül 'Tégin's funeral) Buxarak ulus “the country of the Bokhariots” (prob. in Inner Mongolia, not Bokhara itself, see S. G. Klyashtorny, Drevnetvurkskie runicheskie bamyatnihi, Moscow, 1964 pp. 126 f.) 1. N 12: Uyğ. vir ff, Man.-A ulus “country”, scveral occurrences M I 26, 25-9: Man. Koco ulus iki otuz balık "the country of Koço and its 22 towns! M 1II 40, 6 (ii); burxanlar ulugi: “the country of the Buddhas' T T III 53, 164; a.o. do. 60-1 (1 é:l): Bud. Cambudvip ulus “the country of Vambudvipa” Hüen-ts, 184; TT VIII K.8; Baranas ulus “the country (or city?) of Benares” PP əş, 7; 44, 2; Cinadés ulus “the country of China” Hüen-ts. 240, 267; 0.0. TT VIII A.31 (4 €:D, C.:i (2 61118), E.v7; TT IV ro, 21 (1 €; VI o8; VII 40,34; U II 23,21; PP 3, 6-7 (ulus bodun “the people of the country”), 3o, 8, öz, 3: Civ. kamağ él uluslar “all realms and countries” TT 7 r, balık uluş do. 7, a.o. USp. 88, 15: xiv Chin.-Uyğ. Dict. kto “country” (Giles 6,609) ulus (sic) R 1 1696; Ligeti 274: Xak. xr ulus in the language of Cigll al-garya 'village'; and among the people of Balasiğun, and the towns (or districts? bilad) of Arğü associated with it, a/-balda “tovvn” (or district?); hence the town (5a/da) of Balaşöğun is called Ku:z Ulu:ş (sic) Kaş, 7 62: KB telim arttı élde yanı kend uluş “many new towns (Hend.) sprang up in the realm" 1043; kend uluska 43:6; ulustin uluşka kócügli kişi “a man who travels from one town to another” 4814: xit(?) KBVP kayu kend ulus ordu karşı yér-e “every town  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 197 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. (Hend.) royal court, castle and place” 26; xı on a coin struck in Tiflis in A.H. 644 (A.D. 1244— 1245) uluğ Monkol ulu:ş beg '5eg of the great Mongol empire! (translating Mong. yeke Mopgol ulus) D. Lang, Studies in the Numismatic History of Georgia in Transcaucasta, New York, 1955, p. 35: xiu(?) Tef. ulus (sic), kend ulus 'village, town' 327: xiv Muh.(?) al-hüra voa'l-wiláya “district, province” uluş (sic?, MS. ulnus) Rif. 179 (only): Çağ. xv ff. ulus xa/q “people” Vel. 119; ulus (spelt) xalq wa camá at “people, community” San. 86r. 26 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv ulus Esp usually in the phr. ulus él Qutb 198; ulus (MN 72, etc.: Osm. xiv to xvi ulus “counfry” or “people”, in the sense of a political unit under a ruler, sometimes in association with él; xvrı 'tribe' in two dicts. 7 TS 7 720; 1I 925; III 708. D ülüş Dev. N. fr. üle:- usually a Conc. N. “share, portion' with some specific applications like *chapter' (of a book) and 'fraction'; practically syn. vv. and commoner than ülüğ. S.i.a.m.].g.; in some NE languages üleg. See Doerfer I1 546. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. (Sanskrit lost) ya:rim ülüş “a half” TT VIII 4.7; nom ülüşin bulır “receives his share of the doctrine' TT VI 78; o.o. do. 305, 375 (v1); (I am) bir tancu yérnir ülüsi bolup 'a fraction of a morsel of earth” U III 37, 26; kaz üyüri evininip yetinç ülüşinçe “of the size of one-seventh of a fperilla seed” Pfahl. 6, 6; onunc ülüs 'Chapter ro” USSp. 94, 12; a.o. Hüen-ts. 6: Civ. tüz ülüş 'equal parts! (of M ingredients) H I 166; II 8, 42 and ; (i£ I marry and have other children) ol oğlanlar birle tep ök ülüş (PU) kobı berürmen 'I will bequeathe him an equal share with those children” USp. 98, 17-18: Xak. xi ülüş al-naşib "share, portion'; the -S was originally (agluAa) -8; (here follow ülüğ and ulus); ülüş t:afriqatu'l-angiba" bayna'l-qatom “the distribution of shares among a number of people”, the -ş is altered from -&amp; (Ar. parallel quoted) Kaş. I 62: KB teğse erke ülüş “if a man gets his share” 673; o.o. 432 (erej), 1129, 1420 (bö:z), 1686: xın(?) At. ülüş boldr mli kişiler ara “his wealth was distributed among others” 243; Tef. ülüş “part, share” 338: xiv Muh.(?) al-naşib ülüş Rif. 188 (only): Çağ. xv ff. ülüş bir migdàr ve bir bölüh ve bir baxş "a certain quantity, one part, one share” (quotn.); ülüş also kişşa ve magib *portion, share” (quotn.) Vel. 118; ülüş hişşa toa buhra wa rasad ditto Sar. 86r. 27 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv ülüş “share” Qutb 203; Nahc. 30, 1; 141, 12: Kom. xiv “part, share” "ülüş CCI, CCG; Gr. 270 (quotns.): Kip. xiv (ülü: and) ülüs (with front. vowels") al-nasib İd. 20; al-hişşa ülüş Bul, 6, 4: XV cuz wa "nasib “part, share! ülüş Tuh. 12a. 2; naşib ülüş do. 36b. 10: Osm. xiv ff. ülüs 'part, share'; c.i.a.p. TTS 1 743; 11 949; III 728; IV 802. Dis. V. ALSD alış- Recip./Co-op. f. of al-; normally “to take, or receive from one another', with other cognate,meanings. S.i.a.m.l.g.; in SW Osm., .place'; the reason why the Infin. ALS- 153 exceptionally 'to get accustomed to (something Dat.Y. Uyg. vr ff. Man. TT II iy, 84-5 (1 ö:ç): Xak. xı ol mapa: alım alışdı: “he helped me to collect a debt ( f? qabdi'l-dayn), etc.” Kaş. I 188 (alışu:r, alışma:k), ola:r ikki: tava:r satışğa:n alışğa:nla:r ol "those two are constantly selling property to, and buying it from (yaştariydn) one another” 7 sı8, 22: KB 236o (yariklan-): xiv Muh áxada mina”l-axd (?error for áxir) “to take from one another” alış- Mel. 42, 6, Rif. 133: Çağ. xv ff. alış- (spelt) Recip. f.; (1) mu"dmada kardan “to barter" (quotn.); (2) metaph., mutdü"ana wa dast-bázi hardan "to exchange abuse and blows'; (3) az-ham rabüdan wa az yak-digar giriftan ' to rob and take from one another” San. 46v. 13 (quotns.): Kom. xiv 'to exchange, trade in” alış- CCI, CCG, Gr.: Kip. xiv İd. şo (1 tim): Osm. xiv and xvi alış- veriş- “to give and take mutually'; xv alış- “to set light to (something Dat.) TTS I 21; IV 18: xvin alış- . . . and, in Riri, "adat hardan “to get used to (something) Sar. 46v. 17. D élles- Recip. f. of élle:-; “to come to an agreement, make peace, with one another”. S.i.m.m.l.g. with much the same meaning. Xak. xı KB (if you can get no help against an enemy) yalavaç ıdıp sen bar €lleş yor1 “send an ambassador and go and make peace with him” 2362: xıı1(?) Tef. €l(1)eşmek *peace' 74: Kup. xri işfalaha “to be reconciled (ba:rış- and) €:1(1)e:ş- Hou. 34, 11; sgálaha mina'l-sulh. "to make peace” (ba:nla:ş- and) €:1(1)e:ş- do. 41, 13: xv isfalaha elles- (sic, in facsimile) Bul. 24v.: Osm. xv and xvi ölleş"to make peace, come to terms”, in two texts TTS II 53; III 366. D ilış- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of 11-. Xak. xı ol menin birle: ta:ğdın kodt: ilişdi: “he competed with me in descending (fi'l-nuzül minthe mountain' Kaş. I 190 (ilışu:r, 1ligma:k). D iliş- Recip. f. of 1l-; “to get caught in one another” and other cognate meanings. Survives in some NE and SVV languages, vvith a vvide range of meanings in Osm. Xak. xı ikki: ne:n birle: ilişdi: za"a//aqa”l-şay” bi'l-say' “one thing got caught in another”, and one says kançık ilişdi: “the dog's penis was caught (ta"allaqa) in the bitch'; and one says adğır ilişdi: “the stallions (either horses or camels) bit one another” (ta'adda) (iligü:r, iligme:k, sic in MS.), (here follow uliş-, üleş-, ulaş-, 1lış-), o1 menin birle: tobik ilişdi: “he competed with me in hanging up the ball (fi ta'ligi'l-kura), and argued with me about which of us hung it up best” (ayyınd a"laq lihà) (iligür, ilişme:k) Kaş. 1188-90: KB yafusa çeriğke ilişse eri “if (the enemy's) men approach and engage the army” .. . tişin tirpakin teg yaka tut ilis “go for him tooth and na grab his collar and engage him' 23752377: Çağ. xvff. iliş- band şudan-i çizi bi-cà'i "of a thing, to be tied or fastened in a is -mek (küft, i.e. as opposed to il-, San.'s spelling of 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 198 
     
   
   
     154 il-) and the conjugation is svith front vowels is that it is derived from the noun (/afz) ilmek dám "a trap” San. 110v. 6: Kip. xv tagabbaka "to be entangled, ensnared' ilis- (speltilitiy-, vd in Tuh.s authority having been read as tà) Tuh. vob. 7. D ulaş- Recip. f. of ula:-; "to be joined together (or to something Dat). In the medieval period the Ger. ulaşu: was used as an Adv. meaning 'continuously'. S.i.m.m.l.g. Xak. xı bi:r ne:p bi:rke: ulaşdı: "one thing was joined (rttaşala) to another” Kaş. 1 189 (ulagu:r, ulagma:k): KB iki ajun ulaş "iin together the two worlds' (ie. this world and the next, by seeking the company of pious men) 4354; (in the end) ulaşmış et özler üzülgü turur 'bodies and souls joined to one another will be parted' 6146; xii(?) 4r. negüke bu anı ulaşu kinar "why does it continuously punish him? 446; Tef. ulas- “to be joined one to another ( Dat.); to communicate (something Acc.) secretly (to someone Dat.)'; iki ay ulaşu 'continuously for two months' 326: xiv Rbj. ulaş- "to join oneself to (somcthing Daz.) R I 1684 (quotn.): Çağ. xv ff. ulaş- ba-yak-digar paywastan wa band şudan “to be joined or bound to one another” Sam. 8rv. 16 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv ulaş- “to be joined to (something Dat.)'; ulaşu/ulaşı 'continuously" Qutb 197; ulag- MN 325: Kip. xv katila "to adhere, stick together” ulug- (specifically so spelt) Kav. 74, 6: Osm. xiv ff. ulaş- c.La.p.; six shades of meaning distinguished TTS I 719; İİ 924; HI 704; IV 781. D ulış- Co-op. f. of 1 uli:-; (of wolves) "to howl together' and the like. Sutvives in NE Khak. and SW. Xak. xi bóri: barca: ulişdi: “the wolves (etc) howled ('amat) together; in a verse ulşıp eren börleyü “the men howl (za"rd) like vvolves” Kaş. I 188 (ulisur, ulişma:k) : Çağ. xv ff. San. 82r. 16 (uli:-). D üles- Co-op. f. of üle:-; properly (of several people) “to divide (something Ace.) equally among (themselves), but sometimes, more vaguely, “to divide (something) up”. S.i.a.m.lg. with phonetic variations. yü. virt ff. Civ. bolmiş tüşün tep üleşür biz *we will share the resultant crop equally" USp. 28, 6; alo. do. 55, 16: xiv Chin.-Uvyg. Dict. fén “to divide! (Giles 3,506) üleş- R I 1848: Xak. xr ola:r İkki: tava:rın ülesdi: mayyaza hull teühid min humá mülahu sta axada hişşatahu "cach of them divided his property and took his share” Kaş. I] 189 (üleşü:r, üleşme:k): xiv Rbg. üles- "to divide among oneselves, to share; to distribute! R 7 1848 (quotns.): Çağ. xvff. uleş- (spelt) taqsim hardan "to divide, distribute' San. 81v. 16 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv üles- “to divide (something, Acc.) between (people Dat.)' Qutb 202: Kom. xiv “to divide, share" üleş- CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiv gasama'l-gay' "to divide, distribute (something) üleş- Bul. zör.: Osm. xiv to xvit üles- 'to divide into shares, to share'; c.i.a.p. TTS I 742; İT 949; III 728; IV Sor, DIS. V. ALSD öliş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. (vvith a connotation of completeness) of öll:-, Xak. xi ölişdi: ne: :btalla'l-gay! na nafadat”l-rutüba fi aczáyihi "the thing was wet, and moisture penetrated every part of it Xaş. İ 189 (ölişü:r, ölişme:k). VUD? ölşe:- Hap. leg. but cf. ölşet- ; neither verb is vocalized in the MS. but the reference to eyes suggests a connection with özl, cf. 0:le:s. Prima facie a Den. V. fr. *óles, which might be identical with ó:le:s, «.v., if that word was mis-spelt. Çiğil xi er açıp ölşe:di: ca"a”l-racul hatta ismadarra tarfuhu ta. kada an yuğşü "alayhi min şiddat”l-cüf 'the man was so hungry that his eycs felt dizzy, and almost closed, becausc of his extreme hunger” Kaş, I 283 (ölşe:r, ölşe:me:k). VUD ölşet- Hap. leg. ; Caus. f. of ölşe:-, q.v. Xak. (or Cigil?) xı ol ani: ölşetti: acd"ahu hattà ismadarra farfuhu mün dálika "he starved him until his eyes felt dizzv as a result of it” Kaş. 1 262 (ölşetür, ölşetme:k): (Kip. xv faşaxa “to ill-treat (someone)” elsey- (sic) Tuh. 28a. 13; mafşüx “ill-treated” ölşeyiptir do. 34b. 3; might be a mis-spelt reminiscence of this verb or ölşe:-). Tris. ALS D ilişlig Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. *ilis Dev. N. fr. 11-. Uyğ. vir ff. Man. (?passions) ilislig tartışlığ "which fasten onto a man and drag him” TT III 42. D ülüşlüğ P.N./A. fr. ülüş, (of objects) “held in equal shares'; (of persons) 'entitled to a share (of something). S.1.5.m.l. Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. Elci(?) birleki ten ülüslüg yéri “the land which I hold in equal shares with Elçi(?)” USp. 11, 4-5; 0.0. do. 3, 10; 13, 35; 29, 9; 55, 5: Xwar. xiv ülüşlüğ “having a share (in something ADI.) Qutb 203. Dis. ALY S alay Sec ayla:. E ulyak See uldayp. VU?F ulya:n Hap. leg.; prob. a l.-w. Al-ràl is not a known Ar. word; Atalay is perhaps right in amending it to a/-rabal “a kind of fleabane, Pulicaria'. Xak. xı ulya:n al-röl (sic) wa. husca asl nabt tayyibi” İ-rih yu' kal “the edible root of a fragrant plant” Kaş. / ızı. Tris. ALY D ula:yu: Ger, of ula:- used as an Adv.; cognate to ula:t;, Survives only(?) in NE Tuv. ulay ulay 'continuously, one after the other' Pal. 421. See angulayu. Türkü vırı ula:yu: “all together, en bloc', qualifies the following noun; (Listen) ulayu: iniyigü:nim “all of you my younger brothers' (my sons, my clan, etc.) 7 S r, HH. N 1; (my mother) ulayu: óglerim “all my stepmothers” (etc.) 7 N 9; o.o./7 N 11: H S 13; I1 S 14; Ix. 24: Osm. xvi (only?) ulayu/ulay1 'continuously, without  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 199 
     
   
   
     MON. V. AMstopping' (e.g. of rain) in severa texts TTST 719; IV 782. Mon. AM am 'vulva, pudenda multebria'. S.i.a.m.l.g., but like tila:k, q.v., for reasons of modesty sparsely recorded in the dicts. Sam., for example, mentions it only indirectly, saying that em was originally pronounced am (which is untrue) but was altered to avoid an indecent ambiguity. Oğuz, Kip. xi am ctházu'l-mar'a 'pudenda muliebria! Kaş. 1 38; (under sik q.v.) “in reciting the Koran the Oğuz leave out verses con(g&amp;ining Ar. am "or" because am in Oğuz means farcu'l-mar'a' l1 335, s: Kom. xiv “vulva” amu (sic), CCI; Gr.: Kip. xin farcı?l- mara am IHou. 21, 4: xiv ditto İd. 22: xv ditto Kav. 61, 6; Tuh. 27b. 4. em 'remedy'; in the early period 'remedy' in general, 'vegetable remedy” in particular being ot em (see 2 ot); other early Hends. for "remedy” are em sem and em (PU) yóründek (q.v.). S.i.m.m.l.g. (not SE or SC), but in some languages 'remedy' (proper) is represented by Ar. or Pe. L-w.s 'ilác, dawà, dörü, etc., and em means 'quack remedy, folk medicine! Uyğ. vir ff. Man. M I əş, 14 (okı:-): Chr. U 7 7, 4(2 ot): Bud. em by itself Suv. 478, 17; $96, 2 and 21—Suv. 598, 2 (2 ot); TT VI 264-5 (se:m); TT IV 14, note Arı (1 a:]): Civ. em 'remedy' very common in H I, II; igipe ağriğıpya emi yok “there is no remedy for your disease! TT I 203; a.o. do. 109 (anut-): Xak. xı em al-'ilàc 'remedy' Kaş. I 38; o.o. I 95, 13; 407, 28 (sem), I7 363, 19; III 157 (se:m): KB ayu bérdim emdi igim ham emim 'I have now told you my disease and my remedy' 749; ot em kalmadı “no (vegetable) remedy remained (to be tried)! 1061; o.o. 1085, ctc.: xmi?) Af (who knows) emin 'the remedy' (for the disease of miserliness?) 310; Tef. 76 (se:m): Çağ, xv ff. em dazod 'remedy' San. sor. 29; em oti giyáh-i dawàá'i “curative plant” do. sov. 3: Xwar. xiv ém “remedy" Qutb şo: Kom. xiv “medicine” em CCG; Gr.: Kip. xii al-"aqqür *drugs, simples” yem (?; undotted and unvocalized) Hou. 23, ro: Osm. xiv ff. em 'remedy' c.i.a.p. and see sezm T'T'S I 365; II 375; HII 248; IV 293. im 'sign, wink, password', essentially a secret or surreptitious notification conveyed by a gesture or orally, of which only the parties concerned understand the significance. Survives in NE Alt., Tel, Tuv. im R I 1571, Pal. 192; Şor, Tcl. um R I 1787: NC Kir., Kzx. 1m; NW Kaz. 1m: SW xx Anat. im SDD 789, Tkm. üm. See Doerfer 11 665. Xak. xr im al-amára "the password' which a king prescribes to his army taking the name of a bird or weapon or something else. It is used as a challenge (yatafdtah(?)biha) when two parties meet, so that each detachment (/izb) may recognize its own side, and in order that they may not round on (yakurr) one another 155 by mistake. When two men meet at night one is asked (yus'al) about his countersign ('alámatiht), and if he replies to the man who has the password with the same one (ayda(n)), the other leaves him alone because he belongs to his detachment; but if the one who is questioned mentions a countersign which is different from the password the questioner rounds on him Kaş. 7 38 (prov.): KB ömeg arkışığ yolda imin yorıt “help visitors and caravans on their way with the (right) password' 5546: Xwar. xiv im 'sign' Quib şo: Kip. xiv (under “military terms”) al-xarác *poll-tax' im Bul. 6, rz (this must be an error; some words may have fallen out between the two words): Osm. xiv im 'sign, hint” in two texts; üm 'password' in Dede (N.B. Tkm.) TTS 1376. VU o:m Hap. leg.; the length suggests 0:rather than u:-. Xak. xı o:m al-tuxama 'indigestion'; hence one says er o:m bo:ldi: “the man had indigestion and a stomach-ache (fttaxama . . . wa famita) from eating meat' Kag. I 49. VU üm 'trousers; drawers' (prob. a generic term covering both). N.o.a.b. Üyğ. vır ff. Civ. (if a mouse) üm kişeninde ısırsar 'gnaws at the fastenings of the trousers' TT VII 36, ı4— 15 (USp. 42, 27-8): Xak. xr üm al-saráteil, “trousers, drawers Kaş. I 38; o.o. I 117, 5; 203, 14 (artat-): Kip. xui a/-sarömil(kö:nçe:k, also) 1:m (and içton ai-qumagu'l-dàxil *undérlinen") Hou. 18, 12; al-ránát 'gaiters' i:şl:m (for iç üm) ragiqu'I-saráwil 'thin drawers! do. 13: Osm. xiv and xv im (sic) “trousers” in two texts 773 I 376. Mon. V. AMem- “to suck'; originally prob. only of an infant, later more generally. S.i.a.m.].g. Xak. xı kenç ana:sın emdi: rada'a'l-sabi ummahu “the infant sucked its mother's breast' (rada'a is specifically “to suck the breast"); also used of any animal when it sucks the breast Kaş. I 169 (eme:r, emme:k): xin(?) Tef. ém- “to suck the breast” 76: xiv Rbg. ém- ditto R I 945 (quotn.): xiv Muh. rada'a em- Mel. 26, 9; Rif. 109; al-radü" emmak (sie, in error) 34, 12; 120; maşşa "to suck, suck up” em- 41, 11; 132: Çağ. xvff. emğen süd emen ya'ni gir-xwára 'sucking milk” Vel. 79 (quotn.); 6mmakidan "to suck' San. Irar. 22 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv ém- ditto Quib. so: Kip. xi em- rada"a Hou. 36, ız: xiv ditto İd, 23: xv rada'a ém- Tuh. 17b. 6. um- originally “to ask for, or covet (something)”, the thing asked for is normally Aec. and the person from whom it is asked, if mentioned, AbL., but sometimes the thing asked for is Abl. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. The phonetic resemblance to Pe. umid "hope” suggested an etymological connection and caused some: later modifications of meaning. Xak. .xı ol menden ne:p umdi: “he coveted (fama"a) the thing from me” Kaş. 7 169 (uma:r, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 200 
     
   
   
     156 umma:k): KB umup xayrıdın 'asking for his bounty' $062: xiti(?) At. senin rabma-tipdin umar men op-a “1 ask for well being from Thy mercy' 2; aya ğam katiksiz surür umğuçı “oh thou, that covetest joy unmixed with sorrow' 211; a.o. 375: Xiv Muh.(?) racd tea. amala “to hope" um- Rif. 109 (only): Kip. xiv um- /araccá "to hope for (something) İd. 23: Nv taraccá tea tamanná "(to desire") umTuh. ga. 9: Osm. xiv ff. um- “to hope for” in several texts T'T'S II 926; 11I 709; IV 783: xvin um- (Infin, -mek in error) in Rümi, tatcaqqu" kardan wa. ümid düştan “to expect, hope” San. 86v. 14 (quotn. Fudüli). Dis. AMA VUF oma: Hap. leg.; “mother” in Tibetan is a-ma, the word may have reached Kaş. in a form sufficiently distorted to suggest his absurd etymology. 'This and aba: 'father' are the only 'Tibetan words mentioned by Kaş. Tibetan xi oma: al-umm, ka'annahá baqiyat fihim mina'l-'arabiya “mother”, the word remained with them from Ar. Kaş. I 92. VU öme: 'visitor, guest'. Hitherto transcribed uma, but the front vowels are proved by the Acc. in KB and óme:le:- q.v. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı öme: al-dayfu'l-názil fi'l-bayt "a guest who comes to stay in one's house” Kaş. I oz (prov., verse); o.o. / 106, 1; İT 316, ro: KB ómeg edgü tutğil 'treat a guest well' 496, 4435; 0.0. 4437, 5546 (1m). Dis. AMC F amaç a very early l.-w. fr. Pe., no doubt acquired with the plough, when the Turks first became agriculturalists. Persian dc meant primarily 'plough', thence "a heap of earth thrown up by the plough', thence “such a heap, perhaps further enlarged, used as an archery target', and thence 'a furlong, one twenty-fourth of a parasang', a suitable distance for an archery range. Kaj. noted two of these meanings, San., who recognized the word as Pe., gave only one Turkish meaning. It is listed in SE "Türki amaç 'plough' Shaw 14; SC Sart ditto R 1646; Uzb. omoc “plough” (obsolete) Bor. 304 and in SW Tkm. omaç 'plough' (obsolete). It existed in SW Osm. fr. an early period (see below), but Red. marked it as Pe. and so did Sam. $4, describing it as a 'superfluous' word for “target”. It has, however, been adopted in Rep. 'Turkish meaning (physically) “a target” and (metaph.) 'aim, objective' on the ground that it means 'target' in SW Anat. (amaç SDD 98; emeç do. 528). See Doerfer 11 $542; and cf. bokursi. Xak. xı amaç (?amac) al-hadaf 'target'; amac a/-faddün wa hiya álatu'l-filàha "plough”, that is an agricultural implement Kaş. I 52; o.o. all meaning 'target', 7 333, 8 (2 çak), II 329, 1 (kirgat-); II] 107, $ (yastal-); 276, 14 (kirga:-): Çağ. xvff. amac (sic) "an iron implement (a/at) which farmers fasten to the necks of oxen and use to plough the land'; in this meaning the word is MON. V. AMshared (mugtarak) with Pe.; and in Pe. it also means “a mound of earth (xdR?) on which they put an archery target, a king's throne, and one twenty-fourth of a parasang' San. sov. 1: Xwar. xiv. omaç/omanç “target” Qut? 198: Kip. xiv amac al-ğaradu" İ-mutaqörib (?read mütağdrad) "a target which is near” (7“aimed at”) İd. 23: Xv marmá 'target' omac (src) Tuh. 33b. 13: Osm. xiv ff. amac, often spelt omac c..a.p. T'TS 7 24, 542: II 31, 728; III 543; IV zo. E amuç one of the few serious scribal errors in Kaş. In 1 140, 7, after translating armağa:n ('gift') and saying that there is an alternative form yarmafa:n, ta Ruma amuc is added. 'This has been taken to mean that this was another word for 'gift', but it is merely a miscopying of ta Autea aşahhı "and it is more correct”, D emçi: N.Ag. fr. em, 'physician'. Survives in much the same languages as em, sometimes meaning specifically “quack doctor”. See Doerfer 11 667. Uyğ. vut ff. Chr. U 1 7, 3 (2 ot): Xak. xı (after em) hence al-mi'álic "a healer' is called emet: Kaş. 7 38, 4; n.m.e.: Oğuz x1 Kaş. III 252, 12 (2 ota:-): Osm. xvi al-tibb “the medical profession' otaçılık etmek ve emçi semçi olmak TT II 379. D emçek See emig. Tris. AMC DF amaçlık (?amaclık) Hap. leg.; A.N. fr. amaç. Xak. xi amaçlık yé:r “a place in which archery targets (a/-hadaf li'l-ramy) can be found” Kaş. T 150. Tris. V. AMCDF amaçla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. amaç. Xak. xı er kuşuğ amaçla:dı: “the man made the bird a target” (ğarad) Kaş. I 299 (amaçla:r, amacla:ma:k; «ic, corrected from -me:&amp;). Dis. AMD S emet Scc yemet. ?D amtı: 'now'. Prima facie, an Adv. in -ti: (Studies, p. 145) fr. *am, but the only trace of this word in this sense is in NE Sag., Sor R I 643, Khak. and "Tuv. where it exists side by side with amdı, and looks like an abbreviation of that word. It certainly had back vowels as late as Xak. but in some Uy. texts it seems to be spelt with e-. The dental was certainly unvoiced in Türkü and voiced in Xak. and later; the position in Uyğ. is uncertain owing to the ambiguity of the script. S.i.a.m.l.g., with back vowels only in NE. Elsewhere the initial varies between e, 6, and i and the nasal between -m- and -n-. In Türkü only the word seems to be not only an Adv. 'now' but also an Adj. 'existing now, present. "Türkü vir amt: “nov” I E o, İİ E 8 (1 éI)—Türkü amtı: bodun begler “the Türkü people and 5egs of to-day” 7 S rı, FT N 8; similar phr. I7 S 13;  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 201 
     
   
   
     DIS II S 14; ol amtı: afüf$ yok Türkü xağan “the Türkü xağan ruling at present with nothing to harm him” 7 S 5, /T N z: vır ff. amti: amrak oğlanı:m ança: bili:pler 'now, my friendly sons, know this” IrkB Postscript: Man. amtika tegi “up till nov” TT II 8, qo: Uyğ. ix (1 saw my sons and daughters married) amtı: öltim 'now I have died' Suct 8: vrir ff. Man. amtika tegi TT 777 65 (in all Uyğ. texts the Dat., etc. have back vowels, which seems to show that initial e-, when used, is a scriptio defectiva): Bud. amti is common; amtikan ókünserbiz 'if we now repent' TT IV 10, 24-5 (unusual use of suffix -kan): Civ. amtı is common; amit (Dim. f) TT I 152: Xak. xı amdı: harf ta ma'nàhu al-àn "a particle meaning novv, this very moment”, one says amdı: keldim “1 have just arrived” Kaş. 1 125; amdı: ok 7 37, r6 (2 ok, proves back vovvels); 150.0.: KBamdi( Arat spells emdi) 39, 147 and many o.o.: xıı(?) 4t. emdi (?; sic in Uyğ. script, €:mdi: in Ar.) 21, gg: Çağ. xv ff. émdi hal “nov” (quotn.); émdlkece/émdike dégince zü hàál "up till now' San. 114v. 25: Oğuz xı (after Xak. entry) and the Oğuz put a kasra on the alif and say émdl: Kaş. 1 125: Xwar. xir emdi 'now' "Ali 6, etc.: xii(?) amdı “nov” (ride away from here with your army) Og. 218 (spelling doubtful): xiv emdi Qutb 59, MN 431, ctc., Kom. xiv “novv, forthwith emdi CCI, CCG, Gr. 88 (quotns.): Kip. xırr al-dn emdi: (alif unvocalized) Hou. 28, 18: xiv 6mdi: al-àn İd. 23; (under şemdi:) emdi: ai-àn (an alternative pronunciation şemdi: is mentioned) do. 55: xv al-àn émdi Tuh. sa. 5; a.o.o.: Osm. xiv ff. imdi (?6mdi) 'now' c.ia.p.; xiv and xv indi (séndi) and imden (?émden; sic, contracted) gerü “from now on” in several texts T T'S 1 376-7, 384; II 531, 541; İİİ 367, 376; IV 420, 430. D umdu: N.Ac. fr. um-, “covetousness, desire'. Pec. to Xak. Xak. xı umdu: al-tama' tea I-su'ál "covetousness, request'; hence al-sá'il "a beggar' is called umdu:çı: Kaş. I 125: KB (may God give him the good things of this world and the next) ava kelsii arzu tilek umdusi 'may all that he desires, wishes, and covets come crowding round him” 5895; o.o. 2616, 4215; in 4294 the Vienna MS. reads umdu for tama", Dis. V. EMDemit- “to lean; to incline towards (something Dat.), both physically and metaph. N.o.a.b.; later displaced by egil-, q.v. Xak. xı ta:m emitti: mála'l-cidàr wa ğayruhu li-yasqut "the wall (etc.) leant over preparatory to falling'; and one says kóplüm apar emitti: “my heart inclined (mala) to him” Kaş. I 214 (verse; emitür, emitme:k); three o.o.: KB kamuğ üç adaklığ emitmez bolur 'anything that stands on threc legs does not lean over” 8oz, o.o. 807, 1637: xiv Muh. müla (Rif. adds tea inhand "to be bent”) emit- Mel. 351, 4; Rif. 115: Kip. xv(?) mála (mayril-; in margin in. second hand) emit- Tuh. 3sb. 11. .AMĞ 157 emder- (?emter-) n.o.a.b. The Uyg. text is the first verse of a stanza of which the rest is damaged beyond reconstruction, and its meaning can only be conjectured. Uyğ. vir ff. Man. ayağlarığ barça sizipe emtertipiz “you have heaped(?) all honours upon yourselves! TT 11 75-6: Kip. xiv emderdi: qallaba wa yusta"mal fi qalbi"l-qumdş wa'l-hubüb va nahwihá mina'l-acsámi'l- taqila ba"dahd "ala ba'd wa là yuqdl fi'l-qutn wa nahwihi mina'l-acsámi'l-xafifa "to turn over”, used of turning heavy objects, rubbish, grain and the like, upside down, but not used of light objects, cotton lint and the like" İd. 23; ender- qallaba do. 24. D umdur- Caus. f. of um-, survives only(?) in SW Osm. umdur- “to make, or let, something be hoped for", Xak. xı(in an elegy) kodti: eriğ umduru: taraka'l-ricàl yarcün min xayrihi wa birrihi (he has died and) “left men begging for his welfare and good works' (lit. “making them beg”) Kaş. 1I 54, 4; n.m.e. Tris. AMD D umdu:çı: N.Ag. fr. umdu:; "beggar” and the like. N.o.a.b. Xak. xr umdu:ct: al-sá'il "one who asks, beggar' Kaş. I 141; alo. I 125, 24 (umdu:): KB kişi umduçı bolsa boldi bulun 'if a man becomes a beggar, he becomes a prisoner' 2723; 0.0. 2724, 4214, 4215, 4272: xıv Muh.(?) tümü" wa tufayli "covetous, sponger, parasite umdu:çı: (misvocalized amdu:çı:) Rif. 148 (only). PU imtili: Hap. leg.; almost certainly an error for VU imliti:; it is listed in a section, headed 'af'ál with -? attached” under the cross heading -L- for the third consonant, but as this precedes -Ç-, -D-, and -R- itis probably an error for -T-. Cigil xr one says bu: ı:şı:ğ imtili: kıldı: /a"ala hádá'l-amr min ğayr fadabbur wa là rawiya cuzdfa(n) "he did this arbitrarily and without thought or reflection' Kag. 1 141. D amtıkan, amtikina See amtı:. D umdusuz Hap. leg.(?); Priv. N./A. fr. umdu:. Xak. xi KB (of a secretary) kózi tok kerek ham özi umdusuz “his eyes must be satisfied and he himself without covetousness' 2721. Tris. V. AMDD emderil- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of emder-. Kip. xiv emderil- irqallaba "to be turned upside down' 1d. 23. Dis. AMG D umuğ Dev. N. fr. um- ; in the early period it must have meant 'an object of desire', and the phr. umuğ ınağ, in which it nearly always occurs “something, or some one, desired and trusted'. When um- came to mean 'to hope', it followed suit, and umu *hope, expectation' survived in the xix SW Osm. dicts, but is now obsolete and 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 202 
     
   
   
     158 displaced, usually by Pe. umid; SW xx Anat. umu still means “request” SDD 1:418. Uyğ. vini ff. Man. alku beş ağunlarnıp umugi'Oh object of desire of all five states of existences' TT Ill 1—(receive now) umuğ mağ “oh object of desire and trust' (the worship of all men) do. 4; yértincke umuğ ınağ tórütüpüz *you were created in this world as an object of desire and trust' do. 73: Bud. umuğ inağ is common either as an epithet of the Buddha as in U III 35, 23 or as something which the Buddha vill be for mortals as in U.Sp. ror, 2; Sut. 24, 14; 137, 20; exceptionally in TT VIII E.46 Sanskrit kurutvam dvtpam üátmana "make an island for yourself (sic) is translated kiliplar umuğ inagij ö:z e:tózüpüzlerke: Osm. xiv to xvi (only) umu “hope”, c.i.a.p. T'T'S I 721; İİ 926; III 709; IV 283. 1 1mga: *wild mountain goat'; an old word w. ending -Ba:. "Fhe spelling in "Türkü seems to be amğa:, since Runic m ğ a: could hardly be read imfa:. Became an early l.-w. in Mong. as imaga(n)lima'a(n) “male (wild) goat' (Kon, 309, Haltod 69); Mong. Plur. íma'at in xılı Secret History (Haenisch 82). On this word see Studies, p. 235 and also Sheherbak 118 and L. Bazin, “Noms de la “chövre” en turc et en mongol', in Studia Zltaica, Festschrift für Nikolaus Poppe, Wiesbaden, 1957, pp. 28 ff., both of which contain minor errors, e.g. that the word originally had an initial ywhich rests on no better evidence than a mis-spelling in the Vienna MS. of the KB. Survives apparently only in SW xx Anat. ima/ime S DD 789, 790, both of which seem to mean some kind of wild goat. "Türkü vri passages in 7. N 8 and /1 E 31 have hitherto been read Amğa: Kurğan kışlap and Amğı: (error for Amğa:, the stone is chipped here) Kurğan kışladukda: “after spending the winter at Amğa Kur£an'. This is open to two objections: (1) in the only other early (Uyg. vill) occurrence of kigla:- it is preceded by the Instr, Ötüken İiri:n kışladım “1 spent the winter north of the Ötüken” Sw. E 7; (2) kurğan, 'fort' and the like, is not noted earlier than Kip. xij and Çağ. xv ff. "The correct reading is prob. amğa:korığın “at the hunting ground for wild goats"tbserved for the xa£an' (see korığ) prob. used as a place-name: viii ff. (a leopard and a stag went searching for game and grain) ortu: yerde: amğaka: sokuşmi:s esri: amğa: yalım kaya:ka: ünüp barmi:ş “in the middle country they met a wild goat; the dappled wild goat climbed a bare rock and made off” IrkB 49 (for kaya: cf. KB): Xak. xı KB kayada yoriğlı bu ımğa teke "these mountain goats and ibexes ranging among the rocks' (cannot escape you) 5373: xiv Muh. kabgu'l-cabal *wild mountain goat' ı:mğa: Mel. 72, ro, Rif. 175 (mis-spelt, nün for ya): Çağ. xv ff. ımğa: (spelt) buz-r kühi "mountain goat! San. 114v. 29; (yaman . and, in Mong., buz 337v. 4): Osm. xiv to xvi ime (or? 1ma) “mountain goat'; in several texts. T 'T'S 1 337: II 532; III 368; IV 421. . DIS. AMG 2 1mjfa: the title of a '"l'urkish official; in "Purkish n.o.a.b., but basically identical with a title included in the lists of "Türkü officials in the Sui Shu and two T”ang Shu's (see Chavannes, Documents sur les Tou-kioue ( Turcs) Occidentaux, p. 376; Liu Mau-tsai Die chinesische Nachrichten zur. Geschichte der Ost- Türken, p. 824) in the form ven-Aung-ta (Giles 13,153 5,252 10,473) representing in Karlgren's “Ancient Chinese! rim vyung didi, and probably pronounced in the 'I'ang period as something like i" £o dar, which might represent 1mga:la:r, Xak. xi umjia: al-xázin l'l-amiál göəa”l-qayyım "ala cam"ihü “the treasurer in charge of (public) moneys and the superintendant over their collection” Kaş, 7 128; (in a section headed /a'allà muskanatu'l-lámi'l-ülà da mimmà husirat. fa'uhu) C elımğa: (ie. 1 ımğa:) al-kátibu' lladi yahtub marásila'l-sultàn. bi-xatti'l-turkiya "the secretary who writes the Sultan's letters in Turkish (ie. Uyğur) script! / 143: KB Chap. 34 (2672 ff.) relates to the duties of the bitiğçı élimga: but only the bitiğçi is mentioned in the text; in.a long list of officials in 4064 ff. the él 1mfa: comes after the sü başı "army commander' and hacib “chancellor” and before the öğe: “counsellor” and the kök ayuk "village headman' (q.v.). Tris. AMĞ D umuğsuz Priv. N./A. fr. umuğ, n.o.a.b. In the early period it must have meant, etymologically, something like “vvithout an object of desire, with nothing to look forward to”. Uyğ. viii ff. Man. umuğsuz irinç . . . yılkıta (has been saved) “from existence as an animal without anything to look forward to and miserable! TT /// 25: Bud. umuğsuz inafsiz "with no object of desire and trust? U II 4, 7; U III 16, 21; Suv. 587, 3: Civ. (in an adoption document) (gap) umuğsuz urtS1z kalğay tep 'considering that . . . will remain with nothing to look forward to, and with no male issue' U.Sp. 98, r, Osm. xvr and xvit umusuz “hopeless” in two texts T'T'S II 927; İİİ 709. Dis. EMG D emig Conc. N. fr. em-; 'nipple, teat' or more generally 'breast, udder'; unlike yelin q.v., which is used only of animals, used both of human beings and animals. Survives only(?) in NE Tuv. emig R I 954; Pal. $82; SW Osm. emik 'sucked (dry)', etc. is a Dev. N./A. in -ük (Pass.) and a different word. Elsewhere displaced everywhere by emcek, Conc. N. in -çek which is first noted in xui(?) Tef. 77 and thereafter in Muh., Çağ., Kom., Kip., and Osm., and s.ia.m.lg. Türkü vrir ff. teğlük kulu:n erkek yunt(t)a: emli:g tile:yü:r “a blind foal looks for an udder on a stallion” IrkB 24: Uyğ. viiff. Man. kazğuk tef kara boy emğgi “her black coloured nipples like pegs” M II 11, 18: ken yétiz kögüzinde iki emiği “her two breasts on her broad (Hend.) bosom' U IV 3o, s4-5: Civ. emiğ   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 203 
     
   
   
      DIS. V. EMGSışıp ağrısar “if the breasts swell and are painful' H 7 t19, 196: Xak. xr emig al-tadá "the female breast' ; also a/- tundutva "the (male) nipple' Kaş. I 72: emig sordr: imtakka'l-dar' "he sucked the udder” 77 70, r, alo, 1 485, 23 (cur). imik (of the weather) *mild, warm'. Survives with the same meaning in SW xx Anat. imik/umuk (sic) SDD 769, 1419. Cf. yılığ. Xak. xi al-yawmu l-fütiru'l-harr “a mild day” is called imik kü:n (elif vocalized with both fatha and hasra), and anything which gets warm (saxuna) after being cold, but is not excessively hot (là yaştadd hd aratuhu) is called imik (spelt emik) Kaş, 1 72: xiv Muh. yatom mu'tadil "a mild day" imi:k gin (g- marked; alif unvocalized) Mel. 8o, 7; Hif. 185 (ditto; mis-spelt imr:), D 1 emge:k N./A.S. fr. emfge:-; “pain, agony', hence 'anything accompanied by pain, * laborious effort', and hence 'laboured movement, (of a child) crawling'. S.i.a.m.l.g. in all meanings w. various phonetic changes. See emğekle:-. Türkü vii on ok bodun emgek kórti: “the people of the Ten Arrows (i.e. the Western Türkü) experienced suffering! 7 E 19, II E 16; viti ff. bu irk başı:nta: a:z emgeki: bar “at the beginning of this omen there is a little pain” (later it becomes good) IrkB 57: Uyğ. vni ff. Man.-A M I 9, 6 (1 açığ): Man. sekiz törlüğ emkek (si) 'eight kinds of pain" TT İİİ 39; a.o.o.: Bud. bu mundağ emğek içinde “in pain of this kind' U 77 4, 10; o.0. U IV 30, 34, etc. (1 açığ), PP 2, 7 and many others; in T'T VIII spelt emge:k: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. k'u 'bitterness, affliction" (Giles 6,258) emgek Ligeti 134; R I 959 (misread as emge): Xak. xı emgek al-mihna “pain, agony” Kaş. I 110 (prov., verse); and seven o.o.: KB seni koldi tün kün bu emğek bile “(the Prophet) prayed for you by night and day with this effort' 39; o.o. 373, 1738 (e8İn), 4293, 4608: xın(?) At. küç emğek teğürme kişike “do not use violence or cause pain to people” 331; Tef. emgek 'pain, embarrassment! 76: xiv Rbg. émgek “effort, suffering! R 7 960 (quotn.): Çağ. xv ff. emğek ('with -ğ- and -k') emek ve zahmat “suffering, pain”, also oğlarçıRların vürümezden evvel emekledikleri "of infants, cravvling before they can walk' Vel, 3o (quotn.), émgek emehlemek do. 78 (quotn.); émgek (spelt) (1) ranc-u maşaqqat “pain, affliction, labour” (quotn.) (2) ba-dast-u bü raftan-i atfàl “of children, crawling on hands and knees' (quotn.) San. 114v. 29: Xwar. xır(?) bérge emgek birle élgünni basıp erdi “he was oppressing the people with whips and torture” Og. 24-5; (Oğuz Xağan) emğek çekip turdi “endured many sufferings' do. 235: xiv em£gek 'trouble, toil' Quib zo, emek do. 20; émgek do. şo, 59; emğek Nahc. 270, 2 and 7: Kom. xiv *pain, suffering' emgek CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv emğek al-ta'ab 'toil, weariness'; Tkm. emek ll.23: Osm. xiv emek “pain, suffering; effort'. in several texts (in 7/77 251 also emge   159 but this is merely a Dat. TTS I 267; I1 379, 380; III 251): xvii (after Çağ. émgek) in Rümi corrupted to emek Sar. 114v. 29. VU 2 emğek “the fontanel, the gap in the crown of an infant's skull before the bones join up'. The word appears in the MS. between the prov. and verse under 1 emgek and is spelt ümgük, but this seems to be an error. Possibly merely a special meaning of 1 emgek, but the modern spellings point rather to emğek., Survives in NE Küer, Tel. emgek/ emgey 2 7 960; Khak. e:mek Bar. 336; NC Kir. emgek; Kzx. épbek; SW Osm. İmik, some of these mean “the crown of the head” rather than 'fontanel'. Xak. xi ümgük (?) al-qurquf sva huwa rammá'atu'l-ra's. "the fontanel' Kaş, I 110. ?D ómfe:n an anatomical term; survives in NE Bar. ómgjón “a horse's chest” (dubious, R. gives the same meaning in Çağ.) R I 1315; Khak. öpmen “collar-bone”. Xak. xı ómge:n al-wadac "the jugular vein” Kaş. I 120: Çağ. xv ff. ómgen/ómgün ("vith -ğ-”) muntahá-yi hulqüm sua ustuxudn mà bayn halq wa sina "the base of the throat and the bone betvveen the neck and chest' (i.e. collar-bone”) Sar. 86v. 24. Dis, V. EMGemğe:- “to suffer pain”. N.o.a.b.; later displaced by emğen- or periphrases sometimes containing 1.-vv.s. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. the word qualifying tınlığ, bodun, etc. and transcribed imerigme in USp. 102a. 25; Suv. 154, 1; 173, 6; 585, 4 etc. is an error for emgegme 'suffering' (mortals, etc.): Xak. xt er em£ge:di: imtahana'l-racul wa qasö”l-mihna 'the man was in pain and suffered pain” Kaş. 1 284 (emge:r, emge:me:k); emğeyü:r (sic, metri gratia) yat'ab "is exhausted' I 362, 25: KB tilin emgğemiş er “a man exhausted by talking” 165; emger katığ “yets very vveary” 689; o.o. 332 (etöz), 837 (1 a:r-): Xwar. xiv émge"to suffer! Qut? so, D emğet- Caus. f. of emge:-; "to cause pain to (someone Zcc.)'. Survives only(?) in NW Kaz. imğet-. Türkü vi: [gap] igidin emğetmen tolğatman “feed [the people] and do not cause them pain or distress” 17 N ız: viti ff. Man. sizni emfettim 'I have caused you pain” T'T II 8, 37; o.o. do. 51; M III 45, 1-4 (ógür); Chuas. 299, 315 (1 ür): Uyğ. vir ff Man. (whatever things there are) tınlığlarığ nece emgetgülük tolğatğuluk irintürgülük busanturğuluk "which will cause pain and distress to mortals and make them unhappy and miserable! T'T II 16, 40-4: Bud. emgetip irintürdüm erser U 11 78, 34; tınlığlarığ órlettim emgettim ... ersér if I have disturbed mortals or caused them pain” Suv. 135, 16-17; 0.0. TT VI 2;8(uguz); TT VIII O.6 (emge:tür), etc.: Xak. xı ol anı: emgetti: a ydğu “he wearied him” Kaş. 1 264 (em£etür, emgetme:k): K B meni emfgetür til 166: xin(?) Tef. (Pharaoh) bizni kinar emğetür erdi 'tortured (Hend.) us” 77: Çağ,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 204 
     
   
   
     160 DIS. V. xv tf. émget- Caus. f.; ranc dadan “to cause pain' San. i!4t. 24 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv emğet- “to torture, cause suffering! Qutb şo, 59; emğet- “to weary (someone)” Nahc. 263, 17; 315, 2. D emgen- Refl, f. of emğe:- , "to suffer pain” (occasionally with correlative cc.). Survives only(?) in SE Türki S/rate 38, Şarring 22: NW Kaz. imğen-: SW "Tkm. emen-, xx Anat. emen-/emin- SDD 528-9. Uy. vir ff. Man.-A emgenmis (sc) emğekemiz “the pains which we have suffered! M 7 ır, 18: Bud. Sanskrit ádipito 'set on fire'(?) gutkup emge:nip TT VIII C.5; (emée:nme:klió “painful” do. G. 34); emğek emğenip U III 31, 9 (0: similar phr. do. 46, 19; 3.0.0.; (in USp. 23, 4 imrenürmen is an error for émgenürmen): Civ. isig kuya:şka emğe:nmiş “suffering from sunstroke' TT VT L.o: Xak. xı ol bu: :ska: telim emğendi: "he got very tired (ta"ayyd) over this business”, hence one says xa:n karşı:ka: emğendi: “the xdn reached (nazala) the palace”, the meaning is “he arrived at it tired (rcaşalahu ta"ab) by the journey until he reached it'; this word is addressed to amirs and notables extremely politely (bi-gáyati'l-latáfa); the Oğuz do not know it Kaş. 1 255 (emgenür, emğenme:k): Çağ. xvff émgen- ranc-u zahmat kagidan "to suffer pain” San. rr4r. 9 (quotns.): Xvvar. xiv emğen- “to suffer, be troubled' Qutb 20; emgen- do. şo, 59; emğen- "to suffer” Nahc. 270, 8: Kom. xiv “to weary oneself” emğenCCG, Gr.: Kip. xiv emğen- ta'iba; Tkm. emen- İd. 23: Osm. xiv, xv emen- “to suffer pain or weariness', in two texts TTS II 38o; IH 251. D emğeş- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of emge:Xak. xı bu işda: bo:y emfesti: fa'iba'l-nàs fi hadö”l-amr ba'duhum bi-sabab ba'd "the people got tired with one another over this business” Kaş. 7 238 (emğeşür, emgeşme:k). * Tris. EMG D emiğdeş N. of Assocn. fr. emiğ, 'fosterbrother, or -sister", Survives only(?) in NE Tuv. R I 954 (not in Pal); in one or two languages, e.g. NE Kir, Kzx, displaced by emgektes, in others by periphrases; in Çağ. for a time displaced by the Mong.-Turkish compound kókeltes (sce San.) now obsolete. Xak. xi (in a para. on -daş/-deş) and al- tady “the female breast' is called emiğ, and those who suck the same breast are called emigdes, that is musdhibu'l- tady 'comrades of the breast" Kaş. 1 407; n.m.e.: Xwar. xiv emüğdeş “foster-brother” Qutb 21: Kip. xv (in a para. on -daş/-deş) emiğdeş (mis-spelt emildeş) rafiqu'l-ridà' "comrades in sucking Tuh. 86b. 9: Osm. xv, xvi emiğdeş, with minor variations of spelling: in several texts TTS II 381; III 252; IV 296. D em£eklig P.N./A. fr. 1 em$fek; 'suffering, painful, and the like. S.i.s.m.l., sometimes with EMGextended meanings like Osm. emekli 'retired from work'. Uyğ. vu ff. Man. emgekllg .. . tnliglar suffering mortals” TT. III. 109: Bud. emgekliğ tınlığlar PP s, s; U III 31, 9 (ii); emgeklig karapğuğ tarkardaçı 'dispelling the painful dark” Up. 102a. 34; (Xak.) xın(?) 7ef. emgeklig 'painful' 77 (?so read instead of A.N. emğeklik): xiv Muh.(?) al-şaqi 'miserable, wretched'(? so read for al-jafi) emge:glü: (-&amp;-'s marked) Rif. 154 (only): Xwar. xiv emğekli 'suffering” Qutb so. D emgeksiz Priv. N./A. fr. emğek, “vithout pain, effort' and the like. Survives only in SW Osm. emeksiz, same meaning. UyÉ. ix emğeksi:zin 7I] C 8 (ETY II 38; no context): virt ff. Bud. (they will be able to do their work) emğeksizin “vithout effort Suv. 447, 21: Xak. (man cannot live in this world) emğeksizin min ğayr ta'ab "without (experiencing) weariness' Kaş. 1 420, 5; n.m.e. D emiglig Hlap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. emig. Xak. xı emiğliğ ésle:r al-mar' atu'i-murdi'a “a nursing mother" Ka;. 1 153(prov. v. küse:818). Tris. V. EMGD emğekle:- Den. V. fr. 1 emgek; apparently used only for “to crawl and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. except. NW, often with the -&amp;elided, and sometimes with the initial vowel rounded, as in Uy£., by assimilation with the -m-. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. ómgeklediler (sic) U IV 34, yo (bókseg): Çağ. xv ff. émgeklegen (*with -&amp;-, -K-, -8-” emekleyen tifl "a crawling (infant)” Vel. 78 (quotn.); émgekleba-su'übat ba-dast-u bü rüh raftan-i atfal-i gir-xwüra "of sucking infants to crawl with difficulty on the hands and knees' San. 114r. 26 (same quotn.): Kip. xv habá "to crawl emğekle- (in the margin in a ?SVV hand émekle-) Tul. 13b. 13: Osm. xv ff. emekle“to crawl' in several texts 7 TS 7 377; 111 368; IV 421. D emğeklen- Refl. f. of emgekle:- ; survives in NE Kir. emğekten-, Kzx. epbekten- ; NW Kaz. imğeklen-, usually 'to exert oneself? or “to suffer pain or hardship". Xak. xı ol bu: işığ emğeklendi: "adda hága'l-amr min cumlatı”l-mühna “he reckoned that this business was of a painful kind” Kaş. I 3r5 (emğeklenür, emğeklen-me:k). D emiğle:- Hap. leg.: Den. V. fr. emig. Xak. xı er ura:gutni: emigle:di: "the man hit the woman on her breast! ('alà. tadyiha) Kaş. I 308 (emigle:r, emigle:me:k). Dis. AML amul (?amıl) "quiet, mild, equable, peaceable, even-tempered' ; generally used of people, but occasionally of places. Survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. imil ymil/umul umul 'quietly, gently SDD 769, 1419; a l-w. in Mong. (Kow. 109, Haltod 24). "There was an alternative. form *amur which is the basis of  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 205 
     
   
   
      DIS. AMN 161  amra:-, not noted in “Turkish but an early L.-w. in Mong. (Kote. 110, Haltod 24) with a Den. V. amurli- in the xii Secret History (Haenisch 7). NE amır R I 647, also Khak. and Tuv., is a reborrowing of this word. Türkü vir ff. Man. olarniy amul yavaş kópüli “their mild and gentle minds” M 7/77 zo, 6 (i): Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-A amal (sic) yavaş kópül M III 31, 4 (iii): Man. [ampi yavaş kigilerig TT 71 17, 57-8: Bud. örüğ amıl abayapur atlığ nirvan “the quiet, peaceful sireana called Aöhayabura” USp. 101, 18; o.o. of örüğ amil/amul TT IV rz, 60; Suv. 166, 7; 247, 17-8; örüğ amıl tigisiz “quiet, peaceful, and silent” Suv. 484, 17-18: Xak. xı amul al-sákin “quiet, peaceful” of anything; hence al-halim 'mild' 1s also called amul Kaş. 7 74 (verse): kelğil amul oynalım “come let us play together in peace and tranquillity' (f? sakina tea tumánina) III 131, 23: KB amul 'quiet, gentle' (of people) is common 25, 26 (amrul-), 107, 382, 769, 1416 (örüğ), 2231 (alçak), etc.: xiv Rbj. RI 649 (alçak): Osm. xiv to xvi apul (certainly the same word) and apul apul 'gently, quietly" are very common T'T'S 7 şo, II 43; III 29; IV 31. S emlü See eplig Kip. VUD ü:mlüg Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. üm. Xak. xi bütü:n ü:mlüğ kança: kolsa: olturur 'the man whose trousers are intact sits down wherever he wishes! Kaş. I 224, 6; n.m.e. Dis. V. EMLD emle:- Den. V. fr. em, “to treat or cure' (a person or disease with remedies of various kinds). S.i.a.m.l.g., in some in such forms as emde-, emne-. [n most languages now for *to treat with incantations, folk remedies, and the like”, compound verbs with 1.-vv.s, mainly Arabic, being used for orthodox medicine. Uyğ. viii ff. Civ. H 1I 26, 82: Xak. xı men anı: emle:dim “ölactuhu ma dàwaytuhu "1 treated and cured him” Kaş. 7 287 (emle:rmen, emle:me:k): KB iğiğ emlemese kişi terk ölür “if one does not treat a disease, a man soon dies” 157; a.o. 2002: Xır(?) Tef. émle- ditto 77; Kom. xiv “to treat, cure' emle- CCG; Gr. D imle:- Den. V. fr. im; 'to make a (secret) sign (to someone Dat.) by a wink, gesture, etc.” S.i.s.m.l., often much distorted, e.g. NE Tel. umda-; NC 1mda-. Xak. xi men apa:r imle:dim Şamastuhu bi-'ayn aw agartu ilayhi bi-yad 'I winked at him or beckoned to him* Kaş. I 28; (imle:rmen, imle:me:k); three o.o.; ol mapa: yimle:di gamaza ilayya bi-aynihi, originally İmle:di: 777 310 (yimle:r, yimle:me:k): KB kózin imledi “he winked at him' 768; imledi 'beckoned' 621, 955: xııı(?) Tef. imle- “to wink, (at someone, tapa) 124. D emlet- Caus. f. of emle:-; survives in much the same languages. Xak. xi men ant: 8011125 emlettim armartu bi-'ilácihi “1 gave orders that he should be treated” Kaş. I 266 (emletür, emletme:k). : D imlet- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of imle:- Xak. xı men anı: imlettim “1 ordered that he should be beckoned to or winked at" Kaş. 1 266 (imletürmen, imletme:k). D emlel- Pass. f. of emle:- survives only(?) in NC Kir., Kzx. emdel- “to be treated with incantations, etc.'. Xak. xi iglig emleldi: "the sick man was treated' ('4lica) Kaş. 1 296 (emlelür, emlelme:k). D imlel- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of imle:-. Xak. xı kişi: imleldi: “the man was winked at), and the like Kaş. 7 296 (imlelür, imlelme:k). D emlen-, Ref. f. of emle:- , s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı er emlendi: "the man treated ('alaca) himself" Kaş. 7 259 (emlenür, emlenme:k). D *imlen- See yimlenD emles- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of emle:-. Xak. xı ba:lığla:r emlesdi:le:r “the wounded men treated one another” (ta'álacat) Kaş. I 242 (emleşü:rle:r, emleşme:k). D imleş- Recip. f. of imle:-; s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı ol anın bile: eligin imleşdi: agara tlayhi bi-yadihi wa fa"ala”l-axir mitlahu "he beckoned to him and the other did the same” Kaş. 1 242 (imleşür, imleş:me:k). VUD ümleş: Hap. leg.; Recip, Den. V. fr. üm, prob. in fact used only in the Ger. Xak. xı ol anın birle: çöğe:n urdı: ümleşü: daraba ma"ahu"l-sasılacan "ala xitàri'l-saráwil “he wielded the polo-stick (in competition) with him for a stake of a pair of trousers! Kaş. 7 242 (ümleşü:r, ümlegme:k). Tris. AML PU imliti: See imtili:. D amulluk A.N. fr. amul, “peace, tranquillity'. Pec. to KB. Xak. xı KB 325, 584, 1988, etc. Tris. V. AMLVUD óme:le:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. óme:; not connected, as "Thomsen suggested, with SE Tar. ömüle- “to cravvl” which is merely a much altered Sec. f. of emgekle:-. Türkü vir er öme:leyü barmi:ş tepri:ke: soku:şmi:ş "a man went visiting and met a god” IrkB 47. Dis. AMN F é:mi:n 'safe, secure'; pec., as such, to KB. "The contexts make the meaning certain, and, in spite of the eccentric spelling (with two yds) in the Ar. script, there is no doubt that this is merely a corruption of Ar. amin, same mcaning. Xak. xı KB salàm ol kigike . eminlik amin salim kılsa ötrü emin G boldi càn “a greeting is assuredly a protection  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 206 
     
   
   
     162 DIS. AMN for a man; if (someone) greets him then his life is safe' 5056; kiçiğ bolsa emin uluğ şarrıdın “if the small man is safe from injury by the great” 5062; üçünçi emin tut kamuğ yollarığ "the third (obligation of a ruler to his subjects is) “keep all the roads safe” ” 5577. D umunç Dev. N. fr. umun-, originally 'desire, request, prayer', turning in the medieval period into 'expectation, hope'. Survives only(?) in NW Kar. L. umunts R 1 1793; SW xx Anat. umunca SDD 1419 “hope, desire”. Uyğ. viti ff. Bud. küsügüg umunçuğ turğurur üçün “because it arouses wishes and desires” TT V 24, 68-9: Xak. xı umunç al-ricd" “request, prayer”, hence one says umunç teDpri:ke: tut “make your prayer to God” Kaş. I 133; almost identical entry III 450: KB umuncim sapa “my prayers are to Thee” 29; idim rahmatinda adın yok umunç “1 have no desire other than the mercy of my Lord" 1364; sózin kiyBugi begke tutma umunç “make no requests to a beg who breaks his promises' 2013: xırı(?) At. (oh thou that covetest (see um-) joy unmixed with sorrow) bu ajun kacan ol umuncka orun *what room is there for that desire in this world?' 212; Tef. umanç (?read umunç) Borovkov translates “hope”, but "prayer” seems likelier 328: xiv Rbg. umanç (sic) “hope” (2"request”) R I 1790 (quotn.): Çağ. xv ff. umanc (spelt) tatvaqqu' toa ümid 'expectation, hope” San. 86v. 24: Xwar. xiv umunç/uminç “hope” (fairly definitely); boldi umanç “he became the target” (for the arrow of misfortune and pain) Quib 198; uzun uminclar tutar erdiler “they praycd long prayers” Nahe. 391, 5; 0.0. 435, 16: 436, 2: Kom. xiv “hope” umunc CCG; Gr. : Dis. V. AMND umun- Refi. f. of um-, properly “to desire, request, or pray for (something Dat., from someone /A3/.)”. Survives only in SW Osm. umun- “to set one's hopes on (something)'. Uyğ. viri fT. Bud. küseyür umunur erdim '[ was wishing and desiring” [that he . . . gap] Hüen-ts. 1955; Sanskrit safarana na "having protection (?; perhaps “desiring protection") umu:nğulu:k üze: TT VIII A.28; (Sanskrit lost) umu:ndaçı do. D.7;: Xak. xr men tepri:den umundum racatotu. minallah “1 prayed God” Kaş. I 206 (umunur, umunma:k): (in a verse in which both text and translation are corrupt) tutmis(?) sa:m: umnalım “let us ask for the number (of game) which he has taken(?) for ourselves! //T 429, 6: KB kiçiğ erse umnur sakal üngüke *when he is small he looks forward to (the time when) his beard grows' (when it grows he looks forward to the time when it goes white) 3622: xın(?) Tef. uman- (so spelt) translates racá, and in other quotns. means “to look forward to” and possibly “to hope” 328: X war. xır uman“to hope” 'Ali 28: xiv uman- (once spelt ümen-) “to hope, trust', possibly "to ask for” Qutb 198, 203. Tris. AMN D umunçluğ P.N./A. fr. umunç:, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı umunçluğ adag tepsedi: hasadanà'l-sadiqu'I-marcüte “the friend, for whom we longed, envied us” Kaş. 1 155, 17; n.m.e.: KB (today, choosing his time, the king has summoned me) uminçliğka davlat mana kur badı 'fortune has tightened my belt for me, who long for him(?)' 1588: Xwar. xiv (Usáma was a man) İpen uzak uminclig (sic, in error) *who prayed very long prayers" Nahc. 433, 14-15. D umungsuz Priv. N./A. fr. umunç, n.o.a.b. Xak. xr KB [(Aytoldi's illness grew worse) umunçsuz bolup cündin elig yudi "losing the desire (? to live) he washed his hands of life” rrrş: xın(?) Tef. umançsız boldi kim yalğan sözledi erse “the man who has lied is without hope (in the next world ?)' 328. DF éminlik A.N. fr. emin, 'safety, security”, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı KB eminlik tórü élke énclik bolur 'customary law is a source of security and peace for the realm” 5734; a.o. 5062 (émin): Kom. xiv 'security' eminlik CCI; Gr. Dis. AMR *amur Sec amul, amra:-, efc. S imir Oğuz form of İnir, q.v. ; 'gloom, dusk”, both the dusk of dawn and sunset and the gloom caused by fog or a dust-storm. Survives only(?) in NE Tuv. imir; NC Kir, Kzx. imirt (sic) (morning or evening) 'dusk'; SW 'Tkm. ümür “fog”. Oğuz xı İmir (misvocalized emir) al-dacn tea'l-dabáb 'gloom; mist, fog” Kaş. 1 54; (after ipir) in Oğuz imir I 94: Çağ. xv ff. imir (spelt) buxári “a fog”, which rises from the ground and blots out the sky, in Ar. dabdb, in Pe. najm San. 115r. $. ?D amru: pec. to Uyğ. Bud.; its use in Hend, with üzüksüz and most other contexts in which it occurs suggest that it means 'continuously'; if so, difficult to connect semantically with *amur or *amur- although morphologically it could be a Ger. of the latter. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. amru (spelt eru) ayığ kılınçlarığ ok aşdım üklitdim erser must mean “if I have continuously accumulated (Hend.) evil deeds', Suv. 136, 19-21; same meaning TT VI 270; kayu ódün kaocao kilsar amru bolur seems to mean something like fit is a matter of indifference at what time one performs the kao chao meditation! TT V ro, 115 (he returned to his palace, said nothing to anyone and) amru busanu sakınu olurmiS “sat continuously (could be “quietly”) fecling anxious and thoughtful” USSp. 97, 27; 0.0. Suv. 109, 7; 464, 17 (üzüksüz). D amrak N./A.S. fr. amra:-, q.v. for the meaning; properly “benign, friendly', it came also to mean “to whom one is friendly ; beloved, dear'; it is often difficult to determine which sense is uppermost. It became an early ə ———— ———   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 207 
     
   
   
     D18. V. AMRl-w. in Mong. as amarağ "love, friendship (Haenisch 6); survives in some NE, SE, and perhaps NW languages, the dissyllabic forms being true survivals and the trisyllabic reborrowings fr. Mong. See Doerfer İl 554. Türkü vini ff. IrkB. Postserrpt (amtı:): Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-A Ezrwa teprini) amrak kizi 'the benign daughter of the god Zurvan' M Təş, 32-3: Man. M IT 8, 10 (ii) (öpüğse:-): Chr. Herod addressed the Magi as amrak oğlanlarım U 7 s, 4: Bud. the king habitualİy addressed his son as amrak oğlum or öğüküm PP 4, 4; 5, 7 etc.: amrak yeme adrılur seviğ yeme serilür “friends are parted and lovers are fickl6(?)” PP 78, 5-6; o.o. TT IV ro, 14; Suv. 446, 18; U II 78, 32; U III 12, 18; 36, 14 etc.; U IV 14, 143-5: Civ. (if a man has a mole on his pudenda) uzuntonluğka amrak bolur "he is friendly to women! TT VII 37, 6-7: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. ho hao (Giles 3,945 3,889) 'friendly' amirak (N.B. Mong. form) Ligeti 129; R I 648: Xak. xı amrak köpül al-qalbı”l-mahmülu'l-nagi "a warm, pure heart” Kas. 7 101: Çağ. xv ff. 1mraj (sie, spelt) majliib wa marğüb toa mahbüb 'desired, loved' San. 114v. 27 (quotns.): Xwar. xi(?) anun birle amırak (sic) boldi "he was friendly with him” Oğ. 123: Kom. xiv “having a liking for (something)' amrak CCG; Gr.: Kip. xii 'agiqa *to love (passionately) amra:k bol- Hou. 34, 8: xv mayl "inclination towards (someone) amrak Tuh. 9oa. 13. VU imrem “a public gathering; pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı imrem kut camd"at min ahli'l-wilàyva idà xüdü fi amr "any gatherings of the people of a province when they meet to discuss a matter'; one says imrrem té:risti: taharraka”l-camd" a “the assembly started to move! Kag. I 107; yağı: kelse: imrem tepre:şü:r da cá'a'l-'aduww | ictama"al-ahzab Hi-qitalihim "vrhen the enemy comes the troops assemble to fight them" 7 88, 2 (the translations make it clear that the original text had tepresti: in 7 107 and té:rigü:r in 7 88, 2). D amrang Dev. N./A. fr. amran- ; lit. “in easy circumstances” or the like. Acc. to F. W. K. Müller's note to U IJ 18, 6 corresponds to fregthi (which is normally translated baya:ğut) in the Sanskrit original. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vur ff. Bud. uluğ amrançlar atlığlar “great merchants and distinguished persons” Kuar. 124, 126 (U İH 18, 6 and 8): Osm. xiv émrenc/ émrence (?1mranc/imranca) occurs in two texts where it could have much the same meaning TT.S 7 379. Dis. V. AMR*amur- See amru:, amurt-, amrul-. E imer-/imir- See emğe:-. D amra:- Den. V. fr. *amur (see amul), N.o.a.b. but an early l.-w. in Mong. as amara"to be contented, at peace' (Haentsch 6, Ko., 99). NE Alt. amra-; Kumd., Tel. R 7 648, 164 Khak., Tuv. amıra- “to be at peace', euphemism for 'to die', no doubt reborrowings fr. Mong. rather than direct survivals. See amramaklığ. Uyğ. viri ff. Man. ançulayu amrar erti sizni tüzüğü “they loved you all in the same vvay” (as children love (sever) their mother and father”) TT III 98. emri:- Hap. leg., but see emrit-, emrişXak. xı ol menip yi:nim emri:di: ihtakka casadi "he scratched my body” Kaş. İ 275 (emri:r, emri:me:k). D amurt- Caus. f. of *amur-; “to quieten, calm (someone or something Acc.). Survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. amirt- same meaning SDD 99. See also amırtğur-. Xak. xı ol beg öpke:sin amurttı: askana ğadaba”l-amir “he calmed the anger of the beg”, also used for quietening the excitement of a colt or the boiling of a pot and the like, Kaş. III 428 (verse, no Aor. or Infin.). D emrit- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of emri:-, Xak. xı kaşınma:k menin yl:nim emritti: al-hikka ahakka casadi "the irritation made my body itch”, as when a man has an itch in his arm-pit or neck, and his body is irritated (yahtakk) by it and he bursts out laughing Kaş. 1 261 (emritür, enritme:k). D amrıl-famrul- Pass. f. of *amur-; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Man. amrılmış nirvanığ tapsunlar “may they be at peace and attain nirvána' TT III 168: Bud, argilar teg amrılmış kópüllüg 'with minds at peace like rsz's' U IV 34, 59-60; ötrü kópülleri amrilmaz turulmaz 'then their minds are uneasy (Hend.)' (and become full of doubt) Suv. 290, 16; o.o. U İİİ 7, 3; USD. 103, 23; TT VIII D.24: Xak. xı kayna:r eşiç amruldi: sakana”l-qidr fi ğalayünihd "the pot ceased to boil', because cold water was poured in it; and one says er tini: amruldi: sakana nafswl-racul ma máta “the man's. breathing ceased, and he died'; also used of anything that calms down (sakana) after being excited Kaş. l 248 (amrilur, amrilma:k; sic in MS); 2.0. 7 53, 4 (ağır): KB baripa bütün boljgil amrul amul “be sure of His existence, be at peace and quiet' 26; kópül yéme amrulup "and your mind at rest” 5760; a.o. 5826: xını(?) Tef. amrul- “to be at peace', şr. D amran- Refl, f. of amra:-, basically "to be friendly, loving” and the like in a good sense, it came sometimes to mean 'to desire, lust' in an evil sense in Uyğ. Bud., possibly because Chinese ai (Giles 15) was used in both senses. S.i.s.m.l.; NE Alt. amran- “to live in peace' R I 650, and SW xx Anat. amran- “to loll, sprawl' SSDD gg are prob. reflections of the meaning of amara- (amra:-) as a l-w. in Mong. but NC Kzx. émren-/émiren- (of a mother) “to fondle” R 7 963, MM 141 and SW Osm. imren- “to long for, covet'; Tkm. imrin- “to sympathize with, like” are no doubt direct survivals. Türkü vin ff. Man. (the four seals put on the minds of believers are)  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 208 
     
   
   
     164 DTS. V. AMRamranmak 'a loving disposition' (faith, fear, and wisdom) Chuas. 178; (honour, respect, and serve the Hearers) amranmak blligin “vith a loving disposition' TT 77 1o, 78, amranti kértgüntiler “they showed love and faith” do. 85: Uyğ. vir ff. Man.-A (I have written this) uluğ amranmakin ağir küsüşün “vith great lovingness and overwhelming desire' (i.e. for salvation) M 1 28, 21-2: Bud. sevgülük amranğuluk teg “like one whom one should love (Hend.)” T'T X 256; (in a passage on the viddana series) amranmak 'lust (Sanskrit frsmá, instead of the usual 2 a:z) U II 6, 11 and r5; todunçsuz uvutsuz amranmak kópül uğrında “because of insatiable, shameless, lustful thoughts! Chuas. Berlin 27, 7-8 (a Bud. text): a.o. Hiüen-ts. 1953 (isin-): (Xak.) xiv Rbg. kópül amrındı (sic?) *his heart was pleased' (with something Dat.) R I 650 (rather dubious, perhaps an error for amrildi). D amras- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of amra:-. Uy. viii ff. Bud. Sanskrit yathá sampremikayd “as if by mutual love” kaltı: a:mra:şmışınızla:rça: TT VIII A.ş. D emriş- Co-op. f. (in the sense of total action) fr. emri:- pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı etim barca: emristi: ihtakka casadi min carab aw nahreihi “my body itched with a skin disease or the like" Kaş. 7 236 (emrişür, emrisme:k); et yin üşüp emrişü:r (in winter) al-abdàn tarta"id hatta ka-anna dabiba”l-niml fi'l-badan “their bodies shiver as if ants were crawling on them” 7 463, ız. Tris. AMR F amarı: a l-w. of uncertain origin; v. G. suggested in /ndex to T T I- V Middle Persian abárig "some, a certain number of” and in TT X, p. 56, Middle Iranian Fahmdra, Saka ahumara “incalculable, some”, N.o.a.b. Uyğ. Man.-A Manı burxan amarı burxanlar vröştiler “the prophet Mani and other prophets” (Hend.) M I 24, 5-6; (some of the poultry were cocks? and) amari barca [gap] 'all the rest (hens?) do. 36, 8: Man. amari tınlığlar “some mortals” TT III 92: Bud. amari tınlığlar PP 1, 7; 2,2; 2,8 (u:d; some do one thing, some another, and so on): xırı(?) Tef. ba'duhum 'some of them' amarilart 76 (mis-spelt emeri). (D) emirçge: Hap. leg. Xak. xı emircge: al-ğudrüf 'cartilage; gristle' Kaş. İTİ 442. S omurtka See ofur£a. D amrançığ Hap. leg.?; Dev. N./A. fr. amran-; “lovable”, Uyğ. vii ff. Bud, U II 37, 60-3 (tapçasız). D amranmaklığ P.N./A. fr. the Infin. of amran-, n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vur ff. Bud. Sanskrit hümacchanda 'sexual desire' a:mra:nma:klığ küç TT VIII A.13; tüzün nomka amranmaklığ (spelt emraumakhg) sakınç üze “in loving meditation on the good doctrine' USSp. 59, 19-21; a.0. U 117 63, s(yalğantur-), 85, 1 (tügün). Tris. V AMR D amırtğur- Caus. f. of amirt- (amurt-), and practical syn. vv. it. N.o.a.b. Türkü viti ff. Man. köpülümüz amırtğurup 'pacifying our minds" TT II 8, 72-3: Uyğ. vini ff. Bud. amırtğurdaçı erür “it calms down' (all dissension and strife) U 77 58, s (i); adasin amırtğurup 'reducing its danger! Suv. 410, 17; yaviz tülnür ayığ tüşin amırtğurdaçı *counteracting the evil effects of bad dreams' Suv. 475, 10-11; olo. TT V 24, 78 (egrik); Suv. 399, 19 (kigen); JHüen-ts. 20oo (3 yupla:-). D amriltur- Caus. f. of amril-; syn. w. amırtğur-. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. diyan köpülüğ amrilturur “meditation (Sanskrit dhydna) calms the mind” TT V 24, 74: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. an wén "to pacify, calm' (Giles 44 12,660) amriltur- R 7650. Dis. V. AMSD emse:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of em-. Xak. xı kenç ana:sin emse:di: “the child decided and desired to suck (yarda') his mother” Kaş. I 278 (emse:r, emse:me:k). D emsi:- Hap. leg.; Simulative f. of em-. Türkü vırı ff. (a rich man's sheep ran away in a fright and met a wolf) bóri: ağzı: emsi:mi:ş "the wolf's mouth watered' IrkB 27. Dis. AMS ?F amşu: Hap. leg.; prob. a Chinese 1.-vv. 'The meaning must be something like 'offering. Uyğ. vırı ff. Bud. (give offerings and libations to the Buddhas and food to the spirits) yekke amşusı bu erür “the offerings(?) to the demon are these' (a long list follows) TT VII 25, 8-9. VU?F amşan Hap. leg.; prob. a Chinese ]-w. Xak. xı amşan al-burgán wa huma cild yutaxxad minhu'l-furto "lambskin, a skin used for making furs” Kaş. 1 109. VU?F amsu:y Hap. leg.; prob. a Chinese L-w. Xak. xr amsu:y “a kind of plum (al-iccág), yellow' Kaş. 1 115. Dis. V. AMS?F amus- Hap. leg.; no obvious Turkish etymology, perhaps der. fr. Pe. xámi$g or some cognate Iranian word. Xak. xı amuşdiı: er sakata”l-racul mutriqa(n) min "itáb aw làá'ima, wa kadalika ğayruhu "the man (etc.) was silent either because he risapproved or because he agreed' Kaş. 7 rgo (amusu:r, amuşma:k). Dis. AMY uma:y originally “placenta, afterbirth'; also used as the name of the (only?) Turkish goddess, whose particular function was to look after women and children, possibly because  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 209 
     
   
   
     MON. AN this object was supposed to have magic qualities. Survives, more or less in the second meaning, in NE Şor umay R 7 1788; Khak. 1may (stc) and NC Kir. umay; the last also means 'a mythical bird that builds its nest in the air', but this is merely a corruption of Persian humáy. Türkü vır (my younger brother grew to manhood) umay teg ógüm katu:n kuti:pa: 'under the auspices of my mother who is like (the goddess) Umay” 7 E 31; &amp;.0. T 38 (basa:)— Köğmen [.. .] 1duk yer suv [. . .) kan teprid[e: . . .] umay xatu:n Inscription on a tile found near Ulan Bator ET Y 1I 161: virt ff. Yep. in Mal. 28,a jumble of two separate inscridtiona, one seems to begin at |. ; bu atımız Umay beg atım, but Umay Beg is an unlikely name for a man: Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. two parties to a contract described themselves as Balığ Umay ikigü “Baliğ and Umay, the two of us togcther' USb. s, r and 6; umay köç tüşser “if the placenta is slow in coming away' TT VII 27, 16: Xak. xi uma:y “a thing like a small container (ka'I-hugqa) which comes out a woman's womb after a birth; it is said that it is the child's comrade (saltibu'l-walad) in the womb'. (Prov.) uma:yka: tapınsa: oğul bulu:r “if one worships the placenta (or Umay?) one gets a son”, the women take omens (vatafa''alna) with it Kaş. 1 123: Kip. xv xalaş (al-mar'a inserted above) umay Tuh. 14a. 9 (xalüş means “salvation”, which is quite inappropriate, and also “end”, the addition “of a woman! suggests that 'placenta' was intended). Dis. AMZ VU ümzük Hap. leg.; hardly to be connected with SW xx Anat. ümzük 'short pieces of thread' SDD 1431. The difference between the meanings of this word and yalığ is obscure. Xak. xr ümzük :araf Rhanwi'l-sarc muqaddam wa mu”axxar “the extremity of a saddle-bow in front and behind” Kaş. I 105. Dis. V. AMZD emüz- Caus. f. of em-; “to cause to suck”. "This is the oldest form; emfiz-, prob. a Sec. f. of it, is first noted in Muh. and survives in one or two modern languages, and emzür-, prob. a Caus. f. of it, is also noted in Muh. and was the standard form in Kip. (Hou. 36, 13; İd. 23; Kav. 69, 15). Emiz- s.i.a.m.l.g., sometimes perhaps for emğiz-, except in SW Az. emizdir-; Osm. emzir- ; Tkm. emdir-. Xak. xı ura:ğut oğlıpa: sü:t emüzdi: arda'ati'l-mar' atu'l-laban li'bnihàá "the woman suckled her child (with milk) Kaş. I 180 (emüzür, emüzme:k); a.o. III 264, ır: xin(?) Tef. emüz- “to put out (a child) to nurse” 77: xiv Muh. amaşşa "to cause to suck' emğiz- (sic) Mel. 41, ır, emiz- Rif. 132; (arda'a'l-walad emzür- 22, 5; emzü:r- 102): Çağ. xv ff. émiz- (spelt) Caus. f. of ém-; makönidan wa şir düdan “to suckle, give milk' San. 113v. 5; (émizdir- Caus. f. of emiz-, şir dihanidan do. 113v. 17). 165 Mon. AN Preliminary note. Apart from m there tere three nasal. sounds in early Turkish: dental n, tohich has survived in all languages, guttural y, thich has survived in some languages, been weakened to n in others and in a few, under the influence of Mong. (see Studies, p. 220), strengthened to 9, 9k, and palatal fi, tchich was already becoming obsolete in VIII and has noto evolved into y , n or a combination of the two, usually metathesized, see Clauson, ' The Turkish Y and Related Sounds! in Studia Altaica, Festschrift für Nikolaus Poppe, Wiesbaden, 1957. There is some difficulty in texts in Ar. script in distinguishing between 1) and nf, but the latter combination seems to occur only when -&amp;is the first letter of a suffix, and in Kaş. words containing y are placed in special sections for words containing that sound. Some authorities, e.g. ld., tried to overcome the difficulty by representing t) by n with a diacritical mark, usually three subscribed dots, but this mark is often laching in the surviving MSS.; in other: B sometimes seems to be used to represent y. D an- stem for the oblique cases of ol, q.v. 1 ap 'understanding, intelligence". The earliest note of this word is in Sam. but as it is the basis of apla:- it must be much older. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE and ?SC. See Doerfer II 56s. Çağ. xvff. an (spelt) "aq/-u fahm *intelligence, understanding' San. 52r. 2: Kip. XIV see apla:-. VU 2 ap Hap. leg.; possibly a Chinese l.-w. Xak. xı an ism tá'ir yutadáwd bi-şahmihi “the name of a bird vvhose fat is used for medicinal purposes”, if it is rubbed on the palm of the hand it penetrates to the other side Kaş. 7 4o. VU 3 an Hap. leg.; cf. 2 u:. Oğuz xı ayan exclamation (harf) meaning “no” (là); when a man is given an order he says ap ar “no no”, Kag. I 40. S? 4 ap See 3 ep. E? 5an See 1 ep. 1 én “breadth”, as opposed to length. S.i.a.m.l.g. in forms which clearly point to an original é-. Xak. xı €:n “the breadth' (al-'ard) of anything; hence one says bu: bó:z éni: neçe: “vhat is the breadth of this cloth?” Kaş. I 49:a.o. 1 349 (turk): KB 138 (evlig): xui(?) Tef. én “breadth” 77: xiv. Rbg. ditto R I 726 (quotn.); Muh.(?) 'ardu'l-tawb “the breadth of a garment' to:n €:ni: Rif. 167 (only): Çağ. xv ff. én (with é-") 'ard-u pahná 'breadth" San. 117v. r7: Kip. xiv en (erroneously marked *with back vowel'; v.l. en) al-'ard daddu'l-[awl "breadth', opposite to length d. 23: xv “arid "broad” (yaşşı and) en/én Tuh. 25a. 4. 2 6:n “sloping downwards'; pec. to Xak.; . homophonous vr. én-. Xak. xı €:n yé:r al-habüt mina”l-ard 'downward sloping ground" 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 210 
     
   
   
       166 MON. AN hence one says €:n yok /rabta zca sa' rid “up and down country” Kaş. 7 49; a.o. 111 4, iz (yı:ş). 3 €n “earmark” on sheep or other animals, not noted before xiv but the Dev. V. éne:- is older. Survives in NE Khak. Bas. sg, NC Kır., Kzx., and SW xx Anat. en, in, in SDD 531, 770, 791. Kip. xiv (after 1 é:n) also used şarat udni'l-janam "an earmark on sheep" 1a. 23 (156). 1 ep an Adiectival Prefix forming a quasiSuperlative. S.i.a.m.l.g. as et occasionally ép. In spite of the fairly consistent spelling ay in Uy£., which is contradicted by ep in TT VIII, there is no reasonable doubt that this was always ep. See Doerfer I1 566. Türkü vii en İlk 7 N 4; ep İlki: 7 E 32; İT E 30 "first of all (adverbially): Uyğ. vii ff. Man. -À epilki ditto M I 14, 6: Bud. Sanskrit antima- "last of all” (Adi.) ep kenki TT VIH 4.48; an(sic) ilki TT V 20,2; a başlayukı tıltağı “its primary cause” do. 20, 3 and 7; ap başı do. zo, 10; 24, 55; ar) başlayu Su. 348, 6; ap tübinde 'finally' TT VII 40, 143: Civ. ep ópre “first” (Adv.) TT VIII L.33; ay ilki TT VII 14, 4; H I 14: Xak. xi KB bularda ep altın “the lowest of these” 137, 793 (agnu:k1:), 3997; Kom. xiv er (before labials em) CCI, CCG, Gr. 89 (quotns.). 2 ey survives only in SW xix Osm. but even there described in Sar. 143 as 'obsolete'. Most authorities translate “check”, but as it fs often associated with colours, 'complexion', the Osm. meaning, may sometimes be intended; yana:k, the alternative word for “cheek” seems originally to have meant specifically “cheekbone”, Xak. xi er a/-xadd 'check'; one says kaizil ep red checks! Kaş. ] qo: KBsarığ kilğa en “it will make my cheeks vellow' 477; o.o. (see kiz-) i100, 2385: xiu(?) At. (the prophets have white faces, Muhammad is the eye in the face) yü olar kızıl ep bu enke men-e “or they (have) red cheeks, and he is the mole on the check” 26: xiv Muh.(?) al-xadd er) (followed by al-"arid 'cheek-bone' yana:k) Rif. 140 (only): Çağ. xv ff. ep yayak Vel. 31 (quotn.); ép ditto 84 (quotn.); ép güno wa "arid “complexion, cheek' San. 117v. 28 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv er 'check' Qutb 21; éy do. so, MN 6, etc.: Kip. xiv. eg (with -n) yatlaq '"ala'l-xodd "is used with reference to the cheek! İd. 25; (under buğday) em /azonu”"/l-xadd "the colour of the cheeks” do. 34. 3 en with a front vovvel occurs only in JIrA B, where it might mean “vild game” (but for this $&amp;:v migbt be expected) or, more generally, “food” (usually a:s). Its relationship to Mong. an wild game! (Kor. 15, Haltod 2) is obscure, but since the Mongols must have had their own word for “vvild game” the resemblance is prob. fortuitous. Ar) “vild game” in most NE languages R 7 182, Khak., 'T'uv., and NC Kir, is no doubt a Mong. lw. Türkü vir ff. bars keyi:k epke: mepke: barml:ş epi:zn mepi:n bulmi:s “a leopard and a deer went to look for game (or food?) and grain and found it” IrkB 31 (cf. eple:-). in “the hole, or lair, of a. wild animal”, S.i.a.m.l.g. Türkü vin ff. (I am a göldenheaded snake; cut my belly with a sword and) özü:m yul inti:n bagrmrn yul evr:ntiin 'pull me out of the hole and my head out of the berries(?)' IrkB 8: Xak. xı iin “the den ('arin) of a lion, the hole (tvicár) of a snake and the lair (ma' tà) of any predatory animal”, also pronounced yi:n Kaş. 1 49; yin “a lion's den', hence one says arsla:n yini:; also “the hole" of a snake, and 'the lair' of any predatory animal with fangs or tusks (dü nàb) is called yin /TI 5 (prov. with Dat. yinke:, verse with Dat. yınka: in error): Çağ. xv ff. in (by implication ^with i-") sirdx ta xüna-i cádmvaran "hole, or abode, of wild beasts! San. 117v. 4 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv in 'hole' Qutb şo: Kom. xiv ditto CCG, Gr.: Kip. al-mağdra “a cave! in Hou. 5, 18: xiv (after 1 én) also applied (yanfaliq) in Kip. to al-tvakr sva'l-svicár "the nest or hole! of a wild animal or the abodes (Puytit) of reptiles; hence yılan inidür “it is the hole (cu/ir) of a snake” İd. 23; al-wakr in Bul. 3, 16: xv cuhr in Tuh. 10a. ro: Osm. xv in 'hole, hiding place” (for a man) in one text T TS I 379. o:n “ten”, C.i.a.p.a.l.; the long vowel is shown by sporadic spellings of oon in Uyg., by o:n in Kag, vuná, voná, vunná, vonná in Cuv. Ash. V 266-7 and uon in Yakut Pek. 3037. Türkü vır on 7 N 7; T 26; vii ff. Man. oon Cöras. 42; 0n do. go: Yen. Mal. 26, 11; 28, 7; 29, 5; 30, 2: Üyü, vii Su. E 4, S 7: IX Suci 5; III C 4: vin ff. Man., Bud., Civ. common: xiv. Chin.-Uyg. Dict. on Ligeti 187: Xak. xr ozn al-'agara fi'l-'adad 'the number ten' Kag. I 49; 0.0. 1 69, 26; 219, 14: KB 132, 998, etc.: xi. Zt. (pains come) onun "ten at a time” 210; Tef. 237: xiv Muh. 'agara o:n Mel, 18, o and ri, 81, 8 and 12; Rif. oy, 186: Çağ. xv ff. on (by implication, *with o-") 'adad-i dih San. 88v. zo: X war. xiv MN 61: Kip. xrir "aşara on /lou. 22, 7: xiv on (with back vowel) 'agara İd. 23; Bul. 12, iz: xv ditto Kav. 39, 1 etc. 65, 8; Tuh. 6ob. 4 etc. u:n “flour”, S.i.a.m.lg. Xak. xr un ai-dagiq “Tour” Kaş, 1 49; about 20 o.o.: xiv Rbg. un 'fleur' R 1 1640 (quotn.); Muh. al-daqiq u:n Mel. 64, 7, Rif. 163: Çağ. xv ff. un (with u-”) 'anything pulverized” (mas/iiq) in general (quotn.) and drd 'flour' in particular (quotn.) San. 88v. 22: Xwar. xiv un 'flour' Quib 198: Kip. xii (after 0:n), and it is also “ground flour' (a/-daqiqı”l-mathün) Hou. 22, 7: xiv un (with back vowels) al-dagiq İd. 23; al-tahin “flour” un Bul. 8, 8: xv al-dagiq u:n Kav. 63, 15; Tuh. 15a. 13. 1 op like 1 sa:ğ q.v. and, in English, 'right', the opposite both of “left” and of “vvrong”. Both meanings seem equally old. Except in scripts which carefully distinguish between oand Ó- easily confused with 1 öp, particularly in regard to the cardinal points, since for someone facing East öntün is “East” and for someone facing South optun is “VVest”, Rare in the early period but s.i.a.m.lg. in both   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 211 
     
   
   
     UM MON. AN  meanings, in SW only in the second meaning and in 'l'km. and xx Anat. SƏD 1090-1. Sce Doerfer 11 624. Uyğ. viii ff. Man.-A opinta tepri yeriperü kapağın açdı “on his right he opened the door to heaven” M 7 13, 6-7: Bud. (if he perforins two kinds of deeds) terşli oplt edgüli ayığlı *wrong and right, good and bad” TT VI 196; similar phr. do. ası: Civ. (let him hold this amulet) on ayasinda “in his right palm' TT VII 27, 8: Cigil xı or eliğ a/-vadu'l-yumnà “the right hand” Kaş. 1 41; a.o. (Xak.) I 72, 14 (elig): KB kédin ópdiün ermez n3 soldin opun “(God) is not behind or in front, to the left or the right' 18; o.o. of 'right"(not left) 772, 917, 1857, 4056, etc. — right” (not wrong) 536 (in antithesis to tetrü:), 1225, 590g: xın(?) At, the uses of or) are obscure; in seni rahmatiydin umarmen op-a in it seems to mean *I long for right (guidance) from thy mercy' but in 115-16 (and 198) it seems rather to mean “destiny, fate', kamuğ tórlüg iste biligsiz onı ökünç ol apar yok or anda adın “in all kinds of things the fate of the ignorant man is regret, he has no other fate but this”, Tef. on “right” (not left) 237: Çağ. xv ff. OD sağ faraf “the right side” (quotns.) . ., and sawáb ve rást "right, correct” Vel. 121; ot) (1) rast ba-ma'ná-yi gawáb (quotn.), (2) ràást daddi gap “opposite to left” (quotn.) Sar, Sor. 6: Xwar. xır(?) op yanakta “on the right side” Oğ. 116: xiv op ditto Qufb 117: Kom. xiv. “right (side); right (in antithesis to ters); salvation” op CCI, CCGi Gr. 177 (quotns.): Kap. xiv op (^with -p') al-yamin İd. 25; 2.0. do. 58 (1 sa:ğ), op al-mustaqim “right, straightforward' do. 25: xv yamin 0:1) (mis-spelt oz) Kav. 35, 4; Tuh. 39a. 9; 73b. 8; mustagim op Tuh. 34b. 10. ? 209 Hap. leg.; therc is no other trace of such an abbreviation of opa:y, and it is possible that this was a misunderstanding of 1 on in the sense of “right (not wrong)', which is not noted in Kaş. Xak. xı 0p ı:ş al-amru'l-sahl wa huma qaşr opa:y “an easy thing”, abbreviation of opa:y Kaş. 1 41. iün/ü:n originally "the sound of the human * 'voice', hence more generally “sound”. "The metaph. meaning 'fame' in K.B seems to survive only in SW Osm. Although Xaş. gives the alternative ü:n, ün was prob. the usual form. S.i.a.m.l.g. Türkü vrr ff. Man. uluğ ünün mapradı “he shouted in a loud voice” M 7 6, 10; a.0. M III 45, 5 (i) (E etin): Uyğ. vri ff. Bud. seviglig Ezrwa ünin “vith Zurvan's (i.e. Brahma's) lovely voice U İZ 34, 3 (ii); küvrügdin ün üner 'a sound rises from the drum' Suv. 375, 9; 0.0. U /H 13, 5 (i) (LL aci); Suv. 346, 22; 490, 18; TT V ro, 104 and 108: Civ. kim üni bütüp “if anyone loses his voice” H I 146; a.o. II 16, 29: Xak. xı ün al-;atut; it is also permissible ( yacüz) to say ü:n Alaş. I 39; Ü:n a/-satct, mamdüd wa maqşür *with long or short vowel' 7 49; six o.o.: KB ün (1) “human voice” 77, 1132; (2) bird”s call” 74-8; (3) 'noise' 5954; (4) atı üni “his name and 167 fame" 1692; a.o. 5153: xın(?) Tef. ün “human voice; animal call” 338: xiv Muh. al-şarct ü:n Mel. 73, 12; Rif. 176: Çağ. xv ff. ün (with ü-”) şadd wa àwàz "voice, sound” San. 88v. zo (quotn.): Xwar. xin ditto "AH 21: xiv ditto Qutb. 203: Kom. xiv ditto CCI, CCG; Gr: Kip. xır (after 0:n) also a/-şazct soa'I-híss “voice” Hou. 22, 7: xiv ün (with front vowel") al-sawt İd. 23: xv hiss (in margin hissu'l-na'am *voices of animals") ün Tuh. 12b. 6, şadd ((1) tat, pas with şadd tmina'l-hadid 'iron rust' in the margin; (2) with a/-bayagi "the ordinary (meaning) in the margin) ün do. 22a. rr: Osm. xivff. ün “sound, voice” c.ía.p.; *fame' not noted before xix TTS I 744-5; Il 950-2; III 729; IV 8oz. 1l öp “the front" of anything; in the early period used mainly in oblique cases of which two, öpdün and Ópre: are listed separately; the form ÖDü, q.v., may be a crasis of ópkü:, N./A.S. in -kü: (-ki:). Survives only(?) in SW Az., Osm., Tkm. Türkü vin ff. Man. (if they go to heaven) ópü kapığı kün ay tepri 0l 'its front gate is the sun and moon gods' Chuas. 7-8: Civ. özüne öp iş başlağıl “begin the work which confronts you” TT I 150; in USPp. s, 3 (üçün), 48, 3; 112, 7 which are all receipts given to replace previous receipts, the original, lost, document is called ön bitig “previous(?) document”: Xak. xı ön a/-quddüm "the front", one says ol menden ópdün bardı: "he went in front of me" (quddámi) Kaş. I 4o: xu(?) KBVP (they read this book) malıknıin öpünde “in the presence of the king” 6o: xıır(?) At. öD (1) as an. Adv. eg., (day and night follow one another) ór son-a “in front and behind' 14 (ud-); (2) as a Postposn. e.g. (save yourself from the fire) ölümdin ÖDp-e “before death”: (3) as an Adj., e.g. (this world is an inn at which travellers halt as they pass) ön arkış uzadı kopup yol tutup öpl kopmis arkış neçe keçgülük “the caravan in front has gone away, starting and taking the road, how can another caravan which has (already) started be far behind?' 179-80; Tef. Öp occurs as an Adv. and Postposn. after Abl. and in phr. like senin ópüpde "in your presence” 246: xiv Rog. Qabılnın ópünde “in the presence of Cain” R 7 12o2: Caf. xv ff. Op evvel 'first', etc. Vel. 121: Oğuz xı (after ópdün al-quddám) the Oğuz omit the -dün and say ÖD Kaş. I 115: Xwar. xiv Öp with Abl. 'before' (of time); ópüype “into his presence! Qutb 123: Kom. xiv “in the presence of God” tegeri önünde (sic) CCG; Gr. 183: Kap. xii maqddimt”l- faras "a horse's forelegs' 6:) aya:kla:rı: Hou. 12, 18: Osm. xiv to xvi ÖD, as an Adv., and Postposn. after Abl., “before” (of time and place) is common; occasionally means “superior to (something Abi.” TTS I 564; 1II 559; İV 624. 2 öp 'colour', of anything. Since Chinese sé (Giles 9,602), properly “colour”, is also used to translate Sanskrit ripa “material form”, in some Man. and Bud. texts ór is used in the same technical sense, instead of the natural m————— ——á—á!——— Tw Mn—!—ÀÁvÁ "ÁnÁ en E&amp; EE — À | LLLEEELELELUOIIJIXLLLDSÁDEXERQESIPO'EIIILLSLLLELIL)SDIIIIAIIIAIIMIIRMBMÍ E E NN 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 212 
     
   
   
     168 MON. AN translation of this word, kórk, q.v. Survives only in some NE languages and NC Kir, Kzx.; in these languages it tends to mean 'the complexion of the face' and even 'the face', which leads to confusion with 2 ep and even 1 óp. Türkü vri ff. Man. (the five gods are the majestv) ópl mepzi “the material form (Hend.)' (the self, soul, strength, light, and root of everything on earth) Chuas. 46: Uyğ. viti ff. Bud. beş tórlüg yaruk öp 'five kinds of bright colours! TT V rə, 133—at Op translates. Sanskrit sámarüpa 'identity and material form” U 1I ız, 19, etc.; öp körk rüba TT VI ısı, etc., Suv. 164, 20: Xak. xı ÖD “the colour' (/aten) of anything; hence one says ya:şıl önlüğ to:n “a green (axdar) coloured garment! Kaş. 7 41. VU 3 ön (?üD) 'desolate, uninhabited, desert”. A rare word, n.o.a.b., first identified by Bang in Turcica (M.V.A.G. 1917) p. 286. The synonymous word e:n in most NE languages R I 729; Khak. Bas. 334; Tuv. Pal. 591 and NC Kir. is phonetically so remote that it is hard to connect with this word. Türkü virt ff. özlük at ön yérde: arip opu:p turu: kalmi:ş “a well-bred horse came to a standstill in a desert exhausted and wilting' IrkB 17: Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. tağda ön (v.l. tag) yerde kanda yorısar “on the mountains and in the deserts (v.]. stony or foreign places) wherever he goes. TT VI 115; taştın ön yerde yoriy[ur] do., p. 62 note 115, 2; sansarlığ uzun ön kürtüküğ “the long deserts and snowdrifts of samsára! U I1I129,35; 00 kürtük otrasinda boltukta “vhen one is in the middle of deserts and snowdrifts' Tis. sob. s. Mon. V. ANAp- “to remember, call to mind”. Unless apmın q.v. is an error, not noted before xitt(?) but prob. an older word. Sar.s translation “to understand” is prob. due to confusion with 1 ap and not evidence for an earlier connection between the two words. Survives in NW Kar. Krım R 7 123 and SW Osm., 'Tkm. (Xak.) xin(?) 4t. muni ked ap-a “be sure to remember this” 18; sözümni ap-a “remember my words' 22; Tef. ap- “to remember ss: Çağ. xvff. ap- yàd hardan wa fahmidan sa mutadakkir şudan "to remember, understand, call to mind” Sar. sov. 8 (quotns. in Çağ. and Rim): X war. xiv ap- “to remember” Qutb 9: Kip. xi dakara min dihr xütir”l-şay” “to remember, in the sense of recalling the thought of something' ap- Hou. 35, 8: xiv ap- ("with -9-") dakara İd. 24: xv ıftakara "to think of (something)! ap- Tuh. 5b. r2. én- 'to descend, come down'. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SE in a variety of forms én-, en-, inwhich point to an original é-. Türkü vrrr balıkdakı: tağıkmış tağdakı: enmiş “those vvho vvere in tovvns took to the mountains, and those in the mountains came down' 7 E 12, /7 E r, ibarlık(?) aşdımız yuvulu: éntimiz *we crossed the Barlık (mountain?) and went rolling(?) down hill' T 26: vir (T. Man, enti "he came down' C7rmas, I 4: Yen, bağım kelip esen énip 'my clan came and descended in safety' Mal. 39, 4 (fragmentary, dubious text): Uyğ. vut ff. Man. kalığtın kodi éntipiz “you came down from the firmament” TT III 35; 2.0.0. : Bud. bu yértincüke éne yarlikasar “if (Maitreya) deigns to come down to this world' TT IV 12, 47; uluğ bedük küsüske énip 'sinking in great (Hend.) longing! Suv. 615, 6-7, o.o. PP 49, 5; USp. 94, 4: Civ. aşt kodı enmeser “if (the patient's) food will not go down! H II 14, 119: Xak. xı ol ta:ğdın kodi: éndi: “he descended (nazala) from the mountain'; the -n- is changed (nrebdala) from -1- (see 11-) as in Ar. şafr/şatl and kabn/kabl Kaş. I 169 (no Aor. or İnfin.), (the snow) éne:r “falls” (yanzil) 11 204, 13: KB énigli afar ol ağığlı éner “vhat falls rises, and what rises falls! 1049; a.o. 210: xi1i(?) Tef. én- “to descend, come down' 125 (in-): xiv Rbğ. énditto R 7 727 (quotn.): Mwuh. nazala én- Mel. 31, 115 Rif. 115; olo. 8, 6; o, r, 3, and 8; 81, 123: Çağ. xv ff. én- (with. é- iiv. 7) furüd ámadan wa názil şudan "to come down, descend' San. 115r. 12 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv én- ditto MN 137: Kom. xiv 'to descend' enCCI, CCG, Gr.: Kip. xir nazala (tüş- and) en- (?, unvocalized) Hou. 33, 16: xiv énnaxala İd. 23. 1 ep- “to be perplexcd'; n.o.a.b,, but sec enit-, eptür-. Xak. xı er endi: tahayyara”l-racul "the man was perplexed” Kaş. I 174 (epe:r, epme:k); (see manly virtue and learn it but do not be proud; if a man boasts of his manly virtue without possessing it) enmegüde: (sic) ene:r yatahayyar hálata'l-imtthán “he is perplexed when it comes to a test” 7 252, 19 (the verse has two more syllables than it should, and the first word is probably corrupt): KB epip kaldı Ögdülmiş elgin uva “Ögdülmiş stood in perplexity, wringing his hands! 5967: Osm. xiv to xvi epü yapu *perplexed, at a loss' in a few texts T T'S I 270; Il 385; III 254; IV 299. S? 2 ep- “to bend”, etc. See eg-. on-, etc. Preliminary note. Kaş. /ists three verbs of this form o9- "fo fade', ün- “to rise', and üp“to hollotu out), but not on- "fo prosper! which was tell established at an earlier date, and still survives, though in most languages as 09-. T'wo more verbs appeared in the medieval period, ün- “to be stubborn! and Ön- “to lie in mait. It is not always easy in texts to decide which verb is intended and sometimes sehether. wwords. like onar and onu are conjugational forms of one of these verbs or a longer verb like opar- or a Pronoun (see D onu). on- “to thrive, prospet'. Certainly so spelt in the early period, but became Or- in the medieval period, possibly by false analogy with 1 op, opar-, etc., and s.i.a.m.l.g. with these and some extended meanings, usually as op-. Uy£. virt ff. Man.-A. ol tigi takığular 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 213 
     
   
   
     DIS  kamağan onarlar ermiş yeme érkeki nep [onmaz] ermiş “the hens all seemed to thrive and the cocks [not to thrive] at all” M I 36,8-11; onar . . . onmaz ... onmaz ... onar do. 37, 16-18: (Bud. ongalt kópülgerip in U H 8, 22; 9, 1 efc. is a mistranscription of ögeli): Xak. xi KB bilig bilse ötrü kamuğ ış onur “if he learns wisdom, all his affairs prosper” 1680; similar phr. 2451; serinse kişi teğme işte onur “if a man is patient he is successful in all his deeds” 2612; the interjections ay onur “oh successful man”, and ay kılki onur “oh man of a successful character” are fairly common 2143, A501, 5561; a.o. 2353; (the theory in R 7 1626 that there was also a form op- in Xak. is based on misunderstanding of ondi, q.v. in 4605 and ogar (Imperat.) in 4265): Kip. xiv jg ondi: istagáma'l-amr "the matter was satisfactory, in good order” İd. 25: xv fstaqáma 09- Tul. sb. 7; aflaha "to prosper, thrive! (yalşı- and) opdo. sb. ro: Osm. xiv ff. op- "to thrive, prosper; (of a wind) to be favourable'; c.r.a.p. TTS 1 sas, II 731; III 546; IV 610. 1 op- “to turn pale, to fade, to wilt'. S.1.a.m.l.g. except SW; in SE Türki óp-. Türkü vırı ff. IrkB. 17 (3 öy): Xak. xi barçın bodu:gi: opdi: irrfamasa wa dahaba lawnu'l-dibác wa ğayriht "the colour of the brocade faded and disappeared” Kaş. 11 75 (opa:r, opma:k (sic): KB yüzi kizdi opdi “his face turned red, and then pale' 3845; (the sky, like a devil's face) karardı opup “faded and turned black” 5029; Xwar. xiv on- “to turn pale' Qutb 117 (sic; but the word seems actually to be 2 op- (on-)): Kom. xiv “to fade, wil op- CCG; Gr. S 20p- Sce on-, VU ün- “to risc”, while still maintaining contact with the point of departure, e.g. (of a plant) “to sprout”, (of a man) “to stand up”, as opposed to 1 ağ- “to ascend, climb”, from one point to another. There is great inconsistency: about the vovvel, the form is ön- in Kom. and NC Kır., Kzx., but ün- in NE Tuv. R I 1820, Pal. 432. SE Türki Shaw 28; BS 797; Jarring 327, and SC Uzb. as well as TT VIII, so ün- is prob. the original pronunciation; see 1 ö:r-. Türkü viri ff. yaş ot ündi “the fresh grass sprang up” /7rkB s3, a.o. 6o (bediz), xanlık süsi: avka: ünmi:ş “the Xan's army set out for a hunt' 63; a.o. 49 (1 ımğa:)—in the following passages yün- seems to be a Sec. f. of ün-; (if one takes a white stone and) kiztlsrÉ suv yünser “a reddish water (i.e. tint) rises in it” Toyok 16 (ETY II 58); a.o. do. 22; Man. M III zə, ız (ii) (ezük): Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A M I 77, 2-3 (iğaç): Man. kisiğ oruntakilar barca üntiler 'those who were in confined spaces all rose up” TT' III 103-4; evtin barktın üntiler “they left their homes' do. 138: Chr. neçükin Urışlımtın ünüp bardılar erser “hovvever they went when they rose and left Jerusalem' U I 6, $: Bud. Sanskrit abhramukta “released from the clouds' (moon) bu:lrttin. ünmis TT VIII B4; medhyajalajátam “born in wunclean water . ANA 169 arığsızlığ su:vta: ünmiİşiğ do. D.36; a:tı ünme:yökine “as their name has not arisen” (i.e. been mentioned) do. H.5: kim etad uktam bhavati *why has this been said?” translated bo sa:vda: ne: yörüğ üne: “vhat explanation arises in this statement?” do. H.6; ört yalın üner “a flame rises” U /7 25, 27; 0.0. do. 27, 22; Suv. 375, 9 (ün), ago, 18; TT V 8, 7o; PP 4, $, etc. (all transcribed ón-): Civ. kün üne:r “the sun rises! TT VIII P.39; yürür bultt ünüp “a white cloud rose and...” TT 7 4-55 0.0. do. 45, 46; in medical language ünmeans (of a boil, etc.) “to come to a head” e.g. kart terk üner 'the swelling quickly comes to a head” H 116, 6 ünüp edgü bolur “it comes to a head and gets better” do. 7, 2; a.o. H 1 146 (bos); in Fam. Arch. evdin ün-, of a sum of money, means 'to come from the family's own resources”, and not from a loan: O. Kir. ix ff. yetmiş yaşıma: üntim “1 have reached my 7oth year” Mal. 42, 3: Xak. xı ot ündi: nabata” l-nabt “the plant sprang up”, and in Uyğ. (one of the very rare refces. to this language in Kaş.) one says ol evke: ündi: dahaba ila baytihi "he went home” Kaş. I 169 (üne:r, ünme:k), and seven o.o. of plants, trees, etc.: KB ün- “to spring up” of plants, etc. is common, 120, 972, 975 (2 ap), 2688, 4522, etc.; of a beard 3622 (umun-): xiri(?) Tef. ün- (of plants, etc.), “to sprout, come up” 337: Çağ. xv ff. ün- (-di, etc.) iki kat ol- "to become twice the size' Vel. 120 (quotn.); ünrüyidan "to grow, increase! San. 86v. 26 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv ün- (of plants, etc.) 'to sprout, come up” Qutb 123 (ón-), 203 (ün-): Kom. xiv 'to come out of, proceed from (something 4bL) ón- CCG; Gr. 183 (phr.): Kip. xiv ön- (with front vowels) nutica “to grovv” İd. 23: (Osm. xvii (after Çağ. ün-) the Rümi Turks say ÖD- San. 86v. 26 (no doubt misunderstanding of 2 on- (on-), the word is otherwise unknown in Osm.)). üp- “to dig a hole in (something Zcc.); to hollow (it) out”: cf. 2 üş-, differs from 1 ót-, 1 1:r- in that the latter imply passage through an object, while ür- implies only partial penetration. Survives only(?) in NC Kir. üpü-; Kzx. üng-. Xak. xı ol yığa:ç ündi: naqaba”l-xaşab "he hollowed out the piece of wood (etc.)”, also used when one digs a hole for the foundation of a wall (etc.) (ida naqaba ussa'l-hà' it) Kaş. I 174 (üpe:r, ünme:k): Kom. xiv “to dig, excavate' üp- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv. üp- (with -n-) catewafa bi'l-nagr "to hollow out, excavate' 1d. 25. Dis. ANA ana: 'mother'. Like ata:, q.v., first appears in Uyğ., where it is still rare and 1 ö:ğ, q.v., still common. C.ia.m.lg. except NE where it has been partially displaced by Mong. ece/ice; sometimes subjected to unusual deformations, e.g. anne, to make it a term of more intimate affection. See Doerfer 11 567. Uy. vin ff. Man. anasın [gap] oğlanı severçe “as children love their mother [and father?]' TT III 98-9 (babasın is restored in the gap, but this m—————— — —)nesÁ—nn—X 1—IDM QE EE OLICE)]IEELLELELLLEÉECIEEEIIÁLLIEERIEEICI)LAIIILILIZELLELEIHIUIIUILKHHBREIBHIBHS E EE NN 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 214 
     
   
   
     170 DIS. is quite a modern word and can hardly be right): Bud. Sanskrit matrgata “the company of mothers! analar kuvrağı U 1I s4, 1 (i); öz elgin anasın ölürmiş “vho had killed his mother with his own hands" U III 53, s (ii); (no o.o. noted): Civ. ana tegiri 'the mother's share” Up. 55, 26; öğey anamız “our step-mother' USp. 78, 8 (Arat's corrected text): xiv Chin.-Uyğ. Dict. “mother” ana Ligeti 130; “mother-in-lav” kadın ana R 7 226: Xak. xı ana: al-umm “mother” Kaş. 1 93; (in the Preface) “the Turks call “mother” ana: and they (the (non- Turkish) inhabitants of Khotan and Gancak) call her hana: / 32, 29; and 12 o.o.:: KB atasın anasın 37; a.0.0.: XitI(?) At. ata bir ana bir “vith thc same father and mother” 291; Tef. ana “mother” 5r: xiv Muh. al-umm ana: Mel. 49, 3; Rif. 143;2.0.0.: Xwar. xıt(?) ana “mother” Oğ. 8: xiv ditto Qutb 8; Nahc. 4, 14: Kom. xiv ditto CCI, CCG, Gr.: Kip. xiu al-umm ana: Hou. 31, 19: xiv ditto /d. 23 ('with back vowels"); Bul. 9, 2: XV ditto Kat. 44, 17; Tuh. ab. 11. ini: *younger brother”, C.i.a.p.a.l., but in SW Osm. largely displaced by such phr. as küçük kardeş. Cf. éci:; See Doerfer 11 674. Türkü vit inim and inisi: are common in 7 and //, a collective Plur. in -&amp;ü:n occurs three times; in £ S 1 the spelling is clearly znygiónm, in II N 1 the stone seems to be damaged beyond repair at this point, and Radloff's “retouched” squceze simply reproduces the word fr. 7 S r, in £ N 11 the third letter is not clear in either Russian squeeze or Finnish photograph, but it is clearly not y and could well be f, the -yin 7 S 1 can, therefore, be taken as one of several mason's errors and the word read everywhere, as might be expected, ini:gü:nim “my younger brothers': vril ff, Man. inili écili 'sounger and elder brothers! Chuas. I 31: Yen. inim eçim Mal. 28, 4; a.o.o.: Uyğ. ix inim Suci 6: viii ff. Bud. inisi U II 26, 15; PP 28, 7; a.0.0.: Civ. ini is common in USp.: xiv. Chin.--Uyğ. Dict. "younger brother” ini Ligeti 157; R I 1444: O. Kir, ix ff. inim eçim Mal. 18, 2; a.o.o.: Xak. xı ini: al-axu H-aşğar fi'l-sinn “a younger brother” Kaş. I 93: KB €çi ya ini 3784: Çağ. xv ff. ini kücüh karindag Vel. 8o (quotns.) ; inl biradar-i kügak San. 118r. 12 (quotn.): Xwar. xır(?) ağaları inileri 'clder (Mong. l-w.) and younger brothers! Og. 331: xiv ini Quitb so (young'(?) is suggested as translation, but 'vounger brother” would suit the text): Kom. xiv. 'grandson' (sic) inl CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiv inim a/-Rabir yuxátibu'l-sadir 'an — elder addresses a younger (thus)! 7d. 24: Osm. xv ini in one text 7735 II 542. VU ona: an Adv., pec. to Uyğ. and discussed at length in T'T V, p. 32, note B 8o. It seems to mean both (r) *precisely, exactİy” and (2) '(very) soon'. It seems to be the origin of a modern word ana (with other forms ene, anav) used as an Excl. meaning 'here, here you are”, and an Adv. meaning “merely, simply' which occurs in some NE and NW languages,   ANA NC Kzx., and in a wide range of forms in SW xx Anat. S DD 99, 100, tör, 104, 532, 534, 537, 791, 793. The Kzx. phr. ana mina suggests a connection with ol and v. G. ATG, para. 190 adopts this suggestion, but the oblique stem of ol is consistently an- (with some traces of 1n-) in Uyg. Cf. onu: Uyğ. vt ff. Bud. Ratnaraşı atlığ acarr ona amtı bu erür 'now this is the teacher named Ratnaraşı” Suv. 573, 20-1; Brahmadatı élignig fkörünçlüki) ona iraktın közünü turur “King Brahmadattas' tate chariot(?) is just appearing in the distance! U 77 22, 5-6; men ona basa yitdim 'I have certainly. gone astray” Sie. 615, 14-15; Onn at the beginning of a long sentence. TT. I/ 24, So, (for the second meaning see onakaya). D o:nu: pec. to Xak.(?); apparently the Zlcc. of ol used as a sort of Excl., but irregular since the oblique stem of ol in Xak. is an-. Possibly a later form of ona: q.v. Xak. xı onc says o:nu: meaning göka “that” and mu:nu: meaning Rada “this” fi'l-ijára ila'l-'ayn miüna"l-a"yün “to distinguish one thing from another” Kag. III 238: KB onu and munu occur several times as rhymes at the end of consecutive hemistichs but add little or nothing to the meaning; ayur emdi oğlum barırmen munu sapa kaldı ornum barı ner onu “he said "now, my son, I am going away (from here); niy position and all my goods remain (there) for you” ' 1161; sözin kesti Öğdülmiş aydı munu bu yaplığ bolur beg tapuğçı onu “Ögdülmiş finished his specch and said (this) “the (relations between the) beg and the servant arc like this” (therc)' 4155. Oópl: “other than (somcthing 42/.), different”, when doubled, ópl: ópi: means “various, different kinds of”, Kaş. quotes an alternative form ópin, no doubt Secondary, which appears in some medicval texts, and was the origin of ógin/ógün, q.v. Survives, with minor phonetic variations in most modern language groups, not SW, in SE, SC meaning 'varicgatcd, parti-coloured', perhaps owing to a supposed connection with 2 óp. Cf. adın, adruk, ózge: Türkü vir ff. (how shall I get on) idişimte: ayakımta: ópi: *without my cup and bowl?' IrkB 42: Man. (if we have said) kentü özüumüzni (sic) künte ayda öni biz *we ourselves are independent(?) of the sun and noon! Chuas. 26-7, antın ópl bolğay "it will be different from that” 77 II 6, 25: Uy. vin ff, Man. biligsiz [biligtin] ópi üdürtüpüz 'you separated (mortals) from ignorance” T'T III 31-2: öni ópi kut vvaxşiğlernip “of various good spirits (Hend.)” do. 170: Chr. andın ópi yolça “by a different road” U I 9, 14: Bud. Sanskrit anyatrü ori TT VIII A.30; vibragamita 'separated, parted" öni ba:rırla:r e:rdi do. C.11; 6pl ópi "vartous, different” do. 4.2, G.14, H.8 (09€ ópé); Suv. 598, 1 etc.; burxandın öni “other than the Buddha” U II 32,65; muntada adin tak: ópi aş icgü yok “there is no other (Hend.) food and drink but this” Suv. 610, 16-17; o.o. PP  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 215 
     
   
   
     MON. ANC 66, 2-3 (olğurt-): TT V əz, 40-1 (üdrül-); II 42, 7-8 etc.: Civ. ópi öpl H II 26, 103, etc.; in H I 122 kentir sığnı üç öni kesip “cutting hemp sig(?) into three parts' ÖDİ is prob. an error for ülügi: Xak. xı ópi: a Particle (harf) meaning ğayr “other”, the final yd is altered from the -n in Öönİn, just as in Ar. inhamü is altered from inkamana Kaş. I 135; ópin same translation; one says bu: attan öpin keldür 'bring a horse different from this one” (gayr hádà) I 94: KB (perfume and wisdom) bolmaz özde Opi “are not essentially different” 31:1; bolur xalqka asğı öni 'it has various advantages for phe people' 856; 0.0. 413, 562 (adınçığ), 4320 — yarukta ópin “different from light" 835; a.o. 5530: xu(?) KBVP ópin at “a different name” 26, 67: xim(?) At. 180 (1 69); Tef. ópin “other, different” 247 (in Tef. only ODİ means 'previous', in antithesis to SOD1 'subsequent"): Xwar. xiv tepridin ópin 'other than God' Nahc. 248, 9; öninlerni ixtiyür kilur “he prefers the others” do. 255, 8: Kip. xır önü: and özge: are mentioned as alternatives to ayruk for ğayr Hou. 54, 13-19. ?S D ógü has been read in various passages but does not seem to be an independent word. Türkü vir ff. Man. ópü Sec. f. of 1 öp Chuas. 7 (see 1 öp), kamağ önü(?) yaruk [gap] TT 71 8, 7o (?misreading of öni), söz sav üngüsi “the words which rise” (Particip. of ün-) M İİİ 16, 12: UYĞ. vitr fi Man.-A (gap— they ate and killed his body(?)') tamu ópünipe tüsti, ?error for ópüpe “he fell into the front of hell' M I 20, 11: Bud. [gap]ktin üngü (gap) Particip. of ün- U II 4, 1: Civ. öpü in USp. 65, 4 makes no sense and is prob. a misreading of ótrü: Kom. xiv “only" öpü CCG; Gr. which survives in NW Kar. L inno/onno “only, only just' R 7 1044, 1446 looks like a Sec. f. of ona:. Dis. V. ANAanu:- "to be prepared, made ready'. N.o.a.b., but see anut-, anuk. Uyğ. vı ff. Civ. (an adopted child) Sutpaknın bermiş aşın yep animis İşin kılıp “shall eat. the food given by Sutpak and do the vvork preseribed(?) by him” USp. 98, 5-7 (rather a dubious reading): Xak. xı anu:dı: ne: “the thing was prepared (u'idday; this is an Intrans. (lázim) verb, corresponding to *in'adda, but this word does not exist in Ar. Kaş. IJI 256 (anu:r, anu:ma:k). D éne:- Den. V. fr. 3 én; "to earmark” (an animal). In the medieval period came to mean *to castrate' (primarily an animal, but also a human being). Survives only(?) in NC Kzx. ene- “to earmark' and SW Osm. ene- “to castrate'. Xak. xı ol ko:yın éne:di a'lama ganamahu bi-qaf" atráfi'l-ádán *he marked his sheep by cutting the edge of its ears” Kaş. III 256 (éne:r, 6ne:me:k): Kip. xim xaşd min xagyi'l-faras wa ğayrihi "to castrate a horse or other (animal)' éne - (?, unvocalized) Hou. 38, 7: xıv éne- xaşd İd. 25: Osm. xvi ff. enea71 (less often éne-) 'to castrate' in several texts TTS 1 268; II 384; İV 297. *ina:- See mağ, inal, 1nan-, etc. una - (Intrans.) “to be pleased, satisfied; to agree to (do something, -ğalı/-geli )'; (Trans.) *to be pleased with, to approve (something, originally Acc., later Dat. or Abl). All occurrences prior to XI seem to be in the Neg. f. S.i.a.m.l.g., in NE 1na-/una-. Türkü vir ff. tepri: una:maduk avı:nçu: “the slave girl whom Heaven did not favour” İrRB 38, a.o. Toyoh I1I 2v. 5-6 (ETY II 179) (1 a:1): Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. (the prince) yokaru turğalı aş aşlağalı unamadı “refused to stand up or take food” PP ro, 5-6; ner unamadi "he flatly refused” do. zo, 4, tıdılğalı unamadı “he refused to be prevented” U III 49, 26; (whoever obstructs and . . .) unamasar “does not agree” do. 76, 4: Civ. unamayın 'I will not agree' USp. 9, 5 (reading dubious): Xak. xi ol bu: rgif$ una:dı: radiya bi-hádá'l-amr *he was pleased with this business'; and one says. sen una:dınmu: agabilta wa radayta anta "did you accept and were you pleased ?' Kaş. III 256 (una:r, una:ma:k): xıı1(?) Tef. unamadı with Aecc., also Intrans. 327: XIV Rbg. ol kizığ unamadı “he did not like that girl”, (the serpent was afraid and) unamadı “did not agree' R I 1640; Muh. al-ihtimal “to permit, be thankful” (and other meanings) u:namak (unvocalized) Mel. 35, 14; Rif. 121; tamakkana 'to have authority, be able' una:(unvocalized); al-tamakkur una:mak (ditto) Rif. 106, 121 (only) (it is not certain that these latter entries belong here): Çağ. xv ff. una(-r, etc.) rádi ol- "to be pleased” Vel. 119 (quotn.); una- rádi sudan (Nadar 'Ali erroneously translated it rad? kardan) San. 87r. 17 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv munlar unamadilar Nahc. 366, ır: Kom. xiv una- “to agree, consent, obey' CCG; Gr. 265 (quotns.): Kip. xii ta"a mina'l-à'a “to obey” u:na:- Hou. qr, 21: Osm. xv to xvil una- “to approve', etc. in three texts T TS İİ 729; İV 608 (spelt ona-). D *oga:- See opal-, opar-. E öne:- the word transcribed öneyü in U //7 79, 6; U IV 8, 11 and 36 is oynayu. Dis. ANB F anvant the Sogdian word "mnt (anvant) *'cause' occurs several times in Uyf. Bud., apparently always in Hend. with tıltağ , it has been transcribed variousİy as avant, avt, ayant, and avyat, but these are all errors. Uy£. vri ff. Bud. neğü üçün kayu anvant tiltagin *why and for what reason (Hend.)?” U I24,2;0.0. U III 4, 1; Suv. 24, 18, 140, 16. Mon. ANC enç 'tranquil, at peace, at rest”, for the € see ençgülüğ. N.o.a.b. (Türkü vırı enc has been read in / E 32, but this is an error, see ançula:-): Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. alku tutdacilardın éng esen kilzun meni “may he make 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 216 
     
   
   
      172 MON. ANC me at peace and safe from all grasping (evil spirits) U 77 64, 8-9; o.o. of énc esen Tij. 19a. 3 etc.; (at times even of slight illness and discomfort) neteg énc mü erki 'how do you suppose that he can be at peace?” Hüen-ts. 1828-9; (to all men) éng ting (mis-spelt tünç) bérürmen 'I give peace and rest" USp. 100, 4-5: Civ. kiyn enç bolur 'the pain dies down' TT VII 22,15;2.0.0.; 6nç occurs in TT İ 132, 212, 222: XIV Chin.— -Uyğ. Dict. t'ai p'ing "great. peace! (Giles 10,573 9,310) enc esen R [ 745: Xak. xı €:nç al-mutma'innu'l-sdkin “at rest, tranquil'; hence one says könül €:nçmü “is your mind at rest?'; €nç kend a village belonging to the people of al-Muqanna', God curse him, now ruined Kaş. HI 437; erdi:p munda: enç (sic) amul “you were at rest and tranquil (sálim sahin) here” 7 74, 18; KB ajun éncke tegdi 'the world attained. peace” 103; 0.0. 965, 1044, 1772, etc.: xir(?) At. tilekçe tiril eni "Jive at peace as you wish' 415; Tef. €nç seems rather to mean “comfortable material circumstances' 77: xiv Muh.(?) al-mustarih “at pcace, tranquil' enç (?, unvocalized) Rif. 154 (only) (also falsely converted into a verb tstaráha é:ncdi: do. 103): Xwar. xiv éng “at rest” Qutb 59: Kom. xiv “at peace' enc. CCG; Gr. 88 (quotn.): Osm. xiv enc (rhyming with genc) in one text TT S II 382. VU onc Hap. leg. but cf. onçsuz, q.v. This word has becn read ung and taken to be a Dev. N. in -ç fr. *un- Rcefl. f. of u:-; indeed in KB Arat consistently transcribed on- as un- and took it to be such a word, but it is unlikely that an Intrans. verb like u:- would have a Refl. f. (though such cases admittedly do occur), and it seems more reasonable to take this word as a Dev. N. in -ç fr. on- meaning 'a promising' (course of action) or the like. Türkü vir ol yolin yorrsar ong tedim 'I said “if one went by that route, it is a promising (course of action)” ” T 24 (or, i unc, “it is possible"). Dis. ANC D anaç Dim. f. fr. ana: used affectionately, "dear mother” and the like. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. where it has developed various extended meanings. Uyf. vir ff. Bud. anaçım-a “my dear mother” U III o, 2 (ii): Xak. xı anaç al-sagiratu' lati turá' min nafsthá fitna ka'annahá ummu' l-qasem "a small girl who has such natural intelligence that she seems like the mother of the clan'; this word is addressed to her affectionately ('alà sabili'l-ta'attuf) Kaş, I $2: xiv Muh.(?) (among 'terms of relationship”) sabihatu'l-umm “like a mother” a:na:c (with eim) Rif. 144 (only). enüc Hap. leg., but cf. enücle:-, enüclen-. Xak. xı enüç zafaratu'l-'ayn “a cataract film on the eye” Kaş. I sz öpüç properly "larynx, wind-pipe', also used later for 'oesophagus, güllet” and more generally 'throat'. Survives in several NE languages, often much abraded to 6:c, Ö:ş, 6s,  and the like; SE Türki ópgec; NC Kir. ópgóc, Kzx. ópes; SC Uzb. "ingac. In SW the word used is öpük which is noted from xiv onwards TTS I 745; Il 638; IV 519 (transcribed iügük) in phr. kızıl öpük. Uyğ. vitt ff. (in a list of diseases translated fr. a Chinese text) önüç ağrığ iig “a discase (Hend.) of the larynx' (Chinese velt /tou (Giles 12,981 4,007). U I1 69, 4 (1). D ança: Equative form of ol; properly “as much as that), but normally in the carly period hardly more than 'thus'. There is also, in the early period, a Sec. f. beginning with 1- of this and other cognate words (ançıp, aparu:, etc). This is usually transcribed ince, a spelling which does occur in TT VIII, but as there is also a spelling inça in those texts, and as the word sutvives in this form in NE Tuv., it is likely that the original form was 1nca: and that ince is merely one of several examples of the tendency of 1- to move into a front position (cf. riş, 1:ti:ş, etc.). S.i.a.m.l.g. as ança and the like. As 1nca: always means “thus”, some editors of early texts have tended to 'correct' words meaning 'thus' to ince even when anca: is clearly written. See Doerfer II 560. "Türkü vir ança: “thus” is common in 7 and II and occurs in] T 2, 6, 8, ro (ö:ğleş-), etc.; Ongin 8, 11; Ix. 20, 23; it is gencrally used near the end of a sentence or para. to summarize briefly what has gone before or, less often, what follows, e.g. ant: kórüp ança: bilip *when you see it (the memorial tablet) know thus' (i.e. what has been said in the preceding sentences) 7 S 13: viirff. the concluding sentence of each para. in IrkB begins ança: bili:p (or bili:pler) 'know thus' (i.e. as follows, the omen is good or bad); ança: temi:ş “this is what he said” Toyoh III 2r. 4 and 11; vz (ETY II 179): Man. neçe yügürür erti ança kusar yarsıyor erti “the more he ran the more he vomited (Hend.)” M 7 7, 12-13; 1nca (sic) sakinti 'thus he thought” (i.e. as follows) do. s, r: Uy£f. viu ff. Man.-A inça kaltı 'just as” . . . takı yeme anculayu kalti “and also just as” . . . mça belgürtti 'thus he explained” M 7 7, 2-8, 18: Man. mça kaltı VVind. 22: Chr. (then King Herod) 1nce tép yarhkadi olarka 'gave them the following orders' U I s, 3; ança barip “as they went thus', do. 8, 10-11: Bud. iça: (si) tép yarlıka:dı TT VIII H.1; inçe: (sic) sa:ksa:r “if one thinks thus' do. K.2; o.o. of ince: do. O.1, 9; mça tép tédi is common U II 7, 6; U IV 28, 3 and 6; PP passim; inça kalti TT IV 8, ss—anca yeme kutluğ kıvlığ ermezmü men “am 1 not as fortunate (Hend.; as him)” U TI 7, 6-7: a.o. U IV 28, 5; etözleripe ança munça tusulur “they get more or less advantages for their bodies" TT VI 262: Civ. apa kıtay simikin anca :munca sokup “put in it a certain amount of Chinese sımih” H I 148; inca sözleştimiz *we have agreed as follows" U.Sp. 108, $, 109, 4: Xak. xı aver neçe: a:l bilse: adığ anca: yo:1 bili:r “hovvever many tricks the hunter knows the bear knows as many ways out” Kaş, y i i 1   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 217 
     
   
   
     DIS Iİ 63, 13; 332, 12: Oza:kr bilğe: ança: aymı:ş “the ancient sage said as follows' 7 88, 22; o.o. III 133, 8 (bé); 233, 16; n.m.e.; no occurrence of mça:, K.B (of the stars) bir ança . . . bir ança .. . bir anca 'some ... some” 129; tiliğ öğdüm ança ara söğdüküm “1 have praised the tongue to some extent and at times abused it” 184; bir ança “a certain amount, for some period" 234, 954: xın(?) At. bir ança bodun “a certain number of people” 125; Tef. anca “so (much), bir arça "a certain number of”, ançaka tegi “until, ançadın berü “for some time past' 53: Çağ. xv ff. anca (sic) án gadr “thaçemount, so much San. şiv. 12 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv bir ança . . . bir anca “a certain amount . . . a certain amount' Nahc. 260, 16: Kom. xiv “so (much) anca (sometimes followed by nece); 'now forthwith' (sic) bir ança CCI, CCG; Gr. 37 (quotns.): Kip. xiv (under degme) bir anca: means “some” (ba"d), bir means “one” (wáhid) and anca “like it” (mztluhu) and the two combined ba'd İd. 49: Osm. xiv ff. anca *so much', occasionally onca, and bir anca c.i.a.p. TT'S 125; I1 33; İİİ zo, IV 22. D apgei: N.Ag. fr. 4 ap (3 ep) “hunter”, Rare in Uy&amp;., but clearly so spelt. A 1.-w. in Mong. as apt (Kot. 18, also apgigi; Haltod 4). İt is not clear whether the same word in some NE languages and NC Kir., Kzx. is a survival or a reborrowing fr. Mong. Uyğ. vir ff, Bud. keyikçi ançı tuzakçı boltumuz erser “if vve have been hunters of stags and vvild game or trapper$” U /1 84, 9-10; TT IV 8, 56-7. ?F angu: n.o.a.b., but cf. ançula:-, used only in the Hend. ógdir ançu which seems to mean 'gift' or “revvard”, In U 111 gə, in a note on 32, 16 it is suggested that it is the Chinese phr. an chu “to live in peace' (Giles 44 2,527); the semantic connection is not convincing, but the word is prob. a Chinese l.-w. Uyğ. vırı ff. Bud. alı yarlıkazun tepri baxşı nomlamış nom ertininip ögdirin ançusın “may the sacred preacher deign to receive a reward (or gift in return?) for the precious doctrine which he has preached” U 111 32, r4-16) (go and kill the six-tusked elephant; if you do this) sapa uluğ tórlüg ógdir angu bar “there are various great rewards (or gifts?) for you' do. 56, 8-10. S 1nga:fince: See anca:. 1 inçü: n.o.a.b.; poorly attested in the early period, the only occurrences being in Uyğ. Civ. documents of which one certainly, and the other two probably, date from the Mong. period. There is, however, no good reason for supposing that this is a İ.-vv. The only early (xit) Mong. word of comparable form is ince "a maid-servant given to a bride at her marriage! (Haenisch 83, there connected with Chinese yimg, same meaning (Giles 13,343)) which is no doubt the original form of :nci *dowry' (Kow. 280, Haltod öz). "This latter is . ANC s a Mong. l.-w. in various NE languages and NC Kir, Kzx. “There is no real semantic C133 connection between these Mong. words and inçü:, which at any rate in the medieval period had much the same meaning as English *fief', that is “a piece of land granted by a ruler on condition of the performance of certain services', and, by extension, 'the person(s) bound to perform such services”. Whether this was the original meaning it is hard to say. It has been plausibly suggested that this is the word which appears in the Staél-Holstein scroll] a Khotanese Saka document dated A.D. 925, in the forms” 'ijiva and "rn/i?, meaning apparently 'the chief tribe in a confederation', that is the ruler's own tribe (see Asta Major, N.S., vol. II (1951), p. 17; vol. IV (1954), pp. go ff). The original meaning may have been nearer to 'family or clan property', and in particular 'a chief's own property'. See Doerfer IV 670. Uyğ. virt ff. Civ. (two landowners too old to work say) urluk incülerdin inçü borlukka edlegüçi bir erklüğ kişi bersün “let them give a responsible person from the family properties(?) to the family (?) vineyard to cultivate it” US). 21, 3-4; in USp. 22 (mid-xıv) inçü bağçı “a worker in the family(?) vineyards” occurs ro times, inçü kihki bile inçü borlukçı kezikte barça barsun “in accordance vvith the custom of the family estates(?) let all the vineyard vvorkers on the family estates(?) go in turn” do. 25, 5-7: Çağ. xv ff. inçü “a vassal (fapu adamt) who goes voluntarily to a beg, enters his service and works for him' Vel. 82 (quotn.); incü (spelt) ((1) “pearl”), (2) mamlük 'servant, slave'; (3) amlak wa raqbdüt-t xdşşa-i diwáni *private lands and slaves belonging to the government” San. 117v. 15: Xwar. xir inçi "inheritance! 'Ali 47: Kip. xv in a Golden Horde letter dated A.D. 1428 (they went off) öz élerin ala “retaining (only) their own realms', with éllerin glossed inçü 'fiefs' A. N. Kurat, ZAltin Ordu, Kirim ve Türkistan Hanlarima ait Yarlik ve Bitikler, Istanbul, 1940, p. 9,1. rr: Osm. xv inçüleri ya'ni asirleri ve kulları “their vassals, that is prisoners and slaves! TTS II 541. S 2 inçü See yinçü:. C? ançıp/ınçıp prob. a crasis of ança erip. Occurs always in isolation at the beginning of a sentence, normally meaning “this being so”, or “so much for that”), less often almost “on the other hand, but' or used without any particular content to mark the beginning of a new para. N.o.a.b. Türkü vırı ff. /7rRB, Postscript (alku:): Man. (you will make me a Manichaean) 1ngip “on the other hand” (my mind is not yet stable) TT 1I 8, qo, (1 have been a great enemy and sinned against him) mçıp *but' (1 will submit(?) to God and the doctrine) M III 13, 7 (iv); a.o. do. M III 21, 1(i) (afr): Uyf. vrır (after describing the events of one year) ançıp bars yilka: “So much for that, now in the Leopard Year” Su. E 7; ancip ol yıl küzün “So much for that, in the autumn of that year” do. 8; o.o. do. W 1, 4: vin ff. Man.-A ançulayu kaltı .. . incip “ust as. . . so also” M I 16, 13-15: Chr. (Herod gave his orders  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 218 
     
   
   
     174 to the Magi) incip 'that being so' (they set out) U I 6, 4; (the flame shot up) incip “that being so' (the Magi did obeisance) do. 8, 14: Bud. incip is common in 77” VII, and is the standard translation of Sanskrit tu “but” and hr a particle of vague meaning emphasizing the previous word; as these are enclitics ınçıp exceptionally occurs otherwise than as the first word of the sentence; (if one wishes to be cured of a disease) tngip “then” (one must burn incense) TT VII 40, 19; 1ncgip merely starts a new para. PP 15, 1; 24, 4: Civ. ingip 'but'(?) TT I 79. C ançak almost certainly a crasis of anga: ok, practically synonymous with ança: , the parallel form inçak occurs only(?) once, and there is a suspect form ançağ, see below. See also incek, Survives in NE Khak. ançox just that amount' Bas. 27; NW Kar. K, L ançax/ ançex 'only, but” R / 242; Kom, 156; SW Az. ancağ, Osm. ancak “oniy, only just, but, particularly. See Doerfer 11 559. Türkü vii judging by the squeeze the correct reading of Ix. 17 is (Küli Çlor ançak (not antak) bilge:si: çavuşı: erti: 'Küli Cor was thus his Counsellor and Army Commander”: vri ff. Man. (he tore off his clothes and) 1ngak (sic) yügürti bardı “ran off like that” M 7 7, 17; senin ayğaq ançak ol “vhat you say is like this” M III 23, 6-7 (1): Yen. in a graffito edited in Mal. 39, 6 and amended in H. N. Orkun Türk Dili Belleten, S. III, no. 14-15, p. 53, ançağ étip . . . ançağ ét “so organizing ... so organize” (these texts are incoherent, and the transcription and orthography dubious, the only early occurrence of ançağ) : (Xak.) xir(?) Tef. (you will see it) ançağın “like this” (?); angak (1) “if it were not so'(?); (2) “so long as'; (3) 'thus, in order that'; ancok (3) only 54: Xwar. xiv ançak “only, however' Qutb 8; Kom. xiv (when he had said this the angel) ançak körünmedi 'forthwith disappeared” CCG, Gr.: Kip. xiv ancak hasbu (so vocalized) 'equivalent, sufficient'; you say son bu dır ancak not translated, ? “the conclusion is just this” İd. 24; (in a list of pronouns, adverbs, etc.) bas “only” ancak Bul. rs, 6: xv lá ğayr "not otherwise' ancak, which also means sated. 'equally' and wahdahu "by itself" Tuh. gob. 2: Osm. xiv to xvir ancak (sometimes ancağ) “thus, so much”, and the like in several texts T T.S 7 26; II 33; 111 20; IV 22; xvii ancak (spelt) in Rimi, haman 'exactly so” San. s1 v. 14 (quotn. Fudüli). in(ik 'groaning'; cf. mneikla:-. A Den. V., inckir-, appeared in the medieval period in Çağ. (as inçkir-), Kip., and Osm. fr. xiv onwards. İnçik (mngik) “groaning” survives in SE Turfan dialect K. Menges, Volhskundliche Texte aus Ost-Türkistan, SPAW 1933, XXXII, p. 108. See Doerfer 11 558. Xak. xı K B yatur incikin “he lies groaning” 4722, 5963, 6439: Osm. xiv inçağ (?sic) “a pitiable state" TT.S I 351. SC inçek Hap. leg.; apparently a Sec. f. of ancak (cf. inçe:) Türkü vir ff. Man. (the DIS. ANC sacred king and the llearers discussed these questions for two days and nights, on the third day) bir közüne tegl teprlken inçek katığlantı “the devout struggled on in this way to the very last(?)' (thereafter the sacred king's mind weakened a little) TT 77 6, 29. D énggü A.N. fr. éng; 'peace, tranquillity'. Survives in some NE languages as encü/ encig/encigü R I 746. Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. éncgüp mepip bultukmaz “no peace and joy are found for you” TT 7 2o. S inçge: See yinçge:. D ençlik A.N. fr. énc; 'tranquillity, security”. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı KB (if he has a sword and a bodyguard) beg ençlik bulur “a beg obtains security” . . . (if the sword is sheathed) beg énclik yemez “a beg does not enjoy security” 2143, 2144; 8.0. 5734 (éminllk): xin(?) Tef. ençlik 'comfortable material circumstances' (9) 78. VUF opjin “a kind of devil'; almost certainly a Chinese l-w., possibly representing, as suggested in TT III 29, note gr, wang jén “dead man” (Giles 12,502 5,624). N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viii ff. Man. yek opjinlar 'demons and devils' TT III gr: Bud. TT VI so (yelpik): Xak. xı opu:jyn (specifically so spelt) a/-£uülu'ladi yagtálu'l-insán. fi'l-máfáza "the demon who devours men in the desert” Kaş. I 145. D ençsiz Priv. N./A. fr. enç. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vin ff. Civ. (a man will not be freed) bu ençsizdin “from this restlessness” TT 7 80; (a remedy for pains in the back, breathlessness) ençsiz bolmakığ alku yel igig 'restlessness and all windy diseases” (see 1 yé:l) H I 13: Xak. xi KB ençsiz in an obviously erroneous v.l. 1871. VUD onçsuz Hap. leg.; Priv. N./A. fr. onc q.v.; if this is the right transcription, 'incurable” is the logical meaning; unçsız might mean 'disabling', but is improbable. Uyğ. viti ff. Bud. uluğ tórlüg onçsuz serincsiz emğekleriğ “various great incurable and intolerable pains” U 1I 32, 61. Dis. V. ANCVU?D éngik- Ilap. leg.; morphologically an Intrans. Den. V. fr. énc, possibly in the sense of being at rest because insensible. Xak. xı er önçikti: dahabat hüssatu'l-racul min sabbi'l-má'i'L-bárid 'alayhi ha”annahu muğmü toa arta'ada minhu sva taqallaşa "the man lost all feeling through having cold water poured on him, as if he had fainted, quivered and shrivelled up” Kaş. 7 243 (€nçike:r, ençikme:k). D énclen- Hap. leg.?; Refl. Den. V. fr. énc; cf. önçrün-. Xak. xı K B tümen arzü ni'mat yédiy ençlenip 'you have enjoyed all that you wanted, living in peace” 58or. D éngrün- pec. to KB; apparently Refl. f. of *éncer-, Intrans. Den. V. fr. éne; syn. vv, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 219 
     
   
   
     TRIS. V. ANCénglen-, the choice between the two verbs being determined by the exigencies of the rhyme. Xak. xı KB é(Il)ig taxtka minsün bu kün €nçrünüp yağışı yer öpsü yirak yinçrünüp "let the king ascend the throne to-day, living in peace; let his enemies kiss the ground bowing from afar! 5805; a.o. 6210. Tris. ANC D anga:da: Loc. of anga: declined irregularly as a Noun; 'then, thereupon'. Survives only (?) in NE Khak. ancada same meaning. Uyğ. vtit ff. Bud. (they fainted and) ançada kön temin öglenip “then ifnmediately afterwards recovered consciousness" Suv. 619, 1819: Civ. (if you reach the last month of the year) angada témin “then immediately" TT I 86. D ançakıfüa: Dim. f. of ança:, "a very little”, in Neg., sentences “in the least”. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. virt £f. Bud. ançakı”a yeme korkmatin "and without being in the least afraid' U IV 8, 24; ançakı"a yeme tınmatın “and vvithout resting at all” do. 22, 272; 0.0. do. 36, 95-6; Tig. 15a. 2; Suv. 601, 22; (when 1 heard that you were in good health) antakrva (sic) ok kórünmez yarudi '(everything) became bright (to an extent which) had never in the least been seen (before)! Hiüen-ts. 1876-7; antaki'a ok ol tuğuru umamaklığ emgekintin ozup 'being released from the pain of being completely unable to give birth” USp. ıozc. 6-7 (antakr'a makes no sense in these contexts and is prob. an error for ancaki'a). D ançağınçakan Hop. leg.; ança: with the Suff. (normally Dev.) -ğınça (v. G. ATG, para. 436) 'until and the Suff. -kan (do., para. 437) which has a vague temporal significance; “soon afterwards! or the like. Türkü virt ff. Man. (in his drunkenness he thought he was very happy) ançağınçakan yarın yarudı kün tuğdi 'soon afterwards it got light and the sun rose” M I 6, 19-20. D €nçgülüg P.N./A. fr. ençgü:: “peaceful, tranquil” ş some of the occurrences listed below may be the A.N. énggülük. N.o.a.b. Uy£. viri ff. Man. énggülüg orunka “to a peaceful place” TT 1I ız: Bud. Sanskrit yogaksemátiváhana 'bringing advantageous security” yara:şı ençgölöğke ya[gap] TT VIII 44.36 (so spelt, but prob. A.N); éncgülüg . . . nırvan “a peaceful . . . nirvàna. TT IV 9, 59-60; o.o. U III 11, 4; Tis. 22b. 7-8; USp. 102a. 35 (prob A.N): Civ. ençgülüğ bolğuluk belgün belğürmez “the sign that you will become at peace does not appear' TT 1 61-2; n.o. do. 152-3. ?C ançulayu: prob. a crasis of ança: and ula:yu:, cf. bulitçulayu:, mungulayu:; not connected with ançu:la:-, 'thus, so, so much'. Survived until recently in SW Osm. as ancılayın, same meaning, described in”. Sami 57 as 'obsolete'. Türkü vrirff. Man. 175 M III 14, 3 (ii) (g14-): Uyğ. vir ff. Man.-A inca kalti .. . ançulayu ma 'just as... . so also” M 1 15, 7-10; kaltı . . . anculayu ma do. 17, 14-16; anculayu kalti . . . incip do. 16, 13-15: Man. TT III 98-9 (amra:-): Bud. kalti.. . ançulayu Suv. 138, 22; angulayu ...kalti...-ce PP 38, 5-7; inga kalt. . . anculayu TT V 26,93; neteg ... anculayu do. 24, 52; Sanskrit tathaiva "and like that” ançulayu ok TT VIII B.15; Sanskrit tathágata "having thus come” (epithet of Buddha) ançulayu kelmiş U II 32, 63 and 2 etc., ançulayu 'similarl TT V 8, 77; a.o.o.: Civ. bu 1rk yeme ançulayu ok ol “this omen, too, is the same (as the previous one) TT VII 28, 9 aoo: Çağ. xv ft. ancılayın (spelt) ángunan "thus, so, in a like manner” San. siv. 15: Osm. xiv ff. ancılayın 'thus, so, the same, likewise'; c.ia.p. TTS 1 26; II 34; III zo, IV 22. s opu:jin. See opjin. Tris. V. ANÇD angikla:- Den. V. fr. mçik, “to groan'. Survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. SDD 771; but the Refl. f. also survives in NE Khak. Uyğ. viu ff. Bud. küçsüz savin mgrklayu yatur erdi 'he was lying groaning with a feeble voice” U III 35, 22-3; 0.0. do. 27 (koduru:) Suv. 12, 22 (ağrın-). D enüçle:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. enüç. Xak. xı ota:çı: kö:züğ enüçle:di: 'alaca'I-fabibu'l-'ayn mina'l-zafara "the physician cured the eye of cataract! Kaş. I 299 (enüçle:r, enüçle:me:k). D?F ançu:la:- Den. V. fr. angu:; “to present, offer (something Aec.)”, sometimes to God or a superior; not connected with anculayu:. N.o.a.b. Türkü vri (he seized On Totok”s brother-in-law with his armoured hand, and) yarıklığdı: xağanka: ançu:la:dı: "still in armour presented him to the xağan” I E 32 (hitherto misread as €nçula:dı:): Uyğ. vini Çik bodunka totok bértim 1$varas tarxat anta: ançu:ladlıml “1 gave the Çik people a fotok (military governor) and presented işvavas (q.v.) and tarxans to them there” Su. S 2: virt ff. Bud. (let him take various flowers and foodstuffs and) ağır ayamakin tapinzun ançulazun "worship with profound respect and present them” U 7 şo, 8-9 (the Chinese original has féng hsiem “respectfully present” (Giles 3,574 4,530); ançulasar tapınsar TT V 28, 125-6. D enüçlen- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of enüçle:-. Xak. xı anip kö:z enüçlendi: rcaqa"atı”l-zafara fi “aynihi "a cataract formed in his eye” Kaş. 1 291 (enüçlenür, enüçlen-me:k). D €nçsire:- Priv. Den. V. fr. enç, n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vi ff. Bud. negülük muni teg ençsireyürsen . . . oğlu tıltağında ençsiregülük savlarığ kepürü sözledi “vhy are you uneasy like this? . . . he explained the 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 220 
     
   
   
      176 reasons which made him uneasy about his son' USp. 102b. 11-13. D ençsiret- Caus. f. of éncsire:-; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vniff. Bud. (these many kinds of) unliflara éngsiretmek tsuy “sins of making people uneasy (or insecure)' U II 87, 56; a.o. do. 78, 38. Mon. AND and/ant (the first prob. the original form) 'an oath'; also used in the phr. and iç- "to swear (lit. to drink) an oath'. See Doerfer ll 561. S.i.a.m.lg. except NE; and iç- s.i.m.m.l.g. Uyğ. vur ff. Bud, Kuan 14, 177 (andik-): Xak. xı and al/-half "an oath'; hence one says andık ihljf 'swear an oath” Kaş. 1 42; and key yeme bérü:rler "and firmlv give an oath” 7 459, 6: xiu?) Tef. and iç-/ant iç51-3: xiv Müh. a/-yamin sea”l-half: 'sworn undertaking, oath' and Mel. 82, 15; Rif. 188; a.0. 25, 9 (ic-): Çağ. xv ff. ant (spelt) saıgand *oath' San. sr v. ro (quotn. containing ant iç-): Xwar. xiv ant, ant ic- Qutb 8; Nahc. 265, 2; 333, 15: Kom. xiv “to swear an oath' ant iç- CCG; Gr. 38 (quotn.): Kip. xui halafa andig- (sic) Hou. 36, 18: xiv ant al-yamin; hence antis (sic) 'to drink an oath, that is swear! İd. 24: xv fi'lu'l-qgasam. lahu "indahum “their word for "oath" is ant (“vvith a back vowel") and the Imperat. is antış (other conjugational forms given) Kas. 43, 14; halafa ant bér- do. 77, 8: halafa ant iç- Tuh. 13b. ro, vaminu'l-half ant do. 39a. 8; yamin. ant do. 89b. r: Osm. xiv ff. and, and içc.ia.p. TTS I 3o; I1 42; İH 29; IV 26. Dis. AND apit “a rather large bird predominantly red”, originally “the ruddy goose (Aras casarca), but later used for other large birds. Survives in NE Khak. a:t “the black diver (Azas nigra) and SW Osm. apit “ruddy goose” (xx Anat. ankıt/ankut/anğurt SDD 104-5) There may have been some confusion betvveen this word and Mong. aggir "black diver”, which occurs as a 1.-vv. in NE Alt. anar R 7 184, Tuv. ayğır and NC Kir apir (mas tadorna). Ankud in San. 51v. 29 was misread as ankur and appears as an alternative to ankut in this form in later authorities, e.g. R 7 186. See Doerfer 11 563. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. (if they are reborn as animals, they become) anıt kógürgğen kirpi 'ruddy geese, pigeons, or hedgehogs” Suv. 299, 6: Xak. xı anıt a/-nulhdm "the ruddy goose”, it is a red bird like a goose (al-itvazz) Kaş. 1 93: Çağ. xv ff. ankud/ankut "a kind of bird (murg) smaller than a goose (göz) and larger than a duck (urdak), variegated in colour (ablaq) with black, white and red tending towards yellow, with warm, moist flesh'; also called 'ankut, in Ar. nulidm San. 51 v. 29; 'ankut 'the well-known bird smaller than a goose and larger than a duck, also called ankut/ankud' do. 261v. 17: Kip. xiv. apit (with -D-) a bird called al-unaysa (so vocalized, but ?a/-anisa *magpic') İd. 25: xv abü far   'T'RIS. V. ANC“a chestnut' ankut uh. ab. rr (a very odd translation, some words may have fallen out between the two): Kar. L. pre-Xx 'I am a companion to owls' (Job 3o, 29) da dost ankit balalarına R 7 235; Kot. 156: Osm. xv ff. 8 ptf occurs in one xv text, and in a number of dicts. translating Ar. muhüm and Pe. ruhám (unidentified), surxáb 'ruddy goose', şazodt (normally “bustard”) and güman (normally 'owl') TTS 1 28; Tİ 37; HI 25; IV 28. VU aput Hap. leg. Xak. xi aput qam"ıcl-şürab “a funnel for wine'; prov. bart kiçik bolsa: nput bedük ur ;daà kána'lnaytal sağir fa-da'i'l-qam' habir “if the wine measure is small, put in a big funnel” Kaş. 7 93 (VU bart, q.v., is mis-spelt yurt in the MS.). D anta: Loc. of ol used as an Adv. normally of place “there”, and in the earlier period, of time, “then”, in the latter case usually follovved by a Postposn. In Runic script also written with a ligature representing -nt-; the form in Uyğ. is uncertain and prob. not uniform. S.i.a.m.l.g., except SW where it has recently been displaced by orada (o arada) jin Az., Osm., and phr. like ol yerde in Tkm. Türkü vii anta: “there” is common; anta: késre: *thereafter' 7 E 5,39, etc.; 11 E 5, etc.; Ix. 19; anta: ötrü: 'thereupon' T rz, 16: vini ff. anta: “there” [rk B 56: Man. anta ötrü TT 1110,86: Uyğ. vir anta: “there” common in Şi, anta: ötrü do. S. s: vir ff. Man.-A anta ötrü M I 9, 3: Chr. anta “there” U 7 6, 9: Bud. Sanskrit fata 'there' a:nda:da: (sic) TT VIII 4.46, a:nda: do. K.1(?); anda (?anta) “there” is common; “then” 77 V ro, 96; anta ötrü do. 8, 66, etc.; anta ken do. 8, 81; anta ok “then and there” U // 23, 17; anta basa 'thereafter' do. 19; anda munda “in every direction' Suv. 625, 10-11: Civ. nında: basa TT VIII L.33-4; anta ok TT VII 21, 9: O. Kir. ix ff. anta: “there” Mal. rı, 3: Xak. xı anda: an Adv. (harf) meaning hunáka “there” Kaş. 1 125; ditto 7 130; I 109 III; 224 (basa:), s or 6 o.o.: xin(?) At anda “there” 244, 276; Tef. anda “there, then';. anda kédin (si); anda son 'thereafter'; anda öndin “before that” sr: xıv Muh. tamma “there” anda: Mel. 5, 7; 15, 4; Rif. 75, gr: Kom. xiv “there, then” anda, “then” anda ox CCI, CCG; Gr. 176: Kip. xim hunálika “there” anda: Hou. 57, 4: xiv ditto İd. 24; hunáka anda: Bul. 14, 13: xv ditto Kav. 35, 18; Tuh. 42b. 2 etc.: Osm. xiv ff. anda 'there', less often “thither” and “then”, common to Xvı, sporadic later TTS / 26; II 343 III 21; IV 23. VU?D öndi: pec. to KB, where it is common; it nearly always occurs in assocn. w. tóró: and the contexts suggest that it means 'the traditional customs (of a people)', that is something fairly authoritative, but not as binding as törö: 'traditional, customary law'. Xak. xi KB isiz ópdi urma tórü edgü ur 'do not impose evil customs, impose good traditional laws' 1456: neteg tutsa beğler kör öndi törü bodun boldı andağ ol öndi körü  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 221 
     
   
   
     DIS 'whatever kind of customs and traditional laws the begs maintain, the people become of the same kind, observing those customs' 2111; 0.0. 1459, (1460 spurious), 1547 (töndi), 2179, 2490, 4605, 4720, 5735, 5765. C antağ a crasis of an-(ol) and te:g (the original form anteğ actually occurs twice in 7T); an Adv., occasionally used Adjectivally, meaning “like that, thus, so”. S.i.a.m.l.g. except apparently NW. Türkü vii biz anteg ertimiz "that was our situation' T' 8; (a spy came from the Türgeş xafan) Savi: anteg "his report was as follows! T 2g—körüğ savı: antağ (sic) T 9, similar phr. $ x6; antağıpın üçü: “because you were like that” 7 S 8, I7 N 6; antağ külüg xağan ermiş “he was such a famous Xan 1 E 4, İl E 5; (antak in Ix. 17 is a misreading of ançak q.v.): viri ff. antağ küçlü:ğ men “1 am so strong” IrkB 3, 20, 60; o.0. do. ro, 40; antağ ter “this is what he says” do. 44: Man. antak (sic) terkin “so quickly' M I 7, 15: Yen. andağ (so spelt) ermiş Mel, 29, 7 (rather a dubious text): UyB. vır ff. Man.-A yek antağ ölti 'thus the demon died” Man.-Uig. Frag. aor, 9: Man. nep andağ (sic) tev kür yelvi arvış yok kim ol umağay “there are no tricks (Hend.), sorceries and spells such that he cannot perform them” M II s, 8-10; erdemi sevinçi yel teprinip antağ “the virtue and attraction of the wind god is like this' Wind. 5 (in a later parallel passage muntaf): Bud. Sanskrit tathü 'thus' a:zndaá/andagá TT VIII E.45; also spelt a:nda:$ ; andağ erip “that being so” TT V 22, 17; né üçün andağ tétir 'why is it so called?' do. 24, 63; many o.o. : Civ. bu çurnı kügl a:nta:ğ (sic) ol “the strength of this powder is such that" TT VIII M.2o; a:nda:ğ (si) muhurtta a:nda:ğ yultuz a:nda:ğ raşıta: ermiş “during such a period of an hour (Sanskrit) such a star vvas in such a sign of the Zodiac (Sanskrit)” do. L.31; bu yeme andağ irk ol “this, too, is the same kind of omen” TT VII 29, 8 (cf. ançulayu:): Cigil xı anda:ğ an Adverb (harf) meaning kadálika 'thus'; hence one says andağ (ric) aydim 'I spoke thus' (kadá) Kaş.1 118;abouta dozen o.o. in Xak. quotns.: xır1(?) Tef. anda *thus; such (Adj); andağ ok 'thus' sr: Çağ. xv ff. andak arncılayın Vel. 31; andak ángunán “thus” San. şiv. zr (quotn.): Xwar. xin(?)) andağ körüklüğ “so beautiful that” (kim) Oğ. 59-60; a.o.o. qualifying Adis.: xiv andağ olturur erdi kim ka'annahu "he sat as if he was' (a prisoner awaiting execution) . . . andağ kadğu hasrat birle olturdi *he sat in such anxiety and distress' Nahc. 236, 15-17: Kip. xiv andawok (€ andağ ok) kadáka ay mitl düha İd. 24: Osm. xiv to xvi andak 'forthwith, immediately; so much” in several texts 7 TS 7 26; III 22; IV 24 (other meanings not listed). VU?D ında:ğ Hap. leg.; this word, spelt aif nün dal ğayn follows anda: in a section containing words with -8:- in the second syllable, an a/li/f must therefore be restored after . AND 177 dal, there is a kasra more or less below the vö, but this must belong to the initial alif. Xak. xı ında:ğ ztáru'l-munxul wa'l-£irbal "the hoop of a sieve (Hend.)' Kaş. 7 118. endek Hap. leg.?. Oğuz xı endek al-safh "a flat roof, a level surface” Kaş. I 105: (xiv Muh.(?) al-nihaya "end, extremity', and the like endek Rif. 188 (only) can hardly be the same word). endik 'simple-minded, stupid'. Survives in SW xx Anat. endik 'bashful, gauche" SDD 533. Xak. xi endik er al-raculu'l-ablah “a simple-minded, stupid man" Kaş. I 10$ (prov., verse): (Xwar. xiv ust entikti yıklu yazdi turdi 'he was dumbfounded, almost collapsed and stood still”, unless entikti can be explained as a crasis of entik erdi, this must be a cognate verb entik- Quib 21): Osm. xiv bu yolda ki üküg ylter ende baş “on this road where many stupid people go astray” TTS II 382 (perhaps the same word). D andlığ P.N./A. fr. and; “bound by an oath, sworn (friend). Survives only(?) in NC Kar. anttu: and SW Osm. antlt, (Türkü ix ff. Yen. the reading antlığ in Mal. 39, 2 is discarded in Orkun's (see ançak) revised edition): O. Kir. ix ff. antlığ adaşıma: (I have parted) “from my sworn comrades' Mal. rı, 8: Xak. xı KB ukuş ol sana edgü andlığ adaş 'understanding is a good sworn comrade to you” 317: xiv Muh. al-muhálif 'bound by an oath” andluğ (sic) Mel. şo, 1; Rif. 145: Kip. xv muhölif antlı Tuh. 332. 11; şdhib “friend” (dost and) antlım (sic, antlı with rst Pers. Sing. Poss. Suff.) do. 22a. 7. D andan/andin Abl. of ol used as an Adv.; *thence', less often 'thereafter' (usually with a Postposn.) Cf. anta, which is used in this $ense in those languages in which Loc. and Abl. are identical. S.i.a.m.l.g. as simple Abi. and in most languages with these meanings also. See 1ndin. Uy£. virt ff. Civ. andın ken mepülüğ bolur 'thereafter he becomes happy” TT VII 28, 47: Xak. x1 andin (n.m.e.) is common as an AÖ/,, but occurs as an Adv. at any rate in 7 397, 7 (yaval-): xiv Muh. min tamma “thence” andan (or ?andin) Mel. 15, 3; Rif. gı-z: Çağ. xv ff. andın az à "from him” (simple A51/.?) San. sı v. 25: Oğuz xı andan ba'd dálika “thereafter”, hence one says andan aydım 'I then (5a"dahu) said”, the Turks say anda:, with -a:, meaning “there”, hence one says men anda: erdim “1 was there" I xo9; (after anda:) the Oğuz turn this -a: into -an when it means “thereafter”, but when it means 'there' they follow the same practice as the Turks. (A note on similar interchanges in Ar. follows) 7 130: Xwar. xiri(?) andın son “thereafter” is common Og. 31, etc.: Kom. xiv *then, thence' andan. CCI, CCG; Gr. 177 (under ol, quotns.): Kip. xiv andan fümnta .'then' (or tamma?); this is a compound word meaning min düha İd. 24: Osm. xiv ff, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 222 
     
   
   
     178 andan 'thence, thereafter', etc., by itself and with Postposns., is common until xvi and sporadic thereafter TTS 1 27; HI 35-5; HI 22-3; IV 24-5. S indin/intin. occurs several times in Uyg. Bud., and has hitherto been transcribed intin, but the quotn. fr. Suv. below shows that it had back vowels, and there is no reasonable doubt that it is a Sec. f. of andin, which has not been noted in Uyg. Bud., cf. ança/ınça, etc. It seems probable that it survives in indin “the day after to-morrow' SE Tar. R 7 1450, Türki BŞ 530; SC Uzb. and perhaps SW xx Anat. indi gün same meaning SDD 791. Uyğ. vit ff. Bud, Sanskrit büragd “having gone to the far shore” rndin kidigipa: ba:rmışla:r TT VIII 4.6; other examples of indin kidi£ translating Chinese 5i an "that shore” (Giles 8,966 63) do. A.48 and various quotns. in Hiüen-ts, p. 23, note 1810; la bıntayır 1ndinindaki ay tepriğ körürçe “as one sees the moon beyond the (unidentified Sanskrit(?) word)! Suv. 44, 8-9; (thus, too, the Arhant Upasena) sansardin intin yoğuç ertyük erdi “had passed the far shore beyond samsára' U III 88, 2-3 (the only(?) occurrence in Uyğ. of yoğuç, the normal “Turkish word for "the far shore); intinindinberü ağır uluğ ayamak köpül üze “vith feelings of long-standing(?), deep, and great ICSDEGE Hüen-ts. 1810-12. D opdun Den. Adj./Adv. fr. 1 op, “(situated) on the right”. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vı ff. Bud. soltun . . . ondun . . . küntün . . . kédin “on the left (east) . . . on the right (west) . . . south . . . behind (north) TT VI 94-5: Civ. ondun başı “the right side of the head” ... opdun kulğak “the right ear' . . . ópdin (sic in error) kaş “the right eyebrow" TT VH 34, 4-11. D 6pdün Den. Adj./Adv. fr. 1 ÖD, '(situated) in front'; when used of the cardinal points “east(vvards)”. Survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. öndin/öndün “before, already; (payment) in advance! SDD 1110. Türkü vin (you Chinese) berdin yan(?) teg (you Kıtafi) öpdün yan(?) teg, ben yırdınta: yan (sic) tegeyi:n “attack from the south side . . :, attack from the east side, I will attack from the north side” T rr, ópdün xağanğaru: sü yorr: limi “let us make an expédition. eastwards against the xagan' T 29: Keyerde:(?) ópdün yantac[r] 'turning east at Keyer' (?placename) Su. N 6: viri ff. Chr. M 7II 48, x (v) (batsık): Bud. öndün is usually used as. a cardinal point; küntin sınar tağtın yıpak . öptün yipak kédin yınpak “on the south and north sides . . . on the east and west sides” TT VI 83-5; óptün kédin (VU) yirdin bérdin 'east, west, north, south' do. 291; 6gdün yıpak orunda . . . kündin yıpak orunda . . . kedin yıpak orunda . . . tağdın yınak orunda “in a place to the east . in a place to the south... . in a place to the west in a place to the north' Sue. 466, DIS. AND  5-10; ópdün kédin satığka yuluğka barsar “if one goes east and west trading! PP r3, 7; muntuda (sic?) ınaru ópdün yigak 'beyond here to the east' do. 37, 4-5—öDpdün kapağ "the front gate' is mentioned between the city gate (?, in gap) and the ordu kapağ “palace gate” do. 41, 1-42, 7—Sanskrit brüg “first of all” (Adv.) öptön TT VIII E41; öptün savlığ tüzün yumşak köpüllüğ 'honest(?) in their speech and good and gentle in their thoughts! U II] 73, 15-16; Civ. önpdün kedin . . . küntün tağtın 77 7 6, öpdün küntün . . . kédin tağdın do. 142-3; taş köprüğnüp ópdün sıparkı “situnted to the enst of the stone bridge" USb. t5, 2; Öpdin yıpak . . . (gap) . . . kedin yıpak . . . üstün yipak do. 30, 9-10; öndün yıpak .... kündün yıpak... tağdın yıpak. .. kédin yıpak do. 109, 8-10; öpdün çeriğdin “from the advanced troops” do. 53 (1) 2; a.o.o., öpdün tişnin ikin 'with two of the front teeth” H 7 162: XIV Chin.-Uyg. Dict. tung 'east' (Giles 12,248) öndün R İ 1208; Ligeti 189: Xak. xı ópdün an Adv. (fiarf) meaning a/-quddüm “(in) front”, the Oğuz omit the -dün and say 6p; one says öpdün yorit “ride in front” (qırddam) Kaş. I i15: KB kamuğ aşnuda sen sen ópdün kédin "Thou art before all, Thou art in front and behind” 8; başı erdi ópdün kamuğ başçıka "his head vvas in front of all leaders” 45; tuğardın ese keldi ópdün yeli “an east wind came blowing from the sunrise (quarter) 63; a.o. 2370 (okçı:), 5675: xin(?) öndin 'previously'; munda öndin “before this', etc. Tef. 247: Osm. xiv ff. ópdin (commoner)/ öndün “before” (of time), often as Postposn. after A4bI., common until xvi, sporadic later; fr. about xviit (payment) “in advance! T T SI 564; II 750; III 560; IV 625. apduz a medicinal shrub, *elecampane (Inula helenium)'. Survives in NW Nog.; SW Osm., "Tkm., and possibly elsewhere. Xak. xi apduz al-rásan *elecampane!, the root of a plant which is dug up (yunbaş) and used to treat stomachache in horses! Kaş. 7 115 (prov. 'if there is elecampane, a horse does not die'; similar prov. in Baskakov, Nogaisho-russhiis lovar', p. 42): Çağ. xv ff. anduz (spelt) the plant pi/ğüş (Red., Iris florentina) in medical language rüsan, quşt-i samt ('Syrian costus) and zancibil-i şümi ('Syrian ginger), beneficial for treating all kinds of blisters and: pains and rubbing on animal bites San. 51v. 22: Osm. xiv ff. andiz/anduz “elecampane” in. several texts, mainly dicts., of all periods, also, rather later, anduz ağaçı, with ardıç ağaçı as alternative, is used to translate Ar. and Pe, words for “eypress” and 'juniper! T'T'S 77 36; III 24; IV 26. inti:z Hap. leg.; this word occurs in a list of semi-precious stones between kök yürü:n *bluey white' and sarté 'yellow'; it is quite clear in the facsimile. Türkü vırı ff. intl:z yürüp ra:s ormizt tözlü:ğ ol “a . . . white stone has its origin in (the planet) Jupiter' Toyok 6—; (ETY II 58) M rH — S 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 223 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. ANDDis. V. AND?E anıt- Hap. leg.; the Chinese sentence translated means “1 wish to limit (i.e. not to prolong) my life'. In a note (p. 35, note 1373) v. G. suggests a connection with Cag. anikbut that is an error for inik-, q.v., and does not mean 'to grow bigger'; the obvious word to use would be uzat- but the two words are not at all alike in Uy£. script; anut- would not give the right sense Uy£. viir ff. Bud. küseyürmen kentü özüm anıtmağalı “1 do not vvish to brolonst 2) my life” Hüen-ts. 1972-3. D anut- Caus. f. of anu:- əə prepare, make ready (something). N.o.a.b. Uy. vırı ff. Civ. emin yöründekin anut “make ready a remedy (Hend.) for it” TT I rog: Xak. xı ol yağı:ka: tulum anutti: “he made ready (a'adda) arms against the enemy”, also used when anything is made ready Kaş. I 215 (anıtu:r, anıtma:k (sic); prov.); bu er ol rgiB anutğa:n “this man is always making preparations (abada(n) yasta'idd) for affairs! 1 156, 13; a.o. I 114, 19 (1 oğurluk): KB kişilik kılurka kişilik anut 'prepare a kindly reception for those who practise kindliness' 169o: xıı(?) KBVP rüzini anutmig “having prepared his daily food” 3: xın(?) Tef. anut- "to make ready' 53: Xwar. xıv ditto Qutb 9: Kip. xiv(?) amit- "to prepare to do something', in an abstract sense, marginal note to İd. 23 (V. İzbudak, el-/drak Hagiyesi, Istanbul, 1936, p. 5.). D énet- Caus. f. of éne:- with the same development of meaning. Survives only in SW Osm. where it is now syn. w. ene:-. Xak. xr ol ko:yin énetti: “he ordered the marking (bi-i'làm) of his sheep, that is that a piece should be cut out of its ear' Kaş. I 215 (énetür, énetme:k): Osm. xvii enet- (spelt) in Rümf, qaf" kardan álat-i racüliyat "to castrate”, in Ar. xaşd San. 51 v. s ş6net- (spelt) in Rümi, "to castrate (a man), to geld (a horse)” do. 117V. 3. D 1 epit- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of 1 ep-; cf. eptür-: Xak. xı bizni: kamuğ enitti: hayyarand bi-gani'ihi "he surprised us all [by his skill Kaş. II 274, 26; n.m.e. D 2 epit- Caus. f. of 2 ep- (eg-) and syn. vv. it; "to bend (something), to bow (the head, etc.)”. Pec. to Uyğ. Bud. UyĞ- viri ff. Bud. Sanskrit anavanatakàáyo, *with unbent body” 'epitme: [pap] TT VIII G.6o; epite etózin 'bending their bodies' (in respect) U III 12, 16; 38, 2829; nomluğ etözlerke yeme epitip 'bowing also to the dharmakáyas'! Suv. 32, 22-3. D unat- (una:t-) Caus. f. of una:-; 'to make (someone Aee.) pleased, satisfied". S.i.m.m.l.g. Xak. xı men una:ma:s erdim ol meni: unattı: 'I was annoyed (a5?) about this, but he satisfied me (ardan?) about it” Kaş. I 215 (una:tur, unatma:k): (-kunça) rádi eyle- “to make (someone) Çağ. xvff. unat- . 179 pleased, satisfied' Vel. 119 (quotns.); unat(spelt) rad? kardan San. 87v. s (quotn.). unit- “to forget (something or someone Acc.) ; s.i.a.m.l.g. usually as unut- but with some aberrant forms in NE uptu-, untu-, umut-, umdu- "R / 1627, 1646, 1794- 3i Khak. undu- -[umdu- ; Tuv. ut- and N umut-, the forms with -m- possibly influenced by Mong. marta-lumarta- Kot. 411, 2001. Türkü vırı ff. bilğe: unrtma:z "the wise man does not forget” Tun. IIl a.g (ETY II 95); Man. tepri yerin unutu ıtdı (for 1dt1) “he completely forgot his heavenly country” Chuas. I 15: Uyğ. viti ff. Man.-À emgekemezin unitalam “let us forget our suffering! M I ır, 18-19: Man. kayu kutluğlar okisarlar buyanımın (so read) unitmazunlar 'may the fortunate people who read (this) not forget my merits' do. 30, 7-9; 2.0. TT III 124: Bud. Sanskrit avadhyaptibalo *whose strength is forgetfulness” unıtmak küclüg e:rür TT VIII 4.12; kim tünle kündüz unıtmasar 'whoever does not forget by night or day' U II 14, 2: Xak. xt ol sö:zin unitti: “he: forgot (masiya) his words (etc.)' Kaş. I 215 (unitur, unitma:k); bu er ol sö:z unıtğa:n “this man is very forgetful (katiru'l-nisyán) of words' 1 156; 1 228 (2 üşkür-), three o.o. of unıt-, one (7 215, ro) of unut-: K B unitur özin “he forgets himself” 757; 0.0. 5408, etc.: xu(?) KBVP okirda unitrna ^when you read (this) do not forget (me)” 75: xırı(?) At. (when you wear brocade) unitma bözün “do not forget your (humble) cotton clothing! 354; unıtma meni 482; Tef. unit-/unut- 328: xiv Mu. nmasiya u:mnutMel. 31, 13; Rif. 115 (unu:t-), al-tagáful "to forget u:nutmak sz, 7 (148 v. osa:üuk): Çağ. xv ff. unut- (spelt) farömüş hardan "to forget” San. 87v. 8 (quotns.): Xwar. xur unut"Ali 26: xiv unit-/unut- Qutb 98; unut- MN 146, etc.: Kom. xiv “to forget" unut- CCI, CCG, Gr. 266 (quotns.): Kip. xim zasiya unuf- Hou. 35, 8: xiv ditto İd. 24: xv ditto Kav. 61, 17; 76, 1; sahd ("to overlook") ma nasiya unut- Tuh. 20a. 9. D óped- Intrans. Den. Vas it is not clear whether the basis is 1 ön giving the sense “to move forvvard” or 2 öp in the sense of “to get a better colour'; in any event the meaning is certainly 'to recover one's health”. Pec. to Uyğ. Cf. opal- which is practically syn. but cannot be connected etymologically, since this word is. consistently spelt with front vowels, Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. (if a chronic invalid) ne yeme em kılıp öpedmeser *whatever remedies he uses does not recover! Suv. 478, 17-18; o.o. TT VIII 4.22 (1 i:8); Suv. $98, 17 (E binik-); TT VII 40,(s9 and) 64: Civ. ig tapa körsersen et öpedmeki alp “if you consult the omens about an illness, it is difficult for the flesh to recover' TT I 77; isiğke öpedür “he recovers from the fever” H I 2 a.o.o., terk ópedür “he recovers quickly! H II 6, 6 8.0.0.; 0.0. TT VII 28, 48; 30, 14 (ağrığlığ), 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 224 
     
   
   
      180 DIS. V. ANDapdı:- “to lurk, lie ín wait (for someone 4ec.). Survives in NE Khak.; NC Kir, Kzx; NW Kar. L. T; Kaz. R 1195, 239; Kote. 156; there is a syn., but unconnected verb óp- which first appears in Kip. xiv. İd. 25 and Osm. xiv ff, TTS I 567, and survives in NC Kir. öpü- and SW xx Anat. ón-/óne-/ónü- SDD 1112-3. Xak. xi avçı: keyikni: andı:dı: ihtála'l-qánig li'l-zaby swa làwaga ilayhi li-ya”xudahu “the hunter crept stealthily up to the antelope and watched it intently to catch it; and one says 0l ant; apdxdi: “he crept stealthily up to him to catch him” Kaş. 7 311 (apdı:r, andı:ma:k), a.o. 771 401, 12: Çağ. xvff. andı-(-p)/andı:-(-p) maxfi cust-u cü kil- wa kamin edüb söz diyle- "to make secret investigations and eavesdrop on conversations” Vel. 3o(quotns.); apdi- (mis-spelt epdi- ; spelt) kamin hardan wa mutaraşşid şudan “to lie in wait and spy on (someone)' San. str. 19 (quotns.): Korn. xiv “to lurk' andı- CCG; Gr. S inde- See ünde:-. D ünde:- Den. V. fr. ün/ü:n “to call”, with various shades of meaning “to call out (Intrans., of human beings and some animals), to call (someone Zcc.)', etc. S.i.a.m.l.g. (in SW now only in "Tkm.) vr. various phonetic changes. Uy. vir ff, Man. uluğ ünin ündedi manradı “called out with a loud voice and shouted' M III 9, 12-13 (i): Bud. (he ordered) kim nep ündemeser 'that no one should utter a sound” PP 33, 2; teprisi ündeyü yolayu bérdi 'his god called and directed him, do. 6o, 6; meni ündegil U IJ 26, 13: Civ. ündedeçi til "the vocal tongue' TT I 108: Xak. xı ol meni: ünde:di: da'áni ma nödüni "he called and summoned me” Kaş. 7 273 (ünde:r, ünde:me:k); a.o. 7I/ 69, r: KB ular kuş ünin tüzdi ünder égin “the partridge makes a harmonious sound and calls its mate” 75; élig aydı ünde mapa kirsüni "the king said “call him, let him come in to me” ” 579; 0.0. 95, 955, 1655, 5954, 6285 (in some cases the Vienna MS. has tnde-): xii(?) Tef. inde- “to call, summon' 125; ünde- ditto 339: xiv. Rbg. inde- “to invite (someone Acc., to a meal Dat.) R I 1447 (quotn.): Muh. nàádà ünde:- Mel. 31,9; Rif. 115; al-nidà ündemak (sic, in error) 37, 3; 123: Çağ. xv Ff. ünde-(-di, etc.) kağır- ve da'vat eyle- “to shout, to invite' Vel. 120 (quotn.); inde-(-di, etc.) ditto do. 79-80 (quotns.); ünde- (spelt) şadd zadan (to call out”) wa da'wat kardan, also speit indeSan. 88r. 2; inde- (spelt) “to invite”, also “to invite to one's house” (ba-xàna talabidan), also spelt ünde- do. r16r. 26 (quotns.): Xwar. xır ünde- “to call” ' Ali 37: xiv ditto Qutb 203; Nahc. 389, 2: Kom. xiv “to call, to invite” ünde- CCI, CCG; Gr. 270 (quotn.): Kip. xır náddàá mina'l-munádát fi talab min taqaşşud huüdürihi "to call, in the sense of requesting someone's presence' ünde:- (not vocalized) Hou. 44, 3: xiv ünde- darda İd. 24: xv ündenada Kav. 9, 17; da'à mina'[-da'wa ündeTuh. 16a. 9; talaba mina'l-da'tta ünde- do. 242. 2: Osm. xiv, xv ünde- “to call, summon,  invite, in several texts 7S 7 745; // gsr, HII 729; IV 803. D andik- Intrans. Den. V. fr. and; “to swear an oath'. Survives only(?) in NE Tölös andik- “to declare oneself innocent! R I 239. Türkü vırı ff, Man. yeme neçe igideyü antiktinnz erser 'if we may sometimes have sworn falsely” Chuas. 100-1: Uyf. vin ff. Bud, and andıkmışı taluy ógüzde teriprek ol 'the oath which he has sworn is deeper than the ocean! Kuan. 177; 2.0. do. 179: Xak. xi er andıktı: "the man swore an oath' (halafa) Kaş. I 243 (andıka:r, andikma:k); a.o. 7 42, 11 (and): (xiv Muh. for halafa Rif. 108 has antka:-, which may be a reminiscence of this word, instead of and 1:ç- in Mel.). D andğar- Trans. Den. V. fr. and; pec. to Kag. where there are three main entries. Xak. xı ol anı: anğardı: hallafahu “he made him swearan oath'originally andğardı:, the -d- was elided for the sake of euphony (xiffata(n)) (an Ar. parallel is quoted) Kaş. 7 226 (andğaru:r, andğarman:k sic), men anı: andğardım hallaftuhu I 312 (andğarurmen, andğarma:k), ol anı: andğardı: pa//afahu HI 423 (andğarur, andğarma:k). D apdur- Caus. f. of ap-, q.v., and like it not noted before xııı(?). Survives in the same languages as ap-. (Xak.) xırı ff, Tef. dakkara "to remind” andur- ss: Caf. xv ff. apdurCaus. f.; mutadakkir hardan sva fahmánidan “to remind; to cause to understand” Sar. sov. 26: Kip. xir dakkara agdur- Hou. 40, 10: Osm. xv ff. apdır- (once apdur-) "to remind', in several texts T'TS 1I 36, III 23; IV 26. S ender- See emder-. D éndür- Caus. f. of €n-, “to cause (someone Acc.) to descend” with various shades of meaning. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SE as endir-/éndir/ indir-. Uyğ. vir ff. Man.-A bu yerde munpluğun éndürü basınduru yoriyur sizler “you live in this world in distress, letting yourselves be sent down to it(?) and oppressed” M III şo, 3-5 (ii): Bud. (the soo beggars wept and lamented) kaltı buzağusın énturmis ingek teg “like a cow giving birth to its cnlf” PP 77, 3-4 (mistranslated): Civ. yél yeltirip entürdi lim sındı "the wind blevv and knocked dovvn (the house?) and the roof beam(?) was broken” TT 7 225: Xak. xı Kaş. I 224 (iüldur-): KB (if the tongue cannot speak a word, even if it is up in the blue sky) éndrür özüğ “it depresses the spirit" 1003: xt1i(?) Tef. éndür- "to send down (anzala, a person or rain) i25: Çağ. xv ff. endür- (-di, etc.) da'vat et-, hağır- ve bir nesneyi yoharudan aşağa €ndür- "to invite, to shout, to send something down from above” Vel. 80 (quotn., the first two translations due to a misreading of inde- (ünde-)); éndürCaus. f., furüd áwardan "to cause to descend' San. 115r. 27 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv éndür"to send down! Qutb şo: Korn. xiv “to send down, to lower! endir-/endür- CCI, CCG;   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 225 
     
   
   
     TRIS. Gr. 88 (quotns.): Kip. xiv éndür- razzala "to cause to descend” /d. 22 (under altağu): xv dahdara “to roll (something) along' endirTuh. 16a. 3: Osm. xiv indür- 'to send down (something Acc., to someone Dat., from somewhere 42/.)” TTS I 385; “to humiliate (someone)" IV 431. D eptür- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of 1 ep-; cf. epit-. Xak. xı erni: eptürdi: hayyara'l-racul fi amrihi wa adhagahu “he surprised and bewildered the man about his business” Kaş. 7 zgo (eptürür, eptürme:k). VUD üntür- Caus. f. acne: "to cause (something cc.) to rise from”, etc. Survives with the same phonetic changes in the same languages as ün-. Türkü vir Bolçu:ka: tar üntürü: tegdimiz 'we reached Bolcu as dawn broke' (lit. “making the dawn rise) T 35: Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A M I ış, zo (ağtur-): Man. TT III 122 (1 a:l): Bud. (he gave them provisions for their journey and) uzatip üntürdi 'saw them off and started them (on their journey)! PP 28, 5; a.o. do. 31, 2; küçin üntürgey biz “ve will muster our strength' U I[ 25, 13-14; a.o. do. 84, iz and TT IV 8, 60 (lu:), etóz üze yaruk üntürmiş kergek “one must cause light to rise over the body” TT V 6, 29-30; o.o. do. 6, 35; 10, 102; 26, 85-8; U III 85, 9 (1 a:1): Civ. (the physicians must) bilge biliglerin üntürüp incgelep 'muster and refine their skills' H II 8, 26; (PU) Tuskuka üntürgü bordin 'from the wine to be produced at Tuşku(?)” USp. 71, 3; 0.0. do. 28, 4-6 (2 uruğ), 115, 18; [gap] ağzındın ta:şğa:ru: üntürü:r “he brings up (his food)” TT VIII 1.3: Xak. xı tepri: o:t (sic) ü:indürdi: “God made the plants grow' (anbata'l-nabàt); and one says, in Uy£. (cf. ün-) ol anı: evke: ündürdi: aşxaşahu ilà'lbayt "he started him off on his vvay home”, this is an Uyğ. meaning (lufat) and the Oğuz do not know it Kaş. 7 225 (ündürür, ündürme:k): xin(?) Tef. ündür- “to make (a plant) grow' 339: Çağ. xvff. ündür- Caus. f., ruydnidan "to cause to rise, grow', etc. ş also in the meanings of axad-i haqq “to levy taxes'; and sabz kardan harf “to confirm a statement” San. 87r. 14 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv ündür- "to raise' Qutb 123 (öndür-), 204. ?E ópdür- Hap. leg.; this word has been read in KB 5971; the -n- appears in all three MSS. and the Vienna MS. (in the Mong. Official Alphabet) has a front vowel, but this last is not conclusive. Obviously it cannot be üpdür- ; the alternatives are to assume that the vocalization is wrong and read opdur- Caus. f. of 1 op-, which survives in some NE and NC languages, or assume that the -g- is wrong and read ündür-, which makes better sense. Xak. xı K.B (he could not get to sleep) yana turdı anca bu oldurdi-a sarığ tap ata keldi opdurdi (or ündürdi)-a “he stood up for a little and then sat down; the yellow dawn broke and made him look pale (or made him get up)” 5971. AND . 181 D üştür- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of ün-. Xak. xı ol apar yığa:ç ünturdi: atqabahu”l-xaşab “he ordered him to hollovv out the piece of vvood” Kaş. I 290 (üptürür, üptürme:k). D ündeş- Recip. f. of ünde:- , “to call out to one another”. S.1.s.m.l. Xak. xı ol anın birle: ündesdi: tanádayá “the two men called to one another” Kaş. I 231 (ündeşü:r, ündeşme:k). Tris. AND D antaça Hap. leg.; Equative f. of anta:; presumably “more or less there, nearby'. Uyğ. vir ff. Chr. ötrü antaça bir kuduğ belgürti “then a well came into sight nearby' U I 8, 8-9. D antada Loc. f. of anta:; apparently used only with Postposns. of time, presumably because anta: had become so stabilized as an Adv. meaning 'then' that its Loc. character had been forgotten. N.o.a.b. Türkü vir ff. Man. antada késre 'thereafter' Chuas. 172; antadata (-ta at the beginning of a new line, ?dittography) berü “since that time” do. 7 16— 17: Uyğ. vini ff. Man, antada ken “thercafter” M Il 7, 15: Bud. Sanskrit tata “thereafter” a:nda:da: rna:ru: TT VIII 4.46; andada ken Suv. 598, 18; a.o.o. ?S antakr'a. Sce ançakına:, F enetkek “India, Indian”, fr. Sogdian 'yntkh. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. enetkek yerine “to India” Suv. 3, 16; enetkek tilindin “from the Indian language” do. 343, 5; a.o.o.: Civ. H II 20, 71; 31, 194: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. hsi t'en “India” (Giles 4,031 11,208) enetke (sic) R I 732; Ligeti 134. D opdunki: N./A.S. fr. oydun; n.o.a.b. Uy£. viri ff, Bud. opdunki tizin cókilip “bending the right knee' Suv. 36, 16-17. D ópdünki N./A.S. fr. ópdün; (of time *previous'; (of place) 'front. N.o.a.b. Cf. ópdürti:. Uyğ. viri ff. Civ, óptünki 'previous' (moment) TT VIII L.29: Xak. xı Kaş. III 14 (yalığ): xıır(?) Tef. öpdünki “the previous” (one) 237: Osm. xv, xvi ópdünki TTS II 751; III 561; IV 626. D öndürti: Adv. fr. 1 öp, “in front, in the east”. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. öndürti tart(t)ı “they dragged (me) forwards' Suv. ro, 8-9: Civ. (the powerful enemy that was moving in the west has gone away) ópdürti tepremis ot yalını öçti “the flame of fire that was moving in the east has gone out” TT I 123124; Suv adası sapa öndürti utru kelir “the danger from water comes to meet you in the east' do. 174-5. D a:ndirdin occurs three times in TT VIII; it is obviously an Abl. and ultimately derived fr. anda: but the second syllable is inexplicable. Uyğ. viirff. Bud. Sanskrit £azas *thereafter' a:ndirdin. TT. VIII 4.9; tasmát "from that” ditto do. 4.22; a.o. do. C.17, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 226 
     
   
   
       182 'T'RIS. V. ANDTris. V. ANDD anutul- Hap. leg.?; Pass. f. of anut-. Uyğ. vin ff, Bud. (Sanskrit. lost) alku uğurla:r üze: a:nutulmiş e:rür “he is prepared for all emergencies” TT VIII G.8. PUD apıttır- Hap. lcg.; the beginning ofthe word is clear, but the suggested meaning “to cause to bow' is plausible, and in that case epittür- Caus. f. of 2 epit- might be expected. Uyğ. vir ff. Man. tolp sansarığ sizipe ankittirtipz. “you have made the. whole samsára bow(?) to you” TT III 78. D ópedtur- Caus. f. of óped-; 'to cure (a disease Acc.), to cure (someone Acc., of something 45/.). Pec. to Uyğ. Bud. Uyğ. viti ff. Bud. (they all came and begged him) iglerin ağrığların emletgeli opedtürgell "to treat and cure their diseases” Suv. 597, 20— 21; Olarni barça iğindin ağrığındın ozğurur ópedtürür erti “he was saving and curing them of all their diseases (Hend.)' do. 585, 15-17; 0.0. 505, 19-20 (alku:); $97, 3. Dis. ANG ağığ Adj./Adv. meaning both (a) 'extreme(ly), excessive(İly)” and (b) 'evil(lv)' and the like, so practically sv. w. yavlak. It is not clear whether (5) evolved from (a) or vice versa. N.o.a.b, Türkü vir ol amt: afığ yok "Türkü xağan “that present good (lit. “vithout evil) "Türkü xagan' İ S 3, Tİ N 2; anığ bilig (IT biliğin) anta: öyü:r ermiş “then they began to think evil thoughts” 7 S s, HN 4; afiığ kişi: “evil men" 7 S 5, 11 N s, bilge: Tonukuk afi: 0l öz (sc, quite clcarly, but ?error for uz) ol “the Counsellor 'T'ofiukuk is evil and (cunning?) T 34: vin ff. in. Irk&amp;B at the end of cach para. the omen is usually described as “good” or “bad”, but in $, rr, 18, 55, 64 it is afi: edgü “extremely good”, and in 22, 36 aürğ yavlak "extremely bad”, afit: kılınçli:ğ simnu: “the evil doing. demon (Ahriman)” Tovok I v. 2-4(ET Y I1 178): Man. ani$ (sic) kilinçliğ sumnu Cras. I 4,18; 0.0. of anığ “evil” do. 1 28; 236, 298; anığ yavlak biligin 'with extremely evil intentions” do. so: Uyf. vini ff. Man.-A "ayığ bu[gap] bolup “becoming very .....” M 7 aş, 8 (possibiy busuş *grieved"): Man. anığ ógrüncülüg “extremely happy” M 7 6, 17; anığ kilinç TT // 6, 23; ayığ “evil”, esp. in the phr. ayığ kilmç is common in TT İİ 1o, 7o, 136, etc.; ayı terkki'e tuyunup “very quickly acquiring perception" do. 120 (ayı seems to be an unusually early example of the elision of -£; it occurs only as an Adv.): Chr. ayığ kilinçliğ UIo, 11; ayı ked övkesi kelti "he became extremely angry” do. 9, 16: Bud. ayığ “evil” esp. in the phr. ayığ kılınç and ayığ öğgl 'evilminded” is very common PP 2, r, 3, 7, etc.; TT IV 4, s, etc.; TT VI 196, etc.; anığ (sic) körksüz 'extremely ugly! TT VI 443; munda inaru ayı ırak ermez “it js not very far from here” U IV 16, 156; o.o. of ayı do. 48, 98, Hüen-ts. 287 (kodı:): Civ. ayığ Kilinc H I1 zə 14: Xak. xı ayığ an Adverb (arf)  which represents both na'am 'good' and hi'sa “bad”, hence one says ayığ edgü: ni'ma'l-gay" and ayığ yavuz ne:p bi'sa'l-say'; this Adv. adds emphasis to good, etc. (yadxul ta”hida(n) fi'l-xayr tca ğayvihi) Kaş, 1 84; KB ayı 4599 (kovdas). D anuk Intrans. Adj. fr. anu:-; 'ready' and the like. S.i.s.m.l.g., usually as anik and with some extended meanings. Sce Doerfer II 569. Uy. vir ff. Bud. anuk tururbiz “ve stand ready (at all times, awaiting the king's commands) U /H 28, 16; anuk bolyuk ol “he is ready' (to go to King Siladitya) Hüen-ts. 257: Civ. yarım şık yerin anukun tutdum “Thave received half a şık of his land ready (for cultivation) USp. 28, 3-4; in USp. 98, 14-16, a list of property to be shared between an adopted son and any subsequent children is almost illegible, but might read menipnip (dittography) evümteki barkımtakı negü kimimni orpak (metathesis of oprak?) anik sınuk barim bolğuça bolsa 'whatever property of mine, clothing (?) and household goods, fit for use or broken there are in my house (Jfend.): Xak. xi nnuk ne:p al-şay"u”l-hadir "a thing which is ready' Kaş. I 68 (prov.,), o.o. 1 18, 2; 93, 5 (particularly applied to food rcady to be served): KB bir tanuki anuk “one witness to it is ready to hand” 15; o.o. gg, 552, 653 (küfiür-), 783 (uçuzluk), 5844: xiv Rb. anuk R I 234: Muh. muhayyá (prepared”) tva. hüdir anu:k Mel. 83, r, Rif. 188: Xwar. xiv anuk ditto Qutb 9; Nahc. 293, ir: Kip. xiv anuk al-hádir . . . and when a man wants a present he says to his friend armağan meaning “vhere is the present?”, and his friend replies anuk tur hàdir İd. 23: xv hüdir anık Tuh. 13b. 1. D ina:ğ Dev. N. fr. *ina:-. An early 1.-vv. in Mong. as mağ 'intimate friend, confident, (royal) favourite', and the like (Haenisch 82, Kot. 276 (imak)); the word does not occur in any Xak. language and it is prob. that all the post-Uy i. occurrences are. reborrowings fr. Mong.; those with final -k almost certainly are. S.i.a.m.l.g. See Doerfer I1 668. Uyğ. vu ff. Man. and Bud. only in the phr. umuğ ınağ 'something, or someone, desired and trustcd', see umuğ: Çağ. xv ff. 1naf bi-takalluf olan mugálib “a friend with whom one docs not stand on ceremony'; inak náyrb ve muqarrab “a royal representative or senior minister” Vel. 83; mağ/ınak adim wa rafiq sta nüşahib "friend, comrade, intimate” (quotn. for ınağ), the Rümi author (ie. Vel) distinguished between the meanings of ınağ (translated as above) and mak (ditto), and Nadar "AH and Naşir? followed him; and also, in the rcalms of the Turkish xàns (xateánin-i. Turk), the name of a hereditary office (mangab) which they give as a distinction (ixtrsds) to mugarrabdn-i mugühib San. x17v. 8: Xwar. xiv inağ 'friend, intimate” Qutb 205: Kom. xiv 'trustworthy, faithful' ınak/ınax CCG, Gr.: Kip. xim al-şadiq “close friend” ma:k (Tkm. do:st, taken from the Persian) Hou. 26, 12; (opposite to  | | i |  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 227 
     
   
   
     DIS. 'enemy' ya:ğı:), 32, 10: xv xdşş 'senior royal minister” mak Tuh. 14a. 9: Osm. xiv mağ, xv ınağ/ınax, xvi inak in several texts, originally “the confidential adviser of a minister'; later not much more than “reliable” TTS I 350; Il 538; III 372; IV 4275. infa: "vile, worthless'; pec. to Xak.; the aif is unvocalized in Kaş. but all MSS. of K B have tnfa:. Xak. xı 1n£a: er ai-raculu'l-radi “a vile man", and anything worthless (sdg?f) is called infa: Kaş. 1 128: KB saranlikta inğa negü bar adin 'what other thing is there that is viler than miserliness?' 1672. Dis. V. ANGD opuk- Emphatic f. of 1 on-, pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı er yü:zl: opukti: "the man"s face became pale' (sahuma); and one says barçın opukti: gahabat taráwatu'l-dibàc wa nahwihi "the brocade (and the like) lost its freshness" Kaş. I 216 (opuka:r, opukma:k); in a duplicate entry in /II 394 the first sentence is translated “his face became lean (damara) because of illness, etc.', and the second “the brocade lost its freshness, brightness, and sheen” (farátvatuhu wa nadáratuhu wa mö”uhu wa rawnaguhu). S anğar- Sec andğar-. Tris. ANĞ D anukluk A.N. fr. anuk, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı anukluk al-isti"dad fi'l-umür 'readiness in affairs! Kaş. 1 150: X war. xiv anukluk 'readiness! Qutb 9. D mağsız Priv. N./A. fr. 1naf; noted only in Uyğ. Bud. in the phr. umuğsuz ınağsız. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. irinc (yar)llığ umuğsuz ınağsız 'miserable, destitute, with no object of desire or trust! U II 4, 6-7; oo. U III 16, 21; Suv. 587, 3. D onakaya: presumably a corruption of *onakifia: Dim. f. of ona:, N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. onakaya ólgeli “on the point of death” Suv. 603, 11; 609, 22. Tris. V. ANGD anukla:- Den. V. fr. anuk; 'to prepare (something Aeec.), to make (it) ready'. Survives with the same meaning in NW Kaz. anuklaR. I 231, and with the meaning “to explain, make clear' (fr. the modern meaning of anuk in those languages) in NC Kır., Kzx.; NW Kk. anıkla-, NW Krım anukla- R 7 231. Xak. xı ol anukla:dı: ne:mniı: soacada”l-şay) hádir mu'add fa-axadahu "he found the thing ready and prepared and so took it” Kaş. I 3o5 (anukla:r, anukla:ma:k): KB ölümke özüp çın anuklap yorı “go your way, prearing your soul sincerely for death" 1476: om. xiv “to prepare” anukla- CCI; Gr.: | Kip. xiv (anuk .al-hádir, hence) anukla:- ' ahdard ld. 23: xv ahdara anıkla- Tuh. sb. 12. ENG 183 Dis. ENG ?D epek perhaps crasis of *epgek Den. N. fr. 2 ep, cf. yapa:k ; originally, rather broadly, "lower jaw, jawbone, chin', later, more specifically 'chin'. S.i.a.m.l.g. usually much distorted, in NE usually ek/e:k; SE ipgek; NC e:k/iyek; SC iyak, NW iyek, in SW "km. epek; xx Anat. various forms eyek/enek, etc. (in Az., Osm. usually cene fr. Pe. çara). See sakak, Uyğ. viui ff. Man. TT II 16, 15-16 (opra:-): Xak. xı epek a/-mödiğdn wa'l-fanikàn min canbatayi'l-fam "the two jaws and the junctions of the jaw each side of the mouth"; enek al-xaytu'lladi taşudd bihi'l-mar'a. ximàrahd wa miqna"atahğ “the string. with which a woman fastened her veil (Hend.) Kag. I 13$ (there is no other trace of the second meaning, which is perhaps a metaph. use of the first): Çağ. xvff. enek egek zanaxdün ma"ndsina “chin” Vel. 31; €pek ditto do. 83 (quotn.), épek (“vvith -p-") zanaxdün (quotn.); the author of the Mu'ayyidu'l-fudalá mis-spelt it égel San. 118r. 2: Xwar. xii eyek “chin” ' Ali 49: xiv épek “chin, lower jaw' Qutb sr, (whoever undertakes to keep his tongue) iki epeki arasındakı between his two jaws" Nahc. 382, 3: Kip. xiv enek ('testicles', and also) al-daqan ichin” /d. 23; enek (with -n-) al-dagan do. 25: xv al-hanak "lover jaw' enek Kav. 60, 15; Tuh. 12b. 5; in Tuh. 3b. s mentioned as one of the words containing -p-: Osm. xiv ff. epek “chin”, etc., c.i.a.p. 77TS I 268; II 383; HI 253; IV 297. enük 'the young of a carnivorous animal, cub, puppy, etc.' Survives only(?) in NE Tuv. and SW Osm. and xx Anat. (enik/ónók/ónük). Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. enük '(tiger) cub' Suv. 610, 3 and 7: Xak. xı enük sibiu'l-asad 'lion-cub'; and the young (:alad) of a hyaena, wolf or dog is called enük, and isndra”I-ğalaq "the teeth (ie. wards) of a wooden lock' are called kiritlik enü:ki: (sic) Kaş. 1 72: Çağ. xv ff. énük (spelt) bagga-i siba" wa hilab “the young of beasts of prey and dogs”, just as 'lamb' and the like are called kuzi, “calf” and the like buzaw, 'donkey-colt! and the like xuduk, *piglet' cocğa, “the young of elephants! and the like bala, “game-bird chicks" çorpe and other “chicks” yavvrı San. rı8r. ro: Tkm. xut carrou”l-kalb “puppy” enük (mis-spelt etük, Kip. küçük) Hou. 11, 10: Kip. xiv enük “the young (cart») of a beast of prey or a dog” İd. 24: xv carw (küçük, uruk and) enük Tu. 11b. 6; enük is also one of the translations of kalb do. 3ob. 6: Osm. xiv, xv enük; xv ff. enik “lion cub, puppy, etc.” and even "young snaké' in several texts 77 7 269; 11 385:1H” 253; IV 298. : S inek See ingek. VUD önik pec. to Kag.; in the second meaning, the second syllable carries both kasra and damma the latter prob. added later. Kag.'s etymologv is implausible; prob. a Dim. f. of 1 ön, “little front”. Xak. xı óplk a/-şudğu”lladi yutaxxad”l-mar"a min. sa'ri'l-anz. züra(n) "a 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 228 
     
   
   
     184 false fringe which a woman makes of goat's hair”, also called ópik yörğeye:k, its origin is ÖDİ: meaning ğayr “other”, óplk adrabı”l-wisdda ica ádániha min harir "the silk. tails (i.c. fringes) of a cushion and its ears (i.e. tassels)” Kaş. 1 135. ?S ópük See öpüç. (D) ingek 'cow'; apparently. Den.(?) N. fr. *in, cf. inge:n; it seems prob. that these two words have a common origin in the remote past; S.i.a.m.l.g. as İnek, and the like. Türkü vn (I led (the people) . . . to the Ötüken mountains) ingek kólükin 'with(?) the cattle and baggage animals! T 15: viti ff. IrkB 41 (buza:ğu:la:-): Uyğ. vri ff. Bud. ingek yağı süt birle “vith cows butter and milk' Suv. 896, 1; a.o. PP 77, 4 (éndür-): Civ. inBek yağı TT VII 26, 13; H I 77, etc; H 1I 12,99, etc.; o.o. TT VII 22, 7; USp. s5, 3: xiv Chín.-Uyg. Dict. 'cow' inek Ligett 157; R I 1442: Xak. xi ingek a/-baqara 'cow' Kaş. I it, 0.0. IH 91, 22 (buza:ğu:la:-), HI 121, 7 (2 kü:ç): KB 5372 (u:d): xiu(?) Tef. téve ingeki “femalc cemel' 1:25: xıv /Muh.(?) al-baqara i:ne:k Mel. 71, 1 (only): Caf. xv ff. inek (spelt) mada göre 'cow' San. 118r. r: Oğuz xı ingek a/-tərfd mina'l-saláhif "a female tortoise Kaş. 1 111: Xwar. xiv inek 'cow' Qutb sg: Kom. xiv. 'cow' inek CCI; Gr.: Kip. xır a/-baqara i:ne:k. Hou. 14, 19: xiv inek ditto İd. 24; Bul. 7,9: xv ditto Kat. 62,2; Tuh. 3b. 6. (D) inge:n 'female camel'; apparently Den. (?) N. fr. "in, see inğek. Survives as ingen and the like in NE Tuv., SE Türki, Söam, Jarring; NC Kir, Kzx.; NW Kk. Türkü vin ff. /7kB. 5 (botu:la:-): Xak. x1 inge:n al-náqa 'female camel” Kaş. I 120 (prov.); a.o. I 289, 19 (1pran-): xim?) Tef. ingen ditto 125: Xiv. Muh. al-náqa 1:nğe:n (-$- marked) Mel. 70, 7; Rif. 172: Çağ. xv ff. ingen (spelt) náqa tea şuütur (quotn.) also abbreviated to inen San. 118r. 4; inen sutur abbreviation of ingen do. r:17v. ız: Xwar. xiv. ingen ditto Nahc. 73, 16: Kip. xir al-nàqa knge:n. Hon. 14, 13: NV buxti “the Bactrian camel' besrek (Mong. l.-w.) tca'l-untà münhu “and the female* ingen Tul. 7b. 5; ndqa (tişi tewe; in margin) ingen do. 36b. r: Osm. xiv ingen ditto in one text TTS II 384 (engen). Tris. ENG (D) éne:gü: 'colic'; n.o.a.b. Prima facie a Dev. N. in -£ü:, the obvious connection is with én-, but the -e:- is bard to explain morphologically; not connected with éne:-, Uyğ. viu ff. Civ. (if one drinks the medicine and goes to sleep) énegü ağrığ kéter “the colic pains pass away! H I 20; a.o. do. 16: Xak. xı ene:gü: ism dü” ya'xud mugabilata'l-surra ka”l-qülanç “the neme of an illness like colic which attacks the region of the navel' Kag. I 137. D enüklüg P.N./A. fr. enük. Survives only (?) in SW xx Anat, enikli/ennikli SDD 538DIS. ENG  539. Xak. xi enüklüg arslan /abwa dát agbd "a lioness with cubs' Kaş. I 153. D ini:ğüm See Ini: Tris. V. ENGD enükle:- Den. V. fr. enük, (of a beast of prey, dog, ctc.) "to give birth to young” Survived in xix Osm. but now obsolete everywhere(?) Uyf. viri ff. Bud. yanı enüklemiş bir tis! barsığ “a tigress that had just given birth” Sur. 609, 16: Xak. xı it enükle:di: “the bitch pupped' (acrat); and one says arsla:n enükle:di: 'the lioness had cubs' (ajbalat) Kaş. I 308 (enükle:r, enükle:me:k), a.o. /// 92, 11: Osm. xiv, xv enikle- in two texts TTS I 269; İl 385. D enüklen- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of enükle:-. Xak. xi 1t enüklendi: 'the bitch became the mother of puppies' (döt cird”) Kaş. I 294 (enüklenür, enüklenme:k). VUD öniklen- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. Opik. Xak. xı ura:ğut öniklendi: wada'ati'l-mar'a bi-sud[g] [min sar added in margin] 'anz (MS. ğayr) muzatetorrata(n). (sic) "the woman put on a false fringe of goat”s hair" Kaş. I 311 (öpiklenür, ópiklenme:k, MS. in error ópAili:ma:k). Dis ANL VU anıl pec. to Kaj.; as the basic meaning is “very”, it is tempting to read epil and connect the word with 1 ep, but the (preposterous) suggestion in 7 135, 19 that alarm is a metathesis of this word points to nnıl, Xak. xr apil açuk kapuğ bab futuh cidda(n) "a wide open door” Kaş. I 94. S apul Sce amul, D 1na:l Pass. N./A.S. fr. Fına:- ; etymologically it must originally have meant something like 'trustworthy', but in practice it seems to be used only as a title of office; Kng.'s specific explanation would fit this well, but shows that by xı the etymological meaning was forgotten. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. 1nal occurs 14 times as an element in Proper Names in the lists of distinguished persons in the third 'pfahl' PfaAl. 22-4; usually at the end of the name, e.g. Tenride bolmis mal (l :4) but sometimes at the beginning if the punctuation is right e.g. Inal cor (l. 35); the word is almost certainly a title, the main list of six :nals (ll. 15-16) comes after the names of two seyürs ("army commanders'); upası (VU) Terbi 1nal “the lay-brother Terbi Inal' TT VII 4o, 9: Xak. x1 1nal £sm Kkull fata ummuhu xütün tea. abühu siga, hadü huwa'l-agl “a word for any youth whose mother is a princess and his father a commoner; this is the original meaning (i.e. of the title?)! Kaş, 7 122; VU Tapar rhn Ina:l :Z min mülüh Qifrág (the name of) the son of 1na:1 O:z, one of the kings of Kıpçak” 7 361: Cag(?) xiv ff. according to Ragidu'l-din (early X)v) one of the rulers of the Kirgiz was Urus  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 229 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. ANLInal; Abu'[l- gözi (xvi) repeating this statement added that the title 1nal among the Kirgiz corresponded to pödişdh 'emperor' among the Mongols and Tafiks R I 1441 (P. de C. 138). VU inliç Hap. leg.; prob. like some other plant names, a l.-w, Xak. xı ilic “a mountain plant (nabt) like garlic (al- tm) eaten with roast meat" (al-sin') Kaş. I 115. D aplaf (aplığ) n.o.a.b.; P.N./A. fr. I ap; *possessing understanding'; the cognate word aplak Dev. N. fr. apla:-,, 'understanding' s.is.m.l, though less common than ukus. Uyğ. vin ff, Man.-A köni kértü anlağ törülüğ “having an upright, true understanding and code of behaviour' M I 26, 14-15: (Çağ. xv ff. aplak fahm wa idrük “understanding, perception! San. s2r. 5): Kip. xiv aplu: İd. 25 (ayla:-). D eplig P.N./A. fr. 2 ep; normally with a preceding word connoting colour, “having . . . cheeks or complexion'. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. Xak. xı KB kızğu eplig 'with ruddy cheeks” 4524: Çağ. xv ff. (under ep) kuyas eplig “vith cheeks like the sun” Vel. 31 (quotn.); kuyaş éplig (sic) ditto San. 118r. 7 (same quotn.); Xwar. xiv cécek éplig 'flower coloured' Qutb 51; al enli *with scarlet cheeks” do. 60: Kip. xiv buğday emlü: (sic) asmar 'swarthy' (lit. wheat coloured") İd, 34: Osm. xv, xvı buğday eplü/epll in two texts TT'S II 381 (under en). D eplik A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. 2 ep; 'red cosmetic, rouge”: not used for *white cosmetic' which is opo: or kirge:n. S.i.a.m.].g., except SC(?), vv. phonetic changes. Uy£. vri ff. Civ. uluğ kiçiğ enlik, “a large and a small packet of rouge', occurs twice in lists of goods bought for a bride in Fam. Arch.: Xak. xı enlik al-raxf wa huma şibğ ahmar yutlà bihi wacanátu'l-nisáà' 'rouge, that is a red dye daubed on women's cheekbones! Kaş. I 115: xiv Rbg. enlik A. Battal, İöbnü-Muhennd Lügati, Istanbul, 1934, p. 29; Muh. xidabu”l-hacıb wa hamratu'l-xadd “eyebrovv paint and rouge for the cheeks” epli:k Mel. 63, rş (Rif. 162 has ka:şlık for the first and epli:k (mis-spelt egi:lik) wa mitluhu for the second, and adds ak eplik bayádu'l-'arüs “a bride's white (cosmetic)): Çağ. xv ff. enlik “the red colour (Fazil reng) which women rub on their faces' Vel. 84 (quotn.), éplik 'rouge (ğdüza wa gulgüna) which women rub on their faces' San. 118r. 8 (quotn.): Kip. xur a/-hamra “rouge” which women put on their faces epli:k; and they have a vegetable (nabötiya) rouge; it is a plant (al-hagija) which is grown in our country with the aromatic plants (ai-riyühin) and which we call a/-yamüniya, kérti: epli:k “genuine (a/-sddiqa) rouge” Hou. 18, 174: xiv enlik (misvocalized enilik, under -n- not --) al-hamra li'l-nisà' İd. 24: Osm. xvı ff. eplik “rouge” in several texts 77S III 254; IV 298. 185 D ünlüg P.N./A. fr. ün, lit. "having a voice", S.i.s.m.l. w. phonetic changes; in SW Osm. it has come to mean 'famous'. Xak. xı KB (for the post of Grand Vezir a man must be goodlooking, clean-shaven) toğan ersiğ ünlüg sözi belgülüg “as brave as a falcon, with a good voice and clear speech' 2458. D óplüg P.N./A. fr. 2 ön, 'coloured'; normally with a preceding word indicating the colour. S.i.s.m.l. vv. phonetic changes. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. sari$ óplüg 'yellow-coloured' Suv. 28, 14; o.o. do. 28, 17 ff; TT V 6, 22; TT VIII G.64(altu:n); PP 17,4; U III 40, 36 etc. Civ. çıntan óplüg 'sandal-wood coloured” H II şo, 153: xiv. Chin.-Uyg.. Dict. yen sé “coloured” (Gtles 13,110 9,602) önlüğ, shan sé 'flame coloured' (Ciles 9,707 9,602) şamse óplüg Ligeti 190; R 1 1207: Xak. xi Kaş. I 41 (2 öp). Dis. V. ANLD énil- Pass. f. of €n-, used only in Impersonal constructions. Survives in this usage only in SW Osm. Xak. xi in a para. on the Impersonal use of the Pass., tağdın enildi: nuzila mina'l-cabal 'a descent was made from the mountain” Kaş. 17 130, 28: xıır(?) Tef. (on the last day) yerke énülür “a descent to earth will be made' 126. D opal-/opul- “to recover from an illness'; the two forms are used indiscriminately, opulbeing the older but no doubt a Sec. f. with labial attraction; presumably Pass. f. of *opa:-, cf. opar-. Practically syn. vv. Öned-, q.v. S.i.m.m.lg. Uyğ. vin fi. Bud. TT VI 216 (1 adin-): Civ. iglig erse bat opulur "if he is ill he recovers quickly! TT VII 28, 28; do. 45 and 55; in do. 48 ópedür is substituted for bat opulur; a.o. Suv. 19, 6: Xak. xı sökel opulti: indamala'l-marid “the invalid récovered" and one says kg opultr istaqáma'l-amru'[-mujatwag 'the confused matter was put straight" Kaş. 1 216 (onulu:r, ogulma:k); the same text, but with opuldı: //7 395: xm?) At. baxillik onulmaz (two MSS. opalmaz) iğ ol 'avarice is a disease that does not yield to treatment! 253: Çağ. xv ff. opal- (spelt, *with -p-") brh sudan swa şihhat yüftan wa iltiyüm yaftan "to get better, recover one's health, be cured' San. 88v. r (quotn.): Kom. xiv 'cured' opaldı CCG ; Gr. (?as a Dev. N.): Kap. xiv opul- (with -n-) ta'áfa'l-marid sca barpa"l-curh “of an invalid to recover, of a wound to be cured' İd. 25: xv istakana “to be eased” (in margin ingalaha "to be put rigbt”) onğul- Tuh. 6a. 13: Osm. xiv ff. opul- “to recover, get better' c.i.a.p.; opal- twice in xv, xvi TTS I 546; II 732; III 546; IV 610: xvili (after Çağ. entry) and in Rümi öpülwith damma San. 88v. 2; öpül- in Rümi bih şudan do. 88v. 18 (quotn. Fudüli; the (erroneous) front vowels are deliberate). D üpül- Pass. f. of üp-; “to be dug into, hollowed out'. N.o.a.b. unless NC Kir., Kzx. üpül- used in the Ger. with verbs meaning “to 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 230 
     
   
   
     186 look, to read", etc, to connote 'fixedly, intently' can be taken as a survival. Xak. xr yığa:ç üpüldi: muqira'[-xagab 'the piece of wood (etc.) was hollowed out” Kaş. I1] 395 (üpülü:r, üpülme:k): Kip. xv mcarmaf *hollowed out” üpilmiş Tu. 34b. 3. D apla:- Den. V. fr. 1 ap; 'to understand" with the same shades of meaning as the English word. "The normal early word for “to understand' was uk-, and apla:- was very rare, which perhaps explains why Kaş, thought it was specifically Oğuz. S.i.a.m.l.g. often much distorted, e.g. NE opna-, etc. (Türkü vii the word aplar read at the end of T 34 (sce afiığ) in Radlov's edition is a figment, the photograph in Aalto”s edition shows no sign of it): Uyğ. viii ff, Chr. (the Magi seeing this wonderful manifestation) aplap bilip 'understanding and knowing (its meaning)” U 7 8, 16 (the word is damaged but the reading fairly certain); (O. Kir. ix ff. the reading aplar in Mal. 41, ı is certainly an error, prob. for üçün): (Xak.) xiv Muh(?) fahtma “to understand” apla:- Rif. 113 (only); al-dikr "ro remember' anğlamak (sic?, unvocalized) do. 123 (only): Çağ. xv ff. apla- (spelt) /a/ımidan San. sov. 27 (quotns.): Oğuz xi ol sö:züğ apla:di: "he understood (falrma) the statements (etc.)” Kaş. I 290 (apla:r, apla:ma:k): Xvvar. xiii apla- "to understand! ' AZ 26: xiv ditto Quib 9: Kom. xiv ditto CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv (ay İdeiz "a fence, partition'; one says bunun ar yok dur mà li-hàdà háciz; and al-say we I-mafhiim “a thing which is understood' ts called aplu: that is dii háciz, derived from the previous word, because that which is understood is distinguished (famavvaza) from that which is not (Zavrihi)) hence one says apla- “to understand' /d. 25 (ay "fence, partition” is otherwise known only in SW xx Anat. af/an/ag “a boundary between two fields' SDD 72, 99, 103; it clearly has nothing to do with 1 ap): xv fa/rıma ayla- (spelt ağla- bi-gayn mağnüna *with a nasalized £ayn') Kav. 26, 6, fahima ayla- Tuh. 282. 9. D eple:- Den. V. fr. 3 ep, q.v. N.o.a.b., apna-/apda- in several NE languages R I 188, 195, Khak., T'uv. seems to be a l.-w. fr. Mong. ayna- (Kow. 14, Haltod 2) rather than a survival of this word. Türkü viii ff. bars keyi:k epleyü: menleyü: barmi:s “a leopard and a stag went looking for wild game (or food?) and grain' Irk B. 49. ?E iple- Hap. leg.; Pelliot read this word in the text below and translated it 'to bend', connecting it with 2 ep- (e6-) which is morphologically impossible; it is no doubt a mistranscription of irkle:- q.v. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (then the bull came out at the head of the herd; he made the prince lie down flat and) tórt adakın ipleyü (read irkleyü) kölitdi turdi *bending (substitute “stamping with") his four legs stood shading him' PP 65, 5-6 D óplen- Refl. Den. V. fr. 2 öp, “to become coloured, to recover one's colour”. Survives in DIS. V. ANLNE Khak. önnen-, NC Kır., Kzx. öndön-: the basic verb önne-/öndö- also exists in these languages. Xak. xi tizüm önlendi: talatctwana'l-'inab "the grapes became coloured”, also used of a man when he recovers his colour (talaiwicana) after an. illness Kaş, 1 289 (6nlenü:r, óplenme:k). Tris. ANL E inilgü: this word has bcen read in two inscriptions and translated in various ways. İt does not exist. "Türkü vin tepri: yarlikaduk üçün men kazğanduk üçün türkü bodun kazğanmış erinç ini: ölğü: bunça: başlayu: kazğanmatı:n türkü bodun ölteçi: erti: “because heaven vvas gracious and because 1 gained (victories) the "Türkü people gained. If my younger brother when he died had not gained so much by his leadership the "Türkü people would have died” 77 E 33 (inl: Ölgü: is reasonably clear in the Finnish photograph, but has been read men inilgü: with m for the first £ and n for the 6): vit ff. Yen. in Mal. 28 a very obscure text, apparently consisting of two separate inscriptions read as one and largely unintelligible, ll. 4 and 5, which are among the morc intelligible, are read er erdem üçün inim eçim uyarın üçün bepgü:min tike: berti: tört enelgü:(?) ertimiz bizni: erklig adırt(t)r: (or adırtı:?) “because of my(?) manly qualities, and because of (the abilitv?) of my elder and younger brother, they erccted my memorial stone; we were four . . . (Mal. “ve had four younger brothers', which is impossible), the lord (of the underworld) parted us'. Here too rn seems to be a misreading of ö, Ólgü: might mean herc “destined to dic". Tris. V. ANLD ana:la:- Han. leg.; Den. V. fr. ana:, Xak. xi ol anı: anazla:dı: sammáhá H-nafsihi unm toa nasabahà ilà' l-umiima "he called her his own mother and traced his female parentage to her” Kaş. 7 311 (ana:la:r, ana:la:ma:k). D aptla:- Den, V. fr. *agr:, onomatopoeic; “to bray'. One of several onomatopoeic Verbs of this general form; prob. the origin of ap:ıdaNC Kır. “to shout, scream'; SW xx Anat. (of a buffalo) 'to bellow' ,SDD 103; parallel medieval forms are added below; inle(iple-) still survives in SVV Rep. Turkish. Xak. xı eşye:k anı:la:dı: naFaqa”l-himör “the donkey brayed” Kaş. ] 311 (apıla:r, aprla:ma:k): Kip. xiv inle- (with -p-) anna “to moan, groan” İd. 25: xv anna iple- Tuh. sb. 6: Osm. xvırı iple-/ipilde- in Rümi nálidan tea záridan "to groan, lament' San. 117v. 2. Dis. ANM S epim See eğim. ?E apmin n.o.a.b.; all occurrences are in the Abl. and in rather late block prints, and as the fonn is unusual and unlikely, it seems possible that it is an error for apma(tın) Neg.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 231 
     
   
   
     DIS Ger. in -matin (v. G. ATG, para, 340) fr. ap- *without noticing it, inadvertently'. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. (if anyone sees the spell fastened to the top of a pole) azu yakın tursar apmıntın (?anmatın) anın kóligesl tegser "or stands near it and, vvithout noticing it, gets into its shadow' U /7 39, 87-90; (if someone recites this spell in the ears of) apmıntın (?apmatın) yjilkt ajuninta barmış kusİarnıp keyiklernin “of birds or quadrupeds which have inadvertently been reborn as animals! do. 43, 12-14; 0.0. Set, 169, 8; 177, 16; 227, 7; 424, 21; Tig. 49b. 2-3. D ónmen See órmen. € Tris. ANM VU?F anu:mr: Hap. leg.; prob. a l-w. (?Indo-European). Xak. xı anu:mı: al-cudám 'elephantiasis! Kaş. I 137. D oga:muk Hap. leg.; Den. N./A. fr. 1 op; cf. sola:muk. The word obviously means 'right-handed'; Kag.'s translation must be an inadvertent error for al-ayman. Xak. xi opa:muk er al-raculu'l-aysar "a left-handed man" Kaş. I 162. Dis. ANN D anin /rnstr. of ol used as an Adv.; “therefore, thereby'. N.o.a.b.; anın in the Kip. declensions of ol (Tou. sz, 9; Bul. 15, 4; Kas. 34, 5) is a Sec. f. of the Gen. anın. Türkü vini ff. Man. anın korkdi “he was therefore afraid' TT II 6, az: Uyğ. vini ff. Man. anın (at the beginning of a sentence) “therefore” TT II 17, 72: Chr. (the horse could notcarry it) anın keneştiler “they, therefore, took counsel together” U 7 8, 4: Bud. Sanskrit tasmád "therefore anın TT VIII D.36; (some people slaughter animals and sell their flesh and blood) anın öz igidür “and thereby maintain themselves! PP 3, s; anın antağ tétir “it is therefore so called” TT V 24, 79-80; 0.0. do. 26, 81; Suv. 401, 9: Xak. xı bo:dun anın ürküşu:r “the people are therefore (Hi-acalihi) panic-stricken” Kaş. İT 155, 19; and seven, or eight o.o.ş n.m.e.: KB anın ötrü begler bedütür küçin 'thereby then, he increases the strength of the Peg's 4015; a.0. 2211: Çağ. xv ff. Vel. 32 lists anın (spelt arın) transJating it amy ürün "therefore! and supporting it by a quotn.; San. 52r. 10 (s.v. anı) says that the correct reading in this verse is anı and that Vel. got anin from a faulty MS. and gave it an 'invented' (ixtíráà'i) meaning; the spelling is unusual, but anın “therefore” suits the context better than anı, and may well be right; in any event Vel.'s translation shows that the word was still known in early xvi. S epin See egin. ipen See 2 idi: S üpin See öpi:. D 1nanc Dev. N./A. fr. 1nan- ; etymologically a N./A. meaning 'reliance, trust; reliable, trust. ANN 218 worthy', and normally so used fr. the medieval period onwards. In the early period it was, like 1nal, used normally (or only?) as a title of office, 'confidential minister' or the like, not necessarily of very high rank; in this meaning it survived a long time and was current, for example in the Selcuk empire, sometimes for quite junior officials. Survives only(?) in SW Osm., "km. For the longer form with final euphonic -u: cf. ógrüng/ógrüngü:. See Doerfer 1l 669. Türkü viri ff. Yen. él ógesi 1nancu: bilğe: part of name or title Mal. 26, r, erdemim üçün inangu: (sic) alp (or Inançu:lar?) içinde: (end of line) “because of my manly qualities (I was enrolled?) among the ministers'(?) do. 29, 6, urun başı: ertim inançı: ertim “1 was head of the (urun is clear, possibly for urunu: q.v., a clan name, or a mason”s error for uruğ “clan”) and their minister” do. 32, 15: Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. (in a list of Proper Names) él inanç tirek PfaAl. 23, zo: ol ödün inançları buyruklari xanka ınça tep ötündiler “then his ministers and officers ventured to address the king as follows' PP 8, 7 ff, begke égike inanc tayanç bolğalı küseser “if he wishes to become confidential minister and £ayanç (q.v.) to the beg and his consort' TT VII 4o, 51-2; 0] Ku tao atlığ beg basin inançları “then his officials with that beg named (PU) Ku tao at their head' (and everyone in his house, great and small) Suv. 17, 10-11: Civ. taki élke xanka inanç bolğuka “and when you become a minister of the realm and xan” TT I 188: O. Kir. ix ff. inançu: külüğ €igsi: ben “1 am Inancu Külüg Cigsi' Mal. 24, 5; él inançı: do. 25, 5: Xak. xı inanç al-mu"tamad wa münhu yusammd inanç beg ayt'l-amiru'l-mu'tamad “trusted, trustworthy', hence the title 1nanc beğ, that is "trusted chief” Kaş. I 133; İİ 450 (duplicated): KB ınanç kümafa dünya kodğa seni “the world will not keep faith, it will let you down' 1091; (a ruler must share his secrets with his vezir and his secretary . . .) ay begler ınançı sözün kizle berk “oh confidential ministers of rulers keep your secrets firmly! 2683; (in a list of various offices) 1nane beg 4068: xiv Rbj. adamılar inangi “one on. whom men rely R I 1362; Muh. al-tikka 'reliance' rna:ne Mel. s4, r, Rif. ıso: Çağ. xvff. 1nanc (so spelt) bátwar 'belief, trust”, also the name of a governor of Ray in the reign of Malik Arslan whose daughter was married by Muhammad Ildegiz; their son was Kutluğ nanc Sar. 117v. 12: Kip.(?) xv aman 'trust', etc. (tüzerlik; in the margin in a SW(?) hand) ınanc Tu. ab. rr. D onunç Ordinal f. of o:n; “tenth”. S.i.a.m.l.g. in the later forms oninci/onuncu and the like. Türkü vii onunç ay '(in) the tenth month” II S To: vi ff. Man. onung “tenth (paragraph)' Chuas. 206: Uyğ. viii onunç ay Şu. W 2: vin ff. Civ. onunç (once oninc) ay is common in the documents in USp.: Xak. xr onunc yarma:k a/-dirhamı”l-"aşir "the tenth dirham (etc.) Kaş. I 133; 111 450 (duplicated):  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 232 
     
   
   
      188 DIS KB the form used in the list of Chapters in the Vienna MS. is onunç. Dis. V. ANND anun- Refl. f. of anu:-; “to prepare oneself (for something 2Dat., or to do something Gerund in -£alr/-geli). N.o.a.b. Uy. vini ff. Man.-A M I 14, 4-75 (6:t-): Man. TT II 17, 60-3 (alku:); anuntimiz sizipe “ve have prepared ourselves for you” TT III 3: Xak. xı ol ya:ğı:ka: anundı: "he made ready (ista'adda) for the enemy” Kaş. 7 206 (anunur, anunma:k), isizlikig (sic ?error for isizlikke: anunma: /à fasta'iddanna li'l-garr “do not prepare for wickedness' (i.e. do not assume that people will be wicked) 71/ 161, 3; ( 114, 19 see 1 oğurluk): KB yégüci anundi anuk tut aşı “the eater has prepared himself, have his food ready for him' 1675; sapa ma anunmış turur bu ölüm “this death has prepared itself for you” 1405; 0.0. 3530 and spurious verse in Vienna MS. after 1183: xı(?) At. 209 (1 agii). D 1nan- (1na:n-) Refl. f. of *ina:- “to trust, rely on (someone Dat.)'. S.i.a.m.l.g., sometimes also for “to believe (something Dat.)'. "Türkü vir ff. Man. burxanlarka 1nantimiz tayantimiz 'we have trusted and relied on the prophets” (sic?, not “Buddhas” in Man.) Chuas. 175-6: Uyf. vurff. Bud. sizipe manıp “relying on you” U III 3s, 34; bu savka 1:nanip kértgünüp 'trusting and believing these words' USp. 102b. 27; o.o. do. 100, 8; Hüen-ts. 2061: Civ. öz kentünke inangil “rely on yourself! TT 7 40-1; 0.0. do. 8o, 109; see also ıçan-: Xak.x1 men apa:r inandım rramadtu "alayhi "T relied on him” Kaş. I 206 (1na:nur (sic), 1nanma:k); ya:y kórkipe: 1nanma: “do not trust or expect any good from (là ta'tamid wa là tarcu xayr) the beauty of spring” 7// 161, r: KB inanma mapa 666; o.o. 668, 2374: xır(?) At. ésim tép inanip sirr ayma sakın “do not tell a secret, saying “he is my friend" and trusting him; keep it to yourself” 173; Tef. 1nan- “to believe (in. God)” 129: Çağ. xvff. 1nanbürvar kardan “to belicve in” Sam, Tv. 17 (quotn.): Xwar. xiu inan- “to believe in" Ali 39: xiv inan- “to trust” (this world) Qutb $9: Kom. xiv “to believe in” (God, etc. Dat.) 1nan- CCI, CCG; Gr. 273 (quotns.): Kip. xin şaddaqa min tagdiqa'l-kalàm “to believe, in the sense of believing a statement' inan- Hou. 41, 16: xiv 1nan- şaddaqa wa ámana “to believe, trust! İd, 24: XV ditto Tuh. 22b. 7, a.o.o.: Ostn. xv man- “to rely on (a promise)" 7TS I 385. Tris. ANN S 1nancu: See 1nang. D ianchg P.N./A. fr. inanc; 'reliable, trustworthy'. N.c.a.b.; the entry Çağ. inançlik (sic) in R 1 1441 is not confirmed by any other Çağ. authority. Uyğ. ix inançlığ III C 7 (ETY II 38; on the edge of a fragment;  . ANN dubious): Xak. xı KB kişilik kılığlı 1nançlığ akt 'humane, trustworthy, and generous" 2321: xıı(?) At. nece me inançlığ és erse yakin 'however rcliable and close a friend may be” 174. D 1nangsiz Priv. N./A. fr. manç, 'untrustworthy, treacherous'. N.o.a.b.; the entry GCair. İnançsiz (sic) in RI 1441 is not confirmed by any other Çağ. authority. Xak. xı KB ınançsiz téme emdi sógme meni “do not now call me untrustworthy and curse me' 10gr; 1nançsız ajun “this untrustworthy world' 6629; a.o. 670: xiv Müh, al-xá'in "treacherous” 1:na:ngsiz. Mel. 54, 1 (mis-spelt nansız), Rif. işo, Dis. ANR İnir “dusk”, the half-light betwcen day and night at sunset (and prob. also at dawn). Cf. İmir. Survives in several NE languages as ipir/i:r, etc.; NC Kir. 1pirt/ipir, ipirt and mir; Kzx. ipir and several NW languages as inir/ingir and the like, usually only of evening dusk. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. kün üner uğurda . . . inir uğurda "at sunrise. . ., at dusk' TT V 8, 70-6: Civ. (in a calendar of A.D. 1368) (the planet Mercury) ipirde kózünür 'becomes visible at dusk' T'T VII r, 22: Xak. xr İnir ai-sudfa 'dusk', that is a mixture (/xt/ldt) of light and darkness; in Oğuz imir Kaş. 1 94. D onar Distributive form of 0:n; “ten each" Survives only(?) in NC Kzx. R 7 1043, some NW languages and SW Osm. Türkü vır ff. Man. onar erke bir bir er [small gap) bast urdi “he put one man as head of each ten men” TT II 10, 91-2: Xwar. xin onar Ali 25. D onur See on- KB. D öpür apparently der. fr. 1 öp, but morphologicallv difficult. Survives in NC Kir. ópür "the skirt of a robe or coat; ncedlework on the front of a woman's dress; a dress thus ornamented”, and SW Osm. öpür “advanced, superior, eminent” ( Red.); *well educated; (of an animal) domesticated” (Santi); in Rep. Turkish this is spelt onur (unless this is merely French honneur) . UyB. vir ff. Civ. iç öpürde 1S1rSar “if (a mouse) bites (a hole) in the inner skirt” . . . taş ópürde ısırsar “if it bites (a hole) in the outer skirt! TT VII 36, 8-17: Çağ. xv ff. öpür (spelt) güşa-i dáman-i qaba “the corner of the skirt of a robe! San. 89r. ro (quotn.). D üpür Dev. N. fr. üp-; etymologically “something hollowed out), in practice usually “cave” or similar cavity. Survives usually as üpgür or the like in NE Tuv., SE Türki Shate, BŞ, Şarring and NC Kır., Kzx. Uyg. vı ff. Man. üpürinteki (spelt Znkü-) yek opjinlar “devils ana demons in thcir caves' TT III 91: Xak. xi üpür al-kahf “cave” Kaş. Il 94: KB bu ağzıp mitàh üpür sanı teg “this mouth of yours is just like a cave” (when the words come out, it is like the chilly dawn     ig ə o xə 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 233 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. ANRwind) 2684; üpürde turugli "living in a cave' 4766; üpürde evi 6:55: xin(?) Tef. üpür 'cave' 339: Xwar. xır İDİZ (sic) "hollovv, cave' ' Ali 47, no doubt an error for this word: xiv üpür 'cave' Qutb 123; Nahc. 292, 8; 342, 17. D öpre: Den. Adj./Adv. fr. 1 öp, used both of time and space, and implying both motion and rest; in the earliest period apparently only as a cardinal point “in the east, eastwards', later “in front, forwards; formerly', and (with a preceding Gerund or /42/.) “before”, Cf. öndün. N.o.a.b. Türkü vırı öpre: kün tuğsikda: “in the east, where the sun rise? 1 E 4, I1 E s; ópre: “in the east' // S 13; (T ro, 14, 20; (he killed many of the people) berye: Tavğaçığ ópre: Kitafiif yırya: Oğuzığ “in the south Chinese, in the east Kitans, in the north Oğuz” T 7; ópre: kün tuğsıkına: Ongin 2: viii ff. Man. yer tepri erken önre “before earth and heaven existed' Chuas. 162-3: Uyğ. viri Ópre: “in the east! Su. N 6; S 7: vin ff. Bud. Sanskrit (an»ágatapürvam 'not having come previously' öpre:tin be:rü ba:rma:tukuğ TT VIII A.1; pràg bodhe "before enlightenment” bodhisvinde:(?) ópre: do. D.s; pürvakarmeva “like previous action” (i.e. action in a previous incarnation) ópre: a:junda:ki kilinc [gap] do. F.15; U İT 23, 13-14 (1 6:9); and many o.o.: Xak. xı er ópre: yattı: istalqö”l-racul “ala qafáhu "the man lay on his back” (i.e. face upwards) Kaş. III 378 (see tópre:). S enrek See erpek. Dis. V. ANRS epir- See egir-. D opar- Caus. f. of *opa:-(?), cf. opal-; “to make (someone or something cc.) better, to put (it) right". S.i.m.m.l.g. Uyf. vii ff. Bud. bu munumuznı amti kilinc teprisi oparzun 'now let the god of action (i.e. Sanskrit karma, which operates to inflict retribution for past misdeeds) relieve our distress” Suv. 7, 11-12) 3.0. /füen-ts. Briefe, p. 30, note 1870, 27: Xak. xı(?) Kaş. I 244 (érpel-): KB ked óglüg kerek beg oparsa işi “a beg must be very intelligent if he is to manage his affairs aright” 1989; tapuğuğ oparsa bu yanlığ kiçiğ begipe yağudı onardı keçiğ “a youth like this, if he does good service, dravvs near to his beg and secures access to him” 4042; o.o. 1990, 3988, 4265, 5653: Çağ. xvf. opar- (spelt, *with -p-”) röst kardan hür "to put a matter right”, in Ar. işdbat San. 88r. 15: Xwar. xiv opar- “to correct (someone)” Qutb 117: Kip. xiv opar- (with -9-) qawwama Şayrahu “to set someone aright, to rectify' İd. 25 (this entry immediately follows that of 2 op- (on-), istaqüma, with the (erroneous) implication that it is the Caus. f. of that Verb): Osm. xiv ff. opar- “to improve, correct, put on the right road”), c.i.a.p. TTS 7 543; 11 729; III 554; IV 608. D üpür- Hap. leg.; if authentic presumably : Caus. f. of üp-, but it occurs in a very obscure 189 sentence (yaguruk1i is also Hap. leg.) in a series of sentences describing the effects of an evil omen, and the meaning is uncertain. Uyğ. vii ff. Civ. (the swan has flown away and does not settle on the lake; the child does not come to its mother(?); your wife is depressed) yaşurukı işi üze kapığın üpürser [gap] ur perhaps “if someone has your door broken through on his secret business” TT 7 217-18. VU(D) apra:-/nmpra:- 'to whine, scream, bellow', and the like; prob. Den. V. fr. an onomatopoeic *apir/rpir, the latter still existing as an onomatopoeic for creaking or grating sounds in some NE languages. There is great inconsistency in the vocalization of this verb and its derivatives; the MS. of Kaş. has 1pra:-, iprat:, ipran- but aprag- mainly of the female camel. S.i.a.m.l.g., in a wide variety of forms, some with inserted velar -ğ-, some trisyllabic like NC anğıra-, and some with front vowels e- or 1-. Xak. xi ingen iprasa: bötu: bozla:r “if the female camel calls (hannat), the colt bellows (raga) in reply' Kaş. I 120, 18; n.m.e.: Çağ. xv ff. 1pra-/1)ran(spelt) nalidan "to lament', followed by a long passage saying that the Rümi author (i.e. Vel. s.v. IDran-) spelt the word with front vowels quoting the Muháhimatu'l-lugatayn which he himself had not seen, but that in his experience it had back vowels Sam. rır. 2 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv ipre-(-mek etc.) “to lament' Qutb 60; mra-(-p) do. 206; VU ipreditto MN 376; Nahc. 73, 16 (botu:): Kip. xv za'ara'l-asad (of a lion) "to roar' VU apra- Tuh. 18b. 6: Osm. xiv ff. apra-/ınra(sometimes spelt ipre- in 7 and /T, but the Infins. are all -mak) “to roar, bellow, howl, 200 TTS Təş, 386, II 40, 543; İİİ 27; 30. VUD aprat-/1prat- Caus. f. of apra:-/ınra:-. S.i.s.m.]l. Xak. xı ol anı ipratti: ararmahu mina"l-ranin "he made him moan, groan (etc.)” Kaş. II 357 (pratu:r, inrat-ma:k): Xwar. xiv ipret- “to make (someone) lament' Qutb 6o. VUD apran-/ıpran- Refl. f. of apra:-/fıpra:and synonymous with it. S.i.s.m.l. Xak. xr inge:n ıprandı: harvati”l- náqa wa gayruhu Kaş. I 289 (ıpranu:r, 1pranma:k): Çağ. ipren-(-di) dard ile yab yap gizlüce ağla- "to sob quietly for pain” Vel. 81 (quotn. Muhàkimatu'l- lugatayn, giving this meaning for ipremek/sipremek); ınran- Sar. rı?r. 2 (see 1yra:-) Osm. xiv ff. several occurrences of apran-/ipran- are included underapra-/ 1yra- q.v. VUD anraş-/ıpraş- Co-op. f. of apra:-/ ipra:- S.is.m.l. Xak. xi oğla:n apraşdı: (sic) adiyati'l-sibyán “the boys were hurt' (sic, ie. screamed) Kaş. I 289 (anraşu:r, anraşma:k, sic in MS.), saçlıp suvr: apraşu:r (?, alif unvocalized) “their (the clouds”) water pours down and makes a noise and murmur" (satwt wa xarir) I 258, 4; akin akar aprasu:r 'the torrent flows with a groaning plaintive 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 234 
     
   
   
      196 DIS. V. ANRsound” (bi-anin tva hanin) III 39, 15; ördi: buht inraşu: (sic) “the clouds rose noisily' (zacláà') I1I 398, 24: Xwar. xii ipres- (sic?) "to weep together” “Al 47. Tris. ANR D anaru:/ıparu:finaru: Directive f. of an(01); etymologically “up to that (time or place)” but from an early period used as a Postposn. vv, the Abl. meaning “(from then or there) onwards (to some indefinite point in space or time)'; it therefore became associated antithetically with bérü: meaning 'on that side, there”, as opposed to “on this side, here”, The phonetic history is complicated; the parallel form with 1- is normally spelt 1naru: (the only occurrence of ınğaru: seems to be in Uyf. vi); in Xak. the only form seems to be naru: (aparu in KB örro, Vienna MS., is a false reading) and this survives in SE "Türki, Shaw (nari) BS (neri), Şarring (nari/neri), and SC Uzb. (nari); aparu (later aparı) still survives in SW 'Tkm. apri and xx Anat. anarı SDD 10o, but elsewhere the word has been abbreviated; in NE the forıns are anar/ınar/onary/a:rı and even a:r (cf. the Khak. phr. a:r be:r), in SE Türki Shatc has ari as,veell as nari, in NC the forms, often with rhyming forms of berü, are ar/arı/eri and in NW arıya:rı, Türkü vri (let us make an expedition eastwards against the Türkü xağan) aparu: sü:lemeser “if we do not march in that direction T 20: Uyğ. vi] Türkü bodun anta: ınğaru: (sic) yok boldi: “rhe Türkü people from that time onwards ceased to exist” Şu. N 3o: vu ff. Man.-A az 1naru barmış “he went a little further' M I 35, 4 and 12: Man. muntada 1naru “from now onwards! M III əş, 9 (iii); sizinte ınaru şeçilip “being parted(?) from you” do. 25, r1 (iii): Bud. (not very far) munda inaru “from here” U IV 16, 156; 1naru berü anda munda “that way and this, here and there” Suv. 625, 10; berü . . . 1naru U II 11, 10-211; bu künde 1naru “from this day forward" U III 65, 2-3 (ii); Hüen-ts. so, o.o. TT VHI .1.46 (anta:da:); do. N.11; PP 37, 4-5 (ópdün)—aparu also occurs, but much less often, and has hitherto been misread ayayu, (Tripitaka Acarya) yantut béleg beklep aparu Inanprabi açarıka bitig Kildi 'packed up a return gift and furthermore composed a letter to jfiánaprabha Acarya Hüen-ts. 1859-60; o.o., normally meaning “furthermore, thenceforvvard”, in note on that passage (Hüen-ts. Briefe, p. 28), Suv. 28, ır, as, ir: Civ. bu künde ınaru US?. 88, 23; 107, 8 (and, with kün 116, 11): Xak. xi naru: a particle (Aharf) meaning al-ciha *direction'; hence one says naru: bar 'go in that direction! Kaş. III 223; o.o. I 199, 6 (atin-: translated dálrka'l-cánib “in that direction"); 7352, t3 (translated ba'duAii thereafter"); IH 140, t9; 193, $: KB bu künde naru 597; munipda naru “from here onwards! 4070; (there is also a N./A.S., e.g. munipda naruki , ... yol "the road from here on” 4876): xin(?)  Tef. aprurak bardı 'went forward! ss: Çağ. xv ff. narı óte in the meaning which it has in andan ötelandan agaru "beyond that” Vel. 390 (quotn.); narı (spelt) ar faraf "in that direction” (quotn.), narırak dn faraftar "further on in that direction' Sax, 321 v. rr: Kom. xiv arı 'onwards, towards! CCI, CCG; Gr. 41 (quotns.): Kip. xiv al-ba'id mino"l-şay) tagir tlayhi 'further than the thing at which you point” anğaru (and 'nearer than it towards you” berü:) Bul, 14, 7: xv (tea mina'l-igára and of the demonstratives [i'lI-qarib ay hunà for “near, that is here” beri and) /i'l-ba'rd ay hunáka for "far, that is there” arı Tu). 42a. 10: Osm. xiv ff, aparu at any rate till xvi/apari fr. xvr onwards (1) “on that side, beyond" (as opposed to beril), (2) as Postposn. after Abl, *beyond, on the other side of', of place and rarely of time; c.i.a.p. 7TS I 24; II 33; III 19; IV 21. D oparu: Directive f. of 1 0p; 'towards the right (side)'. Survives only in some NE languages, R I 1028 (various forms) and Khak., Das. 126, where it sometimes mcans “right (not wrong)'. Uyğ. viir ff. Bud. (the emblems on your head-dress) oparu evrilip tururlar 'are turned to the right'; oparu tegzinmek kilip *making a turn to the right” U I7 41, 17. D öpre:ki: N./A.S. fr. ópre:; 'previous', etc. N.o.a.b. Türkü vir T 1:7 (beryekl:): Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. ópreki bilge: ba:xşıla:r "wise teachers of old times” TT VIII H.4; a.o. do. 4.16: Civ. ópreki él(l)igler 'former kings' TT I 93; (take one in ten from these stones and) ópre:ki ta:şka: kat "add them to the previous stone” TT VIII L.17. Dis. ANS PU ipes Hap. leg., Xak. xi a man who is constantly glancing right and left, as if he were a stranger (a'cami) is called ipes kişi: Kaş. 7 94 (sic, listed under -S). D ansız Priv. N./A. fr. 1 ap; lit. without understanding'; later it came to mean (r) "without understanding, ignorant, stupid”, (2) without thinking', hence either 'sudden, suddenly' or *mechanically'. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE.Uyğ. vurff. Bud. (you completely refuted him) bu yeme apsiz uyatip utsukup ózin bilindi “and he admitted himself to be without understanding, put to shame and defeated' Hüen-ts. 1802—3; (I will make all the rivers . .”. trees..."plants... apsiz kórtlesevüglüg ... *unbelievably(?) beautiful, lovely' (agreeably coloured, fragrant, etc.) Suv. 529, 11: Caf. xv ff. ansız/ansızın (spelt) (r) bi-'agl tva nö-faham "without intelligence and understanding! (quotn.), (2) "á-gahàn wa fğafıl 'suddenly and unawares' San. sər. 3: Xwar. xiv ansızın 'suddenly' Quib 8; apsuzun/ apsizda ditto do. 9: Kom. xiv 'suddenly* ansizin CCG; Gr. 38 (quotn.): Kip. xiv ansız (si) al-ğafla 'suddenly, unavvares” /d. 24: Osm. xiv ff. 'suddenly' in several forms, xiv apsuz/apsuzda; xv apsuzin/apsi:zda; xvi apsiz TTS I 30; 11 41; İİ 28; IV. 31.    
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 235 
     
   
   
     .DIS D öpsüz Priv. N./A. fr. 2 öp, n.o.a.b. Uy. viri ff. Man. (then that realm, city, or country becomes) önsüz mepiz[(siz küçlsüz küsünSuz 'colourless, unbeautiful, and powerless (Hend.) M III 37, 16-17 (i). Dis. V. ANSD énse:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of én-. Xak. xt er kótü:din énse:di: 'the man intended and desired to descend (xarzil) from the roof' (etc.); the -n- is changed (mubdala) from -1Kaş, 1 278/ énse:r, énse:me:k). Dis. ANŞ/ D eniş N.Ac. in -ş fr. én-; 'descent', and sometimes as a Conc. N. “declivity, downslope'. S.i.m.m.l.g. Xak. xi K.B eniş “descent” is fairly common, usually in antithesis to ağış *rise' 9o3, 1050, 1087 (ağış), etc.: xiv Muh. al-hudür 'slope, declivity” 6:niş Mel. 74, 13: Rif. 177 (mis-spelt): Kom. xıv “valley, declivity" eniş CCI; Gr.: Kip. xii al-hadara “declivity” (opposite to 'acclivity' yokuş) eniş Hou. 6, 15: xiv eniş al-hudur (and the opposite is yokuş al-şa"üd) . . , eniş al-nuzül "descent” fd. 24: xv hadara eniş Tuh. 12b. 11; 2.0. 22a, 1 (ağış). D ünüş Dev. N. fr. ün-; survives only(?) in NE Tuv. ünüş 'plant, crop'; it is doubtful whether this word has been correctly read in the text below; in most late Uyğ. scripts ünüş and örüş are practically indistinguishable, and örüş would seem to suit the context better. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (until those who hold this dhürani) ünüş (?örüş) yolka teggince “reach the rising road” Suv. 361, 5-6. Dis. V. ANSD énisg- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of én-, Xak. xit ol menip birle: ta:ğdın énisdi: baranr fi'l-nuzül mina'l-cabal "he raced me down the mountain' Kaş, I 19o (€nişü:r, enişme:k, MS. in error -ma:K). S epig- See eğiş-. D unaş- (una:ş-) Recip. f. of una:- , “to reach 8 satisfactory agreement (about something Acc.). Survives only(?) in SE Türki, Shat, BŞ., and NC Kir. Xak. xı bu tışığ ola:r kamuğ unaşdıla:r tarádato hádà'l-amr "they all reached a mutually satisfactory agreement about this affair” Kaş. I1 19o (una:şu:rla:r, unaşma:k). D üpüş- Hap. leg., Co-op. f. (in the sense of total action) of ün-. Türkü virt ff. (a falcon swooped on a hare, but just missed it; the falcon's talons were skinned and) tavışğan teri:si: üpü:şüpen yügü:rü: barml:g "the hare ran off vvith its skin thoroughly lacerated” IrhB 44. Tris. ANS D ünüşlüğ Hap. leg.?; P.N./A. fr. ünüs, . q.v.ş prob. a misreading of órüslüg. Uyf. . ANZ . 191 virt ff. Bud. ünüslüg yoluğ tüz bışruntaçı "levelling(?) the rising road” Suv. 244, 21-2. Dis. ANY 1 opa:y basically “easy”, hence, later, "easy to get, i.e. cheap”. S.i.a.m.l.g. (in SW only Tkm.; in Osm. “easy” is kolay, not an old word) vv. many phonetic changes, e.g. NE opday/ opdoy, Khak. o:y; NC Kir. ipğay/ıptay/ opoy/optoy. Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. (after a prescription for difficult parturition) opay tuğurur “she gives birth easily” H 7 118: xiv Chin.-Uyğ. Dict. 1 “easy” (Giles 5,497) opay Ligeti 187; R I 1026: Xak. xi Kaş. I1 41 (2 09); n.m.e.: KB kilinçi kóni erdi kilki opay “his conduct was upright and his character easy' 407; similar phr. 325, 674; ayitmak opay boldi 'it was easy to ask questions" 1907: (xu(?) At. opaylik “easy to do” 237): Çağ. xv ff. opay rki kat olur “folded double" (quotn.); waqqiya “ounce” (quotn.) Vel. 120: onğay (spelt) arzán wa pahd-t andah 'cheap, low priced” (second quotn.); the 'two Rümi authors' spelt it opay and translated it “ounce”, quoting the same sentence; /Vaşir? followed them and also invented (sáxta) the meaning 'folded in two' San. Sor, 2 (Vel.'s spelling is the better but San.'s translation clearly right; *ounce' may be some muddled recollection of Latin uncia; 'folded double" is inexplicable). VU 2 onay “the planet Yupiter”, possibly, like some other names of stars in KB, a l.-w.; the phr. for "Jupiter' in Kag. is kara: kus. Opay reappears in (3 42 translated müteri, bircis, both 'Jupiter'; it is not known where ŞS found this word. In SW xx Anat. óngay (sic) 'Tupiter" SDD 1111. Xak. xi KB anında basa keldi İkinç opay “after him came Jupiter in the second place” 132. Tris. ANY E apayu See aparu:. E öneyü See E óne:-. VU(D) ópe:yük Hap. leg.; Den. or Dev.(?) N./A. but not obviously connected vv. any known meaning of ön or ün-. Xak. xı ópe:yük (sic in MS.) ne:n a/-şay”ı”l-xöşş bi'l-gav', wa kull gay xuşşa bihi'l-racul fa-husca lahu öpe:yük 'anything which is peculiar to something else'; and anything which is the private property(?) of someone is called his ópe:yük Kaş. 7 162. ?E iniyigü:n See ini:. Dis. ANZ apız “a stubble-field'; later perhaps also 'stubble'. Survives in NC Kir. and SW Osm. and xx Anat. (Türkü vıır ff. Yen. it is unlikely that the reading apızğa: in Mal. 48, 6 is correct): Xak. xı apız al-cill, wa hutca süqu”l-burr tta ğayrihi ba"dama huşida "a field of wheat or other (cereals) after it has been reaped” Kaş. I ga: Çağ. xv ff. apiz (spelt, 'with -p-") mahall-i xird"at ki höşil-i ün taza raf" şuda wa xüşüh-i ün bar zamin münda 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 236 
     
   
   
      192 DIS bdşad 'arable land from which the crop has recently. been reaped and the stubble left on the ground' San. 52r. 7: Osm. xiv ff. apiz is used in several dicts. to translate Ar. and Pe. words, most of which mean 'stubble' rather than "a stubble field” 77S I 28; 1I 39; 111 26; IV 29. Mon. AR a:r 'auburn, bay (coloured)'; pec. to Kaj.; practically syn. w., and perhaps a Sec. f. of o:. Xak. xi ar böri: al-dabu" 'hyaena' (verse); a:r ne: al-latenu'l-aghab 'auburn or bay colour', also called arstl (sic in MS.) bi'l-ziyáda 'with a suffix' Kaş. 1 79. 1 er “man”, originally merely “a human male', later in such specialized meanings as 'male (not female); a fighting man; husband'. See eren, S.i.a.m.l.g. Türkü viri térilip yetmiş er bolmig 'when they assembled, they became seventy men” 7 E ız, 11 E ır, inim Kül Téfin er at bulti: “my younger brother Kül "Tegin received his adult name" 7 E 31 (er at, fairly common in early epitaphs, was the name given to, or assumed by(?), a man when he grew up, in place of his childhood's name, which is seldom mentioned); el(l)iğçe: er tutdimiz “ve captured about fifty (fighting) men” T 42: viri ff. er "a man”, often qualified, e.g. bay er “a rich man”, is common in IrkB s, 7, etc.; beg er do. 5 therefore presumably means merely 'a beg': Man. ol tüzün er 'that good man” M 1 5, ız, 6, 20; a.o. TT 1I ro, 91-2 (onar): Yen. er and er at are fairly common Mal. 26, 3 etc.; 26, 13 etc.: Uyğ. vii er (fighting) man” is common in $u. £ 4, ro, II, 12, etc.: IX oğlanım erde: mariminga: bol 'my sons, when you grow to manhood(?), become like my teacher” Sici 9 (but the correct reading of Suci 7 is marima: yüzer toru:ğ bertim "1 gave my teachers a hundred bay horses each', not yüz er turuğ “a hundred men and a dwelling"): vii ff. Man.-A erli uzuntonluğlı: “men and women' M 7 16, 15-16; ne er sen “vhat man are you? MT 33, 19: Man. inça kalti er “ust as a man: (who blows into a bladder) Wid. 23: Bud. er both by itself and with a qualifying Adj. or Noun, e.g. beğ er “a beg', agg1 er “a cook' is common; in TT VIII D.zo the translation of Sanskrit bharteva "like a husband” is very tentatively read he:re teg: Civ. er kigi er isipe ked bolaym téser 'if a man wishes to become sexually potent' H 7 75; altı er kömür borlukumnı “my vineyard in which six men (are required) for digging! Up. 13, 4; 2.0.0. (but in do. 22, 5 (XIV) the correct reading is har (Pe. 1.-vv., not er) bir kişi “every single man”): O. Kir. ix ff. er and er at are common Mal. 2, 3 etc.; 2, 5 etc.: Xak. xı er al-racul “man”, yucma" eren wa hüda şüdd li-anna simata'l-cam' -la:r 'plural eren; this is irregular because the sign of the plural is -la:r' Kaş. I 35; very common in Kaş. KB er at boldı begler kanati yüği “men and horses are the wings and feathers of begs' 3005; er at 'troops' 2138; and many o.o. of er:  . ANZ xir(?) At, er (spelt er/ér) is common; Tef. er *man, fighting men' 78: xiv Muh. racul er Mel. 6, 16; Rif. 78, a.0.0.; al-zatec 'husband" €:r 49, 10; 144 (the word is spelt both er and er, the latter commoner): Caf. xv ff. er er ya"ni mard Vel. $4; ér[éren (spelt) mard (quotn. w. éren); and metaph. ázáda marddn "free men" (quotn. vv. €ren) San. 9gr. 16: Xwar. xın(?) er (usually spelt ér, once, 314, ?yér) occurs several times in Og.: xiv er “man” Qutb zı, 57 (6r): Kom. xiv “man, nale, husband” er CCI, CCG; Gr. 89 (quotn.): Kip. xiii al-racul er Hou. 24, 17: xiv ditto /d. 9: xv ditto Kav. sg, 14; Tuh. 16b. 7; zaroc er Tuh. 17b. 12 (a.0.0.).: Osm. xiv ff. er usually “husband”, less often “man, fighting man”, c.La.p. TT'S I 270; 11 387; İİİ 256; IV 300. S 2 ér See yér Xak. l rr (or 1r?) 'song'. The prosthetic y- in Uyğ. and Xak. is clearly secondary, as in other words like 1ra:k, since nearly all modern languages which convert y- to j- have ir, survives in NE Khak,, Tuv. ır, NC Kzx. tr; NW Kumyk, Nog. yır, SW Osm. ir, only NC Kir, NW Kk. have Jir; in some modern languages also “tune, epic, folk-tale”, etc. See irla:-. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud, irin oyunin irlayu bódiyü 'singing their songs and dancing their dances TT X 1i44-s—yirib taplayu 'admiring the song” PP 7:, 3: Xak. xi yir al-ğinü” "a song”, one says yır yırla:dı: "he sang a song”), this is generally used of love songs (al-ğazal), and one can also say ir, initial alıf being substituted (for yd”) Kaş. IJI 3; yur al-fazal soa'l-Fínd? İH 143; o.0. İT 14, 9 (koS-); 135, 19 (kosul-); I1 131, 4 (2 ku:ğ): xiv. Muh. al-£imná! yır Mel. 63, 4; Rif. 161: Çağ. xv ff. yır xwánandagi wa gatot-1 ühang “singing, melodious sound” Sam. 349r. 22: Kom. xiv 'song' ır CCI, CCG, Gr. 273 (quotn.): Kip. xiv İr (with front vowel', sic) d. ro: Osm. xiv ff. ir (once, xiv yir) “song”, c.i.a.p. TS 7 ası, 1I 498; HII 342; IV 393: xvii ir in. Rüni, surüd "song? San. 99r. 20. VU 2 ir Hap. leg.; prob. a mere onomatopoeic, but there may be some connection with Ar. "ür 'shame', much used in some later 'Turkish languages. See irra. Xak. xr ir harf yuknà bihi 'ani'l-hacla "a particle alluding to shame'; hence one says er ir boldi: Jacila'l-racul “the man was ashamed” Kaş. 7 36. VU 1 ir “avl, drill; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. otluğ ir “a fire-drill” U JI ro, 22: Xak. xı ir al-mitgab "a drill Kaş. I 45. S 2ir See 1 yır. O:r a word used to describe the colour of an animal's coat, the meaning varying from language to language. Survives in NE Tel. or “greyish” R I 1047; NC Kzx. or “dark reddy brown' R I 1047; MM 262. 'T'wo words ending in -z have been entered here, since no such words with this meaning have been noted elsewhere. See a:r. Xak. xi o:r at faras bayna” Haşqar 1wa'l-kumayt "a horse with a coat   T TA 177— gə UTI TI miti mi ———— 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 237 
     
   
   
     MON. V. AR193  between chestnut and bay” Kaş. ! 45: xiv Muh.(?) (in the list of colours of horse's coats) al-samand 'dun' o:r (spelt o:z) Rif. 171 (only): Kip. xiv az (sic) al-aşfar mina'i-xayl “(of a horse) yellow' /d. rz (prob. an error for o:r or a:r but entered under a/if-zày). 1 óc "height, high, high ground'; N./A. homophonous with 1 ó:r- but perhaps not connected since the exact connotation is slightly different. Not noted before the medieval period, but older since it is the basis of örle:-, örlet-. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SE. Çağ. xv ff. órk/ór ('with ö-, not ü-") yokug ve yokaru “high ground, upwfrds' jel. 1:02 (quotn., the first form due to a misunderstanding of the Dat. órke); ór (1) bulandi 'high ground' (quotns.); (2) metaph., faraf-i bálá-yi db wa samt-i seazidan-i nasim "upstream, upwind' San. 70v. 18. VU 2 ó:r Hap. leg. Xak. xi &amp;:r ('with a front vowel") maltallu'l-xasiratayn mina"l-qabd" "the waist of a robe' Kaş. I 45. l ür “a long time, a period extending far into the past'. Survives only in NE Kaç., Koib., Küer, Sag. R 7 1824; Khak. and Tuv. "Türkü vii ff. Man. ürke üzüksüz emgetirbiz '(if) for a long time continuously we cause pain” (to the light of the five gods, etc.) Chuas. 315: Uy£. viu ff. Man.-A M III 9, 6 (udik); do. 25, 11 (i): Bud. küden ür tursar yaramaz "if a guest stays a long time it is inconvenient! PP 69, 3. S2ür See üyür. Mon. V. AR1 a:r- “to be tired, exhausted, weak', sometimes with implication of weakness for lack of food (cf. aruK). S.i.a.m.l.g., often in a lengthened form arı-/aru-. Türkü vır ff. er süke: barml:ş yolta: atı: arml:ş “a man went on an expedition; on the way his horse became exhausted! /rkB 35; a.o. do. 17 (3 öp): Uyğ. vır ff. Bud. yérleri&amp; kezip nrip 'traversing places and becoming tired' U Hİ zo, 5 (i); ariti armadı “he did not become at all tired” U IV 22, 273: Xak. xı er a:rdi: “the man (etc.) was weak' ('ayya) Kaş. J 172 (arar, a:rma:k); alımlığ kórü: armadı: (sic) *when he saw a creditor, he was not so tired (that he could not avoid him)' 7 149, 2: KB (I have made this long journey and come to you) emgep ham artuk arip 'in pain and very weary' 837; arip kal- 'to be tired and lag behind” 3702-3: xin(?) At. (the miser) armaz osanmaz bolur “does not get tired or despondent (piling up money)” 309; Tef. ar- "to get tired” 55: xiv Muh. ta'iba "to be tired” a:r- Mel. 24, 5; Rif. 106; al-ta'b, nrmak 34, 10; 119: Çağ. xv ff. ar- (-di, etc.) yorul- “to be tired' Vel. 11-12; arxasta şudan "to become tired'; also pronounced har- San. 33v. 8; har- xasta toa münda $udan "to become tired and exhausted” do. 323r. 24 (quotns): Xwar. xiv ar- ditto Quib 10; Nahe. 160, 16; 161, r: Kom. xiv armayin “untiring” CCG; Gr. 39 (quotn.): Kip. xni al-ta'b armak Hou. 27, 14; ta'iba ar- do. 34, 12: xiv ar- (with back vowel") ta'iba İd. 9; ta'iba or- (sic?) Bul. 37r.: xv ta'iba ar- Tuh. 9b. 6; 'ayya (yorul-; in margin) ar- 26a. 13: Osm. xiv ff. ar- "to be tired, exhausted', c.i.a.p. TTS I 42; İT 52 (ar1-), 55; İTİ 38, İV 41. 2 a:r- 'to deceive, trick'. 'The suggestion in Hüen-ts. Briefe, p. 29, note 1867 of a connection with ara: is unconvincing; some remote connection with 1 a:l is possible. N.o.a.b.; replaced by alta:-. Türkü viri süçiğ savın yımşak ağın arıp “tricking (people) with their honeyed words and luxurious treasures! / S s; II N 4: Uyğ. viti ff. Man.-A (the human body is created entirely) teven kürün armakan azğurmakan “by tricks (Hend.) and deceit (/end.)' M III 9, 11-12 (ii); a.o. do. 29, s (ii) (1 yov-): Bud. U İT 77,26;86, 43, TT IV ro, 5 (1 yov-); Suv. 135, 10 (ezügle:-): Xak. xr ol anı: a:rdi: ğarrahu “he deceived him” Kaş. 7 172 (a:ra:r, a:rma:k), ardı: (sic) seni: ki:z “the girl deceived you” (xada'atka) I 412, 21; a.o. I11 62,3 (1 yov-): KB meni ardı dunya “the world deceived me” 1172. 1 er- "to be” (something, somewhere, etc.), necessarily accompanied by a Predicate; it cannot be used by itself to mean 'to exist' (for which see ba:r), but is often used as an Aux. V. after Participles, etc. of other verbs. In the earliest period it was conjugated completely, but the -r- began to be elided fairly early, and after that the tenses formed by attaching suffixes with initial vowels became obsolete and were replaced by the corresponding tenses of bol-/ol- in some languages and 1 tur- in others. However, some tenses, usually without the -r-, s.i.a.m.1.g. 'The unusual very early Gerunds(?) erki, erken, erinç are listed separately. Türkü vırır, vir ff including Man. and Yen. er-, “to be”, and as Aux. V., is very common: UYyğ. viri; viri ff. Man.-A, Man., Bud., Civ. ditto; in TT VIII spelt eror, less often, e:r- never €r- : e:se:r (for erse:r) occurs once: Xak. xı ol anda:ğ erdi: hadd hana "he was thus” Kaş. I 164 (erü:r, erme:k), 8.0.0.: K B ditto: xıri(?) At. ditto.; Tef. er-/erditto 78: xiv Muh. kàna i:di: and also erdi:; mü kàna “it was not” yo:k erdi: and also deyü:l i:di: Mel. 19, 16; Rif. 99 (the alternative translations suggest that, in Muh.'s terminology, er- was the form used in 'Turkistan, i.e. late Xak. and 1:- the form used in "our country”, i.e. early Az.); it is added that most tenses of “to be” are supplied by bol-, er-/i:- surviving only in some: Çağ. xv ff. some individual forms, érdi, etc., are listed in Vel. so-4 and translated idi, etc.; “to be” is not listed as a Verb in San., but various forms like érdi, édi are listed among the Nouns: X war. xi ér- “Ali 27, é- do. 35: xin(?) ér- “to be, and as Aux. V. is common in Öğ.: xiv ér- is . common, Qutb sr; MM 66, etc.: Kom. xiv er- and more often e- occurs in CCI, CCG 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 238 
     
   
   
     194 in various forms listed at length. in Gr. 899o: Kip. xti idi: (partially conjugated) is a 'Turkish. word. (/afza) corresponding to Rdna Hou. so, r1 ff.: xiv (under 'alif alone”) idi: means both arsaía “to send” (see 1:d-) and kana, in the first sense it is conjugated (mutagarrafa), but in the second only in the Perf. (al-mudi) İd. 7: xv there are three forms (luğa) for kàna é:di, idi:, -di: Kav. 27, rg (with examples); idi, etc. are common in Tu). 2 ér- “to reach, arrive; to meet(?)”. "This verb is well established in several medieval languages and survives in SW Osm., but in the early period is so overshadowed by 1 er- that it is difficult to identify, particularly since its Perf. can hardly be distinguished from that of ert-. In the early period there is a phr. erbar- which seems to mean 'to behave in an independent, insubordinate fashion', and can hardly be an idiom of 1 er-. In this sense it may be the basis of erk, q.v.; the same meaning seems to survive in NW Nog. erüv (a Nog. Infin. form) 'freedom, liberty', and NW Kk. er- “to follow; to mect; to amuse oneself" is also connected. See 1 értür-, 1 érig-. Türkü vir temir kapığka: értimiz “ve reached the Iron Gates” T 45 (not from ert-, which occurs as ert(t)imiz and ertü: in T 44) —Karluk bodun erü:r baru:r erikli: yağı: bolti: "the Karluk people, behaving in an independent fashion, became hostile! I N r, the same phr. with bunsız “careless, thoughtless” inserted after bodun 77 E 29; xağanına: ermiş barmış edgü: eline: kentü: yanıltığ “you misbehaved against your xağan and your independent(?) good realm” T E 23, II E 19: viri ff. adığlı: topu:zli: art üze: sokuşml:ş ermi:ş “a bear and a boar met (/Zend,) one another on a mountain ridge” 7rkB 6: Uyğ. vui [gap erlmiş barmis [gap] Ş.N) 2; a.o, do. E 2 (yige:) vii ff. Man.-A M I 14, 12-14 (oğul): Bud. erü erü translating Chinese chiei 'gradually' (Giles 1,629) occurs several times in Hiüen-ts. e.g. (the weather) erü erü isig başladı "has gradually begun to get warm' 1882, see also note 1870, last para.: (Xak.) xin(?) Tef. mapa faryatın érgil “come to my help” (cf. the Persian phr. (ba-Maryad rasidan "to come to someone's help”) 126: Çağ. xv ff. ér- (-ip, etc.) eriş- “to reach, arrive” Vel. $4; ér- occurs both as an Intrans. and "Trans, Verb (lazim ta müta"addi), rasidan wea rasünidan "to arrive, to cause to arrive” San. 97r. 23 (quotns.): X war. xııı(?) ér- “to reach” “Ali $4: Kip. xitt adraka "to reach, attain! er(unvocalized) Hou. 37, 4: xiv ér- ('with front vowel") adraka İd. 10: Osm. xiv ff. er-/ér“to reach, attain', in various idioms, c.i.a.p. TTS I 273; İl 393; III 260; IV 304; xvi (after Çağ. entry) “this verb is used in Rmi with both back and front vowels! (sic) San. 97r. 23. 1 1:r- (?é:r-, see irik-) "to mope, feel lonely or bored'. N.o.a.b. unless it survives as a Trans. V. in SW xx Anat. ır- (sic) "to annoy, or worry (someone)! SDD 774, Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. catiklig işleriğ bütürgeli irmeksizin MON.V.ARyalkmaksizin uzun ödün katığlanmakları üze “in their long-continued. efforts to. carry out the tasks (prescribed) in the Jàtakas without getting bored or nauseated' Suv. 235, 10-12: Xak. xi er İ:rdi: istatehaşa”l-racul, tva hurca min qillati!l- mu'ánasa “the man moped for lack of company” Kaş. 1 172 (2 :r- follows): KB tapuğka yakın tut mapa irmedin "keep close to me in my service without being bored' 592; (I have been very fond of you, but) irersen méni 'you are bored with ine' 714; 0.0. 697, 5671, 6628 (yalk-): Xwar. xiv ir'to be bored' Qutb 6o: Kip. xiv ir- (with a front vowel") dacara “to be bored” İz. ro. 2 i:r- "to make a notch, or breach, in (something .4cc.)'. Very rare, n.o.a.b., almost syn. vv, 1 ót- “to pierce' and ün- “to hollow out”, Cf. i:ril-. Xak. xı ol ta:m i:rdi: “he made a breach (talama) in the wall' Kaş. 7 172 (i:re:r, irme:k): Kip, xiv ir- azáía “to cause to wane' (?, see Eril-) 74. 10. O:r- "to mow (grass, etc.), to reap (crops)', and the like. S.ia.m.lg.; not always easy to distinguish fr. ur- in written texts, but has long 0:- and Aor. o:ra:r. Xak. xi ol o:t (sic, in error) o:rdiı: gata'a'l-hagig “he cut the grass'; also used when one reaps a cereal crop (Aiasada'l-zar'), etc. Kaş. I 172 (o:ra:r, o:rma:k); same phr. 7 14, 11; 1/1 45, 4: KB 1393 (2 ot): Çağ. xv ff. or- (-ar, etc., with o-”) big- “to cut, reap! Vel. 103-4 (quotns.); or- (by implication *with 0-") dizaro kardan “to reap' San. 66v. 21 (quotns,), Xwar. xiv or"to reap" Qutb 118: Kip. xv laşşa “to möv” Tuh. 13b. 9. ur- distinguishable from o:r- by its short vowel and Aor. uru:r; c.i.a.p.a.l. From the earliest period it had two distinct meanings linked by the fact that both involve use of the nrms; (1) "to put (something Zcc., on soinething Dat. or Loc.)'; (2) “to strike (someone or something 2cc.)”, from which, esp. the first, a wide range of idiomatic meanings has developed. 'lhose scholars who have tried to discriminate between these two meanings (e.g. Prof. Pelliot) by spelling (1) or- and (2) ur- were unquestionably mistaken, Türkü vri yelme: kargu: edgü:ti: urğuıl "set up a proper (system of) reconnoitring patrols and watch towers' T 34; a.o. 1 S 10-11, I1 N 8(ölsik)— yarıkı:nta: yalma:sı:nta: yüz artuk oku:n urti: (the enemy) hit him with more than a hundred arrows on his armour and quilted coat” / E 33; o.o. I E 36; Ix. 21: vin ff. oyma: er oğlanı:n kisi:si:n tutuğ uru:pan “a gambler(?) putting up his children and vvife as a stake' İrRB 29; kuğu: kuş kana:tı:na: uru:p “putting (himself) on the swan's wings' do. 3s; yanı:lma:zu:n tep bilgeg urti: "he set up a vvise man telling him not to make mistakes' Tun. llla. 6-8 (ETY II 94)— kidi:zi:$ suvka: sukmi:ş taki: ur katigdi: ba: 'thrust the felt in the water and beat it, tie it firmly! I[rkB 33; o.o. do. 35, ao: Man. didimin başına urdı (the king) “put his crown on his head” T'T I] 8, 67; nom törü  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 239 
     
   
   
     MON. urdi 'he established the doctrine and rules' do. 10, 91; mo. do. 10, gə (onar)--neço urtumuz yontumuz erser “if wc have somehow struck or wounded them” C/iras, 88-9: Uyğ. vır ff. Man.-A içipe urmış erdi “he had put (the fowls) in it” M 7 36, 3: Man. yeme tatığlığ edğü yid tütsüğ urur küyürler(?) “and put up and burn pleasant, fragrant incense sticks” Wind.'35-7—yeklerig urğay “he will smite the demons” M 7/7 37, 6 (1): Chr. bir kapanda urup kigürdiler (the magi) 'placed (their offerings) on a dish and brought them” U 7 7, 4-5: Bud. ur- is very common; for 'to put, set up' and the like PP it P. UI 9, 12; 39, 86-71 Suv. 21, 12; 129, TT V 10, 109; for “to ike PP aş, 6 etc.: Civ ikirer ta: ş a:lıp birni ur (so spelt) “take two stones for each and put one down' TT VIII L.13,a.0.0. in this text and /7 7, 77: Xak. xı eliginde:ki: ne:pni: yé:rde: urdi: "he put (wada'a) the thing which was in his hands on ground! (prov.)—ol kulin urdi: “he beat (daraba) his slave, etc.” Kaş. 1 165 (uru:r, urma:k, this entry is amony the V.s vv. a short vowel but is everywhere spelt u:r- in the MS); and many o.o.ş KB ur- is very common in both senses, e.g. törü edğü urmiş kişi yégleri *the best of men have laid down a good code” 252; kitüb ati urdum Kutadğu Bilig “1 have given the book the name Kutadgu: Bilig' 35o—urdi nawbat tujgi “the sentry beat his drum' 86: xu(?) KBVP xazina içinde urup kizlemiş "he put it in the treasury and hid it” 13: xin(?) KBPP at laqab urdilar “they gave it the name and title” 18-19; At. biliğdin ururmen sözümke ul-a “1 lay a foundation of my words in vvisdom” 81i; bodun möllığ erke urup yüzlerin “the people set their faces towards the wealthy man” 421; x.0. 461; Tef. ur- “to strikeş to put”, etc. i3 common 329: xiv. Mt.(?) daraba u:r- Rif. 75, etc. (only); ur- 120, etc. (only): Çağ. xv fT. ur- (-ar, etc.) ur-, zadan ma"nösina “to strike" Vel. 103-4 (quotns.); ur- (“vith u-") zadan San. 66v. zr (quotns.): Xwar. xim ur- “to strike' 'Ali 28, 29: xin(?) ditto Og. 38: xiv ditto and various idioms M. N roo, etc.: Kom. XIV Ur- “to put; to strike', and in idioms CCI, CCG; Gr. 266 (quotns.): Kip. xut daraba wur- (sic) Hou. 52, 20: xiv u:r- daraba İd. 10; daraba wur- Bul. 56a.; xv daraba ur- Kav. 7, 135 8, 16, 74, 19; Tult. 23a. 11 a.o.o.: Osm. xiv fLur- with a rather wide range of meanings c.i.a.p., consistently spelt ur- not vur- TTS I 723; II 928; Hİ 710; IV 784. 1:ö:r- practically syn. vv. ün-, q.v., from which it can hardly be distinguished in badly written Uyğ. texts; “to rise', usually while still maintaining contact with the point of departure, e.g. (of a plant) 'to sprout'; often used metaph. Survives, sometimes in the extended form örü-, in NC Kır., Kzx., and SW xx Anat. 1118 (örü-?), 1435 (ürü-). See örü:. Uyğ. vini ff Man.-A M I 16, 12 (kaç), do. 17, 16 (evin): Bud. kóplümde 1nca sakınç órdi "the following thought arose in my mind”, U Il. s, 13-14: Civ. (when the abscess has V. AR- 195 cleared up, apply certain drugs) et órgülük 'so that the flesh can grow up' H H 20, 7-8; su:vsa:lık ó:re:r 'thirst supervenes' TT VHİ 1.12: Xak. xı bulit ö:rdi: “the cloud rose” (naga'at); and one says ko:y ó:rdi: “the sheep got up' (nahadat) out of its sheep-fold and was driven towards its pasture; also used when it grazed by itself at night (nafagat tahta'l-layl) Kaş. 1 173 (Ó:re:r, ó:irme:k; MS., in error, orma:k); o.o. I 257, 22 (örlen-), II] 398, 24 (ayras-): Kip. xiv ör- (with front vowel") nabata "to sprout', in the sense of the sprouting of beans and the like /d. 10. 2 ö:r- “to plait'; also used metaph. for building a wall with bricks; Sarmt 199 says that in Osm. Ór- is used to describe any process of plaiting or knitting, but not weaving on a loom. $.i.a.m.l.g.; see tokt:-. Xak. xı ol saç özrdi: ramala'l-sa'r wa nasacahu “he plaited (Hend.) the hair'; also of other things besides hair Kaş, 7 172 (ü:re:r, ó:rme:k); (after 1 ó:r-) and one says ol savdic özrdi: ramala'l-qaf'a wa'l-qirtála “he plaited a basket (Hend.)'; also used of anything that is plaited by hand from cord or palm-leaves / 173: xiv Muh. şa"r madfür “plaited hair” ö:rmiş saç Mel. 45,6; Rif. 139: Çağ. xv fI. ör- (by implication *with ö-”) di çiz-rü ba-ham tábidan wa báftan "to twist two things together, to plait' Saz. 66v. 22: Kip. xu dafara”l-şa"r Ó:r- (misvocalized | ewr-) Hou. 36, 1: xiv ör- both baná 'to build' and dafara İd. 1o (misdescribed as 'with back vovveT). 1 ür- “to blow (a trumpet, a fire, etc. Acc.); to blow (into something Dat.) occasionally without an Object. S.La.m..g.; SE Türki hür-; in SW only(?) xx- Anat. SDD 1435. Uy£. vir ff, Man, mça kaltr er kim yel küçine tolkukuğ ürerçe 'just like a man who inflates a bladder by the force of svind” Wind. 22-4: Bud. (just as fire is produced by a fire drill, dry tinder and) ernip çakmışı ürmişi (niistranscribed övrrfşf) “the vigorous action and hlowing of a man” U II ro, 23-4: Civ. (if anyone says that anything is false or lacking in my statement and) ayak ürüp sözi çın bolsar “if after blowing in a cup (as a form of solemn attestation) his words prove to be true” Up. 4o, 7-8; 41, 6-7; the phr. burunda ür- 'to blow (something) up the nose' occurs in H II 20, 4-5 and 18 and 23; in H 1 the word occurs several times, mistranscribed ytír-, e.g. boğaz icipe ürser yarilur ağızdın ürgü ol "if one blows into the throat, (the swelling) bursts; one must blow it out of the mouth" 188-9; o.o. 130, 131, 185 (kamış): Xak. xı ol ot ürdi: rafaxa'I-nàr “he blew on the fire, etc.” Kaş. I 164 (2 ür- follows); tilkü: ö:z imke: ürse: uduz bulur “if a fox breathes hard (dabaha) into its own hole, it gets the mange! 7 5s, 1; İH 5, iş, kül ürğünçe: kö:z ürse: yé:&amp; al-fath fi'l-camr xayr mina l-fath fil-ramád 'blowing on live embers is better than blowing on ashes' 7 337, 12: xın(?) Tef. ür- 'to blow (bellows, etc.)' 338: xiv .. ?) nafaxa ür- Rif. 116 (only): Çağ. xv ff. . ür(vith ü-, not ó-', but mis-spelt with "back  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 240 
     
   
   
     196 MON.  vowel), also hür- damidan “to blow" San. 66v. 21: Xwar. xiv (the wise man said 'give me your hand”) tak: elgine ağzı birle ürdi “and blew into his hand with his mouth” Nahce. 231, 14: Kip. xii nafaxa ür- (misvocalized etor-) Hou. 36, ::X1v ür- (with front vowel) nafaxa İd. 10; safara (to whistle") rea nafaxa ür- Bul. $4, V.; 85, v.: NV al-nafx ürmek Kav. 61, 15; nafaxa ür- (with front vowel) do. 76, 1; Tuh. 37a. a: Osm. xiv to xvi ür- “to blow' in several texts T TS 1747; I1 955; Iİ 732; IV 8os. 2 ür- (of a dog) “to bark, howl'. S.i.a.m.l.g., sometimes as ürü-, in SE “Türki hür-. "Türkü vir ff. Man. M 7I 45, 1 (i) (1t): Uyğ. viri ff. Civ. it karı bolsar yatıp ürür “vvhen a dog gets old it barks İying down' TT VII 42, 6: Xak. xı st ürdi: zabaha'l-kalb "the dog barked” Kaş. 7 164 (üre:r, ürme:k): xui(?) Tef. ür- "to bark” 339: xiv Mu. nibalıcl-kalb ü:rme:k Ael. 73, 11; Rif. 176: Çağ, xv ff. ür- (with ü-”) farydd kardan, wa in maxşüş-i faryad-i sag “to howl, in particular of a dog, to howl', in Ar. nibah San. 66v. 23: Kom. xiv "to bark” ür- CCG; Gr. 270 (quotn.): Kip. xiv ür- (with front vowel") nabaha İd. 10: xv nabaha (ulu-; in margin) ür- Tult. 37a 8. S 3 ür- See üdür-, Dis. ARA ara: (?a:ra:) difficult to pin down grammatically; there does not seem to be any record of it as the subject of a sentence or in other contexts in which it could be regarded as an ordinary Noun. In the early period it is used only 3s a Postposn. meaning 'between (two places), among (a number of people), and the like; but Raş. translates it as a Noun and does not describe it as a harf. Later it seems to be used almost only in the Loc., either with a preceding Pron. Adj, e.g. bu arada “in this locality", or with a Poss. Suíf. e.g. aramızda 'among us” or with a 3rd Pers. loss. Suff. and a preceding Noun, e.g. oşbu yaruknun arasında “in the middle of this light". Normally used of space, less often of time. S.i.a.m.l.g. The spelling a:ra: in JrkB and TT VIII (SW "km. a:ra) is prob. the original one. Türkü viti (when the blue heaven was created above and the brown earth below, man was created) eki:n ara: *between the two' / E 1, E II 2; similar phr. / E 2, 11 E 4; Ongin 10; (then to the north of the Chinese) Tag(?) Oğuz ara: yeti: eren yağı: bolmis “seven men among the Tag(?) Oğuz became hostile! Ongin 5: viri ff. kamu:S (sic, error for kamı:ş) a:ra: (sic) "among the reeds' IrkB ro, kamx:s a:ra: do. 38: (man was unhappy and the sky cloudy) bultti: a:ra: kün tuğmi:ş busa:nç ara: (sic) meni: kelmi:ş "the sun rose among its clouds, joy came in the midst of grief' do. 52: Yen. él ara:da: "from within the realm' Mal. 30, 4; el ara: do. az, 10: UyÉ. virt Yaris Ağu:lığ ara: Yit(?) başınta ara: 'between Yarış and Ağu:lığ and within the summit of Yit(?)' Su. HV” 6 (text damaged and dubious): vur ff, Man.V. ARA ol takığu kuş ara 'among those. fowls' M I 36, 6-7; a.0. do. o, 2 (ada:); dintarka ara 'among the Elect” M III 30, 11 (sie?, the only case of ara: after Dat.): Man. yalapuklar ara “among men” TT //İ 22: Bud, Sanskrit antará 'between' a:ra: TT VIII G.r—ara: also appears for the first time in oblique cases, e.g. toyınla:rnın a:ra:sinda: 'among the monks' do. 4.24; similar phr. do. H.5, 9; U İİİ 13, 6-7 (ii), etc.—aradin ajun “the intermediate state” U 77 81, 69-70: birkiye (sic?) adrılmışdın berü anir ara on yıl boldi “it is ten years since we parted' Hien-ts. 1867: Civ. kişi ara 'among men” T'T I 160: balık ara 'within the city” USp. 88, 43: kisirin urufin ağı arası (sic, dittography) arasında tütüzgü ol 'he must fumigate between her thighs with rsirin seed! ET I 22-3: O. Kir, x ff. bodun ara: 'among the people” Mal. 15, 3: Xak. xt ara: recasfi”?l-şay" “the middle of a thing”, hence one says kişi: ara: kirdim “I went in among the people” (bayna'l-gatum) Kaş, I 87; similar phr. İT 317, 7; sti, 26 (ülüglüg); $28, 18; IJ 17, 6; III 6o, 8: KB küyer ot ara “in the middle of a blazing fire” 1483; ara .. . ara “at one time... at another, 177 (öğdil-), 400-2; 735: xın(?) KBPP anlar ara 'between them” 36, At. kişiler ara 75; 2.0.0.; Tef. ara in phr. like bizin ara and with Poss. Suffs, in the Loc. is common 56: Çağ. xv f. ara arasında Vel. 16; ara miydn wa zoast middle, centre” , also called aralig; also used in the meaning of arasıda dar müydnaş San. 36v. 2; various other phr. like ara ayı “the month of Savvvval”, arasıda, arasıda men/ara men are listed: Xwar. xırı(?) oşbu yaruknun arasında “in the middle of this light” Og. 55; a.o. do. 162: xiv ara “among” Qutb 10; MN 7, etc.: Kom. xiv only in the form arasında “among", etc. CCG, Gr. 39 (quotns.): Kip. xin bayn ara: [ou. s3, 13 (also quoted with Poss. Suffs. in Loc. and Abl.): xiv ara: bayn İd. 11; bayn with Poss. Sufis. ara: with ditto; a/-bayn ara: Bul. 14, 5-7: xv ara bayn Tuh. 73b. ro, arasinda, aranıza do. 74a. S, 7: Osm. xivff. ara C.i.a.p.; as early as XIV it means “place” in phr. like bu arada and 'time(s)' in phr. like har arada “at all times”, ara . . . ara occurs in XV, XVI, and ara as a Postposn., e.g. xankah-i "aşq ara “in the temple of love” down to xvt TTS I 32; II 46; III 30; IV 32. VU arra (sic) Hap. leg.; onomatopoeic. Xak. xi arra al-baw! 'urne'; an Excl. (harf) addressed to a donkey to encourage it to urinate; it is repeated two or three times and (the donkey) urinates. This agrees (rodfaqat) with Ar. because a/-arr means “copulation” (a/-cimá') in Ar. Kaş. I 38. arı: a large stinging insect, “bec, wasp, hornet'. S.i.a.m.l.g. w. minor phonetic changes (a:r, ara, etc.); in some the particular kind of insect is defined by an Attribute, e.g. Osm. bal arısı *honey bee”, Xak, xr arı: al-zanbür 'hornet, wasp', etc. 'lhis agrees (rodfaqat) with Ar. because a/-ary means 'honey' (al-'asa!) in Ar., but in Turkish “the source of honey” (mà    
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 241 
     
   
   
     DIS. yatatwalladu'l-'asal minhu), and the Çigil "Furks call 'honcy' arı: yağı: samnu'l-nahl 'bee's oil” Kaş. İ 87; o.o. I] 329, 10 and 13; İTİ 156 (ba:l); 276, 19: xin(?) At. 'asal kayda erse bile arısı "wherever there is honey there is a.bece with it), 439: xiv Mult. al-zanbür arı: Mel. 74, 8; Rif. 177: Çağ. xv ff. arı (spelt) zanbsr San. 37v. 11 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv arı 'bee' Qutb 11; MN ro: Kip. xıll al-nahl aru: Hou. ro, 11: xiv aru: both al-nahl wa'l-zanbür; and if they mcan “bee” specifically (bi-'aymthi) they say ba:l arusi İd. ro, al-nahl aru: (al-zanbür Kökün) Bul. 11, 1: XV. Kan, öz, 19 (ba: VU trra (sic) onomatopoeic, cf. arra; sce 2 ır. Pec. to Kaş. Xak. xi ırra al-hacla 'shame' ; yuxaffaf wa yutaqqal “it is made both light and heavy' (?w. -r- and -rr-) Kaş. 1 39; a.o. İ 322 (1 ta:r). VU irü: 'omen, sign”, often in Hend. irü: belgü:. Vocalization uncertain; P.N./A. irülüğ, q.v., but survives in Yakut as i1ra/ira:, Pek. 3808, and is a l.-w. in Mong. as truua (Kon, 321) vv. a N.Ag. iruğaçi, see Doerfer in C.A.Ş. X, pp. s5ft. UyfÉ. vin ff. Man.-A yavlak irü erür "it is an evil omen' M 35, 3: Bud. tükel törlüğ yavlak irü belgüler “all kinds of evil omens (Hlend.) TT VI 6o-ı, VIII O.5; ermez irü belgü kózünser 'if false omens (Hend.) appear' TT VII qo, 39; o.o. of irü belgü U IV 24, 13: Suv. 185, 5-6; 315, 14-15, etc.: Civ. negüg yórip (? so read) İrü 1rklasar “if one seeks by divination for an omen to explain something! TT VII 28, 6. VU?F urra (sic) Hap. leg.; possibly a corruption of the Ar. word. Xak. xı urra al-udra fi'l-ricál "hernia” Kaş. I 39. Ort: 'shout, outcry', etc. No doubt the base, of orla:-, and so to be spelt with 0-. N.o.a.b. Xak. xi ort al-şiydh wa'l-calaba 'shout, outcry'; (prov.) ori: kopsa: oğuş aklışu:r ida teaqa'a'l-suráx | ictama'ati'l-'agira ilayhi H-yu'itül-sarix *when the cry for help is raised, the tribe rallies to it to help the man who raises it” Kaş. 1 87; a.o. III 227 (kikt:): xiv. Muh.(?) al-dacca qua”lğalaba 'shouting, hubbub” o:ri:. Rif. 146 (only). VU 1 urı: “male child, son”, unlike oğul, exclusively masculine. Not noted later than Xak., but common until then. Türkü vri beğlik uri: oğli:n (sic) kul kilti: "their sons, who were fit to he begs they made slaves! I1 E 7 (and 1 E 7 with bolti: in error for kilti:), a.o. I E24, Il E 20: vini ff. Man. the nature of the sin in Chuas. 116-17 is obscure, and the text almost certainly corrupt; özün looks like an error for ajun and öz bolup is unintelligible; (if we have sinned) ilki özün bu özün uzuntonluğ urilar öz bolup "in a pol incarnation or the present incarnation by. women and boys”: Yen. urr oğlan "sons” Mal. 26, 2: yeti: urı: oğul üçün tike: bertlmiz “ we erected (this memorial) for his seven sons' do. 48, 9; Uy£. rx inim yeti: urim üç kizim üç erti: 'I had seven younger ARA brothers, three sons, and three daughters” Suci 6: vir ff. Bud, kenç uri kenç kizlar “young boys and girls” U 77 zo, zo, tenri urisi “a son of a god” (Sanskrit devaputra) do. 28, 6 (i1); 29, 16; a.o. Suv. 597, 23; Civ. urr oğul kelürgey 'she will bring forth a son” TT V11 28, 18; ur1 oğlanlığ evçi "a woman with male children” H 17 18, 65: Xak. xı uri: al-dakar mina'l-awlád "a male child”, one says urx oğla:n “male children” Kaş. 7 88; a.o. 1 251,9: KB ay ersig uti “my brave boy!" 3832. 197 VU 2 utri: n.o.ab.; İrAB 40 is a cryptic para. which continues 'he walks alone striking and cleaving precipitous rocks with a broad arrowhead'; nearly every word in it begins with y-, which may explain the curious use of words; this word obviously means “ravine” or the like. "Türkü viirff. talım (?error for telim) uri: yarınça: “until he cleaves many ravines” IrkB 40: Oğuz xi (under terip q.v.) terip u:rt: al-faccu'l-'amiq "a deep ravine” Kaş. HI 370, 10; n.m.e. oru: (?0ro:) “a storage pit dug in the ground”. S.i.a.m.lg. except NW, S$W with variations in the final vowel (-a, -o, -u) which suggest an original -0:. See Doerfer II 592. Xak. xı oru: “a hole (al-Aufra) which is dug for the storage of wheat, root vegetables (al-salcam) and the like” Kaş. 1 87: KB isizig ya çuğda oruda kerek “you must put a bad man in a sack or a pit” 5549 (see aya:-): Çağ. xv ff. ora (sic) taxıl huyusi "a grain pit' Vel. 104; oru càáh-i galla ditto San. 71v. 7: Kip. xiv Oru: a/-matmüra "storage pit' İd. 10; ditto, but o:ru: Bul. 3, 16: xv cubb 'pit' oru Tuh. 123. 3. S öre: See órü:. D örü: (orö:) Ger. of 1 ó:r-, normally used as an Adv. meaning 'upwards' (in KJ there is even a Comparative f. örürek), particularly in the phr. órü: tur-, properly 'to rise to one's feet', but sometimes “to stand upright. In the medieval period it also came, usually as öre, to be used as a Noun meaning “height, elevation; an upright, pillar, support), and survives with such meanings in SE Türki BS 773; NC Kzx. MM 496; SW "Tkm., and perhaps elsewhere. As an Adv., usually in the phr. örü: (also öre, örö) tur- s.i.a.m.l.g. except SC(?). Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. Sanskrit. uttisthata *rise to your feet' örö duru:pla:r TT VIII E.46; örü tikmiş erdi nomluğ tuğuğ “he has planted the banner of the doctrine upright! Hüen-ts. 1909-10; örü kodi 'upwards and downwards' U III 31, 8, 44, 4 (0; TT X 438; orunlarındın örü turup 'rising from their 7 Suv. 182, 6-7: Civ. örü kodi US). 6 : Xak. xı Kaş. Il 382, 10 (dis): KB törü birle atın kopurdı örü “by his code of laws he raised his reputation” 103; similar phr. 269; (the planets move) kayusı órürek kayusı kodi ro, turdi órü 519; 0.0. 438, 3725: xin(?) Tef. öre/örü tur-, öre 'pillar, support” 248, 250; xiv Rbg. Ore kop- “to rise to one's feet R I 1217  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 242 
     
   
   
     200 TRIS. Tris. ARB F aru:ba:t ap, ley.; no doubt an Indian l.-w. Xak. xı aru:ba:t al-tamru'l-hindi 'tamarind” Kaş. I 138. D arpağa:n Den. N. fr. arpa:; “vild barley', a plant of the wild oats type. S.i.s.m.]l. Xak. xı arpağa:n nat ka-hay”atı” -şa"ir yanbut musanbil tea. la habb lahu “a plant with the appearance of barley which grows seedless cars” Kaş. 1 140: Çağ. xv ff. arpağan “a small plant which grows in the open country (saliráhá) and forms an ear (xüşa) like barley' San. 36v. 26. D arpa:siz lap. leg. in a prov. under arpa: fr. which it is the Priv. N./A. Xak. xı arpa:sız at agu: mats "a horsc cannot get over the pass until it has had a feed of barley' (hatta tagdami l-ga'ir) Kaş. I 123, 19; n.m.e. D arvışçı: N.Ag. fr. arvis; 'spell-binder, sorcerer”. Survives only in NE Tel, arbışçı R I 338; in some other languages the word used is arbağçı or the like, der. fr. arbağ a later Dev. N. fr. arva:- first noted in Çağ, Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. arvışçılar begi “the chief of the sorcerers” U IV zo, 230; a.o. TT V rə, 128. Tris. V. ARBD arpa:la:- Den. V. fr. arpa:; 'to eat barley, feed with barley'. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. Uyğ. vit ff. Bud, ne yep arpalap edgülerke yakın kalğıl 'eating something(?), and cating barley remain close to good men” USp. 46, 1 and 3 (a short very obscurc text, perhaps mistranscribed): Xak. xı ol atın arpa:la:dı: aqdama ferasahu" İ-şafir “he fed his horse with barley! Kaş. 7 316 (arpa:la:r, arpa:la:ma:k). D arpa:lan- Hap. ley. : Refl, f. of arpa:la:-. Xak. xı at arpalandı: (sic) “the horse had barley” Kaş. 7 296 (arpa:lanur, arpalanma:k sic). Dis. ARC F ere) happiness, bliss'; corruption of Sogdian ryz (pronounced rój), same meaning. In this spelling pec. to KB; for some unknown reason, perhaps confusion with irinç which has exactly the opposite meaning, it became corrupted to érinc/érinj, in which form it appears in Kaş. and sometimes in the Vienna MS. of KB. Survives in most NE languages as rris/ris RI 1368; İT 719; Khak. tris; NC Kir., Kzx. tris (and Kzx. ris in. R /İİ 719); SC Uzb. üroz; NW Kaz. uras R I 1655; SW xx Anat. arazfuraz SDD 109, 1420. Xak. xı erinç al-tana"um ea l-taqallub FP I-ni'ma 'happiness, enjoyment; reverse of fortune'; in some languages (/ugát) pronounced erini Kaş. T 132; IHI 449 (duplicate entries; the second mcaning, if correctly translated, seems to belong to irinç): KB ere) kolsa emğek teğir ol ülüş “if he asks for happiness, pain comes (instead) as his portion” 432; (I see that ARB man's behaviour is bad) ereji az ol kör ökünçi uzun “his happiness is slight and his repentance long-lasting! 926; o.0. 434, 677, 937, 2150, 3672 (salın-), 5208, etc. (in 5208 Vienna MS. erin(): xim(?) Tef. ugtimax turğuluk erincü might mean 'paradise is permanent happiness! (Borovkov translates it 'residence', taking it as a Dev. N. fr, *erinRefl. f. of 1 er-, but this is not very plausible) 8i. F orug “a religious fast”. See baca:k. F area 'juniper'. See artuç. (D) arçı: 'saddle-bag'; prob. a crasis of kartçı:, N.Ag. of art, Pec. to Naş., Malov in the index to USp. suggested that a word in USb. 3, 4 read arşar was connected with this word, but actually it occurs in a transcription of an Ar. phr., icár haqqı, "amount due for rent”. Xak. xı arci: a/-haqiba “saddle-bag” Kaş. I 124; o.o. I 231, 14 (artiş-), 250, t1 (artin-). ?F arju: 'jackal, or hyaena(?)'; n.o.a.b. "The -]- suggests a foreign (?Sogdian) origin. ""here docs not scem to be a nativc word for 'jackal', most languages using Pe. sagal. Xak. xı arju: "with -]-' ?ön ded 'jackal Kaş. I 127: XIV Muh. al-dabu" *hyaena', in "Türkistan arju:, in “our country” (Azerbayjan) arsu: Mel. 7, 13; Rif. 79; a.0. 72, 5) 174. S örçüğ See 2 örgüç. Tris. V. ARCDF arju:la:- Den. V. fr. arju:; n.o.a.b. Prob. used only in the Ger. Uyğ. viri ff. Civ. erklig xannın yarlığı arjulayu (mistranscribed arhulayu) turur evinde “the orders (?sic) of the king of the underworld stand like jackals in your housc” TT 7 25: Xak. xı (after arju:), and they say of people when they crowd round (Zaffi) something kişi: arju:layu kurt: (sic, ?error for turdi:) “the people crowded (fxdahama) round it, as jackals crowd round a man to cat him” Kaş. T 127, zo, arju:layu: er ava:r translated “the crowd of men round him were like jackals, because if they find a man alone they surround him and eat him" III 401, 14. DF erejlen- Refl. Dev. V. fr. erej; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı KB él(ljig erejlensü élke yetürsü bili “may Your Majesty live happily and bring wisdom to the realm” 5894. Mon. ARD art (?a:rd) originally 'the nape of the neck'; hence (1) 'a mountain pass or col' (like the nape of the neck a depression between two elevations); (2) 'the back or hinder part of anything'. In (2) it was syn. w. arka: q.v., but for Adv. expressions meaning 'behind' art was used in preference to arka:. "Vhe Directive f. artğaru 'backwards' is not noted before the medieval period. S.i.a.m.Lg.; in SW Osm., Tkm. (a:rt) before Suffs. beginning with vowels ard, which may represent the 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 243 
     
   
   
       MON. V. ARDoriginal form. Türkü viir ff. a:rt üze: "on a mountain pass” /7rk3B 6 (2 ér-): Uyğ. vr ff. Bud. art basut bol- "to back, support (someone Dat.) Suv. 127, 21; 409, 11; a0. U IV 8, 38 (ud-): Civ. (a man who unexpectediy becomes famous) art sayu mayakayur 'defecates on every mountain pass' TT VII 42, s: Xak. xı art saç sa'ru'l-qafà “the back hair", because art is al-raqaba “the nape of the neck”: art a/-'aqaba fi'l-cibál “a mountain pass” (prov.) Kaş. I 42; I 247, 18 (agrul-); 277, 3 (2 assa:-) and s o.o. translated al-'aqaba: KB kayu art aşar kör ógüzler kecer 'some climb over mougyain passes and cross rivers! 1735: XiII(?) Teff anın ardinda/ ardindin 'behind him” 56; ardınça/artınça “behind” 57, 60; artğaru/artkaru “backwards' sg: xiv Muh. “the hindquarters of a horse (Kil; in the margin of one MS.) ard Mel. 69, 14: Çağ. xv ff. art (spelt) 'agaba va rüh-i tang (a narrow road”) San. 36v. 26; ard (rhyming with kdrd) 'aqab 'back' do. 37r. 2; ardınca az 'aqabag 'behind him” do. 37r. 3 (quotn.): Xwar. xin(?) (the army was protecting) ol bóriniy artlarin “the hindquarters of that wolf' Og. 152: xiv artkaru 'backwards! Qutb ır, Nahc. 93, 4; (if Yusuf”s shirt is torn) art yandın “in the back” Nac. 362, 7; artıpa 'backwards' do. 93, s: Kom. xiv “back, behind” art CCI, CCG; Gr. 40 (quotns. including artınça/artunça): Kip. xiv ard, also art, xaif "behind” İd. ro, xalf artunca Bul. 14, 4: xv (in a list of Advs. describing directions) teará' “backvvards” atkarı: bi-fayr rü” "without -r-' (i.e. for artkarı) Kav. 35, 5; art wará' Tuh. yab. 9 (with Poss. Sufis. do. 67a. 3; 74a. 7, 11); xalf atkarı do. 14b. 6; 74a. 7; ta'axxara 'to be behind, late', etc. atkarı kal- do rob. 2: Osm. xiv ff. ard with Poss. Suffs. and ardınca, both mcaning generally “behind”, c.i.a.p. T'T'S 7 33; 1I 47; IH 32-3; 41V 34-5. VU ért pec. to Uyj. and only in the phr. ért bért; prob. a merce fingle with bért, q.v. Uy£. vin ff. Bud. érti bérti ağır bolur "his taxes are heavy! TT VI ır, and see note thereon. with 0.0.: Civ. ért bért almadin *without levying taxes! USp. 88, 41-2; bu yérnip neğü yeme érti bérti yok “this land is not liable to any taxes whatever' USp. 108, 20-1. : VU urt Hap. leg.; Atalay points out that in SW xx Anat. (sce SDD 783) “the eye of a needle! is called igne yurdu, this might well be a corruption of this word, but this word cannot be a corruption of yurt, q.v., the meaning of which in Xak. would be quite inappropriate. There is another possible trace of this word; in (ŞS 29 the translation of ört, etc. includes the words sehir, ağır 'poison'; this might be a misunderstanding of sarmm (see Kag.s translation) the normal meaning of which is 'poison'. Xak. xr urt sammu'l-xivat “the eye of a needle” Kaş. 7 42. ört 'flame, conflagration'; more specific than 1 o:t “fire in general', practically syn. vv. yalın.  "201 S.i.a.m.l.g., in SW only "Tkm. Türkü vir (the next day) örtçe: kizip kelti: süpüşdimiz "they came (against us) flaming like a conflagration, and we fought” T 4o, Uy£. viri ff. Bud. 1nga kaltı temirlig tağdın ört yalın üner erser “ust as flames (Hend.) risc from the Iron Mountain” U II 25, 25-7; ökünmekliğ ört üze örtenip 'blazing with the flame of repentance” U II, 5, 1-2; ört yalın TT V 10, 91 and 93; 12, 121; TT X 340, 360; ört otluğ dyan “a meditation on flame and fire TT V ro, 116; ört yalinhg 'flaming' do. 8, 65: Xak. xı ört a/-hariq 'conflagration, blaze” Kaş. I 42: Çağ. xv ff. Ört su'la-i dtaş “Hame” , and they also use the word when they set fire to one end of a prairie (sa)rd), and it goes in front of the wind and burns off the whole prairie Vel. 100 (quotn.); órt (spelt) ism-i cins az birüyi dtaş “a generic term for fire” Sax. 71r. 3 (quotn.): Osm. xvi ört “blaze” in one text 7 TS I 549 (mis-spelt ort). Mon.V.ARDart- Preliminary note. There are two verbs of this form; one, Trans. 'to load (baggage, etc.) on (an animal, etc.)', the Pass. and Refl. f.s of which in SW XX Anat. shot that it sas originally ard-; the other, Intrans., "to grow bigger, increase, which was always art-, since its der. f.s like artuk are spelt with -t- in all modern languages. The first is first noted in Osm. XVI, but its Pass. and Refl. f.s are noted in Xak. XI; the second ts noted fr. an early period. 1 art- (ard-) “to load (something cc.) onto (something Dat.); to load (an animal, etc. Acc.) with (something bile, etc.); to put (something, e.g. an arm) round (something, c.g. a neck)'. S.i.a.m.l.g.; in SW only xx Anat. ard-/artSDD 111, 117. Osm. xvi ard- “to put (an arm cc.) round (a neck Dat.); to put (a garment Zcc.) over (a shoulder Dat.)' in two texts TTS II 48; HI 33. 2 art- 'to become bigger, increase; to be, or become, excessive”, S.i.a.m.l.g. Türkü vrir ff. Yen. artzu:n “may it increase” is read three times in Mal. 48, 4 and $, but the text is chaotic: Uyğ. viii ff, Civ. (the income from certain properties is to be used for stated purposes) artmışın képesip işletzünler 'let them employ what is in excess (of these requirements) by mutual agreement! USp. 88, 28: Xak. xı artt: ne: “the thing became bigger (záda); and one says anın eye:gü:si: arttı: züda dila"uhu tea hura kinaya 'ani'l-tatáwul “his ribs expanded”, an idiom for arrogance Kaş. III 425 (arta:r, artma:k): KB kuti künde arttı “his good fortune increased daily” 438; o.o. 618 (e:d), 736, 1043, 1062, etc.: xırr(?) At. anın künde arta turur bu bida" "therefore this heresy increases daily” 404; Tef. art- “to grow bigger' so: xiv Muh. záda, katura 'to become bigger, more numerous' . art- Mel. 26, 13; Rif. 109: Çağ, xv ff. artziyád şudan "to increase” San. 35r. 5: Xvvar,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 244 
     
   
   
     198 DIS. ARA (quotn.): Çağ. xv ff. öre (spelt) sufi? "pillar San. 71v. 24: X war. xiit(?) öre dur- ' Ali şo, xiv örü tur- Qutb zoo (mis-spelt uru); Nahc. 240, 13-14: 399, 15; Örü kop- do. 287, ro: Kip. xit a/-maqdm 'standing stil” (opposite to al-haraka "movement” tepreş) örü Fon. 26, 21: (göma (ur-) and you sav to someone vou order to stand (bi'/-qryánr) örü: turgil do. 43, $: NIV, Örü: nişba Ji-qivám “a way of standing up! İd. ır: xv nisbatu” H-qiyüm órü (and tik) Tuh. 36a. 8; (in explaining the use of idi for hána) one says bi turmis idi, bi turuptur idi, bi öre turuptur idi kána'l-amir qö”im muntagib "the beg was standing upright', because Öre mnuxtagsa bi-nişbat”l-qiyüm "is specially used for a way of standing up” do. 67b. ri fL: Osm. xiv to xvii örü durc.i.a.p. TTS I 724 (uru), 11 756; HII 567; IV 630; örü “a height once in xvı 7V 629. Dis. V. ARAarı:- "to be, or become, clean, pure”, B.i.s.m.l,, but rare, Uy. vii ff. Man. arımış kópüllüg kutluğlar 'blessed beings with pure minds' TT HI 120: Bud. a:rir “he is puce! TT VIII 4.45 (no Sanskrit equivalent); közöm a:rıma:dı “my eye was not clean! do. C.17 (ditto); ayağ (sc) kilinclari aridi “their misdeeds were washed awav' TT IV 4, 15; arimak süzülmek 'to become clean and be purified' Suv. 63, 8-9; o.o0. TT IV 12, qo, etc. (alkin-): Civ. kiri arımadın "without its dirt being cleaned off” H 7 66; irin arır “the pus clears up” H II 12,98: Xak. xı art:dı: ne: “the thing was clean! (mazufa) Kaş. III 252 (arir, arrma:k): KB bu er ölmekinçe arimaz kiri “this man's (moral) uncleanness is not cleaned off until he dies” 876; arığsızni yalguk suvun yup arir “man washes his (physical) uncleanness oil with water, and becomes clean! 2108: xin(?) 4r. ne törlüğ arığsız arir yumakın "all kinds of uncleanness are cleaned off by washing ” 111; 0.0. 112, 328; Tef. arı- “to be clean! 57: xiv. Mul.(?) fahura "to be clean, pure” art:-. Rif. 130 (only): Çağ. xv tf. arı: (- p) pak vc arı ol- “to be clean and pure” Vel. 12 (quotn.); ar1-/aril- (spelt) pak wa mugaffá şudan ditto San. 33v. 24 (quotns.): Kip. xv fa/ınra aru- Tuh. 242a. 5. erü:- (of ice, fat, wax, etc.) 'to melt, become liquid'. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. some extended meanings, usually as eri- but w. some odd forms like SE "Türki örü- farring 219: occasionally confused with iri:-. Xak. xı ya:ğ erü:di: dába' Hsamn “the grease (etc.) melted” Kaş, H1 252 (erü:r, erü:me:k); a.o., same phr. IJ 198, 26: xin(?) Tef. eri- "to melt' 81: Çağ. xv ff. éri-/éril- (spelt) gudáxta şudan “to be melted' Sam. 97v. 1 (quotns.): Xwar. xim eri- “to melt” "4/7 39: Kom. xiv “to melt' iri(se) CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv. eri- (with front vowels) ddba İd. 10; a.0. do. 57 (s1z-): xv daüba éri- Tuh. 16b. 3. 1ra:- 'to be distant; to kecp away (from something 2/2)", rare, but the N./A.S. 1ra:k is common, and its spellings prove that the yin Xak. is prosthetic. Survives onlv(?) in some NE languages as irn-/ra- R [| r3öş, III 707 and Khak., and SW xx Anat. SDD 772. Xak. xr yıra:dı: ne:g ba"ıda"l-şay” “the thing was distant” Kaş. 771 88 (yira:r, yıra:ma:k), kó:zden yira:sa: köpülden yeme: yira:r “out of sight, out of mind” 7/I 366, rə: KB yıradı menipdin yigitlik atı "the description “young man”" has (long since) passed from me" 375) (do not take part in debauches) yira “keep away' $263; 0.0. 156, 202: xiv. Muh.(?) ab'ada 'to be remote, to remove' (ké:tir-, in margin) rra:- Rif. 102 (only): Xwar. xiv yira- “to be distant” Qutb or: Osm. xiv and xvi ira- “to be distant” occurs twice and yıraonce (xiv) T 7S 1 353; 11 soo. iri:-Jirü:- “to decay, rot, putrefy'. Survives as iri- (which proves that the Uyg. y- is prosthetic) only in several NE languages R 7 1439, Khak. and 'l'uvy. and also in NC Kir, Kzx. Uy. vir ff. Man. ad[urt]t(?) erni yirüp "his cheeks and lips (begin to) rot” TT II 16, 14: Bud. yirümedin artamadin 'without decaying or going bad” Sus, $30, 3: Xak. xı yığa:ç İri:di: "the wood (etc.) rotted' (Paliva) because of its great age; also used of bones when they rot Kaş. III 2352 (irr, iri:me:k; in all forms the alf is vocalized both with Aasra and damma), edgü: er süpüki: iri:r (misvocalized eri:r) atı: kalı:r "the good. man's. bones rot (tabla) but his name remains” III 367, 23. S üre- See üdre:-. Dis. ARD ?F arpa: "barley”, S12 m.] gr. with minor phonetic variations, Possibly an. Indo-European (7Tokharian) L-w. See Doerfer V 445. Uyğ. vir ff. Man. arpaça saçılmış "scattered like barley M 711 4o, 3 (ii): Civ. arpa talkanit 'barley meat E IJ iz, gt; 30. H 1 71-2 (üğre:): Xak. xı arpa: a/-şa"ir 'barlcy' Kaş, DL 123 (prov.); and 3 olo. KB karın todsa arpa yü balavii bir ol “if thc belly is full, harley and sweet-meats are much the same thing” 3611; o.o. 3612, 4765, 4769 (açım): xın(?) Tef. arpa “barley” sg: xiv Midi. al-ga'ir arpa: Mel. 77, 13; Rif. 181: Çağ. xv ff. arpa (with -p-”) cac 'barley' (also the name of a ruler of the house of Çingis) San. 36v. 25: Xwar. xiv arpa “barley” Qutb ro: Kom. xiv ditto CCI; Gr.: Kip. xin aí-sa'ir arpa: Hoi. 9, 16: xiv ditto İd. 11 (with -p-”): Bul. 6, rs: XV ditto Kav. 63, 12 (spelt arfa to represent -p-); Tuh. 20b. 10. , VU?F irvi: n.o.a.b.; if the plant name is the original meaning no doubt a L-w., but there is no immediately obvious Sanskrit original. Xak. xi irvi: kula:k ai-udnu'I-mu'allalatu'l-haşr “a long tapering ear'; irvi: “an Indian remedy (darod” hindi) used for treating sick people” Kaş. I 128. S(E) irbiç See irbiş. D ürpek N./A.S. fr. *ürpe:-; 'dishevelled, shaggy, bristling', and the like, Survives only   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 245 
     
   
   
      DIS. V. ARB(?) in NC Kir., Kzx., and perhaps SW xx Anat. örpek “a large mushroom” SDD 1116. Xak. xı ürpek (the -p- has thrce subscribed dots, possibly two of them added later) al-ag'at mina'l-hayawàn wa'l-nás 'shaggy of beast or man” Kaş. 7 103: Xwar. xiv başı ürpek bolsa “if his head is dishevelled' Nac. 380, 13; alo, 400, 9: Kom. xiv 'crisp, crinkled" ürpek CCG; Gr.: Ktp. xiv ürpek al-ga'afa 'a curl or lock of hair” İd. rr: Osm. xvi ürpek “dishevelled” in one text T TS 1/1 733. D arvis Dev. N. fr. arva:-; “a magic spell, or charm'; used to translate Sanskrit dhárari. Became a l.-w. in Mong. as”arbislarvis Kon. 157, 164 (translated 'knowledge, erudition”) and survives only(?) in NE Tel. arbış “vvitchcraft, incantation” R 7 338. Uyğ. vr if. Man. M II ş, 9 (antağ): Bud. in TT VI 46s arvis nom bitig represents Sanskrit dadranzisütra, the phr. dar(a)nı arvış occurs several times in TT V; in P/ahl. 8, ış Arvış (mistranscribed Arurz) Tenrim female Proper Name; o.o. TT VI 373-4 (nomçı), U II s8, 3 (ii): Xak. xı Kaş. I 249, ız (arval-); 283, 19 (arva:-); n.m.e. PU irbis “the Siberian panther, Felis irbis'. Became a l.-w. in Mong. as irbis (Kom. 324, Haltod 72) from which the word entered European zoological terminology and was reborrowed in NE Leb., Tel. irbis R 7 1471. NE 'Tuv. irbiş prob. preserves the original pronunciation, but it might have been irpis. AI] the early occurrences are in Üyğ. where the alphabet is so ambiguous that the final sound is not quite certain; it was certainly not -S and both -€ and -z are improbable. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. irbis is included in lists of savage beasts with 'lion, leopard”, etc. in TT VI 116; Suv. 331, 23; 599, 16; 61:0, r3; İrbiş kudruğu translates Chinese pao «wei 'panther's tail (Giles 8,697 12,601), the name of a constellation TT VI 93; in U IV 44, 6 and t1 apparently spelt irbiç, Dis. V. ARBarva:- “to make magic, cast spells”. Survives, generally as arba- in some NE languages; SE Türki, NC Kir., Kzx., and as avra- in SC Uzb. Xak. xı ka:m arvis (later misvocalized arva in the MS.) arva:dı: ragá'l- káhin ruqya “the sorcerer cast a spell' Kaş. 7 283 (arva:r, arva:ma:k): Çağ. xv ff. arba- afsiin kardan 'to make magic' Sar. 34v. 23. érpe:- Hap. leg., but see érpet-, érpel-. Xak. xı ol yığa:ç érpe:di: “he sawed (nagara) the wood' (etc.); and one says ol ı:şığ érpe:di: afsada”l-amr li-mà arada işlühahu "he spoilt the business in trying to improve it” Kaş. I 271 (érpe:r, érpe:me:k). ?D *ürpe:- “to be shaggy, dishevelled', and the like, is not actually noted but must be the basis of ürpek, ürpet-, ürpes-; its relationship to the practically synonymous ürper- is obscure,   | 199 but the likeliest explanation is that both are Den. V.s in -e:- and -er- respectively fr. *ürp. ''he modern forms ürpey- and the like which survive in NC Kir., Kzx. and NW Kar. T., Kk., and Nog. seem to go back to *ürpe:rather than ürper-. D erpet- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of érpe:-. Xak. xı ol yığa:ç érpetti: “he gave orders for the wood (etc.) to be sawn with a saw' (bi-nagri'l-xagab wa ğayrihi bi'l minşür) Kaş. I 260 (érpetür, érpetme:k). D ürpet- Caus. f. of *ürpe:-; 'to make (the hair, etc.) dishevelled'. Survives as ürpeytand the like in the languages listed under *ürpe:-. Xak. xı er başın ürpettl: "the man ruffled (şa"“ata) his head (etc.) Kaş. I 259 (ürpetür, ürpetme:k; MS in error -ma:k). D arval- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of arva:-. Xak. xi arvis arvaldı: zregiyat”l-ruqya “the spell was cast” Kaş. I 249 (arvalur, arvalma:k; arvış mis-spelt ark:;). D érpel- Pass. f. of érpe:-; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vu ff, Bud. (in a fragmentary text) kinda: pa:rmis erpe:lkülüg (sic) “having gone to the torture he will be sawn' T'T VIII G.61: Xak. xi yığa:ç érpeldi: "the wood was sawn with a saw' (nugtra . . . bt'l-mingár); and in the prov. apa:key (so spelt, but obviously corrupt, perhaps read oDpa:rıp) erpeldi: ış uridal-amr böl-işlah fa-nuşira ya"ni ufsida “it was wished to improve the business but it was sawn, that is spoilt” Kaş. 7 244 (érpelür, érpelme:k). ?D ürper- “to bristle, stand on end”, of hair, and the like; perhaps Intrans. Den. V. fr. *ürp, cf. *ürpe:-. Survives only(?) in SVV Az., Osm. Xak. xr er ürperdi: tanaffasa'l-racul wa'zba'arra mina'l- ğadab aw li'l-qitàl “(he man panted and bristled with anger or in a fight”, and one says taka:ğu: ürperdi: tagazza'a'l-dik li'[-gitàl “the cock fluffed out its feathers for a fight”, and one says anın yi:ni: ürperdi: iqşa"arra cilduhu “his skin had gooseflesh' Kaş. I1 217; (ürperür, ürperme:k): Osm. xvin ürper- (spelt) rüyidan-i sabza "of a plant, to sprout'; and metaph. rösf gudan-i müy-i andám ta damidan-i xaff-i nato xattön "of the hairs of the body to stand on end, and of a young beard, to sprout' San. 7ov. 17. D arvas- Co-op. f. of arva:-; 'to say spells together”. S.is.m.l. like arva:-. Xak. xt ka:mla:r kamuğ arvaşdı: haynamatii-kahana bi-kalüm “the sorcerers (all) mumbled (certain) words'; also used when they cast spells for ulcers (raqato rin sa'fa) and the like Kaş. 1 236 (arvaşur, arvagma:k). D ürpes- Co-op. f. of *ürpe:- survives only(?) in NC Kzx. Xak. xı eren ürpesti: taga''aba'l-abtàl wa'zba'arrü gadaba(n) “the warriors bristled (Hend.) with rage'; also used of other people Kaş. 7 229 (ürpesü:r, ürpesme:k; verse).  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 246 
     
   
   
     202 MON. V. ARDxun art- "to incrcase” Ali 29: xiv ditto MN 483, etc. ; Qutb facsimile 88v. 21; 99v. rz: Kip. xiv art- zada İd. 10; zada"l-şay” nafsuhu "the thing increased of its own accord' artfi: Bul, 45r.: XV zada art- Kav. 78, 3: Osm. xiv arta dur- "to go on increasing'; xvi arta varditto TTS I 43. 1 ert- normally Intrans., “to pass” in all theusual meanings of that English word e.g. (of time) “to pass”: (of an illness) “to pass off”, (of physical movement) 'to pass' (from one place to another); occasionally Trans. “to pass” (e.g. a place); in a few passages in Uyg. Bud. it is a "Vrans. with 'sin' or the like as Object, and in this case scems to mean “to commit persistently' (the conclusion in TT IV 14, note A.11 that this must be a different verb is improbable). Survives only(?) in most NE languages. Türkü vrit (I mobilized the army of the On Ok; we, too, took the field and) anı: ert(t)imiz "went past them” . . . (geographical name) tağığ ertü 'going past the . . . mountain' IT. 44; vir ff. Man, bu etözden ertigli *when he passes from this body (i.e. incarnation)" M HI iy, 2-3 (i; 18, 13-14; ao. TT II 15, 7-8 (erki:): Uyğ. vurff. Bud. Sanskrit upátivrità “those who have passed away' ertmisler TT VIII 4.7; düratigá 'difficult to pass” alp ertgülükle:r do. 4.14; kaltı altı kün ertip bardı 'when six days had passed" PP zo, 1-2; kalın satığçılar yolayu ertgeli sakınsar “if a company of merchants contemplate passing (through, ara, hostile peoples) in the course of their journey' Kran. 43; 0.0. U TI əə, 22; 81, 69; U III SS, 3 (1ndin); Hüen-is. 234, 2116; TT VITJI 4.15, 45, etc.— ölüt ölürmek karmapatığ uzati ertser “if he persists for a long time in the sin of killing" U İH 4, 13714; on karmapat ertmek ayığ kilraç “the wicked decd of persisting in the ten sins" U IV 40, 190-1; à.0. TT IV 4, 11-12: Civ. adası erter “its danger passes over” TT VH 14, 21 and 32, etc.; a.o. TT [ 45 (uğra:-): Xak. xı ödleğ ertti: »iada'l-zamàán “time passed'; and one says er evinden ertti: cáwaza'l-racul min baytili "the man passed out of his house", also used of anyone or anything which madd wa cüraza "an mawdi' Kaş. III 425 (erte:r, ertme:k); (if difficulties arise, be patient) erter (sic) teyü 'saying "they will pass” ” HII 233, 15: KB ol erter ödün “at the time when he passes on (to the next world)' 1925: Çağ. xv ff. after art- “to increase” a second meaning fayy şudan "to be crossed, traversed” is added with a quotn., clearly a mispronunciation of ert- San. 35r. 5. VUD 2 ért- in UYĞ. vırı ff. Bud. Hfües-ts. 1981 the Chinese phr. fa chiang (Giles 3,366 1,212) lit. “dharma general” i.e. "a monk of outstanding character” is translated nom értgüsi “leader(?) of the doctrine”, chiang being taken as a verb “to lead'. If this is so, ért- scems to be the Caus. f. of 2 ér- and presumably survives in NC Kzx. ért- “to take (someone) with one, allow (him) to follow one” R 1 790; MM 144. ört- “to cover, conceal (something /4ec.)”. Survives in NVV Kaz. and SW Az., Osm., "Vkm. Uyf. viu ff. Bud. yérig órtüp 'covering the earth” TT V 6, 45-6; Sanskrit praticchádayati “t covers! ürte:r (sic, perhaps the original pronunciation) TT VIII G.69; yasurmazmen baturmazmen órtmezmen kizlemezmen 'I do not hide, suppress, cover over or conceal' (my sins) Suv. 138, 1-2: Xak. xr ol órtti: ne:mni: "he concealed (satara) the thing” Kaş. III 425 (örte:r, órtme:k): KB (clothing) etöz órtgü “to cover the body” 4773; kişi "aybı açma sen örtüp yitür “do not reveal a man's shame; cover it up and suppress it” 6096; tişide uvut kétti örtmez yüzin 'women have lost thcir modesty and do not veil their faces! 6474: xi(?) Tef. ört- (1) "to cover (something Dat. or üze) with (something Acc.); (2) "to suppress, i.c. forgive (sins cc.) 248: xiv Muh. ğatıd "to cover, conceal' ó:rtMel. 29, 7; Rif. 113; al-tağtiya örtmek (spelt -mak in error) 36, 1; 121: Xwar. xil órt"to cover" Alfr 28; xiv. ditto Quib 124; MN 132; “to suppress (sins)! Nahc. 240, 7: Kip. xıl satara ğayrak ört- (vocalized órüt-) Hou. 36, 12: xiv. ört- (^with front vowel) gartà İd. 10; Bul. 67b.: xv ditto Tuf. 27a. 12 (spelt örüt-). j Dis. ARD I D orut Pass(?) Dev. N./A. fr. o:r-; lit. “reaped”, in practice (grass) “vhich has been reaped and left out on the ground to wither'. Pec. to Xak, Xak. xi orut (unvocalized) ot al-davil wea hiwa'L-nabtu'L-'ámi "limp withered grass, that is last year's grass! Kaş, 1 so, orut otın yasurdi Şarmara”l-nabtı” l-tariyı”)-date/la”H-hamid $a. hinva”-nabni”l-"ümi "the fresh grass has covered the limp ragged grass, that is last year's grass! 77 79, 19; küyürdi: orut (vocalized arut) ot (the fire) “has burnt the limp withered grass! I7 133, rs: KB sakal boldi yazki gulaf teg orut 'my beard has become withercd like a spring rose” $5639; same phr. “my hair” 5697. érte: “the early morning”, in the carly period usually associated with 1 tap 'dawn'; in the medieval period it developed two contrary meanings; (1) “early tomorrow morning; tomorrow" ; (2) “carlier than this”, i.e. in the past. S.i.a.m.l.g. with variations in the initial vowel which point to an original érte: and sometimes with -n (erten, etc.). Cf. 2 yarın. Uy£. viii ff. Bud. tanda sayu érte turup 'rising early every morning” USP. 6o, Ia. 15; 0.0. Sut. 4, 9 (ölütçi:), Hüen-ts. 1966 (agtur-): Civ. tan erte TT VII 1, 24, and ar: Xak. xı érte: al-bukra "the early morning” Kaş. 1 124: KB tapuğda kıyılmadı erte turu “he did not fail in his duty, rising early in the morning” 607: xııı(?) At. bu mül kelse erte barur báz keçe “if this vvealth comes early in the morning it goes away again late at night” 184; T«f. erte “in the early morning” 83: xiv Mu. al-gadá “tomorrow' érte: Mel. 8o, 1; Rif. 184; layla fad *tomorrow night” érte: gecesi: So, o (Rif. 185 yarın tünle:): Çağ. xv ff. érte by itself and in 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 247 
     
   
   
       DIS. ARD phr. like érte çağda all translated emtelkf zamanda ve evvel geyenler ve qadim gelenler “in the (remote) past', (quotns.), one containing har tap érte; and érte also means yarinki gün and yarını sabáh 'tomorrow; tomorrow morning” (quotns.) Vel. so; érte (spelt) (r) sábiq “former” (quotns.); (2) atwwal waqt “time past' (quotns.); (3) metaph. (sic) ibtidà-yi şubh "the start of the morning”, just as aksam is atteal-i. şab “the beginning of the night (quotns.) Sar. 99r. 22; ertey armwal-: şübh do. 99v. 3: Xwar. xu(?) andın sop érte boldi tap érte çağda keldi “after that it was the early morning, he came garly at dawn' Oğ. 31-2; 35-6; 0.0. 222, 331: xiv érte 'early' Qutb sı, (he used to pray) tünle (so read) erteke tegi “at night until early morning” Nahc. 233, 16; (no one knows) adam oğlı erte né kılğusr turur "vhat a man ís going to do tomorrow' do. 234, ro: Kom. xiv “early, in due time” erte; “in former times” erte €akta; 'dawn' tap erte CCI, CCG; Gr. 93: Kip. xii bukra érte:, also used for ai-£ad 'tomorrow' Hor. 28, 13: xiv érte: al-ğad İd. ro, Zada(n) érte: (also tanda:, yarın) Bul. 15, 6: xv sahar 'dawn' érte Tuh. 19a. 4: Osm. xiv ff. erteférte c.i.a.p. in numerous phr.; at first “early morning”, by xvi usually 'tomorrow'; no trace of 'former times” T TS I 274; II 393; III 261; IV 305; erden “early” occasionally in xv, xvi, IJ 389; İİİ 257. ordu:, ortu: Preliminary note. T/is is one of the few cases in which two words semantically different are, at any rate in Türhü and Xah., differentiated phonetically only by the difference between -rd- and -rt-; in Uyğ., owing to ihe ambiguity of the script, only the context can decide tohich sword is intended. The second is sbelt orto in "UT. VILI, and the fact that in most modern. languages both words now end in -a suggests that originally both ended in -0:. It is prob. that the words, entered as Y and 2 ordu:, have a common origin, but as they had developed quite different meanings by XI they have been entcred separately; -rd- is an unusual combination of sounds in Türkü and suggests that this is a [.-1o., cf. 2 karşı, 1 ordu: (ordo:) originally “a royal residence, that is “palace” or "royal camp' as the circumstances demanded; in the religious (Bud. and Man.) texts also 'a heavenly mansion'. An carly l.-w. for “palace, royal camp' as ordo in Mong. (Haenisch 125). Survives in NE Tuv. ordu, SE Türki orda Shaw zo, BŞ 761, ?arring 215 (with Sec. f.s), NC Kir. ordo; Kzx. orda, SC Uzb. ürda, NW Kk., Nog, orda, SW Az., Osm. ordu, 'Tkm. orda, In SW Az., Osm. it came to mean “a royal camp', thence any 'military camp' and finally, in military terminology, the largest type of military formation, “army”. Elsewhere it retained its original meaning, but there are indications that in some languages it was rcborrowed fr. Mong. See Doerfer 11 452. Türkü vıı Oğuz yağı: 203 ordu:ğ basdı: “hostile Oğuz attacked the royal camp” 7 N 8, ordu:ğ bérmedl: “he did not surrender the royal camp” 7 N 9: viri ff. xan olu:rıpan ordu: yapmı:ş "the xar came to the throne and erected a royal residence" İrhB 28, alo. do. 34: Man. iki yaruk ordu içre “in the two palaces of light” Chuas. 15: Uy£. (vir ordu: in Su. E 8 is an error, sce E aksırak): vri ff. Man.-A Ordu kent geographical name M 7 26, 30; 27, 6 (see Xak.): Man. iki yaruk ordu M 1 29, 9; 3o, 1; anoşağan orduta tuğku üçün “in order to be born (again) in the palace of immortality” TT III 140; similar phr. do. 165; ay tepri ordusi... kün tepri ordusi “the heavenly mansion of the moon/sun god” M III 7, 6-7 (v): Bud. ay tepri ordus1 TT V 4, 5; tugit ordudakı maytrı “Maitreya (Buddha) in the 'Tusita palace” TT IV ro, 31; o.o. PP 39, 3; 42, 71 43, 5; U II 25, 19; USp. 30, 3-4 etc.: Civ. ordu 'celestial mansion' (in a calendar text) TT VII 4, 1 etc.: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. Rung “palace” (Giles 6,580) ordu Ligeti 188; R I 1072: Xak. xı ordu: gagabatu'l-malik “a king's capital”, hence the town of Kaşğar is called Ordu: kend that is 'the residence and capital of the kings”: Ordu: a qaşaba near Balasağün , and Balasağün is also called Ku:z Ordu: from this, ordu: başı: ismu'l- farrdş li'--mulük “the word for the kings” personal servant” Kaş. 7 124: KB kelip teédi él(l)ig turur orduka 'the king arrived and took up residence in the capital” 487; karşı ordu tura 'the palace, the capital, the fortress' 5263; a.o. 310 (ükül-): xır(?) KBVP kayu kend, ulus, ordu, karşı, yér-e 'every town, country, capital, palace, and place' 26: xiv Muh. dáru'l-malik “royal residence! ordu: Mel. 75, 15; Rif. 179 (adding tva hallatuhu "and his quarter of the town"): Çağ. xv ff. ordu (spelt) xaymagah-i salatitt "royal encampment (quotns.); orda (spelt) haram, ya"ni xana ki zandn-i salatin za ahabir dar ancü büşand "the harem, that is the residence of the vvives of kings and nobles'; orda begi kis-i safid-i haram 'the white eunuch of the harem' San. yır. 14 (orda is prob. a reborrowing from Mong.): Xwar. xiu kel orduka “come to the royal residence! Og. 255; a.o. 270: xiv orda (sic) “palace” Qutb 118: Kom. xiv “royal court' orda (sic) CCI; Gr.: Osm. xiv, xv ordu (once ordi) “encampment” in Dede (Rossi, p. 343; orda in T TS I 549 is a mistake); “military camp” in two texts 777 338. 2 ordu: (ordo:) 'the hole of a rodent, etc.'. Survives as orda/ordo in NE Bar., Tel. R 7 1072, and Khak.; NC Kir., Kzx. R 7 1072, and NW Kk. Xak. xr ordu: náfíqá'u'l-yarbi! wa hucru'l-wabr wa maskan kull haytoán tahta'l-ard *the hole of a jerboa, the burrow of a marmot, and the subterranean abode of any animal' Kag. I 124. ortu: (orto:) originally “the middle, or centre, of anything', hence 'situated in the middle, medium, middling”, with some extensions of meaning, esp. in SW. S.i.a.m.l.g., almost always as orta, with one or two forms with   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 248 
     
   
   
     204 -n (ortan, ctc.) which is always an Adj. and noted as early as Uyğ. A metathesized form Otra: occurs at least as early as xı, but is now rare. See Doerfer 11 587. Türkü vı bérgerü: kün ortu:stpgaru: . . . yırğaru: tün ortu:st:paru: 'southwards towards midday . northwards towards midnight" 7 S 2, I7 N z: vin ff. kün ortu: . . . tün ortu: Jr&amp;B 24) a.o. do. 49 (1 1mfa:): Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-A kün ortudun (sic) sınar “in a southerly direction” M III 10, 12-13 (i); Bavıll balıknın) ortusiparu bardı “he went towards the middle of the city of Dabylon' Manm.-uig. Frag. qor, 11-12: Bud. ol linxwa ortusinda "in the middle of that lotus' TT V 6, zo, kün ortu ódün kün ortu yipak yüzlenip 'facing south at mid-day' do. 10, 88-90; o.o. do. 12, 125; PP 70, 4-5 etc.—otrasinda Tig. sob. s (3 óp)—iki ortun erpek 'the two middle fingers! TT V 8, ss, ortun enetkek élinde “in the country of central İndia” Hiien-ts. 1765, 1864: Civ. kün ortuda TT VII 35, 4-5; tepri ortosında (sic) “in the middle of the sky” TT VIII L.38: Çigil (sic) xı ortu: “the middle (zeasat) of anything'; hence one says ortu: er racul tatassata min "umrihi “a middleaged man”, and one says ev ortu:si: "the middle of the house”, and hence “midday” (al-zuhr) is called kü:n ortu: Kaş. I 124: Xak. xı otra: wasat kull şay” lahu cawánib "the middle of anything that has sides'; metathesis (qalb) of ortu: 7 125; (two camel stallions fight) otra: kö:ke:ğü:n yançılur “the blue fly is squashed between them” (baynahuma) T 188, r: JI 287, 21; 0.0. I 308, 18 (ara:la:-); II 89, 13: KB bodi ortu bolsa 'if he is of medium stature! 2083; similar phr. 2087; ortu kişi “the middle-class man” (neither very rich nor poor) s562 ff. : xiri(?) Tef. orta “the middle 238: xiv. Mh. al-icosat. o:rta: Mel. 14, 10; 83, s; Rif. gö, 188; al-wusti "the. middle finger) o:rta: barmak 47, 11; Tar, al-kahl 'middle aged' o:rta: 48, 17 (143 ça:l): Caf. xv ff. orta (spelt) rcasaf sea. mryán ("middle") (quotn.), and also an idiom (k/mdya) for aiásitu'l-nàs "the middle classes! (quotn.) . .. orta çağlığ hadd-i wasat “of moderate extent? (quotn.) San. 71r. 4: Xwar. xiv orta “middle” Qutb 119; MN 82: Kom. xiv 'middle' orta; 'normally, ordinarily orta kili CCI; Gr, 179 (quotn.): Kip. xii al-wasat o:rta: Hou. 53, 18 (oblique cases follow); ai-wusti orta: barmak do. zo, 15: xiv Orta: (with back vowels") al-teasat İd. 10; orta: barmak al-agbu'w I-xeusti do. iz: XV atwsat orta Ka. 35, 7; al-mu"tadil “medium” (stature) orta do. 59, 16; al-«usti orta barmak do. 61, 4; tasat orta Tuh. 73b. 10: Osm. xiv to xvr orta *middle, medium, etc. c.i.a.p. one ot two early cases of ortu mistaken for 1 ordu: TTS I $49; JI 735-6; III 548-9; İV 611-12. artuç (?arduç) a generic term for "the juniper trec'. İn modern languages largely displaced by the syn. Mong. word arca (Kom. 161, Haltod 33) but survives in NE Tel. artış R I 314; Tuv. ditto; S.E Türki ardaç BŞ şo, SC Khokand artış Shato 5: NW Kar,K ardıc DIS.ARD RT3z3, Naz. artış, SVV Az,, Osm. ardic/ardic., See Doerfer 1] 448. Uyğ. vini ff. Civ. artuç sógüt butiki “the branches of a juniper tree' TT I 165; artuc urugi 'juniper sced' /7 77 30, (77: XIV Chin.-Uyg. Dict. 'juniper' artuç Ligeti 131; RI 315: Xak. xr artuc a/-"ar"ar 'juniper', and two villages near Kashgar are called Artuç Kag. I 95; three o.o.: Çağ. xv ff. arduc nàm-i diraxt-i ablial “the name of the juniper tree', in Pe. awirs and in Ar. 'ar'ar; it is. a kind of mountain cypress (sarto-? hühi) San. 37r. 4. D ertüt Intrans. Dev. N. fr. 1 ert-; “a gift. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vinrff. Chr. öz yüklerin actilar ertütin acugin ötündiler “they opened their baggage and presented their gifts (Hend.)' U I 6, 11-13 (mistranslated): Xak. xı ertüt a[-hadiya “a gift like a horse, etc. which passes between (tumadd bayn yaday) amirs and other persons'; thence it came to be used for any kind of gift Kaş. 0.0. 109; 0.0. 114, 18 (1 oğurluk), 182, 6 (1dig-): KB nen ertüt kilip making things gifts” 1769: xin(?) Ar, men ertüt (spelt artut) kilayin. şahımka anı “1 will present it to my king” 42. D arta:k N./A.S. fr. arta:-; 'spoilt, decaying, putrid'. Survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. ardak SDD 110. Uy£. vii ff. Bud. (if I have given to others) kirliğ tapçalığ yaviz artak aş içgüleriğ 'dirty, damaged, bad, putrid food and drink' Suv. 1:35, 13-14: Xak. xi arta:k ne:p al-;ay'u'l-fásid "a rotten, decaying thing” Kaş. 7 119; İl 40, 13 (tıniğ): KB ukuş birle aslur kişi artakı “vith the help of understanding corrupt men are hanged” 221; (small but well organized is better than numerous) telim tusti artak üküş sü bile *much that is rotten meets you with a numerous army” 2340; idi artak erdi tapuğ, kodsa men “it would be very disgusting if 1 abandoned my duty' 5752: xiu(?) At, sen artak sen “you are corrupt! 395; 2.0. 413. D artığ Conc. N. fr. 1 art-, etymologically 'something which is loaded, or put round something'. N.o.a.b. Xak. xr artığ sudratu'lmara "a woman's bodice'; artığ ahad “idlayi” himl "one of two (equal) half loads” Kaş. 1 98. D artuk (?artok) Pass. N./A.S. fr. 2 art-, originally “additional, an extra amount”, in the earliest texts used chiefly in numerical expressions; later usually 'a large additional amount', less often 'excess, excessive'. S.i.a.m.l.g. as artuk in SE and sometimes SC and artik elsewhere, with some extended meanings esp. in SW. "Vhe theory in TT V 33, note B. 71 that in a number of passages in Uyğ. Bud. the word read adruk is a metathesis of artuk is not at all plausible. Türkü vri kirk artukti: yeti: 'forty-seven' (normally yeti: elliğ) 7 E 15; artuk yılkı:ğ igit(t)i: “he fed more livestock” 7x. 25; ay artuki: tört kün “a month and four days” 77 SW; o.o. I E 33 (ur-); T 4o (1 u:ç): vur ff, Man. yüz artuki kirk *140! Chuas. İ iz, artuk erüş 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 249 
     
   
   
     DIS. ARD 205  erür 'it is extremely numerous" TT 11 8,61:Uyğ. viii ff. Man.-A beş yüz artukı eki otuzunc yilka “in the szznd year" M I 12, 15-16: Bud. artuk in 77 VIII spelt artok, arttok, a:rttok, is very common; (1) in numerical expressions, e.g. otuz artuk uluğ €I uluşlarığ “more than thirty great rcalms and countries" Suv. 3, zo, bir ay artuk *more than a month' PP 68, 1; (2) meaning 'a large amount', e.g. kamuğ tinliğlarka artuk asığ krlu umağaymen "1 shall not be able to do a great deal of good to all mankind' PP 34, 6-7 a.o. do. 65, 8 (açın-), (3) with some suggestion of excessiveness, e.g. i$ kem emğgekin artuk bulup 'fifíding the pain of his illness (Hend.) excessive' U III 35, 19-20; (4) in Tig. 46a. 3 fT. there is a string of identical phr. in which is seems to represent a step in amount tepredi artuk tepredi tüzü tepredi “he moved, he moved more, he moved as much as he could': Civ. (if a particular remedy is applied) artuk edgü bolur 'it becomes much better” H 7 1335; artuk icser bolmaz 'if he drinks more than that, it does not help” do. 171-2: Xak. xı artuk a/-ziyáda “an increase, an excessive amount” Kaş. J 99; ortuk erden artuk alma:s 'a partner does not take too big a share (ziydda fil-qisma) from his partner” 7 99, 5; a.o. II 137, 6 (kösül-): KB üküş sózde artuk asi kórmedim “1 never saw much advantage in verbosity' 171; idi artuk erdem kerek öğ billig (a worldconqueror) "needs a very large amount of manly qualities, intellect, and knovvledge” 281; o.o., similar meaning, 629, 758, 837 (1 a:r-): xin(?) Ar. artuk tileme “do not ask for morc” rgo: Tef. artuk “very great; superior; iki üç yüz artuk “over two or three hundred (years) 60; a.o. 72 (eğsük): xiv Muh. al-ziyáda artuk Mel. 54, 14; Rif. 151: Çağ. xvff. artuk (and artuksı) ziyáda wa afsün 'excess, abundance” San. 36v. 27: Xwar. xi artukrak/artuğrak “more” ' Ali 19: xiv artuk 'more, superior (to others); excess! Quib 11; MN 173, etc.; Nahe. 411, 15: Kom. xiv 'extremely, excessive(ly); (with preceding 52.) more than” artuk/artux CCI, CCG, Gr. 41 (quotns.): Osm. xiv ff. artuk (once artux) consistently till xvi, sporadically thereafter, then artık, c.í.a.p.: normally with preceding Abl. “more than” (occasionally “other than”), also by itself “abundant, superfluous'; bip artuk “over rooo' in xiv, yıl artuğun "over a year” in xv TTS I 42 fl.; 11 56 ff.; III 39 fI.; IV 42 ff. D ortuk (ortok) apparently Den. N. fr. ortu:, but the function of the Suff., normally Diminutive, is obscure; 'partner'. Became ortak at a fairly early date (the MS. of Kaş. where the scribe tended to substitute the later form must have been written during the transitional period). S.i.a.m.l.g., ortok in NE Alt., Tel. R 7 1071; NC Kir. and ortak elsewhere. See Doerfer 11 446. Uyğ. vin ff. Civ. ortuk seems to occur in two damaged and obscure texts; in U.Sp. ss, 26-7; Memet Mopğol cin. ötekçi bile ortuk altı şık yer might mean "six şık of land held in common with Mehmed Mongol the true debtor” (the last two words might be another Proper Name); in USp. 3o, 7 ortakı looks like a N./A.S. in -k1 'situated in the middle', but ortuk in 3o, rz seems to be this word, meaning obscure: Xak. xı ortuk al-şarih “a partner” Kaş. 1 gg (prov. see artuk); börl:nin ortuk (vocalized ortak) kuzğu:nnup yığa:ç ba:şında: “meaning “the crow is the partner (yugarik) of the wolf in hunting and what the crow catches is (put) at the top of a tree" ' 7 439, 28; ortuk bolup bilişdi: "he was my partner (şüraha maf"i) and knew me intimately” III 71, 17 (the first and last clearly vocalized ortuk, the second and third ortak): KB (a servant) begi birle ortuk “in partnership with his master” 2997: xırı(?) Tef. ortak 'partner' 238: xiv. Mu. al-sarik orta:k Mel. 49, 15; Rif. 144: Çağ. xv ff. ortağ/ortak (byimplication *with o-”) sarik wa sahim ('associate') Sas, 71r. 9 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv ortak 'partner' Qutb 119: Kom. xiv “partner” ortak CCI, Gr.: Kip. xin al-garik orta:k Hou. 32, 115 41, 6; gáraka mina'l-sirka ma" fayrak orta:k bol- do. 41, $: xiv Ortak ('with back vowels") al-garik İd. ıı: xv şirha ortak Tuh. 21a. 10; muwàásifa “mediation” ortak do. 35b. 3: Osm. xv ortak (in phr.) “partner” in two texts TTS II 735; IV 612. D ertiğ Hap. leg.; Conc. N. fr. 1 ert-; lit. 'something over which one passes'. Xak. xi ertig al-tariqu”Hmaslük "a beaten track” Kaş. T 103. ?D ördek a generic term for “duck”, particular varieties being distinguished by qualifying Adjs. or Nouns. Exceptionally Kaj. consistently translates ördek “goose” and ka:z 'duck', but this must be an error. Morphologically perhaps Dev. N. fr. 1 ö:r- (the bird) 'which rises' (from the water). "The metathesized form in Suv. (of which the MS. is XVIII) must be a Sec. f.; it survives as ödürek in NE "Tuv. and the eccentric forms in Xwar. and Kip. may also go back to it. S.i.a.m.l.g., normally as órdek and the like. See Doerfer 11 450. Uyf. vırı ff. Bud. (oxen, sheep, swine) kaz ödirek takığu 'geese, ducks, and poultry' Suv. 4, 12: Xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. 'duck ördek Ligeti 190: Xak. xı ördek al-iwazz 'goose' Kaş. 1 103 (prov.); 1 222, 18 (yuga:k) and 4 0.0.: KB ördek in a list of birds 72: xiv Muh.(?) al-batt 'duck' ördek Mel. 73, 5 (added to the text in one MS. only): Xwar. Ördek 'duck' Qutö 123; ewrek ditto 23; évrek ditto 62; évek? ditto 53; övrek ditto 125: Tkm. xii a/-batt ösrdek Hou. 10, 6: xiv ördek al-bat İd. 10; Kıp.(?) ewrek al-baft wa'l-axdar (green) do. 26; al-batt ewrek (unvocalized)/yórdek (sic) Bul. 11, 13: xv battórdek Tuh. 7b. 3. D órtüg Conc. N. fr. órt-; originally “covering” in general (Uyğ. Man. 'covered' may be the Pass. Dev. N./A. in -ük, “covered” not otherwise recorded); in modern languages usually more specifically “head-covering, veil".  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 250 
     
   
   
     206 Survives in SE Tar. örtü: R 7 1236; NC Kir. ürtük; SC Uzb. urtuk Hor. 480 (described as "literary', ?mistranscribed): SW Az., Osm. örtü, "Tkm. örtük. Uyğ. vin ff. Man. ol yaruk örtük (?sic) sayu "every time that light is obscured” (the mansion of the moon god is near the mansion of the sun god) M 7/7 7, 5 (v): Bud. órtüg tıdığlarığ 'coverings and obstacles U 11 33, 5; 42, 9: Civ. üç kıdığliğ bir kıdığsız tört örtüğüğ bérdim “I gave four coverlets, three with borders and one without' USp. 79, 11-12: Xak. xi órtüg "the covering! (al-sutra) over anything, for example the saddle-cloth (ai-£églya) over a saddle, and the brocade (al-dibác) which is laid on the tombs of notables; and also ği/d” kull şay" "the cover, lid, roof”, ctc. of anything Kaş. 1 103: KB bayat tapğı barça kerek örtüğün “God”s worship must always be performed. under cover' 3919; mapa órtüg erdi bu sózler nece kótürdür bu órtüg sen aydip aga 'these words were somewhat obscure to me; you have removed this obscurity and spoken explaining them” 5818: xın(?) Tef. örtüğ 'covering, curtain', etc. 249: xiv Muh. (among words relating to buildings) al-£ità' "the roof” ew ó:rtü:$l: Mel. 76, 3; Rif. 179; (among furnishings, etc.) al-mf' "leather floor-covering' ó:zgü:g 67, 15; ö:rÉü:&amp; 168 (both corruptions of ó:rtü:g): Caf. xv ff. örtük ('with -k') örtülü . . . maxfi ma'násma “hidden, concealed' Vel, 101; örtük /ihaf wa büşti hi ba-bálà-yi xwud pugand “a covering or garment that people drape over themselves! Sam. yir. 2: Kap. xiv örtü: (so read, most MSS. in error ortuk) al-ğitd” İd. vo: xv(?) in margin in SW(?) hand al-ğüa” örtü Tuh. 26b. 6. D örtgü:n Conc. N. fr. ört-, etymologically 'something covered', in practice “haystack” and the like, Survives only in NE Şor R I 1842 and Khak, ürtün 'threshing-floor'. The status of the Kip. word is uncertain; it may belong here, but Mong. zzder 'balcony, raised platform” (Kotv. 279, Haltod 62) was borrowed, as indir/indir) in some NW languages to represent “threshing-floor” and is listed in Kom. xıv Gr. 273; it survives in NW Kar. R 1 1364, Kot. 194 and in SW xx Anat. SDD 771 (from one place only); the Kip. word might be a metathesis of this. Uyğ. vini fF. Civ. in a contract for the sale of land USp. 108, 18-20 the boundaries are described as: E. Burxan kuliniy órtgün; S. “the big road", W. "Tagut's land”, N. Buyançuknun órtgün; it must here mean 'stackyard' or the like: Xak. xı órtgü:n a/-subra "a heap (of cut corn and the like)” Kaş. IJI 412; sondila:ç işı: erme:s órtgü:n tepme:k “it is not the wren's job to thresh the stacked corn' (daqqu'l-huds) I 526, 22: sabanda: sandrış, bolsa: órtgü:nde: irte:ş bolma:ş "if there are quarrels at the plough, there will be no disputes fi halat”l-şubra wa'l-kuds Iİ 402, 20; hàlata'l-kuds II 214, 5; wwagta'l-kuds III 416, 23; these must all mean *when the crop is being stacked': xiv Muh.(?) Rif. 159 (2 0t): Kip. DIS. ARD xiv (VU) irdin (dál unvocalized) al-baydar 'threshing-floor; barn' İd. 10. D örtlüğ P.N./A. fr. ört, 'blazing, flaming'. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viu ff. Bud. avış tamudaki örtlüğ yalınlığ yerde “in a blazing (11end.) place situated in the atıcı hell” TT IV 10, 25-6; órtlóg (sic) tamu:da:kı 'situated in the blazing hel TT VIII N.12: Xvvar, xit örtlü 'fiery' “AZ 46: Kom. xiv “İlaming (hell) órtlifórtlik CCG; Gr. 184 (quotns.). D erdem Den. N. fr. 1 er; etymologically 'manly qualities', esp. 'bravery', but more commonly used in a broader sense for 'goodness, virtue, good qualities! and sometimes applied to things as well as people. In Uyg. somctimes appears metathesized as edrem. An early loan-word in Mong. where it was originally used for 'competence, cíficiency, capability (2/aeniseh 44) and later also for *wisdoin, knowledge! (Kor, 260, //a/tod 60). NE Tuv. ertem 'knowledge, science" Pal. 587 is no doubt reborrowed fr. Mong., but SW xx Anat. erdemyerden “virtue, excellence' SDD 542 is a direct survival. See Doerfer II 451. Türkü viu alpı: erdemi: “his bravery and manliness” Ix. 4; o.o. do, 7 and i2: viri ff. erde:m occurs several times in the Toyok doct. (ET Y II 57-9) as a technical term for *the magical quality, virtue' of a precious stone: Yen. phr. like erdem üçün and er erdem üçün “because of his manly qualities are common Mal. 29, 4 and 7 etc.: Uyğ. vim ff. Man.-A yeti tórlüg erdemte ötrü "by means of his (Xormuzda's) seven kinds of (magic) povvers” M J15,17-18: Man. erdem sevinç the special virtue and attractiveness' (of the Wind God) Wind. 4, 24, 44: Bud. kuan şı 15 pusar kutadmak erdeml 'Kuan-gi 1m Budhisattva's power to bestow good fortune! Kan, 60; similar phr. 71, 218; erdemke (v.l. edremke) tükellig erdiler 'they were perfected by the (magical) power' (of the great d/tárasi) TT VI 352; kentünür yaruk küçlüğ bögülügğ erdemin (v.l. edremin) "by his own bright, strong, magic power' do. 354; a.0.0.: Civ. otnun edremi “the virtue of the remedy' H 11 6, 1: O. Kir. ix ff. erdem and er erdem are common 4A/al. 2, 3; 5, 1 etc.: Xak. xt erdem a/-adab wa'l-manqaba “refined manners, merits” Kaş. 7 107 (prov.); JI 343, 19 (6gül-); about a dozen o.o. translated a/-adab, al-manqaba or both; exceptionally in 7 252, 18 translated. a/-hikm coa! l-. "ilm. *wisdom, knowledge': KB erdem is fairly common in the same meaning as in Kaş., e.g. (God created man, and chose him) apar bérdi erdem bilig óg ukus “He gave him refined manners, knowledge, intelligence, and understanding 148; similar phr. 278, 465; in 284-5, 672-3, 683 it means 'merit, virtue', as opposed to mün “defect, vice”: xıı(?) t. aya şahım erdemlerin sanağan “oh you, who (try to) count my king”s virtues' (can you count the grains of sand?) 59: Caf. xv ff. erdem sibühilik vwa silàhgürluk mahárat “skill in military matters and the use of arms! Vel. sı (quotn.); érdem (spelt) funin-i furüsiyat wa 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 251 
     
   
   
      DIS. V. ARDddab-i sipahikar? "the scicnce of chivalry and the military arts" (quotns.); the. Rümi author (i.e. Vel.) in one place read érdem as eyrüm: (spelt) and indexed it under alif maftüha and in another place read it as érdem and indexed it under alif mahsüra, and in both places gave the following quotn. (quoted) as an example; Naşiri followed him and recognized eyrüm and érdem as synonyms, and gave them this meaning; both were in error San. 99v. 3 (the quotn. does in fact occur twice in Vel., but not under érdem, it occurs under eyrtüm and ürüm spelt with alif madmüma): X war. xiv erdem/érdem 'manliness' , Qıtb 21, 51: Kom. xiv 'virtue, skill erdem CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv erdem al-fadila “virtuc, excellence' İd. ır: xv (san'a 'art' peşe (Persian 6ayşd)), şühib funün "master of sciences” (peşekör and) érdem iyesi Tu. 22a. 6-7, Osm. xiv, xv erlik erderni 'manly virtues' in two texts, and erdem “military skill” in one T T'S III 257. D *ertim N.S.A. fr. 1 ert-; 'transitoriness', see ertimlig. D órtmen Conc. N. fr. ört-, 'roof' and the like. Survives only in SW xx Anat. “the upper surface (of something) SDD 1117. Xak. xi örtmen al-safh “a (flat) roof” Kaş. III 412: xiu(?) Tef. örtmen 88 (badıç) (and 248). PU?F ardun (or artun?) 'cumin', or the like. N.o.a.b.; prob. a foreign word. Uy£. vri ff. Bud. (PU) vibuni artun corresponds to yavani “Carum copticum' in the Sanskrit text and ma ch'in (Giles 7,576 2,092) 'cumin, ammium, pipercula' in the Chinese translation Suv. 476, rz: Civ. ardun TT VII z2, ro, II I 15; H II 8, 38 a.0.0. S erten/ertep Sce érte. S ortun See ortu:. ?S erdeş N. of Assn., ?fr. 2 €r (yé:r), pec. to KB and used only in conjunction with other similar words; in 1697 glossed yerdeş in the Fergana MS.; since Kaş. describes ye:rdeş as Ofuz and mentions Z2 €:r as a Sec. f. of yér in Xak. this is possibly correct, since *fellow countryman' is a likely meaning in the context and the meaning of a N. of Assn. fr. 1 er is not obvious. Xak. xı KB 1697, 2276 (adas). D irteş N.Ac. fr. irte:-; etymologically “search” or the like. Pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı irteş al-tafahhus wa'l-mutálaba yaqa" bayna'l-qawm fi şay” "a close scrutiny and calling to account which takes place in a tribe about something”, hence pne says irteş kopdt: háca'lbaht soa”l-tafahhuş "an investigation and close scrutiny was started” Kaş. 1 97; o.o. I 402, zo, II 214, 5; III 416, 23 (the same prov., see órtgü:n; translated al-mugácara 'quarrel, dispute' in 7 and al-muxágama 'mutual enmity” in II and 1I). PU?F artiz (or artis?) Hap. leg.; unidentified, prob. foreign. Uyğ. vin ff. Civ. artiz in. a list-of drugs /7 1I 20, 79.   207 Dis. V. ARDD arıt- Caus. f. of art:-; "to clean, or purify (something cc); to cleanse (something Acc., of dirt, etc. 451); “to clean (dirt, etc. Acc.) off (something 451.) S.ia.m.lg. w. minor phonetic changes like art- in some NE and NC languages. Üyğ. viii ff. Man. (like a man who sweeps) aritir 'cleans' (and sets in order a house) Wind. 35: Bud. Sanskrit nirdhüntamala 'whose impurities, have been wiped away' a:ritmis kirligler TT VIII E.48; arığsızların arıtıp “viping away his dirt” (on the body of the sick monk) U 117 38, 20-1; kópülüg süzer arıtur üçün "because it purifies (Hend.) the mind” TT V 26, 98; kentü özümüz arıp adınağuğ yeme arıtıp “being ourselves pure and purifying others” USp. 101, 13-14; 0.0. Suv. 139, 11-12; 140, 2-3 (alkındur-): Xak. xı ol tarığ arıttı: naqqö”l-hinla “he clcansed the grain' (etc.); and one says ol ku:zr: artttr naza"a xuşyata”lbaraq “hc castrated the lamb” (etc.); also used when one circumcizes (xattana) a boy Kaş. I 208 (aritur, aritma:k); o.o. I 154, 23 and several in 77 319-22: KB özündin arıtğıl yazukup münür 'cleanse yourself of your sins and faults” 1440; 0.0. 4407, 4997, 5505: xıı(?) Tef. arit- "to cleanse! 58: xiv Mu. athara "to cleanse' arıt- Mel. 28, ır, Rif. 103; tahhara ditto 4o, 15; 112: Çağ. xv ff. aritpák hardan ditto San. 34r. 15 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv arit- 'to cleanse, purify' Qutb 12: Kom. XIV “to wipe (something cc.) off (something Abl.) arit- CCG; “cleansing” artimak (sic?) CCI; Gr. 42 (quotn.): Kip. xiv arit- nazzafa “to cleanse! 1d. ro, Bul, 87r.: xv qaşara (to peel') wa naşşafa arıt- Tuh. 30a. 7: Osm. xiv ff. arit- usually “to wipe (something cc.) off (something AÖİ.), c.i.a.p. TT.S I1 39; 11 53; II 36; IV 38. D ered- Intrans. Den. V. fr. 1 er; pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı ofla:n eretti: 'udda'l-gabi müna"l-ricdl "the boy was reckoned to be a man”) originally eredti: but assimilated, just as one says aí-muddakir (i.e. for mudtakir) from al-dihr Kaş. I 208 (eredü:r, eredme:k); a.o. I 206 (atat-). D erüt- Caus. f. of erü-; 'to melt, liquefy (something cc). S.ia.m.Lg. usually as erit-. Xak. xr ol ya:ğ erütti: "he melted (adába) the fat” (etc.) Kaş. I 208 (erütür, erütme:k): xmi(?) Tef. 81 (dubious; Bor. enters the same quotn. under arit- and erit-, as the Object of the verb is altun kümis kanlarını “gold and silver mines' the first is the likelier): xiv Muh. adaba eri:t- Mel. 22, s, Rif. 102: Çağ. xv ff. érit- Caus. f., gudazdnidan "to melt', in Ar. adàába San. 97v. 24 (quotn.): Kip. xiv (sızdır- adába) this in the Kitab Beylik, but our master Faxru'l-din said "this is wrong, adába is erit- because döba is eri-, while sız- means radica fi nafsihi “to be fully ripe" or the like” İd. 57. D 1rat- Caus. f. of 1ra:-; “to send (someone Acc.) away, or far away'. For the phonetics see  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 252 
     
   
   
     208 1r2:- ; survives in the same languages as 1ra:(not NW Kaz., where 1rit-. R 1368 is a Sec. f. of irğat-). Xak. xr ol anı: yırattı: ab'adahu "he sent him far away' Kaş. I] 315(y1ratur, yıratma:k), KB óvke: özdin yirat 'drive anger away from yourself” 322; a.o. 381. S üret- See üdret-. D órit- Caus. f. of 1 ö:r-. N.o.a.b.; nearly always used in a metaph. sense 'to arouse' (thoughts, emotions, etc.). Uyğ. vir ff. Man. TT IX 41 (bedüttür-): Bud. yég sa:kinc üritür “it arouses excellent thoughts! TT VIII H.3; bhawügraka tegi yeme: öritip 'raising them also to bhavágra (the highest form of existence)! do. N.13; ters kórüm öritdim erser 'if I have caused erroneous views to arise' U II 76, 8-9; 85, 26; similar phr. TT JV 8, 74; Suv. 220, 6; olo, U III 42, 12 (Öpke:), TT V 22, 11-12; VII 40, 138; Hiüen-ts. 147; Sut. 10, 12, etc. arta:- “to putrefy, ferment, go bad”, normally of foodstuffs, but occasionally in a more general metaph. sense. Survives only(?) in NE Kaç,, Koib., Sag. and Tel, R I 309, 319, and Khak. and in SW xx Anat. arda-/ardıSDD in. Cf iri-/irü:-. Uyf. vin ff. Man.-A ólmek artamak 'death and decay' M İİİ i, 13 (ii): Man. (when the wicked, poisoned by the passion of lust) artayu yokadtururda 'become corrupt and allow themselves to perish” TT III 28: Bud. yémisipiz artamağay “your fruit will not be spoilt” (by the birds) PP 8o, 6-7, tegsilmedin artamadın “vithout being changed or deteriorating' U 7I 23, 3 (iii); a.o. Su, «30, 3 (iri:-): Xak. xı arta:di: ne:p “the thing went bad'(fasada) Kaş. 1 272 (arta:r, arta:ma:k), kepe:slig biliğ arta:ma:s translated “the intellect, when fertilized by advice does not deteriorate” (/à yafsud) III 358, 16; o.0. II 17, 16 (ud-); 7 272, 15: KB igi barça étlür törü artamaz “his atfairs are all well arranged; the customary law does not deteriorate 429”, evi tepremezi üçün artamaz *because its (celestial) mansion does not move, it does not deteriorate” 834; tadu artadı “his physical state deteriorated" 1055; o.o. 2108 (of drinking water), 2284 (of an army), 2502, 4384, 4463 (ay1pla:-), 5203 (of the people in general), ş86z (yıdı:-): xm(?) At. ajun artadi “the world has become corrupt' 395: (Çağ. xv ff. arta- in Vel. 16 is an error for artil- (not an old word) San. 35v. 6). irte:- described by Kaş. as svn. vv. iste:-, *to seek, pursue (something Acc.)”. Survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. irde- SDD 794. Xak. xı er rgi irte:di: a/-racıl talaba”l-amr tea iabi"ahu "the man sought and pursued the afTair”, (irte:r, irte:me:k) and iste:di: is like (mitl) irte:di: (iste:r, iste:me:k) Kaş. 7 272 (verse)? o.o.7 245, 14; III 356, 2; biligni: irdedim (sic) 'I sought (falabtu) wisdom and knowledge! I1I 228, 12: xir ff. 4t. (all men are brothers) tafáwutlari yok óte irtese *there is no difference between them, if you DIS. V. ARDinvestigate the matter closely! 292; similar phr. 321; Osm. xiv to xvi irde- (sic) 'to seek, inquire for” occurs in several texts, sometimes in Hend. with sor- and iste-, but one xvi dict. translates Pe. cüstan 'to seek! by isteand irde- as if they had slightly different meanings T T.S I 387; 11 544; 111 380; IV 434. D órte:- Den. V. fr. órt 'to light, or burn (something cc.) S.La.m.l.g. (in SW only "Vkm.) vv. some phonetic changes; some NE and NC forms contain double -tt- which suggests that these go back not to this V. but to örtle- which survives in SW xx Anat. SDD 1116... Uy£. vir ff... Man.-A otugug [gap] küyürür örteyür 'burns (llend.) the firewood' M 1 18, 1-2; a.o. M I 5, 3 (aac): Bud. kentü özümin örtep küyürüp (metaphorically) 'burning (Hend.) myself' U 777 37, 4-5: Xak. xı ol otun órte:di: “he burnt (ahraqa) the. firevvood” Kaş. İ 272 (órte:r, örte:me:k), örter kül-e 'burning cinders” 7 129, 4; IJ 26, 12; o.o. I 245, 12; İİİ 356, 3: xm(?) At. yemişsiz yığaçnı kesip örtegil 'cut down and burn the tree that bears no fruit 324; Tef. örte- "to burn' 249: Çağ. xv ff. örte- (-ğen, ctc.) yak- “to burn' Vel. 101 (quotn.); örte- sözündan "to burn' San. 68r. 28 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 119: Kip. xı ahraga (küyündür- and) ó:rte:- Hou. 35, 4: Osm. xiv órte- “to burn” (metaph.) in one text T'TS ] 550. D artat- Caus. f. of arta-; 'to damage, or spoil (something Ace.) lit, or metaph. Survives only in the same NE languages as arta:-. "Türkü vii (oh "Türkü people, if heaven had not been hostile) élipin tóró:pin kim artat(t)ı: *who would have disrupted your realm and customary law?' 7 E 32, 11 E 19: virt fF. 27k B 59 (y1dit-); Man. kópülin blligin artatdımız erser “if we have corrupted their minds” Chuas. 107-8: Bud, kuslar artatir üçün “because the birds spoil” (the fruit) PP 72, 7-8; similar phr. do. 75, 4; arığ şımnançlarığ artatdımız erser “if we have corrupted pure nuns” TT IV 6, 49; o.o. TT V 14, note À.23, ır, Sus. 134, zo: Civ. işinin küçünin artatur 'it brings your efforts (Hend.) to nought TT 7 64-5; and sce buz-: Xak. xı ol ne:pni: artattı: “he spoilt (afsada) the thing” Kaş. I 260 (artatur, artatma:k); öğünğü:çi: üminde: (sic, ?error for ümini:) arta:tur (sic) mádihw'l-nafs. yufsidu”l-sardmilahu “the self-praiser spoils his drawers' 7 203, 14; a.o, II 360, tr, in İT 335, 6 artalu:r translated yufeo? “it destroys him” is an error for artatu:r: KB yüreksiz kişiler çeriğ artatur 'cowards spoil an army” 2284; a.o. 4076: Kip. xv(?) afsada (azdir- ; in the margin in a later hand) ardat- Tuh. 6a.r. D irtet- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of irte:-. Xak. xt ol anı: irtetti: falıhaşa "anhu sa atlabahu "he had inquiries and a search made for him” Kaş. I 260 (irtetür, irtetme:k). D örtet- Caus. f. of örte:- “to have (something cc.) set on fire, or. burnt, Survives 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 253 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. only(?) in NE Khak., Tuv., and NC Kzx. Xak. xı ol bük órtetti: amara bi-tahriqi'l-acama 'he gave orders that the thicket should be burnt' Kaş. I 260 (örtetür, órtetme:k). See artat- Xak. D artil- (ardil-) Pass. f. of 1 art-(ard-); 'to be loaded (on to something) and the like. Survives as artil- in NE Khak.; SE Türki, NC Kir. and as ardil- in SW xx Anat. SDD 111, Xak. xı er at ü:ze: artildi: alga l-racul nafsahu 'alà'l-faras "the man threw himself across the horse” in such a way that half his body was onc side of it and the other half the other side; and one says tağa:r eşye:k ü:ze: artıldı: "the sack was loaded (/turiilat) on to the donkey' Kaş. I 244 (artılu:r, artilma:k): Çağ. xv ff. artil- ("to increase' fr 2. art-', and) takápü hardan tea qatra zadan “to bustle about, make haste! Sam 35r. 24 İT, this is a curious mistake, the translation having apparently been falsely deduced from two quotns.; one is tépiz eyleben qat" u tağ artılıp “crossing the ocean and throwing himself over the mountains” (mistranslated *hurriedly crossing the ocean and mountains"); it is said in 35v. 5 that Vel. read artayip or artanip and invented a verb arta-/artanmeaning 'to cross'; in fact, although the reading is faulty, the translation is about right; the other is bu kórür her kirpikimke artilip bir qatra yaş (not translated) which clearly means 'this man sees a drop of moisture loaded on each of my eyelashes”: Osm. xvi Ar. al-muflaq translated “an animal which is let loose after its halter has been put round its neck! (yuları boynuna ardilmis) TTS /T 47. E artalD irtel- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of irte:-. Xak. xi irteldi: ne:r) fuhliisa 'ani'l-gay' wa tuliba "the thing was inquired for and sought” Kaş. 7 245 (irtelü:r, irtelme:k). D örtel- Pass. f. of örte:-, "to be set on fire, burnt', Survives only(?) in NE Khak., NC Kir, Kzx. Xak. xı bük örteldi: u/riqatr'iğaytala "the thick tangled trees were burnt Kaş. I 245 (örtelü:r, órtelme:k). D örtül- Pass. f. of ört-, “to be covered, concealed', also in the early period 'to be put over (üze: something) as a covering'. Survives in the same languages as ört-. Uyğ. vı ff. Bud. Sanskrit nivrtánám "of those who are covered' ürtülmişle:rke: (sic) TT VIII A.15; biliğsizlik karapğu üze köpülüm örtülüp “my mind being covered with the darkness of ignorance" Suv. ror, 16-17; similar phr., but mis-spelt örlütüp do. 136, 17: Xak. xı rs er üze: örtüldi: ublima'l-amr “alö”l-racul “the thing was put over the man as a covering'; and one says kó:k órtüldi: “the sky was overcast” (tagayyamat); soa aşluhu hull şay” sutira tahta”l-şay” "basically (it is used of) anything that is concealed under something else” Kaş. 7 244 (örtülü:r, örtülme:k), second phr. repeated 7 r3g, 18; ı:ş örtüldi: “the thing was obscure, ambiguous' (f/tabasa) II 237, 13: ARD- 20g Osm. xvi örtül- (of a port) “to be stormbound” 773S II 568. D artla:- (ardla:-) Den. V. fr. art (ard). Survives in NE Tuv. artta- 'to step over (the back of something)', SW xx Anat. ardla- 'to follow up (something)! SDD 111. Xak. xr ol anı: artla:dı: şafa"ahu "he slapped him on the back of the neck' Kaş. III 443 (artla:r, artla:ma:k). D artin- (ardin-) Refl. f. of 1 art- (ard-); 'to load (something cc.) for, or on to, oneself", Survives as artın- in NE Alt., Tel., Khak., 'Tuv.; SE Türki and NC Kir., Kzx., and as ardin- in SW xx Anat. SDD rır. Xak. xrer arçısın artındı: "the man loaded (ğamala) his saddle-bag on the pack animal", also used of other things Kaş. 1 zşo (artınur, artı:nma:k). , D örten- Refl. f. of örte:-, “to blaze, burn (Intrans.); to be burnt'. Survives in much the same languages as órte:-, Türkü vri ff. uluğ ev örtenmi:ş “a big house was burnt down' IrkB 9: Man. M İİİ 7, 11-12 (ii) (sağurul-), küyürgey órtengeysen “you will be burnt (Hend.) do. 23, 4 (ii): Uyğ. vtit ff. Bud. tört yipak örtendi “the four quarters of the world burst into flames' U IV 40, 164; o.o. U II 8, 27 (édiz); III s, 1-2 (ört), TT IV 4, 1: Civ. karnı etözi órtenür “his stomach and whole body feel as if they wer burning” H İT 22, 30: Xak. xı örtendi: ne: the thing was burnt (4htaraqa), and one says bulit örtendi: “the cloud was red (a/rmmarrat) after the sunset'; the Turks take omens by this Kaş. I 251 (örtenür, órtenme:k; prov); a.o. // 133, 16: Çağ. xv ff. örten-(-ür) yan- “to be burnt', of something which is burnt so completely that no trace of it is left Vel. 100 (quotn.); órtenRefl. f.; s&amp;xta şudan “to be burnt" San. 68v. 22 (quotns.). D órtün- Reft. f. of ört- , “to cover oneself, be covered'; survives only in SW, Uyğ. vut ff. Civ. örtünmiş bés grahlar “the five hidden planets (Sanskrit 1.-vv.)” TT VII r, s and 75: xiv. Chin.-Uyg. Dict. fou t'en (Giles 3,723 11,208) “a cloudy sky” tepri örtünmiş Ligeti 190; R I 1239: Xak. xi ura:ğut yü:zin örtündi: safarati'|-mar'a wachahá wa kadàlika idà satarat; obviously corrupt, safara means "to unveil', ?read safarati and add ğayrahu at the end; “the woman hid her face”, also used when she hides anything else Kaş. 7 25o (örtünür, örtünme:k): xın(?) Tef. órtün“to cover oneself” 250: X war. xiv ditto Nahc. 31, 7: Kip. xiu istatara "to hide oneself örtün- Hou. 36, ız: xv tafatià ditto. (yapinand) órtün- Tuh. ga. 5. D artur-, etc. Preliminary note. 7t is morphologically almost impossible to distinguish betsveen the Caus. f.s of a:r- and art-. Only those of 2 a:r- and 2 art- occur in the early period. Ardur- Caus. f. of 1 a:r- "to tire (someone) out” is first noted in XIV Muh. Mel. 41, 12; 42, 2, Rif. 132 and survives in NW Kaz. Arttir-[ arttur- the Caus. f. of 1 art-(ard-) exists in 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 254 
     
   
   
       210 several NE, SE, and NC languages, but is not noted before XIX. D 1 artur- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of 2 a:r-; cf. the quotns. under that word, and artiz-. "Türkü vii süçiğ savı:na: yımşak ağı:sı:pa: artu:rup ükü:ş türkü bodun öltiğ 'letting yourselves be tricked by their honeyed words and luxurious treasures many of you "Fürkü people died” / S 6; I7 N s. D 2 artur- Caus. f. of 2 art-; 'to cause (something) to increase, grow bigger', with various extended meanings, esp. in SW. S.i.a.m.l.g., usually as arttir-/arttur- Xak. xı o:1 yarma:k üze: bir arturdi: zàáda teühid "ala “aşara daráhim “he added one more on top of the ten silver coins'; and one says er arturdt: 'adá'l-racul fawrahu “the man gave himself airs'; (verse) keldi: berü: arturu: be:rdi: €:lin (VU) ertürü: “he came towards us with an enormous army, boasting and giving himself airs (yaslaf tva ya'dü ftatwrahu); then he surrendered his realm to us' (the third and sixth words are vocalized the same, but must have different meanings; the first is obviously arturu: 'boasting'; the second is not specifically translated, but the likeliest explanation is that it is the Ger. of 2 ertür- 'lctting it pass to us”) Kaş. I 219 (arturu:r, arturma:k): KB (he went every day) tapuğ arturu 'giving more and more service” 610; şukur kilsa ni'mat bayat arturur 'if (a man) gives thanks, God increases His favours to him' 756: xi(?) At. akilik şaraf cüh camal arturur “generosity increases a man”s honour, dignity, and grace” 258, Tef. artur- “to make greater” 6o: Çağ. xv ff. artur- zzyad hardan “to increase (Trans.)” San. 35r. 24: Xvvar. xiv ditto Qutb 11: Kom. xiv “to surpass” artir- CCG; Gr. 2.: Kip. xii záda artur- İon. 40, 14: XIV (the Perf. of art- is arttı:, this is Intrans. (al-lázim)) but in the "Trans. (al-muta'addi) you say arturdi: İd. ro, (after art-) sada fi L-5ay “to increase the quantity in something” artur- Bul. 45r.: xv záda artır- Tuh. 18b. 4: Osm. xiv to xvil artur- occurs in a few texts TTS I 45; II 58; III 41. D ertür-, etc. Preliminary note. As in fhe case of artur-, verbs of this form may be Caus. f.s of I er-, 2 ér- or 1 or 2 ert-, but all early forms seem to be explicable as Caus. f.s of 2 ér-, tehich fs rare, or 1 ert- rohich is not much commoner. D 1 értür- Caus. f. of 2 ér- ; to cause to arrive, bring to a successful conclusion' and the like. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. erdir-. Türkü viii tokuz:ng ay yéti: otuzka: yof ertü:rtimiz “ve brought the funeral ceremonies to a conclusion on the 27th of the gth month” 7 NE; similar phr. J1,S 10; a.o. 7 E qo (ükün:-). D 2 ertür- Caus. f. of 1 ert-; 'to cause to pass, pass by', etc. with various extended meanings. Survives as erttir-/érttir- in most NE languages R I 793, Khak., Tuv., and perhaps NC Kzx. (R / 793, not MM). Uy£. vini ff. Bud, [gap] ertürür erdimiz “ve have  DIS. V..ARDpassed (our lives?)' U 7/7 16, 2; üç yavlak yoldin ertürgeli umaknin (a cause) "of being able to pass by (i.e. avoid) the three evil roads! TT V 22, 32; ertürmezün “let (Silabhadra) not allow (Hücn-tsang) to pass (us) by” Hien-ts. 309: Civ. ertürmiş ke:re:k “one must pass (the time) TT VIII IL18: Xak. xı anın ya:zukin ertürdl: "he pardoned (safaha 'an) his sins”, and one says anın ı:şın ertürdi: "he authorized (acáza) his affair, that is he agrced to it (qağılahu) ; also used of anyone who overlooks something (cáteaza şay” “an matedi') Kaş. I 220 (ertürür, ertürme:k); a.o.(?) 7 219 (artur-). D urtur- Caus. f. of ur-; with a corresponding range of meanings. Survives as urdur- in NE Khak.; NC Kir. ; SC Uzb. (urdir-), some NW languages and SW 'T'km. and vurdur- in SW Az., Osm. Türkü vir içi:n taşı:n adınçığ bediz urtu:rtim '| have various decorations placed inside and outside' (Kül 'Tégin's tomb) / S ız: Uyf. vin tf. Bud. bedük kanlılarda . . . urturup “having them placed on large vvaggons” U III 4o, 28-9: (Xak.) xıı(?) Tef. urdir-furdur- “to order to put (something Zcc., into something Dat.)' 331: xiv Rbğ. urdur- “to let oneself be beaten' (with something birle) R I 1672 (quotn.): Çağ. xv ff. urdur- ("vvith u-") mağrub süxtan "to cause to be beaten” San. 67v. zz: X war. xiv urdur“to order to put (something Acc., on something üze)” Qutb 199: Osm. xv urdur- "to order that (a country Acc.) should be attacked" in one text TT'S 171 710. D örtür- Hap. leg.(?); Caus. f. of 1 ö:r- , "to grow (a plant, etc. Acc.). Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A M I 14, 10-11 (1). D artaş- Co-op. f. of arta:-. Survives only (3) in NE Sag., “Tel. ardag-/artas- “to fall out with one another” R 7 309, 322. Xak. xt yalnuk için artaşdı: fasada'l-nàs ba'duhum bi-ru”ya ba"d “some of the people became corrupt in the view of the others( 7)”, also used of a number of things (kull şay” katir) when some of them become corrupt among the rest Kaş. I 230 (artaşu:r, artagma:k); işı: anim) artaşıp fasada amruhu “his affairs. deteriorated' /1 219, 4. D artış- (ardis-) Co-op. f. of 1 art- (ard-); *to help (somcone Dat.) to load (something Acc.) , and the like. S.i.s.m.l. Xağ. xrol maya: arçı: artışdı: “he helped me to load (a'ánani "ala ilgà' . . . sea hamlihi) the saddle-bag on the baggage animal'; also used for 'to compete' Kaş. İ 231 (artisur, artışma:k). D ertiş- Recip., etc. f. of 1 ert-. Survives only(? in NE Khak. Bas. 63. Xak. xi ol menin birle: arsla:ndan ertişdi: “he competed with me in getting past ( fi'i-mucátwaza) the lion', or anything else that is feared Kaş. 7 231 (ertişü:r, ertişme:k): in the para. on the river Ertiş, 7 97, it is said that the name is taken from the word ertig meaning börm? frl-inu"dbara 'compete with me in crossing”, no doubt a false etymology.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 255 
     
   
   
       TRIS. D irteş- Co-op. f. of İrte:- , n.o.a.b.; SW xx Anat. İrteş- “to quarrel, push “one another about” is a Sec. f. of örteş-. Xak. xı ola:r bu: sözüğ irteştl:le:r tafakhaşü hàáda'l-halüm "they scrutinized this statement', or affair, or something else Kaş. 7 230 (irteşü:r, irtesme:k); a.o. 7 230, 4 (1 ö:ç). D örteş- Recip., etc. f. of órte:- ; lit. "to burn one another, to burn (something) together', and the like. Survives in NE Khak.; NC Kir.; NW Kaz. (ürtes-), usually for “to be angry with one anothcr' or the like (and see SW irteg-). Xak. xı bo:dun bi:r ikindi:nin evle:rin órtesdi: 'the peopK burnt (ahraga) one another's houses'; also used for 'to compete' and “to help” Kaş. I 231 (Ortegü:r, örteşme:k), Oğrak bile: örteşip 'competing with the Oğrak in burning (each other's property) /T 219, 5 (the translation in Kaş. is obviously wrong). D örtüş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of ört-. Xak. xı ola:r bu: r:şığ örtüşdi: “they mutually agreed to conceal (fazedfa”ü “ald satr) this affair'; also used for 'to help someone to hide or conceal (tağfiya .... £a satr) something! Kaş. I 230 (örtüşu:r, örtüşme:k). D artız- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of 2 a:r-. Cf. 1 artur-, Türkü viri ff. Man. tertrü yana igldeyü tepriçimen nomçımen tégmeke artizip 'letting (myself) be deceived by one who says falsely and uptruthfully "I am a man of God and a preacher" ”, Chuas. 135-6. Tris. ARD D arit: perhaps Ger. in -1: fr. arit-, cf. ula:tı:, etymologically it should mean 'cleanly', but normally means 'completely' ; usually, but not, as implied in e. G. A TG, paras. 214, 354, invariably, used with a Neg. Verb. Türkü vii ff. Man. bir aykı çaxşapatığ edğüti: tüketi arit1 tutu umadimiz erser “if we “have been unable to keep one month”s commandments vvell, perfectly and completely" Chuas. 282-4: Uyğ. viti ff. Bud. amranmak nızvanı olarda arıtı bultukmaz “the passion of (sensual) love is completely lacking in them” TT V. 16, note A.39, 4; 0.0. U III 37, 33: 55, 3: U İV 22, 273 (A a:r-), etc. ; in TT V 26, 109 the word erti (quite clear in the facsimile) is prob. a scriptio defectiva for arıtı, (if one has to get on without an army or food it is alright but) kirtğüncüğ erti (?arıtı) titser 1dalasar bolmaz “if one completely (?) renounces and abandons confidence, it is not": Civ, arit! yup “vvashing it clean” H 77 20, 6 S orutğa See oğurğa:, PU'!C ordu:ta:l a/-nüra, presumably “depilatory paste', the normal meaning. Pec. to Kag. and entered twice, once, with a damma on the alif, among dissyllables between ordu: and egdü, which would imply that it was a compound word, and once, with a fatha . on the a/if and -d- for -d-, among the triARD 211 syllables after arkacak; possibly a l.-w. Xak. xı ordu:ta:l a/-nüra in one of the two languages (Freğatayn, ?"l'urkish' and Oğuz)/Kıp.) Kaş. 1 124: ardu:ta:l al-nüra I 145. D artukluk A.N. fr. artuk; 'abundance, excess', and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE(?). Xak. xr yarağ bulup yağuşdı: artuklukin söküşdl: Kaş. says that this describes a man's partner who hid something from him after they had made a joint profit, and gives a translation which is not wholly intelligible, the words must mean “he found an opportunity and approached me, he stripped off the surplus (i.e. profit Kaş. TT go, 9-10; n.m.e.: xır(?) Tef. artukluk (1) “an additional amount'; (2) 'outrage, excess' 60: Osm. xiv to xvii artukluk excellence, surplus, superiority (over someone, üzere)” TTS I 45; II 58; IH 41. D ortukluğ (ortokluğ) P.N./A. fr. ortuk, Survives in NE Alt, Tel, ortoktu: R 7 1071 and NW Kaz. urtaklik both meaning 'jointly owned' and the like. Cf. ortuluf. Uyğ. viii ff. Man.-A men ol edgü mepike ortukluğu bolayan “may I become his fellow participant in that good joy' M I 12, 10-11: ((Xak.) xim(?) Tef. artaklık “incitement” 238). D artğaru See art. D artukrak Comparative f. of artuk, mainly used as an Adv. meaning “extremely, excessively. S.i.s.m.l. Türkü vri ff. Man. (gap) artukrak dıntarlar (gap) meaning uncertain TT II 8, 71: Uyğ. vt ff. Bud. (the pleasant flavours in my mouth have disappeared and) artukrak açığ bolup “become excessively bitter” U /// 37, 31-2; artukrak basutçı 'extremely helpful TT V az, zo, artukrak korksar belipleser "f he fears (Hend.) excessively! Suv. 141, 7; o.o. Suv. 70, zo and zr, 74, 23; 148, 15; USp. 60 İla. 4 etc.: Civ. ay tenri artukrak yaltrıdı “the moon shone particularly brightly TT VII 30, 5-6: Xwar. xr(?) (the child drank the first milk from his mother's breast but) mundın artukrak içmedi “did not drink more than this” Og. g-ro: Kip. xv ep artikrak là azyad minhu “more than anything else” Tuh. ssb. 11: Osm. xiv, xv artuğrak “more abundant' and the like in several texts 77: 1 43; Hl 56; III 39. D órtüglüg P.N./A. fr. órtüg; 'concealed, covered'. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. órtülü. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. órtüglüg kizleglig ağır ayığ kilmçimiz “our hidden (Hend.) grievous misdeeds” Up. ror, 20-1; kop törlüğ tsuyda irinçüde órtüglüg yazukluğ bolmalım “may we not become covered by and guilty of all sorts of sins (Hend.)” 7T IV 14, 64-5; a.o. Suv. 37, 18: (Xak.) xırı(?) Tef. órtüglüg/órtülüg 'hidden, secret" 249, 250: Çağ. xv ff. örtüklük (vvith -k-, -k”) örtülmiş Vel. ror: Xwar. xiv órtüglüg sözüm “my secrct words! Nahc. 421, 7; a.o.   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 256 
     
   
   
       212 TRIS. do. 57, s (ak-): Osm. xv, xvı örtülü 'hidden, secret” in several texts T'T'S 7/7 566; IV 629. D órtgüsüz Hap. leg.?; Priv. N/A. fr. *órtgü, prob. a metathesis, metri gratia, of örtüğ, but a possible Dev. N. fr. órt-. Xak. xı KB eşitti tüzü xalq anı órtgüsüz “all the people listened to him without. concealment” 2685. D orduluğ P.N./A. fr. ordu: ; noted only in Uyğ. viri ff. Civ. in two astrological texts TT VII 13 and 18 where it means “having, or belonging to (such and such) a heavenly mansion'. D ortulug Hap. leg.; syn. with, and prob. a misreading or mis-spelling of, ortuklug; if not, P.N./A. fr. ortu:. Uyf. vii ff. Civ. Sati Yaraknip ortuluğ mal 'goods jointly owned by Satı and Yarak' USp. 62, 2. D erdemlig P.N./A. fr. erdem ; 'possessing manly qualities, brave, virtuous', etc. Survives only(?) in NE Tuv. ertemniğ “learned, educated', and SW xx Anat. erdemli “capable, dextrous'.. SDD 542. Türkü vrit ff. 7rkB 10 (alp): Yen. (I could not remain with) erdemligime “my brave (followers) Mal. 28, 1; a.o. do. 48, 8: Uy B. vur ff. Man.-A tükel erdemlig 'perfectly virtuous” (one of the epithets of a high Manichaean dignitary) M / 12, 18: Bud. edgülüg edre:mligle:r (stc) "good and virtuous men” TT VIII H.10: Civ. erdemlig kişi "a virtuous, or worthy, man” TT VII 42, 1: (Xak,) xiv Muh.. al-musta'idd. bi'l-a'màál (Rif, lül-şay)) “a capable man of affairs' é;rde:mli$ Mel. 56, r, Rif. 153: Kip. xii al-'álim dü”l-fadila *virtuous and wise' érdem1ü: Hou. 26, r: Osm. xiv erdemlü *brave' in one text TT.S I 271. D ertimlig P.N./A. fr. *ertim; 'transitory, fleeting'. N.o.a.b. Uy£. virr ff. Man. TT III şo (ilin-); do. 137 (etöz in this case A.N. in Hk). D erdemsiz Priv. N./A. fr. erdem; "lacking in manly qualities, bravery or virtue'. N.o.a.b. Uy£. viu ff. Civ. TT VII 42, 1 (uldan): Xak. xı erdemsizden kut certilü:r “good fortune is withheld from the man without merits or refined manners” (alladi là manqaba tea là adab ma"ahu) HH 229, 22; 0.0. İİİ 211, 3 (şa:), 7 252, 19; n.m.e.: xiv Mwh. al-daxil fil-a'mál (Rif; al-xihe mina'l-jay) “inexperienced in affairs! €:rde:msiz Mal. 56, 3: Rif. 153. aru:du:n See arumdu:n. F ertini, etc. “evvel”, more vaguely 'precious (obiect)'; fr. Sanskrit rara through some intermediate language, prob. Sogdian r£my, with prosthetic e-; the phonetic evolution fr. -rt-rd- is obscure, owing to the ambiguity of the Uyğ. alphabet, but the word became a l.-w. in Mong. as erdeni (Kore. 259, Haltod 60); the only modern form NE Tel, erdine R I 795 is prob. a reborrowing fr. Mong. Uyğ. vir ff.   ARD Man. rdnide (? sic) yég "better than a jewel' M 11 5,6-7; a.o. TT 111 62-3 (ofat-): Chr. erdini bérüp ermiş "he gave us a precious thing” U 7 8, 18: Bud. çintamani erdini bulsar “if he finds the cintámam jewel' PP 14, 7-8; etózlüg ağılıkıpızlardakı jsig özlüğ erdininizlerni (he will steal and carry away) 'your precious souls, which are in the treasury of your body” U //T 14, 10-12; and many 0.o., esp. in such phr. as nom ertini used instead of norn bitigi for Sanskrit stra: Xak. xı erdini: al-durru'l-yatim "a matchless pearl'; hence one calls a woman ertini: ózük meaning “having a body like a matchless pearl, the -d- being contracted into (udgimat fi) -t-, as one says müddakir for mudtahir Kaş. I 141 (clearly both forms with -t- and -d- were current, but the 'explanation' is absurd); a.o. 7 71 (özük): KB ajun menzi boldi ürün erdini *the complexion of the world became (like) a white pearl' 3840: xiv. Mul. al-durr. erden Mel. 77, 8; erdün Rif. 180: Xwar. xiu(?) (gold, silver, many rubies) kop telim erdiniler "very many jewcls' Og. 120; a.0.0. D ertipü: Dev. Adj./Adv fr. *ertin- Ref. f. of ert-; but used only as an Adv. qualifying Adjs. and V.s and meaning 'extremely, very much”. Common in Uy£. but not noted later, "Türkü vri ertipü: ulug tórü:n “vith a very great ceremony' JI N o and ro (of a wedding); o.o. I1 S 14 and 15 (meaning obscuro): vit ff. Man. ertipü öğrünçülüğ “very joyfu' TT 77 8, s4: Uyğ. viit ff. Chr. U I 8, 4-5 (ağır): Bud. Sanskrit subaha "very many” ertipü üküş TT VIII D.40; U H 15,6; 16, 15; etripü (sic) a:rığ “very pure” TT VHI G.20; oo. with Adj. PP 3,8; 16,1; 26, 5; 38, 8; TT VII 40, 32; Suv. 530, 7 etc. —ertipü kati$lanip “making great efforts! U III 3s, 29; 0.0. do. 37, 2 (ağrı:-), So. 141, 4-5 (uya:d-). D ortunkr Hap. leg.?; N./A.S. fr. ortun (ortu:); 'situated in the middle, intermediate'. Replaced in the medieval period by ortanca/ ortancı (Çağ., San. 71r. 11; Kip., Tut. 38a. 9; Osm., TS 7 550; 11 736) which still survives in NC Kzx. ortanşı, SW Osm. ortanca, Tkm. ortancı, Uyğ. vir ff, Bud. ilki etözlerde ortunkı kenki etözlerde “in their first bodies (i.e. incarnations) and intermediate and last bodies! Suv. 134, 1-2. DF ertinilig P.N./A. fr. ertini; 'jewelled, full of jewels'. Pec. to Uyğ. Bud. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. erdiniliğ otruğ “the island of jewels' PP 33, 7; TT V 26, gi, and 94; erdinilig orunluk “a jewelled throne' PP 46, 2; a.o.o. Tris. V. ARDD artuçlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. artuç. Xak. xi ta:ğ artuçlandı: "the moöuntain. was covered with junipers' (a/-"ar"ar) Kaş. 1 312 (artuçlanur, artuçlanma:k). D artuklan- Reft. f. of artukla:- (which $.i.s.m.] with a wide range of meanings); “to give oneself airs'. Survives with the same mcaning in NE "Tel. R 7 311 and Khak. artiktan-,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 257 
     
   
   
     DIS. ARĞ Xak. xı er artuklandı: 'adá'l-racul tatwrahu “the man gave himself airs! Kaş. I 313 (artuklanur, artuklanma:k). D érte:le:- Den. V. fr. érte:; originz!ly “to do (something) early', with some extended mcanings later. Survives in NE "uv. Pal. 587; NC Kir. and SW Osm. Xak. xi er i:şka: érte:le:di: bahkara'l-racul [i'l-amr. "the man started early on the affair” Kaş. I 316 (érte:le:r, értele:me:k, corrected from -ma:k): xiu(?) Tef. ertele- same meaning 84: Osm. xiv to xvi ertele- "to get up carly' in a few texts TTS I 274; II 394. D ortu:la:- Den. V. fr. ortu:; S.i.s.m.l. with variations in the middle vowel, usually meaning "to reduce by half, split down the middle”, and the like. Xak. xı er ya:şın ortu:la:dı: tanassafa' l-racul min 'umrihi “the man reached middle age” Kaş. I 316 (ortu:la:r, ortu:la:ma:k). D ordu:lan- Ilap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. 1 ordu:. Xak. xı beg bir yé:rig ordu:landı: “the beg chose (ittaxada) a place for himself as his capital” (qaşağa) Kaş. I 296 (ordu:lanur, ordu:lanma:k); a.o. II 294, 24. D arıtın- Refl. f. of arit-; “to clean oneself". N.o.a.b. Türkü virr ff. Man. yunti arıtıntı "he washed and cleaned himself! M I 7, 21: Uyğ. vui ff. Bud. arığ yunup aritinip U 77 42, 31-2; a.0. Suv. 478, 20. D arıtış- Co-op. f. of arit-; survives only in NE Khak. ardis-. Xak. xı ol mana: tarığ arıtışdı: “he helped me to clean the grain” (fitanqiyati'l-linta) Kaş. II 322, 16 (in a grammatical section); n.m.e. Mon. ARG 1 ark 'excrement', esp. “human excrement'. Survives only(?) in NE Khak. arix. Cf. 1 bo:k. Xak. xı ark a/-"adira “human excrement”, and 'iron slag' (xabatu'l-hadid) is called temür arkı: Kaş. ] 42: xiv Muh.(?) al-gà'it “düng” (bo:k, in margin) ark Rif. 142: Kip. xin a/-"adira (bok, also called) ark (misvocalized ork) wa huma luğa “it is a dialect vvord” Hou. 21, 19: xiv arik (so vocalized) al-xuru' “excrement” İd. 12. S2ark Sec 1 arik., irk originally a Conc. N. 'dice, sticks, etc. used for casting lots, divination, etc.', thence 'a magical figure, hexagram', and the like; thence abstract, "an omen, taking omens, divination, etc.” It is listed in R 7 1370 (quoting Zenker) asa SW Osm. word meaning "luck, fortune! and survives in this meaning in SW xx Anat. irÉfirkfirikfiréin DD 772-4. NC Kir. irk *comfort, a peaceful life” can hardly be the same word. Türkü viti ff. bu 1rk başı:nta: “at the beginning of this omen' rk B 57; bu irk biti:g “this book of omens' do. Postscript. UyÉ. vir ff. Bud. (he asked for a piece of chalk, took it and drew a pattern on the ground) irk sacti irkin. körmişdin ken 'threw the dice (or 213 rods?) and after scrutinizing their omen" (rather than 'the dice'—he said) Hüen-ts. 37: Civ. irk is the technical term for the Chinese hexagrams in TT 7 (14, etc.), and also for the omens stated in short sentences in TT VII 28 (8, etc.): Xak. xı trk a/-Rahana twa'l-fàl sca ixrüácu'l-damir divination, taking omens, and elucidating secrets” Kaş. 7 42. S urk See 1 uruk, Dis. ARĞ D 1 arığ N./A.S. fr. arı:- “clean, pure", lit. and metaph., sometimes also used as an Adv. like arıtı: for “completely, thoroughly”. S.i.a.m.l.g. w. phonetic changes in the second syllable. Türkü vir arı:ğ uvuti: yeğ a proverb quoted to justify a military retreat, perhaps “modesty becomes the pure man” T 37: vii ff. Man. arığ dındarlar “the pure Elect' Chuas. 66-7, arığ baçağ baçap 'keeping a pure fast” do. 247 5 o.o. do. 217, 245, TT 11 6,2: Uy. virt ff. Man. ari yollarda yorip *walking in pure ways' TT III 164-5; a.o.o.: Bud. iki arığ kızlar 'two pure maidens' PP 41, 2; arif by itself and the Hends. arığ süzük (as in TT V 6, 22) and süzük arığ (as in do. 6, 24) “pure” are very common; the spelling in T T VIII is a:rığ, see also 1 turuk: Xak. xı arığ ne:p “anything clean' (zazif) Kaş. I 63; o.o. same translation 7 66, 17; 342, 4; arığ (of “gold”) xöliş “pure” I 376, 25; in six other passages arığ means 'completely, thoroughly”, e.g. alpla:r arığ alkışur “the warriors completely destroy one another” I 237, 23; 0.0. I 103, 2; 230, 3; 241, 23 (İğleş-), Iİ 328, 16; III 41, 18—arrığ ne:y al-say'u'lnazif cidda(m) swa'l-tagdid. l'l-mubálaga "an extremely clean thing', the double -rr- for emphasis 7 143: KB arığ bolsa özi “if his soul is pure” 722; o.o. meaning “pure” 831, 3899; (God created innumerable beings) tili birle tenriğ ógerler arığ “they greatly praise God with their tongues” 1022; bu kün kim okisa ol arığ (so read) bilir *whoever reads today, he knows full well' 259: xi(?) Tef. arığ "pure, clean' 57: xiv Muh. al-táhir "clean, pure” a:rı: Mel. 55, s: arik (with -ğ below the -k) Rif. 152; al-bikr *virgin' (opposite to al- fayyib 'married woman', erikmis) aru: krz Rif. 149; arr ki:z 150 (only); Rbg. ari 'clean' (clothes) R 7 269 (quotn.): Caf. xv ff. arığ/arık ar: tea bák Vel. 12 (quotns.); arı pàk sca musaffà 'clean, pure” San. 37v. 12; arif ditto 15 (quotn.; arik ditto zr: Xwar. xiv arığ 'pure! Qutb rz, MN ro, Nahc. 232, 10; 277, 1: Kom. xiv arı "clean” CCI; “pure, holy' CCG; arov “clean, guiltless” CCG; Gr. 40, 41 (quotns.): Kip. xii al-nazif atu: Hou. 27, 17: xiv arı: al-nazif, arığ mutahhar 'cleansed', and it is equivalent (ráci') to arı: in the sense of al-nazif İd. 10: xv al-nazif (mis-spelt al-nadif) aru: (misvocalized oru:) Kav. 64, 17; fühir aru Tuh. 23b. 7; nazif aru do. 36b. s: Osm. xiv ff. ari, occasionally in xiv aru “clean, pure” lit. and metaph., c.i.a.p. TT.S I 39; II 49; III 33; IV 35. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 258 
     
   
   
      214 2 arığ 'copse, wood, forest, jungle' ; sometimes used in lend. with simek, q.v. Survives only(?) in NE Khak., Tuv. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud, Sanskrit dranya "living in a wood' arığınta:kı TT VII B.8, vanasande “in the forest” aria: do. C.4; arığta: do. G.3; a.o. U İİ 55,2; arığ simek same meaning(?) U III ro, 13714; 58,6; U IV 44, 25; USp. 105, ro, Suv. 529, $ etc. VU 3 arığ Hop. leg.; precedes 1 arığ, and so correctly vocalized but semantically close to 1 uruk. Barsğan xı arığ izáru'l-xibà' "the rope bound round a (felt) tent” Kaş. 7 63. arik “an irrigation canal”, S.i.a.m.l.g.. See Doerfer 11 469. Xak. xı arik al-nahr (here) “irrigation canal” Kaş, 7 65 (prov); 7 3oz (ağızla:-), 7 382 (kazuk), a.o.o.: xnn(?) Tef. arik ditto 58: Çağ. xvff. ariB/arik 'a water course (su yoli) dug to provide a flow of water', for example a mill-race (degirmen arigi) Vel. 13 (quotns.); arığ, nahr San. 37v. 15 (quotn.); atik “the same as arığ” do. 21; arğ/fark abbreviation. of arığ/farıK salır ayr. 20 (quotn.): Kip. xiv ark a/-nalır (and al-nahr (if taken as “river?) is called 1rmak) 7d. rr, al-nahr (inter alia) arğ Bul. 4, 13: xv al-nahr arık (and irak (?error), 1rmak, özen) Twh. 36a. s: Osm. xiv ff. ark (the standard modern form) in one xiv and one xv text, arığ once in xv and arik once in xvI TTS I 39; Il sı, HI 37. D aruk (a:rok) Pass. N./A.S. fr. 1 a:r-; originally 'tired out, exhausted', hence “emaciated, weak for the lack of food”, in the İatter sense normally of animals. S.i.a.m.l.g. usually as arık. Uy£f. viri ff. Bud. yég a:rok “very exhausted' T T VIII N.14; siz aruk siz "you arc tired out” PP 55.4; 0.0. do. 37,1; Ffrien-ts. 1914: Xak. xı aruk er “an exhausted (rii'yi) man” Kaş. 1 66; o.o. same translation 7 259, 8; 298, 10 (ó:glen-); 77 28, 3; azuklug aruk erme:s “a well-fed man does not tire (là ya'yi) on a journey! 7 148, 1: xiv Mut. al-nahif 'emaciated' &amp;:ruk Mel. 48, 12; Rif. 143 (nus-spelt :ru:); al-hazil 'thin, out of condition a:ruğ 6s, 14; aruk 1:6s (also 143, 152); hazila wa nahifa aruk bol- 116 (Mek. aruğla:-): Çağ. xv ff. arığ /ağar 'thin, emaciated' Sam. 37v. 17 (quotn.); arık same as arığ do. zr, Oğuz/Kıp. xi arik al-maliziil “emaciated” Kaş. 1 66: Kom. xiv. 'emaciated' arix CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xın al-hazil (opposite to al-samin semiz) aruk IHou. 27, 18: xiv. al-mahzül aruk İd. iv: xv hazil arık Tul. 37b. 12: Osm. xiv ff. aruk '[ean, emaciated” in some xiv, xv texts, arik fr. xiv onwards T T.S I 36; II şo, III 34; IV 36. D ira:k. N./A.S. fr. 1ra:- ; “distant, far away. S.i.a m T g.; 1rak is the only form in SW, and, with rak, in NE, and occurs in all other language groups; yırak is an alternative form in three of them, cirak only in NW, This proves that the y-, where it exists is secondary and prosthetic. "Türkü viri 1rak bodunuğ ança: yağu:tur ermis 'thus they brought distant people nearer to them” 7 S s, I2 N 4;a.0. 1 8 7, JI N s; turuk bukalı: semiz bukalı:  DIS.  ARG irakta: bölser “if one tries to distinguish between a lean ox and a fat ox from afar off" T $-6; 1rak and yağuk scem to occur in antithesis on a balbal ETY II 164: Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. U 1V 16, 156 (afug); (48, 98); rraktin "from afar off” PP 38, 4; U II zə, 6, U III 58, 8 (1), o.o. USp. 103, 18; TT VII 40, 67: Civ. irak is common in TT VII; yırak (sic?) barmis kisi kelmisi sarp 'it is difficult for a man who has gone far away to come TT I ?R: Xak. xi yıra:k yérr “a distant (ba"id) place”, also used for anything distant from friends (a/-fxzoa), ctc. Kaş. III 28 (verse): III 29, 4 (ufra:$); and two o.o.: KB közümde yırak sen köpülke yakın “you are far from my eyes but near to my thoughts” 11; 0.0. 527, 781, etc.: xii(?) KBVP yirak “afar” 48, 49: xn(?) At. yırak tur “keep awav' (from liars) 153; Tef. irak/yırak “distant, extreme! 129, 158; xiv. Mul. al-ba'id v:ira:k. Mel. 83, 9; Rif. 189; a.o. 26, r4 (at-): Çağ. xvtf. yırak dür "distant": Sai. 349r. 25: Xwar. xiv yirak ditto Qerb 91; 1rak do. 206; yırak MN 100, ctc.; Irak Nac. 115, 14: Kom. xiv “distant” rraklhirax. CCI, CCG; Gr. 274 (quotns.): Kip. xir a/-ba"id (opposite to al-qarib yowuk, yakın) yıra:k //ou. 25, 12: xiv yirak al-ba"id İd. 93; xv ditto Tuh. 8a. 6: Osm. xiv ff, trak (occasionally irağ/ırax down to xv) “distant”, c.i.a.p. TS I 352; II 498; III 342; İV 393. uruğ Preliminary note, 4 a N. Ac. in -É fr. ur- occurs twice in Kag., but otherwise means 'seed, pip! «citi some extended meaniigs. In this sense unlikely to be a Dev. N. fr. ut- even in its ancaning of "to but” and the like. D 1 uruğ N.Ac. in -ğ fr. ur-, “a bcating'. N.o.a.b.; cf. 1 uruğluğ. Xak. xı ol kulin uruğ urdı: daraba 'abdaliu darh mubálag fihi “he gave his slave a sevcre beating! Kaş. 2 27, 4; similar phr. 7 386, 16; both as grammatical examples. 2 uruğ originally a Conc. N. “secd, pip, kernel' but with metaph. extensions likc *progeny, descendants', and even “clan”, i.e. descendauts of a common ancestor. S.i.a.m.].g. in various forms (urug/uruk/uru, etc.). Sce ulus. Sce Doerfer 11 468. Türkü vin ft. Yen. possibly occurs in Mal. 32, 15 (rnang): Uyğ. vur ff. Man.-A M I 17, 14 (evin): Bud. yana burxan kutiga uruğ tarığ kemişmiş bolur 'and will throw seed and grain before the majesty of the Buddha” TT VI 454—oğulı kızı uruğı tarığı bağrı böşüki üküş bolur "his sons and daughters, progeny (Hend.) blood relations aud relations by marriage become numerous! do. 105; o.0. do. 205 (alking); TT VII 40, 127; Civ. kendir urugi “hemp seed” TT VII 14, 49; nara uruf£i *pomegranate pips' H J 3; o.o. do. 22, ror and H II (common); bu yérke nece uruğ batsar İkegü ter üntürüp tarirbiz'whatever quantity of seed is planted in this ground, we will raise and produce twice that amount” USp. 28, 4-6—men Sadanın ağam inim uruğum  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 259 
     
   
   
     DIS. ARG tuğmışım oğulum ózlügüm (?so read) “my, Sada's, elder and younger brothers, progeny (Hend.), sons and blood-relations(?)! U.Sp. 13, 12: XIV. Chin.-Uyg.. Dict. chung. 'sced, progeny' (Giles 2,886) uruğ tuğum t 7 1658; ch'in. ch'i "relations hy marriage! (Giles 2,081 1,018) uruğ tarığ Ligeti, p. 275; Xak. xı urujf /rabb kull şay 'the sceds, pips of anything, and al-badr “cereal sced' is called uruğ , hence one says uruğ ekti: "he sowed secd'; and metaph. a/-aqarib “relatives (by marriage)! are called uruğ tarı6 (1nis-spelt torig) Kaş. 1 63, a.o. 1 449, 14 (zaranza:): KB ay edgü kiling agli edgü uruğ “oh progeny of good conduct and good stock” ro8: karfuğ eğriler isiz urğı bolur “all crooked things have evil progeny' 806; kóki edğu bolsun uruğ ham tarif “let her lineage be good on both sides of the family” 4476; a.o. 1959: xnn(?) "Tef. uruğ 'seed' 331: xiv Muh. al-badr. u:ruğ Mel. 78, 1; Rif. 181: Caf. xv fI. uruk kayas xişim qavım 'relatives, clan'; since these words are not used separately kayas is added in this entry; uruğ/uruk is used for a man's sons, brothers, and close relations, like (Pe.) xror$ and kayas for those who arc the xtwig of xwijàteanda that is the sons and brothers of relatives, like (Pe,) tabàr Vel. 98 (quotns.); uruğ/uruk (1) xwig wa tabür :a mansüban wa muta'alliqán' (quot.) ; (2) badr-i zirá'at (quotn.) San. 71 v. ro, uruk kayas Hend. (az ittibd"at), nasl toa tabör wa xvwigán (quotn.); uruk kayaş are used linked together, kayag is not used in isolation, but uruğ can be do. 14: Xwar. xır(?) biznin uruğubiz senin 1$acupnup uruji bolmiş bolup turur “our progeny are the seed of your trec” Of. 191-3; a.o. do. 327: xiv uruf 'secd, descendants, progeny” Qutb 199; MN 64; Makkada uruğım kadaşım (stc) bar '[ have children and kinsmen in Mecca! Nahc. 48, ış: Kom. xiv. 'progeny' uruğ/uruk 'progeny' CCG; Gr. 266 (quotns.): Kip. xiv(?) uruk “a clan, the descendants, of a single ancestor”, marginal note to ld, İzbudak, £El-idrüák Haşiycsi, p. 49: Osm. XIV to XVI uruğ/uruk 'progeny' in. several texts, “secd” in one TTS I sso (oruk), 725; Il 929. oruk (orok) 'path'. Survives in several INE languages A 7 10so (orak), 1:054 (orok); Khak. orax/orğax, Tuv. oruk. Türkü vii bir at oru:kı: ermiş 'there is (reported to be) a path for one horse (at a time)" T 24: Uy. vrir ff. Man. TT 1HI 46 (1 uc): Bud. (he designed to show erring mortals) kóni yol oruk “the true path' TT 1/7 236; similar phr. Suv. 160, 2: Civ. yol oruk TT 7 21: (Xak.) xiu(?) Tef. oruk 'path' (metaph.) 238. VU?D 1 uruk 'rope'; n.o.a.b.; prob. a Pass. Dev. N. fr. ur- in the sense of something put onto something else; the modern word uruk in several NE languages R 7 1658-9, Khak., 'Tuv. meaning “İasso” and the like seems to be a Sec. f. of ukruk, q.v., rather than a survival of this word. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. (one of the, three, demons) uruk üze boyunimmun badi 215 *bound my neck with a rope' Suv. 7, 19: Xak. xı uruk al-şafan 'rope' Kaş. I 66; six o.o. translated al-habl 'rope, cord': xim(?) Tef. uruk “rope, cord' 6o (?mis-spelt aruk), 331: Oğuz xı urk abbreviation (taxfif) of uruk, like 'unq, "unuq Kaş. 1 42. S 2 uruk See uruğ. arka: originally “the back” of a person, animal, or thing; hence metaph. “a backer, someone who stands bchind and supports a person'. S.i.a.m.l.g. Uyğ. viii ff. Man.-A yeme amti bolzun esengü alkış tüzü nom arkasipa *and now let there be well-being and praise to all supporters of the (true) doctrine' M I 27, 11 ff.: Bud. o:t óplüg saçı arkasında yadilu turup “his flame-coloured hair hanging down his back” U IV ro, 67-8; arka bérip 'turning his back' (on the light (Dat.) of the gods) TT VI 273; tüz kópüllüg bursar kuvrağlarığ iki arka kildim erser “if I have caused discord in level-minded religious communities (Hend.)” Suv. 134, 12-14; similar phr. TT IV 10, zo: Civ. süsgüni arkası tutuşur '(pain) grips his shoulders and back' TT VII 25, 4: Xak. xı arka: al-zahr “the back”, arka: al-yahiru”lladi yu áwinuk fi'l-dawáhi "a backer', who helps you in difficulties" Kaş. I 128(prov.); 2.0. (“back”) 7 139, 6: KB bayat ok bolu bérsii arka yölek “may God give you abundant backing and support” go; arka “backing" 1697-8; arka yólek rr6, 1045: xin(?) Tef. arka “back, backing! 58: xiv Muh. al-zahr arxa: Mel. 47, 13; arka: Rif. 114; al-misnad “couch” arka: yatak Rif. 168 (only): Çağ. xv ff. arka pust 'back', in Ar. zahr San. 37r. 22: Xwar. xiv arka “back” Qutb rr: Kom. xiv “back” arka CCT, Gr.: Kip. xir al-zahr wa'l-musá'ada “back, support, help” arka: Hou. 21, 1; a'ána "to help" arka: bér- do. 34, 20; sü"ada "to support, help” ditto 40, 17: xiv arka: al-zahr İd. 11: xv ditto Kav. 60, 17; Tuh. 24a. 11: Osm. xiv ff, arka (once in xiv arxa) (1) 'back'; (2) 'backer, helper'; c.i.a.p. by itsclf and in phr. 7T3 7 39; 11 54; HI 37; IV 38-9. argu: 'valley'; as a Noun n.o.a.b., but noted as a geog. name in M 7 26, 25 and 29; 27, $ as well as in Kaş. Uyğ. vii ff. Man. arku (sic) tağlarığ yanıkurtur “he makes the valleys and mountains re-echo' TT IX 84: Bud. ötrü anupadat yul suvin ótgürdi tavğaç élinip sekiz uluğ arğularında “then he let the waters of the Anupadat spring pass into eight great valleys in China” Hüen-ts., Briefe 41, note 2104; a.o. T'T IX zə, note 77, 5: Xak. xi arğu: al-hhb sva huma bayna'l-cabalayn 'a valley between two mountains'; hence the country (al-bilad) between 'Tiráz and Balásagün is called Arğu: because it is between two mountains Kaş. I 127. *arku: See arkuçı:, arkuru:, arğu:la:-. VU urğa: Hap. leg.; the translation does not make it clear whether it is a generic term or the name of a specific kind of tree. Oğuz, Arğu: 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 260 
     
   
   
     216 DIS. xı urğa: al-datwha "a tall and spreading tree" Kaş. I 128. D arğuç Hap. leg.; Dev. N. (N.I.): fr. 2 a:r-. Xak. xı arfugc 'anything by which a man is deceived' (vugtarr); hence the world is called arğuç nju:n a/-dunyd ğarür (sic) Kaş. I gs. (D) arka:ğ “the woof (or weft) of a woven material”, S.i.a.m.l.g. except SW. During the medieval period a synonymous word arğaç appeared in Çağ. xv ff. (San. ayr. 8) and Osm. xiv ff. (T TS I 34; 11 48; HI 33; IV 35), and is still the word used in this sense in SW Osm./ Rep. Turkish, "Tkm. It seems reasonable to suppose that these two words are Dev. N.s in -ka:ğ and - Bac respectively fr. *ar- which cannot be identified with either 1 or 2 a:r-, and possible that arış “varp”, q.v., is also a Dev. N. fr. this verb, but in the last case there are some difficulties of vocalization. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud, aruşi (?, spelt erüş/) arkağı "the warp and the woof' TT VI 391 (arkuru:); 2.0. do. 394: Xak. xı arka:B /ulimatu'l-tawb "the woof of cloth! Kaş. 7 118; alo. 7 61 (arig): xiv. Muh. al-luhma arkağ Mel. 60, 9; Rif. 159 (misvocalized arkujg). arkuk 'obstinate, refractory', with a second meaning in Kaş.: N.o.a.b. Türkü vur 7 S 8; II N 6 (1 tok): Xak. xr arkuk kişi: "an obstinate, refractory (a/-harün) person": arkuk al-xagabatu'l-mu'tarida bayn há'itayn at süriyatayn “a transverse strut between two walls or pillars! Kaş, 7 109: KB (in a list of bad habits) takı biri erke bu arkuk kılınç, bu arkuk kilincligka bolmaz sevinç "and another is refractory behaviour in a man, a man who behaves in a refractory way is not liked' (or "has no pleasure in lifc” ?) 340; 0.0. 1668, 1670, 2066; xiv Muh. al-qadir(?) 'dirty" (? arkuk Mel. 56, 3: Rif. 153 (ncither word vocalized, the "opposite” is corrupt and unintelligible). D irğa:ğ Dev, N. (Conc. N.) fr. trfa:(q.v., the semantic connection is obscure); “hook” and the like. S.is.m.Lg. usually as irğak, Uyğ. vurff. Bud. TT V rz, 118 (otluğ): Xak. xı irğia:ğ "a hook (a/-s/ss) used to catch fish”: irğa:ğ “an iron hook (al-xuttáf) used to drag ice from the water to the ice-house' Kaş. 1 141: X war. xiv (the elephant would not get up however much they hit him) temür ırğaklar birle “vith iron elephant goads' Nac. 42, 15; 0.0. ('hook") 268, 1-2: Kom. xiv *hook' yırğak (sic) CCP; Gr.: Kip. xiv. irğak . al/-kulláb. tca'l-sinnára. “ron hook; fish hook' İd, 11; Bul. s, 3 (misvocalized irgik): xv zaglam (?, corrupt) cca [-kulláb irğak Tuh. 18a. 2. D orğa:k N.I. fr. o:r- ; 'sickle, reaping hook'. S.La.m.Lg. as orğak/orak, sometimes with the additional meaning “harvest”. Xak. xı orğa:k a/-mincal "sickle” Kaş. I 119; six 0.0. translated. aj-mincal or asnánu'l-mincal "the teeth of a sickle': xiv. Mili. al-mincal orğa:k Mel. 60, 4; o:rğa:k Rif. i59: Çağ. xv ff. ARÓ oraf/orak dás 'sickle', in Ar. mölşad, mincal Sam. 70v. 24: Ktp. xur al-mincal worak (stc?) Hou. 9, 11: xv mincal orak Tuh. 34a. 49a. 8 (and in a second hand in the margin of 13b. 9 against haşşa or-): Osm. xv ff. orak (once in xv oğrak) 'sickle' in several texts. TS 1536, 547; HH 734; HI 847. arğu:n Hap. leg.; prob. “veasel? or the like. Xak. xı arğu:n ditwayhbba min. cinsi'l-curdán “a small animal of the rat family” with a body about half a cubit long, which hunts birds in the crevices of walls; if it jumps on a sheep, the (sheep's) flesh turns yellow, and if it jumps on a man when he is asleep he is seized with strangury (al-usur) Kag. I 120. 1 arkun 'cross-bred': Survives in SE "Fürki arğın/arğun BŞ ao, NC Kir. arğın with various applications animal and human. Xak. xı arkun faras mutallad "a cross-bred horse', the offspring of a vvild stallion and a tame mare, the fastest kind of horse in a race Kaş. 7 107; arkun münüp idà rakiba'l-cawád “riding a swift horse! 7 421, 17: KB kevel mindir arkun 'you ride a cross-bred of high quality' 5803: ş uçar küş teg arkun ağımda kürettim “1 made the cross-bred horse which I bestrode galop like a flying bird” 6536; a.o. 5369 (büktel). 2 arkun “next year”, n.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (they rely on an irregular calendar, thinking that with it they will be out of danger; it is more or less beneficial to their bodies) incip arkun ağır ada tuda kelser “then when next year there come serious dangers (Hend.) TT VI 262-3: Xak. xi arkun tsm l-'ami'l-muqábil "a word for the coming vear'; hence one says arkun (VU) 1:zi: "dm müuqğbil wa qubaqıb "next year and the year after” Kaş, I 108; J 89, 16 (121:). S 3 arkun Sce akru:. arka:r prob. always 'the mountain. shecp, Ocis argali, although the Ar. words used by Kaş. normally mean “mountain goat, chamois' (it is likely that the animal was exotic to Arabs and had no specific name in Ar.). S.i.s.m.l, see Shcherbahk, p. 117, usually as à generic term without indication of sex. ""he Mong. synonym arğali is perhaps a L-w. fr. this word. Uyğ. vir arkar başı: tusinda: prob. “opposite (the place called) Arkar başı:” Sw. S 1: Xak. xi arka:r 'al-urziva, the female of al-rw'ül; its horns arc made into knife-handles Kaş. 5 117; 0.0. 7 214, 17 (sukak); 421, 17 (translated ai-:a'/1): Çağ. xv ff. arkar-1 ğalça “the wild (Pe. 1.-w.) mountain sheep is mentioned twice in Babur (Gibb Memorial facsimile, 141 v. 13; 276v. 10); alkar (sic) qüç-? kühi 'mountain ram' San. sor. 20. D arkis Dev. N. fr. 1 arka:- ş "a person or group of persons travelling for commercial or official purposes', hence both 'travelling merchants, caravan', and *official envoys, mission'; it is not always easy to see which is meant and merchants were often used as oflicial envoys. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 261 
     
   
   
      DIS. V. ARGSurvives in NE several dialects arğış/arğıs HR I 300-1; Khak. arfis 'travelling companion'; NC Kzx. arkis ditto R 7 293 (not in MM); SW xx Anat. (arkış SDD rış) erkis 'caravan' 546. See Doerfer 11 460. Türkü vri (the Basmıl idikut was mv subject) arkig ıdmaz teyin süledim 'because he sent no envoys, I campaigned against him” /7 E 2s; (gap) arkışı: kelmedi: (so read) "no envoys came” Z7 E 41; alo, 188, II N 6 (:d-): Uyğ. vini ff. Bud. (then King Mahendrasena) tört yıpaktın kelmiş arkış yalavaçlar okip 'summoning the envoys and ambassadors who had come from all four corners of the world' U H 21, 17-18; o.o. arkış drkis same meaning U III 29, 2-3 (t:d-); do. 11; arkig do. 29, 14; 30, 20; Hüen-ts. 12, 235-6, 1886: Xak. xı arkış ai-'ir 'caravan' (prov., arkts translated al-safr 'travellec): arkış the word for “an envoy” (al-mursil) to people from one's native country (a/-mazotin), hence one says 8nip arkışı: keldi: cá'a rasüluhu, also used in the sense of al-risála "a mission! Kaş. I 97 (in I 249, 12 arkigi: is an error for arvışı:): KB Xıtay arkışı yadti tavğaç edi "the caravan from China distributed Chinese wares' 68; 0.0. 1386, 1443, 5367, 5546 (im), 5754: xın(?) At. arkış 'caravan' 179, 180 (1 öp): xiv Rbg. arğış 'caravan' R I] 301: Çağ. xv ff. arğış mu'ámala-i ğalla "trade: in foodstuffs' San. 37r. zo: Kip. xıv(?) arğış "caravan, the transport of men or goods by horse and mule', marginal note to İd., İzbudak, El-idráh Haşiyesi, p. 6: Osm. xiv arğış 'caravan' Dede Qorqut, ed. Rossi, p. 332. Dis. V. ARĞ1 arka:- “to search, investigatc”, etc, N.o.a.b., but no doubt the earlier form of the synonymous SW Osm., Tkm. word ara-, which is not traccable earlier than Sar. 34r. 18 where it is treated as a Çağ. word translated miyàán-i (izi-rà tafahhuş hardan "to make an investigation into something', but illustrated only by a Rümi quotn. (Xak.) xin(?) 4t. senip birlikipke dalil arkağan “anyone, who seeks a proof of "Thy uniqueness! 7; (the Prophet) bilig Çinde erse siz arkay tédi “said seck knowledge (even) if it is in China” 104: Oğuz xi 0l anın evin arka:dı: baliata md fi baytilu wa talabahu wa fahaşa mü zanna fihi "he enquired what was in his house and searched it and investigated what he thought was in it” Kaş. 1 283 (2 arka:- follows). 2 arka:- a rhyming jingle not used in isolation; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı (after 1 arka:- in the same para.), and one says ol ant: karğa:dı: arka:dı: /a"anahu tva dakara masá'atahu “he cursed him and spoke of his wickedness'; used as a Hend. (muzdaswica(n)) and not by itself; taken from their word for 'praise' (al- tana") alkış , since it was used frequently in a Hend. alka:- also acquired a pejorative meaning (cu'ila fi'l-sarr); and since it was originally İaudatory the -r- was substituted for -l-,. as malşüş became mearşüş in Ar. Kaş. I 284   217 (arka:r, arka:ma:k; the theory, though prima facie improbable may be correct, see karğan-). ırğa:- “to shake, or rock (something cc.) ; survives only(?) in NC Kir., Kzx.; it also existed earlier in SW Osm. but has there been displaced by the Freq. f.(?) ırğala-. 1t is difficult to connect this verb semantically with irfa:B, but there is a NE Tuv. verb irğay“to be crooked' Pal. 570, and this suggests that there was originally a second verb *irfa:with this meaning. Xak. xı ol yığa:ç ırğa:dı: hazza”l-şacara wa nafadaha li-yasqut tamaruhu *he shook (Hend.) the tree so that the fruit should fall'; also used of other things Kaş. I 283 (ırğa:r, irğa:ma:k), o.o. translated nafada 111 316, 15; 321, 16: xin(?) Tef. irğa“to shake' (a tree) 129: (X war. xivirga-/ytrfaQutb 91, 206, and Kom.xiv yirBa- CCG ; Gr. 133 both meaning 'to enjoy oncself' have no connection with this verb but are Sec. f. of a L-w. fr. Mong. cirğa- (Haenisch. go) same meaning): Kip. xiv 1ra:- karraRa fi'l-mahd va md nösabahu “to rock in a cradle! and the like, also pronounced irğa:-, which also means hazza ld. 11: Osm. xiv to xvi irğa- “to shake (something)! in a few texts T TS I 353; IV 394. D ırğat- Caus. f. of ırğa:-, properly “to order (something) to be shaken', but from a fairlv early date used in the same meaning as, and in place of, irfa:-. S.i.s.m.l. w. some phonetic changes like NC Kzx. irit-. Xak. xı ol yığa:ç irğattı: anfada'l-sacara wa ğayrahd "he had the tree (etc.) shaken” Kaş. 7 263 (verse, no Aor. or İnfin.): xın(?) Tef. ırğat- “to shake (someone)” 129: Çağ. xv ft. ırğat- cunbànidan "to shake, move (something)” San. 98r. 17 (quotn.). D ırğal- Pass. f. of ırğa:-: “to be shaken, to sway', and the like. Survives only(?) in NC Kır., Kzx. Uyf. vim ff. Bud. 1 iğaçlar ırğalur "the bushes and trees sway' Suv. 621, 5: Civ. artuç sógüt butiki yüz tórlügin ırğalur “the stem of the juniper tree sways in every direction! T'T ] 165-6: Xak. xt yığa:ç irğaldı: “the tree was shaken” (nufida); also used of anything that is shaken (/tuzza) Kaş. I 249 (ırğalur, irğalma:k): Kom. “to be shaken, to svvay” ırğal- CCG; Gr. D 1rkla:- Den. V. fr. irk, “to cast lots, consult the omens'. Survives only(?) in SW Anat. irikla- SDD 773. Uy&amp;. vin ff. Civ. TT VII 28, 6 (irü:) a.o.o. in this text: Xak. xı ka:m ırkla:dı: takahhana”l-kühin mutafa”ila(n) fi şay the magician made magic consulting the omens about something! Kaş. 11] 443 (arkla:r, ırkla:ma:k). D ırğan- Refl. f. of ırğa:-, “to shake, swav, rock”, etc. (Intrans.). The commonest member of the group, s.i.a.m.l.g. Xak. xi yığa:ç ırğandı: ihtazzati”l-şacara | wa taharrakat “the tree (etc.) shook and rocked” Kaş. 1 254 (ar&amp;anu:r, 1r$anma:k): Çağ. xv ff. ırğan(-1p) irgala- Vel. 54; air&amp;an- Refl. V., cunbidan  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 262 
     
   
   
     218 "to move, stir' San. 98v. 2: Xwar. xiv irğan"to shake! Quthb 206: Kip. xv inhiazza irğanTuh. 6b. s: Osm. xiv fF. irğan- (in xvi 1Bran-, irkan-, iran- also occur) "to move, sway'; c..a.p. 777 I 353; II soo; /İİ 344; IV 395. D argur- Caus. f. of 1 a:r-; “to tire (someone) out”, Pec. to Kaş, Xak. xr ol atın arğurdi: a"yd farasahu “he tired his horse out" Kaş. 7 225 (verse, arğurur, arğurma:k, sic, not -ğar-, in MS.); a.o. 7 486, 14. D arğurt- Ifap. leg.; mentioned only as example of a Caus. f. of a Caus. f.; cf. arğurtur- Xak. xr anın atın arğurtti: hamala”l-insán "ald Uyd” farasihi "he urged the man to tire his horse out” Kaş. I 229, 13; n.m.e. D arkas- wholly irregular Co-op. Den. V. fr. arka:; survives only(?) in NE 'Tuv. arğaş"to lift something heavy together”, Uyğ. vir fF. Bud. Sanskrit “asfasamlagnıhayd “by the nct of clasping someone closely” arka:şma:k üze: TT VIII C.11: Xak. xi ol anın birle: yük arkaştı: Zamala ma"ahı?l-himl | muzáharata(n), tea hurca an yac'al küll scáltid minhumd yahrahu İf-şabibihi "he carried the burden on his back with him, that is each of them made a back for the other" Kaş. / 237 (arkasu:r, arkaşma:k), a.o. 7 395, 3 (yüzkes-). . D ırğaş- Co-op. f. of ırğa:- , “to shake (something) together'. Survives only(?) in NC Kir. Xak. xı ol menin birle: yığa:ç ırğaştı: “he shook (náfada) the tree in co-operation or competition with me” Kaş. HI 322, 1; a grammatical example, n.m.e. i ris. ARG PUD arkuçı: Hap. leg.; listed between numduet: and erdini: which excludes the possibility that it is an error for “arkışçı: a word which might be expected in this sense; it scems rather to be connected with arğu:la:-, and is presumably a N.Ag. fr. *arku: (or *arfu:, but not thc arğu: listed above) which seems to be also the basis of arkuru: Xak. xı arkuct "an intermediary (al-mutawassit) between two people, and the messenger (a/-rasül) between the relatives of the two parties to a prospective marriage" Kaş. I 141. VU?D arkaçak Hap. leg.; in a section headed af"alil which requires a long second vowel, and completely unvocalized; perhaps Den. N. fr. arka: Xak. xi arkaçak the word for an instrument (4/a) for pouring medicine into the corner of the mouth; it is in the shape of a saucer (al-sukurraca) and has a spout (mat'ab) Kaş. I 144. VU(D) ura:ğu:t *woman', more specific than tişi: which is also used of animals; morphologically a Dev. N. in -ğu:t, noted only during a limited period but very common during that period, during which it displaced evci: and the phr. uzun tonlığ, and was used in parallel with isle:r (işi), in Çağ. it was displaced by DIS..V. ARGurğaçı (San. 71r. 18) which may be connected etymologically and s.is.mib, including NC Kir., SC Uzb., SW 'Fkm.; in other modern languages displaced by forms of ka:tu:n and the Ar. L-w. 'aterat, but it is possible that words in some Kip. texts (Hou. 25, 2; İd. 25; Tuh. 3b. 13) and elsewhere which have bcen deScribed as, or taken to he, 'arerat written with initial a/rf instead. of "ayr are actually later, contracted. forms of ura:fu:t. Xak, xi ura:ğu:t al-mar'a 'woman' Kag. 1 138; about 60 o.o,, all spelt ura:ğut: xii(?) Tef. urağut “vvoman, wife! 330: xiv Rbg. ura$utjurawut is the standard word for *womzn' in the carlier MSS. (in the later often replaced by xatun) R I 1651-3 (adding that it is also common in Zam.): Kip. xiv uragut al-mar'a İd. 9. D arığlık A.N. fr. 1 arığ, 'cleanness, purity". S. m.m.lL.g.. w. phonctic: changes. Xak. xi ariğlık ao/-azàáfa "elcanness" Kaş, I 140: KH (a man fit to be a Per) 1duk ol bu heğlik arığlik tiler wishes for this blessed position of beg and for purity' 1960; xin(?) Tef, arığlık 'purity' (? and metaph. “alms”) 57: Çağ. xv ff. arığlığ (sc) paki tea tahárat “cleanness, purity! Sas. 37v. 19: Kom. xiv 'purity, chastity” aruvlix CCG; Gr. 41: Osm. xiv ff. arihk 'cleanness, purity; innocence', etc.; c.i.a.p. TTS I 37; İİ s2; İİİ 35; IV 37. D arıklığ P.N./A. fr. arik; “having an irrigation canal' and the like. Xak. xr arıklığ yö:r ard düt nahr 'irrigated land” Kaş. 1 147: xiv Rbg. suluğ ariklik (sic) yol “a road running past water and canals! R 7 271: Çağ. xv ff. arığlığ su (sic) àb-i nahr 'canal water! San. 37v. 20 (quotn.) D arukluk A.N. fr. aruk; originally, and correctly, "exhaustion, fatigue", but fr. the Medieval period onwards “İcanness, emaciation”, S.i.a.ın.l.g. Xak. xr arukluk a/-ya" 'exhaustion, prostrntion” Kaş, I 150; (if a guest comes, put him up) tinsin ani) arukIuk hattá yastarih “so that he can recover from his exhaustion! 7I 316, ro: Çağ. xv ff. arığlığ (sic) lağar? 'thinness' San. 37v. 19: Kip. xv huzsla 'emaciation arikhk Tü). 49b. 7: Osm. xv ff. ariklik used in several dicts. to translate Ar. and Pe. words meaning “cmaciation”, etc. 773 137; £ 52; HL 34; IV 37. D *iraklik. A.N. fr. 1rak; n.o.a.b.? Xak. xr yıraklık a/-bu'd 'distance, remoteness” Kaş., HI 51: Xwar. xiv yiraklık ditto MN 146. D 1 uruğluğ P.N./A. fr. 1 uruf; survives only(?) in SW Osm. urulu (vulgarly wurulu) 'struck, wounded! Red. 248. Xak. xr uruğluğ altu:n a/-dahabu'Il-mawdi' “minted gold (coin)', etc. Kaş. 1 147: KB in 6033 (see şatu:) yüz utru nrujlug prob. mcans 'erected facing me”. D 2 uruğluğ P.N./A. fr. 2 uruğ, "of good family", Survives only(?) in NW Kaz. uru:li R I 1322. Xak. xı KB (a vezir) uruğluğ kerek ham sakinuk köni “must be of good  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 263 
     
   
   
     TRIS. V. ARGfamily, thoughtful, and upright' 2186; uruğluğ tarığlığ *well-born on both sidcs(?)! 4496 (cf. 2 uruğ), o.o. 2197, 4488: xin(?) Tof. uruğluğ (of fruit) 'growing' (or morc prob. "bearing sced') 331. D uruğluk A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. 2 uruf; survives only(?) in SE "Türki (of grain) “kept for use as secd' BŞ 789, but sce urluk. Xak. xt uruğluk buğday al-burru'lladi. udduxtra li'l-badr 'seed wheat'; also used for any kind of seed (badr wa bazr) Kay. 1 149: Çağ. xv ff. uruğluğ/urukluk (sic) xwisg? ra qarábat sva intisdb 'kinship, relationship, San. 71v. 12 (quotn. ; another translation düridani 'reaping" is added; it scems to imply a pronunciation oruğluk and is prob. only a “dictionary word"). VUD urukluğ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. 1 uruk. Xak. xi urukluğ, kowa: (sic) dalw dü habl “a bucket with a rope! Keş, I 147. VUD urukluk Tlap. ler. A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. 1 uruk, Xak. xi urukluk yu:y 'wool which is destined to be made into a rope' (a/-bab/) Kaş. I 150. D *arBuluj lap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. argu:. Uyğ. vitr ff. Man. arkuluğ (sic) tağığ "the mountain surrounded (or “vith its sides cleft” ?) by valleys! TT IX 77. E arkulayu See arju:la:-. ?F ura:ğü:n a kind of drug; prob. a l.-w. of Indian origin. Xak. xı ura:ğu:n 4azrod” hindi yutadáwi bihi “an Indian drug used for medicinal purposes! Kaş. 7 138: KI? occurs in 772, 789, 814, R15 (a61:-), its bitterness often contrasted with the swectness of sugar. ?D arkuru: perhaps Ger. of *arkur- Den. V. fr. *arku:, sec arkuçi:, 'crosswise, slanting”, and the like. In the early period an Adv. sometimes associated with turkuru, q.v.; in modern times also an Adj. 'transverse, perverse, incongruous', etc. Survives in NE Bar. arğuru R I 302; "Yel. arkty do. 392; NC Kir. arkı terki, Kzx. arkili; SW Osm. arkuru/aykiri; xx Anat. arkiri SDD 11:15; avğırı do. 127; aykirifaykiri doykuru do. 138. Uyğ. vit ff. Bud. kalti yertinçüde arust (?, spclt erigi) arkağı ikigü arkuru turkuru kavşurup 'just as in this world the warp and the woof grasp onc another crosswisc' (and be: come a single fabric) TT VI 390-1; üstün altın arkuru turkuru ağtarılu toptarilu evrilü tevrilü twisting (Hend.) and turning (Hend.) up and down and across! Suv. 133, 20-22; a.o. TM IV 253, 57-8 (1 öt-): Civ. kayu kunçüylarnın karninda oğul arkuru turup tuğuru umasar “if a child lies crosswise in a woman's womb and cannot let itself be born” TT VII 27, 15: (Xak.) xim(?) 7f. arkuru “crossvvise, across' sg: Kom. xiv tuvramı arkrımı 'straight. (toğuru:) or crooked?' CCG; Gr.: Osm. xiv ff. arkuru (down to xvir) /arkiri (fr. xv) “crossvvise”, ctc.; c.i.a.p. T TS I 42; II 54; III 38; IV 40. | 219 D arığsız Priv. N./A. fr. 1 arığ 'unclean, impure; uncleanness, excrement”, S.i.s.m.l. "Türkü vırr ff. Man. (of a corpse) arığsız yavlək 'unclcan and unpleasant! M 7 s, 10: Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. Sanskrit auci 'uncleanness' arığsız TT VIII D.35; o.o. U III 35, 20 (ağna:-), 37, 4: Civ. arığsız “excrement” H II 27, 145-8: Xak. xı KB yana bir arığsız bu kilki utun 'and another (evil thing) is an impure and wicked man' 341; o.o. 831, 2108 (art:-), 2194, 2198: xrn(?) At. 111 (arr-); Tef. arığsız 'unclean, uncleanness' 58: xiv Muh. al-nacis 'filthy' (opposite to 'clean' ari) arığsız Mel. ss, 5; Rif. 152: Kom. xiv 'impure' ariksuz CCG; Gr. 42 (quotn.): Osm. xiv, xv ariSuz 'impure' in scveral texts TTS I 38, II 53; III 36. D aruksuz Priv. N./A. fr. aruk, n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. aruksuz köpülin *with an untiring mind” U ZE 8o, 16; U IV 22, 273. D urufsuz Priv. N./A. fr. 2 uruğ, n.o.a.b. Xak. xr KB uruğsuz kişiler arığsız bolur “men who are not well-born (tend to) become impure' 2194. D arkassız Priv. N./A. fr. arka:; without a backer, or supporter', etc. Survives only(?) in SW Az. arxasız R 1 294; Osm. arkasiz R. I 291 (only?). Xak. xı arka:sı:z alp ceri:g sıyu:ma:s "a warrior cannot break (the enemy's) ranks without a backer to help him' (Hà bi-zahir yu'awinuhu) Kaş. I 123, 22; 128, 13; n.m.e. D arığsızlığ P.N./A. fr. arığsız and synonymous with it. N.o.a.b.; the A.N. arığsızlık *impurity' is noted in (Xak.) xın(?) Tef. 58. Uyğ. vir iT. Bud. medhyanarahabratimam "like an unclean hell” arığsızlığ prekka (?read pretka, Sanskrit preta “ghost”) oxşatı TT VIII D.a4; asucinánárasena "by a manifold impure strcam' arığsızlığ akin üze: do. D.35. Tris. V. ARGD arkuklan- lfap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. arkuk. Xak. xi er arkuklandı: 'atá'l-racul fi qabüli'l-amr sca haruna “the man was insolent and refractory when he received the order' Kaş. I 315 (arkuklanur, arkuklanma:k). D arığla:- Den. V. fr. 1 arig; lit. “to make (something) clean', but, as arıt- already has that meaning, usually used with specialized meanings. S.i.s.m.l., sometimes much distortcd, e.g. NE arda-/arla- R 7 320, 302. Xak. xi ol kuzti arığla:dı: naza"a xugya hamalihi “he castrated his lamb”, or something else; and one says ol yarma:kığ arığla:dı: iltaqata. acwadi'l-daráhim “he picked out the best silver coins'; also used of anything when one chooses the best of it (fxtdra minhu nugatatahu) Kaş. I 303 (arığla:r, arığla:ma:k). -D arukla:- Den. V. fr. aruk; originally “tö rest when exhausted”, s.i.a.m.l.g. vv. some 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 264 
     
   
   
     220 phonetic changes, usually. with the meaning "to be weak, emaciated” and the like. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. siz aruk siz aruklan "you are exhausted; take a rest" PP ss, q-ş: Xak. xt beğ arukla:dı: acamma"l-amir mina"l-ta"ab "the beg took a rest because he was exhausted'; this is an expression for 'sleep' (al-natom) in the court language (/ugáti'l-xàgániya), the original meaning is 'he rested because of exhaustion' (istaráha | mina'l-kalála) Kaş. I 304 (arukla:r, arukla:ma:k): xiv Mu. da'ufa “to be weak' arugla:- Mel. 28, 5 (Rif. 111. yavrı:-), hazala wa nahafa "to be thin, emaciated” arufla:- Mel. 32, 7 (Rif. 116 aruk bol-); Kip. xiv. arukla- damara “to be emaciated" İd. 11: xv hazala arikla- Tu. 38a. 6: Osm. xiv, xv arukla- ; xv ff. arikladitto in several texts 7 7S 137; /1 sı, III 34; IV 36. D uruğla:- Den. V. fr. 2 uruğ, survives only(?) in SE Türki, “to sow secd; to swarm; (of a crop) to form ears' S/ato 21-2; BŞ 789. Xak. xi ol kebe:z uruğla:dı: zaza'a habba”l-qutn “anhu “be cleaned the cotton lint of seed'; also used for extracting the stone from any kind of fruit Kaş. 7 3o3 (uruğla:r, uruğla:ma:k); a.o. 111 346, 27. D arğu:la:- Hap. leg.; so spelt, a Den. V. but semantically connected not with arğu: but with *arku:, cf. arkuçı:, arkuru: and more remotely with arkis. Xak. xı ol ikki: kişi: ara: arğu:la:di: marra bayna”l-raculayn wa şaqqahumd “he went to and fro between the two men and mediated between them” Kaş. 7 317 (arğu:la:r, argu:la:ma:k). D ariklan- Hap. lcg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. arik. Xak. xı su:v arıklandı: inta'aba'l-mà' “the water was canalized'; also used of land when it contains banks and channels like canals (curuf tea. axádid | ka'l-anhár) Kaş. I 294 (ariklanur, ariklanma:k). D *iraklan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. ira:k, Xak. xi er ye-riğ yıraklandı: 'the man reckoned that the place was distant' (ba'id) Kaş. III 115 (yiraklanu:r, yıraklanma:k). D uruğlan- Hap. lcg.; Refl. f. of uruğla:-. Xak. xi tarığ uruğlandr: in"aqada habbu'l-zar' “the cereal crop formed seed'; and one says kebe:z uruğlandı: “the cotton formed . seed'; also used of any fruit Kaş. 7 293 (uruglanur, uruğlanma:k). D arkalan- Refl. Den. V. fr. arka:; 'to use (someone or something dcc.) as a backer'. 'This and arkala:- si.m.m.lg. Xak. xı ol meni: arkalandı: ittaxadani hH-nafsihi zahir "he took me as his backer”, and one says ol ta:ğnı: arkalandı: istarada ifa l-cabal "he made the mountain his support” Kaş. 7 297 (arkalanur, arkalanma:k): Osm. xvtff. arkalan- “to gain support, lean on (someone)' in several texts T'T'S 7 40; 11 54; IV 39. D arğurtur- Hap. leg., Caus. f. of arğur-. Xak. xi after arğurt-, q.v., “and there is another form (teach) for this, one says arğurTRIS. V. ARGturdi: amara biya" ihi "he ordered that he should be tired out” ' Kos. ] 229, 16; n.m.c. D uru£sirat- 11ap. leg.; Caus. Priv. Den. V. fr. 2 uruğ. Türkü vii Türkü bodun ölü:reyl:n uruğsiratayi:n “1 will kill the "Vürkü people and deprive them of progeny” 1 Evo (II E 9). Mon. ERG erk has two basic meanings, (1) 'authoritv' that is the power to impose one's will on others; (2) 'free-will, independence” that is freedom to decide for oneself without being subject to the authority of others. It became an early l.-w. in Mong. as erke (Haentsch, p. 45) and s.La.m.lg. in a varicty of forms, erk/erik, etc. sometimes with a less precise mcaning, 'strength, power, and the likc. Türkü viru ff. Man. (if we say that the sun and moon die, or that they rise and set involuntarily or) erki bar erser tuğmazun "f they have frec-will, let them refrain from rising” C/imas. 24-5: Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (I could not prevent him) erkim tükemedi "my authority was not suflicient' PP 27, 4; erkimçe tapımça isledim erser 'if [ have acted as I chose and pleased" Suv. 136, 1; the word also occurs fairly often in the phr. erk türk 'free-will (or independence) and maturity' e.g. (as a result of that perception—Sanskrit. tedana) ajunlarka ed tavarka erkke türkke azlanmak turur “desire (Sanskrit snd) for rebirth, inanimate and animate possessions, independence, and maturity arisc' U 7I ro, 14-16; o.o. TT IV 4, 4 (esür-) and in a recurrent phr. in Tig. 19a. 5; 20a. 6; 21b. 2; 25a. 6; 26a. 7 etc.: Civ. (in a favourahle omen) uluğ erk keldi “you have acquired a large measure of independence' TT I 121; erikke (sic) te&amp;ir “hc attains independence' TT” VII 34, 6; (in a document describing arrangements for the cultivation of a vineyard) [gap]yi-kara Minp-kara ikeğü erk yok “(the owners?) . yi-kara and Min-kara arc both no longer able to manage their own affairs(?)” USp. 21, 2: Xak. xi erk al-saltana sca. nafádu'l-amr “political power and effective authority! Kaş. 7 aa: KB bar erse yazukum kina erk saga 'If 1 have sinned, punish me; you have authority! 639; ajun erki buldun “you have acquired author-* ity over the world! 940; (your father was beg before you) erk türk tüze 'enjoving indipendence and maturity! s151; 0o. 942, 1784 Çağ. xv ff. érk ixtivár 'free-will, liberty to choose' Vel. şr (quotns.); érk (spelt) zxtzyár vea qudrat ('power') San. gov. 21 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv erk 'authority, influence! Quib zr (s.v. erklig); öz kulup turur ne erki bolğay "he is your own slave, what liberty of action will he have?” Na/ic. 360, 8: Kom. xiv erk (r) *power, authority'; (2) 'free-will CCG; Gr. oz (quotns.): Osm. xiv erk 'authority' in Yunus; xv. "liberty to choose. between (arasında) two things” in Ent. TTS I 272. irk 'ram': rare and prob, always w. some more specific meaning like “three-ycar-old 2   —”—“-—“5“ı"“““:r2---..—.. Q. ——— —. — —- — ———-.- — eoe . Xİ 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 265 
     
   
   
     DIS. ram), as opposed to kocpa:r, q.v. ; survives in NE Koib., Sag., “Vel, irik/irk 'ram' R 7 1459, 1464; NC Kir, irik '"three-ycar old castrated ram", SW xx Anat. irk ditto SDD 796; a l.-w. in Mong. as irge 'castrated ram” (Kot. 326, llaltod 71). Xak. xi irk al-da'n mma'l-Şanam ta huma ida ta'ana fi'l-rábi'a "a ram approaching his fourth year” Kaş. 7 43: Kip. xiv (“ram” koçka:r/koç) a/-xaşf mina'l-$anam üzük (no doubt error for this vvord, vocalization uncertain) Bul, 7, 13. Dórk Conc. N. fr. 2 ö:r- ; “tether” and the like. Survives in NE Tel. örö: R 1 1220: NC Kir. örö:, Kzx. óre; SW xx Anat.,6k SDD 1106; örek 1114; örk 1115; örük i117. Xak. xi Örk zunáqu'l-bahm toa tawilatu'l-xayl "a halter for a young animal, a horse's tether” Kaş. I 43: KB ay yayığ kutka örk “oh tether of fickle fortune” 91; bu él bağı örki “these (the vezir and the army commander) are the bonds and tethers of the realm' 2419; İkinçi havvaka ukuüş kilsa órk “secondiy, if he makes understanding a tether for his emotions” 2504; 0.0. 722, 1988, 2009: Caf. xv ff. óre ('grain-pit', i.e. ora) and at kóstegi “a horse's hobble' Vel. 104 (?mis-spelt); örük (spe/t) rismáni “a rope' which they tie to a horse's legs when he is grazing! San. yı v. 16: Osm. xiv ff. órk “a horse's tether' in several texts, mainly dicts. TTS I 568; II 755. Mon. V. ERGİrk- “to collect or assemble (things 4ee.)'. Survives at any rate in SW Osm. but usually as Intrans., e.g. (of water) 'to stagnate'. Cf. ük-, yığ-. Xak. xı er tawa:r irkti: cama"a”l-raculu'l-mál tva. ğayrahu "the man collected property (etc.)” Kaş. 111 420 (irke:r, irkme:k): Kip. xiv irk- cammafa İd. 11: Osm. xiv to xvt İrk- “to collect, heap up” (wealth, etc.) in several texts 7773 7 388; II 545; İT 381; IV 435; xvır irk- (spelt) in Rim, cam" hardan "to collect” San. 99r. 15. ürk- “to be startled, scared, frightened". S.i.a.m.l.g., sometimes as ürki-/ürük-, and the like, Türkü vri: ff. bay er korti: ürkü:pen barmil:ş “the rich man's sheep went off in a fright” IrkB 27: Uyğ. viri evi: on kün önre: ürküp barmış “his household had gone off in a fright ten days before” Su. S 7: viti ff. Bud. korkup ürküp belinlep 'frightened, startled and panic-stricken' U İT 29, 17; yana arıtı ürkmez beliplemez 'the elephant is not in the least startled or panic-stricken” U II ss, 3; ürkser belipleser TT VII 4o, ao: Xak. xı ko:y ürkti: “the sheep was scared” (nafarat) by night or day by a wolf or the like; and one says bodu:n ürkti: “the people were scared by the presence of the enemy and panic (al-hazáhiz) broke out among them” Kaş. III azo (ürke:r, ürkme:k): xiv Róg. ürk- “to be scared” R 1 1835 (quotn.); Muh.(?) al-nafar ürkmek (unvocalized) Rif. 123 (only): Çağ. xv ff. ürk- (söelt) also pronounced hürkramidan "to be startled” Sar. 68v. 27 (quotns.); hürk- synonym of ürk- ramidan 324v. 9: ERG 221 Xwar. xiv ürk- ditto Qur 124 (örk-), 204: Kip. xiv ürk- (v.1. ürük-) cafala "to be scared" İd. ız: xv ditto Kav. 9, 7; cafala ürük- Tuh. 12a. 8; tawahhama sva cafala ditto gb. 6. Dis. ERG eriğ, etc. Preliminary note. Kaş. lists a number of tvords spelt alif-rà-kàf, but the vocalization of the printed texts and editions is not toholly reliable. The order of the words is chaotic and seems to be as follows (numbering the words as beloto) 1 erük, örük, örüğ, 1 irig, 4 eriğ, irük, 2 érük, 5 erl:ğ (sic), 2 iriğ, Uyğ. has some of these words and also 1 erig, 2 eriğ, and perhaps 3 erig. Eriğ, the Acc. of 1 er occurs several times in Türhü, and also in KB where it has sometimes been mistaken for 1 eriğ, but in I S rz erig is almost certainly not the Acc. of 1 er and may be 3 erig. There are of course considerable possibilities of confusion, barticularly betsceen the various erigs. 1 eriğ 'advice'; readily recognizable in the Hend. (2) öt erig, but hard to identify when alone. Uyğ. vrr ff. Bud. sizin ütüpüzni (sic) erigipizni “your advice TT VIII N.10: baxşılarnın uluglarnip kórgitmig boşğunmiş ötinçe erigince incip evrilmedim erser ']f I have not behaved in accordance with the advice (Hend.) displayed and learnt of the teachers and great ones” Suv. 136, 4-6; yadıp nomluğ él(ljgler teg ótin erigin disseminating his advice (Hend.) like the dharmaröfds" Hüen-ts. 2003-4; 2.0. do. 2017: Xak. xi KB öt sav eriğ 'advice and guidance" 1548, 2617, 3984, etc.; erig in the phr. sınadı erig 593 (and 619, 764) seems to mean 'the man”. D 2 erig (?erig) in the phr. erig barığ Dev. N.s fr. er- bar- (see 2 ér-); pec. to Uyğ. but see 5 eri:$d. Uyg. vir ff. Bud, (Hidimba, jumping about in demoniac rage) élgin adakın Arcum tonağ ölürgğülük erig bariğ kılıp making wild motions(?) with hands and feet to kill the hero Arjuna' U 1I 25, 2 ff.; anın yavlak eriglerín barığların “his evil wild motions'(?) TT X 347; o.o. U II 635, s (yalğantur-), Hüen-ts. 2078 (not pejorative, but reading uncertain, tuş-). D 3 eriğ Dev. N. fr. 1 er-, perhaps occurs as below. Türkü vir eriğ yerte: "in the place where it is(?)' 7 S 13 (twice): Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. Sanskrit bráhmai'íca "and by the Brahmanical” tört törlüğ zarvva: (?so read) eriğle:ri üze: “by the four kinds of Brahmanical existence”(?) TT VHI F.1o: tözin eriğin “its origin and existence (or nature?) Suv. 593, 22. D 4 erig N./A.S. fr. eri:- (erü:-); “melting, liquescent'. S.i.s.m.l., usually as erü:. Xak. xi erig ne:p 'anything liquescent” (dá'ib) like oil (a/-samn), etc., also anything that melts after being frozen (dába ba"da”l-cumüd) Kaş. İ yo. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 266 
     
   
   
     222 DIS. ERG 5 eri: (?érig) possibly identical with 2 erig; n o.a.b., but sce ériplik, Xak. xr eri: (sic) yılkı:- a/-dabbatı"l-fariha Ca lively packanimal”: hence one says eri: at faras rá'r "a spirited horse'; not known in Oğuz Kaş. 7 70; rki:la:çım eriğ (sic) boldi: sabaha cawàádi tea. "add fi"l-sayr “my thoroughbred horse ran swiftly on the ourney” 7 139, 16: Kom. xiv "lively, energetic! erüv CCGC; Gr. 1 erük a generic term for 'stone fruit', the particular variety being indicated by a qualifying Adj. S.a.m.L.g. except INE. usually with initial ó-/ü- except in SW; a 1.-vv. in Russian as uryuh, which is also used as a reverse l.-w. in some NE languages. Uyğ. vi ff. Civ. tülüğ erüknür kasıkın “the skin of a pcach" H 1 3-8, sarığ erük uruği "an apricot kernel! do. 101; et(?) erük xvvası “the flower (Chinese Jia) of an et(?) plum" H İT 8, 22; tülüğ erük (?so read) çe:çe:kle:nür “the peach flowers! TT VHI P.24: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. hsing 'apricot' (Ciles 4,637) erük Ligeti 135; R 1:774: Xak. xi erük a generic term (ism cami") for pcach, apricot, and plum which are distinguished by adjectives (bi I-sifa); “the peach! (al-xawx) is tülüg erük, “the apricot (al-mişmiş) sarığ erük and “the plum” (al-iccüş) kara: erük Kaş. 1 69; o.o. I 318, 14 (çap), JI 282, ır (1 kak): xiv Muh.(?) aliccaş kara: erü:k, a/-xawx tü:lüg erük; a/mişmiş sa:ru:ğ erük Rif. 182 (only): Çağ. xv ff. ürk (?error for ürük) 'the fruit called erüh” and especially zardalü "apricot” Vel. ror, erük nàm-i sardülü San. 37v. 10: Kom. xiv “plum” erik CCI; Gr.: Kip. xur al-mişmiş sa:ru: erük ('in Tkm.” inserted in error) also called zarda:lu: in Tkm. taken from Pe. Hou. 7, 17: xiv erük al-iccás; it is a general term. (mugfarak) for peach, cherry, yellow plum (a/-barqüq), and apricotş and if they mean "apricot” they say şarı: erük; 'peach' is called naftalu:, a Pe. word İd. 12: xv iccág kara erik Tuh. sa. 3; barquq erik do. 7b. ro, qirüişiya “cherry” kara érik do. 29a. 4; mtişmiş sari erik do. 35a. 2. 2 erük (?érük) 'tanning material', later also *tanned leather". Survives in NE Alt., Koib., Leb., Sag., Tel. irik R 7 1459; NC Rzx. irik do.; érik MM 145. Xak. xr erük (vocalized erik as well) kull mà yudbağ bihi'l-cild “anything with which a hide is tanned'; hence one says teri; erükle:di: "The hide was tanned” Kaş. I zo: Kom. xiv 'tanned leather” erik CCI; Gr. D 1 iriğ N./A.S. in -£ fr. iri:- ; “mouldering, decayed'. Survives as irig/irik in several NE languages, including Khak., Tuv, and as irü: in NC Kir. Xak. xt irig ne: Aul/ şay” baliya “anything decayed'; hence Áagimu'l-xatab “rotten wood' is called iri o:tur) Kaş. I 70. ?S 2 irig "tough, hard” of persons and things, lit. and metaph. S.i.m.m.l.g. as iri/irik, rarely yirik. Prob. a Sec. f. of idrig q.v. Uy. vin ff. liud. iriğ sarsığ söz (or sav) 'rough, harsh language! U I1 76, 6; 85, 23; TT IV 8, 71; Suv. 220,2; TM 1V əsə, 17; 255, 114 (clear in Sur; in the. first three. cases. mistranscribed evrih; the last two. passages are. damaged); iri yavğan kópüllüg 'hard-hearted" TT .N 13; similar phr. U 7/1 ry, 12 (taya:;gu:); TM IV 254, 89-9o: Xak. xı iriğ er a/-raculu'l-caldu l-nafid fi'l-umür "a man who is tough and competent in affairs' (prov.): irig ne:n Aul? şay” xaşin 'anvthing hard”, hence the head of a scrofulous man (al-carbán) is called irig Kaş. 1.70; a.o. I 102 (idrig): KB tapuğka irig bol “be tough in service” 1380; irig sózlemegil kişike tilin; iriğ til ot ol kör küyer teg yalin 'do not speak to a man with a harsh tongue; a harsh tongue is like fire or a burning flame” 1415; o.o. 2586, 3846-7, 4303, 5221, sşgo: xiv Muh. al-xaşin (opposite to “soft” yumşak) iriğ Mel. 56, 9; Rif. 154 (irrig): Çağ. xv fT. irig (with -&amp;') iri, durugt 'tough, hard, rough' Fel. 53 (quotn.); irik (spe/7) durugt sea. xaşin (quotn.); İrikrek durugttar (quotn. and correction of error in Vel. 53 s.v. érikdi) San. 100r. 26: Xwar. xiv irig 'rough, coarse! Qutb 51; Nahc. 105, 11-12; 150, 16: Kip. xir a/-xaşin (opposite to “soft” yumşak) iri: Hou. 26, 18: xv xagin iri (iriğ added in margin) Tuh. r4b. 8: Osm. xiv to xvt İri 'rough, harsh' of persons and things, in several texts T T.S 1 387; 11 544; HI 380; IV 434. D irük Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. 2 i:r-, Hap. leg. but see irüklük. Xak. xr irük al-tulma fi l-hà'it wa ğayrihi "a crack, or breach, in a wall, etc.” Kaş, I zo (prov). örüğ “rest, repose (esp. in the course of a journey), quiet, restful”. Survives in NE Şor örüğ/ürü (?sc) "quiet, modest” R 7 1224, 1883: NC Kir, órgü/órgül; Kzx. érü “a halt on a journey; sedentary” and SW xx Anat. örük “a vacation" SD)? 1:17. "The occurrences in Uyğ. have been much misunderstood ; sonietimes it has been taken as a Sec. f. of ürün and translated 'sercne', which is not the meaning of either word (see e.g. TT i p. 28, note B.1) and sometimes transcribed ürüh, taken as derived fr. 1 ür and translated "everlasting” (see e.g. Index to USp.). Uyğ. vur ff. Man, tinBuluk orunta órügin “by  rest in a place of repose” TT IJI 110: Bud. örüğ uzati sımtağsız dyanda órügin amılin erürler “they rest and are peaceful in restful, long-lasting meditation free from neglectfulness! St. 247, 16-18; 0.0. of örüğ amil see amul; o.o. of órüg uzat1 U II 72, v (i); USp. 102a. 41; Suv. 613, 6: Xak. xı órüg a/-iqüma fi mahán muddata(n) “a temporary halt at a place”, hence one says sü: o: kü:n órüg bold: “the army halted (aqdma) in one place for ten days without leaving it or raiding'; also used of an amir (i.e beg) or a tribe (gabila) when they halt Kaş. I 69: K.B (like caravans) órüg turğu bolmaz 'they do not remain stationary! 1386; örüğ bol amul bol “become quiet and peaceful" 1416; a.o. 1852: Çağ. xv ff. örk ("vith -K', sic?) (inter alia) "a person who is stationary (mugim olmuş) at a place”, e.g. they say of an army which stays at a place ol kün örk oldi Vel, ror, erük (so spelt) (/fnter alia) mahat 1a  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 267 
     
   
   
     DIS dirany-i ördü-yi salatin . . . hi dar cá'i wedqi şamvad "a pause and halt of a royal army which occurs at some place” San. 37v. 9; örük (spelt) (inter alia) ditto abbreviated do. 71 v. 17: Kip. xil al-magám “rest” (opposite to 'movement' tepreş) örü: /fTou. 26, 21. D örük Pass. Dev. N. fr. 2 ó:r-; lit. 'anything plaited', w. various specific applications. Easily confused vv. Órk, but s.i.s.m.İ., usually as örü. Xak. xı örük ku// şay” madfür 'anything plaited”, hence al-dafira', "a plait of hair” is called órük saç Kaş. 7 69: Kip. xv zafira Tuh. 24a. 13 misread as dafira and glossed örmeç/örük. € D erki: an Adv. discussed in v. G. ATG para. 359 and //füen-ts. Biog., p. zi, note 62; in spite of the contrary opinion expressed therein, it seems, except on the rarest possible occasions, to be used only at the end of questions to indicate that a categorical answer is not expected; the best translation is, therefore, a periphrasis like “do you suppose that . . .' or “is it likely that . . .”. Like erken and 1 erinç it seems to be a Dev. form fr. 1 er- dating back to a time when the verbal Suffs. were rather different fr. those in viti and later, Survives only(?) in NE Tuv. irgi “a particle used in questions to make them more polite'. Uyğ. vii ff. Man. amtı ertip kalır erki sen “nov you are perhaps passing avvay?” TT II 15, 7-8: Bud. bola:r (sic) y6ğ mü erki a:zu erme:z mü erki tép sezikliğ bolmig “having become uncertain vvhether these things vvere good or perhaps not” TT VI1I H.5-6; alı çevişi neteğ erki “vhat sort of devices (Hend.) do you suppose that he uses?' U /T 16, 24; Kuan. 99-100;ne tıltağın ne üçün teginmek bolur erki "for what reason and why do you suppose that perception. (Sanskrit vedand) occurs? U HI To, 17-18; o.o. of direct questions U I7 22, 4: 31, 43; U HI 45, 6; U IV 14, 145-6; Suv. 132, 15; 599, 23; İTüen-ts. 62(?), 1829, 1884, etc.—tiplagali bolğay erki men 'I shall, I suppose, listen” U 7/7 29, 4-5: Xak. xı erki: Aarf şahh"a particle expressing doubt , hence one says ol kelir mü erki: a yahdur huma am lá "do you suppose he is coming or not?'; toa huma yunáb manába'l-istifhàm it takes the place of an interrogative Kaş. I 129: KB nelük tu$dum erki yana ólgeli “vhy do you suppose that I was born, if Tam just to die ? 1136; kavuşğum kaçan erki tepri bilir “God knows when, if ever, we shall meet again” 6176; a.o. 5121 (2 öt): xın(?) Tef. erki in questions and statements "perhaps” 82: Çağ. XV ff. see erken: X war. xiv erki in questions Qutb 21. D ergü: Dev. N. fr. 1 er-; cf. 3 erig; “dvvelling place” and the like. N.o.a.b. but see erle:, Uyğ. viu ff. Man.-A(?) kendünüp ergü barkı İgapl "his own dwelling and household goods! TT VT 83, note 464, 1 (cf. the usual phr. ev bark); a.o. M I 14, 12-13 (oğul): Bud. yadıltılar “they dispersed each to his own . ERG kentü kentü ergüsiperü 223 dwelling" TT VI 464; yekler ergüsi otruğlarında “in thc islands where devils dwell' Kuan. 20-1. D órki: N./A.S. fr. r ó:r; “high, lofty', etc. Survives only(? in NE Sag. örkü R 7 1228. Uyğ. vırı ff. Bud. örki badrakalpiki bodisatvlar “the lofty Bhadrakalpika Bodhisattvas' TT IV 10, 32: Civ. TT 1 65 (ıçan-). D örgü: Hap. leg.; Conc. N. fr. 1 ö:r-, cf. 1 órgüg. Xak. xı örgü: al-sanüm 'protuberance, hump” Kaş. I 129. erkeç 'he-goat'; originally quite a general word but survives in NC Kir., SW Az., Osm., 'Tkm. (see Shcherbak, p. 111) and xx Anat. ergec SDD 543; erkeç do. 546: ürğeç do. 1434, usually for "a castrated goat”, in SW somctimes “a three-year-old goat'; Cf. teke:. Uy£. vii ff. Civ. iki süpük erkeç etin 'two bones of a he-goat with flesh on them' H I 16: Xak. xı erkeç al-tays "he-goat” Kaş. I 95 (prov.): KB bular ol sürüğ koyka erkeç sanı “these (learned men) are like a he-goat in a flock of sheep” 4353: xiv Mu. (under 'sheep and goats") al-xassi “castrated” erkeç Mel. 70, 16; Rif. 72 (vocalized ürkeç): Çağ. xv ff. erkeç buz-i nar-i sih sála wa buz-i pigraw-i halla "a three-year-old he-goat; a he-goat that leads the flock San. 37r. 25; érkec same translation, also spelt with e- do. 99v. 24: Kom. xiv *he-goat' erkeç CCG; Gr: Kip./Tkm. xiv erkeç (vocalized erküg) al-tays (presumably in Tkm.) and in Kip. a/-muxgá mina'l-mi'za "a castrated goat' İd. 11; al-xaşşi mina'l-ma'az erkeç Bul. 7, 14: Osm. xv ff. erkeç “he-goat" (generic term) in several texts T'T:S 1 272; II 391; IJI 259. D 1 örğüç Dev. N. (Conc. N.) fr. 1 ó:r-; lit. *something which rises or protrudes', usually specifically “a camel's hump”: S.i.a.m..g. with minor phonetic variations. Cf. örğü:. Xak. xı örğüç a/-ma:c "a wave'; hence one says su:v örğüçlendi: máca'l-má': (here comes 2 örgüç): örgüç al-utfiya “the base of a pot” Kaş. I 95: xiv Muh. (under “camels”) a/-sanam 'hump' ó:rge:c Mel. 7o, 11; Rif. 172: Çağ. xv ff. örküç sar-i şüna-t asb wa kühün-i şutur "the crest of a horse's mane; a camel”s hump', and metaph. bulandi vea sar-i küh “an eminence, the crest of a mountain! San. 71r. 25: Kip. xi samdmu'l-camal örğüç Hou. 14, 15: XIV örğüç al-sanüm İd. ır: xv sanám Or$es (sie; in margin örğüç) Tuh. 19b. 2; a.o. do. 15b. 2 (ya:ğ): Osm. xiv ff. ór&amp;üc "a camel's hump'; in several texts T'T[S II 755; III 566; IV 629. D 2 órgüc Dev. N. fr. 2 ö:r-: survives only (?) in SW xx Anat. örgüç “a weaver's implement” SDD 1115: Xak. xı örgüç dafiratul-mar'a wa qunza"atuhu “a woman's plait of hair and her tresses” Kaş. I 95: Oğuz xı örçüğ al-dafira; metathesis (qalb) of örğüç I 103. erkek 'male, masculine', in antithesis to tişi: *female', a generic term applied to men and animals; said in e. G. A TG, para. şo, to be an 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 268 
     
   
   
     DIS 224 Intensive form in -kek of 1 er, but this is certainly wrong since the initial is é-, not e-, and there is no adequate evidence of the existence of a suffix -kek (as well as -Bek, which is not an [ntensive). S.t.a.m.l.g., usually as érkek/irkek. Türkü viii ff. erkek buza:ğu: *bull calf” IrkB 41; a.o. do. 24 (emig): Uyğ. viti ff. Man.-A (concupiscence) kim érkekli tişili etózinde erür “vhich is in the bodies of males and females' M I 17, 8-10; (all the hens flourished) yeme érkeki nen [onmaz] ermis “and the cocks did not flourish at all” M / 36, 10-11; a.0. M 7I 7, ig: Bud. tişi erkek kut waxsegler “the female and male protecting spirits (Iranian l-w.) Suv. 425, 1-2; tişili erkekli TT V/ 321 (and USp. 99, 1); alti [ér]kek [o]ylar 'the six male pipes' (of a musical instrument). Z/üen-ts.. 133 (and see erpek): Xak. xı erkek "the male (a/-dakar) of any animal; hence “a cock" is called erkek takn:ğu: Kaş. 1 111; four o.o.: KB ayitmaklik erkek turur 'questioning is masculine! (and answering feminine) 979; o.o. 980, 4523: xırı(?) Tef. erkek 'male' 82: xiv Muh. al-dahar erkek Mel. 45, 5; 54, 11; Rif. 138 (é:irBek), isi (unvocalized): Çağ. xv ff. erkek (spelt) nar *masculine', of humans rudakkar “male”, of horses faA 'stallion' Sam. gov, 27: Xwar. xı(?) érkek oğul “a male child” Og. 4, etc.; erkek böri “a male wolf' do. 14i, etc.: Kom. xiv 'masculine' erke(k) CCI; Gr.: Kip. xii al-dakar erke:k (?, not vocalized) How. 24, 17: xiv érkek al-dakar as opposed to female /d. 11; XV al-dakar min. kulli'l-haywánat. erkek Kav. 61, 21; ditto Tul. 16a. rz: Osm. xv, xvi erkek in several phr. T TS 7 272; III 259; IV 303. D erklig P.N./A. fr. erk; both 'possessing power or authority' and 'possessing frce-vvill or independence, free to do as one likes”, The two meanings are very close together, and it is often difficult to decide which is intended; when applied to God prob. both are, and '"inighty' is the best translation, though it does not give the whole meaning. Survives in NC Kir, erktü:; Kzx. érikti, irikti, and NW Kar. L. T. erkli; Kaz. irikli. The phr. erkliğ, xan was early adopted as the title of 'the ruler of the underworld'; it was borrowed by Mong. as er/tk kağan and this phr. has been reborrowed by some NE languages. Türkü vıtu üze: tepri: erklig (gap) “Heaven is mighty above” Ex. A. c. (ETY 1H 123); viu ff. (a man went hunting) tağda: kamlami:ş tepri:de: erkliğ “he made magic in the mountains (and became) independent of Heaven(?)' IrkB 12; o.o. do. 55 (törüt-), do. Postscript (alku:); ka:mágda: erkli:g yultu:z ermi:ş "it was a star more powerful than all the others” Toyok IJI 2r. 7-9 (ET Y II 179); 2.0. do. 2v. 11-12: Man. (if we have believed that He is) kertü erklig küclüg tenri "the true, mighty, powerful God” Chuas. 18-19; erkliğin erksizin 'voluntarily or involuntarily' do. 255; similar phr. de. 265-6: Yen. Mal. 28, s (inilgii): Uyğ. vurff. Man.-A Ordu Cigil Kent erkligi “the independent . ERG  ruler of Ordu: [&amp;ent and Cigil Kent! M / 27, 6-7: Bud. erklig kan yértincüsin “the world of the Mighty Ruler' (i.e. the underworld) U IH 33, 7-8; (tinliğllar tuğum üze erklig bolurlar “mortals acquire control over their rebirths" U JV 28, 7-8; kamağ tepriler üze erklig türklüğ erürsiz "you have authority over all the gods and maturity' 775. 51a. 8 ff.; o.o. TT IV 18, note D.7, 7; V 22, 26-7, and see Indices to TT VI and V7/: Civ. borluk üze . 6. Solta (?read Sultan) Ağa erkliğ bolzun "let S.A. have full ownership rights over the vineyard” USp. 13, io, similar phr. do. 16, 12; 36, 14; similar phr. but with Dat. instead of üze do. sı, 6; 56, rz, 57, zo (in these cases relating to persons not property); erklig beg "the competent authority! do, 114, 14; ao. TT I 25 (nrjula:-): Xak. xı KB ay erklig uğan mepü mursuz bayat oh mighty, powerful, everlasting, unwearying God” 6; biliğliğ kişi tilke erklig kerek “the wise man rnust control his tongue! 971; a.0. 3520: x111(?) At. kul ol málka màli apa erklig ol “he is a slave to his wealth, his wealth is his^ master” 256; Tv»f. erklig “having authority' (usually with üze) 83: xiv Rb. yélke erkliğ farışta “the angel that rules the wind' A 1 782, Muh(?) şühib farmán responsible minister” érklig Rif. 145 (only): Xwar. xiv erklig/erkli 'authoritative, having control” Qutb zı, érklig do. 51; erklig Nahc. 344, 3: . Kom. xiv erkli “mighty”, erkli erksiz 'voluntarily or involuntarily” CCG; Gr.: Osm. xiv erkli “free to choose' (between two alternatives) in one text 7'T'S I 272. S ergen See erpen. D erken like erki: (q.v. and 1 erinç an archaic Dev. form fr. 1 er-; originally used after verbs in the Aor. f. to mean "while, later used rather more freely to mean "while being”, sec v. G. ATTG, para. 437. Survives in NE Tuv. erğin 'a particle used to give a flavour of indefiniteness to a statement' (perhaps a Sec. f. of erki:) and as eken/iken, etc. '*while being” in most other language groups. Türkü vırı ff. Man. Chuas. 213(1 alkan-): Uyğ.viri ff. Bud. ança sözleyü turur erken 'while they were thus speaking' U IV 20, 233; similar phr. do. 28, 18; yoriyur erken “vhile he was walking" do. 30, 34, etc.; siz Enetkekte erken 'while you were in İndia” Hüen-ts. 1790 (and see note thereon); o.o. do. 2022, 2142; Suv. 620, 17 etc.; 621, 19: Civ. Tardış apam ölğen erkende “our grandfather Tardış being (now) deceased! Up. rz, 2: Xak, xi erken a particle meaning Fala kada “the position being so-and-so'; hence one says ol kelür erken kördüm 'I saw him while he was coming' (lala ityünihi) Kaş. I 108; similar usages IT 249, 9; 301, 2; 333, 5 (sékrit-): KB kiçig oğlan erken biliğ oğrenür “a man learns wisdom when he is a small boy” 1823: xin(?) At. biliğsiz tiriğ erken atı ölüğ “the ignorant man's name (reputation) dies while he is still alive' 96; a.o. 215; Tef. yiğit erken *while a voung man' and similar phr. 78 ff. (s.v. 1 er-): Çağ. xv (T. both authorities list RU —----— -——SBÉA-——EREEEEEEEENN 0İ   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 269 
     
   
   
     DIS erken, érkin, éken, and|ékin, usually without cross-refces., and stating that they are all synonymous; but the examples show that érkin/ékin has a different meaning and is a Sec. f. of erki:; érkin (“vvith -K”) is used with another word, e.g. bolmadı erkin olmadımı 'was it not?” (quotn.); erken ('with -k-” has the same meaning (quotn. containing érkenni “his being”) Vel. 49; éken ('with -g-', sic in error) usually used with another word, e.g. fulàn éken fulán iken or idügi 'bcing so-andso” (quotns.); ékin ('with -k-") usually used with another word, e.g. bu érdi ékin bu idi (quotns.) do. 64; érken (spelt) Aast “is” (quotn. containing tilbe érlén dür “is mad"); also spelt érkin (quotn. ne érkin said to mean both *what is?” and 'what liberty of action?) also a lafz-i zá'id 'supplementary word' used dar rawádbit "İn compound expressions” (quotn.) San. 99v. 28 (several oblique cases of érken follow); éken (spelt) same translation as érken (quotn.), also spelt ekin San. ro8v. 19 (several oblique cases follow); ékin (spelt) inter alia; (2) abbreviation of érkin az cumla-i rawübit meaning hast (quotn.); (3) a supplementary word used as an ornament in compound expressions (quotns.) do. 109r. 28: Xwar. xin érken/éken “vhile” ' Ali 37. D 1 irkin Intrans. Dev. N/A. fr. irk-; “collected together in one place” and the like. Survives in SW xx Anat. irkin (and irkim) "a hoard, buried treasure” SDD 796, and also perhaps Osm. ürkün “a pool of rain vvater” and the like. Xak. xı irkin su:v al-má'u'lmüstanqa" 'stagnant water'; also used of anything collected together (muctami'); hence the chiefs (akábir) of the Karluk are called kö:1 irkin meaning that “his intellect is concentrated like a full pool" ('agluhu muctami" ka'lŞadir”l-mumtah”) (see 2 irkin): irkin yağmur al-mataru'l-dáà'im ayyüm 'continuous rain for several days” Kaş. I 108. 2 irkin a title borne by tribal chiefs, inferior to xagan but superior to beg, cf. elteber, 1 €o:r. In addition to the occurrences in "Turkish below, the word often occurs in Chinese records transcribed f-kim (sometimes mis-spelt ssü-Rin owing to confusion between two similar Chinese characters). ""he subject is discussed at length by F. W. K. Müller in “Uigurisehe Glossen” in the Festschrift für Friedrich Hirth, Berlin, 1920, pp. 317 ff. where it is stated that the title Kül Erkin (sic) also occurs in Ragidu'l-din and Abıplğüsi, but in the Russian translation of the former, Rashid-ad-din. Sbornik letopisei, Moscow-Leningrad, 1952 fL, vol. I, p. 147, the spelling is Kül Irkin. Kay.'s etymology is unconvincing; it is almost certain that the title 2 kül, q.v., is not identical with kö:l, this word, too, is prob. merely a title, but if it is der. fr. irk- the meaning, is prob. something like 'convener'. "Türkü vir anta: késre: yer(?) bayirku: uluğ irkin yağı: bolt: “after that the paramount irkin of the Yer (reading uncertain) . Bayirku: became hostile” 7 E 34; [? ululğ 8641125 . ERG 225 elteber özi: kelti: sir(?) irkin oğlı: Yigen Çor kelti: “the great(?) Elteber (of . . .) came himself; Yigen (or Yegen ?) Çor the son of the Sir(?) İrkin came” Ix. 21 (it is possible that the vvord before Bayırku: in the first quotn. which is damaged on the stone and the word before Irkin in the second are identical and may be Sir, q.v.): (Uyğ. vırı ff. Civ. the words İrkent irkini in USp. 22, 8-9 are transcribed as two P.N.s İrkenür İrkey in Arat's revised text, prob. correctly): Xak. xı Kaş. I 108 (1 irkin): KB in the list of ranks and official titles in 4065 ff. which is partly corrupt in all MSS. 4068b. prob. reads kayusi kül irkin “some become gül irkin'; negü ter egitgil Ha irkini (so read) “hear what the irkín of Ha says" 4752. D örğen Conc. N. fr. 2 ó:r-; 'plaited rope, cord', and the like. Survives, sometimes with slightly different meanings, in NE Küer. örğöp (sic) R 1 1230; NW Kar. L. T. órken (and L. erken) R 1 779, 1227; Krim órken do. and SW xx Anat. órgen/órken SDD ırrış. "The word is syn. vv. 1 uruk, the two words are quite unconnected but some medieval and modern words like urBan in Xwar. xit “AH 56 and SW Osm., Tkm. and perhaps arğan/ arkan in SE Türki, NC Kir., Kzx., etc. seem to lie squarely between the two. Oğuz (sic?) xı örğen al-nis' “the thong of a camel's girth' Kaş. I 108; a.o. (in Xak.) 7 195, 17 (örül-): (Xak.) xiv Muh. (under 'camels') a/-habl 'rope' órge:n (-ğ- marked) Mel. 7o, 11; Rif. 172: Çağ. xv ff. órgen (spelt) "a stout rope (rismán-i pahni) used to fasten packages (on pack animals)' San. 71r. 23: Xwar. xiv órgen frope' Qutb 124: Kom. xiv 'rope' órgen CCG; Gr.: Kip./Tkm. xiv urğan (?Tkm.) "the long rope (al-habl) with which sheep are tied for milking and other purposes'; in Kip. órgen İ4. rr: Osm. xvi ff. órgen occurs in several dicts. translating Pe. words for 'rope" and the like T T'S 11 756; III 566. VU?D örğin 'throne'; Conc. N. fr. órge:if that verb really existed. N.o.a.b. Türkü viii ff. altu:n örği:n üze: olu:ripan “sitting on a golden throne” IrkB r: Uyğ. vir anta: yayladım örgin anta: yaratıtdım 'I spent the summer there and had (my) throne erected there” Su. E 9; o.o. do. E 8 (étit-); S 1o (Orge:-): vii ff. Man. TT II 8, 68 (altunluğ), M Hİ 35, 18 (iduk): Bud. Vacrasan örğün üze olurup 'sitting on the Vairasana throne" TT IV 12, s4-5; o.o. TTV 6, 31, etc.; Hüen-ts. 1814. D 1 ürkün Intrans. N./A.S. fr. ürk-; 'panic'. Survives only(?) in NC Kir. Xak. xr ürkün “the panic (al-hazáhiz) which breaks out in a clan because of the enemy, and they seek refuge in forts and castles” Kaş. I 108. S 2 ürkün See 1 irkin. D ürkünç N./A.S. fr. Refl. f. of ürk- (which survives only(?) in NE Khak.); “panic, panic-stricken”. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı Kaş. I 250, 4 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 270 
     
   
   
       226 DIS (ürkül-); n.m.e.: Çağ. xv ff. ürkünç ram tea tealigat "fear, terror” San. 71r. 26. D erksiz Priv. N./A. fr. erk; 'without freewill, involuntary”, Survives in NC Kır.erksiz, Kzx. ériksiz and NW Kar. L. T. erksiz R 1 783, Kaz. iriksiz. Türkü vrı ff. erksiz Toyok IV v. 6(ETY 1I 180, damaged): Man. (if we say that the sun and moon) erksizin tuğar batar 'rise and set involuntarily' Chuas. 22; 0.0. 255, 265-6 (erklig): Bud. (my authority was not sufficient) erksiz 1durmen *] am sending him against my will PP 27, 4; anın yarlıkıpa erksizin men bu muntag yavlak ada kilurmen “1 create these so evil dangers by her command and involuntarily' U IV 16, 160-1; a.o. U 111 84, 8 (ii): Xak. xı KB közl suk kişi özke erksiz erür “the man with a greedy eye has no control over himself! 2611; (when his heart is captivated) bolur erksiz Kişi “a man ceases to be master of himself! 3855; isiz kılsa boynin eger erksizin 'if he docs evil, he involuntarily bows his neck' 4564: xın(?) Tef. erksiz “povverless” 82 (s.v. erk): Xwar. xiv ditto Quib 21 (s.v. erk): Kom. xiv CCG; Gr. (erklig). D ergüz Hap. leg.; Dev. N. fr. erü:- with suffix -ğüz otherwise unknown; for the elision of -ü:- cf. erğür-. The form of the word is firmly fixed by its location between VU Arvuz, a P.N., and öğsüz. Xak. xi erğüz su:v duwábatu'l-talc. wa'l-camd fi ibtidp”l-rabi' "the melting of snow and ice at the beginning of spring”, in a verse ya:y yaru:pan ergüzi: aktı: akin munduzi: translated “the spring morning has dawned and the melted ice, and the streams in flood have flowed dovn” Kaş. 1 96. Dis. V. ERGD irik- (?érik-) Emphatic f. of 1 i:r-, “to be disgusted, bored”, Survives in NE, several dialects, erik- R 7 764, also Khak., Tuv.; SE Türki irik- Shaw 33; NC Kir. erik-, Kzx. érig-; SW xx Anat. erik- DD 544; these forms suggest an original pronunciation as érik-. Xak. xi KB (the world called me lovingly) kópül bérdim erse irlkti éve "when İ gave it my heart, it quickly got bored' 1172; 0.0. 548, 5674: Çağ. xv ff. irik- (-di) sabah erhenden kalk- "to get up early in the morning” (quotns., see below) and /aril- yorul- 'to be vexed, bored' (quotns.) Vel. 53; irik- (spelt) dilgrr şudan "to be displeased' San, 98v. 28 (quotns.) (the error of Vel.'s first translation is pointed out in do. roor. 26 s.v. 2 irig): Xwar. xiv érik- “to be disgusted, bored (with someone 421.” Qutb 51, 60 (irik-): Kom. xiv “to be disgusted' erik- CC7; Gr.: Kip. xii al-dacar "to be annoyed, disgusted” irikmek Hou. 27, 14: XV dacara (yada-, sızla-, in margin) irik- Tu). 23a. 12; nazaga “to be irritable' irik- do. 37a. rz. VU (?D) örge:- possibly Den. V. fr. 2 örüğ: see órgin. The word in Tef., if it  . ERG belongs here, would support the suggested ctymology. Uyğ. vir orku:n balıklığ beltiri:nte: el órginbin anta: örğipen étitdim “1 set up thc throne of the realm at the junction of the Orkhon and Balıklığ (rivers) and rested(?) there” Su. S ro (the word is damaged only the -rğ- being clear, but there is no other obvious reading): (Xak.) xııı(?) Tef. labita 'to stay, tarry' (at a place on a journey) örğe:- (sic) (and órget-) 339, 340. D ürkit- Caus. f. of ürk- ; “to startle (someone AAcc.); to scare (game, etc.) away'. S.i.a.m.l.g. "Türkü vır ff. İrRB zr (üd-): Man. neçe korkit(t)umiz ürkit(t)ómiz erser “if we have somehow frightened or startled people" Chuas. 87-8; Xak. xı ol ko:y ürkütti: “he scared (naffara) the sheep” (etc.) Kaş. 7 263 (ürkütü:r, ürkütme:k): Çağ. xv ff. ürküt(spelt) Caus. f.; ram dàádan “to scare, frighten”, also spelt hürküt- San. 69r. 12; hürküt(spelt) Caus. f, alternative form of ürkütramánidan San. 324v. 9 (quotn.): Kip. xit caffala “to scare avvay” ürküt- Hou. 39, 11: xtv ditto İd. 12. D irkil- Pass. f. of irk-; 'to be collected; to come together, assemble". S.i.s.m.]. Cf. ükül-, yığıl-. Xak. xı sü: telim irkildi: “a numerous army assembled” (ictama'a); also used .of any things that assemble until they are numerous (katura) Kaş. I 249 (irkilür, irkilme:k): KB biliğ kimyàá teg ol nen irklü turur *wisdom is like alchemy; it is a thing which accumulates” 310; Xwar. xiv irkil- “to be collected' Quib 60: Kip. xiv İrkil- ictama'a İd. ır: Osm. xiv ff. irkil- "to assemble'; c.i.a.p. TTS I 388; II 545; III 38o; IV 535. D ürkül- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. (used only as an Impersonal verb) of ürk-. Xak. xı ürkünc bolup ürküldl: :waga'ati'l-hazáhiz hatta nufira minhá 'panic broken out so that (the people) scattered because of it” Kaş, 7 250 (ürkülür, ürkülme:k). D irkle:- “to trample on (something Zcc.)'; Dev. N. fr. irk, but the semantic connection is only metaph. The entries in Kaş. are mostly unvocalized but the Uyğ. spellings of this verb and irklet- and the alternative form with prosthetic y- make the spelling certain. Uyğ. vid ff. Bud. PP 65, 5 (see E iple:-): Xak. xı ol yérig irkle:di: mafi'a'l-ard “he trampled on the ground (etc.)'; dialect form (/uğa) of ikle:di: (misvocalized eğle:di:) Kaş, III 443 (irkle:r, irkle:me:k, all unvocalized); ol yé:rig ikle:di: same translation Kaş. 7 287 (ikle:r, ikle:me:k all unvocalized); ikledi: (sic) me:nip adak kórmedip oğri: tuza:k “my. foot accidentally trod (teatí'a) on the hidden trap” 7 380, 14; ol yérig yikle:di: same translation, in the dialect of those who converted alif into yd”, the more correct form (al-afsah) is lkle:di: Z/I 309 (yikle:r, yikle:me:k): KB see órkle:-. D órkle:- Den. V. fr. órk; 'to tether(a horse, etc. Acc.).” Survives in SW xx Anat. ökle-/   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 271 
     
   
   
       TRIS. ERG óreklc-/órkle- /órükle-/ürükle- SD? 1106, etc.; some of these forms and NE “Tel, óró:lo-, NC Kir, ditto.; Kzx. órele- are perhaps der. fr. örük. Xak. xı ol atığ órkle:di: “he tethered (şadda) the horse to a stake vvith a long rope” Kaş. 111 443 (örkle:r, örkle:me:k): KB (any beg who is prudent watches over his realm) yağı boynı yançtı üze örkledi “he crushes the enemy's neck and ties him down' 2016 (the Fergana MS. reads Ikledi 'trampled', and this, or irkledi, makes better sense, and is prob. the correct reading): (xın(?) Tef. örklen- “to be fastened to (something Dat.) Refl. f. 248 (órhlen-); 340 (iürklen-, same quotn.): Osm. xvi örhfe- translates Ar. words for “to tether” in two dicts. T'T'S 77 756; IV 629. D irklet- Caus. f. of irkle:-; “to make (someone Dat.) trample on (something Aec.)”. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vrurff Man. beş alunuğ irkletip ozkurtupuz “Thou hast saved us, making us trample on the five forms of existence" TT lI] 47: Xak. xı ol anar yér ikletti: 'he made him trample (awfa'ahu) on the ground” Kaş. 7 265 (ikletür, ikletme:k, all unvocalized). D erklen- Refl. Den. V. fr. erK, "to possess power or authority”. Survives only(?) in NW Kar. L., T. R 1 781; Kow. 184. Türkü viri ff. Man. él(lenmekim etöz mepisi begedmekim erklenmekim “my being a ruler, bodily pleasure, my bcing a beg, and my possession of authority! (have become very worthless and trivial in my sight) TT II 8, 43-4. D irkin- Refl, f. of irk-; “to collect (things) for oneself”, N.o.a.b.; irkin- “to stop from hesitation or fright” Red. 293 is no doubt a Sec. f. of ürkün- (sce ürkünç). Xak. xı ol ó:zipe: nep irkindi: “he collected (cama'a) things for himself” Kaş. 1 254 (irkinür, irkinme:k): Çağ. xvfft. irkin-(-ür) translated qgaşd u mayil eyle- “to be inclined towards', but in the supporting quotn. the meaning is clearly "to collect" Vel. 52 (not in Sar. where irk- is described as Rumi). VUD órgen- Refl. f. of órge:-; "to rest” or the like. 'This seems the obvious etymological explanation of this word, although “to be saturated' or the like would suit the context better. N.o.a.b. Türkü vir ff. Man. (then that good man) Kamağ özi tont bastan (sie, as usually in this text) adak(k)a tegi kanka irip(k)e órgenip 'with his whole body and clothing from head to foot lying in blood and pus' M 7 s, 12-14; arığsızka órgenmisin (seeing himself) 'lying in filth" do. 6, 7-8. D 1 ergür- contracted (cf. ergüz, ergüz-) Caus. f. of erü-; 'to melt, dissolve (something Zcc.); "to macerate (something Aee., in something Dat.)'. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viii ff. Man. (the fourth virtue of the Wind God is that he) tumllığığ) erğürer 'melts what is frozen” Wind. 39-40; (the fifth that) isigig ergürer  227 tarkarur 'he melts and dissipates heat do. 46-7: Civ. matu lur suvka ergürüp “macerating citrons (l.-w.) in water' H 77 22, 41; a.o. do. 24, 42; Xak. xı ya:ğ ergürdi: “he melted (adába) the fat” (etc.) Kaş. 7 227 (erğürür, erğürme:k). D 2 ergür- Caus. f. of 2 ér- ; etymologically "to cause (something) to reach or arrive”, but except in Osm. with rather different meanings. Survived in Osm. until fairly recently, but now only in xx Anat. ergör-/ergür-/irkör/ irgór- SDD 544, 796. Uy£. vırı ff. Civ. érte kün tavrak buyan kil aşnukan érgürü etözünni közed “early in the morning swiftly do good deeds; seizing the first possible opportunity(?) preserve your body” TT I 171-3; ürkürü buyan kil TT VII 28,2 is prob. a misrcading of erğürü: Xak. xı ol aşka: ergürdi: adraka'l-ta'àm qabl an yanfalit “he got hold of the food before it went past him”, also used of anyone who gets hold of anything before it goes past him Kaş. I 227 (ergürür, erğürme:k): Osm. xivff. ergür-/irgür(érgür-)/erür-/irür- (érür-) 'to make, or let (someone /ec.) reach (a place Dat.); to bring (something Zcc., to someone Dat.)', c.i.a.p. TTS I 275; H 395; III 263; IV 436. D erksin- Refl. Simulative Den. V. fr. erk; 'to have power, or authority (over someone Acc. or üze:)”. N.o.a.b. Türkü virr ff. Man. él(l)enmek erksinmek “to be a ruler and have authority” M III 16, 9 (ii); a.o. do. 19, 14: Uy£. vir ff. Man.-A M 1 27, 10 (uğur): Bud. bursap kuvrağ üze erksindimiz erser “if vve have exercised authority over Buddhist communities (Hend.) TT IV 6, 45; o.o. Pfahl. 22, 3 (uğur), USp. roza. 7-8: Civ. şılavantılar seliler erksinip “the clergy and laity (L-w.) having authority! (over certain properties) Up. 88, 26-7: Kom. xiv barçalarnı erksindeci "ruler over all” CCG, Gr. D irkiş- Co-op. f. of irk-; “to help to collect', etc. Si,sm.. Xak. xı ol mapa: tawa:r irkişti: “he helped me to collect(fi cam") the property'; also for “to compete”. Kaş. 7 238 (irkigü:r, irkisme:k), kelge:limet irkişü:r tacamma'a li'l-ityàn (the warriors) 'assembled to come” I 144, TO, 325, 11. D ürküş- Co-op. f. of ürk-; “to be completely panic-stricken'. Survives only(?) in NE Khak. Xak. xı Kaş. I 155, 19 (anın): n.m.e.: Çağ. xv ff. ürküş- (spelt) synonym (murádif) of ürk- in the sense of ram &amp;kardan 'to be frightened' San. 69r. 11. D ergüz- contracted (cf. ergüz, erfür-) Caus. f. of erü:-. Survives only(?) in NE Tuv. Uyğ. vir ff, Civ. ölüğ mişkiçninp yakrısın erğüzüp “melting the fat of a dead wild cat” H 7 57-8. Tris. ERG örüki: N./A.S. fr. örü:, 'situated above, high”. Survives only in most NE dialects” 'óregi/ örögü: R I i219, ızər. ÜYĞR. vitr ff, Civ.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 272 
     
   
   
       228 TRİS. üstünki altınkı tapladı örüki kodiki sevindi “those above and belovv vvere pleased, the high and the low were glad' TT I 128-9. D eriglig P.N./A. fr. 3 erig(?); n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vurff. Bud. Sanskrit sádhuvtharam (damaged, but prob. reading) “one who spends his life virtuously' edgü erigligig TT VIII 1: (Xak.) xm?) Tef. şahara “to appear (to someone, üze)” eriglig bol- 8: (belongs here ?). D e:riğlik Hap. leg. (but see örüğlük), A.N. fr. 5 eriğ, Xak. xi érriglik farahatu'l-datwàbb 'liveliness in pack animals' Xaş. 7 152. D erüklük A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. 1 erük; survives in SW Osm. eriklik “a plum orchard'. Xak. xr erüklük mazibatı”l-xatox “a peach orchard' Xaş. I 152. D irüklük A.N. fr. irük; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı KB (if a beg does not perform the essential duties just mentioned) irüklük kirür élke anda basa 'disintegration sets in in the realm in due course” 5906. D órüglük A.N. fr. órüg; 'calm, quietness', and the like. Survives in a word meaning 'an entertainment provided for a newly-arrived neighbour by earlier residents! noted as NC Kir. órülük/órü:lük; Kzx. érulik (sic); SW xx Anat. örülük SD i118. See Doerfer 11 590. Xak. xı KB amulluk kerek erke kilkt opay, órüglük kerek begke tuğsa kün ay “a man of upright character must be tranquil and a beg calm whether the sun or moon is rising! 325; a.o. 1988: (xiri(?). Tef. istawá "to rest” örüğlügğ bol- 8: (transcribed eriplrk?)). D órüklüg P.N./A. fr. órük; “plaited” and the like. S.i.s.m.l. as órülifórülü. Xak. xı KB örüklüğ saçı “his plaited hair” 5825. D erkliglik A.N. fr. erhlig; “povver, authority", Survives only(?) in NC Kir. erktü:lük; Kzx. ériktilik, Xak. xı KB tüzü nepke yetti bu erkliğlikin "Thine authority extends over all things” 9: xıı1(?) Tef. erkliglik 'independence, arbitrary behaviour(?)' 83. F órgesün 'thorn' a Mong. word (Kow. 590, Haltod 114) is mentioned as such in Saz. but does not seem to have become a l.-w. in any 'Turkish languages; it is therefore very unlikely that this is the word in H 77 since these medicinal texts are almost certainly all anterior to xil! ; it is perhaps a misreading of óvkesin “his lung'. Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. kizil órgesin name of a drug H 1I 34, 21: Çağ. xv ff. örkesün (spelt) in Mong. xár 'thorn', in Ar. called şazek San. 71r. zo. D erksizlik A.N. fr. erksiz; 'lack of independence', etc. Survives only(?) in NC Kzx. ériksizdik and NW Kar. L. T. erksizlik R I 784. Xak. xı KB körü barsa yalpuk bu erksizlikin 'if a man could see that he has no (real) freedom of action' (how could he behave so badly?) 1534. ERG 'Tris. V. ERGD 1 örgüçlen- Refl. Den. V. fr. 1 órgüc; “ be lumpy, humped', etc. S.i.s.m.l. Uyğ. virt T Man.-À (of the sca) örğüçlenmekiğ, 'being rough' M //I 9, 3 (ii); Xak. xı su:v órgüclendi: máca'l-má' "the water was covered with waves'; (here comes 2 örgüçlen- ); and one says eşiç órgüclendi: sárati'l-qídr düt utfiya “the pot had a foot-stand' (i.e. not a spherical bottom) Kaş. 1 312 (örğüçlenür, órgüclenme:k); a.o. / 95 (1 örgüç). D 2 örgüçlen- Refl. Den. V. fr. 2 örgüç. Xak. xi kı:z örğüçlendi: “the girl had a plait of hair” (qunza'a tea dafira) Kaş. I 312 (orğüçlenür, órgüclenme:k). D érkeklen- Refl. Den. V. fr. erkek. N.o.a.b. Uyf. virff. Civ. (in a fragmentary calendar text) i:rke:kle:nür “is masculine'(?) TT VHI P.19: Xak. xı su:v erkeklendi: mdca”l-mü "the water was covered with waves'; and one says anın yi:ni: erkeklendi: iqşa"arra cilduhu “his skin was covered with gooseflesh'; wa kadalika ida arö”l-racul raculiya “and also when a man shows virility' Kaş. 7 315 (erkeklenür, erkeklenme:k, in the first two meanings the word seems to be a muddle with 1 órgüglen-). D erigle:- Den. V. fr. 1 erig; noted only in the Hend. ótle:- eriğle:- "to advise'. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud, U 111 15, 11, etc, (Ötle:-). D erükle:- (érükle:-) Den. V. fr. 2 erük (éruk); 'to tan (hides). Xak. xı «obteri: erükle:di: dabaga'l-cild "he tanned the hide" Kaş. 1 306 (erükle:r, erükle:me:k), a.o. I 7o (2 erük): Kom. xiv 'tanned leather' eriklegen teri CCG; Gr. D erüklen- Refl. Den. V. fr. 1 erük; pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı yığa:ç erüklendi: “the tree bore peaches, apricots, or plums" Kaş. I 294 (erüklenür, erüklenme:k); a.o. 7/7 348, r3. D iriglen- Refl. Den. V. fr. 2 irig; survives only(?) in NC Kir. irden- 'to grow (in size or bulk) Yud. 37o. Xak. xı KB iriglendi ödlek mapa tüğdi kaş “the times were harsh and frowned on me' 1586; (do not be angry if harsh words are addressed to you) kóni sóz irig ol iriğlenme öz 'truth is harsh, do not be harsh yourself" 5775. D erükse:- Hap. leg.; Desid. Den. V. fr. lerük Xak. xı er erükse:di: “the man longed (tamanná) for pada etc.” Kaş. I 303 (erükse:r, erükse:me:k). D erksintür- Caus. f. of erksin-, but practically syn. vv. it. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vrit ff. Bud. Sanskrit adhipatim hrtvà 'making him a supreme ruler' erksintürme:k kılıp TT VIII A.7; siladhibati “the lord of uprightness' €axsápat erksindürme:klig do. 4.44. D erksire:- Hap. leg.; Priv. Den. V. fr. erk; “to lack independence or authority. Uy£. viti ff. (gap) erksireyin (gap) M 77 6, 8.   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 273 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. ARLDis. ARL ?E erle: Hap. leg.; the alif is unvocalized, but otherwise the word is quite clear; the translation suggests that it is a scribal error for ergü:, q.v. Xak. xı bolsa: kimin altun kümüş erle: éte:r 'if a man gets gold and silver, kagd yamhad twwatan “so he establishes a residence' (and when he is settled in place he offers his worship to God) Kaş. III 251, ro. D urluk 'seed' (for sowing); metaph. 'progeny, descendants'. Not definitely traceable earlier than xii, the prob. earliest date of the Uyğ. texts quoted below. Pm facie A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. ur, but the only evidence for the existence of such a word is the entry in İs. below where u:r may be a misunderstanding of uru:, Sec. f. of 2 uruğ. The likeliest explanation is that this is a crasis of uruğluk, q.v. Survives only (?) in NW Kar. L., T. urlukfurlux R 7 1:670; Kow. 275; Kaz. orlik and SW xx Anat. urluk SDD 1420. Uyf. vrrff. Civ. (in the usual formula renouncing any further interest in a sold property; ourselves, our elder and younger brothers) urlukumuz özlüğümüz “our progeny and blood relations” USSp. 16, 15 ff. (ağa for “elder brother” dates this document to xut or later); similar phr. do. 57, 13 (alımçı:): in a similar formula in do. r3, 12 the word used is urufum; alo. do. 21, 3 (1 inçü:): Xvvar. xiv (looking with lust is) zin3 urlukı “the progeny of adultery' Nahc. 350, 12: Kom. XIV 'seed' urluk CCI; Gr.: Kip. xim a/-bidar *sced for sovving” urluğ (sic) Hou. 9, 15: xiv (u:r (v.l. urzu) a/-bazr 'seed'); u:rluk al-mu"add minhu [i'l-za'r "that (part of it) which is destined for sovving” İd. ro: xv bazr “seed” urluk Tiu. 7b. 13. D erlik A.N. fr. 1 er; “manliness, virility'. S.i.m.m..g. Uyğ. vir ff, Civ. erliki ked bolur "his virility becomes excellent! /7 7 78: Xak. xı erlik “virility” Kaş. I roq: Çağ. xv ff. érlik (and érenlik) erli Vel, $4 (quotn.); érlik mard? wa dzad mardi 'manliness, liberty' (the latter ?confused with erklik) Sa”. ioor. ıq: Xwar. xiv erlik “manliness, bravery” Quib 21; érlik do. 52: Kom. xiv '(human) nature' erlik CCG; Gr.: Osm. xiv ff. erlik 'bravery', and occasionally “virility” in several texts T'T.S II 392; III 260; IV 303. : D ürlüg P.N./A. fr. 1 ür, 'everlasting'. N.o.a.b. Uy£. viri ff. Bud. ürlüğ enç nirvan balıklığ 'dwelling in the city of everlasting peaceful nfirvána' Suv. 680, 18 (a text printed in the same volume as Suv.); a.o. Suv. 33, 4. D órlem Hap. leg.(?); N.S.A. fr. órle:-. Xak. xı KB toğardın batarka bir örlem yer ol "from east to west it is a distance which can be Covered as a single stage(?)' 3706. Dis. V. ARLD 1 aril- Hap. leg.; the context seems to require that this should be taken as a Pass f. . 229 of 1 a:r- although that is an Intrans. V.; "to be tired”. If a Pass. f. of 2 a:r-, “to be tricked'. "Türkü viri 7 S 9, /T N 7 (alkin-). D 2 arıl- Hap. leg.; a mere jingle used only in the phr. arıl saril- (see 1 saril-) and without a separate existence; apparently different from éril-, q.v. D éril- Hap. leg.; so spelt but ?eril-. Prima facie a mere jingle like 2 arıl-, but unlike that word entered separately with Aor. and Infin. Sec seril-. Xak. xi er érildi: serildi: ihtazza”l-racul min ğamm xa lama mafsahu fühi the man was shaken with grief and blamed himself for it” Kaş. 7 196 (érilür, érilme:k). D f:ril- Pass. f. of 2 i:r- ; lit. “to be breached' and the like; metaph. (of the moon) 'to wane' (i.e. to have part of its visible surface cut off). N.o.a.b. Xak. xı ta:m i:rildi: “the wall (etc.) was breached” (imtalama); hence one says ay imildi: “the moon waned' (axada'l-qamar fi'l-nugsán) towards the end of the month Kaş. I 270 (krilür, 1:rilme:k): KB kün ök (so read) kór irilmez tolu ok turur 'the sun does not wane, it is (always) full' 825; tolu erdi ayım irildi tolu “my moon was full, the full (moon) has waned' 1071; kuruğ kaldi ornı irildi işim “his place has remained empty and my fortunes have declined” 1576: xin(?) At. kamuğ tolğan irlür 'everything that waxes wanes' 199: Kip. xiv iril- zala “to vvane” İd. ro. D orul- Pass. f. of o:r-, “to be reaped, movvn”. Survives only(?) in NC Kir. Xak. xı (in the same para. as urul-) tarığ oruldi: huşida”l-zar" “the crop was reaped' Kaş. 7 194 (no Aor. or Infin.): Çağ. xv ff. orul- (by implication “vvith 0-") dirat? şudan "to be reaped' San. 67v. 15. E D urul- Pass. f. of ur-, “to be put; to be struck”, etc. (cf. ur-). No doubt s.i.a.m.l.g.; in SW Osm. vurul-. Xak. xı er uruldi: “the man (etc.) was beaten” (duriba); and one says ter gi: uruldi: “the table was put into position”, and one says tu:ğ uruldiı: duribati'l- nawba wa hiya”l-tubül “the watch was beaten, that is the drums'; (orul- follows) Kaş. I 194 (urulu:r, urulma:k ; verse): xın(?) At. ozakı urulmis matal “a proverb cited of old” 164 (literal translation of Ar. phr. duriba matal); Tef. urul- “to be put, etc. 331: xiv Muh.(?) duriba urul- Rif. i29 (only): Çağ. xv ft. urul- (with u-") zada şudan “to be beaten' San. 67v. 16: Xwar. xiv urul- (1) (of a table) 'to be placed in position'; (2) (of a drum) 'to be beaten” Quib 199; (1) only MN 21: Kip. xv duriba urul- Kav. 26, 10 (mis-spelt urun-) and 13; Tuh. 86a. 13. D örül- Pass. f. of 2 ór-; “to be plaited' and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. Xak. xı örğen órüldi: rumila”l-nis “the thong of the camel's girth was plaited” Kaş. 1 195 (örülür, örülme:k, MS. in error -ma:k); Çağ. xv ff. örül- büfta şudan “to be plaited, twisted', etc. San. 67v. 16 (quotn.). 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 274 
     
   
   
      230 D ürül- Pass. f. of 1 ür-; 'to be inflated', and metaph. “to swell, be distended'. S.i.s.m.l. Uyf. vini ff. Man. (in the spring months) 1 iğaçlar sisar ürülür “the shrubs and trees swell and are distended' (as a man blows up a bladder) Wind. 21-2: Civ. ka:rnı ürü:lür “his stomach is distended' TT VHI 1.8; karın ürülmekig kerilmekig 'distension (Hend.) of the stomach' /7 11 8, 39; ro, 60: Xak. xi er övke:sinde: ürüldı: "the man svvelled (Pitafaxa) with anger'; and one says ka:b ürüldi: “the bladder was inflated' (nufixa); and one says o:t ürüldi: 'the fire was blown up” (nufixa); both Pass. and Intrans. Kaş. I 195 (prov.; no Aor. or Infin); bu er ol öpke:n ürülge:n “this man is constantly swelling with anger like a bladder” 7 158: xın(?) Tef. ürül- (of a trumpet) "to be blown" 340: Xwar. xiv ditto Na/c. 177, 3: Osm. Xv to Xvit (only) ürül- “to be distended; (of a trumpet) to be blown' in several texts TTST 7475 Hl 955; HI 733; IV 805. D irla:- Den. V. fr. 1 rr; "to sing, recite”, and the like. S.i.m.m.l.g. Although often spelt with prosthetic y-, most ear]y forms and the NE form ırla- and NC Kir. 1rda- show that this is secondary. Uyf. vir ff. Bud. 1rlayu "singing” (with a lovely voice) U II 46, 13; 3.0. TT X 144-5 (1 rr) —yirlap U 71175, 11; TT X 442; bödiyü yırlayu 'dancing and singing” U 141,21; İV 8, 36, o.o. PP 70,2; 71, 1: Xak. xı er yırla:dı: taganná'l-racul uğmiya “the man sang a song” Kaş, /11 308 (yırlar, yirTa:ma:k), a.o. HI 3, 26(13:r):xnn(?) Tef.irla"to sing” 129: XIV Mu. ğann6 yarla:- Mel. 29, 11; irla:- Rif. 113: Çağ. xvff. yirla- (- y) irlaVel. 419 (quotn.); yırla- (spelt; “vith -1-") vtcanandagi: hardan “to sing! San. 349r. 9: Kom. xiv “to sing” ırla- CCI, CCG; Gr: Kip. xırt £arná mina l-ginàá 1rla- (- gil in error) Hou. 42, 14: xiv 1rla- ganná ld. 10: xv ğannd yirla- Tw. 27a. 8: Osm. xiv ff. 1rla- (very rarely yirla-) "to sing'; c.i.a.p. TTS I 355; IH soz, İH 344; IV 396. (DS) orla:- (ori:la:-) abbreviated Den. V. fr. Or1:; to make a loud noise, shout', and the like. Survivesonly(?) in NE orla- Koib. 'to moo' RI 1064; Khak. ditto and “to shout', which establishes 0- as against u-. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. anta ok Bodisavt yana katığ ünin orladı 'thereupon the Bodhisattva elephant trumpeted loudly" U HI 58, 5 (i): Xak. xı er ori:la:dı: şaha”/-racul tva rafa'a "aqiratalın “the man shouted and raised his voice”, and one says er ori:Ja:di: salifa'l-racul sva záda fihi 'anil-gáya “the man boasted and exaggerated grossly' Kaş. I 309 (ori:la:r, orr:la:ma:k), yirtip (so read) yaka: o:rlayu: tamazzaqa'l-curubbán bi-'atoil ma'ahü "they tear their collars shouting at the same time” 7 189, 2 (or possibly o:rilayu:): xiv al-nidá to shout” o:rulamak Mel. 38,1; Rif. 124. D órle:- Dev, N. fr. 1 ö:r, “to rise, go upwards! and the like. S.i.m.m.l.g. vv. some phonetic changes and extensions of meaning; in SW only in xx Anat. SDD 1116. Xak. xı KB (a man by virtue surpasses others) üküş   DIS. V. ARLbolsa erdem er örlep uçar "if he has many good qualities a man soars upvvards" 2646; (the sun turned back to the earth and hid its face) kalık menzi kiş teg bolup örledi "the colour of the firmament turned to sable and rose” (the world rubbed a coal-black colour on its face) 3836; o.o. 3840, 4889, 4967-8, $677 (usually of stars, etc., rising): Çağ. xv ff. órle-(-p) yokuşla- . . . ya"ni yokuşa (ik- "to rise, go upvvards” Vel. 102 (quotn.), örle- (spelt) bald raftan ditto San. yor. 7 (same quotn.). D órlet- Caus. f. of órle:-; lit. “to raise', but in the early period rather 'to rouse, disturb'. S.i.s.m.]. Uyğ. vim ff. Man. (passions, hatred, etc.) örletür erti tınlığlarığ "have disturbed mankind” TT II] 34: Bud. bu müuntağ nızvanılar turkaru amru örletser “if emotions like this constantly (Hend.) disturb him” TT VI 74;0.0. Suv. 135, 16-17 (emget-) 136, 17; TT VI 61, 374; VII 40, 38 etc. D erlen- Refl. Den. V. fr. 1 er, (of a woman) "to be married', cf. evlen- ditto (of a man). Survives only(?) in NC Kir. erden-/erlen“to display manliness, reach maturity; cf. erles-. Xak. xı ura:ğut erlendi: /azavaccati'l-mar'a. “the woman married! Kaş. 7 257 (erlenür, erlenme:k): xiv Muh. al-muzawtaca é;rlenmis Mel. «5, 1 (Rif. 149 begli:g): Osm. xiv erlen- (of a woman) “to marry” in three texts T TS 7 273; I1I 259. D órlen- Refl, f. of örle:- “to rise, climb', etc., esp. of heavenly bodies. Survives in some NE dialects and SE Türki, Xak. xı bulut örlendi: naga'ati'l-saliába "the cloud rose", it is better (tva l-alisan) to say (1) özrdi: Kaş. I 257 (órlenür, órlenme:k; verse): Caf. xvff. ürlen- ba-bálà bar-ámadan "to rise up” San. 7or. 21 (with a quotn. about a dead donkey on whose bones the flesh reappeared; Vel. 103 gives the same quotn. but mistranslates örlendi órtiildi “vas covered"). D erles- Hap. leg.; Recip Den. V. fr. 1 er; cf. erlen-. Xak. xr ola:r ikki: erlesdi: tabürayü fl-rucüliya “the two of. them competed in virility” Kaş. J 239 (erleşü:r, erlesme:k). D orlaş- (orı:laş-) Co-op. f. of orla:-; "to shout, etc. together'. Survives only(?) in NE Koib., Khak. orlas- (sic). Xak. x1 bo:dun kamuğ orlaşdı: saha'l-qatwm va calabii “the people shouted and called out'; originally ori:lagdi: Kaş. / 239 (orlaşu:r, orlaşma:k). Tris. ARL PU aralı: Hap. leg.; the central vowcl, if any, is unknown. Some meaning like "nine months old”, or “vith nine points to its horns” might bc expected, but cannot be got out of the vvord as it stands; -It: is not a possible P.N./A. Suff. in Türkü. Probably corrupt or a foreign word. "Türkü vin ff. tokuz aralı sığu:n keyi:k men “1 -am a nine... . maral deer” IrkB 60. D aralık A.N. (sometimes Conc. N.) in -lık fr. ara:, s.i.a.m.l.g. in a wide range of mean 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 275 
     
   
   
     TRIS. ings. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. [arJalikta USp. roza. 45, if correctly restored, prob. means “in the intermediate state": Çağ. xv ff. aralığ (sic, but certainly A.N.) soasaf tva. miydn "centre, middle" Sar. 36v. 11 (quotn.). D irülüğ Hap. leg.(?); P.N./A. fr. irü:. Uyğ. vu ff. Man. irülüğ edğü künke “on an auspicious favourable day” M I 26, 21-2. D ürlüklüg. P.N./A. fr. *ürlük, A.N. fr. 1 ür; 'everlasting, eternal'; cf. ürlüksüz. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vitm ff. Bud. Sanskrit nityaivönitya eva vá "whether eternal or transitory' ürlüklüğ erse:r yeme: üclüksüz erse:r yeme: TT VIII F.6, akığsiz ürlüklüg paoşin etöz “the stable eternal Sambhogaköya” (recompense body, Chinese pao shén.— Giles 8,731 9,813) Sus. 704, 15-16. D ürlüksüz Priv. N./A. fr. *ürlük; 'transitory'. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Man. TT III 142-3 (bógün-): Bud. akığlığ ürlüksüz beş yapığığ “the five unstable, transitory attachments! Suv. 704, 14-15; o.o. TT VIII F.6 (ürlüklüg); TT X 54o (yatlan-); U III 43, 7. Tris. V. ARLD ara:la:- Den. V. fr. ara:; “to be, or go, between; to mediate”, and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g., with some extended meanings. Xak. xi ol ikki: kişi: otra: ara:la:dı: “he made peace (şülaha) between the two people”, also "he passed (cáwaza) betvveen” them, or two things; and for making peace' (fi'l-sulh) arila:di: is also used, but this is a vulgar expression (lafzatu'l-'àma) and the first is more correct (aşahh) Kaş. İ 308 (ara:la:r, ara:la:ma:k): Çağ. xv ff. arala- (1) tafahhuş hardan "to investigate, cxamine'; (2) dar miyün-i dü amr dardmadan wa miydnçigari hardan "to pass between two things; to act as mediator” San. 34v. 2 (quotns.): Osm. xv aralayıp gec- “to pass over' (a word in making a translation) TTS I 33; arala- 'to separate' (two people) III 32; “to appear between' (two things) IV 33. S orrla:-. See orla:-. D órü:le:- Den. V. fr. örü:: in Kaj.'s meaning Hap. leg.; órüle-/órele- “to rise' in several modern languages may be Sec. f.s of órle:-. Xak. xı ol ko:nuğ órü:le:di: gabağa”l-ğanam gd'ima(n) "he slaughtered the sheep while it was standing! Kaş. I 309 (örü:le:r, órü:le:me:k). D örletiş- Hap. leg.?; Recip. f. of örlet- , “to disturb one another. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. Hüen-ts. 2095 (urundi:). D urıulan- Hap. leg.; Ref. Den. V. fr. 1 uri: Türkü vri ff. üçü:nç kunçu:yı: urilanmi:ş “his third wife had given birth to a male child” IrkB 5. .S orrlag-. See orlaş-. ARM ,231 Dis. ARM D orum N.S.A. fr. o:r-; survives in SE "Türki “harvest time” BŞ 763; NC Kir, “a crop”. Xak. xı bl:r orum ot “the quantity of grass that is reaped at one time” (yuxtalà marrata(n)) Kaş. 1 75. D örüm Hap. leg.(?); N.S.A. fr. 2 ö:r- , “something plaited or woven'. Xak. xı K B 4768(çuz). D órme: Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. 2 ö:r-, 'something plaited or spun' and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. Xak. xi órme: saç al-dafira "a plait of hair” Kaş. I 129; ö: rme:saç ditto 7 11, 27: xiv Muh.(?) tawbu'l-xargáh "the covering of a tent” ö:rme: Rif. r8o (only ; mis-spelt ó:zme:): Çağ. xv ff. órme (spelt) yaR natv'-i rismani ast ht ba-tariq-i nawár-i bahn mi-büfand “a kind of rope which they spin in the form of a thick cable' San. 71v. 1. D órmek Infin. of 2 ó:r- used as a Conc. N.; apparently 'a plaited, knitted or woven garment”. In NC Kir., Kzx. örmek now means “a primitive loom” and in NW Kaz. ermek “a garment of camel's hair” (hence Russian armyak “a peasant's overcoat”). See Doerfer 11 466. Uy. viri ff. Civ. in a document relating to the delivery of various goods, mainly cloth, iki órmek iki ton 'two woven garments(?), two (made up) garments' USp. 31, 18: Çağ, xv ff. örmek yak natw'-i şül-i názuk ki az başm-i şutur mi-báfand "a kind of thin mantle woven from camel's hair” San. 71r. 27. D órmen Conc. N. fr. 1 ö:r, 'swelling' or the like. In. TT VI there are v.l. ünmen (if genuine, a similar Dev. N. fr. ün-) and ómen (with the -r- elided). 'The latter became a l-w. in Mong. meaning “cancer, scirrhous tumour' (Kow. 536, Haltod 111). N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (that mortal in this world) anığ körksüz uduz órmen kart yirip iglig bolur 'becomes a sufferer from evil ugly itches, swellings, ulcers, and pus” TT VI 443: Civ. (eighteen kinds of) örmen kart H TT zo, 10; 22, 16. Tris. ARM D örümçek Conc. N. fr. örüm, “spider”. Survives, more or less in this form, in NE, SE, and SW. In the medieval period an alternative word órmekct:, N.Ag. fr. örmek, appeared, and survives more or less in this form in NC, NW. 'This word was metathesized to örğemçi which is first noted in Cag. xv ff. Vel. 102; San. 71r. 21, and still survives in SC. See also 1 bó:f. Xak. xı örümçek al-'ankabüt “spider” Kaş. 1 152: Xiv Muh. al-'ankabüt ösrümçik Mel.74,4; ó:;rümcük Rif. 177: Xwar. xiv örümçük ditto Quib 124: Kom. xiv “spider” örümçik CCG; Gr.: Kip. xv 'ankabst (böy and) örümcük Tuh. 25a. 13 (in margin, “also örümçek”) Osm. xiv, xv örümçek in two texts TTS II 757; III 568: xvin örmüçek (spelt) in Rumi, 'ankabüt San. 71 v. 2; órümcek .in Rami 'anhabüt, also pronounced örmüçek do. 71v. 19. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 276 
     
   
   
     212 PU(E) arumdu:n Hap. leg.; prob. a l.-w.; in a section for words of the form fa'álii with -n attached and listed after -D- between alu:ci:n and ura:ju:n; undoubtedly an error for aru:du:n. Xak. xı arumdu:n “a kind of dye' (al-şıbğ) Kaş. I 138. VU urumda:y Hap. leg.; morphologically obscure, perhaps l-w. Xak. xr urumda:y al-hacaru” Hadi yudfa" bihi madarratu'l-samm "a stone which is used to avert damage from poison” Kaş. I 159. D armakçı: Hap. leg.; N.Ag. fr. Infin. of 2 a:r-. Türkü virt (because of the intrigues of the Chinese people and) armakçı:sı:n üçü:n “because of their deceit” 7 F 6. ?F armağa:n/yarmağa:n 'gift', and more specifically 'a gift brought back from a journey". The word also exists in both forms in Pe., and, as there is no obvious “Vurkish etymology for either form, it is prob. one of the Pe. L-w. in early Oguz (see óren). Survives only(?) in SW Ösm. armağan. See Doerfer II 465. Oğuz xi armağam “a gift (iadiya) which a traveller who has prospered (al-qadimu”l-ğünim) brings back from his journey for his neighbours'; there is another form Uuğa), yarmaga:n, and this is more correct (aşahlı) Kaş. I 140(in the MS. aşalıl is mis-spelt amuç, and this has been taken as an alternative word for 'gift' by some editors): Xwar. xiv armağan “gift” Quib 10; MN 33, etc.: Kip. xiv. İd, 23 (anu); a/-hadiya armağa:n Bul. s, 7: NV ditto. Tuh. 37b. 10; ahdá “to give a present” armağan ber- do. 5a. 11. D ermegü: 'lazv, slothful'; morphologically obscure; prima facie a Neg. Dev. N. in -gü:, but the semantic connection with erin- makes this improbable. N.o.a.b., cf. ermegür-. Uyğ. vur ff. Bud. ayığka tavranur ermegü tinliğlar üküs “lazy mortals who(nevertheless) hurry after evil are numerous” TT VI 021-2: Civ. (he suffers from dizziness, drowsiness and nausca and) erme:kü (gap) “is listless'(?) TT VHI L8: Xak. xi ermegü: al-kaslán "lazy' Kaş. 1 138 (prov); similar provs. J 42, 4 (eşik): 7o, 27: xiv Muh.(?) (under “horses”) al-bati” wa [-mutawaqqif. 'sluggish and. slow" ermegü: (-&amp;£- marked) Rif. 171 (only): Kip. xmi al-kaslán (opposite to "lively! ça:zlıt) erme:wü: Ion. 26, ro. VUF ermeli: 'swift horse, courser', or the like; L-w. cognate to '"lokharian B ramer[rmer, 'swift'.. N.o.a.b, Türkü vit (when he went hunting) ermeli: teg erti: 'he was like a a courser” /x. 9; Karluk yeğren ermelig arka:si:n siyu: urti: "he struck the Karluk chestnut courser and broke its back' do. 21. Tris. V. ARMD ermefgü:r- Intrans. Den. V. fr. ermegü:; “to be lazy, indolent'. N.o.a.b. Türkü vırı ff. Man. (if we have not praised God well and perfectly) korkmatin ermefgürüp “because we do not fear him and are lazy” Chuas. 211; TRIS. ARM erinip ermegürüp 'bcing indolent and lazy" do. 255, 266; a.o. TT II 10, 94: Xak. xı “er? ermefü:rdi: takásala'l-racul "the man was lazv'; also abbreviated to ermegürdi: Kaş. ITİ 349 (ermegü:re:r, ermegü:rme:k). Dis. ARN aran originally “a stable, Survives in NC Kzx., NW Nog. and several minor dialects (R 1 2&amp;1) for 'cattle pen” and in SW xx Anat. *tobacco barn” SD D 109. Xak. xi aran (with back vowels) a/-ari "a stable" Kaş. 1 76: Çağ. xv ff. aran (1) "a row of stakes (six/tà) which they erect in game-paths for hunting purposes' (quotn.); (2) "an enclosure (muliatemeafa) which they make for cattle to sleep in” San. 36v. 15. D eren irregular Plur. of 1 er; properly *men', but as in the case of oğla:n, its true nature was forgotten quite early, and it was treated as a Sing. S.i.a.m.l.g. usually meaning 'real man, fighting man”, and the like. Türkü vir eren is fairly common but invariably follows a numeral or numerical expression like a:z “fevv”, which suggests that it was regarded more as a collective than a Plur. (which would not normally follow a numeral), e.g. kapim xağan yeti yegirmi: eren taşıkmış “my father the xağan and 17 men marched out” 7 E 11, IL E ıoş olo, / £34; 1E 40 (ükün-); 7 Nə, IHE 37; Hl S ır, Ongin s: Uyğ. vir ff. Man. üç erenler (s/c) “the thrce men” T'T II 16, 30-1: Bud. beş yüz satığçı erenler 'soo merchants! PP 22, 8, bés yüz erennit do. 28, 2; sa, 6; yüzlüğ erenler (sic) 'distinguished people” TT VH 40, 75-6: O, Kir. ix ff. yüz eren Mal. 10, 2 (dubious, text corrupt): Xak. xı eren a/-ricdl “men”, an irregular. Plur. (cam" şadd) Kaş. I 76; o.o. I 74 (oğul, q.v.); I 229 (ürpeş-) and over 20 others, in nearly all of which the word is certainly Plur.: KB ajunda ne yapli$ eren tuğdı kör 'sce what kind of men are born in the world' 234; a.o. 279: xin(?) At, eren (rather broadly) “mankind” 89, go, 93, 373: Tef. erenler “human beings; men (not women)' 8o: xiv Rog. erenler “men, husbands! R7 758 (quotns.); Çağ. xv ff. San. gör, 16 (1 er): Xwar. xiv erenler (brave) men” Qarb 21: Osm. xiv ff. eren (1) “male” (not female) ; (2) "real man, hero”? (3) “man of experience”) c.i,a.p. normally as Sing. ; erenler, too, is common TT'S 7 271; II 38o fl; III 257; IV 302. erin “ip”, sometimes specifically “the lower lip', and metaph. "the lip of a cup'.. S.i.a.m.l.g. as érin, erin, irin, but almost obsolete in SW where “İip” is normally Az., Tkm. dodak; Osm. dudak. Uy. viii ff. Man.-A ol külüp (?read külünç) érni “that smiling(?) lip' M I ro, 8: Man. TT II 16, 15 (adurt): Bud. üstün altın érinleri "his upper and lower lips' U IV 40. 52-3; a.o, Suv. 595, 17: Civ. on yanıda érin ikin ara 'on the roth of the month (the soul) is between the two lips!' TT VII zo, 14-16; érin üze men bolsar “if there is a mole on the lip” do. 37, 9 (USSp. 42, 8): TAE. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 277 
     
   
   
     DRIS. xı erin al-safa “lip” Kaş. 1 77; €:rni: şafatuhu do. 70, 24: xun Tef. erin 'lip' 81: Çağ. xv ff. ern(-ip) mutlaq alt dudak 'specifically the lower lip' Vel. sz (quotns.), érn /abb 'lip' San. 100r. 21 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv erin “lip” Quib şı (erin), 6o (érin); MN121,etc.: Kom. XIV *nostril, gums' (sic) erin CCI; Gr.: Kip. xin al-şafa eren (sic?) Hou. 20, 4: xiv erin naa İd. iz: xv şafa (dodak and) érin T'uh. 20b. 6. D iri Conc. N. fr. iri:- ; 'pus'. S.i.a.m.Lg. (in SE Türki jirip). Türkü vir ff. Man. kan irip 'blood and pus” M 1 5, ro, and 14; 6, 4: Bud. yiriy aşlığlar (demonsy”vvho cat pus" U 11 61,9; o.o. TT' VI 443 (0rmen); X 549: Civ. H II 26, 85 (ak-): Xak. xı irin al-qih va'l-sadid 'pus' (Hend.) Kaş. I 135; a.o. III 59, 18 (1 yüz-): xin(?) Tef. irip 'pus' 126: xiv Muh.(?) al-qih irin Rif. 139 (only): Xwar. xiv ditto Nahe. 331, 12: Kip. xui (al-şafa) iren(?) sta Auwa'l-qih. Hou. 20, 4: xiv İrin al-qih tca'[-midda ('pus?) İd. 12: xv al-qih irin Kav. 61, 12; Tuh.!29a. r: Osm. xvin İrin (spelt) in Rrmi, çirk eva rim “mucus, pus'; in Ar. midda and qih San. Toov. 4. orun (oron) originally 'place', and more specifically “high place, throne'; the first is quite clear in phr. like y€:r orun “a place" (Hend.) and the second in phr. like linxwa orun 'lotus throne'; also used abstractly in phr. like orninta: “in place of (something else)”. An early l-w. in Mong. as oron 'throne' (Haenisch 126), later “place, country, province', and other meanings (Ko. 447, Hattod 82). S.i.a.m.l.g., but not current in Osm. after about xvi until revived recently. Türkü vin ff, Man. orninta kamsat(t)umiz erser 'if we have overthrown (the four kinds of gods) from their thrones” Chuas. 187-8; men keltim ornuma olurdum 'I have come and seated mysclf on my throne” TT IJ 8, 74: Uyğ. viri ff. Man. tinfBuluk orunta “in a place of rest" TT III 110; o.o. do. 12 (6nçfülüg); 1:39 (adalığ)—ol orunka oluru yarlıkadı "he deigned to sit on that thronc” M IIl 34, s (i): Bud. Sanskrit dsana 'seat' tölet oron (sic) üze: TT VIII D.12; linxwa orun 'lotus throne' TT V rz, 126, etc.; o.o. Suv. 182, 6—7 (örü:), U III 43, 29 (bez-, here *bed')—(King Maharati) törttin sınar yer orunuğ iymis basmış 'subdued (Hend.) countries in all parts of the world' Suv. 607, 14-15; 0.0. of yer orun Hiüen-ts. 94, 149, 177: Civ. ig oronla:rinda: “on sick-beds” TT VIII L.25 A, (if) orunin yégin kılmayın 'I do not provide him with lodging and food” US. 98, 20—1—place' H II 6, 14; 8, 21 (ötğürgü:) —borlukunnın ornında borluk tilese "f (you) vvant (another) vineyard in place of your vineyard” USp. 24, 7-8; similar phr. do. 84, 3: Xak. xı orun maredi" or mahdn “place” Kaş. II 72, 4 (Kopur-); 177, 25 (tur&amp;ur-); III 430, 9 (kopurt-); kara: orun a/-qabr "the grave', meaning “the dark place” (a/-maredi"i”l-muzlim) İİ 221, 23: K B orun "place" is common, e,g. orun ol törütti orun yok apar “(God) created places, but has no place himself” ARN 19; ata orni atı oğulka kalır “the father's place and name remains for the son” r:0: xu(?) KBPP padişah ornipa tutmiş turur “he took him for the position of monarch” 32, a.o. 33, but in 34 yerinde, Ar. zız (umunç), Tef. orun “place, seat', etc. 238: xiv Muh. al-maqüm “place” o:run Rif. 179 (Mel. 76, 1 yér): Çağ. xv ff. orun/orn these two words mean maqdm ve cöygüh “place” (Hend.) (quotns.), orn- (-1$a "with o-") anus yerine badal ma'násina'! in his place” in the sense of substitution (quotns.) Vel. 99; orn (spelt) cà :a makán (quotns.); also used in the sense of substitution ('wad) as one says in Persian 'so-and-so was given in place of (ba-cà-yt) so-and-so” San. 71v. $$ Orun cá tra makán (quotn.), when followed by a vowel suffix orn as stated above do. 71 v. 19: Xwar. xiv. (your father's) orni "place" Nac. 14, 5: Kom. xiv 'place' orun CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv orun makdn sta gayruhu İd. ir: Osm. xiv to xvı orun “place” in several texts 7 TS II 736; III 549; IV 612. F ören “bad, ruined'; as Kaş. says a corruption of Persian teayrán, which occurs as a l.-w. in several modern languages in its original or a corrupt form, e.g. NC Kir., Kzx. oyran/ oyron. 'lhe latest trace of óren is in Osm. Sami zoo, where it is described as “obsolete”, Oğuz xı ören ar-radi” min kull şay" 'bad' of anything; 1 consider this to be taken from the Per. word :ayrán 'ruined' (al-xaráb); the Oğuz when they mixed with the Persians (ixtalatat bi'l-furs) forgot many Turkish words and used Pe. words instead; this is one of them Xaş. I 76: Osm. xiv to xvii óren *ruined, desolate' in several texts T'T:.S 1 568; II 755. F(E) üren the Mongolian word ren 'seed, fruit, progeny” (otv. 577, Haltod 126) occurs as a İ.-vv. in several NE languages and NC Kır. It has also been read in Türkü vır ff. Man. üren yaşarur yadılur “the seed turns green and spreads” M III 20, 10-11 (i), but it is said that the text is very difficult to read, and there is no reasonable doubt that this word is a misreading of evin. 233 ürün 'white' in a general sense, cf. 1 a:k. Very common down to xi but almost obsolete thereafter. Survives in Yakut ürün “vhite” (Peh. 3178), and perhaps NC Kir. ürün baran “davvn” and SW xx Anat. ürün 'milk, yoğurt" SDD 1436. Sporadic Uy£. spellings yürün are unlikely to represent an earlier form. "Türkü vii: ürün kümüşl:n "his white silver" II N 11; 2.0. T 48 (altu:n): vin ff. ürün esri: "white dappled” JrkB 4 (falcon”), 41 ('cow' and “bull calf); o.o. do. $, zo, yürün tas “vvhite stone” Toy. s (ETY II 57), a.o.o.: Uy£. viri ff. Man.-A yürün tonluğ dindarka 'to a white-robed Elect! M III 3o, 10-11; ürün M I zə, 4 (ii): Bud. yürün yipin yaruk yaşuk 'white and violet light (Hend.) TT V: 4, 12; o.o. PP 42, 2 (egir-), TT V 6, 47; U IV 30, 51-2, etc.: Civ. ürün yérlig (a mattress) *with a white ground' (and coloured  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 278 
     
   
   
     DIS. ornamentation) USSp. 79, 6; yürüp bulit “a white cloud” TT 14;0.0. TT VlL13,29; H I or, etc.: O, Kir. ix ff. ürüpümig kara:mığ a:zdim “1 strayed from(?) my white and black (livestock ?)” Mal. rr, 3; (my kinsmen, my children) ürüpü:m kara:m do. 45, 7: Xak. xt ürün al-abyad 'white' of anything, in Oğuz (1) ak: ürün a/-kudba "the white crescent in a finger-nail', that is a/-füfa (ditto) in the nails of young people; one says tirna:k ürüpi: bayádu'l-zufr: ürün hulwàánu'l-káhin “a fortune-teller's fee'; one says elig ürüpl: bé:r "give the fee! Kaş. 1 134; three o.o.: KB ürün "white' is common, e.g. (putting off my widow's weeds) ürün kedtim as “1 have put on (a garment of) white ermine” 84; o.o. 881, 1103 (1 saç), 1319, 3840 (ertini), 5640, 6622: xın(9) At. (the prophets have) ürün yüz "white (ie. shining) faces' 25; Tef. ürün 'white' (hair, light) 250 (örün): Çağ. xv ff. evvrün (so spelt) rzgan wa nürüni wa hawá-yi şaf 'shining, bright, clear weather' San. $3v. 1: Kip. xim al-laban mutlaqá “milk” in general ü:rün Hou. 16, 11. D 1 erinç like erki: and erken, q.v., a very archaic der. f. of 1 er-, its particular function (see v. G. ATG, para. 359) secms to be to make statements in which it is included less than categorical, and it is usually best translated “presumabİy, supposedly', and the like. N.o.a.b. Türkü vir (their xagans were wise and tough) buyrukt: yeme: bilğe: ermiş erinç alp ermiş erinç "thcir officers, too, were presumably wise and tough” . . . anı: üçü:n eliğ ança: tutmış erinç “and for this reason apparently they thus held the realm' 7 E 5, /7 E 4; a whole string of similar phr. follows IESs,IIESs,6; I E x1, II E ro, olo. I E 24, II E zo (0); 7 E 26; IL E 35; Ix. 23 (ülüg): Uyğ. viu ff. Bud. (I have done evil) bilip kilmadim erinç "but not, 1 think, done it knowingly! U 77: 87, 59; kapım xan bodun tilipe korkup inca yarlıkadı erinç “my father the xam apparently gave this order because he feared what the people might say' PP ır, 1-3; 0.0. do. ro, 1; 45, s: Xak. xı erinç a Particle (harf) meaning /a'alla 'perhaps', hence one says ol keldi: erinc “he has perhaps come” Kay. I 132; similar entry, but bardı: "he has (perhaps) gone” II 449; o.o. I 46, zo (kanik); 771 6s, 12 (uğra:ğ): 245, 18; 309, r1: K B ölüm buzmağınça buzulmaz erinc 'until death destroys him, he will presumably not be destroyed' 882; o.o. 2062-4, 3739. SF 2 éring/érinj See erej. Dirinç (?erinç): N./A.S. fr. irin- ; wretched, miserable, unhappy'. N.o.a.b., see irinçü:. Türkü vrrr ff. Man. İrinç boldilar “they became miserable" M IH 6, 3 (1); 7, 6-7 (1): Uyğ. vir ff. Man.-A irinç kişi oğlu “miserable mortals" M I 9, 7: Man. (gap) irinç kilip ólürtim “1 have made... . miserable and killed them” TT T7 15, 2-3; oo. TT III aş, 48: Bud. (you will encounter dreadful dangers, and die, and) bizni irinç kılğaysız “make us ARN unhappy' PP 18, 6; o.o. U 1 4, 6 (inağsız), 29, 14; U HI ro, 4 (kolunğuçi:), 1:6, 21 (inağsız), 36, 20; TT IV ro, 13 (2 yarlığ), 12, 44 (01); Suv. 448, 2: Xak. xı Kaş. I 132; III 449 (0, erej). D urunç 'bribe'; the only modern survival is SW xx Anat. örünç DD 1118, noted in one village only; if it can be assumed that this is a mispronunciation, the obvious explanation of this word is to take it as a Dev. N. fr. urun- in the sense of 'somcething put down'. Cf. uruncak. Xak. xı urunç a/-rijtea “a bribe' Kaş. I 132; III 449 (duplicate entries); o.o. I1 354, o (1 aç-), 717 217, r: KB urung alsa hacib bolur beğ, külünç “if the minister takes bribes, the ruler becomes a laughingstock” 2442; urunc almasa (so read) “he should not take bribes” 2506; 0.0. 2443, 4144: xiv Muh.(?) al-rigica u:rünç Rif. 188 (only; also raşd ta barlala "to bribe” (Hend.) urincla:- 109); al-riswa 'to bribe” urr:znclamak . Mel. 39, 3; Rif. 126. D orna:ğ Conc. N. fr. orna:-, “place, seat'. A rare word which survives only in NC Kir. orno: described by Yud. as the N.Ac. of orna:- and possibly NE 'Tel. urna 'insert, insertion! R 7 1667. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. arığ simek orunda sógit altında ftünelriğ ornağ tutunmış erür “he took for himself a dark(?) seat under a tree in a place in the jungle! USp. :0s, 1:0-12: Civ. İğ ağrığ ornağ tutkalir 'diseases (Hend.) promptly occupy the place” TT I 167-8; xiv Chin.-Uvg. Dict. chuang “bed” (Giles 2,778) lornuğ (src) R I 1064; ornuk Ligeti 188 (qhe latter could be a Dev. N./A. in -uk (Pass.) from orna:-). erpe:k 'finger'. Survives only as ergek in most NE languages including Khak. and Tuv., elsewhere displaced by barmak (parmak) which is noted in this meaning in all medieval languages:—Muh., Çağ., Xwar., Kom., Kip., and Osm. Türkü vırr ff. Man. on yılan başlığ erpekin with ten snake-headed fingers” Chuas. s4: UyÉ. vir ff. Man. erpeki “her fingers' M II 11, 22: Bud. atsız erpek “ring finger', kicig erpek “little finger", qrtun erpgek 'middle finger', yanar ernek “index finger', uluğ ernek “thumb” TT V 8, 54-7; ız, r19-20; Suk epreki (sic) “index finger! U II 46, 71-2 (e$-); a.o. TM IV 253, 65-6: Civ. uluğ ernek TT VII 37, ız (USp. 42, ır): Xak. xr ernek al-isbi' 'finger', dialect form of erne:k Kaş. 7 104; erpe:k (sie, in chap. containing dissyllables) a/-işbi" 7 12: (prov.); o.o. 7 248, s (oBrul-); III 13o (1 Su:k); 1/1 443 (sörple:-): xiv Rbg. ernekler ucinda “at the tips of the fingers' R I 787; Muh(?) ra'su'l-igbi' "finger-tip” erge:k (spelt in error with gàf) Rif. 141 (only): Çağ. xv ff. ernek angust ki ba-'arabi 'ibárat ax banün büşad 'finger', which is one meaning of banán in Ar. San. 37v. 5 (in r21r. 25 angugt is also used to translate barmak). VU?D ürpe:k Hap. leg.; prob. Dev. N. fr. *ürpe:- Den. V. fr. ürüp. Xak. xr ürpe:k  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 279 
     
   
   
     DTS. V. (sic, in chap. containing dissyllables) a/-caşş “plaster, gypsum” Kaş. 7 121. ?D erpe:n 'bachelor'; possibly contraction of eringe:n "one who is habitually lazy” fr. erin-. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. ergen; there are several words for “bachelor” in other modern languages, the commonest being boydak. Xak. xı erpe:n (sic. in chap. containing dissyllables) er ai-raculu'l-'azab “a bachelor' Kaş. I 17 (prov.): xiv Muh.(?) al-'azab (opposite to al-muta”ahhil ewli:g) érgen Rif. 153 (only): Kip. xitt a/-"azab miüna”l-rical erge:n Hou. 25, 4: XV "dzib erğen Tuh. 24b. 19: Osm. xiv ff. erğen 'unmarried'; c.i.a.p. 7*T'S II 390; /İT 259; IV 303;.xvii ergen in Rumi “an unmarried man or woman' San. 37r. 26; érgen in Rümi, "azab, ğayr muta”ahhil do. 100r. 5. Dis. V. ARND arın- Refl, f. of art:-; “to cleanse oneself". S.i.m.m.l.g., with some metaph. meanings. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. (if those mortals) ol antağ ağır ayığ Kilinclarindin arınmak tileser "wish to cleanse themselves from those so grievous evil deeds” Stv. 141, 2-4: Xak. xı er arındı: istafaba"l-racul sva'gtasala 'the man wiped his backside and washed himself'; and one says er arındı: zatwwara'l-racul wa ista'ána ay haldqa "anatahu "the man applied depilatory and shaved his pubes! Kaş. I zor (arınu:r, arinma:k); arığ 'clean' is derived fr. arındı: nez “the thing was clean' (nazufa) I 12, 23: xii(?) Tef. arın-, “to cleanse oneself” 58: Kom. xiv arin- (1) to beclean" CCG (quotn.); (2) “to clear oneself of an accusation' CCI; Gr. az: Kip. xiv arin- zafahhara “to cleanse oneself” /d. ro: Osm. xiv ff. arın- “to cleanse oneself; to clear oneself of something'; c.i.a.p. TTSI37;Il sz, HI 35; IV 37. ?D erin- (?érin-) “to be lazy, indolent'; morphologicaly a Refl. f. but with an inexplicable semantic connection with ermefgü:. S.i.a.m.l.g. aserin-/érin-/irin which suggests an original érin-. Sec also erincig. Türkü vur ff. Man. Chuas. 255, 266 (ermegür-): Xak. xı er rgka: erindi: fağdsalc”l-racul li'l-amr mustasohiga(n) lahu "the man was lazy (or dilatory) about the affair because he was uncasy about it" Kaş. I zor (erinür, erinme:k): KB erinmez kilur barça yaipuk işi “he does all the work of a man without idling” 2462: Kip. xv takassala erin- Tuh. 9a. ız: Osm. xiv to xvi erin- “to be Jazy' in several texts T'T.S 1 271; II 391; İİİ 259. D irin- (?érin-) Refl. f. of 1 i:r- (76:r-): “to be miserable, unhappy'. In view of the der. f.s irinç, irintür- there is no doubt about the existence of this vvord, but occurrences are scarce, and there is some possibility of confusion with yérin-, q.v. Uyğ. vr ff. Man. irinür M II 12, 3(i) (kut): Bud. könli yirindi (sic) "his mind vvas distressed” PP 68, s (belongs here ?). D urun- Refl. f. of ur-, with a wide range of "meanings derived from the two basic meanings ARN- 235 of ur- “to put), and “to strike'. S.i.a.m.l.g. Xak. xı ol ö:zin urundt: "he beat (daraba) himself in penitence for what he had done” also used for “to pretend to beat”, and one says er suvluk urundt: ra"ammama”l-racul “the man put on a turban' and ura:ğut bürünçük urundı: :xtamarati'l-mar'a. “the woman put on a veil” Kaş. / zor (urunur, urunma:k): KB kişilik üçün at urundi kişi “a man has acquired a reputation for humanity' 1600; xazina urunsa “f he builds up a treasure" 1926; 0.0. 135 (Sevit), 2184, 2399, 3751, 5893—urundi "he beat himself" (in mourning) 6292: Çağ. xv ff. urun- (spelt) xwud-rá ba-in u ün zadan "to bump against one thing or another" Sanz. 67v. 23 (quotn.): Kip. xiv zalama “to oppress, injure' urundt (but other conjugational forms are translated zulm et-) Bul. 6or.: xv urun- indaraba “to beat oneself! is used as a model conjugation Tu. ş8b. ff.: Osm. xiv ff. urun- “to put on (something, esp. a crown)! is fairly common TTS 7 726; I1 930; İH 713; IV 786. D órün- Hap. leg.?, Refl. f. of 1 ó:r-. Xak. xı er siki: óründi: za'aza'[-racul "the man's penis was erect' Kaş. / zor (örünür, örünme:k, sic in MS.). D orna:- Den. V. fr. orun, “to take one's place, establish oneself (somewhere Dat. or Loc.y, with some extended | meanings. S.i.a,m.l.g.; in SW only Tkm. Xak. xi men bu: yerde: orna:dım “1 settled down (tawattantu) in this place", and one says orna:dı: ne:p “the thing was put (tamakkana) in a place and rested there” (/staqarra), and kü:n orna:di: “the sun set” (ğa5az) Kaş. 1 288 (orna:r, orna:ma:k): K B ajun tindi ornap bu xakan üze: 'the world was at rest when this ruler ascended the throne over it” 93: Xır(?) Tef. orna- 'to ascend the throne; to establish oneself! 237: Çağ. xv ff. orna- (spelt) cd giriftan wa cá kardan “to take a place, to find a place” Sar. 7or. 23 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv orna- “to be situated, to dwell' Qutb 118: Kom. xiv 'to dwell' orna- CCG; Gr.: Osm. xv orna- “to establish oneself, settle” in two texts 7 TS 11 735; III 548. D ornat- Caus. f. of orna:-, “to put (something cc.) in (its place Dat.)', with some extended meanings. S.i.s.m.). Xak. xı men ne:p ornattim wada'tu'l- şay mawdi'ahu "1 put the thing in its place” Kaş. 7 266 (ornaturmen, ornatma:k): xırı(?) KBPP wazir ornipa ornatmis turur 'he has put him in the position of vezir' 33 (v.l. in Vienna MS., other MSS. kodmis); Tef. ornat- “to put” 238: Çağ. xv ff. ornat-(-ti) bir nesneyt bir yere ur-, berkişdür- ve sang- ve mixla- “to put something somewhere, to fasten, transfix and nail it” Vel, 103; ornat- Caus. f., cà dádan “to place”, also metaph muhkam kardan "to fasten' San. 7ov. 9 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv ornat- “to put, place” Qutb 118, Nahc. 427, 12: Kip. xv tamakkana ditto ornat- Tuh. 9a. 9: Osm. xiv and xv ornat- (1) 'to lay down 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 280 
     
   
   
     236 (laws); (2) "to put in place, fasten'; in several texts T TS I 549; İİ1 548. D ornan- Refl f. of orna:-; “to place or instal oneself; to be placed or installed, and the like. N.o.a.b. Türkü vir ff. Man. (the monasteries) nom kuti teprinin ornanğusı 'where the divine majesty of thc (true) doctrine is established” M 7 27, 31-2; (hitherto) menip köpülüm ney ornanmaz "my mind has not been at all stable” M 77 8, 40-1: Uyğ. virt ff. Man. (may the spirits of previous rulers, etc.) tenri €1(1)iğimiz ıduk kut üze ornanmakı bolzun “rest upon our divine king the Iduk kut M IH 3s, 19-20: Bud. (the new house) iyesine kutadur kutluğun kıvlığın ornanur 'brings the favour of heaven to its owner and is established auspiciously (Hend.)” TT VI 100-1; (part of a royal title) uluğ kut ornanmış Pfahl 22, 2: Civ. üskünde tenridem kut buyan utmak yégedmek kentün ornandı 'holy divine favour, virtue, victory, and success have established themselves in your presence! TT 7 1-3; etözünde ayağ cited ornanğu bérdi 'honour and respect have firmly established themselves on you? do. 114-15; in the translations of Chinese calendars the term fing “to be fixed, settled" (Giles 11,248) is translated ornanmak TT VII 11, s: Osm. xiv and xv ornan- “to be established, placed” in two texts 77TS III 548; IV 615. S ürper- See ürüper-. D ornaş- Co-op. f. of orna:-; s.i.m.m.l.g. vv. a rather wide variety of meanings; rare in the early period. Uyğ. vur ff. Chr. er (so read?) ilki tepri uruğı nom kuti ornaşğusı Maryamka (so read?) yükünser tapınsar “if he worships (Hend.) Mary(?) who provided a place (in her womb) for the first-born of God, the majesty of the (true) doctrine” M III 49, 9-12 (ii) (translation tentative, the text has madmam matked as uncertain, but Maryam makes good sense): Çağ. xv ff. ornaş- (-1p) oturug- te berkiş- “to sit together, to be firmly established! Vel. 103; ornaş- bà vak digar cü kardan “to find places together" San. 70v. 7 (quotn.) Tris. ARN VU?D urunu: “flag, standard”. Although it is common in the early period as an element in P^N.s, there is no early occurrence as a N., but see urupuluğ. The medieval words below are clearlv related, and may even be intended to represent this actual word since in these texts Zayn is occasionally used to represent p. A L-w. in Mong. as oroşğa, same meaning (Kot. 449, Haltod 83). In spite of this vocalization this word must surely be a contracted Conc. N. fr. urun- in the sense of 'something set up”. Cf. uruput. Türkü virt ff. the Miran MS. (ETY İl 64 fI.) is full of P.N.s in which urunu: occurs r3 times (a) at the beginning of a name, e.g. urupu: todu:n (title) cigsi: (title) A.5; (b) at the end e.g. D1S. V. ARNkülu:&amp; urupu: A.7; (c) in the middle, e.g. Küre:bi:r (tribal name) urupu: sanu:n (title) Br.9; from the contexts it 1s clearly neither a title nor a tribal name: O. Kir. ix ff. (inscription starts) alp urupu totok ben 'I am Alp Urunu: Totok (title) Mal. 16, 1; körtle: xan alp urupu: P.N. do. ro, 5; urugu: külüg tok bögö: terkepe: (i.c. terken-ke:?) P.N. do. 10, 6 (neither reading certain, this text is in disorder): (Xak.) xiv Muh. bayraq zca "alam "flag, standard” u:rğu: Mel. 51, 5; Rif. 146 (bayrüq wa ra'su'l-'alam): Kip. xiv urğa: (sic) al-bayráq ld. 11. D irinçü: “sin, faul. Morphology uncertain, at first sight bears the same relation to irinç as öğrünçu: to ógrünc, but those two words are synonymous and these are not. N.o.a.b. Türkü vit: ff. Man, anığ kilincka irinçüke "by evil deeds and sins” Chuas. 298: Uyğ. vun ff. Man. irinçü krlığmalar 'committing sins" M 1H 11,8; iringü kılmış kilinçi do. rə, 11-12: Bud. irinçüde boş bolalım “may we be freed from our sins” T'T IV 8, sz and 66, tsuyda irinçüde boş bolalım ditto do. 6, 32, and 41; tsuy irinçü do. 4, 9, etc., Suv. 139, ro and 13 etc.: Xak. xı irinçü: (sic in MS.) al-itm 'sin' Kaş. I 134. D orunçı: N.Ag. fr. orun, Survives in NE Soy. (i.e. "T'uv.), Tel, "heir, youngest son” R I 1034-6; Khak. 'substitute, locum tenens Das. rar and NC Kir. "bedding. "The entry in San. is inexplicable, there is no such. word in Mong., Uyğ. vui ff. Bud. oruncilar court officials of some kind, P'attendants on the throne' Pfahl. 23, 24 (sce içre:ki:): Çağ. xv ff. orunci (spelt) in Mong; gadà wa söril “a beggar' (Hend.) San. 71 v. 22. D urunçak Conc. N. fr. urun-; 'deposit, security, pledge'. Survives only(?) in NE Khak. urunçax 'sudden illness (sic!) and SW xx Anat. uruncak “security” SDD 1421. Türkü viu ff. Man. neçe evnip (?so read) kişi urunçakın yédimiz erser "if we have misappropriated a houscholder's(?) deposit Chuas. 112-14: Uyğ. vini ff. Bud. tolp etózümin sapa urunçak tutuzurmen “l entrust my whole body as a security to you” U İH 83, 7-9; a.o. Tig. 22b. 6: Xak. x1 uruncak al-wadi'a ta'l-amána 'deposit, pledge'; may also be pronounced urunga:k Kaş. 7 1:48 (verse): KB urunçak turur bu sevük cün ravvün, urunçak yana bir kótürmez bu cün “this dear, lively soul is a pledge, but a pledge does not bring back the soul” 3781: (not in Fergana MS.,? spurious): xiv Muh.(?) al-'áriya ca'l-amána "loan, pledge' u:runça:k Rif. 188 (only). D erincig (?érincig) N./A.S. fr. erin-; “indolent” and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. some phonetic changes. Xak. xr KB éringig kışığ sürdi yazki esin 'the spring breeze has swept away the lazy winter' 65; kamuğ eski nepler €rinçiğ bolur érincig yüki kör yérincig bolur “all old things become lazy, the lazy man's burden becomes displeasing' 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 281 
     
   
   
     D1S 687, a.o. 3938 (consistently spelt érincig in KB): Kom. xiv “idle, idleness” erinçek CCG, Gr.: Tkm. xv aslan "lazy' (Kip. yalkaw) erinçek Tuh. 3ob. 6: Osm. xvi erincek 'lazy', once T TS II 391. D uruput a word “used in Bud. texts to represent Sanskrit words like semápati “army commander, general', and the like. Radlov in a note on Ti. zob. 4 indirectly, but plausibly, suggests that it is a crasis of *urungut Dev. N. fr. urun-. Uyğ. viir ff. Bud. Tiş. zob. 4; 26b. 5; 33a. 3; 362. 8, and 37a. 6 list the names of tórt (or tórtegü) uluğ yekler uruputları “four great generals oftiemons (yaksas) and do. 35b. 1 those of four generals of gods (tepri), (PU.) Kançanaçavı uruput Suv. 425, 7; 0.0. do. 10; U IV 18, 220. D urundi: Dev. N. fr. urun-, “conflict”. Survives in NC Kır. urundu: and perhaps urunt, Uyğ. vri ff. Bud, örletişmek óclüg urundı 'mutual disturbance and spiteful conflict” Hüen-ts. 2095. C eren tü:z a star name, to be explained as a compound of eren “men” and tüz 'alike'; almost certainly “Gemini, the 'Twins', which fits the occurrences in KB, Kaj.'s translations are certainly wrong, sec Clauson, op. cit., s.v. ülker. N.o.a.b. Xak. xi eren tü:z (in a Chap. containing dissyllables, so to be taken as two words) £smu'l-mizàn fi'l-nuciim wa hiya min manázili'l-qamar “the word for the constellation Libra, the Scales'; it is one of the mansions of the moon Xaş. 1 76, a.o. III 4o (yulduz): KB in the list of signs of the Zodiac in 138íf. erendiz, glossed cazoza “Gemini” in the Vienna MS., comes in the third place, ie. for 'Gemini'; o.o. spelt erentiz 5676, 6221: xiv Rbj. the word reappears, spelt erendend in the passage (fol. 66v. of the British Museum MS.) taken from KB, see Clauson, op. cit., p. 357. D ornağlığ P.N./A. fr. orna:B; “stable, firmly established'. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. Sanskrit àsthitam 'standing firm” orna:ğlığ TT VIII A.18; kópüli biligi kılıkı ti ornağlığ ermeser “if his mind, knowledge, and character are not continuously stable' Suv. 594, 3-4; a.0. do. 594, 13: Civ. TT I 129-30 (3 al), 189 (idis). D ornağsız Priv. N./A. fr. orna:&amp;; n.o.a.b. "Türkü vir ff. Man. ornağsız ikirçğü köpül “an unstable, indecisive mind” M III 21, 3 (iii). D erinüğsüz (?érinügsüz) Priv. N./A. fr. *erinüg N.Ac. fr. erin-; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. tünle küntüz erinügsüz 'active by day and night” Hüen-ts. 1939. D aranlığ P.N./A. fr. aran. Survives only(?) in NE Bar. arannı, Tob. aranlı R 7 252. Xak. xı aranlığ ev “a house vvith a stable” (istabl) Kaş. I 148. D orunliğ P.N./A. fr. orun. "There is only . one early occurrence, spelt orniliB, but the f . ARS 237 word s.i.s.m.l. with minor phonetic variations Uy£. viui ff. Bud. TT VIII D.17 (1 él). D orunluk A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. orun; *throne, seat”, and the like. S.i.s.m.l, with minor phonetic variations. See Doerfer 1l şor. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. yüksek édiz orunluktin “from (his) lofty (Hend.) throne' PP ör, s, a.o. do. 46, 2 (olğurt-): (Çağ. xv ff. orunduk zir büş 'saddle cloth', in Ar. ğaşiya also pronounced aranduk Sar. 71v. 23; aranduk same translation do. 37v. 5 seems rather to be a Conc. N. fr. aran meaning 'something used in the stable"). D urupuluğ P.N./A. fr. urunu:, n.o.a.b. Uy£. viri ff. Bud. (in a list of stars which are also demons) sarığ uruipulug “having a yellow flag” TT VI 93. Tris. V. ARND irincke:- (?érincke:-) Den. V. fr. irinc; "to realize the misery of (someone /Aec.), to have compassion on (him). N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viii ff. Man.-A irinckemek (?so read, text iringlemek but the MS. is difficult to read) yarlikamak “to have compassion and mercy" M IIl 31, 9 (iii): Man. soyurkayu irinckeyü yarlıkatınız “you have deigned to pardon and have compassion on (us sinners)” TT III 113: Bud. meni irinckeyü U II 88, 71; o.o. TT İV ız, 35; Suv. 587, 21: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. lien min 'having compassion! (Giles 7,156 7,930) irinckep; (5'é yin 'compassionate' (Giles 11,697 13,276) irinckencüci (sic?) U I 57 (only). D irintür- (?érintür-) Caus. f. of irin-; “to make (someone) unhappy' N.o.ab. Uyğ. viii ff. Man. TT II 16, 40-5 (emğet-): Bud. U 11 78, 34 (emget-); TT IV 11, 17(?); Suv. 136, 11 (E burcintur-). D ürüper- Intrans. Den. V. fr. ürüp; “to be white'. N.o.a.b. Uy£. vii ff. Bud. saçı başı yürünerser “if his hair and head are white' Suv. s94, 8-9: Xak. xi ürperdi: ne: abyadda”l-şay” "the thing was white! Kaş. 7 289 (ürperür, ürperme:k; sic in a chapter containing dissyllabic verbs): xııı(?) Tef. ürüner“to become white' 250 (órüger-). Dis. ARS ? S ersü: 'vile' and the like; perhaps Sec. f. of erseg. N.o.a.b. Oğuz xi ersü: a/-radl min kull şay” “vile, ignoble”, of anything Kaş. 7 127: Kip. xiv erşi: (?read ersi:) al-muhnit "one who incites perjury' İd. ız (but cf. erse£). D erseğ N./A.S. fr. erse:- Desid. Den. V. fr. 1 er which s.i.s.m.].; “a woman who runs after men, nymphomaniac'. A l.-w. in Mong. as ereseg (Haltod ss). S.i.a.m.l.g. except SC(?), usually as ersek; in SW only in xx Anat. ersek/erzük SD 547, 548. Xak. xt erseğ i:şle:r a/-mar”atı” İ-mümisatı” H-büğiya "an amorous prostitute” Kaş. 7 104; bu: ura:Éut ol erse:d “this woman desires men”  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 282 
     
   
   
     238 (mutamanniya li'l-ricál) HI 56, 3: xiv Muhi(?) al-"ühir 'prostitute' érseg Rif. 149 (only): Kom. xiv ersek 'prostitute' CCI; “adulteres! CCG, Gr.: Kip. xiv al-zániya 'adulteress” ersüg (sic?) Bul. 9, 7: Tkm. erseg also orospi: a/-qalıba 'prostitute'; the latter a l-w (manqüla) İd. ır: xv Kip. xunta 'effeminate, homosexual' eresig Tuh. 14a. 3; muxannat ditto (PU to:k and) érseg do. 33b. 3 (this, and not muhnit, may the right reading in İd. 12 s.v. ersü:). D ersiğ N./A.S. fr. *ersi:- Simulative Den. V. fr. 1 er, “maniy, virile. N.o.a.b. Xak. xt (under -sı:ğ “a particle of comparison (/iarf taşbih) attached to nouns to form Adis., in order to compare the noun qualified by it to the noun to which it is attached") . . . and one says bu oğul ol ersig Adgü sabi yujbihu'l-rıcdl va yataxalluq bi-xuluqihim “this boy is like men and behaves like them” Kaş. /TI 128, 24: KB kür ersiğ yürekliğ “brave, manly and courageous' 57; ay ersig tona “oh manly hero!' 196, 1360, etc.; o.o. 279, 2281, 2371, 2458 (ünlüg), 3832 (1 urt:), etc.: xın()) At. ersig topa 34. D arsal (or arsıl(?)) Den. N./A. fr. a:r, 'auburn, bay”, Pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı arsal (sic) saç al-şa"ru l-aşhab *auburn hair” Kaş. T 105; 2.0. 1 79 (a:r, spelt arsil). F érsel (for vocalization cf. érsellik) almost certainly a 1.-vv. with prosthetic é- (cf. erej) fr. Ar. ras| 'easy-going, '"leisurely'. N.o.a.b. Xak. xi KB bu €rsel yayığ kilki kurt$a njun 'this easy-going old world with its fickle character” 399; ayur kilkim érsel manma mapa 'it says "my character is lethargic, do not trust me” ” 666; o.o. 548, 685, 1088, 3533, etc.: xiv. Mul.(?) al-malil "tired, languid' é:rsül (sic?) Rif. 148 (only). arsla:n “İon”, animal name w. ending -la:n, An early L-w, in Mong. as arslanlarsalan. S.ia.m.lg., sometimes as aslan or a trisyllable arıslan, etc.; frequently occurs as an element in P.N.s. See Doerfer 11 453. Uy. viii ff. Man.-A arslan oğlu “İion-cub” M 1 8, 5; o.o, do. 18, 3; M III 11, 8 (öpün-): Bud. yalpuklarnın arslanı "oh lion among men!" U I 43, 19; 0.0. Suv. 646, 3; USp. 102a. 28: Xak. xr arsla:n al-asad "lion', and kings are called by this name Kaş. III 412 (prov.); I 75, 18 and 409, 9 (alımçı:) and 14 0.0.: KB arslan “the constellation Leo" 140; til arslan turur "the tongue is (like) a lion” 164; o.o. 784, 2047-8, 2354: xın(?) At. (the monarch is kindly) wa likin buşarda Sará arslanı “but when he is angry he is like a lion of Sara' (place-name, location uncertain) 52; Tef. arslan 'lion' 59: xiv Muh. al-sab' “lion" arsla:n Mel. 72, 4; Rif. 174; al-asad (a sign of the zodiac) ditto 79, 4; 183: Çağ. xv ff. arsalan (so spelt) şir "lon", in Ar. asad; also one of the signs of the zodiac; also abbreviated to aslan San. 37r. 6; aslan şir ya'ni asad, also arsalan do. qov. rr: Xwar. xiv arslan/ arıslan Quib 11, 12; arslam MN 64, etc. DIS. ARS Kom. xiv "lion' arslan/astlan (sc) CCl; Gr.: Kip. xir al-asad asla:n (sic) Hou. 11, 12; (in the list of P.N.s) arsla:n racul asad "a lion man" do. 30, 4: xiv arsala:n (sic) al-sabu' İd. 11; al-sab' arslan Bul. 10, s: xv al-asad arsala:n Kav. öz, 5; arslan Tul, 4b. 6 a.o.o. Dis. V. ARS?E ersi:- the verb yarsı:- q.v. is thus misread in Uyg. viui ff. Civ. TT VEI 18; it is prob. that the same mistake has been made in the following passage in a damaged MS., where *ersi:- the base of ersiğ would not give an appropriate meaning. Türkü vii ff. Man. (when the day of death comes, it weakens all men and kills them mercilessly; it is not afraid of kings; it does not [. . .] commoners) avıçğa kurtğaka ersimez “it is not revolted by (yarsımaz) old möh or vvomen” M III t1, 15 (i). D ursa:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of ur-. Xak. xr ol ani: ursa:di: *he intended and wished to beat him (yadribahu) Kaş. I 276 (ursa:r, ursa:mat:k). D arsik- Emphatic Pass. f. of 2 a:r-, “to be deceived, tricked”. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı er arsıktı: ğurra”l-racul wa. huma mağrür "the man was deceived' Kaş. I 242 (arsıka:r, arsıkma:k): KB (if a man is satisfied, he does not covet anything) kişi nen bile bulsa arsıkmaz ol '(such) a man, evep if he finds something, is not deceived by if 2722; o.o. 2363, 2726, 3618: xir(?) Tef. arsık- “to be deceived (by something Dat.) s9: xiv Muh. al-magrür arsıkmış Mel. 52, 11; Rif. 148; al-iğtirür "to be deceived' arsıkmak 123 (only): Xwar. xiv ditto Quib rr. D ursuk- Emphatic Pass. f. of ur-; 'to be struck, beaten”, etc. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vur ff. Bud. Suv. 621, 8-9 and 625, 17 (1 ok): Xak. xı er ursukti: gulibal- racul frl-darb wa gára madrüb "the man was defeated in a fight and was beaten” Kaş. I 242 (ursuka:r, ursukma:k): KB urayin tegüçi özl ursukar “the man who says "I will beat” is himself beaten” 679. D ersin- Refl. Simulative Den. V. fr. 1 er, survives only(?) in NC Kir. and SW xx Anat. SDD s47. Xak. xı oğul ersindi: abdá'l-sabi min nafsihi rucüliya "the boy was aware of his own virility for the first time" Kaş. 7 253 (ersinür, ersinme:k). Tris. ARS PD arsalik in this form Hap. leg., but survives in SW Osm. as aslık “voman with imperfect sexual organs, sterile". Prima facie a Conc. N. in -lik but with no obvious etymology. Oğuz xı arsalik (of the form af'alal) al-xuntá | mina'l-hayaseán "a hermaphrodite animal” Kaş. I 159: Osm. xvr aslik “a sterile woman' T'T'S II sg. DF érsellk A.N. fr. érsel; "laziness, lethargy'. Pec. to KB. Xak. xi KB mün 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 283 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. ARŞermez maga kör bu érsellkim “this lethargy of mine is not my fault' 686, a.o. 715 (yayığlık). Tris. V. ARS- . D erseglen- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. erseg. Xak. xı işle:r erseğlendi: “the woman looked for (falabat) a man because of her passionate desires! Kaş. / 314 (erseğlenür, erseglenme:k). D arslanla:- Den. V. fr. arsla:n; pec. to Kaş, and found only in the Ger. in -u:, prob. only in association with kökre:-. Xak. xi arsianlayu: kökredim 'I. rfared like a lion' Kaş. I 125, 13; similar phr. 1 142, 13; İl 13, 13; 138, 1; n.m.e. Dis. ARS: VU?D arış “the warp! of a woven fabric; prima facie this word, arka:ğ, q.v., and arğaç are all Dev. N.s fr. a lost verb *ar-, but some doubt is cast on this by the fact that it seems often to contain front vowels. Survives in NE Tel. örüş R 7 1226; NC Kir. erig; SW Osm. arış: xx Anat. eris SDD 545. It should not be confused with arış “the pole, or shafts of a cart” first noted in SC xvii Özb. Abu'l-fàzi (P. de C. 13) and surviving in several NC, NW, and SW languages, which is a l.-w. fr. Ar. 'arig, same meaning. UyB. viri ff. Bud. erüşi (?sc) TT VI 391 (arkuru:): Xak. xı (VU) aris al-sadá "the warp'; hence one says arış arka:$ al-sadü ea l-luhma “varp and vveft” Kaş. I1 61: xiv Muh.(?) al-1üqa '"warp' (opposite to al-luhma arkuğ) e:ri:ş Rif. 159 (only): Çağ. xv ff. (VU) aris tür-i kargáh-i nassáci “the warp on a loom" San. 37v. 13 Éris ditto do. roor. 24: Osm. xiv ff. arış “vvarp”, often in association with arğaç, c.i.a.p. T TS 138; I1 53; I11 36; IV 38. ?D erüş “many, numerous'; often used in association with üküs. N.o.a.b. Türkü vrll ff. Man. artuk erüg erür “they are very numerous! TT 71 8, 61: Uyğ. vir ff, Man.-A (gap) tolu erüş üküş tórlüg (gap) “very many (Hend.) kinds” M 725, ır: Bud. ol edgü kılınç erüş mü “are those good deeds numerous?” U 7I 16, 14 (the answer is “yes”, ertipü üküş), o.o. of erüş Kwan. $7, 68; erüş üküş Sut. rog, 4: Xak. xı KB (VU) ürüş rhyming with üküş and apparently meaning 'numerous' in 4247 (tebiz) seems to be a survival of this vvord. D uruş N.Ac. (connoting reciprocal action) fr. ur- , “fight, quarrel'. S.i.a.m.l.g. Türkü vri uruş kıllip) “ighting” Ongö 10: Xak. xr uruş al-mugácara wa'l-harb ayda(n) "a quarrel, also a fight” Kaş. I ör, al-mucadala wa'l-harb *battle, fight” u:ruş tokuş I ız, 17; a.o. İl 83, 23: KB kilki urus “his eharacter is quarrelsome” 2098; (in 4247 read ürüs, see erüş): xııı(?) Tef. uruş 'battle, vvar” 332: xiv. Rbj. uruş kil- "to fight” R I 1664 (quotns.): Çağ. xv ff. uruş cang “fight, war' Vel. 102 (quotn.); urus (spelt) deverbal noun 239 fr. uruşmak ba-yak digar zadan "to strike one another”, and metaph. camg x cadál “fight, quarrel' Sar. yr v. 7 (quotn.): Xwar. xrr(?) uruş tokuş başlandı “the battle (Hend.) began” Og. 266: xiv urug ditto Qutb zoo: * Kip. xv darabtu darb "1 struck a blow' urug urdum Kars. 23, 3: sgáyib 'hitting the target uruş Tuh. 22b. s, o.o. do. 49b. 11; 50a. r and 2: Osm. xiv ff. uruş “battle, fight” in several texts TT'S 1726; 11 931; IHI 713. : D örüş Dev. N./A. fr. 1 özr-, “rising”. Perhaps survives in örüş “pasture” in NC Kır., Kzx.; SW xx Anat. DD 1118 (compare some meanings of 1 ö:r-). Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. (good doctrine) örüş tüblüg erür 'provide a basis for rising (to better things)” TT V 24, 68; a.o. do. 78 (and see ünüs). ?E erşi: See ersü:. Dis. V. ARSD a:rig- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of 2a:r-. Xak. xı ola:r ikki: a:rışdı: “both of them deceived each other” Kaş. 7 182 (a:rigu:r, a:rışma:k). D 1 eriş- Co-op. f. of 2 €r-, properly “to reach, or arrive, together'. S.i.a.m.l.g. but with such a wide range of meanings that it is doubtful whether all are survivals of this word; they cannot, however, reasonably be connected with 2 eriş- (erüş-). Uyğ. vii ff. Man. İgaplmakığ erişmekiğ serğürtüpüz “you have hindered (or prevented) . . ., and arrival TT III 77: Çağ. xv ff. érig- (spelt) biriy(?) kardan sta az qafd raftan wa mutába'at kardan “to follow, follow behind” San. 98v. 3 (quotns.): Kip. xv lahiqa “to reach' (yetiş- and) eriş- Tuh. 32a. 9: Osm. xiv ff. eriş-/eriş* 'to reach', also, with ile, “to consort with', in several texts 7 TS I 39 (ariş-), 272; İl 391, şor (trig-). S 2 eriş- See erüs-. D erüş- Co-op. f. of erü:-; usually in the sense of “to melt (Intrans.) completely”. Survives only(?) in SE Türki iriş- Shate 33 and perhaps SW Osm. eriş- (of milk) “to curdle” R 7 772 (only). Xak. xı ya:ğ erüşdi: "the fat (etc.) melted” (fagaöa) Kaş. I 182 (erüşü:r, erüşme:k, sic in MS.), ka:r bu:z kamuğ erüşdi: “ali the snovv and ice have melted” (d45a) I 186, ro. D uruş- Recip. f. of ur- “to strike one another, fight, quarrel”. S.i.a.m.lg. with some extended meanings. Xak. xr anın birle: uruşdı: :agácará "the two men quarrelled' (sic); also used when two rulers make war on one another (taharabà) Kaş. I 182 (uruşu:r, uruşma:k), four o.o.: xiit(?) Tef. uruş- “to fight (with someone birle)' 332: xiv MuA(?) düraba “to strike one another” u:ruş- Rif. 133 (only): Çağ. xv ff. uruş- Recip. £.; “to strike (zadan) one another”, and an expression for cang u cidál kardan 'to fight, quarrel” San. 68r. 11 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv uruş- “to fight Qutb zoo: Kom. xiv “to quarrel' uruş- CCG;  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 284 
     
   
   
     240 Gr.: Kip. xv tadöraba urug- Kav. 70, 4; qátala wa düraba urus- do. 78, 11; şaba "to hit (a target)! uruş- Tuh. 22b. 13; dáraba urugdo. 59a. 13 ff.; Osm. xiv ff. urus- “to fight in several texts TTS 1 726; 11 931; 111 714; IV 787. D 1 órüs- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of 1 ó:r-; 'to rise together", Xak. xı Kaş. 7 186, 12 (eğriş-), n.m.e. D 2 örüş- Co-op. f. of 2 ó:r-; “to help (someone Dat.) to plait (etc., something Zcc.)'. Survives in NE Khak. and SE "Türki Shaw 21 (only). Xak. xr ol mapa: yışığ órügdi: “he helped me to plait (f? tatodin) a rope'; also used for competing in weaving (al-raml) something Kaş. 7 183 (örüşü:r, örüşme:k). D ürüş- Co-op. f. of 1 ür-, “to help (someone Dat.) to blow, or blow up (something Ace.). Survives only(?) in NE "Tel, R 7 1835. Xak. xı ol mapa: o:t ürüşdi: "he helped me to blow up ('ald nafx) the fire", also used for competing Kaş. I 183 (ürüşü:r, ürüşme:k). Mon. AS a:$ properly 'ermine', occasionally used for 'weascl'. "The combination of long vowel and final unvoiced consonant is unusual, but apparently original. Both Kaş.”s alternative form a:z and medieval and modern ars are clearly Sec. fs, the latter perhaps influenced by Arabic "irs. Survives in NE as/a:s most dialects R7 535 and Khak,, Tuv.; NC Kir. ars; NW Kaz. as; SW Osm. as, XX Anat. as/ars SDD 116, 118. See Doerfer II 477. Uyğ. xiv Chin.-Uy$. Dict. yin shu (Giles 13,253 10,072, the latter misprinted as chü 3,034) 'ermine' as Ligeti 131; RI 535: Xak. XI 1:8 al-güqum 'ermine'; alternative. form 2:2; used as a name for slave-girls (a/-casvàári): a:z al-qüqum, alternative form a:s, and the latter is more correct (afsal) Kaş. 1 80: KB 84 (ürün) 866 (2 kı:z): xiv Muh.(?) al-qüqum as (mis-spelt aş) Rif. 174(only); Çağ. xv ff. as hükum "the well-known animal with a white coat and a black tip to íts tail, of which they make garments” Sar. qor, zo (and see Osm.): Xwar. xiv as “ermine” Qufö 11: Kip. xiv al-'irs *weasel' as Bul. ro, ro: XV qüqum as Tuh. 29a. 7: Osm. xvi as 'ermine'(?) 77S 77 ş8:xvir as... .. and in Rümi the animal called rüsü 'weasel' San. qor. 22. es 'carrion' and the like; pec. to Xak. Xak. xit. €8 cazaru'l-sibà' “the prey of wild beasts' Kaş. 1 36; tava:r körüp uslayu: (so read, MS. usn layu: in error) eske: coka:r “vhen they see wealth they swoop down on it as a vulture swoops when it sees its prey” (zngaddit 'alayhi kamd yanqaddu'l-nasr idà ra'á'l-cazar) II 17, ız, us es kórüp /// 46, 7. 1 us 'intelligence, the power of discrimination', and the like. A purely Western word to be distinguished carefully from u:z. Survives only(?) in NW Kar. L., 'T. R J 1741; Kot. 275 and SW Az., Osm, Oğuz x1 us al-tamyiz DIS. V. ARSbayna' l-xayr wa'l-garr discrimination betwcen good and evil”, hence one says ol us boldi: 'agala'l-xayr. müna”l-şarr "he understood (the difference between) good and evil” Kaş. 1 36: Xvvar. xın(?) (when he saw her) us1 kalmadı kitti “he lost his senses” Og. 63; a.o. 81: xiv us "intelligence, sense' Qutb 200: Kom. xiv "understanding, intelligence” us CCJ, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xui al-"aql "intelligence, understanding' us Hou. 19,6: xiv us (v.l. u:ş) ditto İd. 14; Bul. s, 16: Nv ditto. Twuh. zab. 5; ğüşiya 'alayhi “not to understand, to be at a loss" usi az- do. 278. 11: Osm. xiv ff. us 'intelligence, sense'; c.i.a.p T TS 1727; II 931; III 714; IV 787: xvin hüş ditto . . . and in Rümi us San. 75r. 9. VU 2 us 'vulture'; n.o.a.b. Xak. xt us al-nasr “vulture” Kaş, I 36 (verse); o.o. 7 228, 14; III 46, 7 (es): xiv Muh.(?) (under “birds”) ükilu'l-mayta 'carrion cater! us (unvocalized, spelt uş) Hif. 175 (only). Mon. V. ASas- (?a:s-) "to hang, suspend (something Aee., on 01 in Uyg. üze:, later Dat.); to execute by hanging'. S.i.a. m.l. g. with some extended meanings. Uyf. vir ff. Bud, kaç kenliğ yemiş sögüt üze birer çınartğu asın “hang bells on "əə spreading fruit trees” PP 79, 4-6; a.o 104, 13: Civ. USp. 88, 45 (üzüm): ku xı ol et a:sdı: “he hung ("a//aqa) the meat (etc.) on a stake" (al-tatad); also used for 'crucifying' (salaba) a man Kaş. 1 173 (a:sa:r, a:sma:k): xiu(?) Tef. as- “to hang” (in both senses) 60: xiv Muh. 'allaqa as- Mel. 29, 6; 40, 15; Rif. 115, 130, al-ta"liq aşmak 34, 9; 119; şalaba as34, 9; 111; al-maslib asmış (v.l. asılmış) so, 14; 146: Rbj. ditto R I 533: Çağ. xv ff. as-(-tt) aş- dteixtan ma'násina "to hang! Vel. I9 (quotns.), as- dwixtan San. 39r. 17 (quotns.): Xwar. xır aş- “to hang up” “AF 34: xiv. ditto Na)c. 126, 2: Kom. xı “to hang” as- CCI; Gr.: Kap. xni şanaqa "to execute by hanging' aş-, also "a//aqa Hou. 34, 15; 'allaqa, aş- do. 42, 11: Xiv a$- 'allaqa bi'l-tadliya tva ra” suhu asfal “to hang (someone) head downwards' İd. 15; a.o. do. 98 (2 y€:m): xv 'allaqa aş- Kav. 10,9; Tuh. 26a. 7; şanaqa tea. "allaqa aş- do. 21b. 6 1 es- (1) Intrans. (of the wind) 'to blow', usually with 'gently' implied; (2) Trans, “to blow (e.g. dust) about; to winnow (grain), and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. Xak. xı esin esdi: nasama'[-nasim “the breeze blew gently'; and one says tarif esdi: “he winnowed (rasafa) the wheat' (etc.); also used of the wind when it blows the dust about (rasafati'I-turáb); both "Trans. and Intrans. Kaş, / 165 (no Aor. or Infin.): KB 63 (öpdün): xin(?) Tef. es- "to blow (Intrans.) 6r (mis-spelt as-), 84: Çağ. xv ff. és- (-ti, etc.) yel esdi, etc, Vel. 58 (quotn.); és- rcazidan-i nasim 'of a breeze, to blow' San. 101r. 7: Xwar. xiv és- "to blow' (Intrans.) Qutb sz: MN 343: Kip. xii Rabba “to blow' (of a wind or breeze) es- Hou. 44, 8 (mis 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 285 
     
   
   
       TRIS. V. ASBvocalized esi-): xiv es- habba"i-rihk İd. 13; suhümu'l-haswà “still air” esmes Bul. 3, 4; a.o. do. 3, 1 (1 yé:l): xv Rabba es- Tuh. 38a. 3: Osm. xiv ff. es- 'to blow' (Intrans.) in several texts T TS I 276; III 266. 2 es- 'to stretch' esp. a rope, cord, and the like. Survives only(?) in NE Tuv. At some unknown date a verb eg- 'to twist, twist together, tie' appcared, and some later user of the MS. of Kaş. became so confused between the two that he altered the S which precedes this verb, 1 es- and 1, 2 us- to S and also this verb to eg- and esil-, esiş- to esil-, eşiş-. "Vhe two verbs are/ hovvever, clearly different, since Pal. 577 distinguishes between es-, Infin. ezer, 'to pull (meat off a bone, a pot off the fire)' and es-, Infin. ejer 'to twist'. 'The earliest references to (4) es- 'to twist', which s.ia.m.lg., are Xwar. xiv Quib 61; Kom. xiv CCG; Gr.; and Çağ, xv ff. Vel. 60; San. 104v. 26. Xak. xı ol yışığ esdi: madda”l-habl "he stretched the rope” (etc.) Kaş. I 165 (ese:r, esme:k). OS- the early existence of this verb, which is practically syn. w. üz- depends on the question whether osul- and osğuç, q.v., have been correctly read in TM JV 253. İt survives only(?) in NC Kzx. 0S- “to cut, catrve; to wound, scratch deeply'; the other references to it are as follows. Çağ. xv ff. os- (spelt) güşt az ustuxwàün büh hardan “to scrape meat off a bone'; it cannot be used in isolation, the word “bone” must be mentioned San. 74v. 23: Kip. xv naliata. “to cut, hew' (yon-; in the margin in another hand) os- Tul. 37a. 10. VU 1 us- “to be thirsty'. Survives perhaps in SE Türki usa-/ussa- Share, Jarring; ussuBS, unless these are Sec. fs of Suvsa:as üs-/üsül- are of süs-. Uyğ. vrır ff. Bud. (because no news came from you) ülgülençsiz üküş usmakimiz suvsamakimuz turdi 'immeasurably great thirst (Ilend. i.e. for news) arose in us”. IHüen-ts. 2040-1: Xak. x1 er usdi: “the man was thirsty' (afişa) Kaş, 1 166 (usa:r, usma:k). 2 us- “to think, suppose'. Homophonous with 1 us and perhaps connected semantically. Survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. SDD 1421. Oğuz xr men ayla: usdum kadàá zanantu “I thought thus! Kaş. 7 166 (usa:r, usma:k): (Xak.) xiv Muh.(?) qaşada "to intend” us- Rif. 114; al-qaşd usmak (unvocalized) 120: Osm. XIV US- “to think, consider! in two texts TTS 1729; II 933. F ös- “to grow' a common Mong. verb (Haenisch 128, Kozw. $14) which s.i.a.m.l.g. as a Mong. l.-w., and is earlier noted as below. In the only two passages in which it has been read in Uyğ. viii fT. Bud. it is clearly an error, in: U İl 10, 24 for 1 ür-, q.v., and in Suv. 566, 3 where the correct reading is üzğen yağmur tökülür “the destructive rain, pours down'; a similar phr. is correctly transcribed in U 7 26, , 15 (Suv. 517, 4). The only reason for doubting 241 that this is a Mong. l.-w. arises in connection with PU ósür-, q.v.; if this is correctly read it might be a Caus. f. of ös-, but it is prob. an error. Çağ. xv ff. ös- ma'lüf şudan wa "adat kardan "to be accustomed to (something) San. 74v. 24 (quotn., an erroneous translation derived from a misinterpretation of the quotn. tuğğan ósgen yerim “the place where I was born and grew up” not “to which I am accustomed"): Kom. xiv “to grow, increase in size” ös- CCG; Gr. 184 (quotn.): Kip. xv óstala"a”l-binü ami”l-şacar wa. bi-ma'nà turubbàá *of a building or tree, to rise, grow taller; to be brought up” Kas. 9, 6; sabba wa tàla "to grow, get taller (uzan- and) ös- Tuh. zıb. ır, 2.0. 24a. 1: Osm. xvii ÖSs- "to grow up" TTS I 749 (üs-). Dis. V. ASAİsi:- “to be hot", There is no doubt that this verb originally had front vowels, but forms with back vowels now prevail in some languages both for it and for its derivatives. "This is the exact reverse of the usual evolution (see e.g. rS, ti:l). Survives with front vowels in all NE dialects and back vowels in NC Kir, Kzx., cf. isiğ. Xak. xi mü:n isi:di: “the soup (etc.) was hot” (saxtmat); and one says temür İsi:di: “the iron (etc.) was hot” (hamiya) Kaş. II] 253 (isir, isi:me:k): Kip. xiv isisaxuna İd. 14: xv ditto Tuh. 20a. 3. *osa:- Sce osa:l, osallik, osan-. Dis. ASB PUF usbad/usban names of drugs; they obviously represent Tibetan words like sbad, spad, etc. but there are no obviously appropriate names for drugs of such a form in the ordinary Tibetan dictionaries. Uyğ. vii ff. Civ. "Tibetan' usbad H 7I 6, 15; 8, 22; usban do. 30, 180. Tris. ASB PU?F usbarı: Hap. leg.; under the heading “af"al with -i attached”. "The only vowel shown is damma on the alif. No doubt a foreign (?Iranian) lL-w. Xak. xr usbarı: xubz malla yufatt fi samn wa yuc'al fih”l-suhhar "bread baked under the ashes crumbled in oil and mixed with sugar" Kaş. İ 141. Tris. V. ASB(D)F osparla:- 'to deliver, hand over, entrust'; Den. V. fr. a Middle Pe. verb avispár- 5 ösbar-, corresponding to Mod. Pe. sipur-, same meaning; an early l-w. which has undergone a good deal of phonetic change. Survives as 18marla- in NW Krım R 7 1396 and SW Osm. Xak. xri yérni Israfil Cavh sü başıka osparladım “I have handed the land over to General İsrafil Çavli” Contract from Yarkand dated A.H. 515 (A.D. rr21-2), J.R. A.S. 1942, 191 fE: xin(?) Tef. osparla-: “to hand over” 332 (usbarla-); isparla- do. 129; ismarla- “to entrust' do,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 286 
     
   
   
       242 130; xiv. Muh.. atcda'a. "to entrust' (VU) ısmarla- Mel. 23, 11; Rif. 105: Xwar. xi ditto "AE 55: xiv isparla- “to entrust' Nahc. 102, 1; 341, 7: Kip. xii sallama min taslimi'l-şay "ila şahibihi “to hand something over to its owner' ospurla:- (alif not vocalized, Imperat. -gil in error) How. qı, 1: xiv i1smarlaatcda'a İd. 14: xv areşd “to appoint (somcone) as executor” asmarla- Tiuh. sa. ro: Osm. xiv ff. ısmarla- (1) "to hand over, entrust'; (2) “to lay down, ordain' in several texts T T.S 7 357; İl sos, 1 347; İV 398: xvii 18marlain Rumi, siburdan vea taveşiya hardan wa tawdi* kardan San. IO4V. 9. Dis. ASC PU usı:ç Hap. leg.; there is no clue to the pronunciation or meaning of this vvord, but it was prob. laudatory. Türkü vri ff. /rRB 29 1 oy). Mon. ASD 1 ast 'the bottom, or lower surface, of something”, syn. vv. and with the same peculiar character as alt, q.v.; not noted before the medieval period, but astin, asra:, q.v., are older. For modern survivals see alt. ((Xak.) xı(?) Tef. astındakı 'situated below 61): Çağ. xv ff. astı alt: taht ma"nösina "beneath” Vel. 18 (quotns. containing astıda): ast ta/it opposite to fatcq “above” Sas. qor. 29 (ditto): Xwar. xiv astında “beneath” Qutb 13; Nahc. 118, 3: Kom. xiv 'beneath' astında CCI, Gr. VU 2 ast Hap. leg. Çigil xı ast a/-aziqqa “lanes, side-streets” Kaş. I 42. üst “upper surface, top”, opposite to alt, ast but unlike those words used as an ordinary N. in phr. like ayak üsti 'the upper surface of the foot', and an ordinary Adj. in phr. like üst yurt “the upper camping ground'. 'There are noearly occurences but the Den. V üste:-, q.v.,isan old word. S.i.a.m.l.g. (Xak.) xini(?) Tef. başlarının üstinde “over their heads'; ayakı üstünke kopdi “he rose to his feet" 341: Çağ. xv ff. üstiğa (sic) üstine Vel. 107 (quotn.); üst bálà sea fatcq 'above' San. 75r. 12 (same quotn. but with üstine which is no doubt a better reading): Xvvar. xıı(?) urum üstike atlar bola sen “you are about to ride against Rome (ie. Byzantium) Oğ. 143-4; (there is ice) üze üstünde “on its summit' 230; kanğa üstünde “on the cart” 276: Kom. see üstün: Kip. xr in the grammatical section the lafza 'expression' fazeç is translated by üst with Poss. Suffs. in oblique cases Hou. 53, 4 ff: xv in a similar section 'ald 'upon' is similarly translated by ist/üst Kas. 45, 18 ff.; "ala üst Tuh. ab. 3; 89a. 9: Osm. xiv ff, üst and oblique cases including üsne (xv) occur in various phr. T TS 17 957; IV 807. Dis. ASD D iste:$ N.Ac. fr. iste:- with meanings developing in the same way as those of iste:-.:   TRIS. V, ASBKhak. isteg tracking, izdó: istek 'wish, Survives in NE following, search” Bas, 68; NC Kir. 'enquiry, search", SW Osm. request. Xak. xi İste:ğ a/-falab tea”l-tatabbu" tea”l-fahş "ani”l-şay” "requcst, examination, investigation of something” , hence one says İsteğ (sic) kopdi: 2dca”/l-falab “a request arose' Kaş. 1 120. D üste:k Dev. N fr. üste:- ; 'something added to something else”. S.i.s.m.]l. Xak. xi üste:k "an increase (a/-ziydda) of something, e.g. an increase of rooo by (another) 100'; hence one says men üste:k bé:rdim 'I gave him an increase” Kaş. 1 120. D üstem N.S.A. fr. üste:-; etymologically “a single act of putting something on something', actually 'gold or silver belt or harness ornaments”. Pec. to Xak., but a l.-w. in Pe. as fistám with some extended meanings. Xak. x1 üstem 'anything, gold or silver, which is inlaid (yuragsa') on the buckles of belts or harness straps'; it is what the Oğuz call sa:xt (Pe. l.-w.) Kaş. / 107: KB ayağ bérdi tamğa at üstem kedüt “he gave him a title of honour, a seal, decorated harness and clothing' 1766; o.o. of at üstem 2280, 2385. D astin Adj. and Adv. of placc, prob. a crasis of *asttin, see alt; syn. w. altin; liable to be confused with oblique Vases of ast, q.v. Survives in SE Türki Shato, BŞ, Jarring, and prob. NC Kir. astan kesten 'upside down' (said to be a corruption of astın üstün) RI 550; astan kesten MM 42. Xak. xı astın a Particle (/iarf) meaning talit “under, beneath'; luğa radiya “an incorrect form”, the more correct (aí-afsah) is altın Kaş. 1 108: KB nà astın nö üstün 'neither below nor above” 18: Çağ. xv ff. astin (spelt) (1) zirin 'situated belov”, in Ar. tahtáni (quotn.); (2) harakat-i kasra "the vowcl sign Rasra, also called asır San. qov. 2; 2.0. do. s. VU östen survives in SE Türki Sato, BS, Jarring and NC Kir, (östön) “a main irrigation canal; it is not clear whether this is the word used in KB or what its etymology is. Xak. xı KB (Ögdülmiş replied and said, “O King") uzun keç yaşasu bu östep eliğ “long live this open-handed one'(?) 1796, similar phr. 1948. D üstün Adj. and Adv. connoting motion onto or situation on (something), prob. a crasis of *üsttün, see alt; liable to be confused with oblique cases of üst, S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE and with some distorted forms in NW like Kar. L. isne; T. üsnü. Uy$. vii ff. Bud. üstün . . . altın “above . . . below, see altin: Civ. üstün . . . altin ditto.; üstün, presumably 'north', is used in conjunction with ópdün, [altin] and kédin in describing the boundaries of a property USSp. 30, 9-11: xiv. Chin.-Uxyg..— Dict. shang 277 upon” (Giles 9,729) üstün Lügeti 276; R I 1886: Xak. xı üstün a Particle meaning fareq “above”, hence one says andan üstün  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 287 
     
   
   
      DIS. V. ASDfawqahu Kaş, 1 108: KB bularda ep üstün "the highest of these” (is Saturn) 131; 0.0. . 18 (astin), 1836: xrir(?) Tef. üstün “above" (Adj.), “top” (Noun) 341: xiv Muh. al-a'là 'higher' (opposite to 'lower' altın) üstün Mel. 14, 10; Rif. gö: Çağ. xv ff. üstün (spelt) (r) fareq $a fàyiq (quotns.); (2) the vowel sign fatha San. 75r. 15: Kom. xiv üstün 'above' (something Loc) CCI, CCG; Gr. 270 (quotns. but üstünde comes from üst): Kip. xıl "ala “upon” (opposite to faht altın) üstün (vocalized üsten) also üzüre (sıc) Hou. 26, 20: xiv "ald isne (sic) and üzre: (unvocalized) Bul. ış, 12; üstün fauwq İd. 13; xv "ala üstün Kav. 35, 6: Osm. xiv "4 üstün “upper, above” in several texts T'T'S 7 749; I1 957 (but the word here may be ustun, metathesis of Pe. sutün 'pillar); ZIJ 735; IV 807. Dis. V. ASDD esit- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of 2 es-. Xak. xı ol urukni: esitti: amadda”l-habl “he had the rope stretched” Kaş. 7 209 (esitür, esitme:k). D isit- Caus. f. of isi:-, q.v.; “to heat (something Zcc.)', also Intrans. “to suffer from fever'. S.i.a.m.l.g. w. front vowels in NE, and sporadically elsewhere, otherwise w. back vowels. Uyğ. viri ff. Civ. eşiçte: isitip “heating it in a cauldron' H 7 og, a.o. H II 12, 97: Xak. ol mü:n isitti: “he heated (saxxaza) broth”, also used when one heats (afmá) iron, etc.; and one says er isitti: 'the man had fever' (humma); the last Intrans., the others Trans. Kaş. I 209 (isitür, isitme:k): K B (when you are young) Sofik işke tutğıl isitür kanın “engage in cold work, it warms your blood' 4623: xiv Muh. ahmáà k:sit- Mel. 21, 15; Rif. 102; alhummáà'l-harra isitmek 64, rz (İsitme: 163): Çağ. xv ff. ısıt- (-kan, etc.) ssrfi tut-, kisdir-, 15582. eyle- "to catch fever; to heat, make hot” Vel. s7-8 (quotns.): 1sit- garm ardan “to heat', and metaph. tab kardan “to have fever” San. 101 v. 13 (quotns.): Osm. xiv 1SS1t- "to heat', once T'T'S I 358. D usit- Caus. f. of 1 us-, q.v.; perhaps survives in SE Tar, usat- R 7 1746. Xak. xi tu:zluğ et meni: usitti: "the salted (mumallah) meat made me thirsty' ('attagani) Kaş. I 209 (usitur, usitma:k); bu kuya:ş ol kişini: usıtğa:n “this blazing heat always makes a man thirsty' (mu'attig) I 155 (verse). (?S) iste:- described by Kaş. as syn. vr. irte:“to seek, pursue (something cc.) ; but the subsequent history of the two words differed; irte:-, where it survives, still has that meaning, but İste:- has developed extended meanings, including in SW “to wish; to wish for (something cc.). "There is no doubt that izde:-, when it occurs, is identical with iste:-, and it is tempting to explain iste:- as a Sec. f. of izde:- Den. V. fr, iz, but it would be surprising if such a sound change had taken place before vii, and the resemblance may be a. coincidence. 'S.i.a.m.l.g., in NC izde-. UyB.   243 viti ff. Chr. (my dear children go and) tilepler istepler 'seck and search” U I 6, r: Bud. isteyü sakinsarmen “f I investigate and think' Hüen-ts. 1961; o.o. of tile- iste- do. note 1870, 23; USb. 102a. 55: Civ. in a stock formula regarding an outright sale, no one may cam çarım kilmazun ayıtmazun istemezünler 'lodge objections, make enquiries or start investigations! US. 107, 12; 108, 13 (Note, in these Uyğ. texts a transcription izde- is not absolutely excluded): Xak. xi Kaş. I 272 (irte:-): xırı(?) Tef. iste- “to seek (someone Zcc.)' 126: xiv Muh. yatlub "he seeks' is iizde:r in Turkistan and İ:ste:r in “our country” Mel. 8, 11; Rif. 8o; aráda "to desire" iste- 22, 7; 103 (tlle:- in margin); faftaşa “to investigate" İste- 29, r3 (only); a/-raftiş istemek 36, 3 (only); al-ibtigaà' "to desire' izde- 35, 14; 121; al-sahwa “to long for” izdecf. 36, 9; 122: Çağ. xv ff. iste- (-İİ, etc.) fsteVel. 59 (quotn.); iste- (spelt) xwastan toa falab kardan “to wish for, to seek” San. rorr, 23 (quotns.): Xvvar. xii iste- “to wish' "Ağ 29: xiv İzde- “to seck' Qutb 62: Kom. xiv “to seek; to summon (to a court of law)' izde- CCI, CCG; Gr. 104 (quotns.): Kip. xii fattaga izde:- Hou. 43, 2: Xiv ditto İd. 13: xv ditto Tuh. 28b. 3; talaba izde- Kav. 9, 17; 74, 19 (also tile-): Osm. xiv ff. iste- “to seek, search for (something) common til xvi, once in xviii, in this sense T'TS I 391; II sag, 111 385; IV 439. D üste:- Den. V. fr. üst; 'to add an additional piece to (something cc.) to increase (it). S.is.m.l. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. tinliğlarnın üzeleyü öğrünçlerin sevinçlerin aşmak üstemek erür “tt is to increase (Hend.) the rising joys and pleasures of mortals” Suv. 266, 6-8; a.o. do. 593, 19: Xak. xı KB yà rabb üste dawlat tükel kil tilek “O Lord! Increase his good fortune and fulfil all his wishes' 116. D istet- Caus. f. of iste:- ; with a similar range of meanings. S.is.m.]l. Xak. xri men anı: istettim ba'attu fi itrihi li-yatlub “I sent (someone) in his tracks to look for him' Kaş. I 260 (istetür, istetme:k): xııı(?) Tef. istet- same meaning 126: Çağ. xv ff. istetCaus. f. talab farmüdan “to order to seek' San. 101 v. 11: Osm. xiv İStet- "to have (someone) sought” TTS II 550. VU 7C östik- Kaş. is prob. right in describing this verb as a crasis of 1 ö:z and tik-. Apparently survives in NE Şor. üstük- “to attack” (Trans. R I 1886; Sag. üstük- “to hurry” (Intrans.) Bas. 257 and NC Kir. üstük-/ üzdük- “to be ravenously hungry'. Xak. xı ol bu: ı:şka: östikti: “he coveted (barrsa) this thing and desired it (/ştdqa) , originally ö:z tikti: Kaş. I 244 (östike:r, östikme:k): KB bireğü bay evlik tiler östikip "one man seeks a rich wife out of greed' 4487 (two MSS. read öz tikip). D istel- Pass. f. of iste:- . Survives only(?) in NE Tuv. istel- and NC Kir. izdel-. Xak. xt isteldi: ne: tuliba'l-say' tea fuhişa “the thing  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 288 
     
   
   
      244 was sought and searched for” Kaş. I 246 (istelü:r, istelme:k): Çağ. xv ff. istel- Pass. f.; xteásta şudan “to be desired” San. 101 v. 12. D üstel- Pass. f. of üste:-; 'to be enlarged, increased'. Survives only(?) in NC Kzx. Uyf. vin ff. Man. üstelzün tepridem küçleri “may their divine powers be increased' TT IIl 170; a.o. M II 6, 4: Bud. kopüldekl edgülerl neteg üstelmiş bolur “hovv are the good things in their minds increased?” U III 73, 11-12; 0.0. U 1 26, 12; TT V 24, 67 and 74: VII 40, 46; Hüen-ts. 1872; alku ödte buyanları aşılıp üstelip “their merits increasing (Hend.) at all times” TT VI 40, 128; 2.0. Hüen-ts. 2015: Xak. xı su:v üsteldi: "the water increased” (záda); also used when something is added to it (uzida fihi), also used of other things Kaş. I 246 (üstelür, üstelme:k). D astur- Caus. f. of as-; “to order to suspend, or to execute”, S.i.a.m.l.g. Xak. xı ol er asturdi: “he ordered the crucifixion (şa/5) of the man", and one says ol et asturdi: "he ordered that the meat should be hung (ta'/iq) on a stake” Kaş. 1 220 (asturur, asturma:k): xın(?) Tef. astur- “to order to hang” 62: Çağ. xv ft. astur- (spelt) Caus. f.; awizándan “to order to hang up” San. 39v. io: Xwar. xırı(?) tağurak (i.e. tavrak) basıp asturip yok bolzunğul tep kilurmen “1 quickly attack, have him hanged and order his destruction” Oğ. I14-I$. D 1 estür- Caus. f. of 1 es-, survives only(?) in SW Osm. Xak. xı ol kavik estürdi: "he gave orders for winnowing (nasf) the bran out of the millet and for cleaning it” (nagiyatihi); also used for winnowing in general Kag. I 221 (estürür, estürme:k): Çağ. xv ff. éstürgey yel esdüreyin “1 will make the wind blov” Vel. 58; éstür- Caus. f. mazánidan "to cause to blow? San. 101r. 21 (quotn.). D 2 estür- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of 2 es-; cf. esit-. Xak. xı (ol» uruk estürdi: madda'l-habl (no doubt error for amıadda) “he ordered that the rope should be stretched' Kaş. I 221 (followed by 1 estür-). VU?D üster- presumably Intrans. Den. V. fr. üst, but the semantic connection is tenuous; the general connotation seems to be 'to be quarrelsome, uncooperative', and the like. N.o.a.b. Xak. xr ol mana: üsterdi: “he opposed me (ndrdni) in the matter'; and one says ol kılmış rsin üsterdi: cahada mà fa'ala "he disowned (or accepted no responsibility for) what he had done'; also used for any kind of denial or disowning (inkdr tva cuhüd) Kaş. I 221 (üsterür, üsterme:k, prov.): KB uvutsuz bolur üsterigli karak “a defiant look is shameless” 2205: xın(?) Tef. üster- “to be quarrelsome” 341. Tris. ASD D üstünki: N./A.S. fr. üstün; 'situated above, or on the top”, hence metaph. “better, superior;   DIS. V. ASDTT the latter. meaning usually in the Hend. yé:g üstünki. S.i.s.m.l. Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-A üstünki kök “hcaven above” M III ro, 7 (ii): Man. yég üstüngi/üstüngi yég “highest" (place, heaven, etc.) TT 1/7 75, 143, 166; 2.0. do. 169 (altınkı:): Bud. yég üstünki (teaching, knovledge) TT VIII G.33; Suv. 148, 20-1; TT IV 12, sz (tüzgerincsiz): Civ. TT 1 128(altinkr); VIII T.16: xiv Chin.- Uyğ. Dict. “imperial court üstünki Ligeti 276; R I 1886: (Xak.) xırı(?) Tef. üstünki “upper” (lip) 341: Kom. xiv "highest” üstüngi CCI; Gr. 271 (quotn.). D üstürti: Adv. of place fr. üst; noted only in the phr. üstürti: kodı: “from on high” as below. Uyğ. vii ff. Man. üstürti kodi énmeser 'if you had not descended from on high” TT III zo: Bud. üz&amp;en yağmur ódince üstürti kodı tökülür “the destructive rain pours down from on high in due scason” U 7 26, 15-16, Stt. 517, 4; a.0. Suv. 380, 9. Dis. ASG asığ 'profit, advantage', and the like; l.-w. in Mong. as qşiğ (sic, sce Studies, p. 206; Kot. 59, Haltod 13); survives in NE "Tuv. ajik (reborrowed fr. Mong.) and SW Osm. ası/asığ/asık 'profit, benefit. See Doerfer 1I 48o. Türkü vırı ff. asığı: bar edgü: “there is advantage in it, itis good” /rRB 32: Uyğ. viu ff. Man.-A mapa ol kişi asığ bolğay “that man will be useful to me” M I 34, zo: asığ tusu kiltipiz “you have brought advantage (Hend.)” TT III 123; a.o. do. 105 (uluğ): Bud. Sanskr. artham “advantage, profi asığ TT VIII D.34; E.44; a:sığ do. D.18; a.o.o.; asığ tusu kil- 'to bring advantage, or profit, to (someone Dat.)'! is very common PP zo, s, 34, 7, etc. U 125,8; İİ 16, zo, and many o.o.: Civ. asığ bolur 'it is advantageous! TT VII 28, 36, and 4s, etc., utrupda asığ tusu yétirü kelti "he has come to mcet you bringing you advantages! 77 ”7 113; do. 58 (egsü:-); in contracts in USp. asığ “interest (on a loan) is common, e.g. biz él yanınça asığı birle kóni bérürbiz 'we pronuse to repay with interest at the customary ratc” ro, 7-8: XIV Chin.-Uyg. Dict. li i 'advantage, profit” (Giles 6,885 5,48«) asığ tusu Ligeti 131: Xak. xt asığ ai-ribh 'profit, gain Kaş, I 64; asığ kılğu: emes /2 yanfa'uka “it gives you no advantage” 1 494, 4; a.o. HI 13, 7: KB asığ kolsa barça özün yassizin "if you seek profit (or advantage) in all things without any losses! 106; o.o. r60 (üküş), 171, 232, ctc. (common): xir(?) Az, (let a man who reads this book) asığ alsu “get advantage from it” 78; tavar asğı "the advantage of wealth' 287; Tef. asığ “profit” (also “a pendant” Dev. N. fr. as-, occurring later, but first noted here) 61: (xiv. Afuh. rabaha "to gain, make a profit ası:t-, no doubt a crasis of asi: ét-, Mel. 26, 7; Rif. 109): Çağ. xv ff. asığ/asık assi (sic?) ve fayida 'profit, advantage! Vel. 19 (quotns.); asığ naf' «va fayida San. 40v. 14: Xwar. xiv asığ ditto Quib 13: Kip. xin al-ribli (opposite to 'loss' kor) asij* Hou. 28, 2: xiv aşığ (and  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 289 
     
   
   
        aslam) al-fáyida İd. 15; al-ribh fi'l-bi* wa'l-şird 'profit in buying and selling! aşşı: Bul. 5, 6: xv rabaha (aslamla-; in margin in later hand) assit eyle- Tuh. 16b. r: Osm. xiv ff. ass) less often ası, “profit, advantage'; c..a.p. TT.S 1 47-8; 1I 60-1; HI 42-3; IV 45: xvin (after Çağ. entry) “and in Rmi ası” San. 40v. 14. S 1:1sığ See Islpg. E 2 ısığ Sce yışığ. D usak Dev. N. fr. 1 us-, n.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Civ. usakı yança içgül (sic) 'drink in accordance to (your) thirst” H I 171; a.o. 199. osuğ (osoğ) “a way of using (something)'; n.o.a.b., but see osuğluğ. Uyğ. viir ff. Bud. (deign to explain) bu darnının incge yanı osufi “the subtle way of using (Hend.) this dhàragi' U II 41, 20; 0.0. do. 48, 14-15; fragment in Oğ. p. 28, note 76: Xak. xı osuğ taháyulu'l-gay! bi”l-şay” “a way of using something for something'; hence one says bu: rg osuğı: münda:ğ “the way of using this thing is as follows! Kaş. I1 64: xiv Muh.(?) osuğ al-hal ta'l-firása (uncertain, ?'condition, insight) Rif. r88 (only: (Xwar. xın(?) anun saçı müren osufi teg “her hair (flovved dovvn her back) like a river” (Mong. 1-vv.) Oğ. 76; Arat points out that the word is out of place here, and suggests that it is an error for Sugi (Suvı) 'water'). PUD osğuç both this word and osku:k (osğu:k), included below are Hap. leg. They are obviously cognate Dev. N.s in -ğuç and -ğuk respectively, and the simplest explanation is to derive them fr. 08-, q.v., but it is doubtful whether this is an ancient verb in this form and other transcriptions, esp. of osguc, are possible. Apart from the difference in the quality of the vowels, 2 üg- would be an appropriate base. Uy. vri ff. Bud. (they force them to lie down in places strewn with) yüliğü osğuç teg bi biçğu “knives and cutting instruments like razors and . .. 'TM IV 253, 41: (Xak.) xiv Muh. (under “cobblers” tools") afra "a cobbler's knife” osku:k Mel. 59, 12; Rif. 158. PU(S) osğun 'onion'; presumably a metathesis of so:Bun, same meaning; survives in most NE languages in a wide range of forms, oksum, uksim, uksum, uxsum, usxum and even muksun, and in NW Kaz. üksün *wild garlic! Bud. 14s: Uyğ. vn ff, Civ. osğun kasikin yıltızı birle yorğurtka (sic) tokup 'pound the skin of an onion with its roots in yoğurt” H 1 44-5. Dis. V. ASGD usuk- Emphatic f. of 1 us-; pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı er usukti: “the man was thirsty' ('atiga) Kaş. I 191 (usuka:r, usukma:k, prov.); (in a para. on the suffix -K-) er asukti: £alaba'l-racula'l-'atag "the man was overcome with thirst" /7 165, 9. TRIS. ASG   245   Tris. ASG N.Ag. fr. asi; “benefactor". N.o.a.b. Xak. xi KB begine asığçı bağırsaknı bil 'know that the kindly man is a benefactor to his master” 2609; a.o. 4419. D asığçı: D asığlığ P.N./A. fr. asığ, 'advantageous, beneficial], profitable”. Survives in NE Tuv. alıktığ, SW Osm, asılı, Uyğ. viri ff. Man. adınlarka asığlığ işiğ işlet(t)ipiz “you have done a deed beneficial to others” TT 7/7 68-9: Bud. asığlığ iş TT VIII E.41, 42; 2.0. do. 4.47; tusuluğ asığlığ USp. 43, 11: Civ. 1rak barsar asığlığ yanar 'if he goes on a long journey, he comes back with a profit" TT VII 28, ss, (a particular omen) asığlığ tusuluğ bolur “is favourable (Hend.)' do. 36, 3 (USD. 42, 16); asığllğ böş satır kümüşüg tükel aldım “1 have received in full five satır in cash with (or as?) interest" USp. 48, 2-3: Xak. xı asığlığ ts “amal dü manfa'a 'beneficial work! Kaş. I 147: KB asığlığ kişi asğı élke tolur “the value of a benefactor is abundant for the realm' 5731; xu(?) KBVP asığlığ turur bu “this is a useful (book)” 15: xın(?) r. bilig teg asığlığ "as advantageous as knovvledge” 100: xiv Muh. al-nafi" *useful, beneficial asığlığ Mel. sz, r, Rif. 148: Çağ. xv ff. asığlık assit ve fayidalu “profitable, advantageous! Vel. 19; asığlığ südmand wa bà manfa'at ditto San. 4ov. 16: Kom. xiv “useful” asığlı (spelt azixit) CCG, Gr.: Osm. xiv to xvi assili 'useful, profitable' in several texts T7TS 7 48, II ör, III 43, IV 46. D asığlık A.N. fr. asığ, 'benefit' and the like; n.o.a.b Uyğ. vri ff. Bud. tinliğlarnın asığlıkı mepiliki üçün “for the benefit and happiness of mankind” U H 34, 6-8. S isığlık See isiglik. D osuğluğ (osoğloğ) P.N./A.; always preceded by a qualifying word. "The spelling'is fixed by TT VIII. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. Sanskrit idyg “made in this way' monda:ğ osoğloğ TT VIII A.37, evamvidhe "like this” ditto do. D.29; a.o. do. E.42; yula osuğluğ 'serving as a lamp” U 111 28, 26; ol er neteg osuğluğ körklüğ menizliğ erdi "in what way was that man good-looking (Hend.)?” U TT 57, 6 (2; o.o. do. ş4, 10 (U II 23, 23); U IV 8, 19 (kilin-); TT V 6, 16; X 134-5: Xak. xı KB bu yavlak osuğluğ turur bu etöz “this body has a bad way of behaving” (if it gets fat, it is wicked) 3599; a.o. 974 (öyük). ?E asğançu See azğançu:. D asığsız Priv. N./A. fr. asığ, “useless, unprofitable'. Survives in NC Kir. asusiz(?) and SW xx Anat. assiz SDD 1:20. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. (if a man without hands goes to an island full of jewels) asığsız kuruğ kalır “he is unable to take advantage of the situation (Hend.) TT V 33, note B.go, 3-4: Xak. xı KB küvezlik asığsız 'pride is      
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 290 
     
   
   
       246 unprofitable' 2120; asığsız kişiler kişide turi 'useless men are bad-tempered to people” 5731: xn(?) Zt. (to such a man advice) asığsız turur “is useless! 110; a.o, 346: Xwar. xiv asığsız “unprofitable” Qur? 13: Osm. XIV assiSiz “useless" TTS I 48. Tris. V. ASĞ?E asğançula- See azğançula:-. Mon. ESG VU üsk a word like alt, etc., used only with Poss. Suff.s in oblique cases; "in the presence of”, N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. in. U 77 88, 68-70 sins are confessed üskinde 'in the presence of” certain named persons; o.o. U II 79, 51; TT IV 4, 13; 12, 48, etc.; USp. 120b. zı: Civ. üsküpde “in your presence! TT I 15, 27; olar üskinde bérdim “1 have given in their presence! USp. 78, 21; a.o. do. 111, 5: (Xak.) xin(?) KBPP TYavğaç Buğra Xan üsküpe kigürmis turur 'he brought (this book) into the presence of 'Tavgag Buğra Xan' 25; Tef. menim üskümde 'in my presence', a.o.o. 340; Xwar. xiv (the Oxus is a mere drop of water) yasim üskinde 'in the presence of (i.e. compared to) my tears'; a.0.0. Qutb 204. Dis. ESG D isig N./A.S. fr. isi:- ; "hot, heat'. S.i.a.m.l.g. sometimes much distorted, w. front vowels in some NE and NW languages and SW Az, and back vowels elsewhere. Türkü vir ff. Man. kün tepri yarukı isigi éngey “the light and heat of the sun will descend' M 11I 23, 2-3 (ii); a.o. do. 45, 6-7 (1): Uy. vrit ff. Man.-A seviğliğ yaltrağlı isiğ yüzünüzen “your lovely shining warm face” M I ro, 8-9: Man. Wind. 46-7 (1 ergür-); a.o. 48-9: Bud. isig usually occurs in the phr. İsiğ öz “life” (lit. *warm self”), e.g. isiğ özlerinde adirtimiz ə... erser “if we have deprived (human beings) of their lives! TT IV 8, 63-4; olo. U III 4, 2; 59, 6 (i) and 2 (ii), etc.; isiğ özlüğ “living” U HI 14, 11 (ii), etc.: Civ. isiğ kuya:şka: emgenmis: kişi "a man suffering from sunstroke' TT VIII I.10; isiğ suv “hot water? do. M.24; İsiğ 'hot' esp. in the phr. isig ig “fever” is common in FH 7 and 1I: xiv. Chin Uyğ. Dict. jo “hot” (Giles 5,649) isig; hsing mig "life! (Giles 4,600. 7,962) isig özün(?) Ligeti 157; R I 1539: Xak. xi isiğ ye:r al-sahb mina' l-ard wa. huswa'l-madida "an extensive desert”: isiğ ne: 'anything hot (frarr), hencc one says isiğ kü:n "a hot day” Kaş. 1 72; KB bu kün tuğsa yérke isiğ “vhen this sun rises over the carth (and is) hot” (the flowers open, etc.) 829; o.o. 522, 1854, 3726, 4620-2: xın(?) Tef. isiğ/issiğ "hot, heat' (of fire) 126; 1S1É ditto 129: xiv Midi. al-harr i:ssi: Mel. 53, 13; Rif. iso and in several phr. 57, 3; 155, etc.; vatem. harr "a hot day” i:si:ğ kü:n 185 (only): Çağ. xv ff. isığ/ısık iss: garm ma"ndsına Vel. s? (quotns.); 181g/151k garm tea harr San. 104v. 24 (quotn); isti ot (si) füfil “pepper,, do. 104v. 17: Xwar. xiv isig/isi   TRIS. ASĞ "hot” Qutb 60-1: Kom. xiv. “hot, burning' isi/issi CCI, CCG; Gr. 107 (quotns.): Kip. xii al-harr 'heat' (opposite to “cold” sawuk) wa husca'l-suxnu'l-hàrr that is 'burning heat issi: Hou. s, 9; al-hammam “a "Turkish bath' İssi: su: that is "hot water' do. 6, 8; a.o. do. 27, 12: XIV İsi: (v.l. issi:) al-Jiarr Id. iş, Bul. 3, 4; al-hummáà "fever” issik (and isilik) do. o, 15: harr issi Tul. 12b. 12; suxn İSSİ do. 19b. 8: Osm. xiv ff, 1sS1 (apparently always so spelt) 'heat, hot”, c.i.a.p. TTS I 357-8; 1H 505-7; İİİ 347-8; IV 399-400. eski: “old”, in the carly period only of things and abstract ideas, “old” of human beings being avıçğa:, S.i.a.m.l.g., used of human beings only rarely and then in a depreciatory sense. Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. eski atın tegsilip yapı bultunp "your old name has been changed and you have found a new one” TT 7 117; eski İsiğke “for a long-standing fever” I1 İT 10, 53; bir eski toşek “one old mattress” US). 84, 4: Xak. xr eski: 'anything old and worn out” (qadim bali), hence one says eski: to:n fateb xalaq 'shabby clothing” Kaş. I 129; KB kamuğ eski nepler “all old things” 687: xiv Muh. al-"atiq *old' eski: Mel. 54, 3; Rif. 150: Çağ. xvfF. eski Kuna “old” San. 104v. 19 (quotn.): X war. xiv eski “old” Qutb 22: Kom. xiv. ditto CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv. eski: al-'atiq Íd. 13: xv ditto Kav. 64, 15. D esgü: N.Ac. (Conc. N.)- fr. 1 es-; as such Map. leg., but it, or cognate words, survive with the same meaning in NE eskin/eskün R I 881-2, and with related meanings in SW xx Anat. esgin/eskin/esğün SDD sso-r. Cf. evüsğü:, Xak. xı esgü: a/-minsaf “vinnowing basket” Kaş. I 129. Dis. V. ESG iske:- "to pluck out'; survives only(?) in NE "Tob. R I rs28, but. the Dev. N. iskek “tvveezers” survives in SE Türki Sac 34 and NC Kır., Rzx. Xak. xı ol yu:n İske:di: “he plucked out (ratafa) the wool (etc.)' Kaş. I 284 (iske:r, iske:me:k): xiv Mult.(?) qaraga “to pluck, tweak' isge:- (unvocalized, -£marked) Rif. 114 (only). D isken- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of iske:-, Xak. at ot iskendi: 'the horse cropped (natafa) a little (gali?a(n)) of the grass'; also used of anyone who plucked out hair or herbage sparingly Kaş. 1 255 (iskenür, iskenme:k). D eskir- Intrans. Den. V. fr. eski:; “to be, or become, old”, S.i.a.m.l.g. except SW where it has become eski- in Osm. and eskil- in Az. (RIS882) Xak.xı to:n eskirdi: “the garment was, or became, shabby' (xaliqa) Kaş, I 228 (eskirür, eskirme:k): xin(?) Ar. yanı eskirür “vhat is new grows old” 195: xiv Muh.(?) "ataqa sca gaduma "to be, or become, old (Hend.) eski-(?) Rif. 112 (only): Çağ. xv ff. éskir- (-di; *with -k-”) kuAna ol- ve eskiVel. 55 (quotns.); éskir-(spelt)/éskil- (*with -1-) kuhna şudan, also pronounced eski-,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 291 
     
   
   
     D18.XASLeliding the r/1 San. 103v. 5 (quotns.): Xvvar. xiv eskir- “to grow old” Qufb 22: Kip. xv, 'ataga -éskir Tuh. 26a. 8: Osm. xv eskil(sic) once TTS I 280. Tris. ESG PUF üskebeç ITap. leg.; of the form uf'alal; with a damma over the alif only; presumably by its form, an Tranian(?) lLl-w. Xak. x: üskebeç a/-zabib 'raisins' Kaş. 1 159. Disiglig P.N./A. fr. isig; 'feverish'. Survives only(?) in NC Kir. 1silt, Uyğ. vii ff. Civ. isiglig erser “if he is fevcplsh' H1 II 14, 116; a.0. do. ro, 57. D isiélik A.N. fr. isiğ, warmth (physical and metaph.); fever; warm feelings, affection'. S.i.a.m.l.g.; with front vowels in NE and sometimes SW, otherwise with back vowels. Xak. xı isiğlik al-hubb wa'l-muwadda "love, affection; hence one says kópül isigliki: kere:k *he ought to have warmth of affection (haráratu'l-musvadda) in his heart” Kaş. I 152: xut(?) Te/. isiglik "heat (of a fire) r26, issilik ditto 130: Xwar. xiv İsiglik “heat” Qutb 61: Kom. xiv "heat” issilik CCI; Gr.: Kap. xiv issilik a/-hummd 'fever İd. 13; ditto issik/isilik | Hu. 9, 15: xv suxüna "heat issilik Tu. 19a. 2: Osm. xiv ff. 15s1lik "heat! fr. xiv to xvii; İssilik xv to xvii. TT.S I 358; İl 507; III 348; IV 439. 'Tris. V. ESGD isiğle:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. isig. Xak. xı er İsiğle:di: gahaba”l-racul fi'l-hummàvati'l-qayz wa'l-hàácitra “the man walked in the intense and excessive summer heat” Kaş. 7 306 (isigle:r, isigle:me:k). VUD?F ósügle:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. kösüğ, which is prob., like other Gancak words, a I.-w. Gancak xı ol kiritlik ósügle:di: 'he opened the lock by a cunning device (bi-hila) without a key” Kaş. 7 306 (ösüğle:r, ösüğle:me:k). D isiğlen- Ref. f. of isigle:-; s.is.m.l. meaning “to be, or become, hot”, Xak.xroler bu: uğurda: barmakka: isiglendi: “the man considered the season too hot ('adda'l-waqt hörr) for travelling” Kaş. 7 294 (isiglenür, isiğlenme:k). Dis. ASL D osa:l Dev. N./A. fr. *osa:-; 'negligent, idle; negligence, idleness'. An early l.-w. in Mong. as osol (the Den. V. is noted in xit, Haenisch 128). S.ia.m.lg. A parallel Dev. N./A. in -n appeared in the medieval period, and s.i.s.m.l. together with or instead of osal ; the earlier occurrences are included below. See Doerfer II 599. Uyğ. viii ff. Civ. osal kilmaplar “do not show negligence! (in carrying out an order) Up. 17, 12: Xak. xı osa: klg1: al insanu'l-gàfil fi'l-umür "a man who is. negligent about matters! Kaş. I 122: KB osal 2 247 bolma saklan kamuğ işte sen “do not be negligent, be vigilant in all things” 443: o.o. 654, 1066: Çağ. xvff. osal tahdrun xa takásul edüb aw yalanmak 'negligence, indolence, or lying' Vel. 107; osal (spelt) qustir tva taqşir wa ihmül 'shortcoming, offence, negligence” (quotns.); also used for göyü” ta mühmül *useless, negligent" (quotn.) San. 75r. 9: Xwar. xiv osal kil- “to be negligent" Qurb 119; Nahc. 224, 10; 08al Qutb zoo (usal): Kom. xiv “negligent” osal CCG; Gr. 179 quotn.): Kip. xv ğafala “to be negligent” osan o1-, with note in second hand that osal, too, is used Tuh. 27a. 10: Osm. xiv and xv osal “careless, negligent in three texts T'T'S 7 727; II 932 (spelt usal); osan/osar ditto, c.i.a.p. I 728; II 931; III 715; IV 787-8 (spelt usanlusay): xvin osan (spelt) in Rzmi, káhil “negligent, indolent' Sar. 75r. 13. D usluğ P.N./A. fr. 1 us and surviving in the same languages; 'discriminating, of sound judgement'. Xwar. xi?) (of elderly men) usluğ Og. 208, 275; uzun usluğ "long headed” do. 313: xiv usluğ “of sound judgement” Qutb 200; Nahc. 437, 4: Kom. xiv *wise' ustlu (sic) CCI; Gr.: Kip. xui al-"aqil 'intelligent' (opposite to bila 'agl usgsrz) uşlu: /70 25, 20. Dis. NASLD asil- Pass. f. of as- ; “to be hung, suspended; to be hanged, crucified'. S.i.a.m.l.g. Xak. xi bi:r ne: bi:rke: asıldı: “one thing was hung (ta"allaqa) on another” Kaş. I 196 (aslur, so vocalized, asılma:k): KB 221 (arta:k): xiv Muh. ta'allaga ası:l- Mel. 40, is, Rif. 130; al-was! "to join! asılmak 37, 5; 123 (unvocalized, perhaps not connected): Çağ. xv ff. asil- (spelt) Pass. f. áwixta şudan “to be hung, suspended' Sarı. 39v. 4: Kom. “to be hung up, suspended' asıl- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv asilta"allaqa İd. ış: Osm. xiv asılan "precipitous” (cliff) TTS I 46: xvi asılmalu *who deserved to be hanged' 777 42; xvi1-xvitt asılacak ditto 7 46: xvırı asıl- . .. and in Rümi, maşlüb şudan "to be executed” Sar. 39V. 4. D esil- Pass. f. of 2 es-, “to be stretched, to stretch (Intrans.)'. Pec. to Kaj.; in one or two places altered to eşil-, cf. 2 es-. Xak. xr yışığ esildi: imtadda'l-habl “the rope, etc. stretched" ; also used for “to be stretched” (mudda) Kaş. 1 196 (eslür (sic), esilme:k, sic in MS.); bu yıp ol esilge:n “this cord is constantly stretching" (yamtadd) 1 158. D osul- Pass. f. of os-, q.v. N.o.a.b.; it is possible that the Uyg. word is mistranscribed, and should be read uşalur or üzülür which would perhaps suit the context better. Uyğ. viti ff. Bud. tolp etözleri tancu tançu bolup biçilur osulur “all their bodies are cut (Hend.) into small pieces! TM IV 253, 63: Çağ. xv ff. osul- (spelt) güşz az ustuxwàn bük şudan "of meat, to be scraped off the bones” San. 75r. S. :  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 292 
     
   
   
     248 D 1 usla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. 1 us. Oğuz. xı ol usla:di: ne:pnií: "he understood( fatana) good and evil, and distinguished (mayyaza) between them” Kaş. 1 286 (usla:r, usla:ma:k). VUD 2 usla:- Hap. leg.; Den, V. fr. 2: us, “to behave like a vulture'. Prob. used only in the Ger. in -u:. Xak. xı Kaş. JI 17, 17 (es). D aslın- Hap. leg.; Refl, f. of asil-. Xak. xi aslındı: ne:p “the thing was hung (ta'alfaqa) on to something! Kaş. / 258 (aslınur, aslinma:k). Tris. ASL D osalhk A.N. fr. osa:l; 'carelessness, negligence. Sa.s.m.]l. Xak. xi KB. 1209 (alk-); 6075. ?E isilgü: Ilap. leg.; no doubt an error for efsilgü: which suits the context perfectly. Uy£. viri ff. Bud. (respect for you is constantly increasing) ner isilgüsi (read egsilgüsi) yok “there is no diminution of it” Hüen-ts. 2076. Tris. V. ASMSF ismarla:- See ospurla:-. Dis. ASN esen “in good health, sound; safe”, S.1.a.m.L.gr. except. SE. "DU he spelling. asar, which is common in Uy£. is prob. an aberration. Not to be confused with Pe. dsdn “easy”, but see Doerfer 1l 478. "Türkü vir ff. esen tükel *healthy and complete; safe and sound” Ir&amp;B 15, 27, 42: Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A esenin bardamaz esenin keltemez “ve went and came back, safe and sound” M 7 ro, 11-12; a.0. M Iİ 13, 16 (0) (igle:-); Bud. esen (asan) tükel PP 22,6:24, 3 ctc.; siz öz uluşunuzka esen ótgeysiz "you will get through safely to your own country” 77ücn-ts. 45-6; 0.0. do. 66, 1874, 1956, 2043; U II 64, 8-0 etc. (6nç): Civ. 1raktaki kişi esen (asar) yanmaz “the man who is afar off does not return safely' TT VH 28, 6; (even if the foetus dies) esen (asan) ozar “she is delivered safely! H I 109; 0.0. do. 110, 114: Xak. xt esen al-sálim 'safe, sound, in good health”, hence one says esenmü sen “are you in good health?” Kaş. I 77 (prov.)ş a.o. I 62, s (tirig): KB esen bol 1190; esen enç tirilğil "live in good health and tranquillity” 1948; 2a.0.0.: xim(?) At. eseninde “in his lifetime! 263: xiv Muh. al-nu'áfá'healthy, well' esen Mel. 56,3; Rif. 154: Caf. xvff. esen sahih :a sölim 'safe and sound", also spelt ésen Sam. qov, r4; 6sen ditto 104v. zr: Kip. xir al-sálim esen Hou. 26, 7; 2.0. in P.N. 29, ra: xiv ditto İd. 13 Osm. xiv ff, esen “in good health, sound”, c.ia.p. TTS I 276; II 397; III 264; IV 307. D esin Intrans. Dev. N. fr. 1 es-, “breeze, gentle wind'. Common in Xak., but rare clsewhere; survives only(?) in NE ezin Tel. R 7 894 and Tuv. and SW xx Anat. esin SDD şşo, Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. (just as a fire) yélig DIS. VASLesinig (asp) basutçisi bulup "when it finds a wind or breeze as its helper! U 17 o, s: xiv. Chin.-Uyg. Dict. hsi féng 'a gentle wind" (Giles 4,163 3,554) esin boldi R 7 894; Ligeti 135: Xak. xi esin a/-nasim “a breeze" Kaş. 1 77; five o.o.: KB 65 (erincig). (8) D osan See osa:l. Dis. V. ASND asin- Refl. f. of as-; 'to hang (somcthing Acc.) on, or for, onesclf'; later “to hang (Intrans.), to be hung up, or suspended'. Survives in NE azin- Leb., Sor “to be hung up”: Tel. "to cook' (i.e. “to hang something over the fire for oneself”), NC Kir., Kzx. asın- “to hang (e.g. a rifle) on oneself'. (Türkü vri (we went along down that river and) asınğalı: tüşür:timiz "let the men dismount to cook' T 27 (Aalto's translation, but the word should be read aşanğalı: “to eat): Uyf. vri ff. Civ. yincülüg morwantla:r asnap 'hanging pearl necklaces(?) on onesel TT VIII L17 (so transcribed but ?read morwartla:r and connect with Pe. marredrid “pearl”), it tişin kenç oğlan asınsar “if a young boy hangs a dog's tooth on himsel? TT VII 23, 2: Xak. xt K B (serve me with timely lovalty) kapuğda asunjil (sic) mapa bol yakın “station yourself at (my) door and be near me” 595. D esin- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of 2 es-. Xak. xt at esindi: “the horse pulled (adda) on the rope in order to get loose and almost broke it” Kaş. 1 201 (no Aor. or Infin.). D isin- Refl. f. of isi:-; "to warm onesclf, be warm'; metaph. “to have warm feelings, be friendly. to, or fond of (someone Dat.)'. S.i.a.m.l.g, with the same variations between front and back vowels as isl:-, Uy. vri ff. Bud. isinmek amranmak sav 'words of affection and love” Hiüen-ts. 1983-4: Xn. xt men ana:r isindim ajfbabruiin “1 was. fond of Sim” and one says 0l o:tka: isindi: “he warmed himself (rgta/à) at the fire'; and one says Ol kü:n isindi: “he basked (taşarraqa) in the sun” Kaş, 7 zor (isinü:r, isinme:k; sic in MS): KB isin- “to become friendly, genial, gratificd (by something Dat.) is common, e.g. 106, 2179, 2470, 4220, etc.; in 4701 two MSS. have isinmak and one isinmek: xiv Müh. hamiya "to be hot” i:sin- Mel. 25, 12; isi:n- Rif. ro8, daf”a "to be warm'* İ:sin26, 5; 109: Caf. xv ff. 1s1n- (sic) garm şudan "to be hot” San. 101v. 28 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv VU isin- “to become warm, hot” Qur? 61, 206 (isin-), MN 49: Kom. xiv "to warm onesclf' issin- CCI; Gr.: Kip. xin. dafr'a isin- Hou. 36, 14: XV ditto Tul. 16a. 7. D osan- Refl, f. of *osa:-; "to be negligent, listless”, and the like. Survives only(?) in NW Krim osan- R 7 1139 and SW Osm. usan-. Xak. xı KB osanma “do not be negligent is common, 1093, 1106, 1274-8, etc.; other forms rr41, 1237, 1449: XI11(?) 4t. (İT send my greetings to the Prophet's four Companions) olardın osanmak kaçan ol mana 'how 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 293 
     
   
   
     "PRIS. V. ASNcould I possibly neglect them?” 32; o.o. 103, 309 (1 a:r-): xiv Muh. tamaftà (e.g. of the day) 'to be long and dreary' osan- Mel. 24, 9; Rif. 106: al-tamatfá osanmak 36, 3; ızı, al-malal "to be listless, peevish' 0:8a:nmak 38, 1; 124; al-Zafla “to be negligent ditto 124 (only): Çağ. xv ff. osan- (spelt) bi-zár şudan wa nafrat hardan "to be listless, and feel revulsion” San. 74r. 18 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv osan- “to be tired of (something 45) Qutb zoo (usan-): Kip. xv malla osan- Tuh. 3sb. rr. D esne:- Den. V. fr. esin; properly 'to blow gently', but usually mefhph. “to yavn”. $.i.a.m.l.g., much distorted in NE (este-/eze-) "Türkü vri ff. esnegen bars men '] am a yawning leopard” IJrkB ro: Xak. xı esin esne:di: ranassama”l-nasim "the breeze blew gently'; and one says er esne:di: “the man yawned' (fatü”aba) Kaş. I 288 (esne:r, esne:me:k); o.o. /T 223, 9; III 147, 13: xiv Muh.(?) tatá'aba esne:- Rif. 105 (only): Çağ. xv ff. ésnedl uykus: geldi, esnedi “to feel sleepy, to yawn' Vel. 60; ésne- (spelt) dahan dara hardan "to yawn', in Ar. fatö”ub San. IO4r. 20 (quotns.): Kom. xiv “to yawn' esneCCG; Gr.: Kip. xui al-tatá'ub esneimek (misvocalized 1/s-) ITou. 32, 2; tatá'aba esne:do. 38, 18: xv al-tatd”ub ésnemek Kav. 61, 14; tatá'aba ésne- Tuh. ga. 10. VU ösne:- “to resemble'. Pec. to Kaş.ş in the Caus. f. the Infin. is spelt with -ma:k. Cf. loxsa:-. Xak. xr bi:r ne:n bi:rke: ósne:di: "one thing resembled (sabaha) another” Kaş. I 288 (ö:sne:r (sic), Ósne:me:k); ka:dka: tükel ösneyü: 'exactly like a snowstorm' 77 223, 10; İİİ 147, 14. D esnet- Caus. f. of esne:- in both meanings. S.i.s.im.]. Xak. xt tenri: esin esnetti: “God made the breeze blow gentliy” (nassama”l-nasim); and onc says ye:k anı: esnetti: “the devil made him yawn' Kaş. 7 266 (esnetür, esnetme:k): Çağ. xvT. ésnet- Caus. f., dahan dara hundnidan "to make (someone) yawn' San. 104v. 6 (quotn.). VUD ösnet- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of ösne:Xak. xı men apar ósnettüm (sic) sabbahtuhu bili sva zanantu antahu hutoa “1 compared him to him, and thought that he was him” Kaş. I 267; (ösnetür, osnatma:k?). VU?D aspar- Hap. leg.; dissyllabic and with back vowels, but the only vowel shown is fatha once on the alif. Apparently an [ntrans. Den. V.; apart from the question whether the word is old enough, it could be a Den. V. fr. osap (osa:l). Xak. xı er aspardı: haruna”l-racul mina'l- "amal wa calasa “the man stopped (work) on the affair and sat down' Kaş. 1 289 (aspara:r, asparma:k). Tris. ASN PUD osa:fiuk “careless, listless'; a comparison between the forms in authorities suggests that the original form was B and the other. 249 osa:fiuk for *osa:nyuk, and that it is a Dev. N./A. fr. osan-, cf. bulğafluk and sarkınuk., N.o.a.b. Xak. xı osa:yuk er al-raculu'l-gàfil “a careless, or negligent man” Kaş. I 160 (MS. faint at this point, osa-ınuk is a possible reading); KH osayuk bu yalpuk bilir ölğüsin özindin ketermez osallık usın “this man is negligent, he knows that he will die but does not shake off from himself the sleep of negligence (or indolence)' 6075; a.o. 3568 (serimsiz): xui(?) Tef. osanuk 'careless” (and osanukluk gafla) 332: xiv Muh.(?) al-tağaful (? for al-mutagáfil) o:sa:nuk Rif. 148 (Mel. 52, 7; u:nutmak). D esengü: A.N. fr. esen, “security” and the like. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. Man.-A kamağ tenri yerine esengüsin berdi “he gave his security to all the countries of the gods” M 7 12, 1-2, esenğü öğrünçü “security and ?oy” M İİİ 43, 2 (li), 3.0. M I 27, ir ff. (alkış): Bud. esenğü bitig “a letter of security, safe conduct(?)' /Tüen-ts. 1819, 1863, etc. D esengülüg P.N./A. fr. esengü:; n.o.a.b. Uy£. viri ff. Bud. (then the Buddha) éncgülüg esengülüg ermekig kilu yarlıkadı 'deigned to create a state of peace and security' (for the merchants) T's. 22b. 8. D esenlik A.N. fr. esen; 'good health, soundness, security”, and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. Xak. xi KB esenlik tilese 'if (you) wish to be safe” 169, 964: X war. xiv esenlik “security, prosperity! Qufb zz: Kip. xiv esenlik (?sic, text eselik) al-salàm (?for al-saláma “security, good health") 7d. 14; a/-salüma esenlik Bul. 6, 1: XV ditto Tuh. 19a. 4: Osm. xv ff. esenlik normally 'greetings, good wishes'; c.i.a.p. TTS I 277; 11 399; İİ 265; IV 308. Tris. V. ASN.D osandur- Caus. f. of osan- ; survives only (2) in SW Osm. usandir “to bore, sicken, disgust (someonc)'. Xak. xi KH (do not he careless or stay near your enemy; withdraw) yağığ sen osandur ant torka yét “make the enemy careless and lure him into the net' 4262: Çağ. xv ff. osandur- Caus. f., bi-zàr hardan "to make (someone) listless' San. 74V. 7D esengüle:- Den. V. fr. esengü:; syn. w. esenle:-; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vrir ff. Bud. ağır ayamakın esengüleyü üküş könül ayıtu: 1durbiz 'We enquire after your health with deep respect and respectfulİy enquire (after you with our) many thoughts” Hiien-ts. 1825. D esenle:- Den. V. fr. esen; 'to enquire after (someone's Jat.) health, to greet (him).' Survives only(?) in some NE languages (rather distorted) and SW Osm. usually for “to bid farewell. Xak. xı ol mapa: esenle:di: hayyani bi-tahiya wa şüfahani “he greeted and shook hands with me” Kaş. I 308 (esenle:r, esenle:me:k): xiv Muh. sallama wa hayyd “to salute, greet” esenle:- Mel. 27, 7; Rif. 110: Kip. xiv esenle- swadda'a “to bid farewell İq,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 294 
     
   
   
     250 TRIS. V. ASN13: Osm. xiv ff. esenle- "to bid farewell; cia.p. TTS I 277; II 398; I1I 264; IV 308; xvii esenle- /esenleş- an expression of the "Turks of Rüm for “to say farevvell” (rorda" kardan), the "Turks of "Turin say xoşlaşSan. 40r. 19. D esenleş- Recip. f. of esenle:- ; “to bid farewell to one another”. S.i.m.m.l.g. Xak, xi KB (when he has passed the age of forty) esenleşti erke yigitlik tili “the tongue of youth has said farewell to a man” 364; o.o. 5445, 5822: Kip. xil wadda'a mina'l-xoidá* esenle:ş- /Jou. 44, 9: Osm. xiv ff. esenleş*to bid farewell (to someone ile)'; c.ia.p. TTS 1 277; Il 398; İİ 264; IV 308: xvii sce esenle:-. Dis. ASR D asra: abbreviated Adv. fr. ast; properly an Adv. 'below, under”, also used as a Postposn. “belovv, bencath' and an Adj. 'low, lowly, inferior'. There is a rare Sec. f. 1Sra: cf. anca:/ınça:, Survives only(?) in SW Osm. esre “the vowel below the letter”, i.e. kasra and xx Anat. asra 'beneath' SDD 120. Türkü vri üze: kök tepri: asra: yağız yer kılıntukda: *when the blue heaven was created above and the brown earth below! 7 E r, 11 E 2; üze: tepri: . . . asra: yer / E 22, IL E 18; II N o: vini ff. üze: . . . asra: JrkB 15, 20, 54, 60: Man. üze o:n kat tenri asra segiz (sic) kat yér 'the ten-fold heaven above and the eight-fold earth below' Chas. 42-4; a.o. M HI 3, 11-12 (i): Uyğ. vin ff. Man, asr[a] kópülin *with humble minds' TT 1/1 3; asra mansiz sakınçlarığ "humble, unassuming thoughts! TT JI 17, 68-9: Bud. asrasinda ağnalım “let us roll on the ground below (i.e. hefore) him” USp. ror, 8: Civ. asra atın yégedtig “you have improved your low reputation TT I 7-8; kodi asıra (sic) kişiçe tutsarmen “if I treat him as a low and inferior person” USp. 98, 21-2: Xak. xı asra: a Particle (herf) meaning taht, 'below'; 1sra: (glossed bi-kasr "with 1- a word (Ralima) meaning dün dülika”l-makan, "beneath that place”, hence one says ol andan isra: ol annahu ba'd dálika va dünahu “he is after and beneath him" Kaş. I 126: xın(?) At. 294 (bus-) Tef. asra 'below (something Abl.) 61: Çağ. xv ff. asır (spelt) harakat-i kasra “the vowel sign kasra', also called astin San. 40v. 5; a.o. do. qov, 2: Xwar. xiv adaklar asra 'bencath the feet! Qutb 12; taxtdın asra 'beneath the throne” Nahc. 204, 10; asrasında . . : asrasıdın do. 289, 11-12: Kip. xim al-aqgá *farther away' (opposite to 'nearer' bésre:) isra: Hou. 56, zi: Xiv işra: aqşö İd. 15: xv aretcal amis “the day before yesterday” asra kün Tuh. sa. 5 (cf. asra:kı:): Osm. xiv to xvi asrafisra as Adv., Adj., and Postposn., also israsında, in several texts T'T'S 7 46; II 59; HI 42; İV 44. S asru See asgru:. esri: 'spotted, dappled', hence various kinds of dappled felines, “leopard”, and the like. N.o.a.b. Türkü vri ff. ürün esri: toan kuş men '| am a white spotted falcon” JrkB 4; also applied to a cow and calf do. 41, and a mountain goat do. 49 (1 1nfa:): Uyğ. vii ff. Civ. ikinti esri atlığ “the second (kind of swelling) is called mottled' H İT zz, 18-19: Xak. xı esri: al-namir “leopard” (and other similar felines); and any 'black and white (mubliq) rope' is called esri: yışığ, and anything "of two colours” (du lawnayn) is called esri: because it is like a leopard Kaş. 7 126: KB (an army commander must have the heart of a lion and) karıştukta esri bileki kerek "and. in close conflict a wrist like a leopard's' 2310; esrip itin “your hunting leopard and your dog” 5379: (Çağ. xv ff. esri “İynx, snow leopard' P. de C. 111 only): Tkm. xiv esri: al-fahd 'lynx, hunting İcopard” İd. 15. S 1sra: Sce asra:. D isrik prima facie abbreviated Dev. N. fr. 1S1r-, but Kag.'s explanation suggests that it was originally the Imperat. of *1srikEmphatic Pass. f. of 1str-. Survives in SE "Türki isrik 'incense used in driving out evil spirits! K, Menges, Volkskundliche Texte aus Ost- Türkistan, SPAW, 1933; xxxıl 12; NC Kir. isrik ^wild rue; SW Osm. 1strik/isrik "a bite, the mark left by a bite”, Xak. xr ısrık “a word used when treating boys suffering from an ulcer on the head or the evil eye” (mina”l-sa"fa atoi'l-ayn); the patient's face is fumigated with incense and one says 1Srik isrik, that is Jm ma"düd ya cinni "be bitten, oh evil spirit” Kaş. I 99. (D) usrik Hap. leg.; etymology obscure but ultimately der. fr. u:, Xak. xı usriK al-wasnán mina"l-nas, "of people, slumbering” Kaş. 7 99. D osruk abbreviated Pass, Dev. N. fr. osur-, 'fart, flatus. ventris. Sis. m.lg., usually ns osuruk; to be distinguished fr. osurak (osurğak) "one who frequently breaks wind', first notcd in Kip. xv Tuh. 12b. 8; 47b. 12 and also s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xr osruk al-rudám "fart” Kag. I 99: Kip. xv (in Grammatical Section) osruk osurdi Tuh. 83b. 7. D esrük abbreviated Pass. N./A.S. fr. esür-; *drunk, intoxicated; drunkenness'. S.i.a.m.l.g. in several forms, often trisyllabic. Türkü vin ff. Man. esrükin biliğsizin üçün "because of his drunkenness and folly' M I 5, 4; o.0. do. 6, 16, 6, zr (1 adın-): Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. tegirmi tam içinde esrük boldun “you have become drunk within an encircling wall TT I 57-8: Xak. xı esrük al-sakrán 'intoxicated' Kaş. J 105; o.o. I 63 (2 adi); T 194 (adıl-) etc.: KB kut esrüki şüçiğ esrükinde batar 'intoxication with good fortune is worse (Pe. l-w.) than alcoholic intoxication" 6141; a.o. 4586 (axsumla:-): xın(?) Tef. ditto 86: xiv Muh. al-sahrün esrük Mel. 55, 1; Rif. 152: Çağ. xv ff. üsrük (sic) mast 'intoxicated" Vel. 107; üsrük mast wa maxmür ditto San. 75r. I9 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv esrük 'intoxicated” Quib 22; “melting” (eyes) MN 347: 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 295 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. ASRKip. xit al-sakrán (opposite to 'sober' ayık) esrük JJou. 26, 15: xiv ditto İd. 13: xv al-sakrán esrik Kav. 63, 6; Tuh. ga. 1; 48a. 3: Osm. xiv (once) esirik; xiv to xvir esrük; xvı ff. esrik “intoxicated”, metaph. “mad” TTS I 281; İİ 403; 111 268; IV 311. D ısrım Hap. leg.; abbreviated N.S.A. fr. ısır-. Xak, xi isrim: kişi: ai-raculu'lmüutaqabbidi”l-qatüb “a verinkled and frowning man” Kaş. 1 107. Dis. V. ASRasur- "to sneeze'. İt is sufprising that this is the oldest form of what is presumably an onomatopoeic verb, which became axsur- in the medieval period and s.i.m.m.l.g. mainly in the latter or similar forms like apsir(NE) and apsır- (NW, SW). A similar verb öksür- “to cough' was common in the medieval period and also s.i.s.m.l., sometimes metathesized to öskür-. Uyğ. vin ff. Civ. asursar “if one sneezes' TT VII aş, 2 ff. (many occurrences): Xak. xı er asurdt: "the man sneezed' ('atasa) Kaş. I 178 (asurur, asurma:k), bu: er ol telim asurğa:n “this man is constantly sncezing' 7 156: xiv Muh. (?) 'atasa axsu:r- Rif. 113 (only); al-sa'àl *to cough' axurmak (unvocalized, ?error for axsurmak) 123; al-'atás aksurmak (?, alıf unvocalized, first -k- kaf, might be intended for öksürmeh) 124: Kap. xin “afasa aksurHou. 36, 10; xiv (Tkm.?) aksur- 'afasa; in Kip. çüçkür- (with cimus) İd. 17; 'atasa akşur- Bul, 63v.: Osm. xiv to xvi axsur-/ ağsır- in several texts TS I 13; 11 18; III 9; IV ır. (?D) esür- “to be, or become, drunk, intoxicated”, lit. or metaph. S.i.a.m.l.g. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. (just as great kings like Ajáta$astru and. Kaniska) erk türkl[eri] mepin ésürüp 'being intoxicated by the joys of independence and maturity! (committed grievous sins) TT IV 4, 4 and note (tentative reconstruction of the text in one MS.): Civ. (if one puts dried partridge's spleen in wine or beer, however much a man drinks) esürmez “he does not get intoxicated' H 7 53: Xak. xt KB (how many things that ought to be done remain undone when a man drinks wine) nece kılmağu iş esürse kelür 'how many things that ought not to be done are done if he is drunk! 2101; 0.0. 2102,6140(axsumla:-), 6142: xiv Muh. sakira "to be, or become, drunk” esri- (sic) Mel. 27, 5; esrü- Rif. 110; al-sakr esri:mek 357, 12 (mis-spelt -mak); 123 (mis-spelt emrimak): Çağ. xv ff. üsürgen (sic) mast olan "being drunk' Vel. ro? (quotn.); üüsrü- (so spelt) mast şudan wa masti hardan, also spelt esri-, but as “drunk” is üsrük the first is more correct San. 74v. 7 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv esri-/esrü- “to be, or become, drunk' Qutb 22: Kom. xiv “to be drunk' esirCCG, Gr. 94 (quotn.): Kip. xiv esrl- sakira ld. ış: xv sakira esir- Tuh. 20a. 8: Osm.. xıv fT..esir-/esri- “to be drunk'; metaph. "to .25L be mad”, both forms c.i.a.p. TT. I 279; II 401; III 267; IV 311. 181r- “to bite'. Survives in some NE and SW languages. Xak. xi 1t 1s1rdi: "the dog (etc.) bit” (adda) Kaş. I 178 (isirur, isirma:k, prov.); isırğa:n it "a biting ("aqür) dog” 7 156; 0.0. J 163, 18; İl 329, 13: xiv Muh. "adda isir-. Mel. 29, 3; Rif. 112; al-'add 1s81rmak 36, 13; yısırmak 1:22: Çağ. xvff. isur(-an, - fan) yemek yé- “to cat” Vel. 59 (quotn.); 1S1r- (spelt) ba-dandàn gazidan “to bite', and metaph. xwurdan “to cat”, but the latter is the more usual San. 102v. 29 (quotn.): Tkm. xiv ısir- "adda İd. iş: xv "adda (in Kip. tişle-) aşra- (corrected in margin to 18ir-) Tuh. 25b. 10. osur- 'to fart, break wind'. Like other indecorous words omitted in some authorities (e.g. Sam.) but prob. s.i.a.m.l.g. Xak. xr er osurdi: radama'l-racul “the man broke wind' Kaş. I 178 (osurur, osurma:k), bu: er ol osurğa:n “this man is constantly breaking wind' (darráf) TI 156: xiv Muh.(?) axraca rih "to let out wind! osu:r- Rif. 102 (only): Kip. xii darafa Oşir- l]ou. 36, Tr: xiv osurdarata; oşurmak a/-dardt tca'l-fusáà' both "a loud and a silent fart' /4. 15: xv darafa osurTuh. 23b. 1; 83b. 7 (osruk). PUD ösür- if correctly read a Caus. f. of ös-, q.v.; but it occurs only once in the Uyğ. vit ff. Bud. phr. ünlerin ósürüp apparently 'raising their voices! in a text first published in U I 43, 17-18 and republished in U IV ro, 52-3; in the latter the second word is printed in italics as doubtful. It is almost certainly an error for üntürüp. If so there is no good reason for supposing that 68- is not a Mong. verb, used as a l-w. in some "Turkish languages. D asurt- Caus. f. of asur-. Survives only(?) n NE Bar. azirt- R7 569: Xak. xı asurtğu: ot a/-"atüs 'snuff' Kaş. III 442; n.m.e. D esürt- Caus. f. of esür-, “to intoxicate (someone 2cc.)”. S.i.m.m.l.g. Xak. xı süçiğ anı: esürtti: “the wjne intoxicated him” (askarahu) Kaş. III 427 (esürtür, esürtme:k) KB esürtmesü dawlat seni “do not let good fortune intoxicate you” 6137; a.o. 6143: Xwar. xiv üsrüt- (sic?) ditto MN 218; esürt- Nalıc. 363, 2: Kom. xiv “to intoxicate' esirt- CCG; Gr. 94 (quotn.): Osm. xv and xvt esrit- (sic) ditto T TS III 269; IV 311. D ısırt- Caus. f. of 1S1r-; "to make, or let (someone Dat.) bite (something /Zcc.). Survives only(?) in NE Khak., Tuv. 1zirt-; SW Osm. isirt-. Xak. xı ol apar etme:k 1S1irtti: “he made him bite (a'addahu) the bread” (etc.); also used of anyone who makes someone bite something Xaş. III 428 (usirtu:r, 151rtma:k). D ısrıl- Pass. f. of 1sir- “to be bitten'. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. Xak. .xi  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 296 
     
   
   
     252 DIS. V. ASR etme:k isrildi: “the: bread (etc.) was bitten' Cudda) Kaş. 1 247 (isrilur, isrilma:k). D isrin- Refl, f. of isir- , survives only(?) in NE Khak., Tuv. 1izirin- "to clench one's teeth', ett., and NC Kir. izirin- “to fly into a violent rage, Xak. xı er isriındi: ikla'azza'l-racul gadaba(n) "ala şay" "the man flew into a violent rage about something'; its origin (aslufhu) is a cauliflower (al-qunnabif) or similar vegetable, which, if it is cooked and then before it is finished cooking (cold) water is poured on it, turns hard and cannot be cooked, so also a mild-mannered man, when he becomes violent (igtadda), does the same Kag. I 251: (isrinur, isrinma:k). D asruş- Hap. leg.; Compet. f. of asur-. Xak. xı ikki: er asrugdi: “the two men sneezed together (fa"dfasa) to see which could sneeze most” Kaş. / 234 (asrusur, asruşma:k). D isriş- Recip. f. of isır- , “to bite each other”, Survives only(?) in NE Tuv. ıztrış-. Xak. xı ikki: adğır birle: isristi: “the two stallions bit each other” (ta"ddda), also used for helping and competing Kaş. I 234 (1stisu:r, 1SriSma:k), a.o. / 285, 14. D osruş- Hap. leg.; Compet, f. of osur-. Xak. xı ola:r ikki: osrusdi: “those two competed in breaking wind' (fi'l-rudám) Kaş. T 234 (Osruşur, osruşma:k). Tris. ASR PUD asırtku: Hap. leg.: this word occurs in a section containing trisyllables ending in a long vowel, following asurtğu: and ağartğu: which are headed by the letter -G- and preceding emirege: which is headed by the letter -K- or -G- (káf); it is itself headed by the letter -K- (qaf), the spelling in the MS. asırtğuk is therefore obviously wrong and must be corrected to asirtku:. "There is a fatha over the alif, but no vowel sign on the second syllable. Morphologically the word is obscure; -KU: is a very unusual variant of the common suffix -Éu: and there is no semantic connection between the word and any known verb of suitable form. Xak. xı al-raculu'l-fatinu l-muta"dqil, "a clever, intelligent man” is called (earlier) asırtku: er Kaş. III 442. D asurtgu: See asurt-. D asra:kı: N./A.S. fr. asra:; lit. 'situatecd belov", N.o.ab. Xak. xi KB yeme edğü tutğıl eliğ asrakığ “Morcover treat. the people under your control vvell” (give them food and drink, and provide clothing for them) 4527: xiv. Muh. asıtcal amis “the day before yesterday” ısra:ğı: kü:n Mel. 8o, 5 (so vocalized); Rif. 185 (unvocalized): Kip. xır atetcal amis asra:ğu: (sic) kün Hou. 28, ız: xiv ditto yasragr (unvocalized, ?for ısrağı:) kün Bul. r3, 7 (and see asra:): Osm. xiv to xvi asrağı “the (day/night) before last” in several texts TTS II 6o, III 42; IV 44. D esirgençsiz Priv. N./A. fr. an unrecorded Dev. N. fr. esirğen-, “unstinting". N.o.a.b. Uyf. vurifi Man. esirgencsizin üleyü yarlikatigiz 'you have deigned to distribute unstintingly' TT. 114. 109: Bud. (giving) esirğençsiz könülin 'with an unstinting mind” U İİİ 11, 15; 4$, 19; alo, Sum, 169, 13-14 (ökünçsiz). D esripü: Den.(?) N./A. fr. esti: and syn. w. that word. Pec. to Uyg. Uy£. viri ff. Bud. esripü óplüp yavlak ört yalın “a fierce parti-coloured flame (Hend.) U 7V 40, 158-9; esripü körkle tağ senirliğ yer orun “a place (Hend.) with variegated beautiful mountains and projecting rocks” Tiş 31a. 5-6; 0.0. U I 36, 7 (mistranslated) ; Suv. 71, 19. "ris. V. ASRD esirge:- Den. V.(?) but not semantically connected with any known word *es; the basic meaning was apparently “to regret! which evolved in two opposite directions; (1) 'to be sorry for (someone)”, (2) “to regret parting with (something); to grudge'. Survives in NC Kir., Kzx., and SW Osm. Uy£. vii ff. Bud. yirif taplayu ésirgeyü ığlayu 'admiring the song, pitying him and weeping PP 71, 3-4: Xak. xı ol esirge:di: ne:mni: tafassara "ald fawti'l-say' «ca ta'assafa "he regretted the Ioss of the thing and was distressed! Kaş, ] 306 (esirğe:r esirğe:me:k): Çağ. xv ff. ésirgediriğ daştan "to grudge, vvtthhold” San. 103r. 16 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv esirge- “to pity (someone 21cc.)” Qutb 22: Kom. xiv ditto CCG; Gr. 94 (quotn.): Kip. xiv esirgerahima “to pity! İd. ış: xv ditto Tu. 17b. 3: Osm. xivíf. esirğe- "to pity'; c.i.a.p.ş the second translation 'to protect' is less common TTS I 278; 11 400; İİ 266; IV 310; xvii after Çağ, entry; "and in ERümi ralım kardan San. 103r. 16. D esirgen- Refl. f. of esirge:-; survives only (?) in SW Osm. Türkü vir ff. Man. M //1 zı, 3 (i) (ağız): Xak. xı ol tava:ripa: esirfendi: za"assafa "ald daháb málihi "he regretted the loss of his property” Kaş, 7 291 (esirğenü:r, esirgenme:k). D isirken- Refl. Dev. V. fr. isi:-, "to comc out in heat spots'. Survives in NE Khak., "Tuv. izirğen- "to feel hot". Uyğ. viri ff. Civ. uzatı kurima:k isirke:nme:k bu:sma:klik bolor “therc is a prolonged feeling of being parched, a heat rash and irritability” TT VIII 1.6: Xak. xı anın başı: isirkendi: xaracat min ra'siht bütür bt-hardra [i-til. tarkül-balq “hcat spots came out on his head because he had failed to shave it for a long time” Kaş. 7 290 (isirkenü:r, isirkenme:k): Çağ. xv ff. isir$an-mak “to blush for shame' Vel, 58 (supported by a quotn. containing Isırğandird: (his boundless favours) “made him blush"). D esri:le:- Hap. lcg.; Den, V. fr. esri:, Xak. xı ol kidizni: esri:le:di: maqgaga'l-libd wa ENENEEPNEPENENNEN Eo roe LLILALLLLh ——--.......——....-z -—— EosVi/ec £0 s ei —— — €“ —.” v 5 medi 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 297 
     
   
   
     MON. AS twajd 'alayhi ka-lawni'l-namir "he embroidered the felt with a pattern like the colours of a leopard” Kaş. 1 316 (esri:le:r, esri:le:me:k). Dis. V. ASSD asış- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of as-. Xak. xt ol mapa: et asışdı: “he helped me to hang( f? ta"liq) the meat on a stake' Kaş. 7 184 (asışu:r, asigma:k). D esiş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of 2 es-. Xak. x1 ol mana: yıp esişdi: “he helped me to stretch (fi madd) the cord'; also used for competing Kaş. I 185 (esişü:r, esişmeşk, sic in MS.). D isiş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of isi:-. Xak. xi İsişdi: ne: "the thing became hot (harra), in the sense that the heat penetrated (ta'adda) all parts of it” Kaş. I 185 (isigü:r, isişme:k, sic in MS.). Tris. ASY S osa:yuk See osa:fiuk. Dis. ASZ VU essiz an Exclamation, 'alas'; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı essiz kalima talahhuf "a word expressing sorrow, like yd asafd 'alas'; hence one says essiz anın yigitliki: ya /ahfd “ald şababihi 'alas for his youth” Kaş. I 145; o.o. 11 188, 12; III şi (ylgitlik): xiv Muh. al-asaf ésiz (mis-spelt é:ser) Mel. 83, 9; Rif. 189: (Çağ. xv fT.(?) the word is listed three times in SS; (1) essiz hayf, afsüs "alas” 12; esbiz (sic, an obvious error) ditto. 13; ésiz ditto (also 'sleep, dream") şr, the first and last illustrated by quatrains of unknown authorship and date). PU(?D) isi:z/issiz “evil, bad”, and the like. N.o.a.b. Türkü vırı ff. bétge:cl: isi:z yavı:z kul “the scribe, (your) bad, useless servant Tun. IV 10-11 (ETY II 96): Uyğ. vür ff. Man.-A isiz kerğeksiz yangalaplar “bad and useless ones, may you be crushed” M 7 9, 12: Bud. isiz yaviz (gap) U Il 23, 23-4: Xak. xı isi:z (in a section headed fa'dl/fa'ül) al-a'ram mina'l-gibyán "of a boy, unruly” Kaş. I 122; (in a section headed fa'"'zi) al-waqihw'l-gaddárwu l-xali'wL-'idári'l-garrir “an impudent, perfidious man who has thrown off all shame and is very wicked' is called issiz kişi:, the double -SS- connotes excess (a/-muabdlağa) I 142; edğü: isi:z katma:s "good and bad (al-rad”) don't mix" I1 386, 24; a.o. II 117 (tilik-): KB edgü isiz 235; 246 (atik-) and many 0.o.: xu (?) At, isiz (sometimes spelt esiz) 'bad' is common; Tef. esiz (sic?) “bad, harm' 84. D u:su:z Priv. N./A. fr. u:; “sleepless”. N.o.a.b. Uyf. vurff. Civ. usuz küçsüz bolur 'he cannot sleep and loses strength' TT VIII I.5: Xak. xi u:Su:z kişi: al-saqadán “a sufferer from insomnia! Kaş, I 122: KB 2314 (ügiə. 255 Tris. ASZ D isizlik A.N. fr. isi:z; 'badness, wickedness'. Pec. to Xak., NC Kir. e:sizdik and SW Osm. Isizlik/1ssizlik “an uninhabited, desolate place' are not connected but are crases of idisizlik, see idisiz. Xak. xı isizlik a/-şarr *wickedness' Kaş. I 152; three o.o. K 8 isizlik uçuz ol “vvickedness is worthless' gor; a.o.o. Tris. V. ASZD isizlen- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. isi:z. Xak. xr o:ğla:n İsizlendi: “the boy was unruly ("aruma) Kaş. I 293 (isizlenür, isizlenme:k). Mon. AS 1 a:ş “food” in a broad sense. S.i.a.m.l.g.; see Doerfer 11 481; from the medieval period onwards liable to be confused with Persian dj 'soup, porridge'. Türkü vir ff. ta:tığlığ A:Şş 'savoury food” Toyok III 1r. 6-7 (ETY II 178): Man. as içkü “food and drink” Chuas. 56; özüt aşına “for the meal (dedicated to) the spirits! TT II ro, 76: Uyğ. viri ff. Man.A as (sic) içkü M I 16, 2 and 6, mepin aşın “their bird-seed and food” do. 36, 6: Bud. aş 'food' is very common, e.g. Suv. 168, 23 (adut); PP 19, 6; 28, 3; Hüen-ts. 169, etc.: Civ. aş “food” is common in TT VII, H II, and USp.: Xak. xı a:ş al-ta"dm “food” Kaş. I 80; and many o.o., usually spelt aş: KB ton ag 'clothing and food' 321; o.o. 1054, 4587, etc.: xın(?) 4t. şarab aş 'drink and food” 297; 3.0. 329: Tef. aş “food” 66: xiv Muh. al-ta'àm aş Mel. 41, 14; Rif. 132, 164: Çağ. xv ff. aş fa"dm San. 41v. zz: Xwar. xın(?) yig et ag sürme (sorma) 'raw meat, food, and wine' Oğ. ro: xiv aş “food” Qutb 13; MN 10; Nahc. 28, 13-14: Kom. xiv “food” aş CCI, CCG; Gr. 43 (quotns.): Kip. xii al-ta"üm aş, and you say to someone who has eaten and drunk ag bolsun, that is yakün şihha "good health” Hou. r5, 13: xiv as al-ta'ám İd. 14; al-tabix 'cooked food” ag Bul. 7, 15: Xv al-ta'ám aş Kav. ış, 19; 31, 3; Tuh. 23b. ro, ş/hhata(n) aş bolsun do. 22b. 4: Osm. xiv ff. aş “food”: c.i.a.p. 77S 7 48; I1 63; III 43; IV 46. 2 a:ş Hap. leg.; but see 2 aşla:-. Xak. xı (after 1 a:ş) and ru'batu'l-inà "the repair of a vessel' is called as (sic); hence one says ayak aşla: “repair the goblet” Kaş. I 8o. €:ş primarily 'companion, comrade', with some special applications like 'spouse' (wife or husband) and *one's equal', i.e. someone of the same rank, quality, etc. as oneself. 'T'he theory that the Suff. of the N. of Association -da:ş/-de:ş is a crasis of -da:/-de: 6:ş is plausible. Like many short words, hard to identify but prob. s.i.a.m.l.g. Türkü (viri the passages in which this word has been read are better explained otherwise; bili eşi: and cav eşi: in T 7; Ix. 17 as bilgesi: çavuşı: and es eri: erkin in Ix. 21 as Siri: erkin): viri ff. Man. Chuas. 197-8 (adaş): Uyğ. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 298 
     
   
   
     254 MON. AŞ viri ff. Bud. és usually occurs in the Hends. eş adaş TT VII B.4; U İV 4q iy (adaş), and és tuş e.g. égipe tuşıpa kasına kadaşıpa “to his comrades (Hend.), family and kinsmen' TT VII 40, 83-5; o.o. TT İV 6, 21; PP 53, 4-5 etc.: Civ. és tuş TT I 48, edgü kilinghf églerke inanmafinga "without trusting virtuous comrades” do. 79-8o; eşimiz USp. ıq, $: O, Kir, ix ff. ésim Mal. 2, r, and 16, 2(?), 6şime: (twice) do. 51, 3: Xak. xi é:g al-şühib "comrade" Kaş. İ 47 (verse); a.o. translated. al-sáliib. tea'l-rafiq. 'comrade, companion' 7 458, 13: KB both és 49, 75 (ünde:-) 16s, etc. and és tuş 5oo, 1694, 2254, 3784 (£çi:) etc. are common: xin(?) Ar. eş 'comrade' is common; Tef. ditto 86: xiv Muh. é:g al-rafiq tea”l-şadiq ("friend") is mentioned as one of the words in which yd is pronounced € Mel. 5, 7; Rif. 76; 0.0. 6, 6; 49, 15; 77, 111, 144: Çağ. xv ff. és eş ve yoldaş aqrán ve amtál ma'násina "comrade, travelling companion in the sense of equals (Hend.)” Vel. 60; ég ("with €-”) şulh ta. irtibdt 'peace, connection” , hence ikisin bir birike 6ş ile rabtida 'connected' és boldilar marbür südand "they were connected” San. 106v. 5 (in Vel. 6:ş is connected with 4 és- (2 es-), and this seems to have caused a misunderstanding in San): Xwar. xiv ég “comrade” Quib sz: Kom. xiv ég al-rafiq İd. 14; Bul. 9, 6: Osm. xiv ff. eş 'spouse, friend” in several texts TT'S I 282; II 403. 1 i:ş (? 1 x:$) basically “vork, labour'; hence 'something done, a deed' and, more indefinitely, 'affair' and “thing” in a semiabstract sense. In Kaş. consistently spelt s:ş, which is perhaps the original form, almost everywhere else, both earlier and later, i:g. S..a.m.lg. Türkü vr işiğ kücig bér- "to give one's services to (someone Dat.) I E 8, ə, ro (II E 8, 9, to), İİ E 14; T sə, Ongin 5,6 (isig bér-), ro, ır: virrff. yeme: ne iş yarlı:ğ yarlrka:sar kop[ka:] işi: yoruk bolğay "and whatever work he orders to be done, the work will be completely successful" Toy. 18-20 (ETY H 58:) Man. işiğ neçe işledimiz erser 'whatever we have done” Chuas. i15-16; işke küdüğke tiltanip *making the excuse(?) that we were busy' do. 267; a.o. 297: UyÉ. vır işiğ küçig ber- ju. E s; the meaning of is in E 11, 12; S 1 is obscure, but it is unlikely to be €ş as suggested by Orkun: viu ff. Man.-A ayduk isepezen (si) tüketi isledemez “ve have done all the work that you ordered' M I ro, 13; (just as a craftsman) is isleyü umaz 'cannot work with' (unserviceable materials) do. 16, 14: Man. işın barça kodur "he stops work completely! M 7 17, 2: edgü kilingli işlarığ (sic) 15laltipiz “you have caused good works to be done" TT İTİ 80; o.o. TT II 16, 44-5 (ışlar küdügler); TT 171 68; M III 34, 2: Bud. iş (always so spelt?) is common in all its usual meanings; iş küdüğ also occurs frequently and seems to mean 'affairs, undertakings” or the like, e.g., sidi tégme isig küdügüg 'undertakings called siddhi” U 1 34, 17: 6.0. TT V 20, 9; 24, 56 ctc.: Civ. (corrupt officials) işinin küçüpün artatur “frustrate your. efforts! TT. ] 64-5; alo. of iş küç T7 VII 35, 15; iş küdüğ is common, TT I 51, 72, 73, etc.; er kişi er işipe ked bolayın téser “if a inan wishes to be sexually potent” /1 1 75; iş "work' is common in USp.: Xak. xı xs al-'amal :ca'l-amr. *work, affair, thing” Kaş. 1 47; xS, Acc. iişiğ, Dat. işka: is very common; İ:şke: occurs twice J 132, 27; İİ 315, 28: KB is (so spelt) is common; iş küdüg 161, 1038, etc.: xırı(?) Ar, iş, Dat. işke, *work' is common, Tey. iş “vork, affair" 127: xiv. Muh. diş al-şüğl work, business” is mentioned as a word in which the yd is pronounced with 'conspicuous clearness”, i.c. as i: Mel. s, 13; Rif. 76; o.o. 40, 3: 83, 9; 128, 189; al-'amal ks şi, 14 (kilmiş 147): Çağ. xv ff. (after és) is also means “var” (cang) Vel. 61 (quotns.), İş (r) kar “vork” (quotn.); (2) metaph., har) wa kárzár “var, conflict” (quotn.) San. 106v. 2; iş küç a Hend. (az fföd") meaning hdr u bár 'business, affairs' (meaning analysed) 106v. 17; a.o. 303v. 10 (1 kü:ç): Xwar. xın dg “vork” 'Alr 32: xiv ditto Qutb 61; MN 73, etc: Kom. xiv "work, business” iş CCI, CCG; Gr. 107 (quotns.): Kap. xiv ls a/-amr ş liş al-'amal İd. 14; al-şuğl iş Bul. 5, 14: xv şuğl is. Tuh. 21a. 9: Osm. xiv ff. is with the usual range of meanings in various phr.; c.ia.p. T77TS 1 393-4; İl 550-3; III 385-8; IV 441-3. 2 is (iş) 'soot, dirty smoke'; unlike 1 i:ş with a short vowel, but with the same uncertainty regarding its quality; the position is complicated by the fact that in the medieval period it became confused with 1S, a Sec. f, of yı:d, q.v. It seems, however, to survive in NE most dialects and "l'uv. iş, Khak., Koib., Sag. 1S; SE 'l'ar., "Türki is; NC Kir. ış, Kzx. is, SC Uzb. is; NW s, SW Az. his, Osm. is. Xak. 1S. sindcu'l-sirác. sea l-duxán "alö”l-hePit sva gayrihd '"lamp-black and smoke marks on walls, etc.'; hence one says to:n iş boldi: tadaxxana” l-tatıb "the garment was blackened with soot” Kaş. 1 37. 1 oş an exclamation used to call attention to something or someone, 'look, see here”, and the like. Not noted as an independent word after about xvi, but fr, about xiii fused. with the Demonstrative Prons. ol 'that' and bu: “this” to add emphasis to them. "These fused forms s.i.a.m.l.g. except NE(?), often much distorted, e.g. in Osm. they have become şu and işbu. Xak. xı Oş a Particle (/iarf) meaning hühadü 'thus'; hence one says oş mundağ Kil “do thus'; og a Particle meaning al-án, 'now, this very moment”, hence one says OŞ keldüküm bu: /udüri al-àn "1 have just arrived! Kaş. 1 36; o.o, İT 45, 27; 128, 7: KB OS occasionally occurs as an Exclamation, e.g. ay bilge özüm os tapuğçı senin “oh wise man, 1 myself, see, am your servant' 203, but usually in the phr. Oş ol 565, etc.; Oş bu 202, 984, etc.; xi1(?) At. anın oş “for that reason, seel” 473; Tef. OS translates spa /a-qad “and indeed'; oşol, oşbu (and even oşbu anlar), —————— €   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 299 
     
   
   
       MON. V. AŞoşanlar 240, 334 (u$), 335: Çağ. xv ff. oş ism-i işdra "a word used to call attention” (quotn.); also used for müubdlağa) before the Demonstrative Prons. osbu in 'this' and oşal án “that” San. 75v. 24; osol/osal o! nesne ve ol himesne “that thing or person" Vel. 107-8; oşal (spelt) shortened and corrupt form of os ol dn Sar. 75v. 28 (quotns.); oşol dn. do. 76r. 7 (quotns.); oşança do. 76r. 2; oşandak do. 76r. 5; oşbu in do. 76r. 4; oşmunça do. 76r. 6: Xwar. xın(?) 0801 and oşbu are common in Og. and oşu and şol occur once each: xiv os emdi 'now at once” Quib 120; 08 “see” MN 37, etc.; Nahc. 104, 9; Oşol and oŞbu ape common Qutb 120: Kip. xiv Oş (with back vowel') há'u'llati li”l-tanbih “an exclamation to call attention” İd. 14; hd huma dü "hi therel” oş/oşta, like the Ar. tantwin (as in example quoted); also in the meaning a-'imdah fi'l-istifhám “do you understand?' Bul. 15, 15: xv harfu'l-tanbih o:$ Kav. 73, 4: Osm. os as an exclamation is common fr. xiv to xvi TTS I 749; H 957; III 735; IV 807 (transcribed üş), şol existed fr. xiv to xvir, Plur. şular till xvi şunlar “thereafter” 7 665 f.; II 866 fI; III 656 ff., IV 724 ff, oşbu occurred fr. xiv to xvi and işbu fr. xiv onwards (but apparent early examples may be due to later scribes); oşbula 'thus', oşbunça “so much' are noted in xiv 1 392, 750; II 958; 111 736; IV 808. VU 2 oş an Exclamation used to call or drive animals; Survives in NC Kir. öş/üşş, SW Osm. oş/uş/oşt/uşta and prob. elsewhere. Xak. xi os oş an Exclamation with which cattle are called (yuğrd) to drink Kaş. 7 36. VU 3 os Hap. leg. Xak. xı og “the heart, centre (qa/b) of a tree-trunk, branch or horn'; hence one says müpüz oşı: “the core (qa/2) of a horn'; and the tail bone ('asibu'l-danab) of a horse or bird is called os Kaş. 1 36. Mon. V. AS1 a:ş- "to cross (a mountain, etc. Acc., later Abl.) , as opposed to keç- “to cross (a river, etc.); also Intrans., e.g. of time, "to pass”. Similar in some meanings to 1 a:ğ- but without the implication of rising implicit in that word. S.i.a.m.l.g. Türkü vir] Kógmen aşa: 'crossing the Kógmen mountains” 1 E 17, II E ış, 0.0. 1 E 21; II E 27; T 26, 35, 37: Uyğ. vir kara: kum aşmış “having crossed the Black Sand (desert)” Su. N 8: vin ff. Civ. aşayın tésersen édiz turur “if you say “1 will cross it", it is(too) high” TT 147: Xak. ol ta:ğ a:ştı: “he crossed (cdtoaza) the mauntain” (etc.) Kaş. I 173 (a:ga:r, a:gma:k); o.o. İ 123, 21 (arpa:sız), III 261, 7; it is also likely that a phr., which is out of place in a para., translating 1, 2 eş-, belongs here; kayna:r eşiç eşdi: (?read aşdı:) ğalatı”l-qidr ğalayan "the cooking pot boiled over” 7 166, 13: xiri(?) Tef. aş- "to rise (to heaven); to pass through; (of water) to overflow (the brim bL) 66: xiv Rbj. aş- “to climb onto (something üze)” R 7 586 (quotn.); Muh.(?) 'abara wa cáwaza “to cross,” emphasis (birdyi  255 pass over” aş- (in margin keç-) Rif. rzz (only): Çağ. xv ff. aş- (spelt) az hadd gudagtan wa ba-tacáwuz hardan “to exceed, surpass' San. qov, 19 (quotns.): Xwar. xim aş- “to climb down' (sic?) ' Ali 39: xiv aş- “(of time) to pass; to pass (through something .45l)' Qutb 13; “to outstrip” MN 69, etc.: Kom. xiv “to pass over” aş- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv aş"addd min matwdi' murtafi" "to pass over a high place” İd. 14: xv caza aş- Tuh. 12a. 7, "adda aş- do. 25b. 13: Osm. xiv and xv aş- “to overflow' T7T.S 71 64; xvi “to cross” IV 47, xvii aş- (after Çağ.) and, in Rumi, custan nar-i svuhüş wa tuyür bar máda wa cuft şudan *of male animals and birds, to mount the female and copulate' Sar. 40v. 19 (also 77S I sı, 1I 64). 2 aş- “to enlarge, increase (something Zcc.)'. Pec. to Uyg.; has sometimes been transcribed as-, but the spelling in TT VIII and (for aşıl-) in Man. Syriac script is conclusively against this. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. kópülin yürekin buyan edgü kilincka üklitti aştı "he enlarged (Hend.) his mind and heart by virtue and good deeds” U IV 22, 269 ff.; kut aşğalı sakinsar “if he thinks of increasing the favour of heaven (to himself)" TT V8, 7o; (ina damaged passage) a:şa y€ğ “more and better" TT VIII N.6; o.o. Suv. 136, 20 (üklit-); 266, 6-8 (üste:-). eş- Preliminary note. Kaş. g?tes two meanings “to amble' and “to pour (a dry substance) ; his third meaning seems to belong to 1 a:g-.. In the medieval period two more meanings appeared, “to twist, tohich seems to represent a Sec. f. of 2 es-, q.v., and “to dig, or row, swhich seems to belong to an old verb fortuitously not noted in the earlier period. 1 es- 'to amble'; survives only, with slightly altered meaning “to run, hurry', in SW Osm, Türkü vri ff. (I am the Road (or Spring?) God with the dappled horse) yarın keçe: eşü:rmen 'early and late I amble along” /rkB 2: Xak. xı atlığ eşdi: xabba'l-fáris wa rakada “the horseman ambled (Hend.) Kaş. I 166 (eşe:r, eşme:k): xiv Muh.(?) qawgaza (corrupt; ?gaza'a) tea harwala 'to move fast, to amble' és- Rif. 114 (only): Kup. xni ('food' aş) and the same word (in fact eş) is used when you order someone to hurry (yasüq) his horse or baggage animal Hou. 15, 14; sir bi'l-dábba “travel on horseback' esgil do. 40, 19: Osm. xiv ff. eş- “to amble'; less precisely “to hurry (on horseback)'; c.i.a.p. TTS I 283; H 405; III 269; IV 313. 2 eş- “to pour (a dry substance Zcc.). Perhaps survives in NE Khak. és- (of a cow) 'to yield milk' Bas. 64. Xak. xı ol kayırnı: eşdi: ahdla”l-raml “he poured the sand'; also used for pouring flour into a sack and the like Kaş. 7 166 (eşe:r, esme:k). 3 eş- “to dig; to row (i.e. dig water)'; not recorded before the medieval period, but no  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 300 
     
   
   
     256 MON. doubt existed earlier. S.i.a.m.l.gr. for "to row' except in SW and for 'to dig' only in NE Tuv. and SW Osm.; in the latter it connotes less vigorous digging than kaz-. Çağ. xv ff. ég... (2) zamin-rá káwidan “to dig the ground', in Ar. tangir San. 104v. 26: Kom. xiv 'to row' eş- CCG, Gr.: Osm. xvii eg- “to dig” TTS II 405. ?S 4 eş- See 2 es-. *ig- (or *yig-?) See işıl-. 1 üş- "to crowd together, collect in a crowd'. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. üş-, Tkm. üyş-. Cf. a:v-, Xak. xi etme:kke: telim kişi: üşdi: “many people crovvded together (izdahama) to get bread” Kaş. I 166 (üse:r, üşme:k): Xwar. xır üş- "to assemble' ' Ali 56: Kip. xiv. üştiler ictama"ü tea. 'ndammi “ald şay “they assembled and collected round something! 7d. rq: Osm. xvii uş- (sic; Red. describes this form as “vulgar”) in Ritmi, az atráf hucüm hardan wa yah-cd cam" kardan "to crowd together from all sides and assemble in one place' San. 75v. 20. 2 üş- “to perforate, cut a hole in (something Acc.). Survives only(?) in NC Kir. üşü- "to bore with an awl' and SW xx Anat. üş- “to hollow out” SDD 1439, but the N.I. “avi, auger', üşgü: first noted in. Kip., Hou. 23, 15; Tuh. 34a. 4 survives in several SE. NC, and NW languages. Cf. üşe:-, 1 öt-, üp-. Xak. xı ol ok üşdi: “hc notched (faqaba) the arrow (etc.) with a tool” (bi I-mitqab) Kaş. I 166 (üşe:r, üsme:k). Dis. ASA aşu: “red ochre'. Survives only in SW Osm. asifasu; xx Anat. agiasu/asur SDD 121-35. Xak. xı aşu: al-mağra wa huma”l-tinu”l-ahmar “red ochre”, that is red clay Kaş. 7 89. VU?D işi: 1ady”, the feminine counterpart of beg, the Sing. occurs only in Üyğ. and apparentİy only in association vvith beg, işle:r, which is said by Kaş. to be an abbreviated Plur., survived rather longer. It may well be that the Sing. f. is és with a Poss. Suff. “his consort', and that the Plur. is merely an honorific Plur. of that word, but if so it is odd that Kaş. did not suggest this. See Doerfer 11 645. Uy£. viri ff. Bud. (various gods will protect) éli$ xanığ begig igig bodunuğ karağ “the realm, the monarch, the 5eg and his lady, and the common people (Hend.)” Suv. 192, 8-9, o.o. do. 192, 19-20; 194, 7-8; TT VII 40, sı, and 75: Civ. (if anyone makes a claim, invoking the authority of) erklig beg işi elçi yalavac 'the responsible (district) governor, his lady and the envoys (of the central government?)” Up. 13, 13; 16, 18; o.o. of beg işi TT I 109, 168; TT VII iş, rr, USp. 77, 15; 107, 14 etc.: Xak. xi işle:r a/-mar”a *woman', originally igi:le:r, that is a/-sayyıdat mina'l-nisà' *well-born ladies", the -i:- was elided because the word is used so much; there is a long story (gissa fawila) about the origin of V. ASthis name Kaş. / 117; about a dozen 0.o., all translated al-mar'a; exactly syn. w. ura:gut, but the latter is five times as common: XIV Muh.(?) al-mar'a işler Rif. 138 (in margin, ebçi: in text), r51 (Mel. ebgi: in both places). Dis. V. ASAD aşa:- Den. V. fr. 1 a:ş, properly “to eat” in a physical sense; sometimes metaph. 'to eat up, destroy' or 'to enjoy, experience (something). S.i.a.m.l.g. Cf. yé-. Türkü vil ff. (or, if it is savoury food) a:şa:yı:n “may I eat it Toyoh HI ar. ? (ETY II 179): Man. künke aşadukumuz bés tepri yarukı "the light of the five gods which we have enjoyed daily” QChuas. 300-1: Uyf. vurft. Bud. kértgüng erser nomluğ tatığığ aşağuluk élig erür “as for faith, it is the hand with which one consumes the sweet (food) of the doctrine" TT V 22, 45; 0.0. PP so, 3-5 (uduğ): TT' V 24, 53 (yé- asa-); Suv. 529, 13 (ditto); in Buddhist terminology the skandha of vedanğ 'perception', usually translated teginmek, is sometimes translated aşamak TT VI, p. 66, note 157: Xak. xı er aş aşa:dı: “the man eat (akala) the food”, the Xököni Turks use this word only of the nobility (a/-ahabira), but other Turks use it indiscriminately Kaş. 11] 253 (aşar, aga:ma:k), it is pointed out in 7/1 261, 7-11 that aşa:r is the Aor. of both 1 a:s- and aga:-: KB sevinçin avınçın küvençin éli aşasu “may he enjoy his realm in joy, happiness and pride' 123; o.o. 836, 148o: Çağ, xv fT. aşa(speit) xtweurdan ta aşümidan “to eat and drink San. qır. 14: Xwar. xin(?) asa- İç- "to eat and drink' Og. 94, 364: xiv aga- Quib 13, MN gö: Kom. xiv “to cat" aşa- CCI; Gr.: Kip. xut akala- (ye:- and) aşa- Hou. 43, 9. eşü:- “to cover, envelop'. Pec. to Xak. Xak. xı ol apa:r yoğurka:n eşüzdi: dattarahu bi'i-ditár "be wrapped him in a blanket', or anything (else) that covered (Hend. him (satara 'alayhi wa gajtáhu) Kaş. Ill 253 (egü:r, eşü:me:k), eşük a/-dirar is derived from eşü:di: dafara 'alayhi 1 14, 18: KB ölüm yérke kómdi eşüdi yérig “death buried him in the earth and covered him with earth' 5212. S uşa:- See uvşa:-. üşe:- "to scrape”, Survives only(?) in NE "Fuv. üje-. Cf. 2 üş-. Xak. xı ol yérrig üse:di: “he scraped (5ahafa) the ground (etc.) searching for something! Kaş. I1] 253 (üse:r, üse:me:k). üşl:- “to be very cold, to shiver with cold”, used only of animate beings, not inanimate objects, but contrast üşüt-. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SC. Xak. xı er ügl:di: hasira”l-racul mina'lbard "the man fainted with cold” Kaş. 111 254 (üşi:r, ügl:me:k); o.o. / 463, 12 (emriş-): II 137, 8 (üşiyü:r taciídu'l-qurr “he gets chilled"): Kom. xiv “to be frozen” üsi- (Aor. üşür) CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiu. barada müna”l-bard "to be cold” ügl:- Hou. 36, 13: 0... —aəxaamnmmy —-veuuznınıuAZAILL o ——— — 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 301 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. ASDxiv. barada üşü- (sic) Bul, 36r.: xv şay” bárid üşemek (sic) Tuh. 7a. ro, barada mina'l-sità? “to be cold because of the winter' üşü- 4o. 8a. 10; şaqi"a (mis-spelt saqi"a) "to be cold” üşü- do. 20a. to. Dis. ASB C oşbu: See 1 os. C agba:r a compound of 1 a:ş and an unidentified second component. Pec. to Xaş. Xak. xi aşba:r (a word) "used when straw and bran are moistened and mixed and fed to a horse' Kaş. 7 117; 2.0. IH gs, 21 (yélpit-). Tris. AŞB PUF i1$vara: undoubtedly a L-w. discussed, with many refs., in S. G. Klyashtornyi, Dreunetyurhskie runicheskie bamyatniki, Moscow, 1964, p. 113, note 179. Although several scholars have proposed an lranian origin, the most acceptable theory, supported by the fact that there is a Plur. f. ışvaras, is that it is Sanskrit ifvara “lord, prince”, obtained through "Fokharian in both dialects of which it has been noted. Türkü vir 19vara: occurs only as a title in front of P.N.s; (VU) Yamtar / E 33; Cikan Küli: Çor Ix. 2; Bilge: Küli: Çor /x. 8, 22, 24; Tamğan Çor Yavğu: (spelt sura) Ongin 4; Tamğan "Tarxan ditto; Tarxan the balbal associated with Ongin (ET Y 1 130): Uyğ. viii işvaras Plur. N. Su. S 2 (angu:la:-). Dis. ASC eşiç “an (earthenware) cooking pot'; n.o.a.b. Uy£. viii ff. Bud. eşiçteki teg 'like (an offering) in the cooking pot U III 24, 8 (i); eşiçteki do, 44, 3 (i): Civ. (in a list of goods; one cow) bir €şiç (one leather bag, etc.) USp. 55, 3; 6Sİçte cokuratip 'boiling in a cooking pot” H 1 47; a.o.o. in H I, II: Xak. xı esic al-qidr "an (earthenware) cooking pot” Kaş, I 52 (prov.); about 30 0.o.: xiv Muh.(?) al-gidr eşiç Rif. 169 (Mel. cómlek): (Çağ. xv fi.(?) eşiç 'cooking pot' P. de C. 22 only). PU uşıç: See usiç. D aşçı: N.Ag. fr. 1 a:ş, “a cook'. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. Uyf. viuff. Bud. Miunki aşçı 'Mlunki the cook' U 177 64, 1 and 18; a.o. TT V, p. zı, note 124, 3: Xak. xı KB 2557 (idisçi:): xiv R3ğ. aşçı ... ayakei *cook . . . cup-bearer' £ 7 605 (quotn.); Muk. tabbáx 'cook' a:şçı: Mel. 58, 3; Rif. 156. D i:şçi: (?::şçı:) N.Ag. fr. 1 ES; *workman'. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NC(?). Xak. xı tavra:k uşçi: “amil müsrü "a quick vvorkman” Xaş. I 468, 25; n.m.e.: KB (if a leader of the people is good) kamuğ edgü: boldi: anin işçisi “all his workmen become good” 894; a.o. 4148: xiti(?) Tef. ditto 128: Çağ. xv ff. işçi (spelt) şdühib-i hör sva mübdşir-t hör *workman, foreman” Sar. 106v. 12 (quotn.): Kom. xiv “vorkman” işçi CCG; Gr. 8641125 257 Tris. V. AŞCD eşiçlen- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. ésic. Xak. xı er eşiçlendi: “the man had a cooking pot' (qidr) Kaş. I 291 (eşiçlenür, eşiçlenme:k). Dis. AŞD VU aştal Hap. leg. Xak. xı aştal oğul “ucza toaladi”l-racul “a man's. youngest son” Kaş. I 105. F ustmax 'paradise'; lLl-w. fr. Sogdian "toitmy, same sound and meaning. Not noted in Uyg. but adopted at an early date by Moslem 'l'urks to translate Arabic canna 'paradise'. The Sogdian form was rarely used; the word became corrupted to ucmak, presumably owing to a false etymology fr. uç-. Survives as uçmak in SE Tar., Türki (Shaw, Jarring): NC Kır., Kzx. (ulmak) R 7 1780; SC Uzb. (ugmox) and SW Osm. where it was obsolete in XIX but has recently been revived in Rep. Turkish. See Doerfer 11 423. Xak. xi ugma:k al-canna Kaş. I 118 (verse); a.o. III 374, 7: KB uştmax (Fergana MS.)/uştmak (Cairo MS.)fugmak (Vienna MS.) 63; in 3503, 3522 (evin), 3656 all MSS. have uçmak: xiu(?) Tef. uştmax/uçmak 334-5: xiv Rbg. uçtmak in one early MS., otherwise uçmak R 7 1731: Muh. al-canna ugma:k Mel. 44, 16; Rif. 138 (uşma:k in margin): Çağ. xv ff. ucmag/ucmak bihigt 'paradise'; also spelt with -ç- San. 65v. 7 (quotn.): Xwar. xii uçmax ' Ali 37: xiv ditto Quib 194; uctmax do. 195; Nahc. 254, 13; 280, 11; ugmax MN 83, etc.: Tkm. xir al-canna ugma:k Hou. 8, zo: Kip. xiv uçmak al-canna İd. 8; Bul. 2, 15: XV ditto Tuh. 11a. 8 etc.: Kom. 'paradise uçmak CCI, CCG; Gr.: Osm. xiv ff. uçmak common to xvi, sporadic thereafter TTS I 710; Il 916; III 695; IV 773. Dis. V. ASDD aşat- Caus. f. of aga:-; "to feed (someone Dat., with something cc.). S.ia.m.l.g.; in SW only xx Anat. SDD zo. Uy£. vii ff. Bud. nos tatığlığ etiğsiz mepgü mepig aşatursız "you cause (us) to enjoy ambrosia (L.-w.)—flavoured supramundane everlasting joy' Suv. 647, 4: Xak. xı ol mana: aş aşattı: at'amani'l-ta'àm "he fed me”, most Turks use the word only for feeding kings and noblemen, but the Oguz use it for anyone; the example is Oğuz Kaş. I 210 (agatur, asatma:k): Çağ. xv ff. aşat- Caus. f.; ágámidan ("to drink”, but “to feed” must be meant) San. qır. 28: Oğuz xı see Xak.: Osm. xiv aşat- “to feed” once TTS I so. égid- primarily “to hear (something ce.) in a physical sense, with some extended meanings, like “to get news of (something Acc.) and, esp. in the Imperat., “to listen' without specific Object, although “to listen” is properly tıpla:-. "The variations in spelling at all periods, and the position of the word after üşet- in Xaş., point clearly to an original initial é-. "The  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 302 
     
   
   
     258 DIS. V. ASDsecond consonant is consistently -d- in Runic script and this -d- survives in the modern Oğuz languages in spellings like the Pass. f£., Osm. isidil-, 'l'km. esidil-. It became -t- in Xak. and most modern languages; the Uyg. spellings are too ambiguous to indicate where and when the change occurred. S.i.a.m.l.g. with some changes, in NE usually €ş-/€sbefore consonants ést-/ést- before vowels. Türkü viu savımın tüketl: eşi:dgil "hear my words completely” 7 S 1, Z1 N 1 (esid); o.o. IS2,1o0; E 12, 22; İİ E 18; N 8, 11; T 12, 15, etc.: vir ff. üze: tepri: esl:dti: "heaven heard on high” IrkB 54, 60; eşidşi:çi:mi:z, no doubt mis-spelling or misreading of egidteçi:mi:z, “our hearers” do. Postseript: Man. kulkakin esidip "hearing with the ears' Chuas. 313 (spelling clear): Uyğ. vrir esidip III 2; eşidip III B 8 (ETY II 37-8): Bud. in TT VIII A. and D. the spelling is consistentiy éjél-, prob. pronounced éséd-; esidte:ci tınlığla:r “people who heard' do. VIII H.10; egid- (or eşit- ?) is common elsewhere, e.g. beğnin catikin egidgeli “in order to hear the king's Játaka story” U 717 24, 6 (ii), but €şid- occurs in PP 8, 8, 15,7; 18, 8, UIV 28, 32, and both spellings occur in TT VI: Civ. eşitip (?eşidip) USb. 73, 7: (O. Kir. ix ff. the readings of this word in Mal. 24, 2; 39, 4 and 6 are unconvincing): Xak. x1 the main entry has fallen out of the MS. but a prov. containing kulak eşitse: “if the ear hears”, follows üşet-, the Aor. and Infin. of which seem to have been altered from esitür, esitme:k: égtür sami'at “heard” İT 377, 14; sö:zin €şit istamt' Ralümahn "listen. to. his words' 7: 428, 9; 2.0. 1 508, ə: K.B esit/esitgil "hear” (a wise saying) is common 233, 452, etc. ; eştip 'hearing' 450: xır(?) At. esit-/ésitis common; Tef, eşit- 87: xiv Muh. sami"a €:şit- Mel. 27, 7; eşit- Rif. 110: Çağ. xv ff. eşit-(- güçı, etc.) zgit- Vel. 63; öşit- sanidan "to hear” San, 106r. 13 (quotns.): X war. xii eşid- (Imperat. eşit) “AF s, 7: xiv ésitQuib 53; MN 56, etc.; Nalic. 369, 2: Kom. xiv. “to hear” eşit- (once işit-) ci, CCG, Gr. 94 (quotn.): Kip. xır sami'a eşit- (alif unvocalized) ITow. 33, 14: xiv égit- sami'a İd. 14; ditto eşit- (alif unvocalized, eşid- before vowels) Bul. 47v.: xv sami"a égit- Kav. 7, 14; 33, 19; Tuh. 20a. 10. D eşüt- Caus. f. of eşü:-, n.o.a.b. Xak. x1 ol mana: yoğurka:n eşütti: “he ordered someone to cover me (daftara 'alayya) with a blanket'; also used for ordering someone to cover (satr) someone with something Kaş. I 210 (esütür, esütme:k, corrected from -ma:k): Kip. xv ğabn “to fold (a garment)' eşitmek (mis-spelt -mak) Tuh. 26b. 8. S uşat- See uvşat-. D üşet- Caus. f. of üşe:- "to have (something) searched”. Survives only(?) in NE Şor ójetRI1307; Tuv. üjet-. Xak. xı ol anın ewin (sic) ügetti: 'the man ordered someone to search (5/-5baht) his house” Kaş. 1 211 (üşetür, üşefme:k). D üşüt- (üglt-) Caus. f. of üşl:-, 'to chill (someone or something); unlike üşi:- also used of inanimate objects. 5.i.a.m.l.g. Xak. xr ol meni: tumlığka: üşütti: amcadani'l-qurr “he exposed me to the cold'; and one says ol sücig üsitti: (sic) “he exposed (tcada'a) the wine to the cold (/'l-bard) until it was chilled' (zvacada'l-qurr): this is a kind of beverage Kaş. I 211 (ügütür, ügütme:k). S €ştil- See 6şidil-. D 1 eştür- Hap. leg.: Caus. f. of 2 eş-, Xak. xı 01 kum estürdi: “he ordered that the sand should be poured' (bi-ihálati'l-turáb) ; also used of ordering that flour should be poured into a sack Kaş. I 222 (eştürür, egtürme:k). S 2éstur- Sec öşidtür-. D üştür- Jap. leg., Caus. f. of 2 üş- Xak. xı ol ok üştürdi: “he gave orders for a notch to be cut (bi- tagb ru'z) in an arrow'; also used for piercing a narrow (hole) (faqb Vari Kaş. I 222 (üştürür, üştürme:k). D éstrüs- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of 2 eştür- , “to make one another hear”, Türkü vur ff. Man, TT II 8, 56 (öğrünclen-). Tris. AŞD D eşidüt Hap. leg.; Active N.Ac. fr. égid-. Uyğ. vir ff, Civ. irakta sav eşidüti edgü, yağuktakı iş bütüti edgü 'hearing news from afar is good; completing the task near at hand is good" TT I 139-40. Tris. V. ASDD ésidil- Pass. f, of égid-; 'to be heard'. S.i.a.m.l.g.; in SW Az., ""hm. esidil-; Osm. işidil-, elsewhere égitil-/égtil- or the like. Türkü vı tf. Man, M III aş, 4 (i) (öğür): Uyğ. viir ff. Man.-A atı öştilmiş “his name has been hcard” M I 26, 27: Bud. eştilme:di: “has not been heard' TT: VIII H.10; eşidilmedi U IV 24, 316: Civ. (the sound of the conch) üküs tınlığlarka ésidilür “is heard by many mortals' TT VII 28, 31; eşidilür TT 1 95, 134: Xak. xı bu: só:z estildi: “this word (etc.) was heard' (sumi'a) Kaş, I 246 (estilür, eştilme:k): xin(?) Tef. esitil- 87: Çağ. xv ff. ésitil- (spelt) Pass. f; masmi şudan "to be heard” San. 106r. 29 (quotn.). S istonlan- See ictonlan-. D ésidtür- Caus. f. of égid- , “to make, or let (someone at.) hear (something €c.), to inform (him) of (it). S.i.a.m.l.g. Uy£. vin ft. Chr. mapa ésidtürüpler 'inform me' U 7 6, 3: Xak. xı ol mapa: edgü: só:z estürdi: "he let me hear (asma'ami) the good news'; originally esittürdi: Kaş. 7 22: (eştürür, eştürme:k): KB (if he comes) égtür mana "inform me” 5022: xiuff. Tef. eşittür- "to inform (someone Dat.) of (something ec.) 87: xiv Muh. asma'a eşitdür- Mel. 22, 7; eşitü:r- Rif. 103: Çağ. xv ff. égittür- (spelt) Caus. f.; gnawünidan "to cause to hear” San.  .——————————  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 303 
     
   
   
     TRIS. V. AŞĞ106r. 28: Xwar. xim) ésitdür- “AH 28: Kom. xiv “to make onesclf heard" işittirCCG, Gr.: Kip. xiv égittir- asma'a İd. 14. Dis. ASG D 1 aşağ Dev. N. fr. aşa:-, 'cating, food”. 'l'his word is said to survive in NC Kir. aşavv R I 536; Kzx. asaw do. 589, but these words are not noted in the xx dicts., and the only two early occurrences might be 4lcc. in Uyg.-A fr. 1 a:g. Uyğ. viu ff. Civ. TT VIII L2 (akla:-), 8 (yarsı:-). S 2 aşağ See aşak. e ?S aşak 'low' and the like, lit. and metaph. A rare word surviving only(?) in SW "Tkm. aga:k; the Dar. f. aşağa included herein survives in SW Osm, aşağı, described in Le. 25 as a (recent) corruption of aşağa. "The word is specifically Western and is perhaps a corruption of alcak. Oğuz xı aşak a/-sa//ı “the foot of a mountain! Kaş. I 66: xin(?) Tef. aşakğa 'downwards'; aşak kil- “to lower' 66: xiv Muh. qagiru'l-zahr “vüth a: short back” (opposite to a/-mrrrtafi" “tall” PU so:l) a:şa:k Rif. 143 (only); taht 'below' aşağa: Mel. 14, 10; Rif. go: Kip. xur al-mustafil “lovv” (opposite to “high” yükse:k/yü:ce:) aşağ Hou. 25, 17, asfal 'downwards' (opposite to 'upwards! yo:ka:rı:) aşağa: do. 26, 1:9: xiv aşak al-mutawádi' '"humble'; aşağa: al-mawdi'u'l-munhadir "a place sloping downwards'; in Türhi (sic) aşaka: İd. 14; al-mustafil (opposite to “high” yü:ce:) asak Bul. 14, 12; asfal (opposite to 'upwards' yoğaru:) asafa: do. 14, 4: xv ditto Kav. 35, 3; Tuh. şa, 6; 73b. 6; aşak do. 73b. 11 (alçak): Osm. xiv and xv (only) aşak/aşax 'low, humble' in several texts. TTS 1 so; II 63; xiv to xvi aşağa (r) 'below (something 4bL.)'; (2) lower'; (3) (socially) 'inferior'; common 7 48-9; 11 62; III 43; İV 46. asuk properly 'the ankle joint' of a man or animal; but the phr. aşuk kemigi 'knuckle bone”, esp. the knuckle bone of a sheep used for various games, is often abbrevíated to aşuk/aşık. S.ia.m.lg. usually as aşık but with other phonetic changes. Xak. xı aşuk ka"bu”l-insan wa ğayrihi (sic in MS.) "the ankle joint of a man or other (animal)! Kaş. 7 66: Caf. xv ff. asuk topuk . . . ve dirsek hemügi 'the ankle; the bone of the elbow' Vel. 21 (quotns.); aşuğ/aşuk güzak-i pay 'ankle', in Ar. ka'b San. 42r. $ (quotn.): Kip. xiv aşuk al-ka'b (mis-spelt al-'akb) İd. 14: xv al-'urqub 'tendo. Achillis, hock' aşık Tu. 24b. 8: Osm. xv and xvı aşuğ/aşuk “knuckle-bone”, for games; in two texts T'T'S III 44. 75 işığ See yışığ. VUS oşuk See yoşuk. S uşak See uvşak. F ışğun L-w. fr. sorrel), and the like. Survives in NC Kir. Pe. agvutan "rhubarb,, 259 igkin. 'rhubarb': SW Osm. and xx Anat. igkin/uskun (and other forms) 'wild rhubarb'. Xak. xi ışğun al-ribàs 'sorrel' Kaş, 1 109; 1 18, 5; a.o. 1 440 (kışğu:n): Çağ. xv ff. uşğun (spelt) ribàs San. 76r. $: Kip. xiv işkun al-ribàs İd. 14. Dis. V. ASGaşuk- originally “to long for (something Dat.)'; later attenuated to 'to feel agitated, be in a hurry'. S.i.a.m.l.g. but now ?obsolete in SW. Xak. xi ol evke: agukti: “he longed for (iştaqa) home (etc.)'; also used for anyone who longs for something (mult müştaq ila şay”) Kaş. I 191 (aşuka:r, aşukma:k), a.o. 17 165, zo: xiv Rbg. asuk- “to be in a hurry" R I 597: Çağ. xvff. aşuk- (-ti, etc.) 'acele ve idtirdb eyle- “to be in a hurry, to feel agitated' Vel. 20-: (quotns.), oSuk-(-tt) ditto do. 107 (quotns.); asuk- (spelt) ta'cil kardan "to be in a hurry”, mis-spelt oguk- by some early authorities Sar. 41r. 29 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv agik-/asuk- “to hurry” Qufb 14: Kom. xiv ditto agik- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xv 'acala "to hurry' aştıkmak (and tezletmek; in margin aşıkmak) Tu. 2sb. 3: Osm. xiv aşık-/aşıx- ditto; in two texts T'T'S 763. D aşğın- Refl. f. of *asfr- which survives in NC Kir. 1$k1- “to rub (something) against (something); “to be rubbed down, worn away'. Survives in NW Kaz. 1skin- R 7 1401; SW Osm. aşın-. Xak. xı taş aşğındı: "the stone was worn avvay” (insahaqa); also used of anything hard (sulb) when it is worn away Kaş. I 254 (aşğınur, aşğınma:k): Osm. xvin aşın- (spelt) in Römi, sayida şudan wa farsüda şudan "to be rubbed down, worn away" San. 41V. 19.. S işkır- See 1 üşkür-. Tris. AŞĞ S aşağa: See aşak. D uşakçı: N.Ag. fr. uşak (uvşak) 'slanderer, false vvitness", Survives in NC Kir. uşakçı, Kzx. ösekşi and NW Kaz. Xak. xı KB evipke yağutma uşakçı kişiğ “do not let a slanderer come near your house” 1299; 3.0. 5303: XIV. Muh.(?) al-nammàm 'slanderer' u:şa:kçı: Rif. 148 (only): Kom. xiv “false witness" uşakçı/uşaxçıfuyşaxçı CCG; Gr. D uşaklık A.N. fr. uşak (uvsak); survives only(?) in SW Osm. Xak: xr uşaklık al-şibyüni fi'l-amr 'childish behaviour'; hence one says uşaklık kılma: /£ zataşab 'don't be childish” Kaş. I 150. Tris. V. AŞĞD aşakla:- Den. V. fr. aşak, no doubt an Oğuz word, though not so described. A cognate form NW Krım aşağala-, SW Osm. aşağıla- survives meaning “to descend; to fall in price; to lower (price or quality); to treat as an inferior'. (Oğuz) xr ol anı: aşakla:di: "addahu şağir “he considered him smail'; 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 304 
     
   
   
       260 TRIS. V. ASG(prov.) yağı:nı: aşakla:sa: başka: çıka:r "if a man underestimates his enemy, the latter comes out on top” Kaş. İT 305 (no Aor. or Infin.). D aşukla:- Hap. leg., Den. V. fr. asuk. Xak. xı ol ani: aşukla:dı: "he hit him on the ankle? (ka'b) Kaş. I 3os5 (aşukla:r, aşukla:ma:k). D usakla:- Den. V. fr. usak (uvsak); “to slander (someone Zcc.)' and the like. S.i.s.m.l. in this meaning and for “to crush (something)'. Xak. xı ol menip sózümni: uşakla:dı: qatta haditi sca teaşd “he falsificd my statement and embellished it with lics' Kaş, 7 30s (usakla:r, uşakla:ma:k). Dis. ESG S eşek See eşğek. eşik 'threshold'. S.i.a.m.l.g., with variations in the -S- (-]-, -Z-, etc.) in NE, sometimes meaning 'door'. See Doerfer 11 646. Uyğ. viti ff. Civ. ésik 'threshold' in an astrological sense, common in TT VII 12and ış: Xak. x ermegü:ke eşik art bolur “to a lazy man a threshold (a/-'ataba) becomes (as steep as) a mountain pass” (a/-"aqaba) Kaş. I 42, s, n.m.e.: KB (the tongue is a lion) ésikte yatur 'lying on the threshold' 164; (whoever came) öpti eliğke égik "kissed the king's threshold” 451: xın(?) Tof. eşik ditto 87: xiv al-'ataba €:şl:ik Mel. 76, s, Rif. 179: Çağ. xv fT. eşik kapu 'door' Vel. 63 (quotns.); ésik xdna wa sard "house, palace” San. 106v. 21 (quotns., the translations erroneous deductions from the contexts): Xwar. xiv ésik in some contexts, e.g. eşik bağla- clearly ("to fasten) the door' in others perhaps “threshold” Quib 52; “threshold” MN 38, etc.: Kom. xiv. “door” eşik CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xur al-báb 'door' (kapu:; and also) eşik that is at-'atabatu'l-fatuqd "a high threshold' How. 6, 5: xiv eşik 'atabatu'l-báb wa yukná bih”l-bab “also used in alluding to the door” /d. 14: xv bağ eşik Kas. 44, 13; 59, 10; 'ataba eşik Tuh. 25b. s. D eşük Conc. N. fr. eşü:- “blanket, covering', etc. Survives in SW Tkm. eşik, Xak. xı eşük a/-ditar "blanket; eşük “the word for anything of brocade (mina'l-dibác) which is sent to be laid on the graves of amirs and kings as a sign of respect, and is then later divided among the poor” Kaş. 1 72; a.o. I 14, 18 (eşü:-): KB şari"at yüzindin kéterdi eşük "he removed the veil from the face of the sacred lav” 54: xiv Mu/i.(?) (in a list of soft furnishings) al-sttr 'curtain' é:gü:k | Ref. 168 (only). D üşik N./A.S. fr. üşi- : “hard frost, frozen”. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SC(?); in SW only in xx Anat. SDD 1439. Xak. x1 üsik “the cold” (a/-bard) which scorches (yvi/iriq) the. fruit and prevents it from forming Kaş. 7 72. D üşgü: See 2 üs-. D eşğek “donkey”, prob. a Dev. N. connoting habitual action fr. 1 eş-, lit. (an animal) which habitually ambles', — S.ia.m.lg.. usually as eşek/eşek, in some NE dialects estek. "The parallel Dev. N. fr. 3 eş-, eşğek, “an oar' is not noted before the medieval period (Çag., Kom., Kip.), and also s.i.m.m.l.g., but usually as eşkek or the like. Sce Doerfer 11 486. Uyğ. virt ff. Nlan.-A M I 16, 11-12 (kaç): Bud. esgek karninda 'in the womb of a donkey' U III 26, 21; a.0. Suv. 341, 22: Civ. eşğek tüsin 'the hair of a donkey' H I 103-4; (one cart, one cow) üç ésgek “three donkeys" U Sp. S5, 23; eşek (sic) occurs several times in U.Sp. 3,a late text: Xak. xr eşğek al-/iimár “donkey” in one of the two pronunciations of eşye:k (sic); the -y- in the latter is changed from one of the two repeated letters (/iarfayt l-tadvif) as occurs in Ar, (three examples quoted, but the phonetic phenomenon is quite different) Kaş. I ri, esyek (sic) al-himdr, another pronunciation is eşğek but eşyek is more correct (afşah) Kaş. 1 114; spelt esye:k in 7 244 (artil-) and five o.o., and ese:k (?error for esye:k) in /T 246, o: xin(?) Tef. esgek/esek ditto 86-7: xiv Muh. al-himár eşek Mel. 7o, 7; Rif. 171: Çağ. xv fl. eşek ('with -k-") eşek Vel. 62 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv esek 'donkey” Quib. 22; ések 52: Kom. xiv 'donkey' eşek CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xur al-himar eşek Hou. 12, 14: Xiv ditto İd. 14: xv ditto Kav. 28, ii, 31, 7561, 22; Tuh. 132. 4. ?F işküm Hap. leg.; prob. a L-w., ?Sogdian. Cf. tevsi:: Xak. xr Igküm “a table (ma'ida) in the shape of a large dish (cafna) used by kings; it has no legs! (qawà'rm) Kaş. I 107. D 1 eşgin Dev. N./A. fr. 1 eş-, usually "a trot, amble; trotting, ambling'. Survives only(?) in NE Bar. işkin R 7 1556 and SW Osm. eşkin, Xak. xı (after 2 esgin) wa yuqdl h”l-safari” l-mü"da, and 'a journey, at high specd' is called eşğin Kaş. I 109: Kip. xır in Hou. 13, 10ff. (al-farasu'l-rahwün “an ambling horse! yorğa:) al-farasw'l-taríq “a trotting(?) horse' esgü:n (or ?eskü:n): Osm. xvi ff. eskin/eskün usually “trotting” (Adj.), in several texts TT. I 283; I1 504; III 269; IV 313: xvii égkin (spelt) in Rrmi, raftàr-i asb "the gait of a horse', and metaph. asb-i xtougráh “a horse that goes well' San. 106v. 19. D 2 eşgin Hap. leg.; Dev. N./A. (cf. 1 esgin) fr. 2 es-. Xak. xi esgin topra:k a/-furab rea” L-ramlu'l-munhál, "earth and sand. which is poured out" Kaş. 7 109. Dis. V. EŞG1 üşkür- Intrans, “to whistle, hiss”, and the like; Trans., “to incite (someone, etc. Acc.) against (somcone, etc. Dat.)'. Survives in NC Kir, Kzx. üşkür- “to whistle; NW Kaz. üşkür- “to spit' (in magical ceremonies) R 7 1351; SW Osm. eşkir- “to excite, incite! Red. 122 (SDD 553 eşğer-), but in most NC, SC, SW languages 'to whistle! is 1gktr- Xak. xı ol itid. keylkke: ügkürdi: agrá'/-kalb 'alá'l-sayd "he incited the dog to chase the wild game'; also used when a man incites somcone   ced  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 305 
     
   
   
      DIS. ASL against something ('alá'l-jay'); and one says yılan üşkürdi: “the snake hissed' (mafaxat bi-fiha) also of a man when he whistles (şafara bi-fihi), and of a vulture when it shricks (safara) (prov.) Kaş. 1 228 (üşkürür, üskürme:k). VU 2 üşkür- n.o.a.b. Xak. xı ol unıtmış sö:züğ üşkürdi: “he remembered (tadakkara) the word (etc.) which he had forgotten” Kaş. I 228 (üşkürür, üşkürme:k): xiu(?) Tef. üşkür- “to remember' 342. VUD üskürt- 1Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of 2 üşkürXak. xı (in a para. followjng the preceding entry and giving the rules fdr forming Caus. f.s of this form) one says só:z üşkürdi: “he rcmembered the word'; and if you wish to form the Caus. of it you say üşkürtti: “he urged the man to remember ('alà tadakkur) what he had forgotten! . . . there is an alternative form üşkürtürdi: “he urged him to incite' ('a/z'T-Hirà', implying that this is the Caus. f. of 1 üşkür-), but the first is more clegant and correct (a/şah ta aşahh) Kag. 1 229. Tris. EŞG PU?F ésgü:ti: "a kind of Chinese embroidered silk brocade'. "There is some difficulty about the actual form of this word, of which the -£is fixed by the Türkü spelling. 'The best evidence should be in Kaş. where it appears under the heading fa'liili; the form to be expected is éggü:ti:, but the MS. actually has espürtr, 'lhe word is fairly common in Uyğ. Bud. and Civ. and is there consistently spelt ésgirti with minor variations of vocalization, "Vhe conclusion seems to be that it is a l.-w. of which the original form was éggürti: but that the -r- was not clearly pronounced and was sometimes omitted. For the earlier misunderstanding of this word in 77 N 11 see E ekinlig. N.o.a.b. Cf. barçın. Türkü vim altu:n kümüş ésggüti: kutay bupsiz ança: bérü:r 'thus they give unstintingly gold," silver, embroidered brocade and silk fabric(?)' ISs, H N 3; ao. II N 11: Üyğ, vir ff. Bud. torku éséirti (?sic) böz ulati bir ed “a fabric, silk clothing, embroidered brocade, cotton, and so on' TT VI 391-2 (and see note); yürün arığ ésgirtide (?sic) "in pure white embroidered brocade” USSp. rozb. 17: Civ. bir yıpağ (?yapağ) ésgerti (?sic) iki ken bir uluğ torku “one coverlet(?) of embroidered silk brocade, two broad and one large piece of silk” U.Sp. 127, 3; eşğirti occurs several times in Fam. /Irch.: Xak. xı ésgükti: (?; see above, MS. ésgürti:) dibac Sini munagqaş min cinsi'l-harir 'embroidered Chinese silk brocade” Kaş. I 145. : D 6şiklik Hap. leg.; A.N. (Con. N.) fr. eşik. "The P.N./A. égiklig is first noted in Çağ. (P. de C. 117) and sim.mlg. Xak. xt eşiklik yığa:ç “a timber destined for use as a threshold' ('ataba) Kaş. I 152. D eşükliğ/eşüklik Hap. leg.'s; P.N./A. and A.N. (Conc. N.) fr, eşük Xak, xı esüklik 261 barçın 'brocade (dibác) destined to be made into a covering! (al-ditár); wa şdühıbuhu brl-kafi'l-rakika and. 'owning a covering' is esüklig Kaş. 1 153. D eşginçi: N.Ag. fr. 1 esgin. Survives in NE Bar. işkinçi "a trotter' R 7 1557 and SW Osm. eşkinçi “a light irregular cavalryman'. Xak. xı (after 1 esgin) hence al-bàridu'l-musri'u'l-fáris "a fast mounted couriet' is called eşğinçi: Kaş. I 109. PUS?F 6şgürti See éggü:ti:. Tris. V. ESGD esgeklen- Refl, Den. V. fr. esgek; "to own a donkey'. Survives in this and cognate meanings in SW Osm. eseklen-. Xak. xr er eggeklendi: "the man owned a donkey'; in one of the two pronunciations Kaş. 1 315 (eşğeklenür, esgeklenme:k; the alternative pronunciation eşyeklen- is not listed). D ügikle:- Den. V. fr. üsik; pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı ol keyikni: üşikle:di: axada'[-zaby fi haşrihi wa hala wucüdihi'l-bard “he caught the antelope when it was distressed and its body was frozen" Kaş. I 306 (üşikle:r, üşikle:me:k): Taput sü:sin üşikle:di: “he made a night attack (bayyata) on the Tanut in the extreme cold” (f? siddati'l-bard) I 307, 15. D üşkürtür- Sce ügkürt-. Dis. ASL C oşol See 1 os. D aşlığ P.N./A. fr. 1 a:$; n.o.a.b. İt is possible that the first occurrence is a P.N./A. fr. 2 a:ş. Xak. xi KB siyasat yoritğu kerek sü başı siyüsatka aşlığ bolur sü isi; siyasat yoritsa sü başlığ bolur, süsi başlığ erse er aşlığ bolur "the army commander must facilitate government policy; the work of the army becomes to repair (if fr. 2 a:s or to feed) government policy. 1f it facilitates government policy, the army gets a commander; if his army has a commander a man is (sure to be) supplied with food' 23Co-1. D ashk A.N. (usually Conc. N.) fr. 1 a:ş. S.i.m.m.l.g., usually 'food, provisions”, less often 'cereals'. Uyğ. vti1 ff. Bud. (in a detailed description of a house) aşlık “the kitchen” 77 VI 85: Xak. xı aşlık al-matbax “the kitchen” Kaş. I 114; aghk tarığ anın üne:r minhu yanbutu'l-ta'àm "the food (crops) spring up because of it” (i.e.the snow) //İ 204, 14: XIV Muh. (under 'trees and plants”) al-£alla “cereals” aşlık (followed by ai-hmta "wheat bu:ğda:y) Mel. 77, 13; Rif. 181: Çağ. xv ff. aşlığ galla San. 42r. 3 (quotns.): Oğuz xi (after the Xak. entry) and in Oğuz al-burr, *wheat' is called aşlık Xaş. 7 114; a.o. 7 373, zz (tari): Xwar. xir aşlık “food”(?) ' Ali 40: xiv aşlık 'corn, grain Qutb 14: Kom. xiv *grain, wheat aghk CCI; Gr.; Kom, xiv  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 306 
     
   
   
       262 À'S. ASL aşlık a/-qamlı "wheat! İd. 14; al-£alla xak Bul. 6, 15: xv ditto Tuh. 26b. 4; 85b. 13. D é:slig P.N./A. fr. é:s; “having a companion'. Survives in NW Haz, işli R 7 1561: Uyğ. vun ff. Bud, Sanskrit bdlasaháyatá "having a fool for a companion” biligsiz éslég (src) bolma:k TT VIII B.6: Xak. xı (after €:ş) sea yüqdl [i lHladi ma'ahu tàbi'a mina'l-cinn, and “aman who has a familiar spirit is called e:şlig Kaş. I 47. D kslig (?rgliB) P.N./A. fr. 1 Es (?1 rs). Survives in SE Türki islik "businesslike” BŞ 603: NC Kir. iştü: 'industrious! and SW Osm. işli, “Vkm. i:şli “busy, fully occupied”. Xak. xı tuşliğ Kaş. 7 485, 9 (sıdrım, which is described as an Oğuz word); 7 509, 3 (küdüğlüg); n.m.e. D isle:r See igi: Dis V. ASLD aşıl- Pass. f. of 2 aş-, q.v.; “to increasc' (Intrans.) Pec. to Uvg. and noted almost only in Hends. Uyğ. viii ff. Man. bu ok [óv]ke biliğ aşfılsalr küçedser “if this emotion of anger increases and becomes strong” TT H 17, 53-6: Bud. ükli- asil- U II 9, 6-8 etc. (ükli:-), aşıl- üstel- TT'VII qo, 128 etc. (üstel-); o.o. TT VI, 348 (kutad-); PP 15, 6 (y1l). D eşil- Pass. f. of 2 eş-, “to be poured out”. Survives in NC Kir, eşil- (also used with kum). Xak. x1 kum esildi: 'the sand (etc.) was poured out” (or 'poured out”, inhala) Kaş. 11975 (eşlür, esilme:k); bu kayır ol eşilge:n "this sand dune is constantly pouring out' (i.c. “on the move! yazlı?) I 158. D esül- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of eşü:-, Xak. xı anın üze: yoğurka:n eşüldi: dutira 'alayhi'l-ditár “the blanket was spread over him”? also used when something is put as a cover (gutliya) over something else Kaş. I 197 (esülür, esülme:k). PUD isil- (?yışıl-) 'to. become expert (at doing something Dat.y. "Fhis V. is apparently cognate to yışığ (?ts1), yışım and yışımlan-; there is no doubt, in spite of the erratic vocalization in the MS., that the whole group had back vowels, but it is not clear whether the original initial was 1- or yt-; as the Uyjg. form of yışığ was tg1£, the first is the likelier. Survives only(?) in NC Kzx. 1sil- "to acquire a habit; metaph. "to get thin'. Xak. xı anın eligi: rska: i1gildi: “his hand — became accustomed (maranat) to the task' (etc.) Kaş, 7 197 (işilur, işilma:k, MS. -me:k); anın eligi r:şka: yışıldı, (a further example of yusul- follows here) 7/7 79 (yışılır, yışılma:k, corrected fr, -»e:;k; vocalized yugul-); bu: er ol eligi: r:şka: yışılğa:n (MS. buyilga:n) “this man's hand is constantly nimble ( yuxiff, MS. vuhiff) in the task and has become expert (nadaba) at it" FİT 53. D uşal- (usa:l-) Pass. f. of usga:- (uvsa:-); “to be crushed, broken into small pieces'. S.i.s.m.., the normal word with this sense being uvul-, q.v. Sec osul-. Xak. xi etme:k uşaldı: “the bread. (ctc.) was. crumbled' (tafattata) Kaş. 1 197 (uga:lur (sic), uşalma:k), a.o. [I 235 (tüvsel-) xiv Rhg. uşal- “to be smashed, crushed! A I :r775 (quotns.): Çağ. xv İT. uşal-/uşatıl- (spelt) Pass. f. gikasta şudan “to be broken! San. 75 v. 13 (quotns.): Kom. xiv ugaldi 'crushed' (perhaps a Dev. N./A. in -d!) CCG; Gr. D üsel- Hap. leg., Pass. f. of üşe:-, Xak. xt anu) evi: üşcldi: "his house was scarched" (buhita), also used of anything else that vou search (tabhiatuhu) Kaş. I 197 (uşe:lür, üse:Ime:k). D 1 aşla:- Den. V. fr. f a:ş, “to cat food": a very rare alternative to aşa:-, Uy. vir ff. Bud. PP 19, 6 (una:-): Kip. xv /ahama “to fecd on meat' aşla- Tu. 32a. 13. D 2 aşla:- Den. V. fr. 2 a:ş, "to repair", N.o.a.b., but the Refl. f. aşlan- “to be repatred” occurs in Xwar, xiv, Qutb 13, and aşlak “a patch; the sole (of a boot)' is noted in SW xx Anat. SDD 123. Xak. xi ol ayak aşla:dı: “he repaired (ra'aba) the cup” Kaş. 7 286 (aşla:r, asla:ma:k); a.o. 7 8o, 17 (2 a:ş): Kip. xiv aşla:- “to mend (reagala) an arrow vehen it is broken” İd. 14. D işle:- Den. V. fr. 1 ES; “to work; to do (something cc.) ; with front vowels everywhere even in Kaş. S.i.a.m.l.g, with minor phonetic variations. "Türkü vır ff. Man. neçe islemeisig iş işleyürbiz 'hov many things we do that we ought not to do” Cfiuas. 296-7: tenri ayğım tüketi işleyürbiz “ve do everything that God prescribes" TT I7 6, 3: Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-A (just as a craftsman) edsiz ney is isleyü (s:c) umaz 'cannot make an unserviceable thing” (? or cannot make anything without (suitable) raw materials) M I 16, 14-15: Man. in. TT III 69 and 72 işletimız prob. represents islet(t)imiz; sce islet-: Bud. (and various craftsmen) kentü kentü uz işin işleyür “each do their own skilled work' PP 2, 6; o.o. of iş işle- (U IJI 26, 10; TT IV 8, 63, etc.; sakinip işleser (if a man) 'devotes himself to thinking! TT V 6, go: Civ. işlezün “let them work' USp. raz, 8; kizil burcak bilen işleyii tut£il work up (the decoction) with red beans and kcep it" H 10i 8, 32; (if one crushes the rootlets(?) of onion and garlic and) yugurup isleser “kncads them and works them up” H / 14s: Xak. xr er isle:di: “the man (etc.) worked" (Camila) Kaş. I 286 (igle:r, işle:me:k): KB ukus birle işle kamuğ iş küdüg “do all your work (Hend.) with understanding' 161; a.o. 255: xu(?) Tef., işler işle- 127: xiv Mu. (al-sugl 1:Ş) a“mahb I-şuüğl işle:- Mel. 40, 3; Rif. 128: Çağ. xv ff. işle- (spelt) kör kardan "to work' San. 105v. 29: Xwar. xi İşle- “to perform (work)! * Ali 32: xiv. ditto. Qutb 61: Kom, xiv ^work' İişlemek CCI; Gr,: Kip,  i i ] | !   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 307 
     
   
   
      DIS. xı fşfağala "to work! işle:- Hou. 35, t2: Osm. xiv ff. igle- 'to work; to do, or make (something Aec.) , c.i.a.p. TİSI 394; İl 552; IH 387; IV 442. D aşlat- Hap. leg.: Caus. f. of 2 aşla:-. Xak. xi ol aya:k aşlattı: arba”a"l-inğ wa'l-qaşa "he had the vessel or cup repaired' Kaş. 1 265 (aşlatur, aşlatma:k). D işlet- Caus. f. of igle:-; "to make (someone Acc.) work; to operate (something /ec.); to make (somcone Dat.) make or do (something Acc.y . S. i.a m.l.g., with minor phonetic variations. Uyf. viii. ff. Mary. edgü kilıncliğ 1glarif (sic) islettipiz “you have made them do good deeds' T'T III 8o (and sec İşle:-): Bud. kul kürüg işlettimiz erser “if we havc made a male or female slave vvork” TT JV ro, 8; similar phr. TT V 25, si and s8; Suv. 136, 1; 596, 22: Civ. işletğil yenik edgü lalarığ “makc the light-weight good mules (Chinese [-w.) work' TT' 7 :i25-6; o.o. USSp. sı, 8; 82, 28 (2 art-); 88, 42: Xak. xı ol apar rs işletti: ista'malahu'[-'amal “he made him do the work' Kaş. 7 265 (işletür, işletme:k), yigitlerig işletü: 'putting the young men to work' 7 263, 8: KB an işletip 483; o.o. 215, 479, etc.: Çağ. xv ff. isletCaus. f.; kör farmüdan “to order to work' San. 106r. 11: Kip. xiv ag£il ğayrak “make someone else work' işle:t Hou. 35, 13: Osm. xv ff. İşlet- “to put (someone) to work'; in several texts T TS 1 394; 11 552; İV 442. D aşlal- Hap. leg., Pass. f, of 2 aşla:-, Xak. xı aya:k aşlaldı: “the cup was repaired' (ru'iba) Kaş. I 295 (aşlalur, aşlalma:k). D işlel- Pass, f. of İşle:-, (of work) "to be done”, S.i.s.m.l, Xak. xi rs işleldi: “the work was done” ('umila) Kaş. I 295 (islelür, iglelme:k). D 1 i:şlen- Refl. f. of igle:-; s.i.a.m.l.g., except NC, often with a Pass. meaning. Xak. xi er i: şlendi: (sic) ará'L-racul annahu ya"mal "amal "the man pretended to vvork” Kaş. 1 297 (2 i:şlen- follows): Çağ. xv ff. işlen- Pass. f.; her harda şudan (of work) “to be done” San. 106r. 12. VUD 2 kslen- (?ışlan-) Rcfl. Den. V. fr. 2ig(?19); to be blackened with smoke'. Similar difficulties and confustons arise in regard to the vocalization and survival of this word as in the case of 2 is, but broadly speaking it survives in the same languages and with the same phonetic changes. İn Kaş. the position is further complicated by the fact that this verb, vvhich probably had back vovvels, and 1 i:şlen-, which almost certainly had front vowels, are treated in a single para., with the. result that the Infin. is shown as -ma:k altered to -me:k or vice versa. In addition a later scribe familiar with modern forms of this verb like Osm. islen- altered the -ş-s to -S-, Xak. xı ev (VU) r:şlandı: laziqa'l-duxan bi'l- bayt 10a astvadda minhu 'the smoke 263 ASN adhered to the house, and it was blackened by it", also used of clothing and other things Kaş. I 298 (r:glanur, r:şlanma:k(?), see above); tütü:n kopursa: (VU) ışlanu:r "if a man raises smoke, he (inevitably) gets dirtied by it' (yatadaxxan) 11 72, 10(-S- later altered to -8-). D işleş- Co-op. f. of işle:- , “to work together and the like. S.i.s.m.l. Xak. xr ol meninp birle: işleşdi: "he competed with me in working' (/i'l-'amal); also used for helping Kaş. 1 240 (işleşü:r, işleşme:k): (Xwar. xiv İşleş- "to be friends with one another” Qutb 61 is a Co-op. Den. V. fr. é:g and should be transcribed ésleg-). Tris. V. ASMD ésimsin- Hap. leg.; almost certainly Refl. Simulative Den. V. fr. €:ş, “to treat as a comrade, or equal", The Suff. -imsin- is properly attached to V.s and scems to be a Refl. Simulative Den. Suff. -sin- attached to the N.S.A. of that V.; it is here attached to a N. by false analogy. Xak. xr K.B (however close the rulers hold you to them, do not forget yourself, act uprightly; however well they treat you, stand in awe of them) eşimsinmeğil sen kaya baknu tur “do not treat them as equals, stand looking over your shoulder at them' 4094-5. Dis. ASN D üsep Dev. (Pass. N./A. fr. üge:-; lit. 'scraped smooth'. Pec. to Kag. Xak. xr üşep ta:ş al-sgaxratu'l-malsá "a smoothed stone'; alternative form (/uga fj) yüseg Kaş. 1 135; yüşen ta:s same translation 771 372. öşün 'shoulder' or the like. Survives in NE Alt, Leb., Sor öfün “collar-bone” R I 1398 (üstü Sor 'shoulder' 1907 is merely the same word with Poss. Suff.); Bar. üjün “humerus, upper arm' 1907; Tuv. ölün *humerus; forearm' ; SE Türki ósgne/ósni, etc. 'shoulder' Saar 24, Jarring 219. Xak. xı Öşün ra'su'l-katif (sic in MS.) “the point of the shoulder' Kaş. I 77. D aşnu: abbreviated Ger. of aşun-, as Adv. 'previously first (of all)” as a Tui us with Abl. “before” (of time). N.o.a.b. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. ey aşnu “first of all” TT V 26, note 5, 9; başda aşnu "first of all” TT V 24, 58; (the bull) aşnu ünüp 'coming out first p 65, 3; agnuca “as previously" U 7 31, 14; USp. 58, 18: Civ. aşnu üç kaşuk içsün "first let him drink three spoonfuls' H 77 18, 63; a.o.o.: Xak. xı aşnu: a Particle (harf) meaning qabl “before”, hence one says men andan asnu: keldim “I came before him” (qablahu) Kaş. 1 13o: KB 'Atiq erdi asnu kamuğda üze ''Atiq was first, above all the others” şı o.o. 8 (öndün), 253, 509, 2356 (1 a:D), etc.: xin(?) Tef. aşnu Adv. and Postposn. 66: xiv Rbg. R 1 60r; Muh. qabl agnu:; qabli menden aşnu: Mel. ıq, 7; Rif. go: Xwar. xır aşnudan “from of old” ' Alf 46: XIV aşnu Adv. and Postposn. Qutb 14; MN 289; Nahc. 4, ış: 241, r6: Kip. xiv agnu; MU — s s— !A——M— ái iili PER 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 308 
     
   
   
     264 DIS. al-qadim | mina'l-zamán 'previous in time” İd. 14: Osm. xiv aşnu zamán "once upon a time” TTS I sr. Dis. V. AŞND aşan- Refl. f. of aşa:-, the two early occurrences are not certain, but the word survives in NE Küer., Tel. ajan- R 7 606; NC Kir., 'l'ob. aşan- do. 590, “to eat to satiety”. "Türkü vii T 27 (?, see asin-): Uyğ. viu ff. Bud. (I invite two monks) kim küntemek menip evimde aşanzunlar “to cat daily in my house" TT 1 p. 26, note 160, 4-5. S aşın- See aşğın-. D aşun- Refi. f. of 1 a:ş-, the -u- is unusual; "to excel (Intrans.); to exceed, surpass (something or somcone /45/.)”. Survives in NE Alt., "Vel, ain-. R 7 608; Khak. azin-; NC Kir. agin-; NW Kum. aşın- R. / 594. Xak. xı ol mendin aşundiı: sabaqa minni "he surpassed (or outstripped) me" Kaş. 7 202 (aşunur, aşunma:k): KB kayu işte aşnu aşunsa ukuş “in whatever matter (his) understanding excels' 2604; 0.0. 1384, 4848, 5052: xm(?) Tef. sózge aşun- “to speak first; aşun- “to excel” 67. D esün- Refl. f. of eşü-, n.o.a.b. Xak.xi KB (Oh mortal man! You see the dead and the living) sizik tutma bir kün esüngey yeriğ “have no doubt, one day you will put on a covering of carth” 3785. İşen- “to trust, believe in, rely on (someone Dat.y. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SW. Exceptionally the NW forms Kar. L. isan- R 7 1387; T. isan- do. 1400; Kot. 195 and Kaz. işanR I 1400 have back vowels, perhaps under the influence of 1nan- which is practically synonymous. Sec içan-, Xak. x1 ol mapa: işendi: ittakala 'alayya fi'l-amr wa" tamada "he relied (Hend.) on me in the matter! Kaş. 7 202 (isenür, işenme:k): K.B bitiğke işenme “do not rely on the letter” (do the best you can) 3894; (do not entrust a task to two people) İşenğü bolur iş kalur kilmadin “they will rely (on each other) and the task will remain undone” 5533: Çağ. xvff. isenme (mistranslated) l/el. 60 (quotn.); işen- mutma'inn büdan swa "timad hardan "to feel secure, to rely on” San. roşr. 22 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv (VU) Isen- "to trust, rely on” Qız) 206 (rgan-): Kom. xıv “to trust' işan- (sic) CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xv fawakkala (VU) işan- Tuh. 10b. 9. S uşan- See uvşan-. Tris. AŞN D aşnu:ki: N./A.S. fr. aşnu:, “former” and the like. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir agnu:ki: tavğaçdakı: oğuz türkü talşıklmış “the Oğuz and "Türkü who were previously (settled) in China came out” Su. S 8: virr ff. Bud. aşnukt ikigü “the first two' (of three) TT V 26, 108; aşnuki sekiz “the first eight! (of ten) do. 127: ASN Civ. aşnukı tüzünler törösin “the traditional law (or customs?) of good men of old times" TT VII 3o, 1-2; aşnukına ópi “different from before” TT I rşo (dubious meaning): (O. Kir. ix ff. aşnuki: is rcad in Mal. 41,2 and 4 but this inscription makes no sensc): Xak. xı KB ey aşnukı kün "on the very first day” 793: xın(?) Tef/. agnuki 'previous'; aşnukılar "men of old time” 67: xiv Muh. al-atowal. "first, former' agnu:kt:; al-atowa'il aşnu:kı:la:r Mel. 14, 7; Rif. go, Adam 'alayhi'l-salam agnu:kr: ata: Rif. 138 (only): Xwar. xiv agnuki 'former' Qutb 14: Kip. xiv aşınğı: yıl !"Gmu'l-'ámi'l-awtoal “the year before last”, also called aşnuğı yıl, the phrase now used is kesgen (i.e. kecgen) yıl hi. 14; "dm "dim awtcal aşınğı: yil Bul. 13, 15: Osm. xiv aşnuği (1) “former”, (2) (men) "of old times” in three texts TT'S I şı, II 64. D aşnukan Den. Adv. fr. aşnu:, sec v. G. ATG, para. 437. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vri ff. Bud. sec v. G., op. cit., occurs in an unpublished part of Hien-ts.: Civ: TT I 172 (2 érgür-). D aşnurak Comparative f. of agnu:; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vur ff, Bud. (you who are afraid) aşnurak yoriplar “get off (the ship) beforc (we sail)” PP 32, 4. Tris. V. ASN- . D aşundur- Caus. f. of aşun-, survives only (?) in NE. Xak. xı KB uluğlar kerek kim kicigke salám aşundursa “important people should take the initiative in grecting their inferiors” (and not vice versa) so60: xmi(?) At. senip mölp ol màl aşındurdukup "your. (truc) wealth is the wealth you have sent in advance (to the next world?)' 433; Tcf. aşundur- (of the hands) “to have made somcthing earlier! 67. Dis. ASR D aşru: abbreviated Ger, of aşur- used as an Adv.; 'very much, extremely'. Survives in NE Tel. alıra R 7 608; Khak. azıra, 'l'uv. alır all meaning 'across, above, bcyond; to excess; NW Kar. T. asarifasira “across, through” Kore. 159, 160, and SW Osm. aşırı *extreme, excessive; situated on the other side of (something); 'Tkm. a:şırı “a streamer attached to a veil or other similar garment", "The word is rather rare in thc carly period and for a brief time but over a wide area becamc asru (sic) in the medieval period. Xak. xi KB ağırladı aşru “he honoured him greatly' 1766: (the word does not occur in xır(?) At, but ked is twice glossed asru and once asru yaxşı "very good”): Çağ. xv ff. asru ziyada te (ok “more, very much” Vel. 17 (quotns.); asru bisydr ditto San. qov. 9 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv asrı/fasru "very, very much”, qualifying Adjs. and Verbs Qutb 12-13; asru ditto MN 98, etc.: Kom. xtv ditto asru/astrifastru CCG; Gr. 43 (quotns.; survives as astrı in NW Kar. T, Kotv. 159).  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 309 
     
   
   
     MON. AY . 265  Dis. V. ASRD aşur- Caus. f. of 1 a:ş-, "to causc to pass over or exceed; to extol', and the like. Fortuitously not noted before xiv, but cf. aşru, agrul-. Xwar. xiv aşur- “to make (something) exceed, go beyond, overflow" Qutb 14; aşur-/aşır- ditto MN 165, etc.; bir kulnup "amalını kókke aşurğaylar “they will extol a servant's work to the skies” Nac. 402, ış: Çağ. xv ff. aşur- (spelt) Caus. f.; gudaranidan toa mutacawiz saxtan "to cause to pass over or exceed' San. 41r. 2. VU öşer- (of the eyes) 'to,be dazzled, or bleary'; pec. to Kaş, Xak.'xi anın kö:zi: öşerdi: sadirat 'aynuhu twa'rmaddat. müna”l-intizdr awi'l-cato' "his eyes were dazzled and bleary because of staring (at something) or hunger' Kaş, I 1:78 (öşe:rür, öşerme:k), bu er ol kó:zi: üógerge:n “this man's eyes are constantly dazzled (yatahayyar) by hunger and the like” 7 157; a.o. III 68, 2. D aşrul- Pass. f. of aşur-, “to be carried over (something .45/.)”. Survives in SE Türki BS 766 (oşurul-), NC Kir. and SW Osm.; "Vkm. (a:giril-). Xak. xi yük arttin aşruldi: “the load was carried over (uciza) the pass (etc.)” Kaş. I 247 (agrulur, aşrulma:k). Dis. ASS D aşsız Priv. N./A. fr. 1 a:8; *without food”. Otherwise noted only in SE Türki, SShatw 9. "Türkü vin içre: aşsız taşra: tonsiz (a people) *without food in them and clothes on them" 4 E 26, IL E 21. D işsiz Priv. N.[A. fr. 1 i:ş, 'without work, with no 'occupation'. S.i.s.m.l. Uyğ. vir ff. Man. İşsiz bos "without work and idle' M 117,2. Dis. V. ASSD 1 aşsa:- Hap. leg.; Desid. Den. V. fr. l a:g. Xak. xı aşsa:dı: (after 2 aşsa:-) wa kadalika ida”ştahd”l-ta"aüm “he longed for food" Kaş. I 277 (aşsa:r, aşsa:ma:k). D 2 aşsa:- Hap. leg.: Desid. f. of 1 a:ş-. Xak. ol art aşsa:dı: "he intended and wished to cross (mtcdwaza) the pass” Kaş. I 277 (1 aşsa:- follows). D aşsat- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of 1 aşsaz-. Xak. xr ol ant: aşsattı: mamiáhu [-ta'àm "he made him long for food" Kaş. 7 262 (aşsatur, aşsatma:k). Dis. V. AŞŞD eşiş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of 2 eş-. Xak. xı ol mapa: topra:k eşişdi: “he helped to pour out (fi'l-ihdla) the dust” Kaş. I 1:85 (eşişü:r, eşişme:k). Mon. AY 1 a:y originally “the moon”, hence from the earliest period “a (lunar) month'; as an Adj. "crescent. shaped”, S.i.a.m.l.g. See Doerfer II 627. Türkü viri ay “month” 7 NE; II N ro, 11 NW; Ongin 12: viii ff. ay “month” [rkB, Postscript; a.o. do. şo (yidit-); yaru:k ay tepri:ke: 'to the bright moon god' Toy. Ir. 2 (ETY II 176): Man. bir ay 'for one month' Chuas. 274; a.o. do. 338: Yen. on ay éltdi: öğüm oğlan “the son of my mother who carried me (in her womb) for ten months' Mal. 29, $, a.o. do. 28, 7: Uy£&amp;. vii ay “month” Su. N 9; a.o0.0.: vin f... Man. ay belgülüg bolur 'the moon becomes visible' Wind. 15; ol aylarka 'in those months' do. 19: Bud. yılın ayın “for years and months” TT VI 62; VIII O.6 (a:yın), ay “moon” and “month” is common: Civ. ay (a:y in TT VIII L.) “moon” and “month” is common: xiv Chin.-Uyğ. Dict. “month” ay and phr. Ligett 126; Rİ 3: O. Kir. ix ff. kó:k tenri:de: kün ay a:zdım “1 strayed from the sun and moon in the blue sky' Mal. 10, 3 (a standard phr. for 'to die' in these texts); o.o. do. 11, 15 (44, 4); 45, s: Xak. xı aty al-qamar “the moon'; an “the full moon” (ai-badr) is called to:lun a:y; a:y is also “month” (şa)r) (verse); the month is called by the name of the moon because its course is known by it (prov.) Kaş. I 82; ay bitigi: the name for “the register' (fümdr) in which the soldiers” names and rations are entered' 7 4o (lit. “the book of the month"); a.o. in this sense /71 77, 7; and about a dozen 0.0.: KB ay “month” is common; “moon” in the name Aytoldi (and see yalçık): xm(?) Tef. ay “moon, month” 43: xiv Muh. al-şahr ay Mel. 79, 15; Rif. 184: Çağ. xv ff. ay: (1) müh ba-ma'ná qamar, (2) müh ba-ma'nà şahr ; also used as a P.N. San. 56v. 26 (quotn.): Xwar. xi ay “moon” 'Alí 36: xin(?) ay “moon” Oğ. 53; also a P.N.: xiv ay “moon, month” Qutb s: MN s, etc.: Kom. xiv, “moon, month” ay/a:y CCI, CCG, Gr. 30 (quotns.): Kip. xit al-qamar ay wa hwwa'l-sahr Hou. 5, 3; al-şahr ay do. 28, 8: xiv ay ("with back vowel") al-qamar, sua yutlaq ay ayda(n) 'ala'l-şahr İd. 26; al-qamar ay Bul. 2, 11; al-şahr ay do. 13, 10; xv al-qamar ay Kav. 15, 17; jahr ay Tuh. 21a. 6; Kav. 22, 2; ditto, rea huwa ism li'l-hilàl (Ça crescent) wa'[-qamar do. 36, 11. 2 ay Exclamation; often no more than a Vocative Prefix. The word is also Ar. and Pe. and s.i.a.m.l.g. Uyğ. vii ff. Chr. ay moğoçJar-a “Oh Magi' U 7 7, ro: Bud. ay kim sen “Hil Who are you?” U 1V 8, zo, olo. Hüen-ts. 1896, igi8, USp. rosşb. r: Xak. xı ay oğul “oh my son!' 7 74, 17; n.m.e.: KB ay introducing a Voc. is common 6, etc.: xıu(?) At. ay ditto ro6, 474 (but aya is commoner): Çağ. xv ff. ay harf-i nida "exclamation” San. şöv. 26: Xvvar. xıur(?) ay introducing a Voc. Oğ. 3z4, etc., also at the beginning of a sentence do. 182, etc.: Kom. xiv ay Voc. CCI; Gr. 31 (quotn.). 1 o:y 'hole, cavity”, with various special applications; homophonous, and semantically connected with, 1 o:y-. S.i.a.m.l.g,, except . SW, usually for 'valley' and the like. Türkü vur ff. (a gambler, staking his wife and  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 310 
     
   
   
     266 MON. AY children) (PU) usic oyuğ alı: barmlış 'succeeded in obtaining the . . . hole' (and did not lose his wife and children) 7rk2 29: Uyğ. vin ff. Civ, H 1 raz (otura:): Xak. o:y al-huwwa fi'l-ard “a cavity (or deep valley) in the ground” Kaş. 7 49; a.o. 1 54, 16 (opuz); o:y opuzluğ yé:r ard düt ğitan tva huzüna *ground full of holes and hard patches' 7 146, 20: KB 3570 (tógne:k); Kip. xur al-wadi 'valley' o:y (also kol) /1ou. s, 18. 2 o:y a word for a colour of a horse's coat; definitions vary but point mainly to “dun”. Survives only in NE several dialects, R I 969, Khak., Tuv. oy “dun”, ağ/ax oy “light bay” or 'pale grey'. Xak. xı o:y at al-farasu'l dayzac Kaş. 1 49 (dayzac is said by Steingass (Persian Dict. 553) to be the Ar. form of Persian diza 'grey', but is translated “dun”): xiv. Müh. 0:y faras bayna”l-şuqra ava İ-hatma “a horse of a colour between reddish and brown' is quoted as an example of a word in which twdtw represents 0:- (not w:-) Mel. 5, 12; 6, 3; Rif. 76-7: Kip. xiii al-agbaru't-ramádi 'dust- or ash-coloured' oy How. 13, 7. ?E 3 oy Hap. leg.; the reading is uncertain, and should perhaps be lüler, l.-w. fr. Chinese lü “a reed' (Giles 7,548) Uyğ. vri ff, Bud. altı erkek (PU) oylar “the six male reeds” (of the Chinese “Pan”s pipes”) IHfen-ts. 133. S uy See u:d. Mon. V. AYay- (r) Intrans. “to speak”, (2) “to say, declare, prescribe (something Aec.) , (3) “to say” with the words said in oratio recta. "Vhere is little difference of meaning between ay-, té:- and sözle:-, but at any rate in the carliest period ay- seems to be to some extent honorilic, while the others are not. N.o.a.b.; apparently became obsolete when ayit-, q.v., came to mcan “to say", but in the transition period it is sometimes hard to say whether Perf. f.s represent ay- or ayıt-. Türkü vri öd tepri: aysar 'when heaven prescribes the time" (all men are destined to die) 7 N ro, Tofiuku(K)ka: baya: aydı: .. . kıynığ köpülünçe: ay ben sana: ne: ayayrn tédi: “(my xağan) spoke to me, 'T'ofiukuk; he said "prescribe the punishment as you think fit; what should I say to you (as a guide)?" ' T 31-2: virt ff. Man. tepri aymış ötçe biliğçe yorımadımız erser "if we have not behaved in accordance with the advice and knowledge declared by God' Chuas. 326-8; (then a voice came from high heaven and) meni okidi inca tép aydı *called me and said as follows' M III 23, 5 (i): Uy£. vur kulim küpim boduniğ tepri: yer ayu: bérti: "heaven and earth deigned to declare that the people were my slaves” . . . ktyn aydim 71 prescribed (their) punishment Su E 1-2; a.0. do. S 9: vür ff. Man.-A (we have completely performed) ayduk igepezen "the work which you prescribed' M I ro, 13; o.o. M I 34, 10-13; TT 1I 8, şı and s3: Man. (the false Mithra) ol dindarlarka inca ayğay 'will address the Elect as follows' M. Il s, 7 (i): ayu yarlikadipiz olarka “you have deigned to prescribe to them” TT 777 162: Bud. ópi ópi kazğanç kilmak ayu berdiler . . . biri ayur . . . biri ayur ... biri ayur "they told of various ways of making a profit. . . one of them said . . , another said . another said” PP 13, 1-6: in the Tantric text T T V 4 ff. the formula sakınç ayu bérelim "et us prescribe the (appropriate) thought” in 8, 76 and 10, 99 is replaced by sózleyü bérelim in ro, 114; o.o. of ayu bér- TT VI 265-6; VII 12, 5; 36, r etc.; VHI H. 4: Civ. in TT. I the standard formula is "if this irk, called ... ., appears, Snvin inca ter “it makes the following statement', but in 14, 32 and zo ayur replaces ter, kotur emin ayalim "let us prescribe a remedy for the itch' H I 168: Xak. xi ol maga: só:z aydı: qala lt'l-kalám "he said a word to me” Kaş. 1 174 (ayu:r, ayma:k); amdt: ok aydım quitu sa'ata'idi 'I have this moment spoken' İ 37, 16; aydim amdı: yat “1 said "lie down at once" ' J 36, rz, and over 30 0.0.: KB (the Prophet) ayu bérdi yol 'prescribed the way (of salvation”) 37; sen amdı kayu sen maya ay aç-a “tell me now and explain who you are” 267; Talikler ayur anı Afrasiyab “the Persians call him Afrasiyab” 280; and many occurrences of Hacib (etc.) aydı “the Chancellor (etc.) said” s8o, followed hy oratio recta: xın1(?) At, ay- with the usual range of meanings is common; Tef. ditto 44: xiv Muh.(?) qala za şüla (?corrupt for sa'ala “to ask”) “to say and?” ay- Rif. 114 (only) (see ayıt-): Xvvar. xiv ay- “to”say, to recite” Qut 6; MN 33, etc.; Nalic. 3, 5, etc. iy-/iy- Preliminary note. There are V.s of these forms in several modern languages, vehich all seem to be Sec. f.s of vid-, eğ- or yidt:-. There fs only one early verb, sehich must be iy(see iyin-) and is 5.0.a.b. 1y- except for two doubtful occurrences in, U II 29, 18 and 24 (sce tay-) occurs only in Hend. ry- bas- “to suppress. Uyğ. vin ff. Man. anın tinli$lar ópke nızbanıların iya basa umadın ok “therefore mortals because they cannot suppress (Hend.) their passion (1.-vv,) of anger' TT II 17, 72-5; Bud. (then the rulers will so organize their countries) kim ayığ kılınçlığ tosun yavlak (PU) muyğa tınlığlarığ iynr basar “that they suppress (Hend.) wicked rebellious evil and headstrong(?) men” TT VI 254-5; a.o. Suv. 607, 14-15 (Orun): and sce basa:. 0:y- “to hollow out (something .4ec., by removing its contents)', with some extensions of meaning. S.i.a.m.l.g.; in Tkm. o:y-. Uyğ. vii ff. Civ. H I 147 (otura): Xak. xı ol ka:ğu:n o:ydt: “he hollowed out (qazoroara) the melon (etc.)” Kaş. 7 174 (o:ya:r, o:yma:k): xıı1(?) Tef, oy- "to gouge out (the eyes)” 234: xiv Muh. naqaşa "to engrave” o:xy- Mel. 32, 1; Rif. 116 (adding wa faqaba "and to pierce”): Çağ. xvíff. oy- háwidan “to hollow out”, in 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 311 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. AYAAr. tagicir | sic, error for taquir) San. 89, 18 (and see u:d- and udt:-). uy- 'to squeeze'. N.o.a.b.; for the vowel see uyma:, Close in meaning to uv- and 1y-, but hardly to be connected etymologically with either since uv- 7» uy- is not a possible sound change in Xak., and the alıf is consistently vocalized with damma in all words in the group. Xak. xı ol u:nuğ uydi: “he squeezed (dağata) the flour in order to make it compact and feed it (to animals)' (yaştadd tva yanca") Kaş. I 174 (uyar, uyma:k): xiv Muh.(?) 'acana, "to knead” uy- Rif, 112 (Mel. 28, 15 yuğur-). ? Dis. AYA 1 aya: 'the palm of the hand', with some extended meanings later. S.i.m.m.l., in others displaced by Mong. l.-w. alakan or Ar. l.-w. kaff. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. iki ayalarnı kavşurup 'putting the two palms together” U JI 46, 7o and o.o. of this phr.; o.o. Suv. 168, 23 ff. (adut) TT V 12, 119; PP 6, 7-8, etc.: Civ, sekiz yanıda ayada “on the 8th of the month (it is) in the palm of the hand' TT VII zo, 8; a.o. do. 27, 8: Xak. xı aya: al-kaff “the palm of the hand” Kaş. / 85; a.o. I 348 (2 kars): KB ayada tutarsen “you hold in the palm of your hand” 717; a.o. 864: xın(?) "Vef. aya ditto 44; a.o. 230 (uvun-): Çağ. xv ff. aya kaff-i dast San. 56 v., 28 (quotn.): Kom. xiv “the palm' aya CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xın al-kaffu'l-maftüh “the open palm" aya: Hou. zo, 13: xiv aya: ("with back vowels") al-kaff; aya: ur- saffaga ay daraba'l-yad "to clap, that is strike the hands together! İd. 27: xv al-haff aya: Kav. 61, 2; Tuh. 3ob. 8: Osm. xiv ff. aya (1) “the palm'; (2) "the pan of a pair of scales” in several texts! T'T'S I 54; III şo. ?F 2 aya: an Exclamation, “oh”, which also exists in Ar. and Pe.; prob. a l-w., but possibly an expanded form of 2 ay. Survives An. NC. Kir. and SW Osm. Xak. xi KB aya as a Vocative Prefix is common 8, 164, 168, etc.: xııı(?) At. ditto; Tef. aya *'oh!' 44. S ayı See aniğ. S eye/iye See 1 idi:. D 1ya/ (E) lye See éyin and basa:. 1 uya: properly “a bird's nest'; somctimes by extension the resting place or 'lair' (properly I:n) of any wild beast. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NW and SW as uya; in the latter languages as yuva which seems to be the old Oğuz/Kip. form. Türkü vırı ff. (a leopard and a deer, see 3ep...) bulu:pan uya:srpa:ru: öği:re: sevi:mnü: keli:r "having found it they come rejoicing (Hend.) to their resting places! JrkB 31: Uyğ. vini ff. Civ. karlığaç uyasindaki topraknı “the earthy material in a svvallov”s” nest” H I 95-6: Xak. xı uya: wahrul-tayr wa “uşşühu “the nest (in general) of a bird and its nest in a tree' Kaş. 7 85: xiv Muh. al-tuşş 267 u:ya: Mel. 73, 8; Rif. 176: Xwar. xiv yuva “nest” Quib 87: Kip. xim al-"uşş yuwa: Hou. IO, 17: XIV uya: al/-"uşş, thus in the Kitáb Beylih, but our şayx Faxru'l-din said 'I do not know (any word for) it except yuwa:' d. 27; yuwa: al-wakar; and one says kuş yuvvası: twakaru'l-ayr do. 99; al-'ug; uya: Bul. 12, 6: xv "uşş yuwa[uya Tuh. 25r. 10: Osm. xvii yuwa (? in Rmi omitted) dşiyüna-i tuyür "a bird's nest”, in Ar. Rínn Chiding place”), "uşş and mafhaş (a nest in the ground") San. 347v. 9 (quotn. Fudüli). VU 2 uya: a term of relationship of uncertain significance, in some contexts apparently 'blood brother", a general term covering both éci: and ini:, in others hardly more than 'blood relation N.o.a.b. O. Kir. ixff. él(lig uyamka: adriltim “1 have been parted from my kinsmen of my realm” Mal. 15, 3: Xak. XI uya: al-ax wa'l-qarib "brother, kinsman'; (verse) tavar üçün tepri: edlemedip, uya: kadaş oghnr çınla: boğa:r it describes the lack of compassion between brethren (al-ixwün) and says “man looks for money and does not fear God, so that he (literally ?) strangles his brother's son (rbn axiht) for the sake of money” Kaş. 1 85; a.o. III 146 (ka:b): xıl1(?) At. ata bir ana bir uyalar bu xalq “these people are kinsmen vvith the same father and mother” 291; Tef. uya corresponds to Ar. a/-dx 324: Çağ. xv ff. uya hamyira-i küçik 'younger sister', also called sipil Sas. 92r. 22 (sipil is the normal word, no other trace of uya: in this sense): Xvvar. xii uya “brother” '4/i 45: xiv uya “blood relation'(?) Qutb 196. Dis. V. AYAaya:- originally “to treat (a person Acc.) with respect, to honour; to preserve (a thing Acc.), to look after it carefully'. S.i.a.m.l.g. (in SW only Tkm. and xx Anat. SDD 134) with a rather miscellaneous set of meanings, of which the commonest are 'to have compassion on (someone), to spare; to withhold, or withdraw (something). Türkü vı ff, (in Toy. IV r. 3-8 (ET Y 11 180) there seems to be a scribal error, the text should prob. read yüz altun ba:p (not aya:p) tamğala:p 'packing up and sealing a hundred gold coins"): Man. TT Il o, 78-9 (ağırla:-): Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. agir ayamakın *with profound respect” U 7 30, 8; normally occurs in Hends., U H 14, 2 etc, (agirla:-); Suv. 195, 21-2 (cilte-): Civ. 77 7 65-6 (1can-): Xak. xi ol to:nın aya:dı: şöna tatobahu “he Jooked after his clothing (etc.) carefully'; and one says xa:n apar aya:ğ aya:di: /aqabahu"l-malik bi-laqab "the xan gave him a title of honour' Kaş. I 271 (aya:r, aya:ma:k): KB ayama “do not treat them gently! (let boys and girls taste the whip) 1494; (a wicked man ought to be kept in captivity) yorik bolsa edgüi aya sarp yürek ^f he obtains his liberty, control him well with a stern mind” 5549: XIV Muh. al-muhübba “to behave in a friendly manner to (someone)! ayamak Mel. 35, ro  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 312 
     
   
   
      268 misvocalized iymak); Rif. 121 (unvocalized): Çağ, xv fi. aya (-r, etc.) man' et- diriğ dut-, kagur- "to refuse, to withhold' Vel 33-4 (quotns.); aya- (spelt) diriğ düştan ditto San. 53V. 13 (quotns.): Kom. xiv “to refuse, withhold' CCG; Gr.: Kip. xv baxl "to be stingy' ayamak 7wh. gob. rz: Osm. xv and xvi aya- "to honour, respect' (someone cc.) in two texts TTS II 76; IV s7. Dis. AYB ?F ayva: 'quince'; as the name of an exotic fruit, prob. a l.-w. A l.-w. in Russian; survives only in SW Osm.; in NE Khak. it is reborrowed fr. Russian. The text in Kaş. is in disorder at this point; the letter V should indicate the last consonant of the word; the text was therefore prob. originally as reconstructed below. Xak. xi V —€ ayva: al-safarcal 'quince'; » avya: al-safarcal, fi luğa “in one dialect' Kaş, 7 114; a.o. of avya: II 311, $ (kamat-): xiv Mwh. al-safarcal aywa: Mel. 78, 11; Rif. 182: Çağ. xvff. aywa bih 'quince', in Ar. safarcal and in Pe. àbi San. 57v. 6: Tkm. xır al-safarcal aywa: Hou. 7, 19: XIV aywa al-safarcal İd. 26; (kürt ai-safarcal in Kip., as if they called it “Kurdish apple”) in Tkm. ayvva do. 81: xv al-safarcal haywa: Kas. 63, 9. aybap “bald”. Survives in SW "Tar. aypan R I sg, the Türki equivalent is aydıpvaş “shiny head” BS 10. NE Alt, Khak. ayan scems to be descended from this word. There does not seem to be any widely distributed "Turkish word for 'bald'. Cigil xr ayban (or aypan?) er al-raculi'l-agla' "a bald man” Kaş. I 116. Dis. AYD uyat 'shame, modesty, shyness'; practically syn. w, uvut, q.v., with which it is used in Hend. in Uy£.; connected with uya:d- and uyal-, but morphologically obscure, possibly abbreviated Dev. N. in-t fr. uya:d-. S.i.a.m.l.g. as uyat, in SW only in Tkm. uyat, xx Anat. oyat SDD 1097. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. uvut uyat Suv. 489, ız, TT V 24, 60-1 (uvut, the spelling evyat in the latter looks like a mistranscription): Çağ. xv ff. uyat şarın 'shame' Vel. 123 (quotn. containing uyatltk); uyat (1) şarm ta. xicálat ('modesty'); (2) 'ayb swa qabáhat 'disgrace, baseness” Sam. gor. 22 (quotn.): Xwar. (xir uyatlu “ashamed” "Ali 46): xiv uyat 'shame, modesty” Quib 196 (and uyatlığ), Nahe. 366, r: Kom. xiv “shame, modesty' uyat CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kap. xiv. ud (?crasis of uvut) al-havá 'modesty, bashfulness'; also called u:yad 7d. 9; Tkm. uyat and ut a/-hayd do. 27. D aytiğ N.Ac. fr. ayıt-, “enquiry”. S.i.s.m.l. w. minor phonetic changes, but now means “statement” (cf. ayit-). Uyğ. vrri ff, Man. aytiğ “enquiry”(?) in damaged passage M II 12, ro: Xak. xt aytif alternative form (lağa fr) of aytış in the sense of istixbàr "ani'l-saláma tea nahtvihd "an enquiry about (someone's)  DIS. V. AYAhealth and the like" Kaş. / 113: KB éligdin üküş öğdi aytığ salim 1durmen sapa 'I send you many praises, enquiries, and greetings from the king" 3907; sapa bolğa xir bayat aytığı "for you at the last there will "m God's cross-questioning" $273; 0.0. 5740, 120. D aydin Den. N. fr. 1 a:y; properly “moonlight”, but sometimes, more vaguely, “brilliance, brilliant”. S.i.a.m.l.g. Xak. xr aydın faxtu”l-qamar *moonlight' Kaş. İ ry: xiv Muh. al-daw' 'briliiance' aydunp Rif. 152 (Mel. 55, 3 ya:ruk); lay! mugmar "a moonlight night” a:ydin/aydin Mel. 8o, o, aydın tü:nle: Rif. 18s: Çağ. xv ff. aydın (spelt) mahtdb 'moonlight' (quotn.); the origin and etymology of it is aytün nıdl-f sab "the night moon” which was corrupted to aydın San. 57r. 14: Xwar. xiv aydın “moonlight” Quib 6: Kip. xit dat'u'l-gamar aydın Hou. 5, 3: al-nür “light” (opposite to 'darkness' kara:ğu:) aydı:n do. 26, 17: xiv aydın al-nür İd. 26: Osm. xiv ff. aydın “light, brilliance; brilliant'; c.i.a.p. TTS 157; 11 77; HI şi, IV 47. D aytış N.Ac. fr. ayıt-, properly 'enquiry', cf. aytığ. S.i.a.m.l.g., in SW only in xx Anat. SDD 567, usualy meaning 'speech, statement". Xak. xi aytış huwa an. yas'ala'l-raculan hull wáhid minhuma fhàla'l-àxir used of two men asking one another about the state (of their health)” Kaş. 7 113; a.o. do. (aytığ). Dis. V. AYDD ayat- Caus. f. of aya:-, survives only(?) in SE "Tar. ayat- “to order (someone) to spare, or protect (someone)! R I 214. Uy£. vir ff. Bud. (faith is called) sevitmek ayatmak edgüke tegürdeci “that which brings men to the good state of arousing love and respect in others” T'T V 28, 119; sevitmiş ayatmış erürsiz "you have made yourself loved and respected” (by, Dat., all the teachers) Hüen-ts. 1782; (then that king . . . see orun) üküşke ayatmış ağırlatmış “made himself respected by many” Suv. 607, 15-16. D ayıt- Caus. f. of ay-, often spelt aytbefore vowel Suffs.; properly “to make (someone Dat.) speak”, that is “to ask”. For some unknown reason it lost its Caus. meaning, as early as xr in Ofuz, and became svn. w. ay-, which then became obsolete. S.i.a.m.l.g., often as eyit-/eyt-. Türkü vin (gap) arkışı: kelmedi: (sic, not yelmedi:) anı: ayıtayın (sie, not afitayin) dp süledim 'no envoys came (from him). I launched an expedition to demand (an explanation) from him” /7 E 41: vni ff. mapa: ayrtma: tédi: “he said “do not question me"' Toy. IVv. 3-4 (ETY II 180); a.o. do. 4-5: Yen. see O. Kir.: Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-A tep sézik aytsar “if one asks in doubt' (after a speech in oratio recta) MI 19, 71; (the sorcerer in the temple) Mar Amu Mojakka ınça tép ayıt(t)ı 'asked Mar Amu Mojak' (the question follows in oratio  (e d  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 313 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. AYD269  recta) do. 33, 18-19; a.o. do. 36, 13: Bud. uyit- (or ayt-) 'to ask' preceded or followed by a question in crafio recta, the person asked, if mentioned, being in the Dat. occurs 9 times in PP and is common elsewhere: Civ. the phr. ayıtıp bitidim is common at the end of documents in USp., e.g. men Turmiş Mip-temürke ayıtıp bltidim “1, 'Turmis, wrote this down to Mir-temür's dictation” (lit. 'asking . . . (what to say) I, then, wrote") r, 11ız: O. Kir. ix f£, a word usually transcribed yita: is common in these inscriptions; it follows the names or descriptions of people, or the Sec. Pers. Pron., uşdally in the Dat., and is followed directly or indirectly by words like (PU) evükmedim (see 2 bük-) or adriltim. It should, no doubt, be transcribed ayıta:, the meaning is less certain, prob. 'asking after . . . health', 'saying farewell' or asking (permission to depart)', c.g. kuyda: kunçuyım ózde: oğlım ayıta: sizime: ayıta: evükmedim adrıltım “saying farevvell(?) to my vvives in the inner chambers and to my dear(?) sons, saying farevvell to you, my own, Í have not stayed at home, ] have been parted (from you) Mal. 3, 1; occurs in eight inscriptions often more than once, and less often in Türkü Yen. inscriptions: Xak. xı ol mapa: só:z ayıttı: sa'ala minni'l-kalám "he asked me a question' Kaş. I 215 (aytu:r, ayıtma:k), ol kişi: ol telim sö:z ayıtğa:n "that man is constantly asking questions” (sa"al 'anr'l-kalám) III 52: KB ayıttı followed by question in oratio obliqua 507; ayıttı élig tegme törlüğ biliğ “the king enquired about all kinds of knovvledge” 623; taki bir tilekimni aytur bu öz “and 1 myself ask for one thing that I want' 859; 0.0. 979, 1069, 1187 (Öğren-), 4528, 5740: xiri(?) Tef. ayt-/ayut- “to ask” 46: xiv Muh. gála "to say” ayt(t)ı: Mel. 3o, 3 (Rif. 114 see ay-); al-qaul aytmak 37, 1 (-mag); 122: şadaqa “to speak the truth' çı:n ayt(t)t: 28, 2 (111 aydr); man yaqül "who says?” kim aydur 17, t; 94: XV(?) Postscript to Zt. ayıt- “to say” soo, so8: Çağ. xvff. ayt(-men, etc.) eyt- Vel. 40; ayt-fayıt- (both spelt) guftan "to say” Som. sar. 3 (quotns.): Oğuz xı (after Xak.) and the Oğuz say men apa:r sö:z ayittum takallamtu ma"ahu wa qultu lahu kalam “I conversed with him and said to him,, but this is incorrect (laysa bi-giyás) Kaş. 1 215 (aytu:r, ayıtma:k): Xvvar. xı ayd- “to say” Ali 8: xın(?) ayttı kim “he said” follovved by oraffo recta, sometimes with person addressed in Dat., occurs 8 times in Oğ.: xiv ayıt- “to ask” Qutb 6, “to say, recite! MN 81, etc.; Nahc. 16, ro: Kom. xiv “to say, declare, confess! ayt- CCI, CCG; Gr. 32 (quotns.): Kip. şadaqa kertl: ayıtHou. 36, 5; qala ayıt- (and de:-) do. 43, 2: xiv ayıt- gála İd. 27; qüla (VU) ayt- (?, Inf. eytmek) Bul. 71r.: xv qöla ayit- Kav. 9, 4; Tuh. 29b, rə etc.: Osm. xiv ff. ayt-[eyt- “to say, speak”, common to XVII, sporadic thereafter, in xiv both ayıtmak and eyitgil, eyittiği occur TTS I so, İİ 79; IJI 53; IV 59. uya:d- “to be shamed by, or ashamed of (something, or someone, JDat. or AL). Except in TT VIII, where -f- prob. represents -d-, and in the Perf., the final consonant seems to have been consistently -d- until xv. Survives in most NE languages as uyat-, occasionally 1yat-, and in some SC Uzb. dialects as uyat-. Uyğ. vir ff. Man.-A uyadmakın(?) in damaged passage M 7 zş, 8: Bud. Sanskrit alajjetavye lajjante “they are ashamed of things of which they should not be ashamed' uya:tmağu:luk sa:vta: uya:turlar, (the opposite) uya:tğulukta: inçıp uya:tmada:çılar TT VIII E.49-50 (see above), artukrak uyadtı "he was more ashamed than ever” U 7/7 83, rr, öz kilmiş kilinclaripa ertipü uyadsar eymenser “if they are very much ashamed (Hend.) of what they have done” Suv. 141, 4-5; 2.0. of Hend. Hüen-ts. 2051: Xak. x1 ol mendin uyatti: istahya minni "he was shamed by me”, originally uya:dtı: but assimilated Kaş. 7 216 (uya:dur, uya:dma:k); ağız yé:sse: kö:z uya:dur “if the mouth eats, the eye is ashamed' (fsfahyd) l ss, 15: KB yorisa uyadmasa yalpuk kórüp "if he walks abroad and is not ashamed when he sees (other) men” 864: xın(?) Ar. uyadıp “being ashamed' 432 (some MSS. uyatib): Caf. xv ff. uyat-(-1p) utan- Vel. 123. D aytil- Pass. f. of ayıt-, “to be asked'. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SW, meaning “to be said, spoken”, etc. Xak. xi sö:z aytıldı: su'ila 'ani'l-kalüm wa ğayriht "a question was asked about the statement (etc.)' Kaş. 7 270 (aytılur, aytılma:k): xın(?) Tef. aytul- “to be said” (Impersonal) 46: Çağ. xvff. aytılmayın eydilmedin Vel. 40; aytil- Pass. f.; gufta şudan “to be said” San. sav. 6 (quotns.): Kom. XIV “to be said” (by someone Abi) CCG; Gr. 33 (quotns.). D aytın- Refl. f. of ayıt-. S.i.s.m.l, with a miscellaneous collection of meanings. Xak. xi Só:z aytındı: famalla su al”l-kalüm bi-nafsihi, he took it upon himself to ask a question” Kaş. 1 270 (aytınur, aytınma:k). D aytur- Caus. f. of ay-, vvith a different shade of meaning fr. ayıt-. Prob. Hap. leg.; ayttur- (and the like), which s.i.a.m.l.g. in the same meaning is a Caus. f. of aytt- in its later meaning. Xak. xi ol mapa: só:z ayturdi: kaffalani “ala takallumi'l-kalàm ma"ahu "he made me responsible for making the statement with him” Kaş. 7 269 (ayturur, ayturma:k): Kom. xıv “to make (someone) confess (a sin)' aytir- CCG, Gr. 33 (quotn.). D oytur- Caus. f. of o:y-; 'to make, or let (someone Dat.) hollow out (something 4ec.)”. S.i.m.m.lg. Xak. xi ol mapa: ka:ğu:n oyturdı: "he ordered me to hollow out (bi-taqwir) the melon' (etc.) Kaş. 1 269 (oyturur, oyturma:k): Caf. xv ff. oydur- Caus. f.; káwünidan ditto San. 89v. 28. D uytur- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of uy-. Xak. xr ol u:n uyturdi: *he gave orders for compressing  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 314 
     
   
   
     270 (lá şadd) the flour and squeezin it (dagtilu) into a sack' (ctc.) Kaş. 1] 269 (uyturur, uyturma:k). Tris. AYD PUD uyadsilik Hap. leg.; almost certainly mis-spelt; in a section headed fu'alil, which contains OSa:yuk followed by the crossheading tva naw' minhu manqug 'defective (?) variety' K (qaf) and this word; this implies some such form as uya:duk, which as a Pass. Dev. N./A fr. uya:d- would be grammatically appropriate. Xak. xr uyadsilik er ai-raculu'Hadi galabahu'l-hayá “a man. overcome by shame' Kaş. 7 160. Tris. V. AYD D ayatıl- Pass. f. of ayat-; n.o.a.b. Uy£. vun ff. Bud. Sanskrit sefkyto “honoured” n:ya:tılıp TT VTZT D.iz, arcito ditto do. 21. Mon. AYG S ayğ See 1 ayığ. Dis. AYG D aya:ğ N.Ac. fr. aya:-; with a parallel evolution of meaning. Survives in NE Khak. ayağ 'compassion, sympathy'; NC Kir. ayo:, Kzx. ayaw (R I zoo) ditto; NW Kaz., Krım ayavv ditto, and (Krım only) “stinginess” and SW xx Anat. aya 'protection'; ayağ “a title” SDD 132. UyfB. viu ff. Man. TT III 75 (emder-): Bud. Sanskrit satkaram 'profound respect ağir aya:ğığ TT VIII E.5; ayağ Cilteg 'honour and respect! U II 77, 18 etc. (cilteg); ayağka tegimlig (7T VIII A.z9 &amp;:ya:Bka: te:gimllg) “vorthy of respect', a stock epithet for Bodhisattvas, monks, etc. U II 11, 9; 32, 63, etc. (this phr., spelt ayağa tegimlig (Kore, 127. Haltod 28) was borrowed in Mong. and there erroneously connected with ayağa “begginz bowl', 1-vv. fr. 1 ayak): Civ. ayafka tegimlig USp. 15, 8; 84, 3; 88, 5; asığın ayağın eğsüdi “your advantage and honour have diminished” T'T 7 58-9; o.o. do. i14 (ornan-), TT VII 34, 10311 (2 açığ): Xak. xı aya:ğ al-laqab “a title of honour” Kaş. III 172 (verse, see akt:lrk); a.o. I 271, 11 (aya:-): KB wazirlik anar bérdi tamğa ayağ "he gave him the post of vezir, a scal and a title of honour” 1036; a.o. 1766 (üstem): xin(?) Tef. at ayağ “a title of honour' (for a Süra of the Koran); aya 'protection (?) 44: xiv. Muh. al-laqab aya: Rif. 145 (Mel. şo, 4 mis-spelt ağa:). 'a vessel' particularly a drinking vessel, for individual use; “cup, goblet, bowl. S.i.a.m.l.g. See Doerfer 11 özg. Türkü viri ff. TR B. 42. (idis): Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. . ayak "ten cups” USp. ss, 26; n.o. do. qo, (1 ür-); bir batir ayak bor bir batir ayak suv "one cup (Hend.) of wine and one of water' /7. ] 16-17 (batir 1.-vv, fr. Sogdian ptr); a.0. H Ii 20, 8o-1: Xak. xı ayak al-qaş"a "a (wooden) bövl”: the Oğuz do not know the word and call “a bövl” çanak Kaş. 1 ayak DIS. V. AYDI 84: and 17 eol: xin(?) T«f. ayak 'cup! 45: xiv. Afuh, al-qadali “cup” aya:k Mel. 7, o, Rif. 79 (confused with 2 ayək), al-gag'a aya:k 69, 6 (aya); 170 (yaya:k); al-manqal “portable brazier” aya:k 169 (only): Çağ. xv ff. ayag/ayak qadah Vel. 39; hüsa ("cup") a qadah San. 57r. 2 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv ayak (and, by false analogy, adak) “cup, goblet” Quib 6: Kip. xv sukurca 'bowl' ayak Tuh. 19b. 6; şabifar (meaning unknown, ?corrupt) ayak do. 20b. 11: Osm. xiv to xvi aya:ğ/fayak 'bowl, cup”, common TTS 7 54; II 70; İH 48. S2ayak See adak. D 1 “ayığ Dev. N. fr. ay-; "word, speech, command'. N.o.a.b., always(?) abbreviated to ayğ. Türkü virt ff. Man. bu savığ ayğlgapl “these words! (Hend.) TT II 6, 25; a.o. do. 3 (isle:-); senin ayğan ançağ ol “your commands are like that” M 717 23, 6-7 (i): Uyğ. viti ff. Man.-A Mar Név Mani Mağıstak ayğın “by the command of Mar Növ Mani Mağistak £M 1 12, 20. S 2 ayığ Sce 1 adığ. S 3 ayığ See 2 adığ. S 4 ayığ Sce ahığ. D ayık Dev. N. fr. ay-, hardly distinguishable fr. 1 ayığ. N.o.a.b. Uyg. vri ff. Civ. (it gives headaches and eye-aches) teprike yağış ayi[k?] bérmeyükke 'to the man who does not give libations and vows(?) to God' TT VII 25, 1 (restore thus?): Xak. xi ayık al-'ida 'a promise'; hence one says anın mapa: ayıkı: ba:r “1 have a promise from him” Kaş. I 84: ayık ayıp kaymayiz aşduqi "idatak “keep your promisc to me" 77 45, 26. (D) ayu:k Sec 5 kó:k, oyuk mirage, landmark', and the like; specifically Oğuz and with some common meanings with öyük, q.v., also specifically Oğuz. Clearly not identical with oyuk, Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. o:y-, 'hollowed out, a hole, cavity' first noted in Kip. xv Tu. 34b. 8; 48b. 8 and s.i.a.m.l.g.; both it and óyük may be Oğuz corruptions of some foreign word (cf. ören). “Survives only(?) in SW Osm. oyuk 'searecrow'; xx Anat. oyuk/hoyuk “scarecrow; landmark, cairn”, and the like, S DD 749, 1098 (hóyük, 756, also has these meanings, inter alia); al-xayál means both “mirage” and 'scarecrow'. Cf, küsgük. Oğuz xı oyuk al-xaydl wa'l-iram 'mirage, landmark” Kaş. 1 85 (verse, oyuk translated iram ta xayál fi l-mafáza “in the desert"); o.o. I 384, 6 (same verse, alığ), kü:çin oyuk tutma:s /à yumkin bi "I-quwewa mm axdi' I-xayáli'llati yungab fi'l-fawá'iz (mis-spelt famaliz) "you cannot catch the mirage which rises in the deserts by force" I 81, 21: Çağ. xv ff. oyuk sang-i nişan hi dar sar-i rahhd biráyi "alümat bi-gudarand “a stone marker which they put up at the beginning of (side) roads to indicate them” Sur. 9zv. 28: 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 315 
     
   
   
     DIS. Kip. xiv. oyuk al-ricàm | wa hiya”l-ahcar ba"duhd "ala ba'd 'alámata(n) h"Hşay” “a heap of stones onc on top of another to mark something” İd. 26: Osm. xıvff. oyuk cii,a.p., usually in Pe. and Ar. dicts. translating words meaning 'scarecrow, statue, heap of stones' TTS I $54; 11 739; İH 551; IV 616. S uyku See udik. S ayğır See adğır. Dis. V. AYĞS oyğat- Sec odğur-. S oyğan- See odun-. " aykır- “to shout” and the like. Survives in several NE, NC, and SW languages. Türkü viii ff. Man. (a large gathering of the common people did obeisance to the king) yeme aykırdılar "and applauded him” T7 1H ro, 82. S oyğur- Sce odğur-. Tris. AYG D ayakçı: N.Ag. fr. 1 ayak: (1) “one who makes cups, bowls, etc.'; (2) “a cup-bearer'. Survives in SE Türki, Shası 30, and NC Kir., Kzx. See Doerfer 11 63o. Xak. xı aya:kçı: (sic) al-qaşşd" "a potter” Kaş. III 296, 23 (sirla:-); n.m.e.: xiv Rbj. ayaKçı 'cupbearer” R I 208 (quotn.), 605 (aşçı:): Mun. al-ğadayiri “a maker of bowls! aya:ğçı: Mel. 58, 5; aya:kçı: Rif. 157: Çağ. xv ff. ayakçı 'cup-bearer' Vel. 39 (quotn.); ayakçı/ayağçı a word for 'cup-bearer' San. s7r. $ (same quotn.). D ayğu:çı: Dev. N.Ag. fr. ay-; lit. “one who speaks, or issues commands', but in practice the title of an office, Türkü vri in the phr. "their xagan seems to be brave, and their ayğuçı: wise', T ro, 21, 29, the title, which refers to Tofiukuk, is clearly a high one: Uyğ. x Bud. in the list of officials in the first Pfah! iş ayğuçı (PU) Avluç Tarxan, ış, zr, has a rather humbler position near the carpenter, and here seems to mean merely 'foreman of works'. D ayağlığ P.N./A. fr. aya:ğ, originally “enğoying respect”. Survives vv. phonetic changes in NE Khak.; NC Kir., Kzx., and NW Kaz., Krım, usually meaning either “compassionate' or 'pitiable, deserving compassion'. Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-AM 127,2 (1 :a:tlığ): Man. ayağlığ atlığ kanım “my respected and famous father' TT III] 2: Bud. ayağlığ bolmak dyan “the meditation (l.-w.) about becoming respected” T'7 V ro, 98; o.o. TT VII 4o, 77 (2 ap); Suv. 446, 17-19: Civ. kisidin ayağlığ 'respected by (all) men” TT VII 17, 22. D ayaklığ Hap. leg.(?); P.N./A. fr. 1 ayak. Xak. xı ayaklığ tevsi: xítàn dü qaş"a "a tray for carrying bowls' (illustration of the meaning of -118) Kaş. İTİ şo, 26; n.m.e. EYG D ayıklığ P.N./A, fr. ayık, n.o.a.b., apparently *one who carries out a promise”, Xak. xi KB ayıklığ turur bu ölüm belgülüg “death manifestly keeps its promises' (a famous man does not die before his time comes) 2286. D ayukluk See 5 kö:k. ?ED uyuğluğ Hap. leg.; by its meaning a P.N./A. fr. u:ğ, occurs in a grammatical section as an example immediately | after ayaklığ, q.v., and presumably a scribal error for u:ğluğ. Xak. xı uyuğluğ ev bayt dü taqat "a domed tent” (i.e. one with curved wooden struts) Kaş. III 5o, 27; n.m.e. ?ED uyuklug Hap. leg.; this word has been read in USp. 79, a list of articles mainly töşek 'mattresscs'; the phr. below comes after these entries and before a list of örtğün 'coverlets', and the transcription is based on the assumption that it is a P.N./A. fr. uyuk 'felt boot, woollen stocking' which exists in some NC and NW languages; see uyma:. It is unlikely to be connected with this word; it might perhaps be oyukluğ 'with a pattern of depressions, or incisions', or merely mistranscribed. Uyğ. vin ff. Civ. bir tatarnın uyukluğ kidiz “one Tatars” . . . felt' US. 79; 11-12. S aykırı See arkuru:. 271 D ayağsız Priv. N./A. fr. aya:ğ, originally 'not enjoying respect'. Survives in much the same languages as ayağlığ with the opposite meaning to that word. Uyğ. vri ff. Bud. U 11 77, 19 and 86, 56 (uçuz), TT VII 4o, 77 (2 ap). Tris. V. AYĞD ayığla:- Den. V. fr. 4 ayığ (aff); “to dishonour'; used in antithesis to agirla:-. Pec. to Uyğ. Uyf. vir ff. Bud, köni kertü nom ayığladım tandım erser “if 1 have dishonoured and denied the rightful true doctrine' Suv. 134, 11-12; a.o. do. 137, 1. Dis. EYG S üyik Sce üdik. VU óyük Preliminary note. There seem to be two different tvords of this form, the first a VU Xah. word connected swith öyük-, the second the Oğuz word öyük wich is still current. VU 1 óyük 'quicksand': homophonous w. öyük-. N.o.a.b., but see 2 Oyük, Xak. xi öyük yé:r al-'ániq mina”l-raml “a quicksand”, that is (sand) in which footprints disappear and their traces are effaced by water, etc. Kaş. I 85: KB öyük cum osuğluğ bolur bilğeler, çıkar suv kayuda adak tepseler 'wise men corne to be like quicksands or peat, wherever they put their feet water emerges' 974; Xwar. xiv öyük “the sediment in wine" Quib 122, 202 (üyük). 2 óyük 'an artificial mound, cairn' and the like. An Oğuz word with an ill-defined  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 316 
     
   
   
     272 DIS connection with oyuk, q.v. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. öyük “an artificial mound, a scarecrow' (acc. to Sami 231 identical with oyuk) and xx Anat. öyek, öyük, üyük, höyük, hüyük with these and other meanings some of which seem to belong to 1 öyük SDD 756, 766, 1123-4, 1441. Oğuz xi öyük küll murtafi! mina'l-ard şibha”l-tall "any piece of raised ground like an artificial mound' Kaş, I 85: 'Tkm. xii al-tall öyük (Kip. tepe:) Hou. 6, 16: xiv (not specifically "l'km.) öyük a/-tallu 1-kabir "a large artificial mound”, also called ba:ş (?Kıp.) İd. 27; ditto öyük Bul. 3, 9: Osm. xv ff. öyük 'artificial mound” in several texts, esp. Pe. and Ar. dicts. translating words with that meaning and once (xvi) 'scarecrow!. TTS 1 753; 11 gör, IV 812 (everywhere iyük). S eyği/eyğü See edgü:. Dis. V. EYGVU öyük- Hap. leg.; cf. 1 öyük. Xak. xı anın ada:kı: kumda: öyükti: “his foot sank (sdxat) in the quicksand' (al-'áriq); and one says anın ada:kr öyüktu: /afamatı”l-hicüra riclahu wa hafiya "the stones bruised his feet and he was footsore' Kaş, I 268 (Oyüke:r, öyükme:k). S öykün- See ótgün-. Tris. EYG eye:ğü: properly “rib” as an anatomical term; also used metaph. for 'the rib of a tent', etc. Survives in NE Tuv. egi and SW Osm. eyegi/eyeyi (prob. both now obsolete), and in various shortened forms eyi in Osm., eğe (i.e. eye) in Rep. Turkish and in xx Anat. eya/ eyelóyek SDD so9, s63, 1123. Otherwise entirely displaced by the Mong. l.-w. kaburğa or the like. Uyğ. vit ff. Civ. (in a list of parts of the body) iki eyegüde “in the two (sets of) ribs” H II əz, 29: Xak. xı eye:gü: a/-dil" “a rib”, and adlà'u'I-xibà “the ribs of a tent” are called eye:ğü: and ard fi wasati'l-cibàl ka'annahu şa"üd "a piece of rising ground in the middle of the mountains' is called eye:gü: yer Kaş. I 137; eye:gü: “the rib of an animal” (etc.) HII 174; a.o. III 425, 7 (2 art-): xın(?) Tef. eyeğü “rib”: xiv Röğ. ditto R I 721 (quotn.): Çağ. xv ff. eyegü (spelt) ustuxtwàan-i pahlü “side bone” (i.e. rib), also spelt üyegü San. s7r. 6; reverse entry 92v. 2: Xwar. xiv eyegü Nahc. 279, ız: Kip. xit ai-dil' eye: Hou. zı, 2: xiv eyegü: al-dil" (one MS. adds and kaburka also means ai-dil'); and it is said of a man who heeds neither reproof nor blame eyegü:si: berk tür "his ribs are firm" İd. əy: xv dil eyeğ (in margin eyegü) Tuz. 23a. 7: Osm. xiv ff. eyegü is fairly common till xvt and ege occurs once in xvit T T'S 1287; II 411; IV 318. Dis. AYL (D) ayla: “thus, like that", "The original form must have been ayla:, see aylok, but it survives only as SW Az. ele; Osm. öyle, Tkm. . EYG eyle; the date of the vowel change is undiscoverable. In the medieval period an alternative form alay appcared in NW and still survives, with minor alterations in NE Bar. A 7 353; NC Kir. (Kzx. olay) and some NW languages (others have Solay from *os alay). "This latter form looks like a crasis of Fanlayu:, Ger. of a Den. V. fr. an.... If so, ayla: is perhaps a inetathesis of this word, since the current theory that it is a crasis of an... and ile (birle:) is open to the objections that it is semantically inappropriate and that there is no evidence that birle: had become ile anywhere before xit. Oğuz xr ayla: kagaliha 'thus'; one says ayla: kilğil “do thus' (Rad3) Kaş. 11135 0.0. 1166, ş (2 us-), 771 186, 3 (buyur-): xın(?) "ef, ayla "thus” 72 (eyle): Çağ. xv ff. VU ayla Hanıçunün “thus, in that way' San, 57v. 2 (quotn.): Xwar. xin VU ayla 'thus' “Ali 16: xiv alay “thus” Quib 7: Kom. xiv 'thus' alay (common)/alay (twice) CCI, CCG ; Gr. 34 (quotns.): Kip. xiv. &amp;amá 'just as” ayla: kim Bul. 15, 13: xv (Aákadàá “like this" bulay dir) hàákadáka “like that” alay dir Tuh. 3yb. 12-13; 1da(n) "with -(n)' and hina'idi(n) "f so, in that event' alaysa do. 60a. 10, a.o.o.: Osm. xivff. VU ayla is common to xvi and sporadic later T'T.S I 288; Il 412; İİ 275; İV 320: xv VU öyle occurs in documents, see A. N. Kurat, Altin Ordu, Kirim ve. Türkistan Hanlarına ait Yarlık ve Bitikler, Istanbul, 1940: xvii öyle, in Rmi, ham(wunàn San. 92v. 19. S 1 öyle See ödleg. S 2 öyle See ayla:. D aylığ DP.N./A. fr. 1 a:y; originally with preceding numeral (so many) 'months old'; later, of a woman, 'pregnant'. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SW in both meanings. Türkü virt ff. eki: aylığ kişi: oğlun "a two-months-old child” 7r£B 2: (Xak.) xiv Muh, al-hubla “pregnant” aylu: Mel. 53, 1 (only); abilatı”l-mara a:ylu: bo:l- Mel. 25, 2 (Rif. 107 yükle:-): Kom. xiv “pregnant” aylı CCG; Gr. 31 (quotn.): Kip. xır al-fiámil “pregnant” aylu: (and yüklü:) Hor. 25, 2. VUC aylok Hap. leg.; crasis of ayla: and 2 ok. Oğuz xı aylok aylok kadàá hadd 'thus, thus” Kaş. I 113. Dis. V. AYLD 1 ayıl- Hap. leg. ?; Pass. f. of ay-. Xak. xı apar só:z ayıldı: “a word was said (q//a) to him" Kaş. 1 268 (ayılur, ayılmn:k). S 2 ayıl- See adil-. (D) uyal- “to be shamed (by something 45/)): to be put to shame'; presumably a crasis of *uyadil-, S.ia.m.lg. except SW, where it is replaced by utan- (uvtan-). Xak. xi ol mendin uyaldı: istahyd minni fi amr, woa'nzacara 'ani'l-iqdàm 'alayhi "he was shamed by me about a (proposed) action and was dissuaded from venturing upon it” Kaş, 7 269 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 317 
     
   
   
       DIS. V. AYM(uyalu:r, uyalma:k): Çağ. xv ff. uyal(-fan, etc.) utan-. Vel, 121 ff. (quotn.); uyal(spelt) xacal şudan “to be ashamed” Sar. gor, 24 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv uyal- “to feel ashamed, to he shamed (by someone Abl.) Qutb 196; MN 74, etc.; Nahe. 59, ro, 183, 7; 351, 17: Kom. xiv uyal- 'to be ashamed” cı, CCG; Gr. 264 (quotns.): Kip. xiv uyal- istahyà; Tkm. utan- /d. 27: xv fstahyd u:yal-/utan- Kav. 76, 9; Tuh. 6a. ro: Osm. xiv and xv uyal- ditto in two texts TTS İl 940. D oyul- Pass. f. of o:y-; “to be hollowed out, pierced”, etc, S.i.a.m.l.g” Uyğ. vit ff. Bud. (a sick man says) turuk bolmisimka iki yanım yerke (doubtful, ? read birke) kirip oyulup telingell turur “because 1 have become lean, my two sides have come together (?) and are hollowed out and pierced' U IJI 37, 2-3: Xak. xi yér oyuldi: harati'l-ard tva xasafat 'the earth crumbled and sank'; and one says kötü: oyuldi: intagaba'l-sath. 'the roof was penetrated' by a downfall of rain Kaş. I 268 (oyulu:r, oyulma:k): Çağ. xv ff. oyul- (spelt) kawida sudan “to be hollowed out” San. 89v. 22 (quotn.): Kom. xiv oyul- (of the ground) 'to sink' CCG; Gr. 175 (quotn.). D uyul- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of uy-. Xak. xt uyuldi: ne:p “the thing was squeezed' (dugita), as for example flour into a sack Kaş. 7 269 (uyulu:r, uyulma:k). S eyle:- See edle:-. Tris. V. AYLD aya:la:- Den. V. fr. 1 aya:, s.i.a.m.l.g. except SC with a miscellaneous set of meanings “to clap, to slap, to fondle, to grasp”, etc. Xak. xi krz aya:la:dı: saffagati'l-mar'a. bi yadayhá “(he girl clapped her hands'; lufa faşiha “a correct word' (?, import obscure) Kaş. III 328 (aya:la:r, aya:la:ma:k). D uya:la:- Den. V. fr. 1 uya:, “to nest, to build a nest'. S.i.a.m.l.g., in SE "Türki uvuli- BS 793[uwala- Jarring 325; SW Osm. yuvala-; elsewhere uyala-. Xak. xr kuş uyazla:dı: 'agga'l-tá'ir rea"itaxada qoahar "the bird nested and made a nest! Kaş. III 328 (uya:la:r, uya:la:ma:k): Kip. xiv yuvala- ca'ala lahu :wakar “to build a nest! Id. gg: Osm. xvi ditto TT'S IV 908. Dis. AYM D ayım 1 a:y with ist Pers. Poss. Suff.; lit. “my: moon”, but often used, like teprim, as a Noun for 'beautiful, or distinguished, woman'; the transitional stage is seen in Kaş. where the Poss. Suff. still had its ordinary meaning but a:y is already used metaphorically. Survives in SE Türki BŞ ro, NC Kir. and some SC dialects. Xak. xr satti menir a:yımı: bá'a xadimi bi-gayr idni *he sold mv servant without my permission' Kaş. II 195, 6; n.m.e.: Çağ. xv ff, ayım   273 xwátün wa bünü-yi haram “a lady of high birth, ot of the harem” San. 57v. 11. D oyma: Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. o:y- , s.i.a.m lg. usually meaning 'engraved or decorated work'. 'This seems to be the word used in a cryptic para, in İrkB about gambling. As in many 'Turkish games, the play consisted in putting pebbles or counters in 'holes' (1 o:y in this para.) and oyma: er, which obviously means 'a gambler”, might mean literally “a man who makes holes for the game”. Türkü vir ff. IrkB 29 (ur-). D uyma: Pass. Conc. N. fr. uy-; nooa.b.; the ref. to 'felt boots' clearly links this word with the modern NC word uyuk 'felt boot, woollen stockiny'', and possibly with uyukluğ, q.v., and so fixes the vowel of this verb as u-. Xak. xi uyma: al-libdu ('I-turkmáni) "Hadi yutaxxad minhu'l-xuff “the (Türkmen) felt out of which boots are made” Kaş. JI 100, 22 (basış-), 207, 3 (talkış-), n.m.e.: Çağ. xv ff. uyma (spelt) xiR zoa mugk “a leather, or skin, bag”, also called tulum, in Arabic ziqq San. 92v. 23 (no doubt belongs here in the sense of something filled under pressure, a meaning also inherent in tulum). D *eymenc See eymencsiz, Dis. V. AYMeymen- 'to be timid, shy (of something or someone, Dat. or Abl.) ; the occasional spellings ay- in Uyg. were merely a device for ensuring that the word was not read as rmen-. S.i.m.m.l. Cf. uvtan-, uya:d-, uyal-. Uyğ. viti ff. Bud. Sanskrit parisaccháradyabhayam 'fear of being put to shame before the community' kuvra:$ka: eyme:nma:kliğ (sic) korkinc TT VIII A.11; birók amtı bu emğek emgenfgeli korksar eymensersen “if you now fear and are timid about suffering this pain” U III 31, 12-13 (ii); a.o. Suv. 141, 5 (uya:d-): Xak. xi ol mendin bu: rsta: eymendi: :stahya minni wa cabuna 'ani'l-igdám fi hàdà'l-amr "he was shamed by me and hesitated to proceed with this action” Kaş. 1 270 (eymenür, eymenme:k); korkup apar eymenü: oynamağil “be afraid of (God) and out of shyness and fear of Him (ğayd”a(n) vea xawfa(n) minhu) refrain from playing about" III 377, 14: KB ózüm 'udrin aysa yeme eymenü 'if I shyly make my excuses' 191; apar eymenürmen '] am rather afraid of it” 777; 0.0. 204, S069, 5869; Çağ. xv ff. eymen utan hicab eyle “be ashamed and embarrassed” Vel. 35 (quotn.); inmen- (so spelt, in error) rhtiráz hardan wa şarm hardan "to be cautious and shy” Sam. 113v. 18 (quotns.): Xwar. xii eymen- “to be shy” ' Ali 47; xiv ditto Quib 19 (eymenmeklik 'modesty', misspelt 58); MN 252; korka eymenü Nahc. 76, 4: r xIV “to be shy” emen- Hmenə : Osm. xiv to xvi eymen- “to be difident, ns (of people A45/.)' in several texts TTSI 289; II 413; HT 277.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 318 
     
   
   
      TRIS. 274 Tris. AYM D eymençsiz Priv. N./A. fr. veymenç, N./A.S. fr. eymen-. N.o.a.b. Uy£. vti ff. Bud. Sanskrit durmadaguna "shameless" eymençsiz TT VIII A.48, (1 have told you of the desires in my mind) eymençsiz kópülin 'without a thought of shyness" U //7 82, zo. Dis. AYN D ayın See ayınla:-. ?F éyin (sic, as in TT VIII, not iyin as spelt hitherto) pec. to Uyg. (but see 1 yir). Its meanings are discussed at length in m. G. ATG, para. 296; although sometimes used as an Adv. in such phr. as eyin keziğçe, it is normally a Postposn. following a noun in the unsuffixed or Dat. case and meaning 'because of, according to, in accordance with', and the like, 1: is therefore practically syn. vv. the Khotanese Saka Postposn. ifii, see S. Konow, Primer of Khotanese Saha, para. 95, and is prob. a l-w. fr. that word. “VPhis is more satisfactory than v. G.'s suggestion, loc. cit., that it and a supposed word “iye, which is prob. merely a misreading of éy(i)n, are derived fr. a hypothetical verb *iy-. Uyğ. viti ff. Man. az bilig eyin . . . ayığ kilinc eyin "because of lust . . . because of vvickednes! TT İl 16, 26-7; a.o. do. 35: Bud. Sanskrit ye efdn anuyásyanti “those who will follow these” kimle:r mupa: éyén (sic) ba:rsa:la:r ş te:pri bu:rxa:n eyen ba:rda:çıla:rığ ukitur “(this signifies those who walk according to (the precepts of) the divine Buddha)” TT VIII ^4.16-17; anupürvam parijità "those who have adapted themselves to the (proper) order” éyén ke:ziğçe tüsütlenilmig do. B.rr, a.o. do. F.14 (ulal-); kópül éyin tapinca küsüsleri terk kanar *his wishes are quickly fulfilled in accordance with his ideas" U 7 27, 8; köpül éyin U 7/1 43, 10; İV ız, 114 etc., tap éyin Suv. 245, zz, eyin keziğçe “one after another, in succession! U 7/7 22, 8; III 35, 16; miscellaneous o.o, U JI 49, 23; İH 79, 4 (ii) (evril-); Suv. ror, 18; 133, 16; 349, 10; 596, 22. ?D oyun 'game, play, merriment' and the like; considering the importance of holes in "Turkish games (see oyma:) the possibility that this is a Dev. N. fr. o:y- cannot be completely excluded. S.ia.m.lg. Türkü virt ff. Man. üküş tórlüg ten oyunun “vith many kinds (Hend.) of amusements” T'T' I1 8, 58; a.o. do. 66 (öğrünç): Uyğ. vı ff. Man.-A (they curse and swear at one another, and this cursing and swearing, like idiots) sógüsce oyunça sakanur “they think of as abuse and amusement” M 7 ro, 19: Bud. TT X 144-5 (1 1r): Cie. on kat kaş oyun yanpkusi eşidilür "the echo of the ten-fold Raş game is heard' TT I 94-5: Xak. xr oyun afl-la'ib “game, sport” Kaş, 7 85; ol oyu:nda: kaldı: turika fi'l-rihün "he was left behind in the race? Il 25, 4: KB oyunka katilmasa élgin tilin 'if he does not take part in sport with hand and tongue' 709; 8.0. 2093 (oyun 'gambling', AYM as an evil): xın(?) 'l'ef.. oym/oyun “yame, amusement! 234-5: xiv Aluh, al-la'b. wa'l-lahto “game, pastime” oyu:n Mel. 63, 12; Rif. 162: Çağ. xvf. oyn (spelt) bözi sta hazl “game, playfulness', also. pronounced. oyun San. 92v. 23; reverse entry do. 28 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv oyun “game”, etc, Qutb 116: Kom. Xiv “game” oyn CC/, Gr.: Kip. xiv oyun al-[a'b İd. 26. D ayınç N.Ac. fr. 1 ayın-, n.o.a.b. in the phr. korkinc ayinc, Uyğ. viii fE Bud. (that man) korkinc ayınç bulmaz (or bolmaz?) “has no fear (Hend.)' (of becoming wicked) U II 39, 9374; 0.0. U IH 57, 1 (i), Tis. 18a. 2. D iyinç N.Ac. fr. 1yin-; n.o.a.b. in the phr. iyınç basine 'oppression, persecution', and the like. Türkü vırı ff. Man.-A (we do only what God commands but) yüzümüz utruluğ iyine. basirç alp e[mgekler?] erür 'persecution (Hend.) and grievous sufferings(?) confront us” TT 1I 6, 6, a.o. do. 15 (ada:): Uyğ. vurtf. Man. (he has suffered many kinds of tying basınç M 11I 37, 14 (1). D oyna:k Conc. N. fr. oyna:-; lit. "a plaything” with various special applications, esp. “a flighty woman'. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SE(?). Xak. xi oyna:k işle:r a/-mar”atı”l-tula"atu'l-xuba'a "a woman who peeps out and hides again” Kaş. J 120: Caf. xv ff. oynak “a place (zamini) that a gazelle digs out (káswida) with his feet and makes his sleeping place” San. 92v. 26 (the translation implies a false etymology fr. o:y-). D oyna:s Dev. N. fr. oyna:-; etyrnologically and semantically very close to oyna:k but with a slight connotation of reciprocity, usually “one who engages in an illicit love affair'. S.i.aam.l.g. See. Docrfer II 671. Xak. xı oyna:ş ai-mar'atu'llati hü man yarhaquhá hardma(n) "a woman who has a secret lover" Kaş. I 120: xiv Mu. al-mafşüq “a loved one” oyna:ş Mel. 49, 15; eşi:k (?corruption of "aşiq), o:yna:ş in margin Rif. 144: Çağ. xv fI. oynaş ma'stig-i zan San. 92v. 24: Kom. XIV 'concubine, harlot” oynaş CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv oyna:ş al-maşüqa ld. 27; Bul. 9, 5: xv ma'sug oynaş Tuh. 32b. ro: Osm. xiv ff. oynaş “illicit lover, concubine” c.i.a.p., esp. in Ar. and Pe. dicts. TTS 7 $54; 11 739; III 551; IV 616. Dis. V. AYND *ayan- See ayancar. ? 1 ayin- used only in association with korkand no doubt more or less syn. w. it. One of the words for “to fear! in Mong. is ayz- (otv. 2, Haltod 1) but the xiii form is ayu- (Haenisch II) and the resemblance is prob. fortuitous. N.o.a.b. Türkü vur ff. korkma: edgü:ti: ötü:n, ayrnma: edgü:ti: yalvar “fear not, pray vvell” (twice in different words) IrkB 19: ə (gap) korkmaz ayınmaz M III 10, iii).  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 319 
     
   
   
     DIS. S 2anyin- Scc 1 adın-. D iyin- Rell, f. of 1y-; survives only(?) in NC Kir. 1yin- “to strive, strain onesclf'. Uyğ. vini ff. Bud. iymur basinur “they suffer oppression T'T VI ro (mistranscribed iyinür and with a false etymology in the note thereon): Xak. xı er iyindi: achada'l-racul. tabi'atahu fi ixrac” l-baráz “the man exhausted himself defecating” Kaş. I 269 (iyınur, 1yinma:k). S oyan- See odun-. D oyna:- Den. V. fr. oyun; 'to play' and the like; sometimes Intrans., sopaetimes “to play (a game, musical instrument, etc., /4cc.)' and sometimes “to play with (someone Aec. or Dat.) , there is sometimes a connotation of amorous dalliance. Uyf. viii ff. Bud, U 1H 26, 6 (iHnçü:le:-): Xak. xr eight occurrences but n.m.e.; sometimes translated /a'iba, e.g. ol menin birle: oyna:dı: /a'iba mai "he played with me” /7 226, 12; and sometimes la"aba, e.g. içtin anar oynayu: fima lá'abtuhu düxila”1-dür *when I dallied with him in the house” ] 225, 28; oynap meni: fa-lá'abani “and he dallted with me" 7 226, 2: KB elik külmiz oynar çeçekler üze “the roebuck and his doe play among the flowers! 79: xııı(?) Tef. oyna- "to play, amuse oneself” 234: xiv la"iba o:yna:- Mel. 31, 1; Rif. 115; mazaha “to joke' ditto 31, 5; 115: Çağ. xv ff. oynabüz hardan 'to play” San. gir. 3 (quotns.): Xwar. xırı(?) ditto Og. rz: xiv ditto. Qutb 115; MN 125; Nahc. 183, ir: Kom. xiv “to play” oyna- CCI; Gr.: Kip xui /a"iba oyna:Hou. 34, 14: Xiv ditto İd. 26: Osm. xiv ff. oyna- “to lose (something) gambling” in several texts TT'S III ssr, IV 616. D oynat- Caus. f. of oyna:-; 'to make, or let (someone) play'. S.i.a.m.l.g. with various idiomatic meanings. Xak. xı ol anı: oynattı: al'abahu Kaş. I 271 (oynatur, oynatma:k): Çağ. xv ff. oynat- bàzi farmüdan San. 91r. 21 (quotá.): Xwar. xiv oynat- “to allow to play” Qutb 116. (Tris. AYN D ayançan N.A. of Habitual Action fr. ayan- the Refl. f. of aya:- which is not recorded before the medieval period, Kom. xiv CCG; Gr.; "reverent”, Uy£. viri ff. Man. ayancap kópülin yüküngü 'worshipping with a reverent mind” T'T 7/1 2: Bud. ayançan kópülin I7üen-ts. 1806. D éyinki N./A.S fr. éyin; n.o.a.b. Uy£. viit ff. Bud, (the soft clouds gleam in even ranks in due season (ödinçe)) üzgen yağmur tökülür öd éyInki koluda “the dashing rain teems down at the moment which accords with the season' Suv. 566, 3-4. Tris. V. AYND ayipla:- Hap. leg.(?); Den. V. fr. Yayın, Dev. N. fr. ay-. "Fhe N.Ag. fr. this Noun, ayınçı “slanderer” is noted in Kom. xiv CCG; . Gr., and a Dev. N. fr. this verb ayındo: AYR 275 (ayınla:ğ) 'slander, abusc', survives in NC Kir, Xak. x1 KB. ayıplamasunlar seni xalq ara, ati) artamasun munt ked kór-e “et them not slander you among the people, let not your reputation deteriorate, look well to this' 4463. Dis. AYR S eyer See eder. PUD uyar this word has been read in two O, Kir. ix ff. and one Türkü vir ff. Yen. inscription, Mal. ro, 17, and 28; for the text of the last sce E inilgü:, 'T'his last passage and Mal. io, 2 yüz er kadaşım uyarın üçün stand together , in both uyar could be an Aor. of u:- used as a Noun to mean 'ability'; *because of the ability of my hundred kinsmen” and, in 28, 4, “because of the ability of my elder and younger brothers", but in that case the word might well be uyur, q.v. This explanation does not suit Mal. 17 where the word has been read three times uyar kadinim üçün r7, 2; uyar begimke: ...uyar kadaşımka: 17, 3; this text is a very unsatisfactory one, and it would not be too difficult, epigraphically speaking, to correct the word to ö:z, for the sake of my own relations by marriage”, (I have been parted from) “my own eg . . . and my own kinsmen”: Talas ix ff. (?) Talas II 5 (see 62ge:). D uyur presumably Aor. of u:- used as a Noun; 'capable, powerful', and the like, cf. uğa:n and sce uyar. Türkü vırı ff. (the xar mounted the throne and established his court) tórt bulu:ptaki edgü:si: uyu:rı: teri:li:pen mepi:eyü:r bedi:zleyü:r "his good and capable men in all quarters of the world assemble, rejoice and adorn (his court)” IrkB 28: Uyğ. viu ff. Man. the word has been restored in éli&amp; begler [uyu]rlarnir “of the king, begs and powerful men' Wind. 31:: (Xwar. xiv uyur in Qutb 197 identified with this word looks more like a finite verb). üyür some kind of small seed, *millet' or the like. The Brahmi (TT VII) spelling uyuri would normally be read üri or uyuri but is the only convenient way of writing üyüri in this alphabet. In the Uyğ. script the word is sometimes spelt fiyür, sometimes nyur and sometimes (yr, ?for Zy(ü)r. The Xak. form üğür is unexpected and prob. represents the same word in a different dialect. There is disagreement about the meaning of kaz üyüri:; Müller in a note in Pfahl. 14 says that in an unpublished text (T 111 56-4) it corresponds to Chinese su mo “Perilla ocymoides' (Giles 10,320 7,969), and v. G. in a note in TT V7/T 68 that in Suv. 476, 12 it corresponds to Chinese chieh tzü "mustard seed' (Giles 1,525 11,317). N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vitrff. Bud. kaz üyüri Pfahl. 6, 6 (ülüg); Suv. 476, rz (see above): Civ. (gap) kaz üyüri bu otlar “... and mustard seed(?), these drugs” TT VIII M.25: üyür (uyur) tügisi 'husked millet" T'T VII 14, 8; in USp. 120. and 123 there are 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 320 
     
   
   
     276 several mentions of yéti (or some other numeral) küri üyür (yur) "seven (etc.) pecks of millet", bir şık üyür (uyr) “one shih (ten pecks) of millet” do. 31, 9; 0.0. do. 14, 14; az, 2: Xak. xı ügür a/-duxn 'inda'l-turk "millet" among the Turks, the Oğuz do not know the word (in this sense) Kaş, 7 54; a.o. Jl izi, $ (katil-); yügür alternative form (luga fi) of ügür “millet” IJ] 9: KB şakar halvva yegli ya arpa üyür (sic) "the man who eats sugar and svveetmeats, or barley and millet' (goes to sleep full and wakes up empty) 3612: Oğuz xı ya:ğ ügüri: al-simsim 'sesame seed' Kaş. 1 54. S ayru: Sec adrı:, ayrak “ibex” See ivik, S ayrık See adrık. S ayruk See adruk, S eyrim See edrim. ?D ayra:n 'butter milk' or the like; if this could be taken to mean lit. 'something separated', it could be taken as a Dev. N. fr. ayr- (adir-), but it is very odd that such a sound change should have occurred in Xak., and it is prob. merely a false etymology. S.ia.m.l.g. See Doerfer I1 639. Xak. xi ayra:n al-máxid (error; read al-maxid) “buttermilk' Kaş. I 120: xiv Muh. al-maxid ayra:n; al-zubd wa'l-samun “fresh and melted butter' ayra:n ya:ğı: Mel. 66, 9; Rif. 166 (mis-spelt in part): Kip. xii a/-maxid ayra:n Hou. 16, 12: XIV (ayır- farraqa “to separate and al-ra"ib “butter-milk”, from which the butter has been extracted is called ayrak and ayran, al-mufarraq, and in Kip. ayran is al-qàárig 'sour milk' İd. 27 (ayrak is otherwise unknown in Turkish, it is the Mong. word (possibly a "Turkish l-w.) ayirak 'kumis'!, Kore, 8, Haltod 2); al-qüriş ayra:n Bul. 8, 3: xv laban “milk” (inter alia) ... ayran Tuh. 31b. 12. Dis. V. AYRS ayir- See adır-. S uyar- See odğur-. S ayrıl- See adrıl-. S ayrış- See adrış-. Dis. AYS PU aya:s (?aya:z) 'bright, cloudless”, occasionally, because winter days in the steppes are often cloudless, "very cold”. "The final sound is uncertain; in Uyğ. it might be either; in Kaş. it is -s, but as Kaş. also spells the Neg. Suft. -ma:s, not -ma:z this may be a dialectic peculiarity. S.i.a.m.l.g., ayas in NE, ayaz elsewhere. See Doerfer 11 628. Uyğ. vini ff. Bud. ayaz (or ayas?) appears in tvvo P.N.s in the third 'Pfahl', Ay a. 1nal, Arığ a. 1nal Pfahl. 23, 16: Xak. xı aya:s kó:k al-samá'l-müşhiya 'a bright sky”, and al-mamálik, DIS. AYR  'slaves' are called aya:s, yugabbah şafd” wachihi bihi "as a simile for the brightness of their faces' Kaş. I 123: Qnf. xvf. ayaz şab-i sáf-i bi-abr “a clear, cloudless night" ş and also the name of a page (giám) of Sultan Mahmüd Sabuktegin who was his favourite (maşüq) San. s7r. 2: Kom. xiv “clear, cloudless” ayasfayaz CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xv sahw 'clear weather' ayaz Tuh. 21b. 13: Osm. xvi ayaz “clear, cloudless' in two texts T'T'S JH 56; IV 47. Dis. V. AYSS eysil- See eksil-. Dis. V. AYŞD oyuş- Co-op. f. of o:y-. Survives in several NE dialects, Khak., and 'l'uv., usually for "to become concave or distorted' and NC Kzx. Oy1S- (1) “to help (someone) to break through (ice, etc.) ; (2) “to walk or ride on a curve, not straight”. Xak. xı ola:r ikki: ka:ğu:n oyusgdi: “those two competed in holloving out (/7 taqwir) a melon'; also used for helping Kaş. 1 268 (oyusur, oyuşma:k). D 1 uyus- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of uy-. Xak. xı ol apar ka:pka: u:n uyusdi: “he helped him to squeeze ( f şadd) the flour into a sack (etc.)” Kaş. I 268 (uyuşur, uyuşma:k). S 2 uyuş- See udiş-. S 3 uyuş- See uduş-. Dis. AYZ aya:z See aya:s. VU uyaz “some kind or kinds of biting insect, fly, gnat, mosquito', etc, Survives only in S Osm., where Red. (only) lists uyaz, ?oyaz (272) and ivez (312), and xx Anat., where the forms are so various İvez/ivizföven/övez (common)/uyaz/üvez S DD 802, etc. that it is impossible to decide whether the vowels were originally back or front. Oğuz xı uyaz al-hamac mina'l-ba'üd 'gnat, or mosquito' Kaş. 1 84: xiv Muh. al-qarqas "a small flea' u:yaz Mel. 74, 8, Rif. 177: Kap. xri al-nömüs 'gnat uya:z Hou. 10, 12: xiv uyaz al/-barğaş 'gnat İd. 27; Bul. 11, 1 (mis-spelt ayır): xv barğaş 1yaz Tuh. 7b. 8; nàmits uyaz do. 36b. 3: Osm. XIV ff. uyaz 'gnat, mosquito' in several early texts; fr. XVI used in Ar. and Pe. dicts. to translate several words, some meaning larger stinging insects; İvez/üvez sporadically fr. xv TTS I 753; H 961; III 739; IV 811 (all under tiyez). S uyuz See uduz. Mon. AZ a: Preliminary note. There are three different” cords. in the early texts: (1) 8:z “fen”, (2) a:z “ust”, a Middle Iranian l.-10.; (3) Az the name of a tribe, which occurs only in Türhü, and has not always been recognized. The passages in EEMMEE—————sá——sss—À— P! À eL SY RH EE EB KIIIINIILL EE 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 321 
     
   
   
     MON. AZ which it occurs arel E20, ILE r? LE 38; 1N 2, 3; T 23, 24; InI N 5, 8 the name of one of Kül Tegin"s horses is Az yağızı: "the bay horse (taken) from the Az'. 1 a:z 'few, scanty, a little”, S.i.a.m.l.g.; in NE as. Türkü vir az bodunığ ükü:ş kıldım “1 made the scanty people numerous' I S 10, II N 7; similar phr. 7 E 19 (II E 16); 1 E 29, II E 24; II E 14 (I E 17); o.o. of az 'few' I E 40; II E 32; T 39; Ongin 7: vin ff. (at the beginning of this omen) a:z (sic) emfgeki: bar “it has a little pain” IrkB s7: Man. (the king's heart) az opidi 'weakened a little” TT II 6, 30: Uyğ. vfir az er it(t)üim "TI sent a few men” Su. E 11: vin ff. Man.-A M I 35, 4 and 12 (aparu:): Bud. az udin 'sleep a little” PP şs, s, az edremlig toyin '(I) a monk of little virtue' Hüen-ts. 2050: Civ. kóplüp [kóküz]üp bütmeki az “the achievements of your mind are scanty” TT 7 82-3; 0.0. do. 159; H II 18, 64; USp. 22, 49: Xak. xt a:z ne: al-say'u'l-galil 'something scanty' Kaş. I 8o: atan yükl: aş bolsa: acka: az (sic) körünür “if a camel has a load of food, to a hungry man it seems scanty” I 75, 25: KB üküş sözleme söz birer sözle az “do not say many words, say a few one at a time” 172; 0.0. 395-6, 734, 866 (2 kt:z), 4580: xın(?) At, az 'few', etc., is common; Tef. ditto 41: Xiv Muh. al-qalil az Mel. 56, 1; 82, 15; Rif. 153, 188: Çağ. xv ff. az andak 'few, a little' San. 39r. s: X war. xiv ditto Quib 17; MN 49, etc.; azın azın “little by little” Qutb 18: Kom. xiv "a little" az CCG; Gr. 45 (quotn.): Kip. xii al-galil (opposite to “many” köp, ctc.) az Hou. 25, 14: XIV ditto; az boldr: şdra galil bi-ma'nà qalla İd. ız: xv qalil az Kav. 24, ış: Tuh. 84a. 8: Osm. xiv ff. az in several phr.; c.i.a.p. TTS I 63-6; II 89; III 57-8; IV 62-3. F 2 a:z dust), l-w. fr. Middle Persian "z, same meaning. Pec. to Uy£. in which it is fairly common. Uyf. vir ff. Man.-A M I 16, 5; 17, 8 etc., Man. TT II 16, 19 and zs, 111 28; Bud. az kiling corresponding to Sanskrit trgnà. "lust', lit. 'thirs? U II 9, 2 and 7; az biliğ ditto do. 13, 2; 0.0. do. 11, 1$ etc. (almir); 76, 14; 86, 31; TT VI 71 (see note thercon); Suv. 133, 18 etc. S 3 a:z See a:8. iz (?rz) 'footprint, track, trace', lit. and metaph. Izığ in KB 4411 seems to be the Acc. of this word and suggests that it was originally rz. S.i.a.m.l.g.ş in NE is. See Doerfer 11 470. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. (although the all-wise Buddha has deigned to enter Nirvana) kodmış izi “the footprints which he has left” (still remain) Hüen-ts. 92; (I have ventured to follow) 1duklar izi kutluğ yer orunka “the footprints of the saints to the holy place” do. 211-12: Xak. xı İ:z (so read, the MS. has a:z corrected to iz) hull xadşa fi'l-ard sva”l-cild tila(n) "any long scratch in the ground or the skin” Kaş. 7 So: KB atı kaldı iz ə name remains as a trace (of him)” 2 235; 871, 877, 5264: xin(?) At, biliglig izi iziegil 277 'follow the footprints of the wise' 225; Tef. ld (sic) 'track' 122: xiv Muhk. al-itr "ala”l-ard “a track on the ground” İz Mel. 83, ır, Rif. 189: Çağ. xvff. İz nişdn-i qadam wa itr-i bd 'footprint' (Hend.) San. 101r. 5 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv İz “track” Qutb 62; MN 260: Kom. xiv ditto CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv i:z al-itr ld. 12: xv ditto Tu. 4b. 9: Osm. xiv İz 'footprint'; c.i.a.p. in phr. TT'S I 397; II $56; HI 391; IV 447. OZ, uz, ÖZ, Üz Preliminary note. Such words are hard to distinguish in oriental scripts. There is no clear trace of OZ as a Noun. There is certainly one U:z, prob. not more than two Ó:z, and more than one Ü:z. There is some doubt about the pronunciation of 'fat', but the evidence points towards ü:z. u:z “a skilled craftsman'; hence, of a man or his work, 'skilled', and by extension, of inánimate objects, "perfect, in sound condition”. S.i.m.m.Lg., with. much extended meanings in SW. See Doerfer II 593. Türkü vii UZIÉ prob. 'skilled work' occurs in a damaged passage in /7 SW; see also 1 ó:z: vil ff. Yen. Uz Bilge: Çanşı: P.N. Mal. 31, 1: UyÉ. viri ff. Man.-A M I 16, 13-15 (edsiz): Man. kaltı uz kişi uzlanğu ed bulmasar "ust as a craftsman, if he cannot find material fit to be skilfully wrought' M 7 17, 1: Bud. tégin kopuzka ertipü uz erti “the prince was extremely skilful in (playing the) guitar” PP 70, 6—7; o.o. do. 2, 5-6 (işle:-), U II 33, 4; TT VII 28, 49 and 55; in some phr. it hardly means more than “completely” e.g. uz açılmış ceceklig “vith fully opened flowers! U 77 $6, 3 0): o.o. TT VIII A.15; B.10; E.39 (odun-): Civ. (ina cure for sore throat; if one does this two or three times) keze uz açılur “it passes off and is completely cured' H 1 154; in TT VII 13, 43 and 52 uz teprisi is the equivalent of the Indian deity Laksma: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. chiang jén 'craftsman' (Giles, 1,246 5,624) uz kişi Ligeti 275; R 1 1742: Xak. u:z kişi: insün sin'u'l-yadayn máhir fi hirfatihi “a man who is skilful with his hands and expert at his craft” Kaş. 7 46: K B tili uz sözi “the words of his tongue were skilful” 531; éter uz İşi “he arranges his affairs skilfully” 4814; Chap. 60, 4456 ff. deals with uzlar 'craftsmen'; o.o. 8os, 1707, 2660, 5992 (yörgüçi:): xin(?) At. anın uz erür bu kitab “therefore this book is skilfully written! 477: xiv Mu. (in a list of words in which ted is pronounced u:) al-şünü wa'l-ustád 'craftsman, skilled worker" u:z Mel. s, 9; şı, 11; Rif. 75, 147; al-musta'-idda “a capable woman' u:z Mel, 53, 2; Rif. 149: Çağ. xv ff. uz bali wa sancida wa máhir "efficacious, experienced, skilled' San. 73v. 3: Xwar. xiv uz “sage” (N. and Adj.) Qutb zor: Kip. xiv. u:z al-gáni'u'l-máhir İd. 12: xv labiq *skilled' (şeber and) uz Tuh. 31b. 6: Osm. xiv ff. uz c.i.a.p.; originally 'skilled', it came by xv to mean also 'clever, sensible' and by , XVII even 'suitable, convenient' 773 1 737-9; II 943-5; IH 725; IV 797.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 322 
     
   
   
     278 MON. AZ ] ö:z basically the intangible part of human personality 'spirit as opposed to the tangible body, hence the early compound word etóz, q.v., “a live body", lit. "esh and spirit"; from this it came usually to mean no more than “self” (generally with Poss. Suffs.), but sometimes 'the interior part of an organism, pith, marrovv”, and the like. It is not always easy to catch the exact sense in some passages, but "şelf” is the commonest meaning, and often in this sense it is combined with kentü, usually as kentü: ó:z, less often ö:z kentü. An ancient word surviving in Cuv. as var “centre, middle', Ash. V 166. S.i.a.m.l.g., but rare in NE where it is ós/üs. Türkü vırı öz “self” is very common, esp. in the forms özüm "İ myself” and özi: “he himself'; in 77 S rr çıntan ığaç kelürip öz yar(gap] "bringing sandalwood trees . . .” it perhaps means “the heart wood of a trec”, in T 34 bilge: Tonukuk aüt:ğ ol öz ol (see afı:ğ) it is prob. an error for uz: vir ff. öz “self”, with Poss. Suffs. IrkB 8, 46, 47, 55; ÖZ süsi: "his own army' do. 34; ol taşı:ğ öz üze: (or özi:nte:) tutsar 'if a man keeps that stone on his person” Toy. 17, 23, 27 (ETY II 58-9); Man. öz is common in Chuas.; öz “(our)selves” 92, 118; kentü özümüzni “ourselves” 299; in other passages it means rather 'spirit' and the like; in 46 the Five Gods are ÖZİ “the spirit” of everything on earth: tirlg özüğ "living creatures” 55; in 194 it is said that three commandments must be kept with the mouth, three with the mind, three with the hands, and one kamağ özün with the whole being'; a.o.0.; in 116-17 ilki özün . . . bu özün “in a previous incarnation , . . in this incarnation” it is prob. a scribal error for ajun: Yen. sce O, Kir.: Uyğ. vri özümin "me myself! Si. N 6: viir ff. Man.-A öz tilin with his own tongue' M 7 19, 12; tiriğ öz də, 26, 17 (adırtlığ), o.o. do. 11, 17; 17, 19; 20, r? AJ HIE 8, o (8) (1 yarın): Man, öz 'own! TT İT 16, 23; III 30; özüğ 'spirit. TT 717 101: Bud. öz with Poss. Suffs., and in phr. kentü öz/öz kentü “self” and öz 'own' are very common; öz öz biligleri tuta “each (god) holding his own attribute! TT V 8, 64; özi yaşı uzun bolur “his life is long" U İİ 49, 20-1; similar phr. TM IV 252, 4; TT VII 4o, 94; İsiğ öz “life” (see Isid): Civ. öz konuk “the location of the soul” TT VII 21, 3 etc.; öz yaş do. 33, 6: (illnesses arise) özde başda iki eyegüde “in the internal organs, the head and the two (sets of) ribs' H 1l 22, 29; a.o. do. 6, 3; Öz 'self' and 'own' are common in USp.: O, Kir. ix ff. öz occurs as part of a P.N. in Mal. s, 2 and is fairlv common in phr. like öz yerim “my own place” do. 42, 1; in three passages do. 3, 1 (so read here); 7, 4; ro, r farewell is said to kuyda kuncuyim özde oğlım “my wife in the inner chamber, and my sons (presumably) in the inside of the camp', or the like. "The two words are linked in "Türkü vttt ff. Yen. in the phr. öz kuy ayıta: do. 26, 4: Xak. xı Ö:z is very common; there are five main entries and over 60 o.o., the latter nearly all with Poss. Suffs and meaning 'self'—0:z al-nafs “self” (verse; 2 à:z follows here): ö:z kişi: af-qarib mina"l-nös "a neighbour; one says bu bizin ö:z kişi: o1 this man is one of our neighbours': ö:z al-qalb 1a. má. yahmi "alayhl-batn “the heart and organs enclosed by the stomach'; one says ó:züm ağrı:dı: “I have a stomach ache': ö:z qalbı”l-şacara “the heart of a trec”, one says yiğa:ç 0:zi: meaning, for example “the pith of a palm tree' (crmmáru'l-naxl): (u:z follows here); ö:z konuki: sn mö yaxtalic mina'l-casad, wa yuqdl hiya' l-rüh “the word for what moves within(?) the body, it is said that it is the souP (verse) Kaş. 1 46: KB öz “self” (usually with. Poss. Suff.s) and '*own' is common; it sometimes means something like “personality” e.g. küler yüz süçiğ söz silig öz kerek "(a beg) must have a smiling face, friendly speech, and a pure personality” 2072: xın(?) .4t. öz “self” and 'own' is common; Tef. ditto; et öz also occurs and secms to mcan “soul, living being”, öz kendü and kendü et öz also occur for “self” 243: xiv Muh. (under 'parts of the body”) al-badan "the trunk! ó:zz Mel. 42, 12; Rif. 138 (adding al-nafs etöz) ; (under al-qarába “terms of relationship” and the like) a/-garibu'l-'aziz (?sic) "an honoured neighbour (or relative ?)' 6:z Rif. 143 (only): Çağ. xv ff. öz kendü Vel. 105; öz (1) xwud wa xwigtan 'self' (quotn.); (2) xwig ta dşind 'relative, comradc” (quotn.) San. 73v. 3: Xwar. xin(?) öz *own' Og. 269, 293: xiv Öz “self, own! Qutb 125; MN 135, etc.; Nahe. 230, 16: Kom. xiv 'self, own' óz CCG; Gr. 145 (quotns.): Kip. xır a/-insihal 'diarrhoea' öz yürimek Hou. 33, 3: Xıv 0:z al-nafs ld. 13: xv (in a Conjugation) özi: . . . Ozileri: "he Lv. they” Kav. 20, 15; “ndahn with him” özl: ka:tında: do. 36, 2; nafs öz Tuh. 36a. 6; ard Pers, Pron. (kensi tea kendi sca) özl do. 39b. 13: Ost. xiv fI. öz with Poss. Suff.s and in various phr, “self” down to xvirş it also means “the heart or middle (of something), the. essence (of à subject) TTS I 572-4; IT 762-7; HT 571-4; IV. 634-7. 2 à: “valley” and thc like. An ancient. word surviving in Quv. as var, Ash. V 167, but otherwise only(?) in SW xx Anat. SDD 1124. Scc 2 özek, 2 özen, 2 ku:y. Uy£. viu ff. Bud. ózlerdeki özeklerdeki 'situated in valleys and smalk valleys! TT V 28, 121 (and see note thereon): Civ. (in a proverb. about incongruities) tağda öz (spelt oz) yok "there are no valleys on a möuntain” TT: VII 42, 8: Xak. xi ö:z al-wádi fl-cibdl "a valley in the mountains; one says fa:f$ ö:zi: ditto. Kaş, P 46; o.o. 111 65, 14 (oğruğ), 106, 15 (2 ku:y): Osm. xvir öz translates teádi in a Te. dict. TTS II 763. 1 1 ü:z “fat” and the like. Survives only as ÜS in some NE dialects R 7 1877, Khak. and Tuv. Xak. xi ü:z (bi'l-samma, 'with front vowel") al-dasam "fat Kaş. I as: üz al-dasam 1 36: Kip. xiv (after üz-) rca hurta (i.c. ü:z) ism li-mà ya'li'l-tabixa müna"l-duhn “indo”l-ğalyan *a word for the fat which rises when food is boiled' /d. 12; a.o. do. 65 (topuz): Osm. xvim 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 323 
     
   
   
     MON. V. AZ(under ! ó:z ctc.) (7) (üz) and in Rümi gil-i raşbanda 'clinging mud” San. 73v. 15 may be the same word; Sam. 201 gives 'sticky mud” as one of the meanings of 1 ö:z. 2 ü:z Imperat. of üz- used in Hend. with the Imperat. of bu:z- as a Noun; it is once of the standard vices or passions, usually coming after anger, lust, and the like; etymologically it should mean 'destructiveness' but according to TT III 27, note 33 it corresponds in M III 19, 16 (i) to yan "hatred” (Giles 13,716) in the Chinese original of that text. N.o.a.b. Türkü vur ff. Man, üz buz biliğ as the first of the evil biligs M HI 19, 16 (i)ifA.o. Chuas. 120: Uyğ. vir ff. Man.-A üz buz M III 13, 5 (iii): Man. TT IJI 33 (ula:ti:;): Bud. öpke üz buz köpül tutdum erser “if I have cherished thoughts of anger or hatred” U 77 76, 8, 85, 25; TT IV 8, 73. VU 3 ü:z Hap. leg.; inadvertently omitted in the printed text. Atalay transcribed óz, assuming a connection with özne:- but this is a false etymology. Perhaps survives in NC Kir. ez "“deaf”, See azı:-, Xak. xi (between 1 ü:z and 1 ó:z) ü:z al-agamm 'deaf'; one says ü:z kişi: Kaş. 1 45. Mon. V. AZA:Z2- "to go astray, to lose one's way'; sometimes used as a quasi- Trans. with Objects like yo:l “vay”, Practically syn. vv. 2 ya:z-. S.i.a.m.l.g. Türkü vı tepri: bilge: xağanta: adrılmalım azmalım “let us not be parted from Tenri Bilge Xağan and go astray' Ortgin 11: vin ff. kuş oğli: uça: a:zti: (sic) keyi:k oğlı: yüğü:rü: a:ztı: “the young birds lost their way flying and the young deer running' IrkB 15; a:zma:zun tép yerçi: yara:tti: “he got hold(?) of a guide, so as not to lose the way! Tun. HI 6-7 (ET Y II 94); and 3 oo: Uyğ. vii ff. Man.-A azmış müunmiş ters azağ nomlağlar “false (Ilend.) preachers who have gone astray (Hend.)” M III 29, 3-4 (di): Man. azmışlarka yolçı yerçi (MS. . yertçi) boltunuz "you have become a guide (Hend.) to those who have gone astray” TT HI 69: Civ. yol azsar ev tapmaz “f a man 103es his way, he does not find his home” TT I 33; bu oğul kız azmağu yalğağu vu ol “this is an amulet (1.-w.) which boys and girls should lick so as not to go astray' TT VII 27, 4: O. Kic. ix ff. Mal. 10, 3 etc. (1 a:y): Xak. xr ol yo:l a:zdı: dalla'l-raculu'l-tariq "the man lost his way' Kaş. I 173 (a:za:r, a:zma:k); a.o. 1 92, 7 (ula:): KB sózüg sözlegüçi azar ham yazar “a spcaker goes astray and makes mistakes! 205; o.o. 384, 677 (yol azar), 2023, 3600, 5262: xın(?) Tef. az- "to stray (from the road Abl.) 41: xiv Muh. xata'a “to err” a:zMel. 25, 15 (Rif. 108, reading xağd “to stride” has atla:-); dalla az- 28, 5; 111; al-dalal a:mak aş, r) r20: ÇAĞ. xv ff. az- (1) rdh gum kardan 'to lose one's way'; (2) bi-xwud şudan “to lose one's senses'; és az- is also used in the latter sense Sam. 37v. 22 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv yol/yoldin az- “to lose one's way' | 279 Qutb 17: Kap. xii dalla mina'l-dalál az- Hou. 41, 17: XIV az- dalla İd. ız: xv axta'a wa táha "to go astray, have a disordered mind” azTuh. 6a. 12; dalla az- do. 23b. 1; fasada wa tüha “to be vicious, have a disordered mind” az- do. 28b. 7, a.o. do. 27a. rr (us): Osm. x1V ff. az- (1) “to lose one's way'; (2) "to deteriorate, go bad”, c.i.a.p. T'T'S 7 65s; II 88; II $7; IV 64. ez- basically "to scratch (something Zcc.)' vv. some extended meanings. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE(9). Xak. xı ol yé:rni: ezdi: (omission? al-ard wa xadaşa”l-cild wa nahwahu “he (ploughed) the land and scratched the skin, and the like” Kaş. T 165 (eze:r, ezme:k): xiv Muh. tarada "to crumble and dip” (e.g. bread in soup) ez- Mel. 25, 15; Rif. 107; al-tard ezmek (armak in text, corrected in margin) rro (only): Çağ. xv ff. éz- (spelt) sáyidan "to crush' Sam. roov. s (quotn.): Xwar. xiv Nahc. 95, s (1 yar): Kap. xiv ezhalla bi-ma'nà dawwaba "to melt (something) İd. ız: xv ez- adába ditto Kav. 9, 20; 76, 3; daba “to melt' (Intrans.) éri-, éz- Tuh. 16b. 3 (dawwaba has prob. fallen out between the two). O:Z- basically “to outstrip (sometimes someone Zcc.)', hence “to escape (from something Abl.); to surpass (someone Zcc.)'. S.i.a.m.l.g. Türkü vini beşbalık anı: üçün ozdi: “Beşbalık therefore escaped” I1 E 28; o.0. I N 7 (ağıt-), II. E 31: vir ff. IrkB iş, etc. (ölüm), a.o. do. 49: Uyğ. vir ff. Man. ozku kutrulku yol yıpakığ “the way (Hend.) of escape and salvation” T'T' IJI 63; o.o. do. 126, 135, 139 (adalığ), etc.; M III 35, 3 (ii): Bud. PP şı, 8 Rf. (etóz); USp. rozc. 7 (ançakına), oz- kutrul- TT IV ısə, şo, V 22, 39; a.0.0.: Civ. bu adadın ozğuluk yolun orunun közünmez 'a way and place of escape from this danger does not appear TT I 20-1: yeme esen ozar “and she escapes in good health” H 7 109: Xak. xı anın ati: o:zdi: “his horse won' (şa?aga), also used of anyone who outstrips someone else (sabaqa "an fayrahu) Kaş. 1 173 (o:za:r, o:zma:k); ozğa:n at faras sabbüq “a horse that always vvins” 7 470, 24: KB ozu bolmadı (the vvicked man) “could not win' 248: xin(?) Ar. tetiklikte kendü Ayastin ozup 'himself surpassing Ayas in shrewdness' 55: Tef, al-sabiqun ozğanlar 234: xiv Muh. sabaqa 0:z- Mel. 27, 1; 0z- Rif. 111; al-sábiq ozğa:n 174 (only): Xwar xiv Abu Bakrnı xayrat içinde ozğaymen “1 will surpass Abu Bakr in good deeds' Nae. 95, 5: Kom. xiv “to precede (someone cc.) ozCCG, Gr. 181 (quotn.): Kip. xri sabaqa ozHou. 35, 10: xiv ditto İd. 12; Bul. 48v.: xv Kav. 74, 7; Tuh. 28a. 1. üz- “to tear (something Aee.), to pull (it) apart or to pieces. S.La.m.lg. with some extended meanings. Türkü vur yinçge: eriklig üzgeli: uçuz “it is easy to tear a thing when it is thin T r3; &amp;o. T r4 (yoğun): . vr ff. Man. üze biça yirtip 'tearing, cutting, and pulling apart” M 7 7, 16: Uyğ. viri ff. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 324 
     
   
   
     28o Chr. U 1 7, 16-18 (bégik): Bud. bu iğnip tözin yıltızın üzgeli katığlanınlar 'strive to tcar up the roots (Hend.) of this disease” U 1H 4, 7-8 (); adınağunuşp isig özin üzüp 'tearing to pieces the living bodies of others” TT /V ro, 10-11; üz&amp;en yağmur *destructive rain' U 7 26, rş etc, (üstürtl:): Civ. yalip kiliç tutup ok üzkelir 'taking a naked sword he smashes the arrow' TT I1 162165; kalanin él óptün yada üzüp 'disclosing his (liability for) land tax before the people and discharging it" USp. 21, 8-9; menip bérimlerimni sen üzüp 'you will discharge iny debts! do. 32, 6-7: Xak. xi ol yip üzdi: "he broke (gata'a) the cord' (etc.) Kaş. I 165 (üze:r, üzme:k); ışlar üzüp kecürge:n küna fagsál xutta "he settled. the affairs"(?) 1 522,6: K B bu sózni esitgil sózür munda üz 'hear this word and cut short your words here” 153; 0.0. 655, 1008, 5383, 5458: xin(?) Tef. üz- “to break” (a rope) 335: Çağ. xv ff. üz Km va'mi bi-güsil “break” Vel. 106; üz(with ü-') güsixta kardan “to break apart, tear off” San. 71v. 25 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv üz- 'to pluck (a flower or fruit), to destroy' Qutb 204; MN 92; Nahc. 281, 6: Kom. xiv *to break, tear apart! üz- CCG; Gr. 271 (quotn.): Kip. xiv üz- ('with front vowels") inqata"a “to break” (Intrans.; ?error); üz ifs “separate” İd. 12: xv faşşala “to cut out” (a garment) üz- Tul. 28b. 4; qafa"a üz- do. 3oa. 10: Osm. xiv ff. üz- "to tear apart, break off”, etc. , c.La.p. 7TS I 754; H 962; IH 740; IV 813. Dis. AZA azu: 'or'. Survives in NE Tuv. azı, elsewhere displaced by Pe. or Ar. l.-w.s or by phr. like Osm. yoksa, Türkü vir (1 have made the 'Türkü people rich and numerous) azu: bu: savimda: igid barğu: "or is there anything false in these my words?" 7. S ro: viti ff, azu: 2. nazü: either... or” Toyok Hr. 1 and 4 (ETY H 178): Man. azu . . . azu Chuas. 230; M HI 38, 3-6 (ii): UyB. viri ff. Bud. azu (in TT VIII a:zu) and azu . . . azu are common; e.g. in Srt. 135, 7-22 AZU occurs twice, azu yeme twice and azuca yeme twice: Civ. azu H I 167; II 18, so: Xak. xr azu: kalima faxyir. bayna"l-şay ayn "a word. (offering) a choice between two things'; hence one says üzü:m yé:gil azu: ka:ğu:n yé:gil "cat grapes or (az) melon'; generally used in interrogative sentences ( fi /-isrifhüm), one says kelir mü: sen azu: barı:rmu: sen “are you coming or (am) going?" Kaş, I 88: KB azu is common, e.g. 16, 243, 1018, 1678, 4701 (threc times in questions): xır(?) Az. azu (mis-spelt in all MSS.) 448 (bun-); Tef. azufadufyà . . . yà adu/yà adura occur, often in questions 42-3. VU ızı: “the ycar after next”, Pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı ızı: a/-qubübib "the year after next”, hence one says arkın (sic) 1z1: "next year and the year after” Kaş. 7 89; a.o. 7 108, 14 (arkun). D oza: Ger. in -a: fr. oz- used as an Adv. of time, 'formerly', and perhaps also of space, MON. V. AZand as a Postposn. w. 215k meaning “before”, Survives in NE Alt., Tel. ozo/olzo R 7 1095, 1145; SE Tar. oza R I 1143; '"lürki ozu BŞ 769. Xak. xı oza: al-dahru'l-sálif time past' Kaş, £ 88(verse, oza: mcaning 'forinerly): KB kamuğda oza 'before all (the others)” si; similar phr. 250, 4993, 5151: Xü1(?) Af, ari zahrı tatğu "asaldın oza “you will taste the bee's sting before the honey' 440; 'l'ef. oza Postposn. 233: X war. xiv oza 'formerly' MN 66; Postposn. Nac. 328, 15. üze: originally an Adv., 'above, on high', also used as a Postposn. vv, the unsuflixed case, or occasionally Loc., of N.s and Gen. of Prons., meaning 'above, upon, on”, In UÜyğ, it developed some rather different meanings, in some cases being used practically as a substitute for the Instr. case, Survives only(?) in SE Türki üze, Jarring 328. It was replaced almost everywhere in the medieval period by üzere with Suff. -re:. 'T his word is first noted in (Xak.) xın(?) Tef. 337; Çağ. xvff. San. 73v. 23; Kup. xiii Hou. 26, zo and Osm. xtv TTS I 754, etc. and, in one form or another, s.i.s.m.l. Türkii vii üze: is common both as Adv. and as Postposn., e.g. 1 E 1, I1 E 2 (asra:)—(my ancestors ruled) kişi: oğlunda: üze: 'over the children of men” Z E 1, I1 E 3; tardu:ş bodun üze: sad ertim (77 olurtim) '] was (enthroned as) jad over the Tarduş people” £ E 17, H E 15: viu ff. üze: as Adv. and Postposn. w. unsuffixed case is common in IrRB) (if a man carries that stone) ÖZİ: üze: “on his person” Toy. 16-17 (ETY Il 58): Man. üze on kat kök “the ten-fold heavens above” Chuas. az: Uyğ. viri üze: . . . olurip Su. N^3: vir ff. Man.-A ezrwa tepri üze kedilip 'bcing placed as clothing on the god Zurvan” M I 21, 3-4 (i); 0.0. do. 28, 14 and zo: Man. bu yer üze “on this carth' M H s, 8 (0; amvardışnlığ ot üze anar yöründek Kiltipiz "you have made a remedy for him with the herb amvardign' TT III 28-9; a.0.0. of üze "by means of, with': Bud. üze occurs as an Adv. but is commonest as a Postposn. meaning: (1) 'on', erteniliğ, orunluk üze olğurdı “he seated him on a jewelled throne" PP 46, 2-3 and many o.o.; (2) “in”, rather than “on”, U II 4o, 107-8 (ucrug); (3) most often, “by means of, with' öz kazğançım üze edgü kiling kilayın *'I will do good deeds with my own carnings” PP 12,2; :g üze: bütürme:'zle:r "they do not make good by labour" TT VIII A.2; o.o. do. H.8 (öğdi:), U I 29, 6-7 (u:d), etc.: Civ. üze “vith” TT VIII I.20 (içle:ğü), kum üze “in the sand” TT I s1; köz üze sürtser “if one rubs it on the eyes" H I 65-6, and many similar o.o. in H 1, 77; (my vineyard) Sügü ógen iize 'on the (hanks of the) Sügü river” Up. 13, 3; bitig kilmis kün üze “on the day on which the contract was made' do. 13, 5-6: O. Kir. ix ff. üze: tepri: yarlıkadı: “heaven on high decreed' Mal. 32, 5: Xak. xi üze: occurs about 25 times as a Postposn., usually translated 'a/á “upon, on”, e.g. yo:l ü:ze: (sic) 'a/à gàri'ati'l-fariq “on the surface of the road” Kaş. 1 66, 17;  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 325 
     
   
   
      DIS. V. AZD1 197, 4 (eşül-), / 219, 14 (2 artur-); n.m.e.: KB bayat rahmatı erdi xalqı üze 'God's merey vvas upon Hlis people” 42, yaşıl kök yarattı üze yulduzu “He created the blue sky and the stars above” 127; 0.0. 79, 302, 382, 709, etc.: xr(?) KBVP munun hikmati kör bu tört nen üze "its instruction is about these four things” 72: xın(?) K BPP (countless blessings) Muhammad Mustafa üze 6-7; At. kecür sen me 'umrur kónilik üze 'and pass your life in uprightness” r$4, (if an elephant is loaded) üzesinde zar 'with gold (1.-w.) upon it” 487; Tef. üze is common as a Postposn., “on, upon, FA about (e.g. a subject), in (a manner)'; otHer forms üzele, üzesine, üzesinde (and üzre) 336-7: xıv Rbğ. toprak üze “on the earth” R T 1299 (quotns.): Çağ. xv ff. üze üzerine Vel. 106; üze abbreviation of üzre bar rü ta bar bálà “upon, above” San. 74r. 15; (üzre same translation and quotn. 73v. 23); öz/üz . . . (3) metaph. fawq ta bala “above” 73v. 7 (a false etymology, the quotn. contains üze): X war. xu üze (but more often üzere) “upon” Afr 46: xın(?) Oğ. 230-1 (üst): xiv üze “on” Qutb 204; MN 432 (and üzre 3, etc.); üzemge “on me” Qutb 125 (özenige): Kom. xiv “by means of, because of' óze( sic) CCG; Gr. 186 (quotns.). ?S özi: Hap. leg.; Sec. f. (or error?) of 2 à:z. “Çiğil xı özi: al-facc fi'l-cibal "a cleft in a mountain' Kaş. 7 89. Dis. V. AZAPED azr- (?VU üzi:-) Hap. leg.; in its second meaning clearly a Den. V. fr. VU 3 ü:z; the front rounded vowel is confirmed by the Caus. f. üzit-, q.v.; the etymology of the verb in its first mcaning is obscure. Xak. xr küp nazt:dt: zraşaha”l-hubb “the jar oozed water', also used of any earthenware vessel (inà' xazafiya) when it oozes; and one says kula:k azı:dı: Aadat"l-udun an tatasamm mina'l-calaba “the car was almost deafened by the noise” Kaş. 11I 253 (azur, azısma:k sic). uZa:- 'to be, or become, long, or long drawn out”, usually of time, less often of space. S.La.m.lg. with some extended meanings. Uyğ. vur ff. Bud. ol tinliğnin yana özi yaşı “uzamakı bolur “and that mortaPs life becomes long” U JI 42, 36ffHL., similar phr. Hüen-ts. 52-3; USp. 102b. 26; TT VI 288 (one MS., remainder uzun bol-); a.o. TT IV ız, 43 (yoğunad-): Xak. xi KB kayu iske évse uzar kéc kalur 'whatever task a man hurries over drags out and gets delayed' 556; (when wicked men are near a beg) uzadı isiz elgi "the wicked man's hand is stretched out” 889; o.o. 4460, 4965, 6486: xin(?) At. 179 (1 öp): Tef. uza- “to be long”, etc. (and uzağan "talP), of a palm-trec) 322: Çağ. xv ff. uza(spelt)/uzal- diráz gwdan 'to be, or become, long' San. 72v. 16 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv uza"to be long drawn out” Qut? 202: Osm. xiv and xv uza- 'to withdraw from (somewhere Abl.) in two texts 779 I1 944; III 725.   281 Dis. AZD (D) özüt apparently “the human soul”, that part of a personality which survives death, and so rather different fr. 1 ö:z "the spirit', the vital spark which distinguishes living beings from inanimate objects, but clearly connected with it etymologically. "The morphology is, however, obscure. Survives in NE Alt, Koib., Sag., ''el., Tuv. (R I 1898), and Khak. üzüt 'a ghost which haunts its former home'. Türkü vir ff. Man. bizninp özütümüz “our souls” Chuas. 1 8; Kamağ yaruk özütlernin “of all the bright souls' do. 7 21; (the five gods are the majesty, the colour) özi ózütl “the spirit, the soul' (the might, light, and root of everything on earth) do. 46-7; o.o. do. 302; M III 15,6-7 (2; TT II 8, 46; 10, 76 and 92: Uyğ. vini ff. Man.-A özütümüz . . . bulzun (so read) “may our souls find” (salvation, pardon, victory, and attainment of the heavenly country) M I 29, 31-4; a.0.0.: Man. tanmış özütler 'souls who have denied (the true faith) M Tİ rr, 13; 12, 7 and 2 (ii): Bud. (if one recites thi; süüfra for the departed and the sufferers in hell) ötrü ol özütler “then those souls” (will be liberated) TT VII 40, 30: Civ. (making offerings and libations to the Buddha) özütke aş bérgil "give food to the souls (of the departed)! TT VII 25, 8; a.o. TT I 29. Kap. xi a/-şaytdn 'devil' özüt Hou. 33, 6 (MS. in error örüt unvocalized): xıv özüt a/-mattá “the dead” İd. 13; Bul. ro, 3. VU izder Hap. leg.; apparently Den. N. in -dep. Xak. xi izder) vare" sabaka "a kind of net used for catching fish; thin stakes are fixed in a row in the water, and a gap is left in the middle of the river, and the net is put in the mouth of the gap; the fish enters it and is immediately pulled out” Kaş. 7 116. Dis. V. AZDD azit- Caus. f. of a:z-; “to make (someone, Acc. or Dat.)lose his way, to lead (him) astray'; and metaph. “to lead (someone) into error, to confuse (him)'. Survives in SE Türki ézitBŞ 582 and SW Osm. Cf. azğur-. Uyğ. viri ff. Man. TT IJI 34 (2 6:8): Xak. xı ol apa:r yo:l azıttı: adallahu'l-tariq “he made him lose his way' Kag. I 208 (azitur, azitma:k), ol kişi: ol yo:ldan azıtğa:n “that man is constantly making people lose their way' 1 155; alo, I1 234, 4: (Qaf. xv ff. azıtkan translated yo/dan azan Vcl. 16 is an error for azikkan as pointed out in San. 38r. 23; azıkis an Emphatic f. of a:z- not noted earlier than Sar.): X war. xiv (and one part of their punishment) yoldin azıtmakdın bolğay *will consist of leading astray' Nac. 387, 2-3: Osm. xiv ff. azıt- “to lead astray', etc. in several texts TTS 7 65; II 87; III 57; IV 64 (with some dubious translations). D ezit- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of ez-. Cf. eztür-. Xak. xı ol ofla:n kula:kın ezitti: agrata . uduna'l-sabi “he had the boy's ear scarified'; also used of anything that is scarified and has  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 326 
     
   
   
     282 DIS. V. AZD long incisions made in it (xudişa ta gurifa tatoila(n)) Kaş. 1 209 (exitür, ezitme:k). D uzat- (uza:t-). Caus. f. of uza:-; lit. 'to make longer', hence “to drag out, to remove to a distance', and other extended meanings. S.i.a.m.l.g. See Doerfer 11 $94. UyB. vil ff. Bud. PP 28, 5; 31, 2 (üntür-): Xak. xı ol yışığ uzatti: "hec stretched (madda) the rope (etc.) ; and onesays ol 1:şiğ uzattı: fawwala'l-amr tea satwwafahu wa matala “he dragged out the affair and postponed and put it off” Kaş. I 209 (uza:tur (sic), uzatma:k); bu er ol tStÉ uzatğa:n 'this man always drags out ( yutatuteil) an affair! ] 155; alo. İİ 234, 3: KB uzat- is common in several meanings: (1) "to drag out', uzatma sózür 'do not drag out your speeches” 27; o.o. 2369 (basıt-), 2366 (ö:ğlen-), 5500-1; (2) “to stretch out (a hand Acc., to something Dat.)', üküş edgülükke uzattı elig “he stretched out his hand to many good deeds! 141; 0.0. 2139, 2507; (3) "to see (somcone) off”, kadaşı uzattı kör OgdülmiSif “his comrade saw Ögdülmiş off' 3834; a.o. 5444; (4) other usages are uzatmazmen da^wàá kiliğli kisig “1 do not let a petitioner be long-winded' 811; kadaşını kórdi uzatu yatip 'he saw his comrade lying stretched out” $974; 0.0. 2365-6, 9: xin(?) Ar. uzatma amal “do not pitch your hopes (l.-vv.) too high” 293; Tef. uzat- “to stretch out (the hand), to spend a long time” 322; a.o. 236 (olduk): xiv Rbg. uzat- "to see off” R I 1762 (quotn.); Muh. madda u:za:t- Mel. 31, 3 (one MS., others and Rif. rrş tart-): Çağ. xv ff. uzat-(-ti) gönder- 'to see off” Vel. ro6 (quotns.); uzat- (spelt) Caus. £.; ràhi kardan ta dirdz hardan "to sec off; to lengthen, stretch! San. 73r. 19 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv uzat- "to drag out (a speech, etc.)' Qutb 202; "to sce off' Nalic. 81, 7; 170, r: Kom. xiv “to see off, escort” uzat- CGG;, Gr. 268 (quotn.): Kip. xiv uzat- fewiala İd. 13; Bul. s8r.; teadda'a "to see off” uzat- Bul. 87v.: xv madda uzat- Twuh. 35b. 6; wadda'a uzat- do. 38b. 8: Osm. xiv uzat- “to sec off” in one text 7TS H 944. D ozit- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of o:z-. Xak. xr bu: er ol atın ozitğa:m “this man is constantly driving his horse ahcad (of the others)” ( yasbiq bi-farasihi) Kaş. I 155; n.m.e. VUD üzit- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of (E) azi:-, q.v. Xak. xr ol anın kula:kın üzitti: faqqala sam'ahu sva aşamma min hatra mü takallama "he overburdened his hearing and deafened him with his volubility'; and one says sirke: küpni: üzitti: “the vinegar made the jar ooze (raşşaha) with its acidity' Kaş. 7 209 (üzitür, üzitme:k). S izde:- See İste:-. D eztür- Caus. f. of ez-; s.i.m.m.l.g. with several shades of meaning. Xak. xı ol oğli: kula:kın eztürdi: “he had his son's ear scarified' (aşrafa) ; also used of any long scratch or furrow (xadş a: xatt) in the skin or the ground Kaş. 7 220 (eztürür, eztürme:k). D üztür- Caus. f. of üz-; 'to cause, or allow (something Aere.) to be torn, pulled to pieces), etc. S. m.mibg. Xak. x1 ol yip üztürdi: ahdaqa”l-habl “he had the cord (etc.) broken' Kaş. I 220 (üztürür, üztürme:k). Tris. AZD D uzatı: for the form ef, ula:tı:, prob. Ger. in -1: fr. uzat-; 'for a long timc' and the like. Unlike most Advs. of this form, survives in NE Khak. uzada; NC Kir. uzata and SW Osm. uzadi, only(?) in the phr. uzun uzadiya “at great length', Uyf. vii ff, Man.-A uzatı (so read?) "for a long timc” M I 9, 3: Man. uzatı üzüksüz 'for a long time continuously TT HI 104; Bud, uzatı “for a long time” U 220, iş, U İH 4, 14; TT V 6, 39; Hüen-ts. 1790; Suv. 354, 7-8 (iinçüle:-), do. 247, 16-18 etc. (2 örüğ): Civ. uzatı "for a long time” TT VII 27, 11; VIII L6; M.35 (uza:t1); 77 IL 34, 31; in TT VII 36, 2 (USp. 42, 15) prob. "lengthways'. D özütlüğ P.N./A. fr. özüt, n.o.a.b. "The meaning secms to be 'rclating to the souls of the. departed', or in some contexts. perhaps 'deceased, no longer in the body”. Türkü virff. Man. (thereafter. they continuouslv devoted themselves to) özütlüğ işke edgü kılınçka 'spiritual works (or work for the souls of the departed?) and good deeds" TT II 10, 86: Uyğ. vin ff Man.-A özütlüğ nigosaklar 'the deceased(?) Hearers" M 7 28, 24; Man. MİLİ 36, 7 (iii) (etózlüg). D üzütlük Hap. leg. but cf. üzütle:-; although there is not a close semantic connection presumably a P.N./A. fr. *üzüt Active Dev. N. fr. üz-. Xak. xi üzütlük al-dinu bi' l-gay! *'niggardliness over something? Kaş. T işo. "Fris. V. AZDD uzatil- Pass. f. of uzat-; “to be lengthened” and thc like. Survives in NC Kzx. and SW Osm,, "km. Xak. xı KJ sózügnl kisurfil uzatildi yas 'shorten your speeches and your life will have been lengthened” 176. à D üzütle:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. *üzüt; cf. üzütlük. Xak. xr ol ant: üzütle:di: baxxalaAu tca. natabahu ilá'l-buxl "he called him a miser and attributed miserliness to him” Kaş. 7 299 (üzütle:r, üzütle:me:k). Dis. AZG D 1 aza:k Dev. N./A. fr. a:z-; syn. vv, 2 azuk, N.o.a.b., but see Doerfer 11 479. Uy£. vin ff. Man.-A azağ (sic) nomlağlar “false preachers" M III 29, 4 (1): Man. azağ (sic) nomluglar TT IX 89: Bud. kalti puran! ulati azak nomluğlar sözleyürler “as the false preachers, the Purünas, etc, say” U II 8, 13-14: Xak. xı ntğalır oknr: aza:k tegmedi: bu: sa:v uşa:k /am yabluğ tlayya hádihi'l-namima bi'an haüdihi"l-fattana turid an tarmi rlayya bi-sahm ğarb “this slander did not reach me, ME ——s—In— is T ael .“çÇcŞ-—”-—————0—X ok) 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 327 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. although this trouble-maker meant to shoot a stray arrow at me” Kaş, 1I zo, 6 (for farb cf. 2 azuk); n.m.c. S 2 azak See adak. Az 'a large tooth or tusk' of a human being or animal, originally 'canine tooth', later usually molar'. An carly, First Period, l-w. in Mong. as arağalara”a (Haenisch 8). S.i.a.m.l.g. w. minor phonctic changes. Sce Doerfer 11 474. Türkü vin ff. topu:zun azı:ğı: sınml:ş 'the boar's tusk was broken' IrkB 6: UYĞ. viri ff. Bud. (the demon . . . tears countless mortals) aafğları üze “vith his fangs” U I 45, 17/IV o, 71; ao. TT V 24, 48: Xak. xı azığ “the canine tooth (a/-na5) of any animal” Kaş. I 64: Çağ. xv ff. azu dandán-i niş “canine tooth', in Ar. db San. 39r. 13: Kip. xii al-dirs "molar tooth' azığ Hou. 206: xiv azu: ("with back vowels") a/-dirs İd. 13; 2.0. do. 20 (uluğ): xv dirs azık (in margin azı) Tul, 23a. 6. 1 azuk properly “food for a journey' for man or beast; sometimes more generally “food, provisions”, S.ia.m.lg. See Doerfer 11 473. Türkü vri (our horses were lean and) azu:ki: yok erti: “they had no food for the journey' 7 E 39: Üyğ. viri ff. Man.-A M III ro, 9 (ii) (alkin-): Bud. azuk ditto U 1171 29; 36 (damaged): Xak. xi azuk a/-zdd 'provisions for a journey' Kaş. I 66 (prov.); four 0.0., same translation: xüut(?) At. çığaylık yarınlık azuk yokluki 'poverty is lack of food for tomorrow' 187; Tef. azuk “food” 43 (and azuksiz): xiv Muh. zádwu'l-tariq "food for a journey' azuk Mel. 82, 15 (azik/azuk); Rif. 188 (azüh): Çağ. xv ff. azuğ/azuk tiiga tva. xwürak “food (for a journey)' San. 39r. 14 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv azik/azuk ditto Qutb 18: Kom. xiv 'food' azix CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv azık al-zád İd. iş, al-zawwüda, same meaning azik Bul. 8, 17: xv zád azik Tuh. 13a. 1; 23a. 6: Osm. xiv ff. azuk till xvr, azık fr. xiv onwards, both meanings; c.ia.p. 77TS 7 64; 11 86; IH 56; IV 63. D 2 azuk Intrans. N./A.S. fr. a:z-; cf. 1 aza:k. Xak. xı azuk o:k sahmu'l-garb. sca huwa'lladi là vudrá man ramáhu “a stray arrow, that is one shot by a person unknown': azuk munuk a/-àábiqu'l-dàll "runavvay, lost” Kaş, İ 66: KB azuklar yolindin keterdi meni “(God) removed me from the way of those who had gone astray' 3585: Çağ. xv ff. (under 1 azuk) Táli'-i Harami derived this word fr. a:z- and translated it gumráh “lost” and Naşiri followed him; they were mistaken San. 3or. 14. D uzak N./A.S. fr. uza:-; "Jong drawn out, long lasting'; hence, through such phr. as “a long journey', “far away, distant, remote'. S.i.a.m.l.g. Uyf. viri ff. Civ. İğlig erse uzak bolur 'if he is ill, it becomes a long drawn out affair TT VII 28, zı ctc.: Xak. xi al-amr ida tala "a long drawn out affair' is called uzak rg; hence one says yala:vaç uzak AZG- 285. bardı: abta'a'l-mursil'the envoy has been gone a long time” Kaş. 1 66; igledim andın uza:k (sic) 'I was ill a long time (£atoila(n)) because of it” 7 380, 16: xiri(?) 7ef. uzak (you should not sleep) “for a long time" 322: xiv MuAh.(?) Rif. 109 (at-): Caf. xv ff. uzak dür toa ba'id “far away, distant” Sam. 73v. 18: Osm. xv uzak “long” of time or space in two phr. 77S İT 944; İV 797. D ozuk Intrans. N./A.S. fr. o:z- ;survives only (?) in NE Bar. ozok “previously” R 7 1146; NC Kzx. ozik “in the front rank'. Xak. xı ozuk at al-farasu'l-sábiq fi'l-halaba wa ğayrihà “a horse that wins a race, etc.” Kaş. I 66. D azğa:n N/A. of Habitual Action fr. a:z-, lit. “habitually going astray', but in practice normally used as the name of a shrub, “vild rose, wild briac', and the like. Survives in its literal sense in some INC, NW languages and for 'wild rose” in SE Türki Shaw 8; BS 48; Jarring 31 and SW xx Anat. azan/azzan/ azğan SDD 142-s. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. in a list of P.N.s azğan cecek terim Suv. 137, 18: Xak. xı (in a prov.) yığaç yavuzi: azğa:n “the worst (ardal) kind of tree is the (one called) azğa ın”, this is a tree (?shrub) wbich has white and yellow flowers like a rose and a red fruit like the drop of an earring; in our country it is planted round the edges of vineyards (?; f? xassi'l-kurüm), because it is useless as firewood, since when it is kindled it splits and flies out of the fire and sets light to clothes or anything else in the house Kaş. I 439, 7; n.m.e. D azğun N./A.S. fr. a:z-; lit. "lost, straying”. S.i.a.m.l.g. except INE. Meanings vary fr. the original one to 'dissolute, wild, ferocious', and *thin, emaciated”, Xak. xı KI (as dangerous as a wild boar, as strong as a wolf) adığlayu azğın (MSS. in error azğır) "as ferocious as a bear” (as vicious as a mad dog) 2311: xim (?) Tef. azğun “lost, astray” 42 (and azğunlrk): Çağ. xv ff. azğun gumráh wa dşufta "lost, distracted! Sar. 39r. 9 (quotn.): Kip. xiv azğun 'mis-spelt ozjun) al-dáll "lost İd. 12: Osm. xv azgun/azkun “erroneous" in two texts 7 TS TI 86. E azğır Sec azğun. Dis. V. AZĞD azğur- Caus. f. of a:z- “to lead astray”, esp. in a moral sensc. S.i.s.m.l.g. Türkü vrır ff. Man. azğuruğlı yolka “to the road that leads astray” Chuas. 127; a.o. do. I 18-19 (2 ó:g): Uyğ. vur ff. Man.-A M III 9, 11-12 (ii) (2 a:r-): (Xak.) xiv Rbg. azBur- ditto R 7 577: Çağ. xvíff. azğur-(-dun, etc.) azdurVel. 17; azğur- (spelt) Caus. f.; az ráh ba-dar burdan swa. adlal hardan "to lead astray” San. 38v. 15 (quotns.). D ozğur- Caus. f. of o:z-; “to rescue, save (someone ec. or Dat. from something Abl.Y. Survives only(?) in NE Khak. osxir  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 328 
     
   
   
     284 DIS. V. AZÓUyğ. vir ff. Man. tlüneriğl tamudin tüzünl ozkurtunpuz (sic) "you have rescued them all from gloomy hell” TT 711 67-8; 0.0. do. 47 (irklet-), 7o: Bud. kayusipa emğektin ozğurğaysen "you will save everyone of them from suffering” PP 6, 2; o.o. U II 58, s (i) (1 ba:f); Sue. 166, 4-5 (ozğurur kutğarur 'rescues! (Hend.)); 582, 17; s8s, 16 (önedtür-): Civ. bu kart igke adaka tegdükde ozğurur 'when a man falls victim to these dangerous septic swellings it cures him' HIl3,1 Tris. AZG D oza:kt N./A.S. fr. oza:, 'previous, of old time', and the like. Survives in some NE and SE dialects. Türkü vin ff. Man, M III 15, 9-11 (i) (yórüg): Uyg. viir ff. Man.-A ozakı özke “in a previous incarnation' M I 9, 4: Xak. xı (after 0Za:) hence one says oza:kı: bilğe: ança: aymış “a sage of old time (akimu”l-dahril-salif) said as follows' Kaş. 1 88; a.o. 7 385, 26: KB seninde ozakı ajun tutğuçı “the ruler of the world who preceded you' 5137; 0.0. 2699, 5339: xui(?) At. bu bir söz ozakı urulmis matal 'this one saying is an old time proverb' 164; Tef. odakı/ozakı 'previous(ly)" 233: Çağ. xv ff. ozağu kün diünki gün degil óteki gün . . . ve uzun gün “the day before yesterday . .. a previous day” Vel. 106; ozağu kün parirüz "the day before yesterday” Sar. 73v. 16 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv ozakı 'previous (year), former (times), (men) of old time” Qutó 202; Nahc. 11, 6; 266, 2; 368, 2-3: Kom. xiv “the day before yesterday' ozav kün CCG; Gr. D azığlığ P.N./A. fr. azığ, "having tusks, canine tceth", ctc.; s.La.m.lg. except SC, SW with some phonetic changes. Uy£. virt ff. Bud. (an elephant) Sanskrit isádanta "with strong tusks' yoğon azığlığ TT VIII C5; kadir yavlak azığlığ tipraklığ tinliğ “a creature svith strong and dangerous teeth and claws' U II 35, 21-2: Xak. xi azığlığ at al-farasu'l-qárilt “a horse that has cut all its teeth'; also used of any animal that has cut its canine teeth (tala'a nöbuhu) Kaş. 1 147: KB idi yaxşı aymış azığlığ kör er “the mature man very aptly said” 283; a.o. 2287: xın(?) Tef. azığlık (animals) "having tusks' 42: Xwar. xiv azığlık (a wolf) with sharp teeth" Qutb 18. D azukluğ P.N./A. fr. 1 azuk, "having food for a journey'. S.i.a.m.l.g. with some phonetic changes and extensions of meaning. Xak. xı azukluğ er /nsdr dü zad “a man who has food for a journey' Kaş. 1 148 (prov.). D azukluk A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. 1 azuk; "food prepared for a journey'. Survives only(?) in SW. Xak. x1 azuklük má uidda li İrad 77eoared as (ood for a journey' I274,17. . fr. uzak; survives only(?) in n various cognate meanings. Xak. xı uzaklık a/-ibrá! fi'l-anmr 'dilatoriness over something' Kaş. İ 150. D azkifia: Dim. f. of 1 a:z; "very few, very little”. S.i.m.m.l.g. vv. some phonctic changes and some additional Suffs., c.g. askincak. Türkü vırır uluğ irkin azkifia: eren tezip bardı: “the great İrkin and very few men fled' 1 E 34; azkina: türkü (bodun) “very few of the Türkü people" T o: Uyğ. viti ff. Bud. Sanskrit a/lpotsukas "worrying about trifles' azkya sıkışlıkın TT VET B.6; pulahamátram “equal to the weight of a (single) seed” a:zkya: te:pince: do. F.12; 0.0. do. A.0, 17; azkına kaldı “very little (of the treasure) remained' PP 5, 6: Civ. azk1-a oyup 'scooping it out a little" H / 147; ao. 161: Xak. xı KB azkina tat "taste a little (food)' 5440: xın(?) 7ef. azğına/azkına “a little; a few! 41: Çağ. xvff. az azğına kam kamah wa andak andakah “very little! San. 39r. 6 (quotn.): Osm. xiv azkinek (sic) "very little” in on: text 7 TS 7 290. D azğançu: no doubt to be so spelt and not asfan(u; morphologically obscure but ultimately derived fr. a:z-; the context indicates the meaning 'deccit', but perhaps 'flattery' is also implied. N.o.a.b. See azfancu:la:-. Uyğ. vin ffi Bud. tağun azğançu sözle“to speak in deceitful and flattering(?) words' occurs several times in an unpublished text TT IV 18, note A72, 8. S azkiya See azkifia:. D uzkiya Dim, f. of u:z; “rather skilfully, wiselv'. Pec. to Uyğ. Uyf. vı ff. Bud. mandal kilzun uzkiya "let him make the mandala (magic circle) skilfully! Su, 487, 7-8: Civ. könül ker tutup uzkıya olurzun “let him sit (i.c. conduct himsefl) wisely with mind at case” U Sp. 45, 13. Tris. V. AZGD azığla:- Den. V. fr. azığ, survives onlv(?) in NE Alt, Tel, azu:la:- "to göre” R 1 573. Xak. xı tonuz atığ azığla:dı: "the boar struck the horse with its tusks ()/-n65://) and wounded it”, and one says men topuznr: azığla:dım 'I struck the boar on its tusks'; also used in both senses of any wild beasts (siba") that have tusks Kaş. 7 304 (azığla:r, azığla:ma:k). D azuklan- Rcfl. Den. V. fr. 1 azuk, “to procure, or have, food for a journey'. S.i.m.m..g. Xak. xı er azuklandı: sára'l-racul dıpl-zad 'the man came into possession of food for a journey' Kaş. 7 294 (azuklanur, azuklanma:k). D azğançu:1a:- Den. V. fr. azğançu:, the contexts indicate the meaning “to deceive'; the spelling in U 1, which is quite clear, is either an error or a dialect form. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viii ff. Chr. meni ozğançuladı bu moğoçTar “these Magi have deceived me” U 7 o, 15: Bud. (in a long confession of sins) azğun 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 329 
     
   
   
     DIS çuladım (sic) erser “if I have been deceitful” U 77 76, 7; azbanculadim do. 35, 24; azğançuladımız tağunladımız erser TT IV 8, 72; özümde yavızlarığ kórüp uçuz1adım azğançuladım erser “if, secing evil things in myself, 1 have belittled them and been deceitful' Sus. 136, 13714; a.o, do. 220, 3. Dis. EZG D eziğ Dev. N. fr. ez-; survives in NC Kır., Kzx. ezü: 'oppression'; morphologically distinct fr. ezik, Pass. N./A.S. 'crushed, bruised', etc. which survives in SE Türki BŞ 580 and SW Osm. Xak. xr eziğ ku/ xadşa fi'l-cild füla(n) "any long scratch in the skin” Kaş. 7 71. ezüg (or ezük?) “false, lying; falsehood, lie'. N.o.a.b. Cf. ötrük, igid, yalğa:n. Türkü viii ff, Man. kimni üze yeme ezüğ tanuk ünmez “and he does not rise up as a false witness against anyone” M //T 22, 12 (ii): Uy. vi if, Bud. ezüğ yalğan söz “false lying vvords” U 77 76, 5; 85, 22; TT IV 8, 70; ezügüg “a le” Suv. 135, 12; (the decrees of the Buddha) ezüg igid bolmaz 'are not false (Hend.)”, US). 106, 28; o.o. U 717 69, 1; 70, 29; Suv. 371, 8 (atğanğu:): Kip. xii al-kidb “le” (ötrük/yala:n and “truth” is also called çın and “lie”) ezü:k (?sic, MS. erü:k) wa hiya luğa là ya"rifuhd ahad "but it is a word that no one knows' Hou. 27, 4. SE uzik See üjek. D 1 ózek Dim. f. fr. 1 ö:z, basically "the core or centre” (of something), with various specific applications. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SE. See Doerfer 11 595. Xak. xi özek al-abhar wa huwa "irq fi bátini'l-sulb “the spinal cord, that is the vein in the centre of the spinal column" Kaş. I 71 (quotn. fr. the Koran illustrating al-abhar): Çağ. xv ff. özek (spelt) möda wa rişa-i qurüh :wa damdmil "the matter and pus in ulcers and boils” Sam. 73v. 18: Kip. xv qalbu"l-şaçara “the heart of a tree” özek Tuh. 29b. 13; naxd' "spinal cord' özek do. 36a. 11. D 2 özek Dim. f. fr. 2 ö:z, “a small valley'. Survives in NE Alt., Tel, özök R 7 r3oz, NC Kzx. özek MM 493 and SW xx Anat. özek SDD 1125. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. TT V 28, 122-3 (2 ö:z), this word corresponds to cA'r *a stream, or valley between two mountains' (Giles 1,007) in the Chinese original: (Xak. XI see üzük). VU'?C or S özök Kaj.'s explanation is possible, but it is perhaps a Sec. f. of 1 ózek, with the vocalization altered to suit the etymology. Cigil xı özök /aqab li'l-nisà' "a Proper Name for women'; hence one says altu:mn özök naqtyatu'l-nafs ka! l-dahabi'l-xàligs *with a soul as pure as pure gold”, and ertini: özök sáfiyatu'l-badan ha”l-durra *with a body as pure as a pcarl”, because the peerless pearl is called erdini: and is contracted (sie, see ertini:); this Proper Name is used of Cigil women; its origin is ö:Z a/-nafs and the kaf ie. -Ök) attached to a word to mean 'pre. EZG “285 cisely that thing”: hencc one says ol erni ök keldür 'bring that man (and not someone else)”, with words with back vowels and those containing qaf or gayn Ok is used instead Kaş. 1 yi, a.o. I 141 (ertini:). D üzük Pass. N./A.S. fr. üz-; 'broken, torn off', and the like. It is not clear whether the entry in Kaş. is correctly placed here, or whether it should be transcribed ózók and regarded as a Sec. f. of 2 ózek, In a number of medieval and modern languages üzük is a Sec. f. of yüzük, q.v., and the word in Cag. relating to a tent may belong there. Türkü vii ff. IrkB 48 (ula:-): (Uyğ. see üzüksüz): Xak. xı üzük zull mà istancala mina'l-ard wa sára hiyad "any piece of ground which is swampy and becomes waterlogged'; and any “branch of a valley" (xalic mina'l-awdiya) is called üzük su:v Kaş. 1 71: (xiv. Rbg. (some of their statements are) üzük 'abbreviated' R 7 1896, but the older D.M. MS., 2v. 16, has kesük, same meaning): Çağ. xv ff. üzük (with -k”) xargáh asbübi . . . wa xàtim 'components of a tent . . . (and finger-ring”) Vel. 106 (see above), üzük ((1) anguştar 'finger-ring" (quotn.); (2) namd-i rü-yi alaçuq “the felt covering of a tent”, (3) ödra wa gusixta 'piece, fragment; broken, torn' San. 74r. 8. Ozge: “other, other than (something 81.), different'. Poorly attested in the early period, the occurrence in Talas is very dubious, the Uyğ. documents quoted are xit! or later, and the supposed occurrence in KB 1375 (see R 1 1294) is imaginary (etózke read at ózge), but s.ia.m.g. Cf. adın, adruk, ópi: Talas ix ff.(?) ózge: uya:rı:na: adrılmış 'separated from his other capable men'(?) Talas Il s (ET Y II 134) (after a gap; Özge: is reasonably clear in the facsimile but the next word is prob. wrong, and the whole very dubious): Uyğ. xum(?)ff. Civ. özğe alban yasak tutmayın “not being liable to any other land tax or tribute" USö. 22, 42-3; özge kişi "a third party” do. 32, 8 and 10; a.o. do. 112, s: (Xak.) xi?) Tef. ózge “another, other than” 243: xiv. Rbj. ditto R 1 1303 (quotn.); Muh. ko:cdan ó:zge: ğayrı”l-qabş 'apart from (i.e. in addition to) the ram” Mel. 18, rr, Rif. 97: Çağ. xv ff. özge (with -&amp;-") (kendüye ve) ğayri “(to himself and) other”, and it is also used in praise or censure, when one says of someone ózge dür Vel. 105 (quotns.); ózge (spelt) (1) Şayr “other (than)'; (2) xalım digar “another”, óOzgege b5a-digari "to another” (quotn.) San. 73v. 25: Xvvar. xiv özge “other (than), Qutb 125; MN 82, etc.; Nahc. 85, 17: Kom. xiv “other” óz&amp;e CCI, CCG, Gr. 186 (quotns.): Kip. xım ğayra "other than” (ayru:k; and there is another expression) özğe: (and another ópü:) Hou. 54, 13 ff.: xiv özge: both Zayr 'other' and sáyir “the rest” /d. 13: Xv öZğey (sic) means Zayrahu (and ayruk much the same), and also siwá “except” . . . illü and “except me” menden ózgey Kav. 40, 7 fi.; gayr özğe Tuh. 26b. 10; 89b. 13: Osm. .xiv ff. Özğe "other (than something 451)", c.i.a.p. 773 1 $73; I1 764; III 572; IV 636. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 330 
     
   
   
     286 D üze:ki: N./A.S. fr. üze:; 'situated upon” and the like. N.o.a.b. "Fürkü vir ff, Man. (the majesty, etc.) kamağ yer üzekinin “of everything on earth.” C/nas, 45: Uyğ. vri ff. Bud. kaltı tirpak üzeki toprak teg 'like (i.c. as little as) the dirt under a finger nail TT VI 336; yana sizni üzeki ayançan kópülin İdi unutmaz “and with supremely( ?) reverent thoughts he never forgets you” MHüen-ts. 18os-7: Civ. sarığ üzeki ağrığka “for a disease of the gall-bladder'(?) H 7/1 12, 100: (Xak.) xır((?) Tef. (the earth and) ol kim anın üzekini “that which is on it' 337. D ezüğçi N.Ag. fr. ezüğ, n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. ezüğçi yopağçı kişi ol erür “he is a liar and a false accuser” Suv. 563, 4-5. D üzuklük Hap. leg. A.N. fr. üzük. Uzüklüg in USp. 17, 6 is a mistranscription of üjJüklüg “in the handwriting of”, P.N./A. fr. F üjek; and the supposed occurrence in KD 1988 (R 1 1896) is a mistranscription of örüğlük. Xak. xı üzüklük z:ngr' (sic) 'severance, interruption! Kaş. 7 152. D ezügsüz Priv, N./A. fr. ezüg; “free from falschood'. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viirff. Bud. U 7 35, 1 (igidsiz); Hüen-ts. 216; Suv. 347, 9. D üzüksüz Priv. N./A. fr. üzük; 'uninterrupted, continuous(ly)'. N.o.a.b. Türkü vii ff, Man. Chuas. 315 (1 ür), TT JI ro, 86: Uyğ. virt ff. Man, tutçi üzüksüz 'always and continuously' TT 777 26; o.o. do. 104 (uzatı:), M HI 25, 11 (i): Bud. amru üzüksüz 'continuoasly and uninterruptedly! Suv. 109, 7; 464, 17; 0.0. TT V 8,68; U 126,2; TM IV 255, 132. Tris. V. EZGD ezügle:- Den. V. fr. ezüğ, “to deceive'. N.o.ab. Uyğ. vinif. Bud. tinliğlarığ ardım ezüğledim erser “if 1 have tricked and deceived people” Sur. 135, 10; alo, do. 220, I. D ózekle:- Den. V. fr. 1 özek, Survives, with different meanings in NE Tuv. özekte- 'to put a wick in a lamp, to stoke a stove, to light a fire” and SW xx Anat. özekle- “to bring together to a central point” SDD 1125. Xak. xi ol ko:yug özekle:di: qata'a abhara'l-£anam *he cut the sheep's jugular vein'; also used for striking it Kaş. 7 306 (özekle:r, özekle:me:k) Dis. AZL D azhk A.N. fr. 1 a:z; 'scantiness, deficiency, insufficiency, and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE. Xak. xi KB mipin döstun erse bir ol nzlıkı “if you have friends by the thousand, (the loss of) one leaves a gap” 4190: Çağ. xv ff. azlığ kami tea quşür 'shortage, insufficiency” San. 39r. 11 (quotns.): Xevar, xrn(?) (there was so much booty that) at ka'atir ud azlık boldi “there was a shortage of horses, mules, and oxen' Og. 273-4. . EZG. D uzluk A.N. fr. uz; 'craft, profession! or, more. generally, "skill, dexterity”, Survives only(?) in SW Osm. Türkü ix ff. Yen. Mat. 31, 1-2 should probably be read (Uz Bilge: Çanşı:) uzlrkin üçün alpin üçün erdemin üçün “because of his craftsmanship, toughness, and manly virtues": Xak. xi üzlük a/-hirfa “a craft Kaş, 1 253, 1 (ógren-); n.m.e.: KB (a man cannot get any advantages from his enemies) kalı kildi erse ózi uzluki *"however much skill he himself exercises' 4191; (another class of the community are the uzlar, craftsmen) tirilgü tilep ózke uzluk kilur 'they exercise their craft because they wish to make a living for themselves! 4456: Osm. xiv ff. uzluk 'skill, tact (as a virtuc), cunning (as a. vice)”, in several texts. 77S 7 738; 11 945; 1V 798. D izlik A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. i:z; lit. 'something connected with footprints or tracks”, Survives only(?) in NW Kaz. izlik “track, path” and SW xx Anat. 1zlik “a line”, izlek "footpath” SDD 778, 804. Xak. xi izlik "the Turkish shoe (al-hidà' made from the hides of slaughtered beasts! Kaş. 7 noq (prov., see oldi:-): Kip. xin al-sarmtica 'slipper' (başma:k, also) izlik Hou. 19, 5: xiv İzlik md yulbas frl-ricl “foot-vvear” İd. 13. D özlüğ P.N./A. fr. 1 ö:z, originally “possessing a vital spark, living”, and the like. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. özlü, "km. ó:zli, where it has a rather wide range of meanings. Uyğ. viirff. Bud. sansiz tümen özlüğ ölürür “they: kill countless myriads of living beings" PP 1, s-6, o.o., same meanings, Suv. 21, 11; U IV qo, 190; kisğn ózlüg yaşlığ tinliğlar “short-lived mortals” U 11 42, 27-8; uzun özlüğ yaşlığ “long-lived” Suv. 474, 21; İSİğ özlüğ ertininiz “your jewel of life" U III 14, 11 (ii): Civ. in USp. 13, 12 (2 uru6), 16, 17 özlüğümi(üz) scems to mean 'my/our blood relations” or the like: Xak. xı K B ózlüg ukug “inborn understanding! 1870; kicig oğlan özlüğ etöz mepzefi “a small boy is like a living body” 3603: X war. xiv ózlüg "living, lively! Qutb 125. D özlük A.N. (sometimes Conc. N.) fr. 1 ö:z, in the early period used only of horses, where it is not clear whether the connotation is 'personal” (ö:z “self” of the owner) or 'spirited' (ö:z 'vital spark" of the horse); in either event it means, in practice, 'a high bred bloodhorse”, S.i.m.m.l.g., where it usually means “personality” and the like, but has other meanings also, Türkü vir (in a list of precious objects) ózlük atın “their blood-horses” 7I Nir, ILS 12; olo, Ix. 4, 15; vin ff. IrkB 15 (3 ön): Yen. özlük at Mal. 28, 3: Xak. xt özlük a.-muqarraba (?so read, the MS. has al-maqarr bihi, which seems to give no sense) mina'l-xavl, sca. kadálika hull şay” xaşşalhı”l-racul li-nafsihi “a favourite horse', also *anything which a man reserves for himself' Kaş. II 438: Çağ. xv ff özlük xmudi wa hasti sta anüniyat 'personality, existence,   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 331 
     
   
   
      DIS. V. AZLegotism' (quotn.), also bd. xwtd. 'solitariness' (quotn.) Sen. 74r. 6. D üzlüg (ü:zlüg) P.N./A. fr. 1 ü:z, 'fatty, sticky, glutinous', and the like. S.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı (after 1 ü:z) hence ü:zlüfs as "fatty (dasim) food" Kaş. 1 4s; (after 1 üz) hence üzlüg mü:n 'fatty broth! 7 36; n.m.e.: Xvvar, xır üzlü “marrovvy" (sic?) “Al 56. Dis. V. AZLD azıl- Pass. f. of a:z-, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı yo:l azıldı: dulla'l-tarig "the way was lost! Kaş, I 196 (azilur, azilma:k): xın(?) At, yirak turğu yumşak tép azilfnaBu “you must keep well away (from a snake) and must not be deceived into thinking that it ís harmless' 216. D ezil- Pass. f. of ez-; “to be scratched", etc. S.i.a.m.l.g. with the same extensions of meaning as ez-. Xak. xı anı) eti: ezildi: xudişa lalinuhu “his flesh was scratched'; also used of anything in which long scratches are made Kaş. 1 196 (ezilür, ezilme:k; in the MS. the alif is unvocalized, the printed text is falsely vocalized): Çağ. xvff. ézil- (spelt) sayida şudan "to be ground, worn down' San. 10ov. 19: Xwar. xiv ezil- 'to be rubbed, worn down' Quib 23; mahüsiniı tükel ezildi “his beauty was completely destroyed” Nahe. 79, 10; a.0. 103, 6. D uzal- Pass. f. of uza:-; irregular, since uza:- is Intrans., and practically synonymous with it. Xak. xı er uzaldr ta'ayyá't-racul toa baqiva fi amr là yanfaric "anhu sari'a(n) 'the man was unable (to finish) and persevered with an affair but did not dispose of it quickly ; hence one says iğliğ uzaldı: “the pangs of death were difficult ('asura) for the sick man' so that he could not be put an end to (/à yuqdü) because of his strength (ie. “he İingered”) Kaş. I 196 (uzalur, uzalma:k, MS. in error -me:k); (of flowers in the spring) üküş yatıp uzaldı: fa-fala. mà qàsà fi'l-ard “and for a long time they stayed below ground” I 233, 28; sensiz özüm uzaldı: translated nafsi taştdq ilayka “my soul longs for you” IlT 131, 23: KB bu beglik uzala uzun boldi yaş “this rule endured and had a long life” 405: mana öznese kim uzaltp ölür 'whoever rebels against me dies a lingering death” 678; o.o. 8or, 8o9, 1096, 4261 (everywhere mis-spelt ózel-): xu(?) KBVP bu tórt nik sariflar uzala kilur 'these four good and distinguished people play a prolonged part 64: xu1(?) At. (the miser) wabal kótrüp bardı uzala söğüş “has gone (from this world) bearing a load of retribution and prolonged curses! 242: Çağ. xv ff. uzalipfuzala uzanup ve büyiytip . . . ve uzanup yatıb “grovving longer and bigger . . . lying outstretched' Vel. 106 (quotn.); uzal- see uza:- San. 72v. 16. D üzül- Pass. f. of üz-, "to bc torn, or pulled to pieces', and the like, S.i.a.m.l.g. with some extended meanings. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. künipe . kolğuçılar üzülmedi “the daily (stream   287 of) beggərs was uninterrupted' PP 7, 2-3; tamuda tuğdaçı tınlığlarnıp üzülmeki bolur 'there occurs a cessation of mortals born in hell” U T7 38, 74-5; similar phr. do. 43, 25; (the chain of life and death) üzülmez “is unbroken' TT VI 015; similar phr. do. 205 (alkinc), 381; aşılzun üzülzün “may they (respectively) increase and be brought to an end” TT VII 40,15;0.0. Hüen-ts. 11, 209, 1925: U III 60, s: Civ. (my claims against the other parties(?)) üzülmeyür “are not cancelled USp. 112, 9: Xak. xı üzüldi ne:p "the thing was broken' (inqata'a) Kaş. I 196 (üzülür, üzülme:k); bu yışığ ol üzülge:n “this cord is constantly breaking” (abada(m) yanqatı") I 158: KB (whenever I test the evil-doer) kéte bardi künde üzüldi küci 'his strength goes away and is broken in a day' 247; o.o. 6146 (ulaş-), etc.: Xwar. xiv üzül- “to be broken! Qutb 204: Osm. xiv ff. üzül- “to be broken, interrupted'; c.i.a.p. TT 1 754; H göz, III 740; IV 814. D özle:- Den. V. fr. 1 ö:z, the meaning in Xak. presumably comes fr. this word in its sense of 'the core or centre of something'. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. özle- “to desire'. Xak. xı ol u:nuğ özle:di: mallala'l-'acin "he baked the dough in the embers” Kaş. 7 286 (özle:r, özle:me:k): KB sukun açmış özler kaçan tok bolur 'when is the man who is famished with covetousness and desires (more) satisfied? $384: xn(?) KBVP kamuğ bu kitübni alıp özlemiş “they all took this book and made it their own' 13: xiv Muh. ixtöra “to choose (for oneself)' ö:zle:- Mel. 22,3; Rif. 102 (misspelt): Osm. xvrr ózle- in Rümi, xwástan ma talab kardan "to desire, long for” San. 73v. 1 (quotn.). D 1 a:zlan- Refl. f. of azla:- which is not noted earlier than (Xak.) xır(?) At. 360 and Xwar. xiv Qutb 18; Nahc. 402, 13, where it means 'to depreciate, despise'. Survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. SDD 144. Xak. xı ol bu: yarma:kığ a:zlandı: "he considered this (sum of) money small” (galil); also used of other things Kaş. I 297 (a:zlanu:r, a:zlanma:k): KB ukuş azın azlanma asğı üküş “do not underestimate (the value of) understanding; it has great advantages' 305. DF 2 a:zlan- Refl. Den. V. fr. 2 3:2; pec. to Uyg. Uyb. virt ff. Bud. azlanmak is used (instead of 2 a:z) to translate the technical term ?rsnà “lust” (lit. 'thirst") U II 9, 13; ro, 15; (if in giving alms) azlandım ktvirfakJandim erser 'I have been greedy and mean' Suv. 136, 15-16; adın kişinin edgüsipe azlanmamak künilememek “not to ust after or envy other men's good things” do. 220, 3-5. D u:zlan- Refl. Den. V. fr. u:z; survives only (?) in SW Osm. Red. 251 'to be good, excellent, Uyğ. vin ff. Man. M I 17, 1 (uz): Xak. xı er u:zlandı: abdá'l-racul fi san'atihi hüsn "amal wa hadüqa "the man created fine and skilful work in his craft' Kaş. I 297 (u:zlanu:r, u:zlanma:k).   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 332 
     
   
   
       c Refl. Den. V. fr. 1 ;survives only SW Osm. özlen- “ro be fatty, glutinous”. xı eşiç üzlendi: irtafa'a dasamı”l-qidr fat in 1he pot rose io the top) Kaş. I şə) (E    ül-, eyn. w. jt. N.o.a.b. vin ff. Bud. üzlünzün v.l. in one MS. Qlzun TT VI 381: Xak. xi uruk "the rone b (ingaza'a) Kaş. D üzlün- Reft. f. of ü               ; lit. "to be torn . Survives only(?) in NW Kaz. üzülüş- (ofa 7 and debtor) to settle their accounts! R 7 1349. Xak. xi hing broke' (ngata'a); and this is the izlügdi: ne:p 'the t ne says beği: kisi: (sc; cquired, ihe three dors chan to have b i : word                      E )v»zala: Scc uz     it. supreme, |j hiç - i £- vin ff; Bud. ietiksiz vanslates Sanskrit Gnuttara, same ianing U 1l 39, 101; üzeliksiz nom oşğunmuş öz baxşılarım ' my own teachers *ho have learnt the supreme doctrine TT "II 40, 145; 0.0. Sut. 24, 10 etc. "termination, üzlünçü: NAŞI fr. üzlün-, iümate': Pec. to Uyg. UyB. vufk Bud. nın ayığ yohmnip bu ok üzlünçüsi erür this indeed puts an end to his evil road (of ransnügrations) U H 23, 16-18, similar phr. o, 44, ag, üzlünçü tüb "he ulimate basis? lüen-ts. 1534; a.0. TT VII Alar. üzlünçülüğ P.N..A. izlünçü:, n.o.a.b. 7B. van fll ... ki i üclünçülüğ atur "here ends the iurroCucuon!' TT VIIH                    m    ) üzüm NOS, fr. locking,   DIS. V. AZL sense w. sönic phonctie changes:in Jnd - x» “ ü fA NW Kaz. cüzüm (fr. the Sec. £ yüzüm), e Doerf 473. Uy &amp;. vini ff. Civ. kurug     er 11 üzüm suvi a decocüon of dried grapes H 1 83: in. H İl several phr. including kurug üzüm and 1t üzümi "wild grapes? (lit. "dog's grapes); asğu üzüm 'grapes hanging (on the vine USp. 85, 45-6: xiv. Chin.-Uvg. Dict. pu -'ao 'grape' (Giles 9,497 19 en) üzüm Ligen 2773 Rli 303: sak      zl pz $56  5 un yüzün: al- zabib üm Ael. 78, 9: Rif. 182 zm isin” ku:ru: üzüm): Kom. xiv züm QCCI; Gr. i32 (quom): “nab yüzüm pu borla:) Hou, ” 2s ai- n kur: yü omitted; E             B i Cunt    bul "dale  T ba"d  atuyn fad yüqdir "aiğ”hsi a d ram” Keş. ?Pago:(Rip.xiv azman "a gelded when fully grown! Jd. 13). 'fris. V. AZMD üzmele:- Den. V. fr. üzme: Dev. N. fr. Uz- which exists in some modern languages. Survives onlv(?) jn NC Kzx. üzbele- “to pull up gently'. Uyğ. vin ff, Bud. alku tórlüg tsuynup tözin yıltızın birtem üzmelep pulling up completely the roots (Hend.) of all sins” T'T IV 12, 58-9. D leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr.  cümlen- Hap. üzüm. Xak. xı badıç üzümlendi: sara'l-'arig : the vine-1trellis. becione. covered .4 295 (üzüimlenür, üzümda "inab  Dis. AZN D uzun Intrans. Dev, N./A, fr, uzai-; "long. ofonnie and space. The phr. azun tonluğ “nh de ng cibles 3 Dann vur]y period "oMIDEUGÍCO    not, ss 0   uU      m.l.e. Fürkü vür JT:2í.€ &amp; "Er H A LUI —- ini T DH iyi vzin 16: luti do. 22 üçü 33 Man. uzun tonlug Chuas. 117 van £i Man.- A erli uzun Tontusti: sonun .. voman” M 1-16, 15-16: Man. üzün sansar "uin of rebirths! (Sanskrit sos cra)   Q 758: Bad. üzün ssnsar U 1] 133. 12; üzün türhoru "fər 2277 U HT 42, aii eit 2, Cof tine Ste. 140, PER iş uzun ioTaé “Sə le egg having bons joscly 349. a-aş a0. ÜSp. 104, 12  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 333 
     
   
   
     DIS. AZR ipse): Civ. üzün isiğ “a persistent fever' H 5 2. II 8, 49: 10, 64-5-—uzun tonluğ TT vH 26,1; 37 s (USp. 42, 5); (102 bales of) uzun karida böz "ong cotton cloths a cubit «ide(?Y USp. 13, 2-3: Xak. xi üzün 'anyihing long” Gamil) Kaş. I 77, six o.o.: KB pzun keç yaşağıl “ive long! 1553; 0.0. 1585, 4296 (üstep)—kah bolsa elğip bodunka nün "f your hand is outstretched to the LM yol “a long journey! 837; rn üzün à  i ) Hg ; Tef. uzinfuzun 'long, lengih” (of time pace) 322-3: XIv Muh. al-tuwil uzun j 48, ro, Rif. 142 (u:zu:mn), sz: Çağ. ime) Qut 202; MN 147: Bom. ditto (and ce) CCI; Gr. 268 (quctns,): Kip. xiu alzun Hou. i3: XIV üzün göfasoil Cómo Ka. 18, eic; Tuh. 23b. s:         i icr Özen and braing the 2 Ou de noced in Kap. fr. Hou.6, 18, İd. 12, etc. ai SE. UvB. vis £. Bud. ! "m tbe heart of the lo Rip.xivóOzen saqu'l-gacara wa'l-rukb(?1ea rukn) the trunk, shaft of a tree (or pillar?) İd. ız, al-süg özen (MS. ören) Bul. 3, 13.         Dis. V. AZND 1 uzan- Refl. Den. V. fr. u:z; "to work at, or be the master of, a craft'. Survives in NE "Pel. R I 1759, Khak, and "Tuv. and NC Kir, Uyğ. vin ff. Man. TT III 68, izə (1 2:3; Bud. al altağ uzanrnakim üze 'owing to my mnastery of devices (Hend.) Suv. 365, 20-1; kirn birók önü óni sastralarda uzanmakliğ bramanlar bar erser whatever Brahmans inzsters in various süstra's therc are” U 1I 27, 315; oo. HH 55 ,  x Ner PE NE der 593. 11. D 2 uzan- Ref. f. of veut; “o be long, ı tetohed out), and the hke, First noted in xni Hou. 41, etc. Survives in  irrilmute to uteabdy doen. Vu a -eı ht, to be self-ceriticd! and N.o.a.b. "Türkü vn if yeme: bu: s.avığ anga: (?4c, MS. fençek) öznemüissler yeğ a:hg bulu:şğalı: una:ma:du:klar “and they argocd(7) in this way uhout Tc abjeect bur did not cán Éioding à good yölunən” Tuy, Ho2v. 2 AETY PH a;g)y Man. ÜSenedtóniz erser "if se have been rebellious? Chuas 23: Uy. vini f. Bud. U I1 77, 17: 38 Üüran-); Nauk. xr oğul əfarkə: óeue:di: the meh inedhnt (uta) to his f r, and did nən obey (Jam yanqdd) bis orders; abo used Uu. faoc   UÜu4av 4 Jdl OZzen, nean!          200 289 in other contexts Kag. 1 288 (özne:r, özne:1ne:k): K.B 678 (uzal-), 681, 960, 2420, 4303: Rap. xiv özne- (?sic, vocalized ózen-) salama “to aci wrongfully, or tyrannically”, etc. 7d. 135. Tris. AZN üzcpü: (or üzenğü:?) 'surrup'. S.i.a.m lg., including Quv. yarana sh. V or, "The original form ijs uncertain, but the first is the Lhkeler. "Phis is basically the NE form, the y San X604 Sog, etc. being ezene/izepe/ izeni/üzenef/üzeni/üzönö, elsewhere the form is üzepgi or the like, but this sound change is not unusual in these languages. See Doerfer Xl 598. Xak. xı K B (if the begs look after the common people, they become great and rise) üzenü bar erse ciógen (?so rcad) berk kapar "fa man has a stirrup, he knots it and pulls it tight! 61170 (the MSS. have çıgen, but E : her ttace of such &amp; word, The                    sayru 1-viküi i ) dito: Çağ, a ff. no zo: (Xwor. xiv T b 204): Bom. xiv CCI, COĞ, Gr Fap. xin Uzetgü: (Que, İT Hut nü: Hou. 14, 1: XV al-rikdb üzengi Kam. 64, 3: Tuh. 16b. ız: Osm. xiv and xv üzeğü (?representing üzenü) in several texts. TTS 11 gör, 111 739; İV 812. D uzunçı: this seems to be the only. possible transcription of this word, which is pec. to KB, and describes a person of an unpleasant character; presumably N.Ag. fr. uzun, in which case some meaning like 'bore, longveinded” is indicated, perbaps 'grumbler'. Xak. xi K.B (have nothing to do with two kinds of people) birisi uzunçı yopağ kılğuçi biri Yki yüzlüğ kişi umduçı 'onc is the grumbler who makes accusations, the other the twoficed 1 r 272: Özke yukin, uzuncif sakin 'do not make un ? niator, take care to kecp the yraribler 2way from sou! 5303; 2.0. 5863.      Dis. AZR    4175057 7” 7 7 feehu Sásm.l, often in the phr. azar azar “İrtic Nak.x;i KB kimiz süt ya yup yağ yaxş ut kurut yadım yə kidiz ham azar evke tut 'kumis, milk, or wool, fat or yogurt, cheese, rugs or felt, take a little of each. for soar heme! q4042 (azar ds rhe reading of the best MSS, ej in Arat's text is an error). D üzre Sv üze:. D a«rak (lv: ie Éoof Tau; smaller, fever, 5 Nul. sang esxsept NC Nak. xi azrark aşar oxüngil ta'o:ssdf        
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 334 
     
   
   
       296 DİS. "alayhi qalila(n) "regret it. very. little! Kaş. III 361, 4; n.m.e.: Xwar. xiv azrak 'less' Qutb 17. Tris. AZR D üzere: See üze:. S üzerlik See yü:ze:rlik. Tris. V. AZRD özirken- llap. leg.; Rcefl. Den. V. fr. 1 à:z; the suggested translation is conjectural. Uyğ. viu ff. Man. özirkentipiz yomkini “you have brought masses of them back to their (truc) selves(?) TT III ror. Dis. V. AZSD üzse:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of üz-. Xak. xt ol yışığ üzse:di: "he intended and wished to cut (va/idig) the rope! Kaş. 7 276 (üzse:r, üzse:me:k). AZR Dis. V. AZSD ozus- Recip. f. of 0:z-; "to race one another” and the like. S.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı ol menip birle: at ozuşdi: "he competed. with me in horse racing' (f? sibügi'i-xayl); also used for helping Kaş. 7 184 (ozugu:r, ozugma:k, MS. in error -me:k). D üzüş- Co-op. f. of üz-; “to pull off, tear, break, etc., together'. Survives only(?) in NC Kir. and one xix Osm. text TT'S 1 75s. Uyğ. vin ff. Civ. alim bérim üzüşdimiz “ve have ccased to trade” USp. rrr, $-6; (I have received half a yastuk of silver from Inanqu) üzüşüp kesişip kétdimiz “ve have (thus) reached a final settlement! do. 116, 11: Xak. xı ol mapa: üzüm üzüşdi: “he helped me to pick ("a/£ qatf) grapes'; also used in the case of cutting a rope(/fi hadqi'l-habl) and for competing Kaş. 7 184 (üzüşü:r, üzügme:k): Çağ. xv ff. üzüş- (spelt) Co-op. f.; bá-ham qaff hardan "to break together! San. 72v. 9 (quotn.).    
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 335 
     
   
   
        INITIAL LABIAL PLOSIVES Preliminary note. Tie initial labial sounds in the Turhish languages soere. discussed at length in a paper of that name (Studies, p. xvit) and the conclusions there reached are summarized in Studies, pp. 171-2. Briefly they are as follows: (1) there tere originally in pre-vim Turkish both voiced and unvoiced initial labial plosives, b- and p-, but thf latter had disappeared nearly everywhere by viti, and is now found only in a few words in some languages in the Oğuz group, which toas unusually conservative in some matters; (2) contrary to this tendency, some Oğuz languages converted the initial b- in three words ba:r, bar-, and bé:r-, and twords derived from them into V- at an early date; (3) m- was not an initial sound in native Turhish words in pre-vit Turkish, but evolved by a process of retrogressive assimilation in most languages, probably during vut, in 1words. containing a nasal sound later in the word. In this case, too, the Ofux languages söere conservative and retained the original b-, which is also found sporadically in Türhii vut, and vin fT, Yen., and in Uyg. vin, Su. only. Where the later nasal toas n or 1) the position is quite clea?, 'I' is ben in the languages just. mentioned and men elsewhere. But where the nasal was fà the position is confused by the fact that in most swords this fi had become y before the word comes to our notice. Exceptionally we can be sure that 'dung' vas *bafak because, in addition to the Uyg., Xah., etc. form mayak, Kaş. records an Oğuz form baynak, but iz the case of a word like muyğak the original form *buü&amp;ak can only be inferred. — İn the bresent section all words are indexed toith initial b- ; where there is evidence from the Oğuz languages that it svas originally p-, (p-), or in doubtful cases (? p-) is added after the word. Where a word containing a nasal is noted only toith initial m-, it is indexed in that form, but the original form toith initial *b- is listed here with a cross-reference, but where the original bsurvives sometohere, even if only in a modern language it is indexed in that form. Mon. BA *ba: See ba:lığ. ?F wa: Exclamation, not a proper Turkish sound, perhaps a l.-w. fr. the Arabic Excl. tá 'alas', etc., also used in Persian. Cf. 2 ya:. Xak. xı wa: har/ inhür li-amr ámir muxdtib “an exclamation of dissent from something which someone says'; hence one says Wa: ne: tö:rsen inhàr 'alayka bi-mà taqül “1 disagree . with what you are saying'; also harf tawaccu*   fi-alam "an exclamation of distress in time of pain” Kaş. 1I 215. 1 be: Hap. leg.; onomatopoeic. Xak. xı be: hikaya "an tu ac”l-da”n "an onomatopoeic for the bleating of sheep'; hence one says ko:y be:le:di: "the sheep baaed” Kaş. III 206. 2 bé: “mare". Survives in NE Alt., Leb., Tel. pe: R IV 1212; Khak., Tuv. be, biye in NC Kzx. and several NW languages. "These forms point to bé:;, not br: Türkü vri ff. (the beg went to his horses) a:k (sic) bé:si: kulu:nla:mil:ş “his white mare had foaled” /rkB s: Xak. xı bé: al-ramaka 'mare'; for (all) Turks except the Oğuz Kaş. J1I 206; III 88 (yoza:-); 310 (yelne:-); xın(?) Tef. bé: 'mare' 100: xiv Muh.(?) (after *mare' Kisra:k) al-hublà wa mà lihà walad “(a mare) in foal or with a foal” bé: Rif. 170 (only): Çağ. xv ff. biye (spelt) mádiyün 'mare' San. isov. 3: Kom. xiv “mare” bey CCG, Gr.: Kip. xiv. al-hicru'l-rağüt “a mare with a foal at the udder' be: Hou. 12, 8. VU?F 1 bi: *knife' or the like. Prob. the base of bile:-. Pec. to Uyğ. and normally used in the Hend. bi bıçğu. Possibly a Chinese l.-w. fr. some word like 9'i “to split” (Giles 9,018). Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. Sanskrit ksurasya dhürd va “like the sharp edge of a razor' y[üli]günüp bisi (spelt pis?) te:à. TT VIII 4.1; (all kinds of dangers including) ağu bi bıçğu o:t suv “poison, sharp instruments, fire and water" U II so, 4 (i); o.o. of bi biçğu do. 71, 4 (i); U IV 20, 237; TM IV 253, 41 (osBug); Ti. 31a. 1) 493. 3. VUS 2 bi: See bó:g. 1 bu: “this”, C.ia.p.a.l. The oblique stem seems to have been bun- (changing in most languages to mun-) fr. the earliest period, but the Plur. was bu:la:r for a long time. The Abl. and Loc. are often used as Advs. meaning *hence' and “here” respectively. See also bunça:, buntağ. Türkü vir bu: “this” is common; bunu: /7. N 15; bunta: "here" £ S 10, etc.; vili ff. bu is common in /rRB, etc.: Man. ditto (but see bunça): Yen. ditto: Uyğ. viii ff. Man,-A bu; Dat. mupar MI əş, 8, a.o.o.: Man. bu; muni teg “like this” TT 7/7 26, 104, etc.: Bud. in Bráhmi script (TT VIII) invariably spelt bo/bho/po, oblique cases mon- and mun-/mu:n- in about equal proportions; this prob. represents a dialect pronunciation, perhaps under the influence of ol, rather than the original form: Civ. as in Bud.: O. Kar. ix ff. bu occurs and possibly bunta: “here” in Mal. 13, 5: Xak. xı bu: harf wa ma"nahu hadd a particle meaning “this”, hence one says bu: er “this man” Kaş. III 206; 2.0.0., one says mupa:r aydım “1 said to  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 336 
     
   
   
      492 5 MON. BA this man” FİT 375, munu: har/ sta ma"nahu hütva dü a particle meaning: “this”, it is the answer to the question ka:nı: ayna hurca "where is it?” FİT 237; other oblique cases are munda: “here”, mundin “hence”, bu:la:r “these”, bu:ni: “this” occurs once 7 445, 17 (xuma:ru:) perhaps a scribal error: Kİ as in Kag.: xın()) At. the forms are bu, muni, mupa, munda, mundin; Tef, the forms are bu, muni, munip/munur, mupar, munda, mundin, bularfmunlar 1:08, i10, 225-6: xiv Muh. hàdá bu: Mel. 5, 4; 8, 15, etc.; Rif. 75, 81, etc.; hd”ulöü” buzlar 8, rs, 81; hàhuná mu:nda:; min hàhuná mu:ndan 15, 3; 9r: Çağ. xv ff. munun, munda 5Dunug, bunda Vel. 385-6; bu Demonstrative Pron. in 'this' San. 141 v. 24(quotn.); munur, muna/mupa, munda do. 320v. 9fl.; some declensional forms, with quotns., do. rv. r6 f: Xwar. xii. bu, in oblique cases both b- and m- e.g. bunlar/munlar 'A/i 9: xın(?) the forms in Og. are bu, muni, etc., bunda (twice)fmunda (8 times), munlar: xiv bu, oblique cases in m- Qmuib (only munda “here” listed 112); MN passim: Kom. xiv bu and oblique cases with m- in Sing. and b- in Plur. are common CCI, CCG; Gr. 65: Kip. xii hada bu:, hö”ula” mu:nla:r Hou. so, 14: xiv. bu: bi-ma'nà da İd. 28; in the grammar do. 118-19 bu:, bula:r, bunda: are mentioned; in Bul, IS, a grammatical section, the forms given are bu:, munlar, bunun, bun, munlarun (U-hd'ulà), bulara: and bularun (/ahum), munlarun (/ahum fi'l-ibtidà “to them in the beginning'?): xv in a para. on the Demonstrative Pron. in Kar. 49 the forms quoted are bu:, bu:lar and munda:; in a similar para. in Tuh. 42a. bu and mu are given as alternative forms; forms occurring elsewhere are bular/ mular, munu, munun, munda: Osm. xiv ff. bu, bunu, etc. are the normal forms at all periods, bular was the standard form till Xv1 and occurs sporadically later. T'T'S 7 122 ff, IJ 174 fL; HI is ff., IV i130ff; munda occurs in one xiv text 77 698. 2 bu: 'steam'; this is the oldest form of this word, but in almost all modern languages in which it survives the form is buğ or the equivalent. S.i.a.m.lg. Almost syn. vv. bus but an etymological connection is improbable. See Doerfer 1l 791. Xak. xi bu: al-buxár 'steam'; hence one says eşiç bu:sı: 'steam from a cooking pot' Ka. 111 206: xiv Muh.(?) al-buxár bu: Rif. 184 (only): Çağ. xv ff. buğ “the steam” (btixár) which rises from boiling water or a cooking-pot and the like; the steam (i.e. mist) which rises from the ground or in the mountains is called duman San. 136r. 23; reverse entry do. 225v. zo: Kip. xiv buğ ma yartafi" min buxári'I-gidr “the steam which rises from a cooking pot' 7d. 33: Osm. xiv ff. buğ 'steam' in several texts. T'T'S 7 120; /1 171; IV 128. Mon. V. BAba:- "to bind; to fasten (something /Acc., to something Dat.), both lit. and metaph.  N.oatb.; in about xili: it was replaced. by bagla:-, q.v. Cf. çığ-, çiğ-. Türkü viri 727 (1): vir ff. IF B 14 (edgü:ti:); 33 (ur-); (?) Toy. IVr. 3-5 (sce aya:-): Man. böş tepri yarukin evke bark(k)a badimiz erser 'if we have bound the light of the five gods to our house and household goods' CAuas. 235-6; kentü könülin nığoşaklar üze bamaz ulamaz "he does not fasten (Hend.) his own mind on the Hearers (l.-w.)' M III 22, 12-13: Uyğ. vini ff. Man.-A ol üç yekleriğ anxrwznta badı “he fastened thosc three demons to the Zodiac (1.-vv.)” M I 19, 1-2; aydı ban tep "he said "bind him” ” Man.-Uig. Frag. 400, 2: Bud. (hang a bell on each tree) işığ bag, kamağ 1818. başın birgeru bap “tic a cord (to each) and tie the ends of all the cords together PP 8o, 1-2; bayurmen 'I bind', in a mystical sense U 7I 69, 1—5 (i); a.o. U TE 83, 2: Civ. afrifin bazun “let him bind up his painful (parts)! TT VII 29, 22; a.o. H II 16, 19: Xak. xı ol atığ ba:dı: “he tied up (şadda) the horse' (etc.) also anything that one ties up with a rope and makes fast (hull şay” "aqada "alayhi br'l-habl qta awtaqahu) Kaş. III 247 (bar, ba:ma:k), at ba:dim rabattu'l-faras "1: tied up the horse! 7/7 250, 3; alo, III 224, iz (Kasi:): K B katiğ ba ani “tic it (your tongue) up firmly' 964; o.o. 542 (katığ), 741, 1456, 1496, 1588: xırı(?) Ar. nelük malka munca könül bamakışp “vhy do you fix your mind so (firmly) to wealth' 183; similar phr. 220 (in both verses theze is a v.l. bağlamak). Mon. BB S bew[bóv See bó:g. Dis. V. BBGE büvkür- See bürkür-. Dis. BBL PUF bibli: (?pipli:) Hap. leg.; unvocalized but in a section headed fa'ii, etc. L.-w. fr. Sanskrit pippali “long pepper. See bitmül, Xak. xi bibli: al-dàr fulful "long pepper Kag. I 430. Dis. BBR PUF papur(?) See butar. Mon. BC VU bug buc Hap. leg.; onomatopoeic for bird-song. Xak. xı Kaş. I] 290 (simürgük). Mon. V. BCbiç-/biç- “to cut”, one of several words with this meaning, cf. üz-, kes-, etc., with restricted meanings like 'to cut out (a garment)' in some modern languages, ''he original form was almost certainly biç-, but there is great inconsistency about the vocalization, some modern Janguages having a back vowel in the verb and a front one in der. f.s like bıçak or vice versa. Survives with back vowel in NE and NC Kir, and front vowcl in NW, SW; in SE, SC «here -1- does not occur the true form    
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 337 
     
   
   
     DIS: BCG is uncertain. Türkü vırır (at the funeral) bunça: bodun saçl:n kulkakl:n y[apaki:n b]icdi: “so many people lacerated their hair, their. ears, and their cheeks! /7 S 12: viui ff. (ants gnawed an old ox) béli:n bice: 'cutting into its waist! IrkB. 37: Man. M I 7, 16 (üz-): Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. yitl kiliçin biçip "cütting with a sharp sword' U II 78, 30-1; bıçğalı U IV ro, 49-50 (ufra:-); o.o. U III 37, 8; 45, iz: Civ. tiprak biçsar “if a man cuts his nails" TT VII 32, 2and 17; ton bicsar “if a man cuts out a garment” do. 38, ro: biçğu do. 32, 1 (tirpak): Xak. xr er et biçdi: “the man cut (qata"a) the meat; (etc.) Kaş. II 4 (bıça:r, bigma:k); Minifk erin biçtimiz “ve killed (gata/na) the men of Mınlak” 7 434, 9; 6 o.o. translated qafa"a: KB kiliç ursa bıçsa yağı boyuni “if the sword strikes and severs the enemy's neck” 286; (this dagger) bıçığlı kesiğli turur “cuts (Hend.) 8ro: xin(?) At. 376; Tef. biç- and kesbıç- ditto 105: xiv Muh. haşada "to reap” bi:ç- Mel. 25, 7; Rif. 107 (bt:s-); al-qat' bıçmak 35, 7; 120; ditto bi:cmek 36, r3 (Rif. öt-): Çağ. xv ff. bic- (spelt) qaf" hardan, and metaph. haşdd tva diram; hardan, “to reap” San. 143r. 22: Xwar. xiv biçiğli “reaping” Qutb 32; biç- “to cut” MN 45: Kip. xiu haşada bic-(-gil) wa hurca tafsilu'l-qumág wa huetoa'l-tawstt bi"İ-sayf also “to cut out” (cloth) and “to cut in two' with the sword Hou. 33, 20; fagsala mina'l-tafsil biç- do. 42, 21: xiv biç- (with -Çç-) Autoa mugtarak bayn hagdi'l-zar' va fagli'l-qumág 1d. 29; faşşala big-(- mek) : Xv fassala wa wassata biş- (sic) . 9, 8; wassata biş- do. 25, ro, faşşala (üz- and) biç- Tu. 28b. 5; wassata do. 38b. 9. Dis. BCA VU baça: Hlap. leg., but see baça:sız, spelt bea, perhaps a L-w. Uyğ. vri ff. Man.-A (or "Türkü vrr fT. Man.?) (all men desire this) yeme birkinye mün baca sintmda süpükimde (gaplp bolmadı erser “and if (or because?) there has not been one single defect or fault(?) in my body and bones! M I 23, 31-4. PUF po:ct: no doubt a Chinese l.-w., perhaps ba izü 'lute, guitar” (Göes 8,551 12,317). Pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı po:çı: kopuz al-arann mina'l-a'wád, sva huroa naw' miüna"l-barabit “a lute which is plucked(?), it is a kind of guitar Kaş. İTİ 173; poçt: al-hirán wa huwa'l-arann mina'l-mazáhir "a lute', it is a stringed instrument which is plucked(?) 777 219. Dis. V. BCAbaça:- “to fast” for religious reasons. No doubt a pure Turkish word, contrary to the views expressed regarding baça:k, «q.v. N.o.a.b. "Türkü vru ff, Man. neçe yanılu baçak baçadımız erser “if we have sometimes kept irregular fasts" Chuas. 137-8; 0.0. do. 248, 258, 276: Uyğ. viri ff. Chr. kim mapa atayu arığ baçak baçasar 'whoever calls on me and 293 keeps a pure fast” M II 49, 7: Civ. (if a childless woman wants a child) yéti künke tegi begli yutuzli bacap 'the husband and wife must fast for seven days, and . . .' TT VII 26, 4-5. Dis. V. BCDD bictur- Caus. f. of bic-.. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv, the same phonetic variations as biç-. [n some NE and SE languages it has acquired the restricted meaning 'to have (an animal) castrated”. Xak. xı er yığa:ç bicturdi: “the man ordered that the wood should be cut (bi-gat'irl-xagab) so that it was cut” Kaş. II 171 (bıçturur, bicturma:k): xin(?) Tef. bictur"to order to cut off! (hands and feet) 105. Dis. BCG D baça:k N.Ac. fr. baça:- “a (religious) fast", A Turkish l-w. in Mong. as bagak (Kow. 1081) and also »smagak (Kow. 1996) which shows that it must also have been used in Uyg. Bud. Salemann, who was unaware of the etymology and true meaning of this word, suggested that it was a l.-w. fr. Sogdian p'iyk “hymn,, a word which does exist as a lw. in Turkish, see paşık, and Benveniste accepted this in Journal asiatique, vol. 236, 2, p. 184, but it is an error, N.o.a.b. İt was displaced in the medieval period by orug noted in (Xak.) xiu(?) Tef. 239; xiv Muh. Mel. 27, 15; Rif. 111; Kom, xiv CCI, CCG, Gr. 179 (quotn.); Kip. xv Tuh. 68b. 9 and Osm. xvi TTS III s49; IV 612 and still surviving in some NW and SW languages, which is an Iranian (?Sogdian) l.-w. with prosthetic O-, cf. Persian röza. Türkü vir ff. Man. baçak sıdımız erser “if vve have broken our fast” Chuas. 256; baçak olurup 'while keeping a fast” do. 257; baçak baça:- do. 137-8, etc. (baça:-), (when day dawned) kiçiğ baçak erdi “it was the small fast” TT II 8, 62; o.o. Chuas. 285, 330; M HI 38, 4-s (i): Uyğ. vii ff. Chr. M III 49, 7 (baga:-): Xak. xi baça:k sarcomu'l-nasárá “a Christian fast” Kaş. I 411. D bicak Dev. N. (N.I.) fr. biç- ; 'knife' and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. w. back vowels, and also vv. front vowels in some SC, NW languages. See Doerfer 11 721, 844. Uy. viri ff. Bud. biçak U IV 32, 7 (éligle:-); yiti bicekin “his sharp knife” U 111 64, 9: Civ. biçek ucinda “on the point of a knife” H I 117;a.o. II şo, 167: Xak. xı biçek a/-sikkin "a knife! Kaş. I 384 (prov.); over 20 0.0., normally same translation, once al-sayf 'sword': KB (he holds) bedük bir biçekiğ “a big knife' 772; o.o. 8to-1, 4131: xui?) Tef. bigak 105: xiv Muh. . al-sikkin bı:ça:k Mel. 12, 1 ff; 71, 6; Rif. 86, 173: Çağ. xv ff. biçek igne, süzan ma"nüsına "needle? Vel. 134 (quotn.); biçak (“vith -€-") káürd "knife”, in Ar. sikkin San. 144r. 7 (quotn.); biçek (spelt) sızan, in Ar. s5ra do. 144r. 9: Xwar. xiv bigak “knife” Nahc. 214, 7: Kom. XIV 'knife, dagger” bıçak CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kıp. xiv bicak (with -ç-) al-sikhin İd. 29: xv sikkin bigak (sic) Kav. 44, 13; 64, 15  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 338 
     
   
   
     294 DIS al-tabar "axe” nacık, ?error for biçak do. 63, 19; haşşdd “reaper” (sic, but apparently an alteration) biçak Tük, 13b. 2; sikkin biçak 19b. 4: Osm. xiv ff. biçak in several phr. TT. 7 95; 11 136; IV 99. D biçiğ Dev. N. fr. bic-; “an agrcement” the semantic connection is not obvious, but the derivation is certain, cf. bıçğa:s. Survives only(?) in NE Tel. pigu:; SC biçik "the cut of a garment R /[V 1318. Xak. xi biçiğ (misvocalized bayığ) al-mitáq twa'l-ahd 'contract, agreement; hence one says ol menip birle: bıçığ (sic) kildi: 'ahada mafi "he made an agreement with me" Kaş. 7 371: xın(?) Tef. bicif translates a/-"ahd and bigig kil- "ahida 93 (unvocalized; Borovkov, misled by the main entry in Kaş., transcribed as baçığ). D bicuk Pass. N./A.S. fr. bic-; properly 'cut', but usually “half”, cf. yarım. The word is unvocalized in Kaş., but was prob. still spelt biçük, in the medieval period it tended to become buguk by regressive assimilation. Survives in SE "Türki puçuk “snub-nosed” Shatv 58; ditto and 'with broken edges” BS I27; "a piece; dilapidated” Jarring 232, and SW Osm. büçük 'hal'. Xak. xı biguk(?) 'anything cüt” (maqtii') ; hence "half anything! (nisf kull şay”) is called biguk; onc says biçük yarma:k “half a drrham' Kaş. 1 377: xiv Muh. (under: a[-ba'u'L-maksira) al-maqti! bi:çük Mel. 82, iz, Rif, 189; nisfil-layl “müdnight” dün bu:gu:kt: 8o, 8; i85: Çağ. xvff. buçuğ/buçuk kasi ki bini-vi ü macruh gagta ma"yüb şuda 'a man wbose nose has been injured and has become disfigured” San. 130v. 16: X war. xiv bucuk batman “half a batman” Nahc. oy, 7: Kip. xın al-nişf buçük Hon.23,1:xiv buçük (“vith -ç-” al-nisf Id. 29; al-nisf (yo:sım?) Tkm. bucguk Bu/, 9, 2: xv al-nisf bisuk (sic); some people say ya:rum; the latter is used only to qualify a noun (mniidáfa(n), but busuk (sic) is used both that way and in isolation (mufrida(n)) Kav. 64, 19; nisf buçuk (and yarım) Tuh. 36b. 6; 62b. s: Osm. xiv ff. bucuk 'half'; c.i.a.p. T TS T ig, II v7; HI 113; İV 127: xviii buçuğ/buçuk . and, in Rim, nisf San. 130v. 16. S bucak Sce buçğa:k, S buguk Sec bicuk. D bıçğu: Dev. N. (N.I.) fr. big- , 'saw' or other cutting. instrument. Survives in NE Alt, Leb. piskt, "Tuv. biskt “a churn stick', and in several NW and SW languages as btcki (and the like) “sav”. Uyğ. vir ff. bi biçğu sec I bi:, kilici bicéesi (sic) 'swords and saws(?) Kuan. 27: Xak. xı (in a para. on the N.L.) bı:çğu: (sre) ism /i-dlati”llati yuqta" bihö”l-şay” “the wotd for an instrument with which something is cut”, derived fr. bı:ç- qafa"a Kaş. 1 13, 11; (in a similar para.) yığa:ç bıçğu: “the axe (al-fa's) with which wood, etc., is cut” I7 69, 27; n.m.e.: xıı1(?) Tef. bıçku 'sword' 10s: Çağ. xv ff. bıçğı (spelt) arra “a sav”, in Ar. mingár San. 144t. 8: X war. xiv. bicgü (sic) . BCG 'saw' Nalic. ir, 6-7: Kom. xiv 'saw'! bicki; “scissors” bucki (sic) CCT, Gr.: Kip. xin al-mingár bicku: Hou. 23, iş: Nv ditto bişki: (sic) Kav. 25, 9; bicku Tuh. 34a. 3; 49a. 3. D bıçğu:ç NI, fr. biç-, 'scissors'.. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı bıçğu:ç 'scissors' (al-migrád), that is anything used to cut things Kaş, 1 452; Kip. Nit al-migass 'scissors' (kipti:; also. called) bigkug (mis-spelt and unvocalized); "Tkm. sındu: /1on. 23, 11. D bicfa:k Dev. N. (Conc. N.) fr. biç- lit. 'something cut off, 'segment', and the like, with various particular applications. In some languages, even Uyg. (see buçğaksız), became buçğak by labial assimilation at a very early date. Survives in Kaj's last meaning in NE Şor piskak; Tel, pickak R IV 1318-22; "Tuv. bişkak, SE "Türki puckak BŞ taz and NC Kir. buckak and for "corner"” and the likc in several NW and SW languages as bucak/ buçak, See Doerfer H 842 and ?843. Xak. xı buçğa:k qufru'l-ard “a region, or zone (segment) of the cartlı", hence one says ye:r buçğa:kı:: buçğa:k 'a corner! (al-záteiya) and the like: buçğa:k cid akari'rl-cuzur yuc'al minhu'l-hidàá “the skin of the shank of a slaughtered beast used to make a shoe! Kaş. I 465: Çağ. xv 1L. bucak (sc?) unc cca dil'-i xdna the corner or side of a house” San, 130v. ro (quotn. Z'udifi, i.c, Rümi?), yaka buckakdağı kentler 'remote villages! Bübur (Gibb facsimile, 311 v. 13): Kom. xiv kün tuvuşnin buşğakı (sic) 'the castern. quarter CCG; Cr.: Kip. xin al-zá:wiya müna”l-bayt sa ğayrihi bu:ca:k. Hou. 6, 14: xiv bucak (with -€-) al-zateiva İd. 28; söümiyatıcl-bayt bucak Dul. 14, 10: XV zéieiva bucak Tuh. 18a. 3: Osm. xiv if, bucak 'corner' T TS I 119; 41 170; Hl iiz, İV 1275. S buçğa:k Scc biçğa:k, D bici Tap. leg.; Dev. IN. fr. hig-.. Xak. Xr biçğil suqáqu'I-yad. wa'l-ricl sta. kadálika şuqdaqı”l-ard 'cracks in the hands or fect', also 'eracks in the ground! Kaş, I 480; (in thc grammatical introduction) bı:çğı:l (sic) yesr suqdqu'l-ard, derived. fr. bt:çr:ldi: (50) nem "the: thing was cut” (xqofa"a) I is, 4 (scc bıçılğa:n). D bıçğa:s der. fr. big-; for the meaning cf. bicif. "l'here is no doubt that Kaş, intended the word to be spelt in this wav, it is placed with bekmes and Ktrba:s in a section headed -S, but there is no other known word with the Suff, -Ba:s and it may be a Sec. f. of -ğa:ç dissimilated fr. the preceding -ç-. Xak. xr bıçğa:s al-'ahd ta'l-mitáq bavna'l-qatem. tea ğayrihim “an agreement or contract between (the members of)a tribe, etc.” Kaş, Z 449(verse): XIV. Muh.(?) a/-maxdtira 'danger'(?) bıçğuş (sfc?) Rif. 189. Tris BCG D buçğaksız Priv. N./A. fr. buçğak (bicBa:k); n.o.a.b. Uyf. vin ff. Bud. ulusgi  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 339 
     
   
   
     DIS. BCN balık: bulupsuz buçğaksız “their countrv will have no remote corners (Hend.)' TT VI 427. Tris. V. BCGD buçğaklan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. buçğak (bıçğa:k). Xak. xr buçğaklandı: ne:n şöra li'l-ay' zameyd wa ahöri" “the thing had corners and shanks” Kaş. 17 273 (buçğaklanu:r, buçğaklanma:k). D *bicakla:- See biçekle:-. Dis. BCG, S biçek See bigak. S bicge/bicgü See bıçğur. F beckem (?peckem)/bercem (?percem.) Benveniste pointed out in Journal asiatique, vol. 236 2, 1948, pp. 1831f. that beçkem is an Iranian word which survives in Wakhi as bicham “a horse's tail'. Percem (parçam) is a Pe. word, still used as a l.-w. in SW Osm. for "a tuft of hair”, one left when the rest of the head is shaved; “a horse's forelock'; “a lion's mane” and the like. Sce JDoerfer II 840. Xak. xı beckem a/-sazoın wa hura'l-harira aw danab baqari'l-iahg yatasatotwam — bihil-batdal yawma'l-qitàl “a badge, that is a piece of silk or the tail of a wild ox that warriors wear as a badge on the day of battle! Kaş. 7 483 (verse): Oğuz xı the Oğuz call it berçem ditto. F becküm (?peçküm) Hap. leg. Benveniste pointed out (op. cit. under beçkem) that this is an Iranian word, corresponding to Sogdian ptiknp and Pe. baçham, başham 'sofa; court; vestibule'. See 2oerfer 11 722. Xak. xi becküm saqifatu'l-bayt "a portico, or long stone bench, in front of a house” Kaş. I 484. "ris. V. BCGD biçekle:- Den. V. fr. biçek (bıçak), "to cut with a knife, etc”. Survives only(?) in NC Kir. bigakta-, Kzx. pışakta-. Xak. xı ol anı: bicekle:di: saca'ahu bi'l-sikkin “he stabbed him with a knife' Kaş. 7I] 340 (biçekle:r, bicekle:m:ek). D biçeklen- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of biçekle:-. Xak. xr er biçeklendi: "the man owned a knife” Kaş. II 265 “5: r, biçeklenme:k). DF beckemlen- Hlap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. beçkem. Xak. xı er beçkemlendi: “the man wore a badge (£asavıcpama) on the day of battle (etc.)” Kaş. II 277 (beçkemlenü:r, beckemYenme:k). Dis. BCL VU beçel n.o.a.b. İt is difficult to see any connection between the two meanings; the bá in Kaş. is unvocalized and the two words may have been pronounced differently. Xak. xı beçel a/-matkd” mina”l-nisd” wa'l-amtan 295 mina'[-ricál xoa"l-xayl soa. cani t'l-hayatcán "of a woman, with a large clitoris; of a man, horse or any other animal, entire (i.e. not castrated)" Kaş. I 392. Kom. xiv “vith an injured hip” beçel CCG, Gr.: Kip. xiv biçal (v.l. baçal “vvith -ç- and back vowels') 'crippled (a/-zamin) of a man, horse, etc.” İd. 29. Dis. V. BCLD biçil- Pass. f. of biç-, “to be cüt", etc. S.i.a.m.lg. vv, the same variation in vocalization as bıç-. Xak. xı yığa:ç bicildu “the wood (etc) was cut” (quti'a) Kaş. II 122 (bigiluzr, biçilma:k): Çağ. xvff. bicildiraw şudan “to be reaped' San. 144r. 5. E Tris. BCL D bıçılğa:n Hap. leg.; N./A. of Habitual Action fr. bictl-, Syn. w. biggil; Kag.s statement that that word was der. fr. bicilapplies to this one. Xak. xr bıçılğam ai-şuqüq fi'l-aydi wa'l-arcul wa'l-ard ma"a(n) *cracks, both in the hands and feet and in the ground' Kaş. I sg. Dis. BCM D biçim N.S.A. fr. btg-; survives only(?) in SW Osm., "Vkm. biçim (sic) “the cut (of a garment); form, shape, manner. Xak. xi bi:r bıçım ka:ğu:n “a slice (şafba) of melon', or something else Kaş. I 395; a.o. I t5, 15. D bıçma: Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. big-. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. biçme, which, as well as being an ordinary N.Ac., also means 'cut out, fashioned (for a particular purpose). Xak. xı biçma: yori:incéa: al-gattu'l-maqtü' 'reaped lucerne'; note that words with the suffix -ma:/-me: and a Pass. meaning ('alá ma"nö”l-maf"ül) are genuine words (ism mahd) and I mention them accordingly Kag. I 431 (this explanation ariscs from Kas.'s earlier statement that he does not list conjugational forms scparately). Dis. BCN F bé:gin 'ape, monkey'; L-w. of IndoEuropean, prob. Iranian, origin, cf. Persian büzina, prob. entered Turkish as the name of one of the animals in the twelve-year cycle. A L-w. in Mong. as begin (Kow. 1121, Haltod 284). N.o.a.b.; now displaced by other l.-w.s, usualy Ar. maymün. See Doerfer Il 821. Türkü vir beçi:n yılka: “in the Monkey Year” I NE, H.T. II x (ETY II 109): Uyğ. vil ff. Bud. (in a list of unclean animals) böçinnin U Tİ 31, 53; 0.o. of bécin *monkey' U IV 28, 10; 44, 6 etc.: Civ. bécin (in TT VIII spelt pöçin, pçen) as an animal in the cycle of years, etc. is common in 77 VII and VIII and ÜUSb.: Xak. xi be:çin al-gird *monkey'; bé:cin *one of the twelve years in Turkish! (bzi-turkiya) Kaş. I 409; be:çin yılı: in the list of years / 346, ro: xiv Muh. al-qird bé:ci:n Mel. 72,6; 81, 1; Rif. 174, 186: Çağ, xv ff. böçin (spelt) büzina “moönkey” ə 144t. IO (quotn.): Xwar. xiv (Yazid 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 340 
     
   
   
       296 DIS. drinks wine and plays) becinler birle itler birle “vith monkeys and dogs” Na/c. 183, 10-11: Kip. xiv a/-qird becin (-c-) Bul. 10, 15. VUF bum Hlap. leg.; no doubt a l.-w., ?Sogdian. Xak. xr bujin, with -]-, a/-xarbaq “helleborce” Kaş. 7 398. Dis. V. BCND biçin- Refl, f. of biç-, n.o.a.h. Xak. xi er özüne: et bicindi: "the man pretended to cut (vuqatti) meat for himself” , also used for doing it by oneself (al-rnfirád bihi) Kaş. HH 141 (bicinu:r, biçinma:k): Kip. xiv. faşşala “to cut out (clothes)' (blc- and) biçin- Bul, 7ov.: Osm. xvi and xviii biçin- “to cut out (clothes) for oneself" in two texts 77 7 96; IV ror. Tris. BCS VUD baçasız Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. baça: q.v.; spelt öçasız. Uyğ. vir ff. Man.-A (or Türkü vir ff. Man.?) muns[üz] baçasız arığ turuk “free from fault and defect(?) pure and clean! M 7 24, 2. Dis. BCŞ D bicis Tlap. leg.; Dev, N. fr. biç-, Xak. xı Dicis "the word for any piece (gif"a) of brocade given to a guest who attended banquets given by notables, and feasts” Kaş. 7 366. Dis. V. BCSD bicis- Hap. leg.?; Recip. f. of big-.. Xak. xı ol meníiy birle: yığa:ç bıçışdı: "he competed with me in cutting( f? qaf”) wood' (etc.); also used for helping; also used of two men when they part company (al-raculán ida tahácará) Kaş. IH 92 (bıçışu:r, biçişma:k). Mon. BD bat Preliminary note. T7rere is no doubt about the existence of an Adv. bat (?pat) seiich was originally a pure onomatopocic (see Kag.), and came 10 mean 'quickly! and the lihe. There is no reason to doubt the authenticity of a second bat noted in Kas., and prob. surviving in NC Kir, Finally there are trco or. perhaps. three. early occurrences of schat seems to be a different word əvhich may survive in NE Twv. 1 bat (?pat) originally an onomatopoeic for the sound of a falling object hitting the ground, but normally used as an onomatopoeic meaning *quickly, hurriedly'! Survives in NE Tuv. pat “extremely” (e.g. tired) Pa/. 328; SE Türki pat 'quickly, soon” Shaw, BŞ, Jarring; NC Kir. bat ditto; SC Uzb. bot ditto; SW Osm. pat ditto, and onomatopoeic. Uyf. vin ff. Civ. (the child) bat tüşer “is soon born” H 7 23; bat edgü bolur "he quickly recovers” do. 28; o.o. TT VII 28, 28 (onal-), 28, 37: Xak. Xt one says bat kel, like the expression (VU) Sap kel in telling (someone) to hurry (bi'i-isrd'); and for the sound (/i-saxwt) of anything  BCN light which falls bat tüşdi: (“it fell with a plop') Kaş. 1 319: Çağ. xv ff. bat züd ra sari" “quick, quickly (quotn.); bat bat züd züd San. r19v. 13: Xvvar, xin bat "quickly" "Ali 47. 2 bat perhaps survives in NE Kır. bat “ylue, paste". Xak. xı bat a/-facir "thc thick juice of pressed dates” Kaş. 7 319. 3 bat the first two quotns. below come fr. inscriptions of which the text is very dubious, but if tightly read. may be the word which survives in NE “uv. pat "worthless, insignificant' Pal. 328; the third quotn. may have 1 bat in an unusual meaning. Türkü vr (gap) yaviz bat biz azığ üküsüğ kórtig er(sig]ti: süle[li]m “ve are in a bad way and worth very little; you have seen how few (we are) and how many (they arc); let us take the field bravely” Ongin 7: O. Kir. ix ff. (gap) bat ermiş öldim “1 was worthless and died Mal. 10, 11; Uyğ. viirff. Bud. (if a man has offended the begs and they contemplate killing or torturing him, their swords and saws(?) and whips break into small pieces and) nep bat kilu umaz “they cannot do him harm'(?) Kuan. 27. bet “the (human) face”. Rare in the carly period being syn. vv, 2 yü:z but survives with this and extended meanings, 'cheek, the surface (of water)', etc., as bét/bet in NC Kir, Kzx.; SC Uzb; several NW languages and in SW Osm. in the phr. bet bepiz 'complection' Uyf. vin ff. Bud. (tantric) bir yeğirminç isak(?) atli$ uzik ol béti üze urğu ol “the eleventh is the letter called isa (?); one should put it on one's face” TT VII 41, 2-5: Çağ. xv fl. bet ri wa "arid "face, cheek' Sar. 119v. 19. bit originally 'louse', but also used for 'bug' and other parasites, including those on stored products. S.ia.m.l.g. Uyf. vir (PL Man.-A tonnun biti “body (lit. clothes") louse” M 1 8, 14: Xnk. xı bit a/-qaml "louse” ş and the worm (al-düd) which attacks wheat is called tarığ biti: Kaş. 7 320: xw Muh. al-qaml bi:t Mel. 74, 6, Rif. 177: Kom. xiv "louse' bit CCT; Gr.: Kap. xni al-baqq sta”l-fasafis "bug” (kandala:) T km. beşik biti that is "the cradlc 1ouse” (qamlu'l-mahd) Hou. 11, 20 ff.: xiv bit al-qaml İd. 28; Bul. ıı, 6: xv ditto Tul. 29a. 8 1 bo:d prob. originally 'stature, the size of a man”, but from the earliest. period it also clearlv means 'a clan', the Sing. of bodun, q.v.; the meaning underlying the latter is perhaps “lineage” that is the size of a clan as a number of natural families. S.i.a.m.lg.; in NE bot/pot/pos/poy, elsewhere usually boy, usually 'stature', but in NE “self”, the meaning “clan” is rare, but survives in SW Osm. See Doerfer 11 812. Türkü vin (the "Türkü people (bodun) died, disintegrated, and were destroyed) Türkü şiri(?) bodun yerinte: bod kalmadı: “no clan remained in the country of the fortunate(?) "Türkü people"   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 341 
     
   
   
     MON. BD T 4; (if it had not been for Elteriş Kağan and myself) bod yeme: bodun yeme: kişi: yeme: idi: yok erteçi: erti: "there would not have been a clan or a people or (even) an individual” T 6o: Uyğ. (viii bod has been read in Şu, E ro and W 1 but in both places seems to be part of a longer word, in /£ 10 a placename (?Bodukli:) and in W r of bodun): vin ff. Bud. körk mepiz öp bod üze atkangulüksuz üçün “because of their frecdom from attachment (to this world) in respect of perceptible qualities (Sanskrit vi£aya) form and substance! Suv. 60, 6-8; a.o. do. 593, zo: Civ. bodka: tegmiste 'when he has grown to full stature' U.Sp. 98, zo: XaK. xı bo:d qaddı”l-insán wa qümatuha “the size and stature of a man”, hence one says uzu:n bo:dluğ kişi: “a tall Gamilu”1-qadd) man! Kaş. HJ 121; olo. I 412, 21 (1 ta:l); Hİ 216, 21 (tapi:); and see Oğuz: K B (God does not walk or lie down or sleep) nö menzeğ nà yanzağ kótürmez boduğ “He has nothing like or resembling Him and does not wear a physical form” 17; o.o. meaning 'body' 3571, 1099 (1 ok); toss (egil-)—kapuğda kalin bod térildi tolu “a dense mob of people has assembled at the gate' (but where can 1 find a competent man to manage my affairs?) 1614; kalin bod kara baş “a dense mob, common people” 1622: xın(?) At. halal yégli kanı kórünmez bodi "where is the man that cats (only) permitted food? His shape is not scen' 418: xiv Muh. al-qadd sca'l-qama bo:y Mel, 48, 7; 66, 14; 83, 15; Rif. 142: Çağ. xv ff. boy (1) gámat San, 142v. 12: Oğuz xı bo:y al-raht wa'l-qabila zoa”l"aşira "clan, sub-tribe, tribe'; anecdote describing its use in the phr. bo:y kim "what tribe do you belong to?” Xaş, III 141; o.o. under words described specifically as Oğuz I 44, 13 (1 u:e, a/-gazım 'tribe"); 7 338, 27 (kim, al-qabila wea hisva ism cam', a *collective noun”), /7 209, 2 (çakrış-, al-qawm); III 447, 13 (toldra:-, al-nás "the people", MS. to:y in error); o.o. of bo:y under words specifically or by implication described as Xak. I sı, 16 (0glt, ai-gawm); 237, ro (alkış-, a/-qarcm), 238, 17 (emgeş-, a7-nös), II 274, 10 (tarmaklan- a/-/i/al wa'l-qabà'tl “clans and tribes”), 316, 21 (yulit-, qabila): Xwar. xiv bod/boy 'body, stature', etc. Qutb 35; boy ditto MN 6, etc.; boy bér- “to submit Nafic. III, 17; 38o, 9: Kom. xiv “body” boy common CC?, CCG; Gr. 63: Kip. xui al-qadd tva'l-qàma bo:yı: (sic) Hou. 19, 17: xiv boy al-qàma İd. 37; ditto boyı: (sic) Bul. 9, 11: xv badan "body” boyu, corrected to boy Tu. 8a. 3: Osm. xiv boy 'clan', c.i.a.p.; “body, stature! in two texts; 'branch' (not “bank” as translated) of a river in one xvi text 77S 7 114; J1 162; III 109; IV izi. 2*bo:d “colour” or the like. "This word seems to be the original form of boy in Uyg. vır ff. Man. and the basis of 1 bodu:-. UYyğ. vir ff. Man. kara boy “black coloured! M 171 11, 18 (emig). E 3 bo:d 'bustard' follows 1 bo:d in Kaş. 777 121; it is an obvious error for to:d, q.v.; the 297 following entry bo:d moncuk presumably contains a similar error. 1 bu:t (bu:d) properly “the thigh'; sometimes more generally “the leg”, “the hind legs (of an animal)", and the like. "The original -d, which could in any case be inferred fr. the long vowel, survives in SVV Az. bud and the oblique cases (budu, etc.) in Osm. and the long vowel in "Fkm. bu:t. Sia. m.lg.; cf. udluk. Uyğ. vii ff. (Bud. but kótürmece tınlığ oğlanıpa “for the sons of men who walk on their legs" TT VII 40, 141-2 is thus transcribed in the text, but the word is more likely to be bod “having a bodily form”): Civ. kolin butin sizlatur 'it makes his arms and legs ache” TT VII əş, 2; kayu kişilnip koh] buti başı yomá£i tepreser “if a man's (arms,) legs, and head all twitch' do. 34, 2-3: Xak. xı bu:t al-faxid "the thigh' Kaş. III 120; (of a bird) butt: sinu:r. tarkastr richihu "its leg breaks! 7 254, 24: KB (of farmers) kerekliğ kişiler turur bu butu 'these are the mainstav(?) of people, essential (to the community)' 4400: xi(?) Tef. bud/but 'leg' (in phr. farms and legs") 109, 112: xiv Muh. a/-/faxid bu:t Mel. 48, 3; Rif. 142 (followed by “thigh bone” uyluk): Çağ. xv ff. but bud, rdn ma nàsina 'thigh' Vel. 146; but az ran tà sar-i angusgtàn-i bü "the leg from the thigh to the toes' Sar. 130r. 23 (quotn.): Kom. xiv '"thigh' but CCI; Gr.: Kip. xii al-faxid but Hou. 21, 6: xiv. bud (sic) al-faxid, and some of them substitute -t and call it but İ4. 29; but a/-faxid do. 33: xv al-warik *haunch, hip-bone' bu:t Kav. 61, 7; faxid but Tuh. 27b. 4. F 2 but the normal rendering of 'Buddha' in Uv£. Bud. is burxan, but but, prob. a ].-w. fr. the Chinese rendering of Buddha, fo (G?/es 3,589; Ancient Chinese b'just in Karlgren's Grammata Serica, No. şoo 1.) occurs in namo but the Uyg. rendering of the Sanskrit formula namo Buddháya "homage to the Buddha in TT IV 14,69; VII 40, 3 etc. But in the passages below is more likely to be a l-w. fr. Pe. than Chinese direct, but the Pe. word itself is likely to be a l.-w. for Chinese prob. through Sogdian, dating from the time when there were Buddhist temples in the Sogdian-speaking areas. Cf. burxan. See Doerfer 11 716. (Xak.) xiu(?) At. öz elğin but étip idim bu tédi “making an idol with his own hands he said “this is my lord" ' 124; Tef. but/but burxan 'idol' (also but xana "dol temple rız: Xwar. xiv but “idol” Qutb 38. VU 3 butt (?bu:d) pec. to Kaş. the meaning common to his two translations seems to be something like “a valuable object'. Xak. xı bu:t the word for any 'large and precious turquoise' ( fayrzzac) hung on the forelocks (al-nawdsi) of the sons and daughters of notables; hence one says kız bu:t urdi: (MS. uri:di:, but wada'at requires urdi:) wada'ati'I-cüriya dálika “the servant maid put on that object' (presumably on the child, not herself): butt the word for tlie provision (mira) made for  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 342 
     
   
   
     298 MON. BD anyone who brings a gift or present from a notable; for example if one man gives a horse to another, the groom is given a dinür or a sheep, and such a sheep is called bu:t Kaş. 7/7 120. VU böd “a royal throne; N.o.a.b. In 7 S 1 the first passage quoted appears as bu ödke: olurtim, but this seems to have been an error and is changed in IJ. N, the later inscription. Türkü vir (I Tenri: teg Tenri:de: bolmiş "Türkü Bilge: Xağan) bódke: olurtim “have taken my seat on the throne” 7I. N r (I S r “at this time", sce above), bödke: özüm olurıp “I myself, sitting on the throne' 77 E 2; bödke: körüğme beğler-ğü yayiltacrsiz *will you 5egs, when you look to the throne, misbehave?” 7 S ır, I1 E 8. Mon. V. BDbat- basically “to descend and disappear! (as opposed to én- which is merely 'to descend"), hence “to sink; (of the sun, etc.) to set.” S.i.a.m.l.g. Türkü virt ff. Man. (the sun and moon) tuğar batar 'rise and set” Chuas. 24: Uyğ. vii kéce: ay [bJatar erikli: süpüşdim “T fought at night as the moon set” Su. Er (Ramstedt read varuk batar, but the photograph shows no room for the extra letters): viti ff... Bud, (then. those mortals, as they revolve in the river of this world) comar batar teğzinür, “sink (Hend.) and revolve' TT VI 19s v.l.; o.o. of çom- bat- U III 44, 2(0; TT IV, p. 15, footnote 4-5; ao. TT VIHI K.s (elig): Civ. ay tepri battı "the moon has set' TT 1 40; in TT VII 1, an astronomical text, batar, of a star, means both 'sets' and “is below the horizon'; a.o. USp. 28, 45 (2 uruğ): Xak. xı kü:n battı: farabati'l-sams "the sun set”, and one says korufjrn (misspelt) suvka: battu rasabati'l-anuk. fi'l-ma' "the lead sank in the water (ctc.); also used of anything which disappears from sight (ğaba 'ani'l-'ayn) Kaş. II 293 (bata:r, batma:k), (the duck) suvka: bata:r yaris fi'/-má' 'dives under water' / 528, ro, a.o. JI 128, 6: KB künüm batğalır teg "as my sun sets! 1072; xiv. Muh.(?) ğaşa bat- Rif. go (only); ğabatı"l-şamş kün battı: do. 113; al-faws batmak do. 120: Çağ, xv ff. bat- firi raftan "to descend, sink" San. 119r. 28: Xwar. xiv kün batar (quasi-Noun) 'sun-set' Qutb 29: Kom. xiv "to sink, set" bat- CCG; Gr. $3 (quotn.): Kip. Şatasa of the sun, moon or star, “to set), batHou. 35, 18, £ága mina'l-gawg 'to sink” su:da: bat- do. 47, 17: xiv bat- jatasa (normally “to dive") /d. 28; bat- ditto, do. 33; ğaşa bat- Bul. 6sr. xv ğatasa bat- Kav. 8, 15; 76, 4; Éariqa "to sink, be submerged' batTuh. 272. 2. PU bö:d- Hap. leg.; the first letter is undotted, but as the word comes between t:d- and bu:dit must have been öz. Xak. xr anın kó:zl: bé:dti: abşarat 'avnuhu da'ifa(n) "his eyesight was vveak” Kiş, III 439 (fatlia over first letter; b6:de:r, bé:dme:k). S bit- See büt-. bu:d- "to die of cold”, survives with the same meaning only(?) in SW xx Anat. bıy-/buy-/ buyu-/buz-/büy- SDD 202-42; Tkm. buy-. Xak. xr er tumluğka: bu:dti: haşira”Eracıl mina'l-bard sea. máta "the man suffered from the cold and died' Kaş. III 439 (bu:da:r, bu:dma:k). büt- has an extraordinarily wide range of meanings, the starting-point of which seems to be "to become complete'. "This developed in two contrary directions, “to come to an end, be finished', and “to be rcady to start” with various special applications. S.i.a.m.l.g., in NE, SE, NC Kir, biit-/püt- in NC Kzx., SC, NW, and SW bit-. Uyğ. vırı ff. Bud. Sanskrit sampannabrahana (a man) 'whose efforts are complete' (i.e. *crowned with success" bütmiş (bütmiş) katığla:nma:klığ TT VIII 4.5; na hrtam bhavati 'it is not done' (by wisdom) yara:tılmış bolma:sa:r a:zu bütmiş (ğütmiş) do. 4.11; (a man strives only so much) yávad arthasya nişbattı "as to achieve his purpose” ne:ce:ke: tegi asığnın bütmekl bolsar (pütmeki polsar) do. E.44; alku tórlüg küsüşleri kanıp bütüp “his desires of all kinds are satisfied and fulfilled” TT VII 40, 130; similar phr. U 7/1 8s, 12; U IV 14, 135-6 -—-uluf nlapadturju is büter “the great task of weakening (the devils) comes to a (successful) end” TT V ro, 97-8; a.o. Suv. $39, r—(a stainless pure magic body) bütti "has come into existence' TT V 8, şə: Civ. in fortune-telling texts, e.g. TT I 75, 176; VII 28, 28 (uğra:- ) phr. like iş büter or bütmez are common—in medical texts büt- “to heal (Intrans.)' is common, e.g. bés on yıl kart bütmeser kişi etin yakğu ol bat büter 'if a man has an ulcer which will not heal for five or ten years, he must rub it with human flesh and it heals quickly" H / 3o0-1—kim üni bütüp "f a man's. voice fails! do. 146: Xak. xr er ü:niü: bütti: the man's voice failed' (xafat) because of hoarseness in the chest, or iliness, or n blow; and one says anın alımı: bütti: fabata daynuhu 'alayhi toa. şahla "the debt due to him was proved and authenticated'; and one says ba:ş büttli: indamala'l-curh "the wound healed'; and one says kul tepri:ke: bütti: “the servant acknovvledged (aqarra) the uniqueness of God” Kaş. II 294 (continues in Kip., q.v.); (when the wise man sees it) sö:zke: büte:r yuşaddiq halümi "he confirms my statement' III 137, 6; 0.0. I 219, 26; İTİ 166, 20; 240, 26: KB büt- is common, usually “to believe, rely on (somcone Dat.)', e.g. büt maya 742; o.o. 28, 46, SI, 290, 725, 729, 915, 1090, etc.— berge basi büter 'the wound inflicted by a whip heals' 2580: xui(?) At. bu til başıktursa bütmez büter ok başı “if the tongue wounds (the wound) does not heal, (as) an arrow wound heals” r39-4o, Tef. bit- (of a girl's breast) “to grow, fill out” 104; büt- “to believe in (someone Dat.) rr3: xiv Muh. nabata (of a plant) “to grow' bit- Mel. 31, 9; Rif. 115: Çağ. xv ff. büt-(-tl, etc.) bit- . ... eker yerden nabüt bit- . . . veydi cardhat ogulup bit- .. . . ve yü bir iş ve bir bina tamam olup bit  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 343 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. BDA"of a plant, to grow; of a wound to hcal; ofa task or building to be completed" Vel. 144-8 (quotns.); büt- (r) rüyidan giyáh wa sabza of a plant or vegetable, to grow'; (2) tltryàm yüftan zaxm wa cardhat "of an injury or wound, to heal'; (3) süxta şudan sea ancám yüftan "to be done, finished'; (4) 5a-"amal amadan wa haşil şudan "to he produced, to come to pass”: (s) teufüg wa "timüd kardan “to trust, rely on” San. 128r. 16 (quotns.): bit- (1) to (4) as above, “in these four meanings a duplicate (murádif) of büt- above' do. 143r. 7: Kip. xt (after Xak. entry) and one says ot bütti: fala'a'l-nabát wa nabata “he plant emerged and grew', also used of frufts when they grow; and one says oğla:n bütti: "the child was born' (tondida), and one uses büttl: of anything that grows or is born or created (xuliqa) Kaş. II 294 (büte:r, bütme:k): Xwar. xiv bit-/ büt- (1) "to be completed, achieved'; (2) "to believe in (someone Dat.)' Qutb 34, 39; Nahc. 26, 6: Kom. xiv “to grov” bit- CCG; Gr. 61 (quotns.): Kip. xiv bit- (sic) nabata ld. 28; inqadá wa nabata “to be accomplished; to grow" bit- Bul. 24r.: xv qadd (?qudà) ay al-şuğl 'of a task, to accomplish (?to be accomplished)" bitTuh. 30a. 7; nabata bit- do. 374. 4: Osm. xiv ff. bit- 'to come into existence, be produced', and the like; “to sprout, grow; c.i.a.p. TTS I 110; HH 156; HI 106; İV 116. Dis. BDA S bitl: See bitig. PUF buda 'liquorice' ultimately der. fr. Sanskrit madhuka (see H. W. Bailey in Fuad Köbrülü Armağam, Tstanbul, 1953, p. 53). Arat's translation “grape” based on a supposed derivation fr. Chinese f'u t'ao (see üzüm) is an error. Uyğ. vin ff, Civ. bir sunça budanı “a piece of liquorice an inch (l.-w.) long” H I 146; buda tübi 'liquorice root” do. 1915 0.0. do. iso, H İİ 14, 133. botu: (2poto:) “camcl colt, usually under a year old”, see Sheherbah, p. 106. An carİy 1.-vv, (with Mong. suffix) in Mong. as botoğan (Haerisch zo, Kow. 1 181). S.i.a.m.l.g., usually as bota or the like; this final -a, and the Mong. form, strongly suggest an original final -o:. The SW forms, Osm. puduk; Tkm. pota hint at an original initial p-. See Doerfer lY 777. Xak. xi botu: faşilu” l-naqa "a camel colt' Kaş. III 218 (the word is in a Chapter containing dissyllables ending in long open vowels; the final ceat in the MS. was rather misshapen and a later scribe put two dots over it and turned it into qaf, the word has therefore usually been mistranscribed as botuk, cf. çatu:), a.o. 7 120, 19 (apra:-); JJ 341, 4 (bozlat-): xiv Rbğ. bota Shcherbak, p. 106: Çağ. xv ff. bota ogul “child” Vel. 146 (quotns.); bota baça wa farzand-i adami wa söyir haywànat 'umüma(n) sea baça-i şutur xuguga(n) “a human child; the young of an animal in general, and a camel in particular' San. 130t. 25 (29) (same quotns.; the transla-. tion, other than the last phr., is due to a mis299 apprehension; one quotn. refers to botalik téve 'a camel with a colt', in the other botam is used to address a dying son, obviously in a purely metaph. sense): Xwar. xiv (like) ingen ingen (sic) bodalarıpa ipreyü 'camels calling to their colts' Nahe. 73, 16: Kip. xv al-qa"üdu "şagir “a small camel colt' bofa: Kar, ör, 20; hawlivu'l-ibil “a one-year-old camel colt' bota Tuh. 13a. 2. D büte: Ger. in -e: of büt- used as an Adv.; noted only in Xak. Xak. x1 büte: /rarf tea ma*náhwu'l-katir a Particle meaning “a great deal; hence one says men apar büte: yarma:k bé:rdim a'faytuhu (words omitted; "1 gave him 4a great deal of money?”, and one says bu: r:şka: büte: boldi: madd zamán mina'l-dahr li-hádà "He time for this is past', like (bi-manzila) the Oguz word kibe: for a period of time (li-burha mina'l-dahr) Kaş. III 217: KB büte boldi €liğ yüzin körmedim “lt is a long time since I saw the king's face' 1587; 2.0. 3635. : Dis. V. BDAbedü:- “to be, or become, big, great. etc." Survives only(?) in NE "Fuv. bedi- and SW Osm. büyü-. Uyğ. virff. Man. katığı bedümiş padd “the padd (?; l-w.) whose violence has become grcat” TT 177 88: Bud. U II o, 6 (ükli:-); see also E kedi:-: Xak. xi oğla:n bedü:di: “the boy became big” (kabura); also used of anything that becomes big after being small Kaş. III 259 (bedü:r, bedü:me:k; everywhere spelt bedi-; this verb and bödi:-, which is so spelt, are placed under the cross-heading -D-, and beforé the cross-heading -D- which is followed by udr:-, bodu:-, etc.; it seems fairly certain that both -D- and bedü:- were intended, sce bedüt-, but seem to be dialect pronunciations); a.o. 1 319, 11 (Kop, also spelt bedii:di:): KB bedu:-, consistently so spelt, is common, e.g. (God gave him wisdom and) yalguk bedüdi “man became great” 150; 0.0. 289, 731, 737, 1757, 5153: xiv Muh.(?) "azuma “to be, or become, big” (VU) beyü:- (unvocalized) Rif. 131 (only); irtafa'a "to rise' PU berü:- (unvocalized, first letter undotted) should perhaps be read bedü:- 1:02 (only: Kip. xv xdyala “to behave conccitedly' biyi- 7uh, 14b. 11. DF biti:- “to write; to write (something 4cc.). "This word is considered to be a Den. V. in -1:- fr. “bit, an unrecorded l.-w. fr. Chinese öf *writing brush' (Giles 8,979; Pulleyblank's Middle Chinese' fiit); it became an early l.-w. in Mong. as biçi- (Haenisch 15), and this Mong. word has been reborrowed in some NE languages (but Khak. pas- looks more Jike a l.-w. fr. Russian pisat”): otherwise survives only in SE Türki pit- Shaw; püt- B5; piti-/püt-/ pütü- Jarrimg. Cf. 3 yaz-, T ürkü vur bepgü: taş tokı:tdım biti:dim “1 had this memorial stone driven into (the ground) and inseribed it” £ S 12-13; o.o. 4 SE, 1 SW, IH SW, Ix. 28: vur ff. biti:dim IrRB, Postscript ; 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 344 
     
   
   
       300 DIS. V. BDATun. İV 11 (ETY 11 96): Uyğ. viu bitig [biti:]dim Sw. Sb.: viri ff. Man.-A bitidim M I 28, 22: Bud. bitideçi bititdeci writing (this stra) or causing it to be written' Sut. 447, 17; Civ. biti- (usually in the form bitidim) is very common in the contracts in USp.: O. Kir. ix ff. bitigli: Mal. 24, 3; bitidim do. az, 6: Xak. xı (in grammatical section) er bitig biti:di: karaba"l-raculu l-kitáb "the man wrote a letter (or book, etc.) Kaş. /1 325, 7; n.m.e.: KB biti- is common rıq, 258, 1342, etc.: xı1(?) At. bitidim 465, 475; Tef. biti(and? bit-) "to write! 104: xiv Muh. kataba biti:- ATek 30, 115; 39, 2; 41, 6; Rif. 114, 131: Çağ. xv ff. biti-(-di, etc.) yaz- "to write! Vel. 134-6 (quotn.); biti- (spelt) ruwistan “to write! San. 143r. 13 (quotns.): Xwar. xin(?) (Then Oğuz Xan sent his orders to the four quarters and) bildürgülük bitidi “vrote to inform them” Og. 104: xiv bitl- ditto Quib 34. MN 578, etc.: Kom. xiv “to write' biti- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv biti- kataba İd. 28: Osm. xiv and xv biti- 'to be destined', i.e. written by fate in a few texts 7 TS I 110; II 156; IV 116. S buta:- See butri:-. butu:- “to prune' (a tree, etc.). "l'his was no doubt the original vocalization of this verb, cf. butik, but it became buta- early in the medieval period. S.i.s.m.l. in its original meaning and also for (of a trce) 'to throw out branches. Xak. xı Kaş, 1I 337 (butikla:-); n.m.e.: Kip. xiv buda- qallama “to prune' İd. 29: xv ditto Tul, 30a. 6 (in margin in second hand budadı ay ğaşana, same meaning): Osm. xvir buda-, in Rümi, pirastan büğ wa diraxt az gáx-i záytd “to prune the superfluous branches off a vine or tree' San. 131r. 28. ?D 1 bodu:- (?bodo:-) “to dye (something Acc.) ; presumably Den. V. fr. 2*bo:d q.v. Survives in NE Tel. pudu-, 'Tuv. budu- and in all other language groups as boya- or the like. Xak. xı ol to:nuğ bodu:dt: sabaga'l-taitb “he dyed the garment (etc.) Kaş, III 260 (2 bodu:- follows in same para.): xiv Muh. şabağa bo:ya:- Mel. 27, 13; Rif. 111; al-şabğ bo:ya:mak 37, 14; 124: Çağ. xv ff. boya-(-b) bir rengle boya- “to dye with a colour! Vel. 158; boya- rang kardan San. 141v. 27: Xwar. xiv boya- ditto Qutb 35: Kom. xiv ditto CCI; Gr.: Kip. xur şabağa bo:ya:- Hou. 37, 2 (Imperat., in error, -gil): xiv ditto Bul. 55v.: xv ditto Tuh. 23a. 2. VU 2 bodu:- 'to fasten, or nail (something Acc., to something Dat., or üze)'. N.o.a.b., but see bodul-. Uy£. viri ff. Bud. (the merciless rulers of hell) örtlüğ yerke bodiryu çalarlar 'throw them down and fasten them to the fiery ground” TT VI p. 73, note 308, 30; órtlüg yér üze etózlerin boduyu tokip do. 31-2: Xak. xı (after 1 bodu:-), and onesays ol okin urdi: keyikni: yığa:çka: bodu:di: ramá'l-savd tva alzagahu bi'l-gacara “he shot the wild animal and fastened it to the tree" (etc.) Kaş. III 26o (bodu:r, bodu:ma:k, mis-spelt bodu:rma:k).  bödi:- “to dance", An l.-w. in Mong. as bóci(Kot. 1220, Haltod 311) which fixes the first vowel as -Ó-, not -ü- as usually transcribed, but suggests that the original form was bódl:- ; this links with the fact that in Kaş. this word, though spelt bódl-, is indexed under -D, see bedü:-, but this form, if authentic, must have been a dialect pronunciation. Survives only in several NW languages as blyl-; the NC forms Kir, biyle- Kzx. bile- are Den. V.s fr. biy (bödiğ, q.v.). Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. U 1 41, 21; İV 8, 36 (1rla:-); TT X 144-5 (1 vr); oio. do. 469; U II 24, 4; 25, v: Xak. xi ki:z bödi:di: (sic) raqaşati”l-cüriya "the servant girl (etc.) danced” Kaş. III 259 (bódl:r, bódl:me:k, see above; prov. containing bödl:g): xiv Muh. raqaga (VU) böyl:- Mel. 26, ır, Rif. 109; al-raqş (VU) böyimek 120 (only, -mak in error): Kom. xiv “to dance, clap' beyi-/biyi- CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xit raqaşa be:y- Hou. 34, 14: xiv böy- raqaşa İd. 37 (and see 1 bük-). Dis. BDB SF bitbül See bitmül. Tris. BDB SF pitpiti Scc bitmül, Dis. BDC F badıç “vinc trellis" , no doubtlike other words connected with vines, e.g. 2 ba:ğ, bo:r, an Iranian l-w. N.o.a.b. "The word is noted in Pe. as zoöyic (Steingass 1454) and Tafik vo'ig (Tef. 88). Xak. xı badıç a/-"ariş "vine trellis” Kaş. I 295 (üzümlen-), n.m.e.: xiri(?) Tef. "ala "uruşiha badıçları örtmenleri üze 88 (apparently alternative translations for a/-'arig which means both “vine trellis' and “open hut with a light roof"). Tris. BDC DF badıçlık Hap. leg.; A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. badıç. Xak. xı badıçlık (MS. -d- for -d-) yiğa:ç “vood (al-xagab) prepared for the manufacture of a vine trellis ('arrgu'l-karm)' Kaş. I 502. Dis. BDD D bütüt Hap. leg.; Active Dev. N. fr. büt-; “the successful performance (of a task). Uyğ. viii ff. Civ. TT I 140 (esidüt). Dis. V. BDDD bedüt- Caus. f. of bedü:-; to “make something, big, greater, etc.' Survives only(?) in NE Tuv. bidit- and SW Osm. büyüt-. Uy£. vir ff. Civ. kiçiğ atın bedüt(t)üp "you have increased your small reputation' TT 7 8: Xak. xı ol oğla:nığ bedütti: rabba'l-sabi eva kabbarahu "he brought up the boy and made him grow up” Kaş, II 3oo (bedütü:r, bedütme:k, This verb, kadit- and kidit-, q.v., are placed in a section preceded by -D-, which is followed by one preceded by -D- and ends in”   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 345 
     
   
   
     DIS. the following sentence, 'some of them (i.c. the 'Turks) make the dáís in all these verbs yd on the (false) assumption ("a/4 tawahhum) that they are dal (with a dot over). I heard this among the Yağna:, Tuxsı:, and Oğuz and parts (atraf) of the Uyğur.. The alteration of döl to dül is also permissible in Ar., as one says mà düqtü "adüqa(n) wa 'adüfa(n). 'The spelling bedüt- was therefore deliberate, but seems to represent a dialect pronunciation): KB the word is consistently spelt bedüt-; (know that knowledge is great (bedük) and understanding great (ulug) bu iki bedütür üdürmis kuluğ “these two make tbe chosen servant great” 152; 0.0. 298, 1001, 1359, 4015 (anın), s8or (buka:): xiv Muh.(?) 'azzama gayrahu *to make (someone else) great' (VU) beyüt(unvocalized) Rif. 131 (only). DF bitit- Caus. f. of biti:- “to have (something Acc.) written. N.o.a.b. Türkü vii Türkü Bilge: Xağan éli:pe: biti:tdim 'I had (this inscription) written for (i.e. addressed to) the realm of "Türkü Bilge: Xagan' T 58: Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. bitit- usually means 'to have (a Buddhist scripture) written' as an act of piety e.g. Suv. 447, 17 (biti:-); U HI 38,69, and 77; TT VII 40, 10; (any man who in order to seduce women) yırlap takşurup bitig bititser “sings, or composes verses, or has letters vvritten” (will be reborn blind) U 777 7s, 11: Xak. xi ol bitig bititti: aktaba'l-kitàb "he had a letter (book, etc.) written Kaş. 77 298 (bititü:r, bititme:k); a.o.o.: xiv Muh. kattaba bitit- Mel. 41, 7; Rif. 131: Çağ. xvff. bitit-(-ti) yazdur- Vel. 134; bitit- (spelt) Caus. f.; nutoisánidan San. 143v. 15 (quotn.). PUD bodut- (bodot-) Caus. f. of 1 bodu:-; “to have (something) dyed'. This is almost certainly the verb in PP 2, 4-5 which Pelliot transcribed butat- and derived fr. buti:- ; Pelliot's translation, including a mistranscription of kars as kazış, is not plausible. Survives as boyat- in SE Türki Shaw, Jarring; NC Kir. (boyot-); Kzx.; SC Uzb. (büyat-); and several NW and SW languages. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. (some people spin wild hemp, wool, or hemp and) böz bodatıp kars tokıyur "have the thread (lit. “cloth)) dyed and weave garments” PP 2, 4-5. D budut- lap. leg.; Caus. f. of bu:d-; an earlier form of the Caus. f. than SW 'Tkm. buydur-. Xak. xi ol kişini: tumluğka: budutti: ahlaka'l-racul fi”l-bard sva töoacada”l-qurr hattà: mata “he killed the man in the cold, and (the man) experienced such cold that he died' Kaş. 11 302 (budutu:r, budutma:k, the initial seems to have been altered to y- in the MS. by someone vvho supposed that the word was the Caus. f. of yo:d-, but such verbs with initial y- are listed in İT 315 ff. and not in this section). D bödüt- Caus. f. of bödi:-, “to make (someone Acc.) dance”, Survivesonly(?) in NW Kaz. biyit- R IV 179o. Xak. xr ol oğlini: büdütti: bomala ibnahu "ala l-zafan fa-zafana BDĞ "he urged his son to dance, and so he danced” Kaş. II 3o2 (bódütü:r, bödüt-me:k). 461 Tris. V. BDDD bedüttür- Hap. leg.?; Caus. f. of bedütand syn. vv. it. Uyğ. viii ff. Man. kop kópülin uluğ tap öritteçi bedüttürdeçi (spelt betüdtürteçi) 'arousing and increasing great desires with his whole mind' TT IX 41-2 (meaning indicated by the Tokharian original, except that only one verb 'arousing' is in that text). Dis. BDG D batığ Dev. N./A. fr. bat-, lit. "the act of sinking! w. various special applications. Survives at any rate in such words as NC Kir. batu: “the act of sinking; a hole, depression' and SW Osm. bati 'sunset, west'; but some words below and modern forms like SE "Türki batuk 'quagmire', Shaw qo, and SW Osm. batik 'sunk, sunken' are prob. derived fr. the parallel Pass. Dev. N./A. batuk, and words like batak “morass” are Sec. f.s of batğak, a Dev. N. first noted in Çağ., San. 119v. 16. Üyğ. viri ff. Bud. (in a list of evil beings) batığdakı ağuluğ lu:lar “poisonous dragons in the gorges (or swamps, etc." 7T VI 96—7: Xak. xı batığ “the gorge (a/-ğamiq) of a river, etc.” Kaş. 1 371: K B (anything that rises must descend) ağışka eniş ol edizke batığ “a descent (follows) a rise, the sunken the high” 1087; bilgi batığ “a man whose knowledge is profound” 4704; 5713: xiv Muh. al-muğammas fi'l-màá' (VU) batuk Mel. 83, 14; Rif. 18g: Xwar. xin(?) (this golden bow reached) kün tugusidin da kün batisikaca “from east to west' Oğ. 318-19: xiv batığrak (of grief) 'deeper' Quzb 29: Kip. xiv batuk fàyir yugàl lahı”l-ğattüs "a bird called the diver' İd. 28: xv ğaffas batuk (pointed as battuk) Tuh. 26b. 4. bidik *moustache'. Survives in some NE and NW languages as miy1k; SW Az. bif; Osm. biyik; other languages use the Pe. J.-w. burüt or Sec. f.s like murut/murt. Xak. xı bıdık al-sabala "moustache" Kaş. 1 377: xiv Muh. al-sibál bıyı:k Mel. 47, s: Rif. 141: Çağ. xv ff. bığ (sic) burüt San. 147r. 24; miğ burüt, in Ar. sabalat do. 32r. 11: Kip. xmr al-şarib *moustache' biyik (MS. yayik) Hou. zo, 8: xv al-şarib mıyık Kav. 60, 15; ditto biyik Tük, zob. s: Osm. xv ff. biyik noted in several phr. TTS II 138; IV 101. D butik Conc. N, fr. butit:- , “the branch (of a tree, etc.”), with some extended meanings. For the vocalization see buti:-; -1- is not noted later than Xak. S.ı.a.m.l.g. vv. some TS changes (b/p, t/d). See Doerfer II Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. butikin yulduzin Gapelt budhihkim yuduzim) 'with its branches and roots TT VIII K.10; asok sógütnür butiki “the branch of an asoha tree' U II 24, 3; 0.0. Suv. s29, 7-9 (ulun); TT III 28, note 71, 3: Civ. tit sógüt butiki *the branches ofalarch' TT I 163-4; do. 165 (artuç): Xak.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 346 
     
   
   
      302 xı butik: al-fugn. wa'l-gu'ba mün hull şay” “a branch or twig of anything; butik a/-qirbatı”l-şağira "as mall water-skin' in the dialect of Kaşğar: butik "a skin container (qirba) made from the skin of a horse"s leg and used for storing kumis (al-àmi;), etc.”: butak also “a branch” in one dialect; the tá can carry either a fatha or a kasra Kaş. 1 377 (verse containing buta:k); 6 o.o. of butik and 5 of butak: KB yadıldı butik: “its branches have spread out" 4892: xın(?) Tef. budak “branch” (and budaklı "having (many) branches”) 109: xiv Muh(?) al-ğüşn bu:ta:k Rif. 182. (only): Çağ. xv ff. budağ/budak sav-i diraxt "the branch of a tree" San, 131r. 27: Xvvar, xiit budak ditto “AF 57: xiv butak ditto Qutb 39; MN 133: Kom. xiv ditto butak CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiu al-far" "branch" bu:ta:k (and see çıbık) Hou. 7, rr: xiv budak ai-Zugn; and some of them turn the -d- into -t- İd. 29; reverse entry do. 33; al-ğuşn butak Bul. 3, 13: xv firá'u'l-gacar büfak Kav. $9, 9; £ugn butak Tuh. 26b. 5; budak a/-usn (in margin in second hand, cf. butir-) do. 30a. s: Osm. xiv. ff. budak *'branch'; c.i.a.p.; occasionally butak fr. xv onwards T'T'S I 119; I1 171; III 113; İV 127. D boduğ (?bodoğ) Conc. N. fr. bodu:-; 'dye', sometimes more specifically “hair dye', 3 or more generally "a bright colour”. S.i.a.m.l.g. usually as boyağ, boyaw, or boya. Uy£. viii. ff. Civ. boduğ 'dye' H 1I 16, 13: Xak. xı boduğ al-xidáb (hair) dye” Kaş. İl 11,3 (kus-); 304, 23; /atoni?l-dibüc “the colour of the brocade” I 175, r (0p-); n.m.e.: KB sözi kör çeçek teg tümen tü boduğ “his words are like flowers with their innumerable colours” 452; 0.0. 1399, 1957 (tutun-), 4885: Çağ. xv ff. boyag/boyak rang-i şabbüği “a dyer's colour' San. 142v. 14: Kom. xiv “dye” boyow (?) CCG; boya CCI; Gr.: Kip. xir al-şibğ .. tea Ihuiwa'l-fuiowa 'dye' ..... that is “madder” bo:ya: Hou. 24, 6; 31, 8: xv (in a list of Dev. N.s) boyaw fr. boya- Tuh. 84a. 4: Osm. xv boyağ 'dye' in one text TTS II 163. E botuk See botu:, ?F batğa: Hap. leg.; prob. l.-w. Syriac petqülpetqa which is a l.-w. fr. Greek p originally "a board, or writing tablet", hence more generally “a document. Cf. bötkeçi: Xak. xr batğa: “the board (a/-laceli) on which felt and goat's hair fabric for caps is cut out” Kaş. I 424. S budğay See buğda:y. Dis. V. BDĞ S badğa :- See bağda:-. Tris. BDĞ D batığlık A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. batığ, “a lavatory” or the like. Pec. to Uyğ, not the original form of SW Osm. bataklik 'morass, bog' which is an A.N, (Conc. N.) fr. batak (batBak). Uyğ. viu ff, Bud. Sanskrit. var DIS.  BDĞ cakumbhikd “a: lavatory jug! batığlıkta:kı (spelt pa-) küzec TT VIII C.ro, (in a list of parts of a house) yılkıka atlık kişike batığlık “a stable for the livestock and a lavatory for the people (in the house)” TT VI 87. D boduğluğ P.N./A. fr. boduğ, “dyed, coloured”, S.i.s.m.1 Uyğ. vürff, Bud. boduğluğ kereze ton kedip 'wearing n dyed monk's robe (l.-w.)' USp. 105, 10. Tris. V. BDGD butikla:- Den. V. fr. butik; 'to prune (a tree cc.) and other cognate meanings. This must have been the original form of this verb, but in the MS. a fatha has been marked on the tá of this verb and the Refl. f. in addition to the original kasra. S.is.m.]. as butakla:-, budakla-, and the like. Xak. xı ol yığa:çığ butikla:di: qafa"a ağşüna "[-gacara "he cut branches off the tree'; the more correct form (wca'l-agahh) is buti: di: Kaş. III 336 (butikla:r, butikla:ma:k). D butiklan- Refl. f. of butikla:-; (of a tree, river, etc.) “to form branches”. S.is.m.l. as that verb, q.v. Xak. xr yığa:ç butiklandi: “the tree grew branches” (barhamat); and one says Suv buttklandı: sára'l-màá* a"dad "the (running) water became separate streams”, the origin is the word butik £usgnu'l-gacara Kaş. II 264 (butiklanu:r, butiklanma:k; doubly vocalized everywhere, see butikla:-): KB tuğardın butiklandi (sic in Fergana MS., others butaklandit) ot teg yalın “the light branched out from the sunrise like a fire" 3839; a.o. $679: xiu(?) Tef. budaklan- “to form branches' 169. Dis. BDG D bedük N./A.S. fr. bedü:-; “big, great”, practically syn. vv. ulug, q.v. 1f there is any difference between the meanings of the two words, it is perhaps that bedük was originally *physically big”, while uluğ was “great” in a wider sense. S.ia.m.lg., in some with considerable phonetic changes, e.g. NE pedik/ pi:k/müzük, NC, NW biyik, SW Az. böyük, Osm. büyük, in some NE, NC, NW languages meaning rather “high, tall' than "big, great. Türkü viri tokuz oğuz (PU) etiğ yağı: ermiş bedük ermiş “the Tokkuz Oğuz and (PU) Etig vvere hostile and numerous (?, or powerful) Ongin 6: Üyğ. vir ff. Man.-A (then if the divine power becomes food and drink for the man and woman) küçlüğ bedük bolur “they become strong and big” (and have children) M I 16, 3-4: Man. (trees and shrubs become) küçlüg köp bedük Wind. zo: Bud. bedük bergen katığ kağalın tokip emğetip 'striking and torturing them with great whips and tough willow rods' TT İV 10, 7; 0.0. of bedük berge Suv. s, 23; 7, 21; v. l. Coq, Chuastuanift, Derlin, 1911, 27, 4; kap kara uluğ bedük tağ teg “like a pitch black, great, big mountain' U IV 8, 10; similar phr. do. 40, 164-5; U II 36, 18; bay bedük  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 347 
     
   
   
      DİS. V. BbGbayağut erdl “he was a rich and great merchant! USf. rozb. 7-8: Civ. (in a list) bir bedük bir kigig (so read) iki égic 'two cooking pots, one big, one small” USf. ss, 25: Xak. xı bedük “big” (a/-kabir) of anything; one says bedük tevey “a big camel” Kaş. 7 385; five o.o. of bedük, óne, 1 94, 3 of be:dük (the spelling with -d- is deliberate, sce bedüt-): KB bedük (sic) is common, both in a concretc sense, e.g. bedük bir blceklp “a big knife', and an abstract, e.g. atı bedük “his reputation is great' 58; o.o. 152, 278, 420, 672 (öktem), 2118 (uluğsığ): xin(?) Tef. büyük (and büdrük) “big” (e.g. of a tent pole) 113: Çağ. xvif. beyik böyük” Vel. 134; beyik (?or biyik) buland tva buzurg 'tall, big” San. 150v. 3 (quotns): Xwar. xin(?) bedük, bedik, once bédlk (physically) “big” is common in Og.: xiv bedük 'big, high” (of voice) “oud” Qutb 29; Nahe. 128, 3: Kom. xiv “high” beyik CCG; Gr. 54 (quotn.); “thick, obese" baxec CCI; Gr. also belongs here?: Kip. xv "ali “high, tall' (yüksek and) büyük Kav. 36, 8, "ali biyik Tuh. 24b. 2; 73b. 13. DF bitig Conc. N. fr. bitl:-, a general word for anything written, 'inscription, book, letter, document', etc. Survives only(?) in SE Türki pitik Shaw, pütük BS ( Şarring pütüş) and NW Kar. L., T., Krim bitik, biti/bitik are listed in xix Osm. dicts. as "Old Turkish”. See Doerfer 11 717. Türkü vr bitiğ 'inscription', and bitiğ taş “memorial stone” occur several times in 7 and II, Ix. 28 and Ongin: vin ff. bu irk bitl:g “this book of omens' IrkB, Postscript; Tun. III a. 2-4 (tamğa:lığ): Uyf. viu bitig "inscription several occurrences in Şu: viri ff. Man. nom bitig 'a (Manichaean) scripture' M I 25, 10: Bud. nom bitig “a (Buddhist) scripture' TT IV 14, 68; this phr. and bitig, same meaning, are common in TT VI and VII: Civ. bitig is the standard term for “document, contract in USp.; kisim (PU) Silapka bitig kodtim “I have made (this) will in favour of my wife Silag(?)' 78, 4: Xak. xı bitig a/-kitàb 'anything written (book, letter, etc.)': bitig alkıtaba “handvvriting”, also a Dev. N. (ai-maşdar), hence one says anın bitigi: belgü:1üğ hitübatuhu záhira "his handwriting is clear" Kaş. J 384; and about 40 o.o.: biti: al-kitab mina l-kutubi l-munzala mina”l-sama" *a revealed scripture' III 217 (not a Xak. form, possibly dialect): K B (a wise man) özi bardı kodti bizipe bitig “has gone himself, but has left his will for us' 755; (the good vezir must understand) bu tórlüg bitiğ “documents of this kind' 2218; o.o. 258, 4048 (ağı:çız): xi?) Tef. bitiğ translates al-hitàb in the particular sense of “holy book, scripture! 104: Çağ. xv ff. bitik (*with -k”) maktüb “letter”, etc. Vel. 135 (quotns. adding 'also a plant growing out of the ground” Saz. 150v. 7 (s.v. biyik (bedük)) points out that this is an error arising fr. a misreading of biyik), bitik (spelt) maktüb eva nümcişta "letter, something written' (quotn.), adding that the word in this sense is included as Pe. in two Pe. dicts. San. 143v. 363 19; Oğuz xı bitiğ a/-"üda 'amulct, charm" Kaş, 1 384; a.o. HI 164, 1 (kövvüç): Xwar. xii bitl: "letter', etc. '4li $1: xiv bitig ditto Qutb 34: Kom. xiv bitik “book, register' CCI, CCG, Gr. 61 (q.v.; quotns.): Kip. xii al-kitab bitig Hou. 23, 7; 50, 19: xiv biti:/ bitiğ al-hitáb, “the (word with) final -ğ is the original form, later it was turned into -1:” fd. 28: xv katabtı”l-hitab bitiğni yazdum Kav. 31, 8: kitab bitiğ (wa kebin) Tuh. 31a. 3 (kebin is otherwise unknown, Atalay translates bitig (a) kitap; (b) kefin 'shroud'; (c) mihir 'dowry', which suggests that he took kebin to be a corruption of kefin, but there does not seem to be any justification for the last two translations. Nabát “plant” bítig do. 36a. 5 and bitig Dev. N. fr. bitti do. 84b. 2 is obviously a different word. "There is no etymological objection to a Dev. N. fr. bit(büt-) meaning 'plant' in Kip. but the word is otherwise recorded only in Vel. where it is an error): Osm. xiv. bitig; xiv to xvi biti usually “a letter), sometimes more generally "written document”, in xiv and xv also in the special sense of “an obituary, the record of a man's deeds compiled during his lifetime and published on his death” TTS 7 109; IJ 155; IH 105; IV x15. D bödl:ğ N.Ac. fr. bódi:-; “a dance”, "The only certain survival is NC Kir. biy, Kzx. bi, but NE Tuv. deviğ “dance” Pal. 138 is perhaps a metathesized form. Xak. xi bódig al-zafn wa'l-rags “a dance” Kaş. İ 412 (the -dis deliberate, see bödi:-), a.o. bódi:g (sic) al-raqş III 259, 19. D bütgü: Dev. N. fr. büt-; n.o.a.b. In Xak. obviously an euphemism. Uyf. vir ff. Civ. (a particular kind of vessel) tatığlar bütgüke tayağı tétir "it is called a support for the preparation of (or the man who prepares?) delicacies TT I 191-2: Xak. xı bütgü: al-ğö”it 'excrement'; this word is used only for addressing children in a special meaning (xássgata(n)) ; one says bütğü: ba:rmu: a bi-ka gàá'it am là "do you want to defecate or not?” Ka. I 430. Dis. V. BDGD bütgür- Caus. f. of büt-. N.o.a.b., the normal Caus. f. of büt- is bütür-, q.v. Uyğ. vir ff Civ. bu yılda [kal]an urubni bütgerdimiz 'this year we have paid the outstanding taxes (l-w. Ar. rub' "a quarter") USp. 22, 53-5 (as corrected in Arat, Uygurca Yazılar Arasında, Istanbul, 1957); küz yanıda yeti tar kebez bütğürürmen “1 will deliver seven taz) (see 6 tan) of cotton seed on the first day of autumn” do. 70, 6: Çağ. xv ff. bütker-(-ü, etc.; “vith -k-”) bitür-, tamam et- "to complete'; örf-, satr et- . . . barda püsluk ma'násma “to cover, conceal', in the sense of covering with a curtain Vel. 145 (quotns.); bütker- (1) rayánidan "to cause to grow'; (2) i/tiyàm dadan "to treat, cure'; (3) söüxtan sta ancüm hardan “to make, finish”, (4) ba-'amal áwardan "to produce'; (s) büşdnidan "to conceal” “San. i29r. 12 (quotns.); mE — — dár——án —X!—————— e L L)LCTEZEEGBIEIZEEESLLLERIBEEE?ULHUMAMIRXIIHÓPQII!)'ES. IL LLL 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 348 
     
   
   
     304 bitkür- Caus. f; the first four meanings, similarly phrased; duplicate (muraádif) of bütker- do. 143r. 9 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv bitgür- “to fulfil (a request)” Qur) 34. Tris. BDG DF biti:gü: Conc. N. fr. bitl:-, survives onlyi(? in SE "Türki pütkü “document, nominal roll' BS 132. Xak. xi biti:gü: a/-daredtu” Hturkiya ta. ğayruha “the "Turkish ink-pot and the like" Kaş. III 174. PU?F bütü:ğe: this seems to be the only 'Turkish. word for 'egg-plant' which is not certainly a l-w. All modern "Turkish languages use some form of the Pe. word, sometimes in its form as a l.-w. in Russian baklazhan, except SE “Türki vvhich has çeyze a corruption of Chinese chia-tzü. 'l'his suggests that this word, too, is a l.-w., prob. Iranian. "The use of büta in the translation in Sa. suggests that the author held this view. The Kip. meaning, which prob. represents a different word, survives in NW Kaz. büteke/bütege *bird's gizzard' R IV 1898. Xak. xı bütü:ge: al-bádincán 'egg-plant' Kaş. I 447: Çağ. xv ff. bütege (spelt) 'the name of a kind of plant (giydh) which grows in clumps (bita büta) in the plains! Sar. 130v. 6: Kip. xv qünişa “a bird”s gizzard' bütege Tu). 29a. 9. DF bitiğçi: etc. Preliminary note. Three 1cords all meaning. "scribe, secretary', and the like, bitigçi:, bétke:ci:, and bitigü:cl: must be carefully. distinguished, since etymologically they are quite. distinct. Only the last still survives. DF bitigci: N.Ag. fr. bitig; 'scribe, secretary'. N.o.a.b, Xak. xi KB ağıçı bitigci ya iş tutğuçı 'treasurer, secretary, or controller” 2494: xII(?) Tef. bitiğçi 'scribe' ros: xtv. Muh. kátib 'scribe' bitigci: Mel. 58, 9; Rif. 187: Çağ. xv ff. bitikçi nuwisanda “a writer San. 7r. 17: Xwar. xiv bitigci 'scribe" Qutb 34: Kip. xin al-kátib. bitigcl: (?; MS -c-) Hon. 23, 7; bitikçi: (with -ç-) do. so, 19: Osm. xiv bitikçi 'scribe' in one text TT.S III 106. DF betke:çi: it seems to be certain that this has no connection with biti:- but is a N. Ag. fr. a Syriac L-w., see batğa:, which was no doubt a Manichaean introduction. Türkü vir ff. yagrIma:z betke:ci: “a scribe who makes no mistakes! Tun. IIIa. 10 (ETY II 95); a.o. do. b. 2-3; bö:tğeçi: Tus, IV 10-11 (isi:z): Man. betiğeçi oğlan “an apprentice seribe" M II 14, 6-7 (iv): Uyğ. vitr ff. Man.A M I 28, 19 (ağduk), o.o. do. I zı, title; IHI 43, 13: Bud. betkeçi körümçi, scribes and soothsayers” T T VI 264 (and see note thereon); 0.0. USSp. 102b. 28, and as a title in a list of P.N.s Pfahl. 12, 19-20; Civ. (in a similar list) betkeçi (PU) Kotsu USP. 74, 19. DF bitigüci: N.Ag. fr. biti;gü:; secretary”. Survives only(?) in SE *scribe, "Türki DIS. V. BDGpitküçl Shaw; pütküçl 4S. Uyğ. vit (we assembled at the "Tayğan lake) bidigü:ci: (sic, quite clearly) er anta: 1t[tim] 'I sent a secretary from there” Su. S 3: viii ff, bitigüçi occurs as a v.l. for bétkecl in some MSS. TT VI 264: Caf. xv ff. bitküci/bitiküci (with * k-?) yazıcı “seribe” Vel. 135. D bedüklük A.N. fr. bedük; 'greatness, bigness'. Survives in the same languages and with the same phonetic changes as bedük except in NE, Xak. xı K? uluğluk sapa ol bedüklük sapa “might and greatness belong to Thee (oh God!)' 7; o.0. 154, 941, etc.: xti(?) Tef. büyükük 'the height (or size ?, of a wall)' 113: Kom. xiv “height” beyiklik CCI; Gr. D bitiglig P.N./A. fr. bitiğ , survives only(?) in SW Türki pitiglik (tur-) “(to be) written' Şarring. Xak. xı (after bitiglik) and with final -&amp; şahbıbuhu “the owner (of writing material)” Kaş. I 508; bitiglig er “a man who owns a written document (rug'a) do. 511, 19: xin(?) Tef. bitiglig (r) “vritten” (in a book); (2) (of the bezel of a ring) 'inscribed' 104: Caf. xv ff. bitiklik (^with -k- -k”) yazılmış "written (matter)! Vel. 136; bitiklik maktub toa nuwigta şuda "written" (quotn.); “in this passage bitiklik is the equivalent (murádif) of bitilğen and bitilmls' Sar. 8r. 28. DF bitiglik Hap. leg.; A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. bitig. Xak. xi bitiğlik ne:D şay” yu'add li-yuhtab 'alayhi 'something prepared to be written on” (i.e. writing paper, etc.) Kaş. 7 508. D bütgüsüz Priv. N./A. fr. bütgü:; n.o.a.b. Uy£. vii ff. Bud. (if you want a simile; if men want gold ore, and search everywhere and find it, they break it into small pieces—small gap) bütgüsüz kavışğusuz kılıp (and then at the appropriate moment smelt it) Suv. 71, 12-16; the meaning must be something like 'making it completely amorphous". Tris. V. BDGD bedükle:- Den. V. fr. bedük; 'to be, or become, big; to consider to be big', etc. Survives in much the same languages and with the same phonetic changes as bedüklük. Xak. xi ol meni: bedükle:di: 'addani kabir "he thought that I was big! Kaş, HI 340 (bedükle:r, bedükle:me:k, the -d- is deliberate, see bedüt-): Xwar. xii(?) (forty days after he was born) bedükledi yüridi oynadi 'he grew big, walked, and played' Og. 12. : D bedüklentür- Caus. f. of the Refl. f. of bedükle:-; n.o.a.b . Uyğ. vr ff. Bud. (it is called the moon (month) which shines) 1 ığaçığ kamşatığlı bedüklentürügll “in order to shake the bushes and trees and mak€ them grovv” Wind. 16-17. Dis. BDL VU butlu: “a camel”s nose peg'; pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı butlu: xagág anftü'l-ba'ir "a camel's 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 349 
     
   
   
     DIS. BDM nose peg' Kaş. | 430: Oğuz(?) Kaş. II 16, 27 (tak-; the word is here translated ai-wars, which has no appropriate meaning and is perhaps a scribal error for al-xagá;). D bo:dlug P.N./A. fr. 1 bo:d; usually with preceding Adj. 'having a (tall, short, etc.) stature'; if by itself, 'tall'. 5.i.m.m.l.g. usually as boylı/boylu:. Türkü vii: altu:n bodlu:ğ (mis-spelt bodli) buğra:lık yara:ğay “the golden-bodied camel stud will flourish' IrkB 5: Xak. xi III 121, ro (bo:d); 138, 19 (1 si:n); 156, 23 (ta:; n.m.c.: xin(?) ef. boy “stature” 106: Caf. xv ff. boyluğ/boyluk the Suffix -hB/-hk/-lig/-lik is an Adjectival and Possessive Suff. as in the phr. sarw boyluğ sarw qümat 'with a figure like a poplar' San. 142v. 23 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv uzun bodluğ *tal! Qutb 35; Nahc. 102, 6; orta bodluğ “of medium height” do. 22, 15: Kip. xv al-raculu'l-mu'tadilu'l-qüma “a man of medium height” orta bo:lt: (sic) Kas. 59, 17. D butluğ P.N./A. fr. 1 bu:t, "having legs, thighs', etc. N.o.a.b. Türkü vrir ff. Man, (if we have injured two-legged human beings or) tórt butluğ tınlığka 'four-footed animals' Chuas. 81; a.o. M III 38, 12 (ii): Uy&amp;. vir ff. Man. TT IX 85 (2 ağu): Bud. kamağ iki butluğ yalanuklar “all two-legged men” USb. oz, 25-6: Xak. xi Kaş. I 126, 9 (adrı:). Dis. V. BDLD batil- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of bat-; irregular since bat- is [ntrans. Uyğ. viu ff. Man. toz toprakka batılıp “being submerged in the dust (Hend.) TT III 27. DF bitil- Pass. f, of biti:-; "to be written'. Survives only(?) in SE "Türki pütül- BS. Uyğ. vur ff. Man.-A bitilmis boldi “it was vvritten” M I 25, 4 and 7: Civ. bitildi US. 118, 2: Xak. xi bitig bitildi: kutiba'l-kitab "the book (etc.) was written' Kag. I7] 119 (bitilü:r, bitilme:k); bu: er sü:ke: bitilge:n 'this man's name is constantly being written (yuktab) in the army (register)” 7 521; o.o. II 139, 10; 160, 13: XirI(?) 4t. tar erse ken erse bitildi rüzun “your fortune (Pe. rizi) whether it is straitened or comfortable has been written (in the book of fate)! 315; Tef. bitil- “to be written down' 105: Çağ. xv ff. bitil- (-di) yazil- Vel. 136 (adding “also in the same sense as bit-, of grass ““to grow out out the ground", ctc. (quotn.)'; in San. 348r. 24 (s.v. yétil-) it is pointed out that this is an error arising fr. a misreading of yétil-); bitil- sureigta şudan “to be written' 143v. 18 (quotn.): Xwar. xri (?) bitilmiş erdi kim 'it was written that” Oğ. 105-6: xiv ditto Qutb 34; MN 78. D 1 bodul-(?bodol-) Pass. f. of 1 bodu:-; “to be dyed, stained', etc. S.i.s.m.l., usually as boyal-. Xak. xi KB (when a fighting man sees the enemy, his face flushes) karışsa bodulur kizil ham yağız “vhen he enters the battle he is stained red (with blood) and brown (with. dust)' 2384. 305 VUD 2 bodul- Pass. f. of 2 bodu:-, “to be fastened, or attached to (something Dat.), usually metaph. Pec. to Uyğ. Uyğ. viti ff. Man. TT III sz (il-): Bud. mepisine bodulmış kişi men “I am a man attached to the pleasures (of this world)' Hüer-ts. 290-1; sansarka yeme ilinmez nirvanka yeme bodulmaz "he is neither involved in samsára nor attached to mirvána' Suv. 373, 14-15; 0.0. do. 102, 19-20; Hiien-ts. 2121, etc. D batla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. 2 bat; the modern NW, SW verb patla- 'to burst, crack', etc. is a Den. V. fr. 1 bat, but does not seem to be an ancient word. Xak. xi ol bö:zni: batla:dı: tacara'l-kirbás bi'l-tacir “he dressed the linen with the thick juice of pressed dates! Kaş. III 291 (batla:r, batla:ma:k). D bitle:- Den. V. fr. bit; “to delouse'. S.i.s.m.l. w. minor phonetic changes. Xak. xi er bit bitle:di: talaba'l-raculu'l-qaml 'the man hunted for lice” Kaş. III 291 (bitle:r, bitle:me:k): xiv Muh.(?) fala ra'sahu “he deloused his head" Rif. i113 (only, spelt bitize:-): Kap. xun fallà min. tafliyati'l-qaml bitle:- Hou. 42, 19: xiv bitle- falà İd. 28: ditto Tu. 28b. 2. D butla:- Hap. leg.(?); Den. V. fr. 1 butt. Xak. xı ıt erig butla:dı: “the dog bit ('adda) the man's leg (sdq) , also used when one man hits another on the leg Kaş. III 291 (butla:r, butla:ma:k). Tris. V. BDLD botu:la:- (?boto:la:-) Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. botu:; “to give birth to a foal. Türkü vit ff. ürü:p ingeni: botu:la:mi:ş “his white she-camel had given birth to a foal” IrkB s. Dis. BDM D batim Hap. leg.; N.S.A. fr. bat-. Türkü viri süpü:g batimı: karığ sóküpen forcing our way through snow as deep as (the length of) a lance! 7 E 35; II E 26-7. PUF bitmül one of several words for “long pepper' going back ultimately to Sanskrit bipbala, which survived almost unchanged in bibli: (?pipli:), q.v. There is an intermediate form PU pitpiti in Uyğ. vırı ff. Civ. H 7 7, 15, 35, 159, which is probably taken fr. some Iranian form of the word lying behind Pe. bilbil (Ar. filfil). "There is another intermediate form PU bitbül (?pitpül) N.o.a.b., cf. murç. Uy£. vir ff. Civ. (PU) bitbül TT VII 22, 8; (PU) bitmül H I7 28, 126: Xak. xı (PU) bitmül a/-dör fulful "long pepper? Kaş. I 481 (ba unvocalized). D batma:n Dev. N. fr. bat-; etymologically “something which sinks' (ie. in the scales); actually a unit of weight. In the early period it was used both for liquids and solids, and judging by the contexts in which it is used cannot have been very large, perhaps about 2 pounds avoirdupois. S.i.m.m.l.g. with a very 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 350 
     
   
   
      306 wide range of values; e.g. in SE 'F'ürki Sha puts it at anything between 320 and 1280 lb., BŞ $7.3 kilos (about 113 lb.) and Jarring 573-44 kilos (about 1,130 lb.); in SC Uzb. Borovkov says that it varies from 72 to 396 lb.; while in SW Osm., Redhouse says, it varies fr. 54 to 22 lb. Uy£. vir ff. Civ. yeğirmi batman edgü bor 'twenty batmans of good wine' US. 71, 4; on bés batman mén 'fifteen batmans of flour' do. 76, 8; o.o. do. 91 (flour, meat, horsehair), // 1 t9 (meaning obscure): Xak. xi batma:n a/-mand “a unit of weight (here prob. 2 Ib.) hence one says bir batma:n et "a batman of meat! Kaş. 7 444: xiv. Muh.(?) al-mam ditto ba:tma:n oif. 187 (only): Çağ. xv if. batman roazn-i mu'ayyan "a unit of weight in Pe. mann (between 40 and 84 Ib.) San. 119v. 7: Xwar. xiv batman (three of barley) Nağc. 28, 11; (half of red gold) do. 97, 7: Kip. xır al-ratl "a unit of weight! (?about a lb.) batma:n Hou. 55, 15: xiv batman ditto İd. 33; Bul. 9, iz: xv ditto Kav. 22,4; 39, 11; Tuh. 17a. 1. Dis. BDN D bodun Plur. or Collective £.(?) of 1 bo:d, cf. eren; lit. 'clans', in practice a semitechnical term for “an organized tribal community, a people', in the sense of a community ruled by a particular ruler; hence, esp. in such phr. as kara: bodun, 'the common people' in antithesis to the supreme ruler, and the subordinate tribal or clan rulers, the begs. Very common in the early period but n.o.a.b. Kaş. mentions a form boyun as current in languages in which -d- had become -y-, but there is no record of the word in this sense, although it is common meaning “neck”, Türkü vur bodun is perhaps the commonest word in the inscriptions; it occurs (1) by itself; (2) in the expression used by a ruler bodunim “my people”: (3) preceded by an ethnic name, which may be either Turkish or foreign, e.g. Türkü bodun “the "Türkü people”, Tavğaç bodun “the Chinese people” (practically equivalent to “the Chinese Empire”) I S 4,5 etc.; Soğdak bodun “the Sogdian people” 7 E 39; (2) and (3) both occur in toku:z oğuz bodun kentü: bodunim erti: “the Tokkuz Oğuz people were my own (subject) people” I N 4. 'The later meaning occurs in kara: bodun “the common people” JI E 41 and "Türkü kara: kamağ bodun “all the Türkü common people” I E 8-9, 11 E 8, and is even clearer in 7 E 6, I1 E 6 (üçün): viri ff. Man. türk bodun 77 71 6, ro, uluğ kicig kamağ bodun “all the people great and small” do. 8, 65; beğke kara bodunka do. 8, 69: Yen. kara: bodun Mat. 32, 6, a.o.o.: Uy£. vir bodun in all usages is common in Şiz, c.g. kentü: bodunım F 2; türkü bodun N 8 and kara: égil bodunığ “the common, ordinary people” E 2: viri ff. Bud, ulus bodun “the people of the country” PP 3, 6; 30, 8; 62, 5; (my father the Xan) bodun tiliga korkup 'fearing what the people would say” do. 11, 1-2; kamağ kara bodun TT X r;7o; yéti tümen yeti min bodunlar “77,ooo people”   DIS. BDM TT VI 302; kent tegrekl bodunuğ bokunuğ “the people (jingling Hend.) in the neighbourhood of the town' TT X şı-z, 2.0.0.: Civ. él bodun in USSp. 14,6; 17, 2 after lists of names (some the same) scems to mean “people (resident in this district)”, a.o.o. of bodun in the sense of “(individual people)”: O. Kir. ix ff. altı: bağ bodun “the people of the Six Clans" Mal. r, z, 5, 2 a.o.o. of bodun “people”: Xak. (Çiğil) xı bodun a/-ra'iya tva 'accámu'l-nás. “the pcasantry and. common people” in Çigil Kaş. 7 398; about 30 o.o. in ordinary Xak. quotns., almost half with -dfor -d-, the commonest spellings are bo:dun and bodu:n and the translations. a/-gatcm "tribe', al-nás "people", and occasionally al-aqwám “tribes” and al-qabila 'tribe': boyun al-qawem in the language of those who make -d- -y- Kaş. HI 169: KB bodun is very common, it sometimes means 'the people' as a community but more often “people” as individuals, e.g. (the Prophet) bodunda talus: kişide kedi “most excellent of people and best of men” 34; bodun tili 'people's tongues” 194; bayudı bodun “the people (the community) became rich” 291: xııı(?) Az. bodun talusı 257; bir ança bodun “a few people” 123; 421 (ur-); Tef. bodun is common translating al-qatwm, al-ahl "the people”, al-alizàb 'groups of men”, etc. rog bozun ditto (once?) rro. E budun (Tef.) See yodun. D bütün Intrans. N./A.S. fr. büt-; usually “complete, entire”, S.i.a.m.l.g.; unlike büthardly ever with -i- for -ü- but with some other phonetic changes (b-/p-; -d-/-t-). See Doerfer 11 719. Uy£. vii ff. Man.-A (may all our bodies) bütünün katağın turzun “stand complete and strong” M 7 28, 26: Bud. bütün yértincü “the whole earth” TT X 251; bütün etözi “his whole body” do. 293; Suv. 4, 20; 2.0.0.: Civ. tükel bütün (spelt p-) “perfect and complete! TT VIII L.8a.; a:y teri bütün (bötün) “the moon is full” do. 30; (big affairs are not cheerful and) kiçiğ iş küdükler bütün ermez “small tasks are not carried out(?) TT I 73; bütün berdi “he has delivered the full (amount of cotton cloth) USp. 34, 17: Xak. xı çın bütün kişi: a/-aminu”l-naşih "a reliable and sincere person”: bütün a/-şahil: “genuine, complete', of anything; one says bütün yarma:k dirham şahih "a genuine (or undamaged ?) silver coin' Kaş. 7 398; a.o. / 224, 6 (ü:mlüğ): KB bütün is common; bütün bol mupar 'be assured of this” r9, a.o. 26 (amrul-)—bolur ötrü işler bütün 33o—çın bütün er 868—o.o. 407, 763, 865, 1980, etc.: xın(?) At. bütün çın 57; bütün kiılkı "his whole character” 341; 7ef. bütün 'complete', etc. 113: xiv Muğ. al-gahih bü:tün/bütü:n Mel. şs, r, 83, 17; Rif. 152; 189: Çağ. xv ff. bütün durust 'complete, perfect”, etc. San. 130v. 6 (quotns.): Kom. xiv "whole, complete' bütün CCJI, CCG; Gr. 71 (quotns.): Kip. xin al-gahih mina'l-áfa tva amtáülihá 'complete (free) from defects and the like” (opposite to 'defective', sınuk) bütün Hou. 27, 1: xiv. bitün (?misvocalized) al-kánil  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 351 
     
   
   
     DIS. BDR "perfect", bütün al-sahih İd. 28: Osm. xiv bütün 'complete' in a few texts TZ TS III 124; IV 140. ı Dis. V. BDNDF bitin- Refl. f. of biti:-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı er bitiğ bitindi: “the man pretended to write a book (document, etc. al-kitab)'; also used when he applied himself to writing it by himself (istabadda bi'l-kitába) without getting help from anyone else Kaş. 11 140 (bitinü:r, bitinme:k): bitiğ bitindi: “the book (etc.) was written (Rutiba), also bitildi: II 139, 7; 160, 13: KB kitábka bitindi bu xakan ati “this Xakan's name was wriften in the Book (of Fate)! 115 (Vienna MS. bitildi): xin(?) Tef. bitin- "to be written' ros. D butan- Refl. f. of buta:- (buti:-); survives only(?) in SW Osm. budan- “(of a tree) to be pruned, (of branches) to be cut off a tree'. Xak. xı yığa:ç butandı: quti'at ağşünu "Eşacara "the tree was pruned'; also used of a man who pretends to hit it(yadribuha) Kaş. II 141 (butanu:r, butanma:k): Osm. xvii budan- (by implication “in Rümi') pirásta şudan büğ wa diraxt az şüx-t xüyid "of a vine or tree to be cleared of superfluous branches” San. 131r. 26. Tris. BDN D bodunluğ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. bodun. Xak. xı bodunluğ bokunlu£ kişi: insán di raht oa "aşira "a man belonging to a clan and tribe! Kaş. 1 499 (spelt with -d- for -d-; a jingling Hend.). Tris. V. BDND bütünle:- Den. V. fr. bütün; survives in SW Osm., but there meaning “to complete, repair'. Xak. xı ol sö:züğ bütünle:di: fahaşa "an haqiqati”1-halam "he investigated the truth of the statement” Kaş. III 341 (bütünle:r, bütünle:me:k). Dis. BDR badar (padar?) onomatopoeic for the sound of footsteps and the like. Survives only(?) in SW Osm., Tkm. patir patir, same mcaning. Cf. English patter. Xak. xi badar badar yügürdi: 'adà ta sumi'a li-'adwihi hafifa(n) “he ran and (the sound of) his footsteps was heard faintly! Kaş. I 360 (MS., in error, yadar yadar), a.o. 1 349 (çalk). F patir Sanskrit pátra "a bowl', received through Sogdian p'ttr. N.o.a.b. Became a l.-w. in Mong. as badir (Kon, 1070); badar (Haltod 273) specifically for "a monk's begging bowl". Uy$. vir ff. Bud. (the Buddha said, “my good Ananda”) patırımın (PU) suncgufumin kötürgil “take up my begging bowl and my (Qy TT X 124-5: Civ. bir patir ayak bor bir patır ayak suv birle “one bowl of wine and one bowl of water" H I 16-17; öz patır bile on iki patır künçit aldım “1 have received twelve bowls of millet (measured) in my own bowl' USp. 27, 5-6. . bitrik bazru'l-mar'a | 307 PUF butar Hap. leg.; this is the first entry in the section headed -R and precedes badar; the first letter is undotted but must be bd and carries a damma, the second has two faint dots and is unvocalized, this section is not free from scribal errors (see badar) and judging by the meaning, it is likely that Kag. actually wrote papur, Xak. xr butar fütu'l-bardi "the papyrus reed” Kaş. I 360. S bütrü: Sce bütürü. PU?F batrak flag, banner, standard”, First occurs in Uyğ. as part of the panoply of demons in association with various l.-w.s of Sanskrit origin and probably itself a similar l-w., possibly received through Sogdian. It has no obvious Turkish etymology, and its phonetic history is obscure. The Uyg. alphabet 1s too ambiguous (b/p, d/d/t) to make its Uyg. pronunciation certain; the second vowel was rounded but this is unparalleled elsewhere. 'The Xak. spelling was certainly batrak, the main entry preceding that of buçğaK, it was originally the same elsewhere, but some later user of the MS. added two dots below the tà, and this caused the spelling bayrak ih the printed edition. By Çağ. the word had in fact become bayrak and this is the form in all modern SE, SC, NW, and SW languages in which the word survives; there must therefore have been, subsequent to Xak., an evolution batrak x badrak — badrak — bayrak, the intermediate stages of which are lost. See Doerfer 11 727, 824. Uy. vitr ff. Bud. (the demons holding in their hands) trzul (PU) batruk 'tridents (Sanskrit trifula) and flags' 'U IV 8, 9; trzul (PU) batruk vjirli$ tokimak “tridents, flags, thunderbolt (vajra) maces' do. 8, 39-40; trzul (PU) batruk ckir bindipal 'tridents, flags, wheels (cakra), and lances (bhindibala) do. zo, 236-7: Xak. xt batrak 'a lance (mafrada) with a piece of silk at its head which a champion uses as a badge (yatasatowam) on the day of battle' Kaş. I 465; ağdı: kızıl batrak “the red flag (al-'alam) was raised' JJ] 183, 6; a.o. JI 205, 2 (talpış-): Çağ. xvff. bayrak (spelt) 'alam-i hüçih “a small flag”: also “the winning-post' (qaşabıcl-sabq) in a race San. 128r. 6. VUD. bodrak Hap. leg. in a rather wellpreserved inscription. Mal. identifies this with a Çağ. word botrak (P. de C. 161, not in San.) 'scattered', but this is impossible since that word is der. fr. botra- which is not Turkish but a corruption of Mong. Dóte'ere(Kow. 1231, Haltod 309). Perhaps der. fr. 1 bo:d, but -rak is normally attached to Adjs. not Nouns. O. Kar. ix ff. (I have been parted) big bodrak yuntim sizime: “you, my thousand sturdy(?) horses! Mal. 45, 8. ?F bitrik pec. to Xak.; no doubt the basic meaning is 'pistachio nut” and a l.-w. fr. some Iranian language, cf. Pe. pistih. Xak. xi "clitoris": Arğu: xı bitrik al-fustuq “pistachio nut' Kaş. I 476. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 352 
     
   
   
      408 F badram “merriment" and the like, hence “a feast'. No doubt an Iranian l.-w., cf. Pe. badrüm "a delightsome place" (Steingass). S.ia.m.lg. except NE as bayram (in NC Kir. mayram; Kzx. meyram) as the "Turkish equivalent of Arabic al-'id “a (Moslem) feast”. See Doerfer II 823. Xak. xı badram al-surür twa'l-dahika bayna”l-qatım "general merriment and laughter', and the ground (al-ard) when it is covered with flowers and blossoms, is called badram yé:r ard naziha 'pleasant ground'; I do not know what its origin (asluhu) is because I have heard it from the lips of Persians (al-furs), but the Oğuz call “the (Moslem) feast day” (yaterma't-'id) bayram that is 'a day of pleasant merriment”, the -d- being changed to -y- as is their custom; it is a genuine word (luğa mahda, ie. pure Turkish?) in this sense Kaş. I 484; a.o. I 263, 11 (avin-): xi(?) Tef. bayram 'religious feast! 89: Çağ. xv ff. bayram al-'id San. 128r. 7 (quotn.; also “a kind of cotton fabric like 'Iráqi linen but finer! (quotn.); there is no other trace of this meaning): Oğuz xı bayram al-'id; I reckon that it 1s an alteration of the popular word (gatelu'l-nás) badram meaning 'merriment and enjoyment'; the (Moslem) feast day is a day of merriment. The pagans do not have a feast day or consequently a word for it; if there was one, all the Turks would know it, but the only ones who know this (word in this sense) are those who have turned -d- into -yin their language Kaş. III 176: Xwar. xiv bayram “the (Moslem) feast' MN 20, etc. D batruş Hap. leg.?; presumably a Dev. N./A. fr. 1 batur-, but there is no obvious semantic connection. Xak. xı batruş su:v al-mö”u”l-kadir *muddy — water'; and also macaroni (al-itriya) when it contains too much flour and too little water Kaş. I 459. Dis. V. BDRD 1 batur- Caus. f. of bat-; lit. “to cause to sink', with various extended meanings. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE(?). Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. erdemin baturup 'concealing their special virtues! TT VI 352; (the six male pipes of the Pan's pipes) baturu umaz ülgüsin 'cannot lower their pitch(?)” Hüen-ts. 133-4; (if the Master did not deign to return, should we mortals not all be) sansarlığ uzun tünde comurmius batarmış (sic?) 'submerged and sunk in the long night of samsára?' do. 301-4 (batur- lit. “to allow oneself to sink”), a.o. Suv. 138, 1 (ört-): Xak. xı ol só:zi:n mendi:n baturdi: katama minnisirrahu tea kalámahu 'he hid his secret and his statement from me' ; and one says Ol anı: suvka: baturdi: "he ducked him (maqalahu) in the water'; also used of anything that one puts into something liquid or soft, for example candied sugar (ai-fánid) into fruit juice Kaş. II 73 (baturur, baturma:k); bu kişi ol sö:z baturğa:n “this man habitually conceals (kítmàn) his statements” 7 $ı$, 19: KB (the gate keeper must watch the first light  DIS. BDR drive away dark night at the gate and) kapuğda batursa yarumig künüğ “must let the bright sun sink at the gate' 2530: Kom. xiv 'to conceal' batir- CCG; Gr.: Tkm. xiv batur(cahada, no doubt an error for) cahara “to burrow, drive into a burrow', and the like İd. 33. D 2 ba:tur- Hap. leg.; only quoted in a grammatical section as an example of a Dis. V. der. fr. a Mon. V.; Caus. f. of ba:- Xak. xı ol ko:yuğ ba:turdi: arbafa'l-fanam “he had the sheep tied up” Kaş. III 192, 11. D bütür- Caus. f. of büt-; with the same wide range of meanings. S.i.a.m.l.g. with the same phonetic variations as büt-. Cf. bütgür-. Uyğ. vir ff Man. çaxşapatığ bütürti (spelt ?-) “they carried out the commandment TT III 138-9, 142; a.o. do. 144: Bud. bütür“to perform, carry out” is common, e.g. (whatever your command is) ol yarlığının bütürgeli anuk tururbiz 'we stand ready to carry out that command” U TV 12, 104; 0.0. TT V zo, 8 (alp), 22, 13 and 20; 24, 51; VII 40, 91 and 97; VIII A.2 (üze:); U I 34, 18; HI 44, 4 (i); Hüen-ts. 311 (üksürüg); Sus. 71, 20; 235, 10-12 (1 l:r-); 529, 22; 602, 12: Civ. bütürüp berürbiz “ve will pay in full' USp. ız, io: Xak. xı ot ba:şığ bütürdi: “the medicament healed (darıala) the wound'; and one says (0l? anın üze: alımın bütürdi: “he enforced (abarra) his contract and rejected (barhana) his plea and insisted (a/zama) on (being paid) his debt in accordance with the contract'; also used of things other than debts Kaş. II 72 (bütürür, bütürme:k): KB (a man must have knowledge) ked bütürse Isi "if he is to carry out his work properly” 327; (I was bare-faced, God) bütürdi sakal "made my beard grow' 1098; (give them food and drink and) bütür oprakığ “give them proper clothing” 4527 (and see bütürü:) :xııı(?) At. yaraf bulsan oprak yalınnı bütür “if you find suitable clothing, clothe the naked” 330; Tef. bitür- "to make (plant) grow' 105: Xwar. xiv bitür- “to carry out, perform' Quib 34: Kom. xiv “to complete, carry out” bitir- CCG; Gr.: Kap. xii gadá'l-háca "to perform a necessary task” (VU) bütü:r- Hou. 35, 12; batta min batti'l-amr. doa”l-şuğl “to settle a matter, perform a task' bütür- (sic) do. 38, 11: xiv bitür(sic) cabara "to repair, put right” İd. 28; qadö”l-şuğl bütür- Bul. 75v.: Osm. xiv and xv bitür- 'to produce; to perform; to satisfy (a need); to heal (a wound)' in several texts TTS I 111; İİ 157; IV iy. D batruş- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of batur-. Xak. xı ola:r ikki: bi:r bi:riğ suvka: batruşdı: “the two of them ducked (maqa/a) one another in the water' Kaş. 71 203 (batruşu:r, batruşma:k). D bütrüş- RHecip. f. of bütür-, n.o.a.b. Xak. xi ola:r ikki: bütrüşdi: “the two of them negotiated and argued about their mutual claims" (tahákamd wa tabarhaná má'dda'ayá) Kaş. Tİ 203 (bütrüşü:r, bütrüş  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 353 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. BDŞme:k): Osm. xiv bitriş- "to settle one's accounts' (with someone, ile) in one text 77S I rrr. Tris. BDR D bütürü: Ger. fr. bütür- used as an Adv.; *completely', etc, N.o.a.b., cf. büte:; Uyğ. vir ff. "Bud, etózüm kópülüm bütürü öğirip sevinip “my body and mind were completely delighted (Hend.)' Hüen-ts. 296—7: Xak. xr KB bütrü 'thoroughly, completely? is fairly common, e.g. (the sun raiscd its head, and disclosed its face again) alun bütrü tutti ürün kuş ópl “the world compJetely assumed the colour of a white bird” 5828; o.o. 71, 193, 3949, 4420, 4961; there is also a Comparative f. ayıttı bu höcib sózin yétrürek tlleki ne ermis takı bütrürek “the Chancellor questioned him about his statement most searchingly (asking) more fully what his wishes were' 507. PUD buturğa:k Dev. N. in -ğa:k (connoting habitual action); there is no verb butur- and this would be much more easily explained as tuturğa:k der. fr. tutur- but R IV 1857 records a NC Tara word buturğak “a tree which has split and is bound round to save it from collapse”, so the form may be correct although Radloff's "Tara entries arc rather suspect. Xak. xı buturğa:k “a thorn tree (sawk) shaped like a pistachio trec (al-fustug), which has thorns (ria'áliq) whicb catch the clothing, etc. Kaş. I soz. (PU)D budursı:n 'quail, Coturnyx'; as such Hap. leg., but obviously connected with the later words for *quail' assembled below. Kaş. does not contemplate the existence of "Turkish words containing six consonants and a long vowel, and it is possible that the original form was *buldursrn, which links with the later forms and perhaps explains the intervocalic -d-, very rare in Xak., -sım is a very rare Suff. but may have the same relation to -çın, which occurs as a Suff. of other names of birds, as -Sil to -çıl, The later form survives in SW Az. bildircin; Osm. bildircin, but all other modern languages use some form of Mong. büdüne (Kom. 1230, Haltod 312). Xak. xi'budurstn a/-salwá 'quail Kaş. I $513 (verse (caklin-); translated a/-summáni *quail"): (Çağ. xv ff. kerek (spelt; otherwise unknown) *a bird smaller than a grey partridge', called salwá in Ar. and bıldırçın in Turkish Sar. 3oor. 28; n.m.e. (the latter by implication not Çağ.)): Tkm.(?) xir al-summàn (VU) bıldirci:n Hou. io, 9: xiv. bildircin a/-summönf in Ykm., Kip. buyurctn (-c-) 1d. 36; al-summán VU buldurcın Bul. rı, 13 (only second -u- marked): xv (a/-summan bedene Kav. 62, 13; Tuh. 19a. 12) the latter adds Tkm. buyurçun (mis-spelt buyurquk). Tris. V. BDRD butarla:- perhaps Den. V. fr. the Aor. f. of buta:- (butt:-); the meaning is clearly 'to tear to pieces'. N.o.a.b. Türkü vii ff. Man. antak terkin butarlayu (üze, etc., see üz-) “thus 309 quickly tearing to pieces (tearing, cutting, and tearing to strips his clothes)! M I 7, rs: Uyğ. vilt ff. Man. (like a calf, which when reborn as a lion) [gap) titretir butarlayur 'terrifies and tears to pieces (oxen)' M I 18, 4 (ii): Bud. tilki bóride ulatı yaviz tınliğlar butarlayu tartip 'evil creatures, foxes, wolves, etc., tear to pieces and drag” U III 79, 1-3 (i). Dis. BDS D batsık Dev. N. fr. bat-, used only with preceding 1 kün for “(sun)set". N.o.a.b. "The final -k became -ğ in Xak., and there is some evidence that this sound change of -Stk was fairly common (see Brockelmann, para. 109). Türkü vm: kuri:ğaru: kün batsıkı:pa: *westwards towards the sunset” 7 S 2, II N 2; kurya: batsıkdakı: Soğd “Sogdiana in the west' (and other countries) 7 N 12: Uyğ. ix (my fame reached) kün tuğsuk(k)a: batSik(k)a: Suci 4: viu ff. Man.-A kün batsıkıparu M /Tİ 9, 3 (ii), kün batsıkdın do. 4 (ii): Chr. óptün kün tuğsuk kedin kün batsıkıpa tegi M III 48, 1 (v): Xak. xi kü:n batsığ al-Zarb *west! Kaş. I 463. D bodsuz Hap. leg.?; Priv. N./A. fr. 1 bo:d. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. (the evil beings) bodsuz köligesiz barirlar “valk about without tangible form and casting no shadow' TT VI 99. Dis. V. BDSD bütse:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of büt-. Xak. xı ba:ş bütse:di: qaruba”l-curh mina'l-indimàl “the vvound came near to being healed” Kaş. III 283 (bütse:r, bütse:me:k). Dis. V. BDŞD bitiş- Co-op. f. of bitl:- , n.o.a.b. See also bütüş-. Xak. xı ol mapa: bitig bitişdi: “he helped me to write (7 kitba) the book (letter, etc.) ; also for competing Kaş. IJ 88 (bitisü:r, bitişme:k). VUD buduş- Hap. leg.; unvocalized but obviously the Co-op. f. of bu:d- with the particular connotation of 'to be completely split by the cold”. Xak. xr budusdt: ne: infaraca”l-şay” wa tagá'asa ka”l-riclayn ida tafahhacd “the thing svas split and (the parts) separated like the legs when they are straddled” Kaş. II 93 (buduşur, buduşma:k). D bödüş- Co-op. f. of bödü:-(bödi:-), survives only(?) in NW xix Kaz. biylş- “to dance together R IV 1r79o. Xak. xı oğlan bödüsdi: ftabara'l-sibyán fi'l-zafn wa'l-rags “the boys competed with one another in dancing (Hend.)' Kaş. 1I 93 (bödüşü:r, bödüşme:k). D bütüş- Recip. f. of büt-; survives at any rate in SW Osm., Tkm. bitiş- "to be contiguous to one another, to join, adhere'. In the MS. of Kaş. the Perf. is unvocalized and the other two forms vocalized öfffş-, ?in a later hand, but the word must have been bütüşin Xak. Xak. xı ola:r ikki: bütüşti:le:r  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 354 
     
   
   
     310 aqarra hull sáhid minhumd má'dda'à "alayhi sahibuhu "each of them admitted. the other's claim on him” Kaş. 11 88 (bütüşü:r, bütüşme:k). Dis. BDZ bediz 'ornamentation', perhaps specifically “painted ornamentation”, N.o.a.b., but a First Period l.-w. in Mong. as beder 'marks, stains”, etc, (Ko: 1113, Haitod 282). Türkü vini (in the account of the erection. of Kül Tegin”s tomb) 7 S 12 (urtur-); / N 13 (ét-); oo. I NW; İN 14; II SW; Ix. 24 (bedzet-): vir ff, ((I am a maral deer) bedi:z tiz üze: ünü:pen (I roar) Irk B 60; the word is clearly out of place here and prob. an error for bedü:k, 'rising on mv great legs”, the scribe's eye having caught the next word): Yen. bedizi:n üçün “for their ornamentation' Mal. 32, ro: Uyğ. viti ff. Bud. (they have made a model of the heavens) kim yeti grahlar kizleyü umaz bedizin 'in order that the seven planets (Sanskrit graha) may not hide their representations(?)” (they have made a time kecping device) Hüen-ts. 130-1: Xak. x Kaş. I 436 (burxan): KB tanuk ol sapa barca sürat bediz 'all forms and adornments(?) are a witness to 'lhee' 20; bu törlüğ cécek yerde munça bediz 'thesc various flowers are so many adornments on the ground' 96; (He created the blue firmament and raised it on high) kün ay birle yulduz bezedi bediz 'and adorned it with the sun, moon, and stars” 3724; a.0. 1524: xiv. Muh.(?). af-nags "picture, painting', etc. bedi:z(?), Rif. 189 (bedi:r); Mel. 83, 14 has baxis. Dis. V. BDZD bedze:- Hap. leg. in a very dubious text, but no doubt Den. V. fr. bediz and the original form of beze:-, q.v. Türkü vrir bedzemis “adorned” (the tomb) xe Asxefe a. 2; c. 3 GZTY H 121); the reading 5egsemiş in a. 3 is improbable. D bedzet- Caus. f. of bedze:-. N.o.a.b. Türkü vii (I obtained a decorator from the Emperor [of China] bedzet(t)im “and ordered him to ornament (the tomb)” 7 S ır: (1, Yoluğ Tegin, stayed here for a month and four days and) biti:dim bedzet(t)im 'wrote (the inscription) and had (the tomb) ornamented” I7 ST; (various people held a funeral feast (sce yoğlat-) and) bedizin bedzet(t)i: “had (the tomb) ornamented' Ix. 24: Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (let him make a picture of me four fect high and wide and) iki éligimde bügde baltu tuta bedizetziin (sic) let him paint me holding a dagger and an axe in my two hands” Suv. 544, 6-7. "Tris. BDZ D bedizçi: N.Ag. fr. bediz; 'painter, decorator”. N.o.a.b. "Türkü vir (Tavğalç kağanta: bedizçi: kelürtim “1 obtained a decorator from the Emperor of China” 7 S DIS. V . BDŞ11; 0.0. 7 S 12 (İçreki:), 7/ NE (élteber); 77 N i4: Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (in a. colophon) Koçoda bedizçi (PU) El-toz 'El-toz(?) the illuminator in Koço” U 77 zo, 1 (1): Civ. (in a list of names) bedizçi USp. 6:1, 18: Xak. x1 KB (in a list of craftsmen) bedizci 4458. D bedizliğ P.N./A. fr. bediz; 'painted, ornamented'. N.o.a.b. Xak. xi bedizliğ ev bayt miuzaxrof 'a house painted (with frescoes 7)" Kaş. I soy: KB ediz ken bedizlig sarüyiıp kalıp "your high, spacious, painted ( ?frescoed) palace remains" (but you lie in the grave) 1419; 3.0. I S24. Tris. V. BDZD bedizle:- lap, leg.; Den, V. fr. bediz; “to ornament, adorn (mctaph.?). Cf. bedze:-. Türkü viii ff. rk D 28 (uyur). Mon. BG D 1 ba:ğ Conc. N. fr. ba:- ; 'boud, tic, belt”, and the like; also 'something tied or fastened together, bundle, bale', etc. In early political terminology ba:ğ also seems to mean “a confederation', that is a number of clans united by contractual arrangements, as opposed to bo:d 'clan', a number of families united by tics of blood, and bodun “a group of such clans'. S.i.a.m.l.g. as bağ, baw, bo:, ctc. See also bo:ğ. Scc Docrfer IE 70s. Türkü vin ff. Yen. bağım bodunimka: adriltum 'I have been parted (by dcath) from my confederation and people" Ma. 27, 7; a.0. 38, 4 (dubious): Uyğ. virt ff. Man.-A kamağ yeklere bağı bolzun “may it become a bond to bind all the demons' M I 15, 19-20; 0.0. M İİ 12, 18 (i): Bud. alku tınlığlarnın bağlarındın ozğurdaçı “the saviour of all mortals from their bonds” U II 58, s (0), bağ cuf 'bonds and wrappings' Suv. 165, 20-1; 0.0. TT V 26, 116 (boğuz), 24, 78 (e&amp;riK) V7 110, ctc.(buka:ğu:):/777 A. 35: Civ. in astronomical terminology bağ is one of the "units” in the cycle of sixty TT VII 1,2 and 72; 6, 2 and 5; yüz iki bağ bözni “roz bales of cloth! U.Sp. 13, $$ 0.0. do. 29, 3; 91, 10 (2 0t); TT I 9 (yulun-): O. Kir. ix ff. alti: bag “the: six confederations” was a political unit in "Tuva in the O, Kir. period, usually described as altı: bağ bodun Mai. 1,2; $, 2; 24, $$ 49, 4 (sce also 1, R. Kyzlasov, “Novaya datirovka yenisciskoi pis'mennosti', Sovetskaya. arkheologiya, 1960) 3,: Xak, xi ba:ğ any 'bundle' (huzma) of firewood or anything else, hence one says otun ba:ğı: 'a bundle of firevvood” Kaş, III 152i o.o. I 409, 6; II 21, 19 (çiğ-): KB munun bağı mundağ “the connection. betwecn these things is like this" 727: xın(?) Tef. bağ “bond, dog's İcad”, etc. 87: xiv Muh. al-'igába 'turban' ba:ş ba:fr; al-nmigádb 'veil' yü:z ba:ğı:, (Rif. adds sidádu'l-sadr (a woman's) breast binder! tö:ş ba:ğı:) Mel. 53, 6; Rif. 150; 2.0. 67, 7; 167 (bé:l): Çağ. xv ff, bağ band wa riştih “bond, fastening, cord” Sar. 125r. 16 (quotn.): Xwar. xır ton bağı “belt” “Ali 21: xnr(?) Og. 33 (altunluğ): xiv bağ *bonds' Qur? 23; a.0. do. 44 (çu:ğ): Kom. xiv 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 355 
     
   
   
       DIS. bav 'chain, fetter' CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv ba: al-ribát fastening”İd. 33: xval-"uqda"a bundle, for example a bale of silk or the like ba:ğ Kav. 39, 3. F 2 ba:ğ the Persian word bdğ 'garden' was a very carly L-w. in Turkish, primarily for *vincyard', for which there is no native Turkish word. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE, usually in its Pe. meaning. Uy£. viii ff. bağ borluk “vineyard (Hend.)' TT IV ro, 6: (xiv) Civ. bagnt edlep *'cultivating the vincyard' USp. 22, 41: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. 'vineyard' bağ borluk Ligeti 137; R IV 1127: Xak. xti ba:ğ al-karm “vine” Kaş. IJI 152; ba:ğıka: kir udxul fi'l-karm "go into the vine(yard)' LII 212, 1: KB yer suv bağım “my landed property and vineyards' (or gardens?) 2278: xin(?) Tef. bağ 'garden' 87: Kom. xıv “vineyard” bağ CCI; Gr.: Kom. xiv (after 1 ba:ğ) and ba:ğ al-bustàn 'garden' borrowed from Pe. İ4. 33. (D) bo:ğ 'bundle' and the like; presumably a Sec. f. of 1 ba:ğ, the word also occurs in Pe., but seems there to be a Turkish l.-w.; for the difference between the two words see bofla:-. N.o.a.b. See Doerfer 11 789. Uyğ. viri ff. Civ. (a donkey is hired) tokuz otuz boğ (text in error tok) bözke “for (a rent of) 29 bales of cloth' Up. 3, 4-5: Xak. xı bo:ğ 'aybatu'l-matá' wa rizmatuhu “a bale or bundle . of merchandise! Kaş. 111 127; olo. II 341, 13 (boğlat-) and ?I/ 133, r (çığıl-): Osm. xiv boğ 'bundle' in one text TTS IV 117. S buğ See 2 bu:. 1 bo:k (sic) (r) *green mould'; (2) 'excrement, dung'. S.i.a.m.l.g. in the second meaning, in the first only(?) in NE Koib., Sag. poğ R IV 1265. The secondary meaning metallic slag' also occurs. Cf. 1 ark. Uyf. viri ff. Civ. (a virtuous man is as good as the Buddhas) buyansız kişi bok bakır birle tüz ol “a man without merit is no more use than copper slag” TT VII 42, 2: Xak. x1 bo:k 'the grcen mould (al-xudra) which forms on bread when it turns musty owing to age or putridity', also of other things Kaş. I1] 129: xiv Muh. al-£à'it 'excrement' bo:k Mel. 48, 1; Rif. 142: Ofuz xr bo:k a/-gá'ig Kaş. III 129: Kom. xiv 'dung' bok CCG; Gr.: Kip. xit al-'adira 'human excrement” bok Hou. zr, 19: xiv bok al-xur' “excrement” d. 34: xv 'adira bok Tuh. 25a. 6. VU 2 bo:k Hap. leg.; an onomatopoeic. "The only modern trace seems to be in NE Khak. poxla- (of the heart) “to beat”. Xak. xı (after 1 bo:k), and one says ka:ğu:n bo:k yé:rke: tüşdi: "the melon fell to the ground with this sound” (al-sato!); and one says of anything hollow that falls to the ground and bursts bo:k etti, it is an onomatopoeic (hikaya) for the sound Kaş. III 129. Mon. V. BGbak- "to look at (someone or something Daz.), with some extended meanings like "to look, after (someone); to look to, obey (someone)'.  BGA 311 S.i.a.m.l.g. Xak. xı ol mana: bakdı: nazara dlayya "he looked at me” Kaş. 11 16 (baka:r, bakma:k); 16 o.o.: K B bak- is common, e.g. öz ózipe bakıp 'looking at itself' 81; (the planet Venus) seve bakti erse 'if she looks lovingly (at you) 135; 0.0. 195, 255, etc.; xni(?) At. bakığlı okiplt asığ alsu tép 'saying “let him look and read and draw advantage from it" ” 78; baka körgil 'look and sce' 99; Tef. bak- “to look (at something Dat.) 89: xiv Muh. nazara bak- Mel. 7, 18; 31, 15; Rif. 79, 116; al-tatallu' "to look towards, stare at” bakmak 34, 8; rro: Çağ. xvff. bak(mayın, etc.) 5ak- Vel. 131; bak- mnígàh hardan “to look (at)' San. 125v. 13 (quotns.): Xwar. xır bak- “to look, glance (at something Dat. "Ali 31: xiv ditto Qutb 27, MN 108, etc., Nahe. 284, 17 (alart-): Kom. xiv bak-/bax- 'to look, look at, look after' CCI, CCG; Gr. 49 (quotns.): Kip. xii /ahaza "to glance at” bak-; :ntazara baka: tur- Hom. 36, 17; tatalla'a min tatallu' "ala ciha “to look towards! bak- do. 42, 2: xiv bak- stazara İd. 34: tatalla"a ma talla"a wa nazara bak- Bul. 39r.: Xv bak- nazara at tatalla"a bak- Kav. 9, 12; 4.0. 31, I1 ; basara "to sec, perceive” bakTuh. 8b. 2; ra"d “to see” bak- do. 17a. 12; nazara bak- do. 37b. 5$: Osm. xiv T TS II 24 (alart-). boğ- “to strangle, choke (someone //cc.)”. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. some phonetic changes (b-/p- ; of-[-0:-[-u:-). Uyğ. virrff. Civ. boğmak bolsar “if a man has a choking fit" H I 184: Xak. xr ol erni: boğdu: "he strangled (xanaqa) the man” (etc.) Kaş. II 14 (boğa:r, boğma:k), 1 85 (2 uya:) and three o.o.: K B yarağsıznı boğdı eligde urup “he strangled the useless ones, seizing them with his hands” 437: Çağ. xv ff. boğ- xafa hardan wa gulü-rd tang fuşurdan “to strangle, to squceze the throat” San. 135v. 20 (quotns.): Kip. xir xarmaqa boğ- Hou. 35, 17: xiv bo:- xanaga İd. 28; boğdi: xanaqa; va himca "alam, wa. taraqqaqa ba'uhu idü kana "alam “to strangle', and bugdt: with -u- means “flag, sign, landmark” (9) İd. 33 (there is no other trace of buğdı: in any such sense): xv boğ- xanaqa Kav. 10, 6; 76, 14; ditto bo:-; Tkm. boğ- Tu). rşa, 3. bok- “to cross (the legs)'. Survives in NE Leb. puğ- R IV 1361; el, pok- do. 1264; SE Tar. boğ- do. 1647. C£. bağda:-. Xak. xi ol ada:kin bokdi: “he drew in (damma) his legs towards himself after they had been stretched out” Kaş. 1I 16 (boka:r, bokma:k): KB (do not hurry over anything) serin öz boka '(sit) crossing your legs and be patient" 1310. Dis. BGA baka: by itself 'frog'; also “tortoise” if preceded by words meaning “horn, stone”, and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. minor phonetic changes in both meanings. See kurbaka:. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. müyüz baka: (horn) 'tortoise' U II as, 21: Xak. xı baka: al-difda' 'frog'; hence "the tortoise' (al-sallafa', sic) is called müpüz baka: Kaş. III 226: Gag. xv ff. baka and  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 356 
     
   
   
     312 DIS baka çanak /ak pust "tortoisc', also called taş baka/taş bakka ("stone frog), in Ar. PU katf (or kaşf, unlike any known Ar. word for "tortoise') San. 126r. 18; taş bakka sang puşt 'tortoise', also called baka/baka canak' in Ar. (as above) do. 157r. ro: Xwar. xiv baka 'frog' Qutb 27: Kip. xin (al-difda" kurbağa:), al-sulahfa (VU) kabırçaklu: bağa: ya'ni difda" dat "ilba (mis-spelt 'ayi-a) that is "a frog with a box” Hou. 7, s: xiv. kaburçaklı: bağa: al-sulahfà İd. 68; ditto (hut kabırçaklı:) ma' nàhu difda" dát qubba meaning “a frog with a dome” Hil. 5,2: xv sulahfa kabarçaklı bağa Tuh. 192. 9; kabarşaklı (sc) bağa 39b. 3: difda' bağa do. 23b. 7: Osm. xvin (after Çağ. entry) and in Eri kablu baka and (PU) tos baka San. 126r. 18 (the latter Hap. leg.). D baku: (bakku:) Dev, N. in -ğu:, with the -ğ- assimilated, fr. bak-; lit. "a look-out. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı baku: a[-quff “a hill, high ground” Kaş. III 226, (after soku:) 'just as the word baku: a/-quff was abbreviated, it originally had -kk- (a/-qaf mugaddad)' do. 26; (the wolf) baku: ağdı: climbed the hill (to escape me)” /// 219, 17. PUF 1 buğa: Hap. leg.ş a Sanskrit l.-w., perhaps püga 'betcl-nut'. Xak. x1 buğar a drug (datcá) imported from India one says Sa:rığ buğa: 'yellow (asfar) buğa? and bo:z buğa: *reddish (aşhab) buğa? Kaş. III 224. S 2 buğa: Sec buka:. buka: 'bull'. S.i.a.m.l.g. with some phonetic changes (b/p; k/8). Some NW "Tat. dialects and SW, Osm. only, have -0- for -u-; sce Shcherbak, p. 99. Cf. u:d, öküz, sığır, Not to be confused with the Mong. word buğu 'stag' (Haenisch 21, Kow. 1160) which occurs as a l.-w. in the Chin.-Uvg. Dict.; Xwar. xil (?) Of. 29, etc.; Çağ, Vel. 153; San. 136v. 9, and survives in SE Türki and NC Kir,, Kzx. Sce Doerfer 11 752. Türkü viti T s (1ra:k): Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. bukas: aşnu ünüp "his bull came out first and . . .' PP 6s, 3: Civ. USp. 68, 3 (eckü:): Xak. xı buka: fahlu'l-baqara "bull” Xaş. İT 226; alo. al-tair 'bull II 79, 21 (mügres-): KB boyun yal bedüttün buka teg kılıp "you have made your neck and the back of your neck bigger like a bull's! şSor: Çağ. xv ff. buga gdzc toa. gátomiş "bull; buffalo' (also a Proper Name) San. 136r. 24; buka the same as buğa do. 137r. 4: Kom. xiv 'bull' boğa CCI; Gr.: Kip. xi (cattle! in general şığır, a/-fazer öküz) ai-"iche l-şabbir"l-mür şadiol-qufas “a sturdy bull calf which is ready to breed” buğa: Hou. 14, 19: xiv. buğa: al-fahlu'l-imuddakir l'l- (VU) diráb “a male animal'(?) and any male animal (fahl) is called this, the "Turks and Persians say bağa: (sic?), its origin is the Ar. word bagga' lustful', but its (form) is incorrect (a/-ma'bün) İd. 33; (bullock” öküz) al-taswru'l-rayn “an entire bull' buğa:, used specifically in this sense and also (more generallv) for the best (al-cayvid) of anything Bul. 7, 8: xv . BGA al-tawr (öküz and) buğa: Kan. 62, 2; later buğa (and öküz) Tuh. ria. 2; Ala Buğa Proper Name do. 41b. 7. Dis. BGC VU bukac/buka:c n.o.a.b. Xak, xi bukaç al-tar. awi'l-qidr min xazaf "a jar or cooking pot of clay'; one says eşiç bukaç qidr ta fator as a Hend. ('ala'i-11bà^? Kaş. I 357; (buka:ç art the name of a mountain pass ('aqaba:)) buka:ç al-tatr wa'l-qidr; one says esic buka:ç 7 411: xiv. Muh.(?) (among blacksmith's implements) kür “a blacksmith's furnace' baka:ç (sic) Rif. 160 (only). F bakçan “silent meditation'; n.o.a.b. L.-w. fr. the synonymous Chinese phr. »o ch'an 'silent. meditation! (Giles 8,021 348; Ancient Chinese m(b)ak tsg'an). Uy. vur ff. Bud. (then the venerable arhat Sàriputra in that monastery) bakçan bolur erdi “vas (sunk in) silent meditation U 777 88, 17; a.o. do. 89, 2. 'Tris. BGC D baka:çuk Hap. leg.; Dim. f. of baka:; lit. "little frog”, for a parallel animal simile cf. Latin musculus "little mouse'. Cf. sıçğanak, Xak. xı baka:çuk rasğir baka: wa huma farisatu”l-dirdf" “Dim. f. of baha: ; the muscle of the forearm' (sic but ?“biceps”) Kag. 7/7 226. Dis. BGD bugdr: Sec bo:g NW. D bokdam Hap. leg.; N./A.8. in -dam (connoting resemblance) fr. 1 bo:k; “mouldlike”. Uyğ. virit ff, Civ. (your old name has been changed and has become new) bokdam atın “your mouldy reputation" (has been changed, etc.) T'T 1 118. D bağdaş Dev. NA. in -S (connoting reciprocity) fr. bağda:- ; survives in SW Osm. Xak. xi KB bağdaş ilme “do not sit crosslegged” (at a feast) 4114: Kip. xv cafd “to sit cross-legged' bağdaş oltur- Tu), 12a. 10. buğda:y “vheat”, S.i.a.m.l.p. vv. some phonetic changes, Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. (a statue of Buddha) buğday evininçe “the size of a grain of wheat' Pfahl. 6, 6: Civ. livi aşı buğday tetir "the (appropriate) offering (l.-w.) of food to it is said to be wheat' TT V1! 14, ag: Xak. xr buğda:y a/-hinta *wheat! (prov.); the people of Barsğün cannot pronounce buğda:y and call it budğa:y and this word (is used) to test anvone who says 'I 2m not one of them" Kaş. III 240; and 7 0.0.: KH (in the list of the signs of the zodiac) buğday başı “the ear of wheat', the Ar. name of Virgo 140: xin(?) Tef. buğday “vheat” 106 (5oğday): xiv. Mh. al-hinta bu:ğda:y Mel, 6, 13; 65, 14; 77, 13; 79, 6; Rif. 7z, 165, 181, 183: Çağ, xv ff. buğday gandum “"vvhcat”, also used for burc-i sunbula 'Virgo' Sam. 136r. 29: Xwar. xiv buğday “vheat” Qutb 37; “a fruit (on the tree of the knowledge of good and evil)” Nahc. 281, 6: Kom. xiv “vheat” boğday/buğday/boday 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 357 
     
   
   
     DIS. BĞĞ CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xii al-hinta bu:day also called buğday Hou. 12, iş: xiv Tkm. buğday al-qamh *wheat'; Kip. buyday; and to describe a man with a brown complexion (asmar) they say buğday emlü: (see eplig) s and (in Kip.) buğday is not used except in this phr. Jd. 33; ai-qamh buğday Bul. 6, 15; al-qamhiya 'wheaten food” buğday as do. 8, 2: xv al-qamh buğday Kav. 63, ız, qamh buday; Tkm. buğday Tuh. 29a. 3: Osm. xiv ff. buğday “vheat” is noted fr. xiv onwards; a Sec. f. buğda is noted in xiv and xv and buğday eplü fr. xiv to xviii. T TS 7 119; İT 173; İİİ 114; IV 128. D boxta:y Hap. leg.; Den. N. fr. bo:ğ. "The sound change -ğt- » -xt- also occurs in ağtar-. "The Suff. -ta:y, which has no relation to the Mong. P.N./A. suffix -tay[-tey (Studies, P. 202), is very rare, and its significance is obscure, cf. turumtay; as Kaş. gives practically the same translation for bo:ğ and this word, it cannot have much content. Xak. xı boxta:y 'aybatu'l-tiyàb "a bale of clothing': VU boxto:y alternative form (luğa fihi) Kaş. III 239. : Dis. V. BĞDD bakıt- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of bak-, cf. bakur-. 'l'he modern Caus. f. baktur- docs not seem to be noted earlicr than (Xak.) xiv Muh. amara bi'l-ta'ammul "to order to contemplate' bakdur-, Mel. 41, 5, where Rif. 131 has bakur- Xak. xı ol anı: evdin bakrttı: atla"ahu wa amaralın an ytbsir (words omitted» “he showed him and told him to look «at the house?'; also used for anyone who urges someonc to look towards a place (yanzur ila maddi") Kaş. II 308 (bakitu:r, bakitma:k). D bukatt- (buka:d-) Hap. leg.; Intrans. Den. V. fr. buka:. Xak. xı buza:gu bukattı: (sic) şara”"l-"icl fahl ['I-bagara wa “udda min cumlat”l-fuhül “the: calf became a bull and was reckoned among the bulls'; originally buka:dti: Kaş. II 308 (buka:tu:r, bukatmaik, sic). D bağda:- “to trip (someone Zcc.)'; Den. V. fr. 1 ba:B with a different meaning fr. bağJa:-. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. bağda- "to cross the legs, sit cross-legged'; cf. bağdaş. Xak. xr ol anın ada:kin bağda:dı şağzaba riclahu fi'l-sirà' "he tripped his leg while wrestling! Kaş. III 276 (bağda:r, bağda:ma:k); a.o. /] 364, 14: ol anın ada:kın badğa:dı: same translation; a metathesized Çala qalb) form of bağda:- 777 288 (badğa:r, badğa:ma:k). D bağdat- Caus. f. of bağda:-, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı ol anın ada:kın bağdattı: "he ordered (someone) to trip (5/-şağzaba) his leg while wrestling! Kaş. II 327 (bağdatu:r, bağdatma:k). D boğtur- Caus. f. of boğ-, “to order (someone Dat.) to strangle (someone Zec.)'. Survives only(?) in SW Osm., Tkm. boğdur-. Xak. xı Ol anı: bofturdr "he ordered that he 313 should be strangled' (hi-xanqihi) Kaş, HI 171 (boğturur, boğturma:k), a.o. /T 173, 18: Çağ. xv ff. boğdur-. Caus. f., xafa farmüdan “to order to strangle' San. r3ör. ş. Tris. BĞD (F) bağa:tu:r by origin almost certainly a Hunnish (Hsiung-nu) Proper Name, and more specifically that of the second Hsiung-nu shan-yü (209-174 R.C.) whose name was transcribed by the Chinese as Mao-tun (Giles 7,699 12,221; Old Chinese prob. something like mog-tun). 'The word occurs only once in the early period and then still as a P.N. but was an carly l.-w. in Mong. as ba'atur (Haenisch 11)/bagatur (Kore, 1058), primarily as an element in P.N.s, e.g. Yesügei Ba'atur (Haenisch 184) but also as a common noun meaning “picked warrior'. It is prob. that the transition from name to noun took place in Mong.; "Turkish had other words like alpa:ğut with this meaning. The word reappears in Turkish in the medieval period generally in forms with medial -h- which suggest that the immediate source was Pe. S.i.s.m.l. in SE, NC, SC, and NW as batır/batur, R IV 1511-16, which seem to be direct borrowings fr. Mong. See Doerfer I1 817 and Studies, p. 19. Türkü vun fi. atım Bağa:tu:r Cigsi: “my name is Bağa:tu:r Cigs:' Tun. IV 12 (ETY II 96): Xwar. xiv mapa alp bahatur quwwathijs kişiler 1da berğil "send me tough warriors and strong men” Nahc. ısı, o: Kom. xiv 'brave (man)' bağatur CCI; bahadur CCG, Gr.: Kap. xv sucá' 'brave!' bahadur Tuh. zob. 8; Kav. 23, 12; 60, 6. Dis. BGG D bakığ Hap. lcg.?; N.Ac. fr. bak-. Xak. xt bakığ a/-nazra "a glance, look”: hence one says anıp bakığı: kör absir nazratahu "see how he glances” Kaş. 7 373. VU bokuk (?bokok) “a svelling, esp. in the throat', in humans “goitre, double chin”, in birds 'crop'; metaph. 'a bud'. Survives in NE Alt, Tel. poğo:k, Leb. po:k R IV 1264-5; Şor puğak do. 1362; Khak. poğo 'goitre, bird”s crop”, sometimes “a (bride's) necklace'; SE Türki pokak “goitre” BS; poxak/po:kak/ porkak Jarring: NC Kir. poğo:k 'necklace'; bokok 'bird's crop” R IV 1265, 1646; boğok 'goitre' Yud.; Kzx. buğak “goitre”, NW Kk. buğak 'goitre'. The evidence points to -0- in the first syllable. See Doerfer II 801. Xak. x1 bokak (sic) al-ha:sala "a bird's crop”: bokuk camü'atu'l-naser wa. akmámu'l-anwár | :ea'l-ashür “a cluster of flowers, the buds of flowers'; hence one says çeçek bokuklandı: “the flower has come into bud” (takammama), that is before the blossom has actually opened (yatafattara”l-zahr) (verse): bokuk 'goitrous flesh” (lahm ğudadi) which grows between the skin and the flesh each side of the Adam's apple (al-hargada); (a long account of the prevalence of this disease in Fergana and the Siqni country and of the reasons for it follows) 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 358 
     
   
   
     34 DIS Kaş. II 285: Kap. xiv (VU) boğağ al-halg "throat! İd, 33 (an inexact translation, see boğaz): al-hawsala (VU) boğa:ğı: (sic) (and kurşa:k) Bul, 12, 7: xv tahtu'l-hanak. “the part bencath the chin' boğak Kar, 60, 15. Tris. BĞĞ (D) buka:ğu: 'fetter, leg-iron, handcuff'; morphologically Conc. N. fr. *buka:-. S.i.s.m.l. (NC, NW, SW). See Doerfer 11 725. Uyğ. vii ff. Man.-A yazukluğ ernip ... bukağusı "the fetters . . , of a criminal” M III ız, 19 ()): Man. bukağutakılar “those who are in fetters' TT III 49: Bud. bağda bukağuda yatip 'lying in honds and fetters” Kas. 38; ao. TT VI 110: Xak. xi buka:fu: al-maqtara (sic) “the chains! that are put on a thief Kaş. 1 446: xin(?) Tef. bukağu “fetters” ro? (bokagu): Çağ. xv ff. bukağu/bukavv the same as buxagu/buxaw (Osm.) in the sense of farq toa zincir 'neck-ring; chain” San, 137r. 5: Kip. xiv bukawu: al-gayd “fetters” 1d. 33: (qayyada bukagula- Bul. 74v): xv qayd buwawt; Tkm. buğavvı (in margin in SW hand bukağı) Tul. 29a. 13: Osm. xiv ff. bukağu 'fetters, etc.”, fairly c.i.a.p. TTS I 122; İl iy3, HI 578 (p-); IV 130; XVIII buxağı in Rmi, “a chain' (zincir) that they fasten to the legs of animals or criminals San. 131f. 7. . D bukağuçı: N.Ag. fr. buka:ğu:, n.o.a.b. Cf. bukağuluğçı:. Uyğ. vur ff. Bud. (in a list of. disreputable occupations) bukagugi boltum erser “if I have become a jailer' U İT 85, 13; ao. TT IV 8, 61 (2 kina:-). D bokukluğ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. bokuk. Xak. xı bokukluğ er “a man with goitre” (ratesafa) Kaş. 1 497. D bukagutud P.N./A. fr. buka:ğu: 'fettered', etc. Survives in NC. Kir. boğo:lu:, Uyğ. vin ff. Bud, boyunları bukağuluğ "with their necks chained” Suv. 12, 17. D bukağuluğçı Hap. leg.; N.Ag. fr. bukağuluğ. Uyğ. vurff, Chr. (Herod ordered) öz bukağuluğçı ölütçi yarğanlarka "his own jailers, executioners and judges Oy UIg9, 17-18. Tris. V. BGGD bokuklan- Refl Den. V. fr. bokuk; n.o.a.b, in the sense of “to come into bud”, of a plant, bush, etc. Uyğ. vii ff. Man. Wind. 10 (ağirlığ): Xak. xı Kaş. II 285 (bokuk); T 437, 5 (same verse as in /7 285). Dis. BGL D bağlığ P.N./A. fr. 1 ba:ğ, with several meanings der. fr. that word. S.i.s.m.l. with the same phonetic changes as 1 ba:ğ. UYĞ. vii ff. Bud. çap bağlığ (PU) kü tao atlığ bir beg "a beg named Kü tao(?) of the Chang family” Suv. 4, 7, (edgü öğli bağlığ bodisatv Avalokite$vara Bodhisattva, “the B. who looks kindly (on men)” U 7 17, 6; as Müller, do. . BGG I $6, points out this must be an error for bakığlığ): (Civ. in a contract USp. 13 relating to the sale of a vineyard the price is quoted in l. 2 as yüz iki bağlık uzun karıda böz (see uzun) and inl. ş as yüz iki bağ bózi; bağlık must be syn. av, 1 ba:ğ and is either an A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. it, otherwise unnoted, or a scribal error): Xak. xi KB beg atı bilig birle bağlığ turur "a örg”s reputation is bound up with his wisdom' 1953: xiv Mu. al-muğlaq 'bolted' (opposite to 'open' acuk) bağluk (sic) Rif. 154: (Mel. şö, 3 bağlamak in error): Çağ. xv ff. bağlığ/bağlık baglu ve bağçalı . . . ve bir daxi bandla baglu “ovvning a vineyard or garden” (fr. 2 ba:ğ) and also 'tied. with. bonds! cl. 130 (quotn.); bağlığ basta 'bound' San. əsr. 21 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv. bağlığ/bağlık/bağlı “bound, fastened' Qutb 24. (D) bakla:n one of the group of animal names ending in -la:n; a particular kind of lamb, but whether of a particular age or “fat” or the like is obscure. N.o.a.b. Cf. Doerfer II 751. Xak. xı bakla:n kuzu: al-hiamalu'l-fariyu l-samin "a tender, fat lamb" Kaş. 7 444: Xwar. xiv (one should eat a lamb) baklan erken (before it becomes a şişek (tişek)) Quib 27. Dis. V. BCLbakil- Pass. f. of bak-; s.i.s.m.l. meaning “to be watched, looked. after”, and the like. Xak, xr yö:rke: bakıldı: (i/í'a wa nuzira Ha ard “he ground was carefully examined and looked at” Kaş, HI 131 (bakilur, bakılmu:k): Çağ. xv ff. bakil- mpoáh karda sudan "to be looked at” Sas. 126r. r, D boğul- Pass. f. of bof-; "to be stranpled, choked'. S.i.mm.lar, Xak. xr er boğuldi: vunniqa l-racul "the man (etc.) was strangled' Kaş, U 131 (boğulur, boğulma:k): Kom. xiv. "to be drovvned” bogul- CCI; Gr. D bokul- Hap. leg.; Pass. €. of bok-. Xak. xı ada:k bokuldr xidot wa quhidatr l-riclu l-inafrüiga “the leg which had been outstretched was grasped and drawn in” Kaş, II 131 (bokilur, boki/ulma:k sic, both kasra and damma on the Infin.). D bağla:- Den. V. fr. 1 ba:ğ, usually “to tie, fasten', and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. with the same phonetic changes as 1 ba:ğ, Cf. ba:-, bofla:-. Uyğ. ix (I had three sons and three daughters) evledim bağladım “1 married off (the sons, i.e. gave them their own homes) and gave (the daughters) in marriage (i.c. to another clan) Suci 6 (text as corrected bv Gronbech): Xak. xı ol otug bağla:dı: hazama'I-hatab “he tied the firewood (etc.) in a bundle' Kaş. 111 292 (bağla:r, bağla:ma:k), kóglüm aga:r ba£layu: 'aqadtu qalbi "ala hubbihi “1 fastened my heart to (love for) him” 777 309, ro: xiu(?) (At. 183, 220 v.l see ba:-); Tef. bağla- “to tie (the hands); to bolt a (door)', etc. 88: xiv Muh. ağlaqa ma şadda “to bolt, fasten” ba:ğla:- Rif. 104 (Mel. 23, 3 bağlan-), qayyada “to bind' (Rif. tva katafa "to handcuff”)  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 359 
     
   
   
     TRTS. V. BGMbağla- 3o, ir; ba:ğla:- 114: Çağ. xvff. bağla- bastan “to bind' San. 124r. 18 (quotns.): Xwar. xir bafla- “to bind, fasten', etc. "Ali 26: xın(?) ditto. Oğ. 3o, 34, 363, 366: xiv. ditto. Qutb 23; MN 365; Nahe. 17, 1 (yip): Kom. xiv “to tie up, fasten' bağla-/ balğa- CCI; ditto and bavla- CCG; Gr. 47 (quotns.): Kip. xri rabafa “to tie up” ba:ğla:Hou. 36, 3; şadda min gaddi'l-faras wa ğayrıhd za humsa”l-ribdt “to fasten, that is tic up a horse etc.” bağla:- do. ar, 3: xiv bağla- rabata, der. fr. ba:ğ al-ribát İd. 33; gallaqa "to bolt” bağla- Bul. 64r.: xv rabafa bağla- Kav. 74, 6; bağla-, and some of thgm substitute -yfor -É- do. 7s, 11: rabafa bayla-; Tkm. bağla- Tuh. 17b. 2; sarra wa rabata ditto bayla- do. 23a. $: Osm. xiv ff. bağla- “to tie (on); to bolt”, c.i.a.p. 7TS I 69; II 95; III 62; IV 68, 467 (kapu). D boğla:- Hap. leg. (later ?absorbed by bafla:-). Xak. xı ol ton boğla:dı: 'abba'l-tatob fi şimanihi “he packed the clothing in his baggage”, they distinguish between packing clothes (saddt'l- tawb) and tying up other things (hazm ğayrihi) placing fatha on the bd” in the first verb (i.e. bağla:-) and damma on the bü” in the second (i.c. boğla:-) Kaş. HI 292 (boğla:r, boğla:ma:k). D bokla:- Den. V. fr. 1 bo:k. Survives in NE Sag. R IV 1267; Khak. pogla- “to go mouldy'; NC Kir. bokto- “to curse! ; SW Osm. bokla“to soil, besimirch, bring into disrepute'. Oğuz xı yılkı: bokla:dı: rafati'l-dàbba “the horse staled” Kaş. III 292 (bokla:r, bokla:ma:k). D bağlat- Caus. f. of bağla:-, “to order (someone Dat.) to tic up (something Zcc.)'. S.i.s.m.l.g. w. the same phonetic changes as 1 ba:ğ. The MS. of Kaş. gives onc example of this verb and then one example of what is evidently boğlat-, unvocalized, with a single Aor. and Infin. for both. Xak. xı (men) apar otun bağlattım '| ordered him to tie up (ahzamtuhu) the firewood' (etc) Kaş. İT 341 (bağlatu:rmen, bağlatma:k): Xwar. xiv bağlat- "to have (a door) bolted” Qutb 24. D boğlat- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of boğla:-. Xak. xı (men) apar bo:ğ boğlattım (bá' unvocalized) hamaltuhu "ala saddi'l-'ayba. wa'l-ruzma li-siwán tawbi'l-nisa' “1 ordered him to fasten up the bag or bale to pack the women's clothes! Kaş. Hi 341 (boğlatu:rmen, boğlatma:k, both vocalized 5a-). D bağlan- Ref. f. (sometimes used for Pass.) of bafla:-. S.i.m.m.l.g. vr. the same phonetic changes as 1 ba:ğ. Xak. xı otun bağlandı: "the: firewood was tied up” (fuzima); and one says Özİnpe: otun bağlandı: "he set out to collect firevvood (bi'I-ihtitáb) and tie up (huzim) a bundle of it for himself'; bağJanu:r, baglanma:k; and one says ko:y bağlandı: "the sheep (etc.) was tied up” (rubita) Kaş. H 238: KB oyunka katilsa boyun bağlanur “if a man gets involved in. gambling, his neck is bound' $928: xıı1(?) 315 Tef. bağlan- "to be - fastened, tied' 88: Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 24. D boğlan- Hap. lcg.; Refl. f. (used as Pass.) of bofla:-. Xak. xı to:n boğlandı: 'ubbiya br'l-siwáni'l-tawb “the clothing was packed in the baggage! Kaş. H1 239 (boğlanu:r, boğlanma:k). D boğlun- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of boğul- and syn. w. it. Xak. xı at boBlundt: “the horse (etc.) was strangled' (ixtanaqa) Kaş. II 239 (boglunu:r, boğlunma:k). Tris. BĞL S bafiltak Sce bağırdak. Dis. BGM D boğım N.S.A. fr. boğ- (semantic connection obscure); “a joint, or articulation; a knot (in a stalk, etc.)'. Survives in SE "Türki and SW Osm., Tkm. See Doerfer Il 799. Cf. bogun, bağış. Xak. xi boğım a/-aşca" fil-isbi' “the knuckles of the fingers' ; anbibu'i-gasch sea”l-halfa 'the knots in a cane or alfalfa grass', too, are called boğım Kaş. I 395 (and see boğun): Kom. xiv 'joint' boğum CCI, CCG; Gr. D boğmak Infin. of bof- used as a Conc. N.; 'something worn tightly round, or on, the ncck, collar-button, necklace”, and the like (for the semantic connection, cf. English “choker?. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. where it is now normally syn. vv. boğum (but Sami 316 distinguishes between boğmak *joint, knot" and boğmuk “necklace”). Xak. xı boğmak zirru”l-qamiş “the (collar) button of a shirt': boğmak a/-tiqşar, that is “a necklace (qiláda) of gold, etc. set with jewels and pearls, with which the bride is adorned for her wedding" (tuzaff bihá'l-'arüs) Kaş. I 466: xiv Muh.(?) (among articles of clothing) al-mixnaqa “necklace' ('choker) boğmağ Rif. ıso (onlv): Osm. xivff. boğmak 'necklace'; c.i.a.p.; boğmuk ditto occasionally fr. xvt onwards: xvu1 boğmak in Rümi, gardan-band 'neckJace', in Ar. tiqsàr San. 136v. 7. Tris. V. BGMD boğmakla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. boğmak; its existence is rather dubious; it is listed among verbs ending in -la:-, but none of the words quoted are so spelt; prob. the only form actually current was the Refl. f. Xak. xi kóplek boğmakladdı: (si) “the shirt buttons (etc.) were fastened” (sudda) Kaş. IH 350 (boğmaklanu:r, boğmaklanma:k sic). D boğmaklan- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of boğmakla:- q.v. Xak. xi er boğmaklandı: sadda'l-racul 'urwata'l-qamis “the man fastened up the button-loop of his shirt! Kaş. IJ 274 (bağmaklanu:r, boğmaklanma:k). 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 360 
     
   
   
      316 Dis. BGN bakan “torque, necklace'. Pec. to Kaş. and not connected with NC Kir., Kzx. bakan 'tent pole' which is a l.-w. fr. Mong. bagana (Kow. 1056, Haltod 270); there seems to be no basis for the statement in R IV 1437 that the word also exists with this meaning in Çağ. and his Kom. bakan is a misreading of bakam a L-w. fr. Ar. baggám "logwood (a dye wood)'. Xak. xı bakan al-Ahalqa twa'l-fateq. "a torque or necklace” made of bronze; one says altun bakan “gold necklace” and so on Kaş. 7 399; (in a para. under turma: on Ar. and Pe. İ.-vv. in Oğuz) the Oğuz call a/-fa«q kalı:da, which is Ar. qiláda, but the Turks call a *necklace or torque' bakan 7 432, 7. bikin “the hip, or flank' of a human being or animal. Survives in NE "Tel. pıkkın R 7V 1307; Khak. pixti (i.e. pixin with 3rd Pers. Poss. Suff); Tuv. bığın: NC Kir, Kzx. mikin. See Doerfer 11 754. Uyğ. vini ff. Civ. bikin üze 1sirsar “if it bites on the hip” 77 VII 36, 16 (USp. az, 29, misread boyun): Xak, xi bikin. a/-xaşıra "hip, flank” Kaş. 7 399: Çağ. xvff. bikin (spelt) pahlü ta tahigah 'flank, hip” San. 147v. 6: Xwar. xiv bikin ditto. Qutb. 39: Kip. xiv bikin. al-xaşira İd. 34: xv xüşira (uca tea) bığın (in margin, "and with -k-”) 7uh. 14a. s. PU boğaü Sce boğay. D boğun Intrans. Conc. N. fr. bof-; syn. sv, bofim, but much commoner. S.i.a.m.l.g. with some phonetic changes. Xak. xr boğun al-aşca" 'knuckle', also armbübu'l-qagab “the knots in a cane'; the -n is changed fr. -m; this is permissible (cà'/2); (Ar. parallels are quoted) Kaş. 1 309: Çağ. xv ff. boğun (spelt) band tea mafşali “a joint or articulatton' in the limbs of a man, or the trunk (tana) of a tree San. 136v. 13 (quotn.): Kom. xiv 'joint' buun (ie. buwun?) CCI; Gr.: Kip. xin 'agdu'l-aşabi" 'joint in the finger' bo:&amp;un Hou. 20, 17: Osm. xıv ff. boğun "joint; knot'; c.i.a.p. TTS I 112; II 159; III 107; IV 119. bokun a word without independent existence used as a jingle with bodun. N.o.a.b. Uy£. vun f. Man. kamağ yok çığay kap kara bodun bokun “ali (of us) destitute, ordinary common people” M /İT3ş, 10-11;a.0. do. 34,9: Bud. TT X s1-2 (bodun). ?F bağna: “a rung of a ladder! or "a step of a staircase'; it is not clear which is intended. N.o.a.b. The word in Kip. quoted below is proh. not connected and seems to be the Mong. word bağana (see bakan). Both this word and Satu: have a foreign look, but there is no obvious foreign origin for either. Xak. xı bağna: daracatu'l-sullam "a rung (step) of a ladder (staircase) Kaş. I 434: KB satu kördüm ellig anın bağnası “1 saw a ladder (staircase) with fifty rungs (steps)' 6033; a.o. 6043: (Kip. xv şuba (several meanings, here perhaps “forked branch”) bağana, Tkm. çatal Tuh. zob. 3).   DIS. BĞN D boğnak Dev. N.A. fr. boğun-, the general connotation must be something like “stifling”, but translations vary. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. boğunak 'stifled, choked; violent gusty rain'. (Xak. xı see boğnaklan-): Çağ. xv ff. boğnak/boğnuk (both spelt) /azoğ-yz muhtabis-i tira “an oppressive and gloomy atmosphere” Sar, 136v. 8; boğak Aatwá-yi mühtabis, also called boğnak do. r3ör. 26: Kip. xiv boğanak (?; so vocalized) şı"büb mina'l-mafar *deluges of rain” /d. 33: Osm. xvii boğnak/ boğnuk (after Çağ.) and in Ri, bürün ki dargudar bágad 'heavy rain'; also gird-bád *whirhwind' San. 136v. 8. Dis. V. BGND bakin- Refl. f. of bak-, s.i.a.m.l.g. with varving meanings. Xak. xı xg közdine: bakınğıl /rrazir 1/4 öxirül-amr wa tadabbar look at the consequences of the affair and reflect Kaş. H1 raz (bakınu:r, bakınma:k), 2.0. JI 160, ş: KB (do not forget death, be ready for it, do not forget yourself) tübüpke bakın 'look at your inmost being” 1323; 0.0. 60s, 1462: xin(?) At. ne iş utru kelse anar ked bakın *whatever task confronts you, scrutinize it thoroughly! 369: Xwar. xın(?) (Altun Xan sent many gifts to Oğuz Xan and) ağızıka bakındı “paid heed to his svords” Oğ. 122. D boğun- Refl, f. (usually used as Pass.) of bo£-; “to he strangled”, etc. S.i.s.m.l., w. some phonctic changes. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (gap) boğunsar tidtursar “if (a man) is roughly handled and lets himself be obstructed' TT VII 40, 19: Xak. xr at bofundi: “the horse (ctc.) was stranpled' (ixtamaqa) Kaş. II 142 (boğunu:r, bofunma:k): Osm. xvi boğun"to strangle oneself", in one text 773 II 112. D bokun- Refl. f. of bok-; survives in NE "Tel, poğın- “to bend (the knecs)', in respect. Xak. xı er ada:kın bokundt: qabada'l-racul riclahu”l-mabsüta “the man. drew in his outstretched legs! Kaş. II] 142 (bokunurr, bokunma:k; unvocalized and bà' undotted). Tris. BĞN D boğundi: Hap. leg.; Pass. Dev. N. fr. boğun-. Xak. xı boğundiı: mafdnatıcl-hayawdnát min gayri'l-adami “the bladder of an animal, but not of a human being” Kaş. T 449. D baka:fiak Den. N. fr. baka:; “the frog” in a horse's hoof (the metaphor is the same as in English). Survives with the same meaning, and for “one half of a cloven hoof” in NC Kır., Kzx. bakay and SW Osm. bakanak. In Kaş. the word is in a Chapter listing words containing -y-, and the original spelling must have been baka:yak but in both places a dot has been put over the yd” in addition to the two below it, no doubt by someone familiar with the Osm. pronunciation; in the second occurrence this letter carries a qanıma instead of a fatha. Uyğ. vr ff. Man. (long gap) bakanak turkurup (long gap) TT LX 82: Xak. xı  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 361 
     
   
   
        DIS baka:yak má bayn zilfay hull di zilf wa ahad şiqqayı "l-zilf “the part within the cloven hoof of any animal with cloven hooves, and one half of a cloven hoof': baka:yak (so read) nustir hawáfiri'l-xayl “the frog in a horse's foot Kaş. III 177: Osm. xv ff. bakanak common in Ar. and Pe, dicts. translating words meaning 'frog' and 'cloven hoof” T TS I 71; II gg, III 63; IV yo. D bakanlığ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. bakan. Xak. xi bakanlığ kadis sayr du halqa "a strap with a ring on it” Kaş. 7 499. D bokunluğ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. bokun, q.v. Xak. xı Kaş. I 499 (bodunluğ). D bağnalığ Hap. leg.?; P.N./A. fr. bağna:. Xak. xi KB ediz bağnalığ men satu kördüküm “the high ladder (staircase) vvith rungs (steps) which İ saw' 6052. Tris. V. BGND boğnaklan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. boğnak. Xak. xı bulut boğnaklandı: şöra”l-sahüb qaza"at "the clouds broke up” Kaş. II 274 (boğnaklanu:r, boğnaklanma:k). Dis. BGR bafir properly 'the liver' with various extended and metaph. meanings, the latter mainly arising from the belief that the liver was the source of the emotions. S.i.a.m.l.g., sometimes vvith large phonetic changes e.g. NE Alt, Tel. pu:r, other dialects pa:r. See Doerfer 11 707. Türkü vii ff. Man. yerdeki bağrın yorığma tınlığ 'terrestrial creatures that crawl on their bellies' Chuas. 84: Uyğ. vin ff. Man. (gap) özi bağrı (gap) M III 36, 7 (v): Bud. bağrın yori$áma TT IV 8, 58; 2.0. do. 4, 6 (ığla:-): (birds peck his entrails, his lungs and) bağırın “his liver” U IIIJ 79, 4; o.o. U IV 14, 153; TT X 175 (sun-)—(his sons and daughters, his progeny) bağırı böşüki prob. “his blood relations and relations by marriage! (see böşük) TT VI 105 (2 uruğ), 124, 309: Civ. bağırdın tepremis ig ol “it is a disease arising from the liver” TT I 221; (in a remedy for a swelling in the nose) kızıl bağır ikisin yar tuz birle incge kinlep 'slicing two ravv livers (?, perhaps a technical term) finely with rock salt! H 7 142-3: Xak. bağır a/-habid “the liver'; and a man who obeys nobody is called bedük bağırlığ, that is “big-livered”, and &amp;abidu'l-gaws “the central hand hold of a (long) bovv” is called ya: bağrı: Kaş. I 360; 3 o.o. of bağır (kabid) as the source of emotions: KB oğlum bu bağrım oti “my son, this fire in my liver” (i.e. dearly loved) 1482; bağırsaknı bulsa özün bağrı kil “if you find a kindly (master), be yourself affectionate to him” 2609: xıv Muwuh. al-kabid ba:ğır Mel. 47, 15; Rif. 141: Çağ. xv ff. bağır cigar 'lhver' San. 125r. 23 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv bağır 'liver; the centre (of a mattress)', etc. Qutb 24; MN 279, etc.; Nahc. 1772, 7: Kip. al-kabid ba:ğır Hou. 21, 13:  . BR 317 xiv bağır ditto. İd. 33: xv ditto bavvur, Tkm. bağır Tuh. 3ob. g: Osm. xiv ff. bağır “liver” lit. and as the source of emotions; c.i.a.p. TT.S 168; I1 gr, İİİ 6o, IV 67. bakır 'copper'; sometimes “a copper coin', or 'the weight of a copper coin', a “mace” onetenth of a Chinese ounce. S.i.s.m.l. in most groups, but more often replaced by l.-w.s. Cf. tu:ç. Türkü viri ff. Yen. [gap]: bakı:rı: bupsı:z erti: “his . . . and his copper were without limit” Mal. 26, 7; bağı:r (?s:c) do. ır (kózpü:): Uyğ. Civ. bakır is the normal unit of weight in prescriptions in H 7 6 fI., and IJ and TT VII 22 eg. bir bakır “one mace'; in USp. 18, so, etc. and Fam. Arch. bakır frequently occurs as a unit of currency, (copper cash), one-tenth of a Sitir and one-fivehundredth of a yastuk; a.o. TT VII 42,2 (1 bo:k): Xak. xı bakir ai-nuhàs “copper” (prov.): bakır fulus bi'l-.Sin biha biyá'Gtuhum “a copper cash” in China, their purchases are . made in them: bakir sukim the name of “the planet Mars” (a/-mirrih) as a simile for its redness Kaş. 1 360; o.o. (sukim): KB yağız yer bakır bolmağınça kızıl “the brown earth is as red as copper” 120; (if you do not speak, your vvords are considered golden) bakır boldi tildin çıkarsa anı “they become copper if you let them pass your tongue' 1916; a.o. 4888 (sukım): xırı(?) Tef. bakır “copper” go: xiv. Muh.(?) al-mís 'copper' bakır Rif. 178 (only): Xwar. xiv bakir 'copper' Qutb 27: Kom. xiv 'copper' bağır (sic) CCI; Gr.: Kip. xır a/-nuhas ba:kır Hou. 31, 30; 50, 19; bakır do. 23, 21: xiv bağır ai-mis; bağır (VU) sigan “the star called Aldebaran' £d. 33 (the latter may be an error of the author's for yağız sığın 'brown maral deer”), bakır a/-nuhds do. 34 (mis is a Pe. ].-w., nuhás Ar; in this dialect of Ár. one may have had another meaning, perhaps 'brass' or 'bronze"); al-nuhàs bagir (MS. yağır) and fu:g; al-nuhàsu'l-agfar (yellow) yez; al-mis bakir Bul. 4, 9-10; (al-dabarün yağız (?; MS. yağir) şığın do. 2, 14): XV al-nuhds ba:kır Kav. 58, 13; Tuh. 36b. 7; háwun 'a mortar” bakır keli do. 37b. 11: Osm. xvir pakir (*with p-") in Rumi, mis, in Ar. şufr ('copper'); also in the meaning of zang ki bar rü-yi mis nişinad 'corrosion which settles on the surface of copper! San. 126r. 19 (there is no other trace of bakir in this sense, perhaps an error for pas). buğra: "a camel stallion'. "The word was used as a P.N. by the Karakhanid dynasty and was an early l.-w. in Mong. as bu'ura (Haenisch 24)| buğura (Kom. 1166). Survives only in Türki buğra Shaw; boğra/buğra/buğur Jarring; NC Kir. bu:ra (perhaps reborrrowed fr. Mong.) and, until recently, SW Osm. buğur. For camel terminology generally see SShcherbak 103 ff. and J.-P. Roux “Le chameau en Asie centrale', C. 4.53 V, pp. 35ff. See Doerfer II 747. "Türkü vir ff. titi:r buğra: men 'I am a camel stallion with a herd of females! IrkB zo: Xak. xı buğra: fahlu'l-ibil “a camel stallion'; Buğra: Xa:n took his name from it Kaş. 1 420; ten o.o.: K B titir buğrası  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 362 
     
   
   
     318 DIS.  2312 (1 ö:ç), Buğra Xan is mentioned in 88 and Chapter İV, title: xiv Mi. fahilu'l-cimàl bu:ğra: Mel. 6, 12; Rif. 77; (under 'camels!) fahlu'l-darrab(?) buğra: 7o, 9; 172: Çağ. xv ff. (buğra: “a well known kind of broth (aş) which was invented by Buğra Xan, who was the ruler of Çin and Xità at the time of the rise of the Salcuks; it was originally called buğra:xa:nı: after him and later the xa:nı: was omitted for the sake of brevity; it is made with dough kneaded into thin threads' Sam. 136v. 1); buğur (spelt) sutur-i dü kühàn “a two-humped camel', both male and female do. 136v. 11: Xwar. xiv buğra “camel stallion” Qutb 35: Kip. xti (under “camels”) “the twohumped stallion which they mate with female Arabian camels to produce Bactrian camels (al-buxáti) buğra: Hou. 14, rq: xiv buğra: fahlu'l-camal ; and in the Kitab Beylih buğra: al-buxti “Bactrian camel! İd. 33; al-camalu'l-há'ic “the rutting camel' buğra: Bul. 7, 5: Osm. xıv ff. bugur (sometimes in xvii puğur) “camel stallion', fairly c.i.a.p., buğra in one xiv text TTS I 121; 11 172; İV 129. VU bığrığ, boğrul Preliminary note. Although these teords are vocalized differently in the MS. the translations make it clear that they are etymologically connected and the most probable explanation is that they are Dev. N.s fr. boğur-, Caus. f. of boğ-, which survives only in NE Sag. poğır- R IV 1266. A general connotation of "throttling” is therefore indicated, but the precise meaning in this context of al-amt, rehich has several meanings, is obscure; possibly "a bulge” (in the sense of something produced by excessive pressure) or "overfilling”. It is not easy to connect the second meaning of boğrul «eit the first, semantically it is casier to connect seith böğrül, q.v. VUD boğruğ Hap. leg.; see above. Xak. xt boğruğ (MS. birig) al-amt fi'l-Eirára wa'l-toatb wa nalnwih: “a bulge(?) in a sack, milkskin, or the like” Kaş. 7 461. VUD boğrul (?boğrıl) Hap. leg.; see above. : Xak. xı boğrul (ra? unvocalized) a/-amt fü lL-sei'a'i'lL-mal'ün. sva'l-watb. (MS. in error fabb) sca nahecihi “a bulge(?) in a full food-bag, milk-skin, or the like": boğrul (so vocalized) ko:y al-£anamu'l-lladi ibyadda halquhu “a sheep with a white throat' Kaş. 7 481. VU?D bağram Hap. leg.; so vocalized, but etymologically it could be a N.S.A. of buğra:meaning 'notched' that is “in ridges'. Xak. xt bağram kum a/-ramlı”H"alici” -cubayl “sand heaped in layers and small hills”, the sands between Kaşğar and Yaürkend are called bağram ku:m:: (sic) Kaş. 1 484. Dis. V. BGRba:kır- "to shout, bellow', and the like. A western (Oguz) word; s.i.a.m.l.g. except NE and SE. Oğuz xi tevey ba:kırdı: "the camel bellowed' (şdğa) Kaş. HT 186 (ba:kira:r, BĞR ba:kirma:k): (xiu(?) "F'ef. bakra- (of a camel) 'to bellow' gö): Osm. xvii bağır- in Rümi, farydd hardan “to shout! San. 125r. 15. D bakur- Caus. f. of bak-, see bakit-. N.o.a.b. Xak. xi ol mapa: kişi: bakurdı: anzara (omission) “he made me look (at the man) Kaş. II 83 (bakurur, bakurma:k): (xiv. Muh. amara. bi'L-ta'ammul “to order to contemplate” bakdur- Mel. 41, s; Rif. 130; Rif. 131 adds that -t- may be substituted for -d- but quotes the alternative form as bakur-, not baktur-, a scribal error?). S buğar- Scc bufra:-. D bokur- İTap. leg.; Caus. f. of bok- with the connotation of drawing in or contracting something. Xak. xı ol at teği:rinden bokurdri: hayza min qimati'l-faras wa gayrahi bi'I-muhàábbát aw ğayrihi “he reduced the price of the horse (etc.) as a personal favour or for some other reason'; also used for anything that you bring down from its place (Rafaffa min mahallihi) Kaş. II 82 (bokurur, bokurma:k). VU buğra:- the relationship between the two forms of this verb is morphologically obscure; both are n.o.a.b., but the first seems to be an earlier form of NW Kaz. bura- 'to fashion (logs); to build (a house) out of fashioned logs'. 'They have no connection with buğra:ğu:, q.v. Xak. xı ol yığa:çığ buğra:dı: hazza”/-xaşab “he carved, cut incisions or dovetails, in the wood' (etc.) Kaş. IJI 277 (buğra:r, buğra:ma:k): ol yığa:ç buğardı: hazza fi'l-xagab "he made incisions or dovetails, in the wood'; the original form (aşlıclın) was buğra:dı: Kaş. J| 8o (buğaru:r, buğarma:k). VU bukra:- Hap. leg.; this is prob. the correct form of this verb, the -t:- in the Perf. seems to be a scribal error caused by the form of the preceding verb. Xak. xr at sucr:di; bukrı:dı: (sic) soataba l-faras :wva camaha “the horse reared up and ran away'; this verb is used only in the Hend. (muzdatwica(n)) and not by itself (miufrida(n)) Kaş. 111 279 (bukra:r, bukrama:k). D bağrık- Hap. leg.; Intrans. Den. V. fr. bağır. Xak. xı aç er bağrıktı: /agiga xágiratu'l-raculi'l-cá'i' bi?l-habid 'the hungry man's sides stuck to his liver' Kaş. 7I 227 (Aor. and Infin. omitted). VUD buğruş- Hap. leg., Co-op. f. of bufra:-. Xak. xı ol mapa: yığa:ç buğruşdiı: "he helped me to carve, make incisions (fi hazz) in the vvood” ş also used for competing Kay, I7 203 (buğruşu:r, buğruşma:k).. Tris. BĞR D bağırçak Conc. N. fr. bağır, survived until recently in SW Osm. Sami 269; R IV 1452 meaning 'the point of junction of the pole or shafts with the body of a wagon'. Xak. xı bağırçak akáfw'l-himár "a donkey's pack-saddle" Kaş. 7 502. ERE NN  — ——— — 2X— .....-.25:.—.......80. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 363 
     
   
   
       TRIS.: VU buğurda: (of hair) 'curly'; the form is certain since it follows a cross heading -D-, but morphologically obscure and with a forcign look. Sutvives as buyra in NC Kir.; NW Kl., Nog.. and SW 'l'km. and as bódre in SE "Türki, NW Tat. Xak. xı buğurda: sac al-sa'ru'l-ca'd “curly hair” Kaş. 1 488. D bağırdak Conc. N. fr. bağır, translations vary but the general concept is one of a gar-. ment or wrapping to protect the liver; bağıldak which first appears in the medieval period is a Sec. f. Both survive in SW Osm. only(?) meaning 'swaddling clothes, a girth to hold a baby in the cradle', etc. See Doerfer II 75o. Xak. xı bağırdağ” sudratu'l-mar'a "a woman's bodice” Kaş. I soz: xiv Muh.(?) (under *women's clothing") al-bagiltak bağırta:k Rif. 150 (only): Caf. xvff. bağıltak “a cotton robe ( penbelii kaftan) worn over the head and body beneath a robe' (cubbe) Vel. 131; bağırdak “a piece of material or girth” (parca tva bandi) tied onto a cradle over the infant's stomach! San. 125r. 25; bafiltak/ bağıltak arxalıq (Azerbayidni) 'jacket' (quotn.) followed by quotns. fr. Vel. with cubbe misread as cebe "armour worn in battle” and two Pe. dicts. in which the word is described as Pe. San. 125v. 6 (this suggests that bağıltak may be a Pe. corruption of bağırdak): Kip. xrır al-hulüta (Pe.) "a woman's veil bağırda:k Hou. 18, 15: (xiv. boğurdak/ bokurdak 'throat, larynx /d. 33-4 and xv boğardak ditto Kav. 60, ış have no connection with this word but are Sec. f.s or, more probably, errors for boğazdak a word not noted earlier than xiv Mu. Rif. 140 (only); the same words (errors?) occur in Çağ. xv ff. San. 136v. 11; 137r. 6): Osm. xiv ff. bağırdak 'swaddling clothes; girth for a cradle'; c.i.a.p. TT.S 169; I1 94; HI 61; IV 68. D buğrağu: Den. N./A. fr. buğra:: lit. “vith a character like a camel stallion's', hence “violent, aggressive'. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı KB (if a man eats to satiety) kılkı bolur buğrağu “his character becomes aggressive” 1126; aya buğrağu 6166. D bağırlak 'sand grouse'; presumably Dev. N. fr. bağırla:-, but the semantic connection is not apparent. Survives in SE Türki bağıtak 'the large sand grouse, Pterocles ahenarius! Sha: 210, which is a later form of xvii bağırtak "Tibetan short-toed sand grouse, Syraptes tibetanus in the “Five Language Mirror”, see E. D. Ross, “A polyglot list of birds in "Turki, Manchu and Chinese” Monographs of the Asiatic Society of Bengal 11 9, Calcutta, 1909, p. 287 (the sound change -1- — -t- suggests an origin further northwest) and in SW Osm. bağırtlak (sic) “the sand grouse Tetrao alchatar, the black grouse, Tetrao tetrix!' Redhouse 330; boğırtlak (sic) kusi “a kind of partridge (cil)! Sami 316. Xak. xı bağırlak a/-qatdt 'sand grouse, Pterocles! Kaş. 1 soş: Çağ. xv ff. bağırtlak (spelt) same as bağrı kara Sar. 125r. 24; (bağrı kara "a bird (paranda) larger than a dove, striped  BĞR 310 with various colours, predominantly yellow, with a black breast, which lives in the waterless stony desert (sa/rrd)' (quotn.); also called bağırtlak, in Pe. sangşıkanah(9), in Ar. gatàt do. 125r. 18): Osm. xv ff. bağırtlak fairly common in Ar. and Pe. dicts. for 'sand rouse', etc.; once (/V 119) xvi boğurtlak TTS I 69; I1 gs, H1 61; IV 68. D bağırlığ P.N./A. fr. bağır, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı bağırlığ er al-raculu'lladi là yangád li-ahad “a man who does not obey anyone'; (similar Ar. phr. quoted) Kaş. İT 494; a.o. I 360, 24 (bağır). D bakırlığ P.N./A. fr. bakır, “possessing, or containing copper'. Survives in NW Kar. L. bağırlı A IV rasz. Uyğ. viu ff. Man. (gap) bakırlığ (spelt p-) közlüğler 'with copper (coloured?) eyes” TT IX 63: Xak. xı bakırlığ "the name of a place near Balásagün': bakırlığ ta:ğ cabal dü nuhdüs “a mountain containing copper (ore) Kaş. I 495. D buğra:lık Hap. leg.; A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. bufra:; "a stud of camels'. Türkü vı ff. İrkB s (bodluğ). VUF bokurst: “a wooden plough'. Survives only(?) in SE Türki bukusa BŞ 95; bokusa/ bukusa Şarrıng 59; an odd-looking word, with no Turkish etymology; prob. a corruption of Tokharian A öydkdş “a pointed stake”, van Windekens, Lexique €tymologique des dialectes tokhariens, Louvain, 1941, p. 104. Cf. amag. Türkü vırı ff. eki: ókü:zü:g bir bokursı:ka: kölmiş “(a man) harnessed two oxen to one vvooden plough” (they stand still unable to move) JrkB 25: Xak. xı bokursi: al-mün “a ploughshare” Kaş. 111 242. D bağırsak, bağırsuk Preliminary note. The phonetic difference between these two words is clear down to about xiv and there is no trace of the first svord after that date. By about xur the second had become bağırsak and survives meaning "entrails in NW Kar. T. bavursak R IV r566 and SW Az. bağırsağ, Osm. bağırsak, a mord meaning “small pieces of dough fried in oil', sohich seems to be the same word with an altered meaning, survives in SE Türki bağursak/boğursak BS 52, 82 and NC Kir. bo:rsok, Kzx. bawirsak; see Doerfer 1I 797. D bağırsak N./A.S. fr. bafirsa:-; 'compassionate, kindly', and the like. Uyğ. vırı ff. Man. bağırsakım “Oh my kindly onel” M IJI 8, rz (ii): Xak. xı bağırsak kişi: al-insanu'l-"atüfu” İ-hafi "a kindly, gracious man” Xaş. I soz: KB bağırsak idi (God) “the compassionate Lord" 34; (his manner was humble and) bağırsak könül “his thoughts kindly" 107; atadın anadin bağırsak bolup “being by heredity kindly” 717; o.o. 41, 317, 763, 1133, 2574, 2609 (asığçı : bağır), etc.: xin(?) Tef. bağırsak “compassionate” 88: Kom. xıv bavursak 'compassionate' (Grenbech's “beloved” is dubious) CCG; Gr. 53 (quotns.).  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 364 
     
   
   
      426 D bağırsuk (?bağırsok) Conc. N. fr. bağır 'entrails'.. See above, Uyf. vit fl, Bud. (birds peck) bağırsukın "his entrails" U III 79, 3: 0.0. U IV 8, 6; TT X 548: Civ. ditto H IE6, 11: Xak. xi bagirsuk al-mi'à' 'entrails' Kaş. I soz: Çağ. xv İT. bağırsak (sic) rüda tea am'à “entrails" San. 125r. 25: Xwar. xiv bağırsuk Nahc. ız, 4 (1 büken): Kip. xın al-muşrün “entrails" bağırsa:k Hou. 21, 16: xiv bağarşuk (sc) ditto /d. 33: Osm. xiv to xvit bağarsuk 'entrails' fairly common; also bağırsak fr. xvi T TS II 93-5; III 59; 1V 66-8. D bağırsaklık A.N. fr. bağırsak, 'compassion, kindliness, loyalty', etc. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı KB 595 (uğurluğ), 608, 9535, 1481, 5796: xiu(?) Tef. bağırsaklık 'kindliness' 88. D bağırsız Priv. N./A. fr. bağır, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı KB bağırsız tusulmaz oğulda “there is no benefit to be got from a son lacking affection' 2574. Tris. V. BGRD buğrağur- Intrans. Den. V. fr. buğrağu:: n.o.a.b. Xak. xı KB özün buğrağursa bedütse boyun “if you yourself are aggressive and thicken your neck” 6369. D bağırla:- Den. V. fr. bağır, survives only(?) in NC Kir. bo:rdo-/bo:rlo- “to skirt (a mountain); Kzx. baurla- (1) “to lie on the stomach'; (2) “to feel deep affection" R IV 1432; bawirla- “to flog a horse'; (of water) bawirlap (kat-) “(to freeze) solid” MM 78. Xak. xı ol anı: bağırla:dı: darabahu “ald kabidihi rca kabadahu "he hit him over, or wounded him in, the liver'; and one says ol ya:sın bağırla:dı: aşlaha ma"cis qatsihi “he repaired the handhold of his bow' Kaş. III 331 (bağırla:r, bagirla:ma:k). D bağırlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of bağırla:-. Xak. xr kam bağırlandı: if"ancara”l-dam qea”n"aqada “the blood coagulated and became solid”: also used of sour milk when it curdles (al-rá'ib ida xatura) Kaş. II 264 (bağırlanu:r, bağırlanma:k). D buğralan- (buğra:lan-) Hap. leg.: Refl, Den. V. fr. buğra:. Xak. xi tevey buğralandı: tafabbala”l-camal "the camel (colt) became a stallion” Kaş. 7/7 zoo (buğralanu:r, buğralanma:k). D bağırsa:- Hap. leg.: Desid. Den. V. fr. bağır, cf. bagirsak where the meaning is more metaphorical. Xak. xı er bağırsa:dı: igtahá'l-raculu'l-kabid. “the man longed for liver Kaş, HII 332 (bağırsa:r, bağırsa: ma:k). Dis. BĞS VU buxsr: Hap. leg.; perhaps a İ1.-vv.ş cf. buxsum. Xak. xı buxsi: the name of a kind of food (al-ta'ám); to make it wheat is boiled and put in a jar with almond kernels and a/-talbina (a mixture of bran, milk, and honey) "RIS. BĞR is poured over it; it is then left to ferment, and the solids are eaten and the liquid drunk Kaş. I 423. VU boxsak Hap. leg.; a mere jingle with axsak, Xak. xi Kaş. İ 465 (axsa:k). VUD boxsuk (?boxsok) 'manacle, fetter', and the like; perhaps a Conc. N. fr. boxsa:but the semantic connection is tenuous. Survives only(?) in NE Bar. poksak 'fetters' R IV 1265. Cf. buka:gu:. Xak. xi boxsuk al-ğull 'hand-cuffs, iron collar'; boğsuk luğa fihi a dialect form of the same; there are similar interchanges of x and ğ in Ar, e.g. xatariğadar Kaş. 1 46s: Kip. xiv bokşak sayr yu"mal fi'l-qatosi '[-mutoattar li-yu'tadila'l-cánibu'I-má'il "a strap fastened to a bow when it is strung to straighten a bent end” fd. 34. PU buxsum 'beer'; perhaps a L-w.; cf. buxsı: and beğni:, N.o.a.b. See Doerfer II 723. Xak. xr buxsum “beer” (al-mizr) a beverage made out of millet (al-duxn) Kaş, 1 485 (in a para, for vvords vvith final -M), a.o. buxsun (sc) III 234 (toma:): xiv Muh.(?) nabidu”l-şair PU buksum (yusun unvocalized) Rif. 161 (only). Dis. V. BGSVU boxsa:- the semantic connections between this verb and boxsuk, and between the two meanings of this verb are tenuous; the Caf. meaning would be more appropriate if in that case it were regarded as a Sec. f. of xboğza:- a Den. V. fr. boğuz. Cf. boxsat-. Xak. xı ol apar boxsa:di: abá qabül amrihi ta. fila (?error for fa'ala)'l-fr'l. kariha(n) “he refused to obey his orders and did his work reluctantly' Kaş. 111 284 (boxsa:r, boxsa:ma:k): Çağ. xv ff. boxsa-(-dı) "Zşiqıy hacr u firqatda ağla- (of a lover) "to vveep in enforced absence and separation”, not used as a general alternative to ağla- but only of a lover Vel. 147 (quotn. fr. Muhdhamatı”l-huğatayn drawing this distinction); boxsa- (spelt) girya dar gulü girih gaştan az şiddat-i anbüh “to be on the point of sobbing in the throat because of deep distress”, in Ar. Zussa; followed by a statement of Vel,”s explanation; other forms translated &amp;ussa-nàk şudan "to be distressed' Say. 130v. 18 (quotn.; the reference to “throat” suggests a connection with bogaz). VUD boxsat- Caus. f. of boxsa:-; perhaps survives in NC Kir. buksat- “to grasp” R IV 1804 (only). Xak. xr ol oğlini: ska: boxsatt: hamala ibnahu "alá'l-'utuwso. fi'l-amr *he urged his son to be insolent over the matter', also in other contexts Kag. I] 335 (boxsatu:r, boxsatma:k). 'fris. V. BĞSVUD boxsuklan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. boxsuk; occurs only in a prov. quoted under boşlağlan-. Xak. xi boslaflansa: boxsuklanu:r man tahatwara fi'l-umür toa "aşd”l-muşir tuğall vaduhu ila "unuqihi “if a man   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 365 
     
   
   
     TRIS. V. BG$rushes heedlessly into affairs and disregards advice his hand is chained to his neck' Kaş. II 272, 14. Dis. BGS D 1 bağış Den. N. fr. 1 ba:ğ, with the connotation of something which fastens things together. Survives only(?) in SETürki bağış Shaw, Şarring, "Tar. böğiş R IV 1455 'joint, articulation”. Cf. boğım/boğun. See Doerfer 11 706. Türkü virt ff. (in a series of questions about the parts of a tent) bağışı: ne: teg bar ol 'how are its girth-ropes(?)? It has them”, /rRB 18: Xak. xt fig mafàágilu'l-agábi' wa sá'iri'l-a'dà' “the joints of the fingers and other limbs'. and also anábibu'l-qasab “the knots in a cane” (etc.) Kaş. I1 367: Çağ. xv ff. bağış band u büğ "bond, tie'; also used for xargah asbübi “tent gear” Vel. 131; bağış (1) band wa [anáb-i xayma 'a tent rope'; (2) maf ;al-i zünü 'knee joint' San. 125r. 26. F 2 bağış See bağışla:-. D bakış N.Ac. fr. bak-; "look, glance'. Survives in SW Az. baxış: Osm., Tkm. bakış. Xak. xı bakış al-munázara brl-başur "a mutual look or glance" Kaş. I 367: KB yiti közlüğ ol kör bakışı yırak “he is keensighted and long-sighted' 1855: Çağ. xv ff. bakış nigüh “1ook, glance” San. 126r. 20 (quotn.). F bağşı: l.-w. fr. Chinese po-shih (Giles 9,072 9,009; Ancient Chinese ödk-şi) (Buddhist) 'religious teacher'; an early 1.-vv. in this sense in Mong., occurring in the two A.D. 1352 hP'ags-pa inscriptions where it is spelt baggi, not baxji (the alphabet distinguishes clearly between these two sounds) and still surviving in this form but with rather altered meanings (Haltod 272). As bağşı: is the most probable pronunciation of the Chinese phr. at the date when it was borrowed, the word was prob. so pronounced in Uy£., where it is common, but as -ğŞ- is not a possible combination in pure Turkish words (see Studies, p. 169) it no doubt fairly soon became baxst:. There is no trace of the word between Üyğ. and Kom. xiv/ Çağ. xv ft, and it is prob. that when it reappeared it had been reborrowed fr. Mong.; by this time it meant 'a scribe' and more specifically "a scribe able to write in the Uyğ. (or rather Mongolian official) alphabet' (see Studies, pp. 175 ff.). It still survives with such meanings as “strolling minstrel, magician, shaman, quack doctor” in SE Türki baxşı Shaw, BS, Şarring, NC Kir. bakşı, Kzx. baksı, and SC Uzb. baxsi, See Doerfer II 724. Türkü vir ff. Man. bağşısına 'to his teacher” M III 21,6 (iii): Uyğ. viui ff. Bud. in TT VIII A.3, C.19, etc., bağşı: (or baxşı:?, spelt pahti|pühti]bháhsi) translates $asta, guru, dcharya, all meaning 'religious teacher”, o.o. U III 46, 1; U IV 28, 4; Pfahl. 6, 5; Suv. 187, 9 etc.: Civ. lükcüplüg bağşıka “to the teacher living at Lükçün” USp. gr, 14-15; a.o. H II 8, 25 (ota:çı:): xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. 8641195 M 321 “teacher” bağşı R IV £132; Ligeti 138. Çağ. xv ff. baxşı "the word for the scribes of the Shahs of ''urkistan who do not know Persian” Vel. 125 (quotn.); baxşı (spelt) natwisanda wa dabir wa xwünanda wa carrüh 'scribe, secretary, singer, surgeon' San. 119v. 26 (quotns. including one fr. Babur saying that 'surgeon' is a Mong. meaning): Kom. xtv 'scribe' bakşı CCI; Gr.: Osm. xv the scribe who wrote MS. B of the At. in Istanbul in A.H. 884 (A.D. 1479-80) in the Mong. official alphabet with Ar. transcription describes himself as Şayxzada 'Abdu'l-razzáq baxşı. Dis. V. BĞŞD bakış- Recip. f. of bak-, “to look at one another". S.i.s.m.]. Xak. xı ola:r bi:r bi:rke: bakışdı: tanázará bi'l-liház “they looked at one another out of the corners of their eyes' Kaş. I] 103 (bakışu:r, bakışma:k), o.o. I 170, 18; 183, 6; 519, 9: KB (the sun is the fourth planet, itgiveslighttothe world) yakışsa yarutur bakışsa özün “vhen they approach and look at one another it illuminates it” 134; 2.0. 137: XIV Muh. tanázara bakış- Mel. 42, 4; Rif. 133: Çağ. xv ff. bakış- Recip. f.; ba-ham nigüh hardan 'to look at one another” Sar. 125v. 29: Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 27. D boğuş- Recip. f. of boğ-, "to strangle, or try to strangle, one another'. Survives in SW Osm., Tkm. Xak. xı ola:r ikki: boğuşdu: "each of them strangled (xamaqa) the other” Kaş. II 101 (boğuşu:r, boğuşma:k): Çağ. xv ff. boğuş- Recip. f.; “to squeeze' (a/şırdan) or strangle (xufa ardan) one another” San. 136r. 5. Tris. BĞŞ DF baxşılığ P.N./A. fr. baxşı: (bağşı:), n.o.a.b. Uy£. viii ff. Man. baxşılığ İburxan te]pri tuğtunuz 'you were born as a divine teacher-burxan' TT III 129-30. Tris. V. BGSDF bağışla:- Den. V. fr. 2 bağış “a gift, a Ll-w. fr. some Iranian language (cf. Pe. baxş) which is recorded only in Kom. xtv CCİ, Gr. Survives only(?) in SE Türki baxşla-/bağışla- “to give” ham 40, 44; beğişli- “to dedicate (something to someone)” BS 64, bağışla- “to forgive; to give” Jarring şo. Xak. xr ol mana: at bağışla:dı: twahaba li faras "he gave me a horse (etc.)” Kaş, IIT 335 (bağışla:r, bağışla:ma:k): KB aki bol bağışla 'become generous, give gifts” 2053: xil(?) Tef. bağışla- toahaba 88: xiv Muh.(?) al-hiba "to give” bağışlamak Rif. i25 (only): Çağ. xv ff. bağışla- baxşidan yani 'afw hardan wa "ata kardan “to forgive, to give” San. 124v. 27 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv bağışla- 'to give, to reward' Qutb 24; MN 368: Kom. xiv “to give” bağışla- CCI; Gr.: Kap. xr wahaba ntina'l-hiba (mis-spelt hayba) bakışla:- (sic) Hou. 44, 7: xiv bağışlawahaba; its origin is baxşiş taken from the Persian İ4. 33; teahaba baxışla- (si) Bul. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 366 
     
   
   
     322 TRIS. V. BĞS86v.: xv trahaba mina”l-hiba bağışla- Kas, 78, 13: Osm. xiv TTS II 9 (ağın), DF bağışlal- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of bağışla:-, in a para. on forming the Pass. f.; n.m.e. Xak. xı at bağışlaldı: “the horse was given” (rcuhiba) Kaş, ITİ 344, 10. DF bağışlan- Refl. f. (used as Pass.) of bağışla:- : “to be given", Xak. xi at bağışlandı: “the horse was given” Kaş. 711 344, 19 (quoted as an alternative form to bağışlal-), n.m.e.: Çağ. xv ff. bağışlan- Pass. f.; baxşida şudan “to be given, forgiven” San. 125r. 13 (quotn.). Dis. BGY PU hoğay “lov”, n.o.a.b. Prob. the origin of Mong. öoğoni “short, low! (Kot. 1160, Haltod 291), in which casc the '"l'urkish word must originally have been *bofafi; the suggested parallels in. Hüen-ts., note 2091, are not very plausible. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. édizi boğaysı "its: height and lowness', translating Chinese kao hsta "high and lov” (Giles 5,927 4,230) Hüen-ts. 2091; a.o. do. note 2091 translating Chinese pei 'low, humble' (Giles 8,759). Tris. BGY S baka:yak See baka:fiak. Dis. BGZ boğuz (boğoz) 'throat'. ""he second vowel was very short and habitually elided before Suffs. beginning with a vowel, and the inconsistency between -u- and -a- in its later representation suggests an original -0-. Survives in NE Tuv. boss; SE Türki bufaz/ buğuz Shaw; boğuz BS, Jarring; NC Kzx, buaz; SC Uzb. büğiz, NW Kaz. buaz; Nog. buğaz and SW Az., Osm., "Tkm. boğaz. Some of these words mean also (or only) (of an animal) 'pregnant'; the connection is obscure but as old as Xwar. xın(?). See Doerfer 11 792, 798. Cf. tamga:k. Türkü vir boğzı: tok erti: “their throats were satisfied" (eating hares and wild game) T 8: Uyğ. vil ff. Bud. kiçiğ kaplınıp kisğaçı boğuz bağı yok erser “if a small cart has no shafts or throat band” (i.e. horse collar, it cannot move) TT V 26, 116; yalın boğazı (sic.? boğzı) todmaz “his naked throat is not satisfied! TT VI 14: Civ. bogz1 “his throat' TT VIII 11; boğzınta do. 7; boğuz içinde kart bolup “f there is a swelling in his throat' H I 187; o.o. 12 (ağrıs), 185-8: Xak. xi boğuz (sic here and elsewhere, not boğaz as in printed text) a/-halq 'throat' Kaş. 1 364; three o.o., bogzr: JI 290, 8; III 264, 7; boğzın /7 306, 4: KB boğuz “throat” is common 991 (ülüg), 993, 1312 (boğuzun), 2096 (boğzı), 3797 (boğzum), etc.: xır(?) Tef. boğaz (sic) “throat” 106: xiv. Mul. al-halq boğuz Mel. 47, 1; Rif. 140 (boğaz): Çağ. xv ff. boğuz bofaz hulqum ma'nàsina "throat, windpipe' Vel. 153; boğz (spelt) gülü wa hulqim ditto San. 136v. 4 (quotn.); boğuz (spelt) gulü tea /'"aliq-5 dawább "throat! and "cattle fodder” (sie?) 136v. 12; bofuz is the Çağ. equivalent of Rumi boğaça 136r. 26: Xwar. xii(?) töl boğaz boldi "she became pregnant! Og. 64-5; 83: xiv boğuz 'throat; the neck of a stringed instrument” Quib 35; boğaz 'throat' Nahe. 18, 6: Kom. xiv 'throat" boğaz CCI; Gr.: Kip. xır al-hulqüm boğa:z Hou. 20, 8: xiv (boğağ a/-halq, also boğurdak and) boğaz İd. 33: xv al-halq boğaz Kav. 6o, 14; hülqüm bowaz (in margin Tkm.(?) boğaz) Tuh. i2b. s: Osm. xiv ff. boğaz (once xiv. boğuz 7 112) 'throat' in phr. T T'S I 112; I1 158; İİİ 107; IV. 118. "Tris. BGZ D boğazdak See bagirdak Kip. Tris. V. BGZD boğuzla:- Den. V. fr. boğuz, "to cut the throat of (somcone Zcc.), slaughter'. Not noted before xın but see boğuzlan-. Survives in SE Türki boğuzla-, SW bofazla-, (Xak.) xiu(?) Tef. boğuzla- “to slaughter” (a lamb) 106: xiv Muh. dabaha "to slaughter” boğuzla:Mel, 26, s, Rif. 109: Çağ. xv ff. boğuzladabh kardan San. 136r. 7 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv boğuzla- ditto Quib 35; Nahc. 214, 7: Kip. xiii dabalta boğuzla:- Hou. 34, 4: xiv boğazla- ditto. Id. 33: xv dabaha boğazlab?l-işmüm (? meaning here; normally 'with front vowels") Kav. 75, 4; ditto bowuzla-; Tkm. boğuzla- Tuh. 16b. 2; a.o.0. : D boğuzlan- Refl f. (used as Pass) of boğuzla:-. Türkü vir yörçi: yer yanılıp boğuzlantı: "the guide lost the way and had his throat cut” T 26: Çağ. xv ff. boğuzlanPass. £.; dabht sudan San. 136r. 22. Mon. BG F be:£ originally “the head of a clan, or tribe, a subordinate chief', and the like. C.i.à.p.a.l. from the earliest period, but almost certainly a l.-w. fr. Chinese po "the hend of a hundred men” (Giles 9,358; “Ancient Chinese” (Karlgren' gəh). Survives. with some phonetic changes (b-/p-; -e-/-é- ; -8/-y) and alterations in meaning parallel to the alterations in social structure; e.g. in the Ottoman Empire it came to mean “a junior administrative officer" and finally hardly more than a complimentary title given to members of the gentry. See Doerfer 11 818, 828. Türkü vri beg is very common; the Türkü 'realm' (6:1) consisted of the xafan aud his ministers and officials, beğler: “the begs' (one of the very rare uses of the Plur. Suft. in Türkü) and bodun, “the tribes, clans, common people”, in the opening address in 7 S 1-2; I] N 1-2 the xafan's own family, bodunim, various kinds of begs and finally Tok(k)uz Oğuz begleri: bodunu: are addressed: viri ff. beg is common in IrkB, e.g. in s beg er “a chief! went to inspect his studs: Yen. beg occurs several times as the title of the person commemorated: Uyğ. vir beg and begler occur several times:    
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 367 
     
   
   
     MON. BG vir ff. Man.-A beğ occurs as the last component in the title of a subordinate ruler M 1 27, 9; and as a title in bilğe beg tenri Mar Nev Mani do. 12,19; ólügüg tirlglügli (sic) beg ay tepri 'the Moon God, the lord who brings the dead to life” do. 24, 27-8; él(l)ig begler “monarchs” Wind. 31: Man. turunlar kamuğ begler kadaslar “stand up all chiefs and kinsmen” M 71 9, 4: Bud. él tutdaçı beg erke 'for a chief who controls a realm' (three things are necessary) TT V 26, 104-5; bef işi "a chief and his lady” Suv. 192, 8-9 etc. (işi), él(1)1g beg “a monarch' U 171 41, 7 (ii); 3.0.0.; kazlar begipe oxşafı “like the leader of a flock of geese' T'T X 135; a wife speaks of her husband as beğim U 7/1 85, 6 and ır, a.o.o.: Civ. beg er TT / 36, etc.; beg işi TT I 108, etc. (İŞİ), o.o. TT” VII rə, 7-8; 34, 10-11 etc.: O. Kir. ix ff. beg is common, usually as the title of the person commemorated, e.g. altı: bağ bodunka: beg ertim 'I was the chief of the Six Confederations" Mal. 1, 2 (see 1 ba:ğ): Xak. xr be: al-amir "a chief”: be:ğ zawcu'l-mara "a woman's husband” Kaş. Jl] 155; over 100 o.0., spelt beg, once be:ğ 7 521 (keçür-) and once bé: III 133, 16; the standard translation is al-amir, it occurs as a title e.g. Çağrı: Beg I 421, 8; Bilge: Beg 7 428, 18; occasionally *husband' 7 240 3 (üzlüg-); //T 133, 16: KB beg is common both in the specific sense of “a subordinate ruler' e.g. él kend begi 216, and more vaguely as "lord, master”, e.g. beğim *my lord” 85; Chapters 28 and 38 relate to the position of beğler in the kingdom: xin(?) At. is dedicated to Dád Ispahsálàár Beg 69; Tef. beg (sic) 'ruler' (of a town or province); él bégi oq: xiv Muh. al-umara beğle:r Mel. s, 5; Rif. 75; amir beg 6, 17; 78; a.0.0.: Çağ. xv ff. bég (with -8”) beg mir ma"nösmna Vel. 140; bég ('with -&amp;") abbreviation of biyik (bedük) “tall, great”, and metaph. mamld wa sultàn "lord, king” San. 147v. 22 (quotns.): Xvvar. xını(?) beg “chief” is common in Og. and beğler are mentioned as a class 95, 220, 245, twice in association with élgünler “the common people”: xiv böğ 'chief, master” Qutb 30 (also bégim “mistress”), Nahc. 36, 6; beg ditto MN 2o, etc.: Kom. xiv 'prince' beg (in Grenbech's view reborrowed fr. Persian); 'chief' (CCG ; “Lord” (God)) bey CCI, CCG; Gr. 54 (quotns.): Kip. xır a/-amir bey Hou. 23, 6; in the list of Proper Names spelt bey 29, 3: be:y 30, 6; be: 29, 14-15; beg 29, 8 and 17; in 29, 13 and 17; 3o, 3 and 8 the author hesitates between beg amir and bek qawti 'strong': xiv Tkm. beg (with -8” al-amir; Kip. bey İd. 35; a.o. do. 37: xv al-amir be:y Kav. 12, 17; bl: 15, 13; bey 16, 17; 31, 11; bi, not translated is very common in Tuh. 41a.ff.: Osm. xiv beg 'subordinate ruler”, fr. xvir occasionally bey; c.La.p. TTS 1 87; İl 123, 133; İİİ 77, 86; IV 89 (fr. xv onwards occasionally “live decoy bird"). : (S) bek (?pek) “firm, solid, stable', and the like, Kaş. s.v. berk, q.v., says that bek vvas the original form and berk an expanded form 323 with -r- added (zá'ida) but the facts are, no doubt, the opposite; both forms occur as early as Uyg. vii ff. Man. S.i.a.m.l.g., in SW as pek but this may not be the original form as perk does not occur. İn some modern languages bek but not berk, is used as an Adv. meaning “very” qualifying Adjs. and a few Verbs. Uyğ. viit ff. Man. bek katığ kértgünclüg “havinga firm (Hend.) faith” M I 3o, 2-3; a.o. M III 36, 3 (ii): Bud. bek katığ . . . kértgüng TT VII 4o, 117; bek tutup "holding fas! TT V 26, 111; a.o. U III 44, 6 (i): Civ. bek tutTT İ 34-5, 41: Xak. xı bek ne: 'anything firm, solid' (muhkam) Kag. I 333; bek tut ahfaz 'hold firmly! ZZ/T ır, 4; o.o. İ 349, 21 (berk): 455, 21: KB yanı nep talular ma özke bekim 'I am (always) seeking new things but I am stable at heart" 686; bek tütayın (sic in all MSS.) 721; o.o. 697, 2015, xırı(?) At tiliy bekte tutğul . . . kalt çıkşa bektin “keep your tongue under control . . . if it escapes from control” 131-2: Çağ. xv ff. pek ('with p-”) cami" wa hama 'all' San. 126r. 24 (quotn. fr, which this false meaning was inferred; see also Osm.): Xwar. xın(?) (he loved that stallion) bek (?pek) çok "very much” Oğ. 224: xiv bek 'firmly! Qutb 30: Kip. xi (among Proper Names) bektemür (amir hadid aw) hadid qaswsoi “strong iron” Hou. 29, 13 (see beg): xiv bek ai-rabtu'l-sadid “a firm bond', originally berk; the original form is also used and is commoner 7d. 34: Osm. xv ff. pek “firm, solid, violent'; c.i.a.p. 77TS II 769; İH 576; IV 639: xvi pek . . . and in Rümi, muhkam wa matin wa ustuwár 'firm, solid, stable" San. 126r. 24. à 1 bö:ğ “a poisonous spider, tarantula”. Sur" vives in NC Kzx. büyö/büyü, NC Kumyk miya; Nogay biy, SW Osm. böy/böye (now obsolete?); TTkm. mö:y. Arabic al-fafat is not the usual vvord for “spider” and prob. means *poisonous spider”. The Kip. translation 'scorpion! (normally ca:dan) is odd, and perhaps an error. Cf. órümcek. Xak. xı bó:g al-tatát 'a (poisonous) spider' in one of the two languages (i.e. Xak. and Oğuz?) Kaş. III 131; bö:y al-tatát, alternative form of bö:8, the latter is more correct (asahh) İİİ 141: Çağ. xv ff. bew (or baw?) rutaylà 'tarantula' San. 127r. ag: Oğuz xı biy (so vocalized, but 2read böy) alternative form (luğa fı) of bó:y III 206 (it is perhaps implied that bó:y, too, was Oğuz): Kom. xiv böv “spider” CCG; Gr.: Kap. xiii al-"aqrab 'scorpion' bö:y (also caya:n) Hou. rı, 17: xiv. bö:y al-"aqrab İd. 37; Bul. 11, 4: xv 'ankabüt “spider” böy (and Örümçük and) bew Tuh. 25a. ış: Osm. xiv ff. böv/böy “tarantula”: fairly c.i.a.p., esp. in dicts. T'T.S II 169; III 111; İV 125. VU 2 bö:ğ a technical term used in the game of knucklebones. Survives only(?) in NC Fur. bögö, Kzx. bügó/bügü R IV 1881-2. 1 Cik, q.v., which has the opposite meaning, is commoner. Xak. xı bó:g :sm twaq'r'[-ka'b fi'l-la'ib li-zahrihi “the word used when the knucklebone falls on its back in the game (of knucklebones), one says çik bö:g Kaş. III 130. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 368 
     
   
   
     324 MON. BG 1 bük 'thicket' and the like. Survives in NE bük/pük several dialects R. 7V 1394, Khak., Tuv., and SW Osm. bük; the origin of the entry bük 'forest' in P. de C. 173 is obscure, it does not occur in earlier Çağ. authorities. Xak. xı bük a/-acama “a thicket, brushvvood” Kaş. I 333; 0-0. İ 233, 27; 245, 3 (Örtel-), 260, ız (örtet-): Kip. xiv bük al/-ğaba “thicket” İd. 34: Osm. xiv ff. bük “thicket” in two xiv texts and several xviii dicts. 7TS I 132; II 186; HI 123; IV 139. VU 2 bük 'corner; the corner post of a house”, N.o.a.b. Türkü vinrff (a big house was burnt; right down to its floor nothing remained) bükl:pe: teg!: kodmaduk “right to its corner posts(?) nothing was left' IrkB 9 (cf. 1 kat): Arğu: xı bük a/-zátveiya "a corner' Kaş. 1 333. Mon. V. BGbóg- “to collect, gather together (people or things) and in particular “to collect, or dam up (running water). Survives in NC Kir. bógó-; Kzx. bóge- 'to dam up (water); to block (a road) and SW xx Anat. bófe-/ bóye-/büge 'to dam up' SDD 224-8, 237. "The verb seems to have become böğe- in the medieval period; see bógül-, bógün-. Uy£. viti ff. Bud. türe bóge 'rolling up and gathering together (all my sins) Suv. 137, 4: Xak. xı ol su:vuğ bógdi: “he collected (qard) the water and gathered it together in a basin (sikr) that he had prepared for it”, and one says be sü:sin bögdi: "the beg assembled (cama'a) his army”, the volume (katra) of an army is constantly compared to water, for example one says Su:v aktı: “the water flowed' (sala) and sü: aktı: “the army strcamed out” (sála) Kaş. II 19 (böğe:r, bógme:k); tepizni: kayğukın bógme:s al-bahr là yuskar bi'l-zawraq "you cannot dam the sea with a small boat' 7 roo, 18. 1 bük- Kaş. gives two meanings (1) “to bend, bow', and the like (Intrans.); (2) "to feel aversion, be revolted by (something 445/.)', but later usages and the Pass. f. bükül- show that it was a Trans. V. w. the Object sometimes understood. S.i.a.m.lg., usually in the first sense but w. an Object stated. Exceptionally NC Kir. distinguishes between bük- “to bend” and bökö- "to feel aversion', but it is unlikely that this reflects a genuine original phonetic difference between two verbs with different meanings. Cf. yükün-. Xak. xr ol meni: körüp bükdi: *when he saw me he cleaved to the ground and was humble, hiding himself! (lata bi'l-ard. :a'nxafada. mutakammina(n); and one says ol aşdın bükdi: "he was revolted (sabi'a) by the food, so that he loathed it and was disgusted'; and one says ol tava:rka: bükdi: translated “his eye was filled (imtala'a) with wealth, etc.', ie. "he was greedy for wealth! Kaş. 11 18 (büke:r, bükme:k); uvut bo:lup büke: turdiı: translated *he was ashamed so that he was humble and hid himself from the people and turned away from me” ("adön?) İH 231, r: (KB the alternative rcading bu sóznüp katı for bu söz bük katı in 870 is obviously to be preferred): xiv Mudh. tand "to fold up” (Trans.) bük- Rif. 112 (only); al-tayy bükmek Mel. 35, Iş r20 (Mel. also has çulğa- (çuğla:-)): Çağ. xv ff. bük- xam hardan ssa tah hardan "to bend, or fold' San. 137r. 7: Xwar. xiv bik- (sic) (of the moon) 'to set' Qutb 32: Kom. xiv 'to fold' bük- CCG, Gr.: Kip. xin farid bük- Hou. 38, 3: xiv bük- raqaşa "to dance” (prob. in the sense of 'to bend (the body)'; unlikely to be a Sec. f. of böy- (bódl:-), q.v.); bük- fatala “to twist' (a thread, etc.) 7d. 34; tat bük- Bul. 47v.: XV ditto Kar. 9, 7; 74, a, Tuh. 24a. 8; baraka (of a camel) “to knecl' do. Rb. 6. ?E 2 bük- Sec evük-. Dis. BGA S bigi See kl:b. bóke: although Kay. says that the primary meaning was 'a big snake' and that it was used metaph. of strong warriors the evidence points rather in the opposite direction. An early l.-w. in Mong. as bókó “vvarrior, wrestler' (Haenisch 17); survives in this sense in NE pöKö several dialects R 7V 1299; bökö Russko-alt. slovar" (s.v. silach); SE "Tar. böke R IV 1663-4 and perhaps NC Kir. bökö, but these may be reborrowings fr. Mong. See Doerfer 11 803. Türkü vii 7x. 17 (alp): Xak. xt böke: a/-tu'bünu'l-'azim "a big snake', it is said in the folk-tale (ai-matal) yeti: başlığ yél böke: “a snake with seven heads' (yél is unexplained, possibly “demon”, see 1 yé:l); and warriors (al-abtàl) are called by it, for example one of the great men ('uzamá) of the Yabükü was called bóke: (VU) Bodraç (a long anecdote about his defeat by Arslan Tegin follows) Kaş. III 227: KB böke yolçılığ “having a warrior as a gülde” 2354; ay bóke 3545; böke yavğusı 5523: Çağ. xvff. böke “a strong man and wrestler ( pahlawwàn 1a kugti-gir) who defeats all his rivals! San. 138r. 1 ('wrestler' suggests a re-borrowing from Mong. ; see also a:la:). bögü: (bógó:) 'sage, wizard'; the word seems to connote both wisdom and mysterious spiritual power. An early l.-w. in Mong. as bó'e (Haenisch 16)/|báge (Kot. 1242, Haltod 307) where it means “a male shaman', as opposed to tduğan 'female shaman” (a purely Mong. word). Bógü: Kağan was the regnal title of one Türkü and one early Uyğur kağan. Survives only(?) in SW büyü (spelt bügü) “sorcery, vvitchcraft”, Türkü vmi Bógü: Xağan T 34; Türkü Bögü: Xağan T so: vi ff. Man. Böğü Xan TT II 6, 33, etc.; a.o. M HI 15,6 (ii) (bögülen-): Uyğ. viui ff. Bud. bögüler kuvrağında “in the assembly of sages! TT V ro, roy, bógü Kun Futsi “the sage Confucius' do. 26, 104; 1duk böğü biliglig 'sacred and with mystical knowledge" Suv. 89, 9; olo, do. 137, 7; 174, 8; U İİ 44, 33(?), Tepri Bógü Tepriken Pfahl. 6, 3: O, Kir. ix ff. Urupu: Külüğ Tok Bögü Terken Proper Name(?) Mal. ro, 6: Xak.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 369 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. BGD- 325  xt bögü: al-'álim wa'L-hakim wa'l-'ágil "learned, wise, intelligent', hence the Hend. bögü: bilge: Kaş. III 228; o.o. I 428, 23 (bilge:); Hİ 228, 13 (üdür-); 303, o: KB ay bógü 183, etc., and ay bilge bögü 191-2, etc. are very common; bógü beg kim erse biligke yakin 'whoever is a wise ruler is close to knowledge' 254; a.o.o.: xi(?) KBVP ol élnip böğüsi hakimi turup “being the sage and wise man of that realm' 27; a.o. do. 11: xiv Muh. al-sihr *witchcraft bó:gi: Mel. 83, 17; Rif. 189: Kom. xiv bügüler “the (Jewish) prophets” CCG; Gr.: Kip. xv siftr (cádü (Pe.) and) bógi Tuh. 19a. 3:, Osm. xvii bügi (spelt) in Riimi, sihr wa füfsün 'magic, witchcraft" San. 138r. ır. Dis. V. BGED bekü:- Den. V. fr. bek. N.o.a.b., cf. berki:-, Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. (all good doctrine is . . .) kutrulmakdın beküdeçi 'confirmed by salvation” TT V 24, 67 and 77 (there misread beküt-): Xak. xı tüğü:n bekü:di: istahkamati'l-'ugda "the knot was firmly tied”, also used of an affair when it is confirmed (istahhama) Kaş. III 270 (bekü:r, bekü:me:k): KB (the tribal customs were put in order and the realm organized; the king attained peace) beküp él uli 'the foundation of the realm being firm' 1772: xın(?) Tef. bekü- “to be firm, stable” 96: Kip. xiv (after bek/berk) and beki-/berki- are derived from them /d. 34. Dis. BGC DF begeç Dim. f. in -€ (rare; usually affectionate) fr. beg; original "little chief as a term of affection. In the medieval period, like beğüm, “my chicf' it acquired a female connotation. It seems to survive only in NC Kzx. bikes “husband”s elder siste" and NW Kaz. bikeç "young woman, fiancée'. Xak. xi beğeç /agabu'i-takáhkin “a title of princes'; hence one says Beğeç (perhaps Bekeç in Ar.) Arsla:n Tégin; when it is pronounced with -ğ- its meaning is yd umayyar "oh little chief!" as a Dim. f. of amir, to express affection and tenderness ('atf wa tahannun), the word beg al-amir has a -8 Kaş. I 357: Caf. xv ff. béfec ('with -8-”) duxtar hiz: ma' nàsina 'girl Vel. 141 (quotn.); beğeç zan-i muhtarama “a lady of quality” also spelt bége San. 147v. 27; the same entry reversed 148r. 5 (quotn.). Dis. BGD D beküt Hap. leg. and quoted only in a Hend.; Dev. N. fr. bekü:-, 'secured' or the like. Xak. xi Kaş. III 8 (yasut). VU bügde: 'dagger'. N.o.a.b. See Doerfer II 746. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. (in a list of arms and ornaments: lance, sword, crown, thunderbolt, wheel) bügde (iron whip) TT V 10,93; 0.0. Suv. 28, zo, 544, 6 (bedzet-): Xak. xi bügde a/-xancar “dagger” Kaş, I 418; a.o. III 272, r: KB bu büğde bicek kim eligde turur 'this dagger which is in my hand' 81o: Oğuz xı (the Turks say büğde: for 'dagger' and the Oğuz) bükte: Kaş. 7 31, 24. . PU bügte: Hap. leg. and noted only in a Hend., cf. büğteçi:. Türkü vri ff. Man. (if by mistake we have done something wicked, saying) buyan bügteg kilurbiz 'we are performing a meritorious act (Hend.)' Chuas. 141-2. VU büktel n.o.a.b.; the underlying meaning may be “mature”. Xak. xr büktel er a/-raculu"l-rab"a "a mature man”, büktel at al-farasu'l-adakk "a horse with a broad flat back” Kaş. I 481: KB (your stable is full of) kevel tazı büktel takı arkunı 'blood horses, Arabs, horses vvith broad flat backs and crossbreds' 5369. PU?D bóf£tür Hap. leg.; the td” carries both kasra and damma, but the latter must be correct if this can be taken as a Dev. N. fr. *bógüt-, Caus. f. of böğ-, in the sense of “a place where (water) collects'. The Kip. xiv word for al-hidáca "a camel litter for women' PU bógter /d. 34; Bul. 7, 6 (mis-spelt with y-) is difficult to connect with this word. Xak. xi böğtür al-hazan wa'l-wahada fi'i-cabal 'rough ground, a deep valley in the mountains' Kaş. 1 455 (verse). Dis. V. BGDDF beged- Intrans. Den. V. fr. beg; “to become a beg'. N.o.a.b. Türkü vırı ff. Toy. z24-5 (ET Y II 59; 1 u:ç): Man. TT II 8, 42-4 (erklen-). D beküt- Caus. f. of bekü:-, “to fasten, make fast, consolidate'. Cf. berkit-, bekle:-. S.i.a.m.lg. except NE, which uses forms of bekle:-. in other language-groups the wotds used vary between bekit- and berkit- and in some both occur; in SW Osm. has pekitand Tkm. berkit-. Xak. xı ol ı:şığ bekütti: “he fixed (ağıRama) the business”, the original usage is for fastening a knot (ig3 şadda”l-"uqda) Kaş. II 309 (bekitü:r, bekitme:k, sic); KB (Aytoldi) bekütti tiliğ “held his tongue' 956; beküttı isig 1:580 (one MS. bekitti): xu(?) KBVP bir ança bekütip yakın tutğunı “he will take firm hold of a certain number and keep them near him' 49: xıı(?) Tef. beküt- “to establish' (Islam) 96: Osm. xv ff. pekit- (?so read) 'to consolidate, secure'; in several texts T TS II 124; III 78, IV 89. D büküt- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of 1 bük-. Xak. xı ya:ğlığ aş meni: bükütti: “the fatty food turned my stomach (ğalaba “alü qalbi), and T was satiated (şabi"tu) with it and had indigestion (Zamita "alayya) without my stomach being filled'; similarly if someone gives property (ml) to someone else until he has a surfeit of it (imtala'a 'aynahu), the latter says ol meni: tava:rin bükütti: 'he has satiated me (aşba"ani) with property' Kaş. II 309 (bükütü:r, bükütme:k). 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 370 
     
   
   
     326 ''RIS. Tris. BGD PUD büğteçi Hap. leg.; N.Ag. fr. bügte:, Türkü viri ff. Man. (if we have sinned against the holy prophets and) buyançı bügteci arığ dindarlarka 'the meritorious (Hend.) pure Elect" Chuas. 66—7. Tris. V. BGDVUD bügde:e:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. bügde: Xak. xı ol anı: büfgde:le:di: reaca” ahu bpl-xancar “he stabbed him with a dagger” Kaş. 11] 352 (bügde:le:r, bügde:1e:mte:k), Dis. BGL DF beglig P.N./A. fr. beg. DF beğlik A.N, (sometimes used as Conc. N.) fr. beg. These two words must be taken together since to a large extent they have the same meanings, and in most texts the scripts are too ambiguous to make it possible to determine which word is intended. The P.N./A. usually means “having the rank, or status of beg', less often it means 'having a chief, or a husband'. The A.N. originally meant 'the rank or status of Peg', or “fit to hold such a rank'. Later it came to mean “a district governed by a 5eg”, Beglig now seems to be obsolete, but beglik with various phonetic changes (see beg) s.i.a.m.l.g. except NE with some changes of meaning, e.g. in NC Kir biylik is the normal word for "a government” and SW Osm. beylik often has that sense. Türkü vj: tavğaç bodunka: beğglik uri: kul bolti: (corrected in /7 to kilti:) “they made your sons who were fit to be chiefs slaves to the Chinese pcople” 7 E 7, ILE 7; similar phr. 7 E 24, II. E 20: vin ff, nelük ölğey 0l begli: ol *why should it die? It is fit for a chief! IrkB. s7 (sec kanığ): Yen. beglik kası [gap] “his family of chiefs' Mal. 20, 9: Uyğ. viri ff, Bud. beglig (or -k?) erenler “men with the rank of chicf” U III 4s, 8: Xak. xı tavar kimin üklise: beglik apar kerge:yür “if a man's wealth accumulates, he is more worthy of the chieftainship than the others” (/eeca. atelá. bi'l-imára min gavrihi) Kaş. I 362, 24; n.m.e.: KB beglik "the rank, or position, of chief' is common, c.g. beglik bulur 'he attains the rank of chief" 301; 0.0. 430, 552, 819, etc.; (the king had his eyes and ears fixed on the whole realm) açıldı apar barça begliğ (sic?) kapuğ “all the doors of the government(?) werc open to him” 436; similar phr. 554 (in this passages Arat reads ğeklig and translates 'closed', but there is no evidence that such a word existed and a P.N./A. of an Adj. would be very unusual): xıır(?) Tef. (a Christian came from the Christians of Rüm and) anda beflig (or -k?) maliketke olturdi “and sat in the seat of government there” 94; XIV Muh.(?) al-muzarmıcaca "a: married. woman? begli:$ Rif. 149 (Mel. 53, r érlenmig). " D beklik A.N. fr. bek; 'firmness', etc. Básm] Xak, xi KB 21:32 (tutruk). BGD Dis. V. BGLD bögül- Pass. f. of böğ- , “to be damrmed up”, etc. Survives only(?) in NC Kir. bógel-. Xak. xi su:v bógüldl: rctanta"a”l-ma” min sahr uttuxida lahu 1a hatura “the water was collected by a basin (or dam?) which was made for it and grew in volume' Xaş. II 132 (bógülür, bógülme:k; mis-spelt with y-, which is an impossible initial in this chapter). D bükül- Pass. f. of 1 bük-; 'to be bent, folded, etc.'. S.iam.Lg. Xak. xi butik büküldi: irqaza"at” Hxüfa “the bough broke, also used when it is bent ('ufrfar); Intrans. and Pass, (ya fa"addü aca là yata"adda), also used of anything when it is doubled over or folded (dü ntanà wa'n'atafa) Kaş. II 132 (bükülür, bükülme:k); o.o. 7 437, 5; IJ 28s, 16: Çağ. xv ff. bükül- (spelt, also bükrey-) xamidan toa tah sudan “to bend (Tutrans.), to be folded' San. 137r. 22 (quotns.): Kom. xiv bügül- 'to bow, bend”: Kip. xiv bügel- (sic; *with -6-”) sacada tva rafa'a 'acizatahu 'to prostrate oneself, raising one's buttocks' /d. 35: xv inladaba “to be bent, convex' (bükrey-, in margin) bükül- Tuh. 6b. r3. DF beğgle:- Hap. leg., but see beğlen-, Den. V. fr. beg. Xak. xı ol anı: begle:di: nasabahu tlá'l-imára wa. sammáhu amir "he appointed him to be a beg and named him beg! Kaş. HI 292 (begle:r, begle:me:k). D bekle:- Den. V. fr. bek, S.i.s.m.l. in NE, NW and SW with various phonetic changes, and wide developments of meaning, esp. in SW where it is consistently bekle-, not pekle-. Originally it meant. “to fasten, make fast, sccure'; thence “to kecp secure! and so “to watch over”, thence more indefinitely “to watch for, expect, and finally merely "to wait. Cf. berkle:-. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. yantut béleg beklep “packing up a return present” JPücn-ts. 1858-9; o.o. PP 63, 5-6 (adak); TT V p. 16, note Aşq, 8: Civ. kudug için bekledi 'stopped up the interior of the well TT 7 103-4; beklep 'fasteniug' (the diram to the gussct of the wife's drawers) VII 26, 11: Xak. xı ol neyin bekle:di: bafaşa málahu "he stored his property in a safe place”, and one says ol kapuğun bekle:di: "he fastened (sadda) his door'; also used when one ties up (arefaqa) something Aag. I7I 292 (bekle:r, bekle:me:k); o.o. 7 504, 10; İ/T 445, 16: KH bilig birle bekle bu bulmis ödüğ “by means of knowledge secure this opportunity that you have found” rör, (if the man who finds me) tutup beklese 'seizes and fastens me up' 700; 0.0. 712, 1703, 2016: xt11 At. tilin beklegende “for the man who holds his tongue! 144; Tef. bekle- 'to keep (oneself from miserliness)' 96: xiv. Muh.(?) hafiza bekle:- Rif. 107 (in margin sakla-): Xwar. xiv bekle- “to hold fast (traditions)! Nahc. 207, 9: Kip. xiv bekleharasa "to watch over, guard' /d. 34: xv qafala "to store up” bekle- Kat. 74, 4: Osm. xiv and xv bekle- (r) “to keep (a secret)”: (2) “to protect (someone .4cc., from something bl.)  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 371 
     
   
   
     'TRIS. V. BGMin several texts. T'T/S 1 87; IV go: xvin bekle- (spelt) in. Rmi, büs düştan "to guard, protect' San. 126r. 22 (quotn.). D beklet- Caus. f. of bekle;-; survives in SW Osm. with extended meanings. Oğuz xı beğ ofriny bekletti: “the beg ordered that the thief should be bound and imprisoned" (br'stitaqiI-ligg tva habsihi); and one says men at beklettim “1 ordered that the horse (etc.) should be fastened up” (bi-Aifz) Kaş, 11 341 (bekletü:rmen, bekletme:k). D beklel- Hap. leg.?; Pass. f. of bekle:-; occurs in a series of clauses,describing sufferings of various kinds; no ordinary meaning of çığ/çık suits the context, and it is prob. a Chinese l.-w. Uyğ. viri ff, Bud. (if they arc flogged with all kinds of whips and willosrods and) bekte çığta beklelmiş erserler *bound in . . .' Suv. 117, 13-14. DF beglen- Refl. f. of begle:-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı ura:ğut beglendi: £azazoaccat”l-mar”a “the woman was married” Kaş. II 239 (beglenü:r, beglenme:k); a.o. 77 254, 3: KB in 3535 a passage relating to the activities of the fickle world the Cairo MS. reads biriğ beglenür kör takt bir begin okiyu turur teğme künde ópin “he makc one man a beg and summons a different beg every day'; the Vienna MS. has beğleyür which looks the better reading; the Fergana MS. is quite different and probably corrupt. D beklen- Refl. f. (sometimes used as Pass.) of bekle:-; survives in SW Osm. Uy£. vun ff. Civ. ti[n bleklenmelkiğl “shortness of brcath” H 7 iz: Xak. xi beklendi: ne:n istahkama”l-şay” “the thing was firm, solid, secure'; and one says er evinde: beklendi: “the man barricaded himself (tahaşşana) in his house'; also used if he was imprisoned (/rubzsa) in it Kaş, 77 239 (Oğuz follows): Oğuz xı beklendi: ne:g /ufiza "-şay), vata'addá wa la yata'addà “the thing was stored up” or “the thing was in store'(?) Kaş. II 239 (beklenü:r, beklenme:k): Osm. xvı beklen- “to be solid, hard” in one text 7 7S III 78. D bóglün- Hap. leg.; Ref. f. of bógül-, Xak. xr su:v bóglündi: istanqa'a'l-má! "the water was stagnant'; and one says Sü: bógTündi: “the army assembled' (/crama"a) Kaş, II 239 (böğglünü:r, bóglünme:k). D büklün- Hap. leg.: Refl. f. of bükül-. Xak. xr büklündi: ne:p in'atafa'l-sav' wa yutanná “the thing was bent (or folded) and doubled over” Kaş, I] 239 (büklünü:r, büklünme:k). ı D bekleş- Co-op. f. of bekle:-; survives only (?) in SW Osm. 'to keep svatch together; to wait for one another”. Xak. xı ol meni birle: bekleşdi: 'ahada ma'i “he made a compact with me”, and one says 01 mapa: kapuğ bekleşdi: “he helped me to fasten (/7 tasfiq) the door” Kaş. I7 203 (Oğuz follows): Oğuz xr ol mana: at bekleşdi: “he helped me to 327 fasten up (fi hifz) the horse' Kaş. II 2o3 (bekleşü:r, bekleşme:k). Tris. BGL D bógülüg (bógólóg) P.N./A. fr. bógü; “magic, mystical', and the like. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. böğülüğ etóz (a spotless, clean) “mystical body” TT V 8, 52; bógülüg erdem “mystical virtue! TT VI 354 (and aşo v.l); Kuan. 188-9. Tris. V. BGLD bögüle:- (bógóle:-) Den. V. fr. bögü:, n.o.a.b. but see bógülen-. (Xak.) xiv Muh. Sahara “to make magic, bewitch' bö:gü:le:Mel. 27, 3; Rif. 110 (bógü:le:-); al-sihr bó:gülemek (in error -mak) 37, 12) 124. D bögülen- (bógólen-) Refl. f. of bögüle:-: “to have mystical wisdom' and the like, N.o.a.b. Türkü vır ff. Man. (I have told you about these three divine kings! coming, descent, virtue) bógüsin bögğülenmekin *wizatdry and mystical wisdom' M İİİ 15, 6 (ii): Uy£&amp;. vii ff. Man.-A vidya bógülenmekin “its wisdom (Sanskrit ]l-w.) and mystical wisdom' M 7 zr, r (ii): Man. [tepri burxan) böğülenmekK kutığ kıviğ bulmiş bolğay “he will have attained the good fortune (Hend.) of the mystical wisdom [of the divine burxan| M Il s, 3-s (i): Bud. (Kuan.si-im Bodhisettva by his mystical knowledge) alkuni kórür bógülenür 'sces all things and has mystical knowledge of them” Xuan. 207-8. Dis. BGM D büküm N.S.A. fr. bük-; survives only(?) in SW Osm. for "a fold; a skein (of wool)', and the like. Oğuz xi büküm etük “the slipper (al-xuff) worn by women'; the other (Turks) call it mükim/mükin, substituting m- for b- and -n for -m, I reckon that this is incorrect (/aysa bi-samim) but the Kipcak and other confederations (ah/af) call it by these names Kaş. I 395 (Atalay, loc. cit., suggests correcting to acláf and translating 'tribes', but aclaf does not mean “tribes”, in the passage quoted, 7 280, 13 (cquals 7 334, 21 under sik) aclaáfu'l-turk. means “the vulgar. uneducated "Furks?. ?C bekmes (p-) 'syrup of fruit juice'. Survives only in Osm. pekmez, Prob. a compound of bek and a corruption of some foreign word, prob. Ar. (and Pe.) muzz 'rather acid”. See Doerfer 11 756. Oğuz xı bekmes al-rubb 'syrup of fruit Juice' Kaş. 7 459; a.o. İ 440, 21 (s.v. talkan in a verse not specifically described as Oğuz): Tkm. xırı al-dibs “syrup” bekmes (MS. behmeg) Hou. 16, 1:xiv (? Kip.) al-dibs bekmez(s) (sic) Bul. 8, 7: xv al-dibs bekme:s Kas. 63, r. "Tris. V. BGMDF begimsin- Iap. leg.; Refl. Simulative Den. V. fr, beg; (irregular, see atakımsın-),  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 372 
     
   
   
     328 TRIS. V. BGMUyB. vir ff, Civ. beğimsinmeyük beg bolsar 'if someone not fitted to be a beg becomes a beg” TT VII 42, s. Dis. BGN VUD büken (?bükin) Kaş. lists this word vv. three meanings, except in the third the Af is unvocalized ; it is noted only once elsewhere. All meanings seem to be appropriate for an Intrans. Dev. N./A. fr. bük-; “melon” only if it is one with a folded, corrugated surface. Xak. xı büken ai-'innin "impotent": büken al-mumarrağa (?read al-mimraga) mina'l-am'à' “part of the entrails, the coecum”: büken al-bittixu'l-hindi 'the Indian melon! Kaş. I 399: Xwar. xiv (the Prophet went to pray; then that accursed man threw) tövenin nacasatlığ bükenlerini (sic) bağırsuklarını “the filthy bowels and entrails of a camel” (all over him) Nahc. 12, 4. ?F beğni: 'beer'; n.o.a.b. There is no widely distributed Turkish word for 'beer', and this word and buxsum, q.v., are perhaps l.-w.s. See Doerfer 11 759. Türkü vr ff. bir kün bir kon iki: küp beğni: "for one day one sheep and two jars of beer! Tun. IV 9-10 (ETY H 96): Uyğ. vir ff. borka: beğni:ke: (spelt behrike:) tokıtmış kişi “a man who lets himself be overcome by wine or beer” TT VHI Lir; bor begini H 1 sz (mis-spelt begili) and 53; bor begnl TT VII 25, 14: Xak. xı begni: sarabu l-hinta wa'l-duxn wa'l-ja'ir 'a drink made of wheat, millet, and barley' Kaş. I 434; oo. İH 60, 15 (yus-); III 81, 7 (yivil-): xiv Muh.(?) nabidu'l-duxn “millet beer' beğni: (-&amp;- marked) Rif. 161 (only). Dis. BGND bögün- Refl. f. of böğ- ; survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. böven-/büğen- (of a stream) "to be dammed'; (of water) 'to collect and become higher'; (of people) “to assemble SDD 228, 237. Uyğ. vir ff. Man. ürlüksüz nomlarığ böğünüp “discarding” (or opposing?) transitory doctrines T T TTT 142-3 (spelt pöhünüp): (Xak.) xın(?) At. (if two qualities are combined in a man) bögendi ol erke muruwwat yoli "the road to nobility is blocked for that man' 150. Dis. BGR VU bógür (? bögör) “the kidneys'; hence, more generally, the part of the body near the kidneys, “the loins”, An early l.-w. in Mong. as bó'ere (Haenisch. 16). Survives in NW Kaz. bóyer, but generally displaced by bógrek, q.v. Uy£. viri ff. Bud. (in a tantric text; the tenth letter is called [gap]) iki bógür üze urğu ol "he should place it over the two kidneys (or loins?)! TT VII 41, 1-2: Xak. xı bögür a/-kulya 'Kidney' (and bógür (the same word used metaph. ?) "the name of a castle on a high mountain between Kuga and Uyğur, one of the frontier posts”) Kaş. 7 361: Çağ. xv ff. böğr tahigdh wa guürdagah “the loins, the place where the kidneys are'; also called bögür, in Arabic xàágira San. 138r. 2; böğür the same as böğr tahigdh do. 7. D bekrü: Ger. of *beker-, Intrans. Den. V. fr. bek, used as an Adv.; 'firmly, tightly". N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vt ff. Man.-A bekrü (spelt begrü) kizle yaşurğul "hide (Hend.) it carefully” M III 29, 1 (ii): Bud. bekrü kizlep PP 56, 1: Civ. yerde kazğuk bekürü tokayin téser 'if he says "I will fasten a peg firmly in the ground" ' TT 7 185-6: Xak. xi KB (if you find fickle fortune) idi bekrü tut 'grasp it very firmly! 725; küdez bekrü til “keep a close watch on your tongue' 4344. D bükri: presumably Dev. N./A.S. fr. *bükür- Caus. f. of bük-; 'bent, bowed, hunchbacked', and the like, primarily of persons; survives in SC Uzb. bükri; NW Krim bükrü/bügrü and SW Osm. only in the phr. egri bügri; some NC, NW languages use cognate forms like bükür; other languages use other words, generally egri:. See Doerfer II 8o4. Xak. xı bükri: al-ahdab min hull şay) 'humpbacked, convex of anything” Kaş. 7 420; bükri: bolup muğdaredib zahruhu "with a bent back' (in submission, not through infirmity) J 219, 26: Xwar. xiv arkası bükrü ermiş “his back was bent” Nahc. 274, 17: Kom. xiv bükrü 'humpbacked' CCI; 'bent? CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv bükrü al-ahdab (and büker al-muxnd "cut down, destroyed' (?)) İd. 34: xv ahdab bükri Tuh. 4a. 10. DF beğgrek Comparative f. in -rek fr. beg; irregular since beg is a N., 'superior, more than an (ordinary) beg”. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. virt ff. Man. (in a hymn?) tegrim alpim begrekim M II 7, 6 and 8: Hud. siz kişide adruk begrek er kózünürsiz 'you appear to be different from and superior to other people” PP 66, 4-5. VUD böğrek Dim. f. fr. bógür and syn. vv. it; not noted before the medieval period. S.a.ml.g.; NE several dialects pügrek/ pürek R IV 1396-7; Khak. pügürek/pürek; 'Tuv. bü:rek: SE "Türki burak (with Aáf) Shaw; börek BŞ, Şarring: NC Kir. böyrök, Kzx. büyrek; SC Uzb. buyrak, NW Kk., Kumyk, Nog. büyrek, Kaz. böyerek: SW Az. böyrek: Osm. (bógrek)/bóbrek/bóyrek ; 'Tkm. bóvrek. See Doerfer 11 8o7. Çağ. xv ff. (VU) büğrek quita wa gürda “kidney”, büğrekçi 'bodies of troops which are kept in reserve' on the right and left flanks when dispositions are made on the field of battle; that on the right is called sak (sa:ğ) bügrek and that on the left sol büğrek San. 138r. 3: Kap. xır a/-Rulya *'kidney! (VU) bügrek Horn. 21, 17: xiv ditto İd. 34: xv kulta bürek (in margin büğrek) Tuh. 3ob. 9; al-kultea bü:rek Kav. ör, ro: Osm. xiv ff. böğrek is common down to xvi and noted as late as xviur-xiX. but seems now to have been displaced by bóbrek TTS I 117; 11 167; IV 125. VUD böğrül Hap. leg.; there is obviously a semantic and structural parallel between this 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 373 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. BGSword and boğrul (a shecp) “vith a white neck (boguz), which can be explained morphologically by regarding this as a Den. N. fr. böğür and boğrul as a similar Den. N. fr. *bofur, an L/R form of boğuz. Xak. xı bógrül at al/-farasu'l-axgaf tva kadáliha'l-fanamu'l-agkal wa fayruhu “a horse with white flanks, or dappled'; also used for a sheep, etc., which is 'parti-coloured' Kaş. 7 481: (aşkal, too, has semantic connections with sàkila 'side, flank"). Dis. V. BGRD *beker- See bekrü:, bokris-. PUD bekris- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of *beker-, see bekrü:, the first letter is undotted and the word completely unvocalized, but the translation suggests that a word of this form must be assumed. Xak. xı (winter says to summer: *under my influence men and horses become active; diseases, too, abate" et yin taki: bekrişü:r za yaşluba abdànu'l-nàs wa luhümuhum 'and people's bodies and flesh become hard” Kaş. 171 278, 14; n.m.e. Tris. V. BGRVUD bögürle:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. bógür, Forms of a parallel Den. V. fr. bógrek have similar meanings in some modern languages. Xak. xı ol anı: bógürle:di: "he hit him over the kidneys” (kalàhu); and one says ol yağını: bögürle:di: "he broke into the enemy's ranks (daxala gaffa'l-'aduww) on the right or left, so that he routed him without meeting him face to face” Kaş. III 332 (bógürle:r, bógürle:me:k); a.o. I7] 345, 28. Dis. BGS DF beğsiğ Dev. N./A.S. fr. *begsi:-, Simulative Den. V. fr. beg; “fit to be a beg”. Pec. to Xak. Xak. xı bu: er ol beğsiğ hada racul yujgbih. xuluquhu xuluga'l-umará “this man's caracter is like the character of öegs" Kaş. 111 128, 25 (s.v. -sığ): KB adirmazmen begsig yà kulsığ kişiğ 'I do not differentiate between a man fit to be a beg and one fit to be a slave' 809. bökseğ “the upper part ofthe chest; a woman's breasts! As such n.o.a.b., but prob. the origin of Mong. bóhse (Haenisch 17; Kow. 1252). "This word is said to mean “the buttocks', but retains its original meaning as a reborrowing in Caf. and also in NC Kir., Kzx. bóksó, and in at least one passage in the Secret History this meaning suits the context better than *buttocks'. Uyğ. viit ff. Bud. (the soo maral deer were terrified by the fear of losing their lives and lay flat on the ground and) [gap] işin bóksigin (sic?) ómgeklediler 'cowered on their . . . and chests' U IV 34, 70: Xak. xı bökseğ zaribatı”l-mar”a “a woman's breasts': bökseğ a/-nahr "the upper part of the chest' Kaş. I 476: Çağ. xvff. bökse ("vith -k-”) "the part of a human or animal body above the waist* Vel. 153 (quotn.); bókse (spelt) bölarar 329 az hamar “(the part) above the waist" "San. 138r. 6 (same quotn.). D beksiz Hap. leg.?; Priv. N./A. fr. bek. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. (this girl Mamik?”s body) beksiz mepüsiz ol 'is unsubstantial and impermanent TT X $45. Dis. V. BGS?E büksül- See bükşül-. Tris. V. BGSD bökseğlen- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. bókseg; the word is consistently spelt bókstiglen-, but this must be an error. Xak. xı krz bökseğlendi: mahada tadyu'l-cáriya “the girl's breasts became rounded” Kaş. II 277 (bókseglenü:r, bókseglenme:k). Dis. BGS D bögüş Dev. N. fr. bóg-; “concentration (of thought)” and the like. N.o.a.b. This word has been taken as meaning 'wisdom' or the like and connected with bógü:, but this is morphologically impossible and does not suit the contexts. Uy. viri ff. Bud. (then the Bodhisattva thought 'from what origin and under what impulse does lust come into existence?") antağ ógeli bógüs urup odğuratı ukar “thus thinking and concentrating (on the problem) he vividly understood! U İT 9, 11-12; sakınç üze işletip kópülüpüzni yüz Ori şastrlarda, bögğüş üze kılıp sakıncınıznı tokuz bölük nomlarda “setting your minds to work on thoughts about the hundred odd füstras and concentrating your thoughts on the ninc sections of doctrine! Hüen-ts. 2056-9. Dis. V. BGSD beküş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of bekü:- ; this is clearly the right form; in the MS. the damma is struck out in two places and replaced by kasra. Xak. xi beküşdi: ne: istahkama'l-;ay' “the thing was. thoroughly firm' Kaş. II 105 (beküşü:r, beküşme:k). D bögüş- Co-op. f. of bóf-; s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı ol mapa: su:v bögüşdi: “he helped me to dam and collect the water' ( ft sakri'l-mà' wa garwihi); also used for competing Kaş. İİ 105 (bógüsgü:r, böğüşme:k). D büküş- Co-op. f. of bük-, s.i.s.m.]. Xak. xı ol mana: ta:l büküşdi: “he helped me to bend( fi 'atf) the branch” Kaş. II 105 (büküşü:r, büküşme:k ör-Rdf sulba *with -k-?. PUD bükşül- Hap. leg.; spelt everywhere with -s- but this is morphologically impossible and clearly an error for -S-; the word is obviously a Pass. f. and its position in Kaş. between borbal- and türpil- makes the initial b- certain, but it has no obvious semantic connection with any other verb in this section. It should prob. be taken as a Pass. f. of büküş- in the sense of "to be bent to breaking point”. Xak. xı ka:b büksüldi;  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 374 
     
   
   
        330 DIS. V. BGŞtafazzara”l-ziqq the. water-skin burst": also used of any container when it bursts or splits (tafazzara tva taşaqqaqa) Kaş. II 229 (bükşülü:r, büksülme:k). Dis. BGZ F bekiz n.o.a.b., only in the phr. bekiz belgülüg 'clearly manifest”. As pointed out in TT IX, p. 20, note 29 a l.-w. fr. Persian pákiza "pure, clear, correct”, and the like, or some cognate lranian word. Xak. vrit ff. Man. bekiz belgülüg bolzun translates "Tokharian pakri tükovy “may it be manifest” TT IX 29: Bud. Sanskrit suprakásita "well explained” uz bekiz belğülüğ (spelt pekiz pelgülüg) kilılmışlar TT VIII 4.16; 0.0. TT VI 383 (vl. 1. 9); 417 (v.1.) Mon. BL F ba:l 'honey'. Cf, mir. İt is generally agreed that this is a very early l.-w. fr. some IndoEuropean language, dating fr. a period when m- was so inacceptable as an initial that it was replaced by b-, cf. burç for mure 'pepper' q.v. "The closest IE parallel is Latin mel; the Sanskrit form is madhu. Kaş. describes the word as Western, but the 4 o.o. are all in quotns. of pure Xak. words. S.i.a.m.l.g. SuvArin, Kip., Oğuz xr ba:l al-'asal *honey'; the Turks call it art: yağı: Kaş. HII 156 (verse); o.o. 17 267, 3 (suvığlan-), 354, 8 (yalğat-), III 103, 16 (yalğaş-), 338, 15 (kasikla:-); xi?) Tef. bal 'honey' go: xiv. Afuh. al-'asal ba:l Mel. 18, 3; 66, r, Rif. gö, 165: Çağ. xv f. bal 'asa/ (quotn.); also 'a kind of intoxicant' (muskirü!) made of honey water San. 126v. 20 (the latter perhaps a Pe. usage, illustrated by a Pe. quotn.): Xwar. xiv bal 'honey' Quib 26: Kom. xiv ditto CCI, CCG; Gr. (and 'becs-wax' balauz; auz fr. Russian vosk “vax"): Kip. xır al-'asal ba:l Hou. 16, r: xiv ba:l (^with back vowel") a/-'asal (and balawus al-jama' '(bees-)wax') İd, aş, al-'asal ba: Bul. 8, 4; xv muflag al-'asal 'honey in general” ba:l; 'asalu'[-nahl 'bee's honey! ar:u (mis-spelt uru:) ba:lt that is “pure honey' ('asal nazif; arı: “bee” being mistaken for arığ 'pure); 'asalu'l-qasgab “cane sugar' in all its varieties is called kara: ba:l Kav. öz, 18-20; 'asal ba:l Tuh. 25a. 6; (şama" (mum wa) balawuz do. 21a. $). bé:l ^waist', with some extensions of meaning like *mountain col'. S.i.a.m.l.g. Türkü vri ff. IrkB 37 (biç-): Uyğ. vür ff. Bud. belçe boğuzça suvda “in water up to their waists and necks' PP 36, 4-5; 0.0. U II 24, 1 (ulin-); TT V 4, 4: 4, 7 (egin): Civ. say yazıda bel yok “there are no mountain cols on level stony ground” TT VII 4z, 8, o.o. do. 24, 23 (Kolbiç) 25, 3 etc.; O, Kir. ix ff. Mal. 3, 2 (kö:ş), ro, $: Gigil (sic) xi bé:l al-xaşira “the waist'; hence one says anı: bé:linde: tut 'seize him by the waist'; and one says ol apar ança: aş bé:rdi: bö:l Kildi: “he gave him so much food that his waist was filled' (rmiala'at. xarçdşiruhu), similarly if anyone gives someone more food than he wants one says of him bé:l kildi: Kaş. 1H 133: KB belin badı “he girded his waist' 5824; a.o. 2360 (yarıklan-): xıı(?) Tef. bel *waist' gö: xiv Muh. bandu'l-toast *waist-band' bé:l ba:ğı: Mel. 67, 7; Rif. 167: Çağ. xv ff. bél Ramar 'waist' San. 149r. 29 (quotn.): Xwar. xi(?) Og. 12-13; 33 (altunluğ): xiv bél “vaist” Qutb 30; MN 107: Kom. xiv "waist! (lit. 'kidneys') bel CCI; Gr.: Kip. xır al- hiyaga “belt” (ku:sak, ku:r) bé:l ba:ğı: that is “vaist-band” (ribátu'l-xagr) Hou. 19, 3: xiv bél al-toasat İd. 35: xv al-xaşr bel also used for al-zahr “back” and al-wasf Kav. 60, 18: Osm. xv ff. bél (so spelt) *waist' in several texts T'T:S IV 102. VU bol Hap. leg.; although (VU) oğar, q.v., may well be an Ar. l.-w., the resemblance between this word and Ar. baliya, which Kaş. mentions, is purely fortuitous. Xak. xı bol at a/-farast”l-mühaccal "a horse with white stockings' and al-agarru'l-muhaccal “one with a blaze and white stockings! is called (VU) oğar bol; and stale wheat that has lost its taste is called bol tarığ, the same phr. is used when it has been spoilt by rain or moisture; and anything that has deteriorated (baliya) with age is called bol; there is a phonetic and semantic resemblance between baliya and bol Kaş. 1 335. Mon. V. BLD bal- (ba:1-) Pass. f. of ba:- , “to be fastened, tightened', and the like. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. (our thoughts, love, and longing for you) kün künine üstelür balur 'increase and are intensified from day to day” Hiüen-ts. 1870-3: (Xak. xr Kaş. 17 27 (ban-), the language suggests that Kaş. did not think that bal- still existed). bil- "to know'; c.i.a.p.a.l. Can be used both by itself and for “to know (something Acc.) ; şin the carly period the phr. bilig bil- “to have knowledge, be wise! is common both in the positive and negative form ("to be ignorant"). Also used as an Aux. V. with the main verb in the Ger. in -u:/-ü: meaning “to know how to, to be able to (do something)'. Türkü vii bil- is common both by itself, e.g. anar kórü: bilin 'look at it (my memorial stone) and know (what it contains)! 7 S ır, İT N 8 and in such phr. as bilig bilmez kişi: 'ignorant people” 7 S 7, II N s: vii ff. ança: bili:p (or bili:pler) 'know thus' precedes the last sentence of every para. in IrhB: Man. bilip bilmetin 'wittingly or unwittingly' Chuas. 196; eki yıltızığ üç ödki nomuğ biltimiz “ve knevv the tvvo roots and the doctrine of the three times” do. 159; a.o.o.: Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-A bilmez kişi teg “like an ignorant man” M Təş, 18: Man. (if a man) bu munça savığ adıru bilmeser ukmasar 'cannot distinguish and understand vvords like this” M T 18, 4 (0): a.o. TT II 16, 38: Bud. bil- is common both by itself and with an Object, e.g. bir bile nom bilir er “a man who  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 375 
     
   
   
     MON. V. BL knows vvise doctrine" PP 14, 2-3, and in such phr. as tuyğuluk bilgülük yol "the road which one should perceive and know' TT V 24, 79: Civ. bil- is common in the same usages as in Bud.: Xak. xi ol bilig bildi: "arafa”l"aql wa'l-'ilm. wa'l-hikma wa ğayrahd "he knew. wisdom, knowledge (etc.)! Kaş, JI zz (bili:r, bilme:k; the people of Arğu: say bilü:r, but the other (Turks) do not agrce vvith them about this); bil- is common both with an Object, and by itself, e.g. kula:k eşitse: kó:pü:l bili:r “if the ear hears, the mind knows it" (ya'rifuhu) I 212, 1, and as an Aux. V. e.g. TH 20 (yipgil): KB bil- ip common in all three usages: xtii(?) Zt. ditto; Tef. ditto 100: xiv. Muh.. fahima “to understand' bil- Mel. 30, 3 (Rif. 113 apla:-); 'arafa bil- 43, 9 and 145 135; al-ma'rifa bilmek 35, 9; 121: Çağ. xv ff. bil- (-mepmiü, etc.) 5:/- Vel. raz, bil(with -1-”) “to know' (dörstan), and in combination (with another verb) it expresses the meaning of “to be able' (qudrat sva tawaná'i) San. 148r. 13 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv bil- “to know' Qutb 32, MN 173, etc.: Kom. xiv bil*to know' and as Aux. V. CCI, CCG, Gr. 57 en Kap. xın 'a/fma “to know! bil- Hou. 15 (misvocalized 5e/-), 'arafa wa 'alima bii- do. 38, 6 (ditto): xiv bil- "aima İd. 35; 'arafa wa 'alima bil- Bul. 6ov.: xv ditto Kav. 9, 21; 74, 5; Tuh. 25b. 11; a.o.o. bol- originally “to become (something)', implying a change of state, in contrast to er- 'to be (something)' with the contrary implication. From a fairly early date, however, bol- began to lose its distinctive character and verge, at any rate sometimes, towards “to be”, and when some tenses of er- became obsolete they werc usually replaced by tenses of bol- (but see 1 tur-). C.i.a.p.a.]. For unknown reasons the b- was elided in some Western languages at an carly date, prob. through an intermediate form with w-. Today ol- is the only form in SW Az., Osm. (but not 'Tkm.) and occurs sporadically elsewhere, but only under the influence of Osm.; otherwise the form is bolwith minor phonetic changes. Türkü vii bolis common and always implies a change of state; e.g. (the xagan died and) boduni: kün kul bolti: “his people became maidservants and slaves” 7 E zo, İl E 17; it also occurs in the phr. yok bol- 'to cease to exist', e.g. türkü bodun yok bolmazu:n 'may the "Türkü people not cease to exist' 7 E 11, Z2 £ 10: Vili ff. (the sun rose) kamağ üze: yaruk boltı: “it became light everywhere' IrkB 26; bir tavılku: yüz boltı: yüz tavılku: min boltr: “one spiraea became a hundred, and a hundred spiraeas became a thousand” do. 32; 28.0.0.: Man. nifosak boltumuz “ve have become. Hearers (l.-w.)' Chuas. 1706; nede ötrü yok bolğay 'why will he ceasc to exist? do. 169; antada késre ne bolğay "what will happen after that?” do. 172; a.0.0. Uy£. vir the title of the author of the Şine-usu inscription was teDri:de: bolmis él etmiş bilge: xağan “the wise xağan who came into existence in (or from?) heaven and 331 organized the realm” N 1; both bol- and yok bol- are common: 1x oğlanım erde: mariminca: bol “my sons, come to be like my teacher among men” Stci 9: vii ff. Man.-A (if a lamb or a calf changes its body and is reborn) arslan oğlı bóri oğlı bolup “becoming a lion cub or a wolf cub' M 7 8, 5-6; a.o. do. ız, 10-11 (ortukluğ) etc.: Bud. bol- “to become' is very common; when used in the Imperat. form in phr. like kutluğ bolzun “good luck' the drift from “to become' to “to be" is already apparent; also used idiomatically, e.g. (a monarch has need of three things, an army, food-supplies, and loyalty; if he has to lose the first two) bolur 'he can survive'(?) (but if he loses the third) bolmaz "he cannot" TT V 26, 109-10: Civ. bol- 'to become' is common; in such phr. as mana . . . bor kergek bolup “since I needed, or came to need, wine', USp. 1, 3, the drift in meaning is beginning: O. Kur. ix ff. üç yaşımda kapsiz boltum 'I became fatherless at the age of three” Mal. 6, 1; o.o. do. 45, 2-3 etc.: Xak. xı bol- is very common, two or three times commoner than er-, but as there is n.m.e. for either it is impossible to decide whether Kaş. distinguished between the meanings of the two verbs; bol- with a Predicate is normally translated by a single Ar. verb, but where this is not the case, e.g. / 446, zo (boşu:ğu:) and 23 (tusa: ğu: it is usually translated şöra "to become'; in / 26, 15 and 16 it is translated hana "to. be', but The context requires 'to become' (bolu:r, bolma:k): KB bol- is very common and seems to meari “to become” rather than “to be”, see e.g. 66, 113, 116, 119; er- is equally common or commoner; in the list of planets, 13: fL, bol- and kel- alternative, both indicating a change of circumstances, e.g. anında basa boldi ikinc opay “after it Jupiter, the second planet, became (visible) 132: xiti(?) At, bol-, about equally common with er-, sometimes clearly means 'to become', but sometimes hardly more than “to be”, T*f. ditto but bol- seems to be less common; bolur “t is (possible) 107: xiv Muh. in the introductory section (Mel, 7-8; Rif. 79-80) on the differences in pronunciation between the Turks of 'Turkistan and those of “our country' (Iraq or Azerbayjan?) it is said that some of the latter elide b- before (vocalic) tcáte and for ayş Rana “vhat was it?” say ne: woldi: for ne: boldu: and for ayş yakün ne: veolğay for ne: bolğay, in 19, 13 ffT., 99 it is said that hana is translated by ér-/é only in the Perf., the other tenses being supplied by bol-; a/-kawn bolmak 35, 7; 120; şöra wa tamma "to become, to be complete' bol- 27, 13; 111; o:1- occurs in 24, 4; 25, 1 (107); 29, 10; 30, 7 but was prob. not in the original text: Çağ. xv ff. bo1-(-ah, etc.) ol- Vel. 154-5; ol- sudan wa büdan "to become; be” also pronounced bol- San. 8or. 15 (quotns.); bol- ditto 138r. 11 (quotns.): Xwar. xi bol-/ol- “to be” "AF 47: xıv bol- “to be” Qutb 35; MN 17; Nahe. 29, 3 etc.: Kom. xiv bol- “to become; to be” CCI, CCG, Gr. 63 (quotns.): Kip. xti sára .bol- (“vith back vowel Hou. 41, 9; hána 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 376 
     
   
   
     332 MON. bol- do. 43, 11: xiv ol- gára İd. 19; bol(with back vowel") sára do. 35; kàna ol- Bul. 77 (sára not listed): xv bol- Rana ate şüra ato cará (to happen!) Kav. ro, 5; sára bol- Tu. 22b. 10 a.0.o. (kána not listed): Osm. xiv ff. ol- in various conjugational forms; c.i.a.p. TTS I s40ft.; II 724 ff., III s40ff.; IV 604 ff.; bol- occurs sporadically i.a.p. 7 113; H 159; HI 108; IV 119. bul- "to find” with some extensions of meaning, 'to obtain' and the like. 'The relationship between this word and the synonymous 2 tapis discussed in Clauson, Türöçe sözler üzerinde araştırmalar, Jean. Deny Armagáni, Ankara, 1958, p. 68; briefly bul-, though common in the earlier period, now survives only in SW Osm., all other languages, even Az., Tkm. having tap-. As bol- and bul- are normally indistinguishable graphically some occurrences of bul- may have been missed. Türkü viri (I looked for a guide and VU) çülgi: Az erl: bulttm “found a man of the çülgr: (?, q.v.) Az (tribe) T 23; inim Kül Tégin er at bulti: (so read) “my younger brother Kül Tegin acquired his adult name” 7 E 31; the honorific term for "to die” should prob. be read kergek bul-, e.g. (my younger brother Kül 'Tégin) ózince: kergek bulti: “met his destined(?) fate” 7 E 30; 0.0. do. 4; Ix. 23: vin ff. oğlan kekük tezeki:n bultr: “a boy found the dung of (some kind of) falcon' /rk B 23; a.o.o.: Man. yilkika barimka bulup 'acquiring cattle and property' Chuas. 200, 250; a.0. M III 21, ı (1) (ağız: Uy£. vi Man. üküş telim tinliBlar bulti erti “many (Hend.) mortals have found” [the three evil ways?] TT III 21: Bud. bulmakı tapmakı bolur “it results in finding (a pure rebirth) U I7 36, 43; (fear of) ayığ kilinç bulğuluk 'finding (i.e. acquiring) evil behaviour' do. 39, 92; ağıçıların bulmadı “he did not find his treasurers” PP ro, 5; 0.0. U III 67, 1 (iii) etc.: Civ. TT VII 42, 5 (atakımsın-): Xak. xı ol yarma:k buldi: “he found (zoacada) the coin' (etc.) Kaş. II 22 (bulu:r, bulma:k); and about 20 o.o.: KB uluğluk bile bul üküş €lke erk “by might acquire authority over many realms' 942; 0.0. 940 (erk), etc.: xın(?) 4t. bulur bir nen içre dalillar mip-e “he finds within one thing a thousand proofs” 8; a.o.o.: Tef. bul- “to find” 110: xiv Muh. hasiba "to think, deem' bul- Rif. 107 (only); wacada wa lahiqa “to find, attain' bul- Mel. 32, 1; 116: Çağ. xv ff. bul- yàftan tea dark hardan “to find, reach' San. 138r. 11 (quotns.): Xwar. xii bul- "to find” ' Ali 31: xiv ditto Qutb 37; MN şo, etc.; Nahc. 20, 7 etc.: Tkm. xiv buleacada (Kip. tap-) İd. 36; laqa”l-dayi" “to find something that has strayed' bul- Bul. 79r. böl- “to divide, separate, distinguish”, etc. Poorly attested in the early period but s.i.a.m.l.g. Cf. adir-. Türkü vit in T s-6 (1ra:k) the last word in the sentence has been read bilser (by Radloff and "Thomsen) and büpser (by Ramstedt), but the photograph shows quite clearly bólser 'if one (tries to) distinguish between' (a lean ox and a fat ox V. BL-” in the distance): Çağ. xv ff. böl- qismat wa hişşa hardan wa cudü hardan “to divide into shares, to distribute; to separate" San. 138r. 14 (quotns.): Kip. xiv. böl- “azala "to remove, set apart, discharge (from office)' /d. 36. Dis. BLA bala: originally “a young bird, nestling”, a meaning which seems to survive only in SW Osm.; thence, by extension, 'the young of an animal', and in modern times even 'a human child”. S,i.a.m.l.g. Xak. xi bala: farxu'l-fàyir “a nestling'; this word is also used metaph. for “the young of any predatory animal (realad sabu"), etc.', so long as it is small (prov.):(balu: follows here): bala: “a helper (a'tvdr) for a man in his work', esp. used in regard to agricultural work Kaş. III 232 (the second word is presumably the first used metaph.): Caf. xv ff. bala baga-i cánwár "the young of an animal San. 126v. 25 (quotn.); under énük “puppy” do. 118r. 11 ff. it is said that bala is the word used for the young of elephants, wild beasts, and reptiles: Xwar. xiv bala 'a young animal” (gazelle, cat, etc.) Qutb 26: Kip. xur bala: occurs in the names of slave girls, ak bala: farx abyad and ay bala: farx qamar Hou. 30, 12: xiv. bala: (*with back vowels") al-farx İd. 36: xv farx bala (tuğu, yavrı, (PU) mamrax) Tu). 27b. 12. VU balu: Hap. leg.; onomatopocic. Xak. xı balu: balu: “an Exclamation (2arf) with which a woman puts her child to sleep in its cradle” Kaş. 11I 232. S bile: Sec birle:. Dis. V. BLAD 1 bele:- (be:le:-) Den. V. fr. 1 be:; pec. to Xak. Xak. xı ko:y bele:di: za”aca "l-da'n 'the sheep bleated' Kaş: III 270 (bele:r, bele:me:k), a.o., spelt be:le:- 777 206 (1 be:). 2 bele:-/bö:le:- “to swaddle (a child)” and the like. Survives, with the same meaning im NE Khak. pöle- and NW Kaz. bile- R IV 1761; perhaps the origin of Russian pelenat' same meaning. Xak. xı ol kencin béle:di: "he laid (adca'a) his child in the cradle and fastened him (azcfaqahu) in it); and one says ol anı: ka:nına: be:le:di: (sic) "he laid him in his blood” Kaş. III 270 (béle:r, bö:le:me:k sic): Kom. xiv 'to swaddle' bele- CCG; Gr: Osm. Xv1 ditto in one text T'T'S HH 127. D?F bile:- Den. V. fr. 1 bi:, “to sharpen' (a knife, etc.). S.i.a.m.l.g. w. some extended meanings; cf. kondı:-, kik-, yitit-, yanu-, Xak. xr ol biçek bi:le:di: amd tea asanna'l-sikkin 'alá'l-misann "he sharpened and whetted the knife on the whetstone'; and one says ol trg bile:di: “he sharpened (ahadda) his teeth" Kaş. III 270 (bile:r, bile:me:k): xiv Muh. (?) ahadda bi:le:- Rif. 102 (only): Xwar. xiv bile- ditto Qutb 32: Kom. xiv ditto CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv blle- sana İd. 35; xv ditto Tic. 20a, a: Osm. xvii bile- in Rümi  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 377 
     
   
   
     DIS . BLD : 333  to whet on a whetstone, to sharpen' Sam. 149r. 27. D bula:- Den. V. fr. 2 bu:; “to cook', more precisely 'to cook in steam' (see bulat-). As bulğa:- became bula- in many modern languages, it is not clear to what extent this verb has survived, but it certainly survives in NE Khak. pula- (of steam) “to rise in clouds! and NW Kaz. bu:la- ditto R IV 1836. Cf. bisur-. Xak. xı kuzi: bula:dı: (abaxa”l-hamal kadalika (?read wa ğayrahu) "he cooked the lamb" (etc.?) Kaş. II 270 (bula:r, bula:ma:k): xiv Muh.(?) tabaxa bula- Rif. 111 (Mel. 28, 8 has buşur- (sic), and Rif. in” margin bisur-). Dis. BLB balbal “a stone pillar erected on a grave in token of an enemy killed by the deceased and occasionally inscribed with the name of the enemy”. N.o.a.b., but survives as a l.-w. in Russian (kamennaya) baba “(a stone) balbal”. Türkü vii (my father the xagan died) kanım xafanka: başlayu: baz xağanığ balbal tikmiş 'we erected stone pillars, with (one symbolizing) Baz Kağan at the head of them, for my father the xagan' I1 E 16, I1 E 13; olo, IE2$; 11 S 7, 9; Ongin 3; Tölis Şadıp balbalı: balbal near 1] (ETY I go), (VU) Isvara: Tarkan balbalı: balbal near Ongin (do. 131): vin ff. Yen. türk xan balbalı: Mal. 32, 10 (the other supposed occurrences in Mal. are very dubious). Tris. BLB S bilewü: See bilegü:. CF balavuz See bal. Dis. BLC balçık “mud”. Kaj.'s description of the word as Oğuz is odd; it occurs in a Xak. quotn. in Kaş. and in later Xak. languages and s.i.a.m.lg., w. various phonetic changes, and metatheses of -ç- and -k, Cf. 3 balik, 2 titig. Oğuz xı balcik al-zahl! "liquid mud” Kaş, 7 467; 2.0. in a verse certainly Xak. 7 248, 3 (yuğrul-): xiu(?) Tef. balçık 'clay' go: xiv Muh. al-tin “mud” ba:lgik Mel, 59, 9; Rif. 158; al-tin balçık, fimu'l-ra's ba:ş balçık: al-uşnan "alkali” (?, MSS. al-asyán, unvocalized) kara: balçık 75, 1; 178: Çağ. xv ff. palçığ (so spelt) gi! “mud” in Ar. toahl San. 127r. 1: Kom. xiv 'mud' balçuk CCZ; Gr.: Kip. xur al-tin ba:lçık (-c-) Hou. 24, 13; balçık (-ç-) do. 42, 1: xıv balçık al-fin fa, 36; Bul. 4, 10: xv al-fin balşık Kas, 58, 14; Tuh. 23b. 6. Dis. BLD buht “cloud”, s.i.a.m.lg., usually as bulut, See Doerfer 11 771. Türkü vri ff. (men were bad-tempered and the sky cloudy) buliti: (so read) a:ra: kün tuğmi:ş “the sun rose among the clouds! TAB 52; a.0. 53: Üyğ. viri ff. Man. boz bulit “a grey cloud” M 77 ır, 19; 8.0. do. 16 (tohhg): Bud. kalti buhttin ünmiş ay tepri teg “like the moon-god rising from the clouds' TT IV 4,8; 2.0. VIII B.14 (ün-): Civ. TT I 5 (ün-): Xak. xı bulit a/-sahába “a cloud”, Kara: bulit “a black cloud'; a:k bulit 'a rain. cloud” (al-muzn) Kaş, I 354 (prov., verse); over 20 o.o., three times vocalized bulut: KB bulit kökredi “the cloud thundered' 86: xu(?) At. anın baxşişındın bulit uvtanur “the clouds are put to shame by his generosity' $7; two o.o. (some MSS. have bulut), Tef. bulut “cloud” rrı: xiv Muh. al-ğaym “cloud” bu:lu:t Mel. 79, ro, Rif. 184 (mis-spelt): Çağ. xv ff. bulut abr “cloud” Sam. rqi v. 13: Xwar. xiv bulit/ bulut 'cloud' Quib 37,38; MN i11; Nahc. 38,9 etc.: Kom. xiv 'cloud' bulut CC7, Gr.: Kip xii al-saháb buli:t Hou. 6, 6: xiv bulut ditto İd. 36; Bul. 2, iş: xv ditto Kav. 58, 4; Tuh. . 19; famám “thin white clouds” bulut do. 26b. 2. baitu: (balto:) 'an axe'; in the early period more specifically 'a battle axe', later more generally. S.ia.m.lg., in SE Türki paldu/ paltu Share, ?arring, palta BS; elsewhere balta. Uyğ. vı ff. Man.-A (then the god Hormuzd split the fiend's head) ot teprig baltuca kilip “using the Fire God as an axe' M I 20, 13: Bud. Suv. 544, 6 (bedzet-): Xak. xı baldu: (sic) a/-fa”s 'axe' Kaş. I 418; a.o. III 421, 25: KB kayusi cerigde kiliç baldu yér “some men suffer sword and axe (wounds) in the ranks 1736; a.o. 2141: xmni(?) Tef. balta 'axe' go: xiv Muh.(?) al-tabar 'axe' balta: Rif. 169 (only): Çağ. xvff. baltu balta tabar ma"ndsina Vel. 133 (quotn.); baltu tabar, in Ar. fa's San. 126v. 7 (same quotn.): Oğuz xr otu:p kese:si: baldu: “an axe (fa's) for cutting firevvood” Kaş. 1 14,2; n.m.e.: Xwar. xiv balta 'axe' Qurb 26: Kom. xiv “small axe” balta CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiv balta: "an axe (al-fa's) used for chopping firewood' /d. 36: xv al-fa's balta: Kav. 64, 1; Tuh. 28a. 2. baldir, etc. Preliminary note. Kag. mentions five different | words. with these consonants variously vocalized, of tchich the last tivo present no particular problems. The first is mentioned tyoice, the second twice, and the third three times followed by the sentence wa hadihi”l-arba"a bi-igbà'i'l-bà' "ard these four have back vowels; the problem is which four ? The first word seems to be identical voith the well-known cord beltir, there is no difficulty about the difference between -dand -t-, cf. baltu:, Kaş. baldu:; the 'four therefore which have back vowels seem to be the second sword, the two mentions being taken as identical, and the three occurrences of the third. These two words therefore, which are pec. to Kaş., can be taken as baldır. There is another well-knoton word baltir not mentioned by Kaş. 1 baldır Hap. leg.; cf. baldız. Xak. xı baldır oğul a[-rabib 'step-son' (or 'fosterchild'?); baldır Krz al-rabiba "step-daughter” (ditto) Kaş. 7 456. RU —nrnnÁpÓ M'EN 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 378 
     
   
   
     334 DIS 2 baldır Tlap. leg., but perhaps a mis-spelling or Sec. f. of bildir, which seems to be connected semantically. Xak. xr baldır tarığ a/-zar"u”lladi hurita fi ibtidá'i'l-rabi' ma dülika azhü lahu "a crop which is sown in the beginning of the spring, and that is the most thriving sort”, and anything that is done it the first possible opportunity (f? 1btidà' amdnihi) is called baldır, and one says baldır kuzi: for “a lamb born at the beginning of the lambing season' ( fi ibtidá'i'l-natác) Kaş. I 456. baltir properly “the calf of the leg'; in some modern languages other adjacent parts of the leg. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SE(?) with some phonetic changes. Uyğ. viir ff. Civ. (on the second day it is in the heel) üc yapida baltirda “on the third in the calf' TT VII zo, 5-6: (Xak.) xiv Muh.(?) lahmı”l-saq “the fleshy part of the (lower) leg” ba:ltır Rif. raz (only): Çağ. xv ff. baltir gust-i narm hi dar qalam-i pà başad "the soft flesh on the shin-bone'; Naşiri mistranslated it as yön 'thigh' San. 127r. 2: Kip. xir a/-sdq baltır (misvocalized baltar) Hou. zı, 6: xiv baltır /ahmatı”l-saq İd. 36: xv al-sdq baltır Kav. 61, 7; Tuh.. 18b. 13. beltir 'the junction of two or more roads or rivers'. An early L-w. in Mong. as belgir (Haenisch 14, Kot. 1116, the -(- implies -tnot -d-). Survives in NE several dialects peltir R. IV 1246; Khak. píltir; Tuv. beldir. Uy£. virt (I spent the summer there, west of Iduk Bag) yavas (VU) tokus beltiri:nte: 'at the junction of the Yavaş and “Tokuş (rivers) Su. E 9; a.0. S ro (öÖrğl:-): viu ff. Bud. balik ortusinda beltirde 'at a cross-roads in the middle of the town' PP zo, 5; o.o. U IV 8, 3 and 13 (U I 39, 3 and 13); Hüen-ts. 1939: Civ. tört beltirindeki toprak “earth from the junction of four roads” H I 114; (if a man unfit to be a beg becomes a beg) beltir sayu berge salur “he lays on the whip at every cross-roads” TT VII 42, 5: Xak. xt beldir ra'nu'l-cabal "the crest or a mountain' (i.e, the point where the slopes on each side meet); one says ta:ğ beldiri: Kaş, I 456. bildir "last year”, Radloff's suggestion that it is a crasis of the purely modern phr. bir yil dir is, of course, preposterous. Survives in NE Alt., Tel, piltir R IV 1315; Khak. piltir; NC Kır., Kzx. biltir; SC bultur NW Kaz. biltir; SW. Az., ''km. bildir, Osm. bildir, İt is an open question whether SE Türki baldir/baldur, etc. Shan 45; BŞ ss, Şarring 47 “before, formerly, earlier” is a survival of this word or 2 baldır but suggests that they may originally have been identical. Xak. xı bildir aj-'ámu'l-mádi "last year” Kaş. 1 456: Çağ. xv ff. biltur par-sdl ditto San. 149v. 13 (quotn.): Kip. xii al-'ámu'i-mádi biltir Hou. 28, 7: xv ditto İd. 36; al-'ámu'l-awwal baltur(d) (sc) Bul. 13, 14: xv al-sanatu'l-müdiya biltir yil Kav. 36, 12; sana (yil wa) bilfir Tuh. 19b. 11; müg? biltir do. 35a. 9: Osm. xiv buldur in one text; xv ff. bildir in several dicts, T T'S I7 136; //I 89; IV 99. . BLD VU buldur a reduplicated onomatopoeic of 1 type common in "lurkish languages; the only direct parallel scems to be NC Kzx. buidur buldur 'glittering' or 'rapidly, noisily R IV 1:853 (not in MM); cf. also SW Osm. güldür. Xak. xit a:ş kuduğka: tüşti: buldur buldur étti: “the stone fell down the well and the noise of its fall rose like this onomatopoeic' (mit hádihi l-hikaya) Kaş. I 456. baldız “a man's wife's younger sister", Survives in this meaning in NW Kaz. and SVV Az., Osm., "Tkm., and also in NC Kir,, Kzx. but according to MM 68 in. Kzx. it also means 'vounger sister and even 'brother-in-law', 'The last usage must be quite modern, but the use of the phr. eke baldız in Uyj. directly parallel to éci ini suggests that it was also sometimes used in the sense of 'younger sister" even in Uyg. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. Suv. 554, 1516 (eke:): Xak. xı baldız uxtu'l-mar'ati l-gufrá “a (man's) wife's younger sister'; a man's sister is called sipil, not baldız Kaş. I 457; 2.0. III 7 (yurç): xın(?) Tef. 72 (eke:), go: xiv Muh.(?) uxtu'l-mar'a ba:ldu:z Rif. 144 (only). Dis. V. BLDD?F bilet- Caus. f. of bile:-. Survives in SW Osm. Xak. xı ol bice:k biletti: asarıma (MS. here amarra, but asanna in a.0.) "I-sihkin wa amara bi-imhàyihi “ala”l-misann “he had the knife whetted and ordered that it should be sharpened on the vvhetstone” Kaş. /7 31:0 (biletu:r, biletme:k), a.o. II 325, 16. D bulat- Caus. f. of bula:-; Hap. leg.? (see bula:-); the translation. shows that this is a Caus. f. and the statement that the form was originally bu:lad- arises fr. a false analogy with Den. V.s in -d-. Xak. xı ol ku:zi: bulattı: amara bi-tabxi”l-hamal “fi buxarvl-qidr “he ordered that the lamb should be cooked in the steam of the cooking pot'; also used of anything that is cooked in the steam of the cooking pot; bu:la:dti: aglcuhu) fa-hudifati'l-toğuu tahfifa(n) was the original form; then the (long) tedzo was elided to shorten it (/a-udğima "and it was contracted! is added between the lines, perhaps later) Kaş. /T 310 (bulatu:r, bulatma:k). D bulduk- (bultuk-) “to be found', etc.; Pass. £s of bul-. N.o.a.b. "Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. (the passion of love) olarda ariti bultukmaz “is never found among them” TT V, p. 16, note A39, l. 4; a.o. VI 386 (étigsiz): Civ. ençgün mepip bultukmaz “you do not find peace or joy TT I 21-2: Xak. xr buldukti: ne: qoucida”l-şay” “the thing was found” Kaş. II 227 (bulduka:r, buldukma:k). D biltür- Caus. f. of bil-; “to make (something ec.) known (to someone Dat.)'; to inform (someone of something). S.i.a.m.l.g. vv, minor phonetic changes. Cf. bildüz-. Uyg. vini ff. Man. avig tamu emgekin biltürtüpüz "you have made known the pains of the avici (Sanskrit) hell” TT II] s8-g: Bud. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 379 
     
   
   
     DIS. BLG .335  biltürmedin without informing! v.l. in TT VI 35$ (bildüz-): Xak. xı ol maya: rs biltürdi: 'arrafani'l-amr wa a"lamanihi "he made the matter known to me and informed me of it" Kaş. 11 176 (biltürür, biltürme:k): KB bilig bildürür "he disseminates knowledge” 398: xın(?) At, bilig bildürür 1:07; Tef. bildür-/biltür- ditto ror-z: Çağ. xv ff. biidür- Caus. f.; fahmdünidan wa ma"lin hardan “to inform, make knovvn” San. 148v. 10 (quotns.): Xwar. xii bildür- ditto “AH 37: xi?) ditto Og. 104 (biti:-); 323: Kom. xiv 'to make known' bildir- CCG; Gr. 58 (quotns.): Kip. xv biye bildirdim atn: eyerleniptir '[ informed “he beg that the horse was saddled' T'uh. 7ob. 10. D bultur- Caus. f. of bul-; 'to make, or let (someone Dat.) find (something cc.) N.o.a.b.; the parallel Caus. f. of bol- s.i.s.m.l. but is not noted before Kip. xiv İd, 35 and perhaps Çağ, xv fI. San. 140v. 6, the translation given here, however, does not really suit either word. The entry in Bul. secms to belong here. Cf. bulduz-. Uyğ. vir ff. Man. (you have shown us . . . you have erected . . .[gap]) bulturtunuz “you have made us find” TT IJI ss: Bud. tinliğ oğlanına bulturaym mrvanığ “let me cause (or help?) the children of men to find rirvána! TT VII ao, 142: Kip. xiv kaffá 'to give enough'(?) buldur- Bul. 77v. D bildüz- Caus. f. of bil-; syn. w. biltür-. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vr ff. Bud. (they go about doing good to mankind) biltizmedin tuyuzmadin "without letting it be known or noticed” TT VI 335: Oğuz xı ol mapa rs bildüzdi: a'lamani'l-amr “he informed me of the matter' (bildüzür, bildüzme:k), this Oğuz word is irregular (xdrica “am”l-qiyas), the Turks do not use it Kaş. 17 202. D bulduz- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of bul-, cf. bultur-. Xak. xı bulduzdti: ne:pni: awcadahu'l-say' “he made him find the thing” Xaş. 7I 202 (bulduzur, bulduzma:k). Tris. BLD ?C bulitculayu Hap. leg.; prob. a crasis of bulitca. Equative f. of bultt and ula:yu:, cf. anculayu. Uyğ. viir ff. Bud. (PU) yanalığ sü bulitçulayu yığğaymen “1 will collect an army of elephants (as massive) as n cloud” Hüen-ts. 319-20. D buliıtlığ P.N./A. fr. buht; “cloudy”. Si.m.m.lg. vv. some phonetic changes. Türkü vir ff. er busu:şlu:ğ tepri: bulr:tlığ "people vvere anxious and the sky vvas cloudy” İrkB sə. PUF buldunı: Hap. leg.; no doubt a l.-vv., perhaps Iranian (see kendük). Gancak xı buldunr: “the name of a milk dish (al-rattya) in vvhich fresh grapes and raisins are mixed, it is then eaten” Kaş. 7 492 (the fourth consonant is certainly wrong; the word occurs in a small section headed fu'iuli, with four cross-headings -N-, -R-, -L-, - N-; the first, under which this is the only word, is obviously an error, prob. for - T- or possibly -B-). ?S bildirçin: See budursi:n. D bulitsız Priv. N./A. fr. bulit; “cloudless”, N.o.a.b. Uyf. viu ff. Bud. anabrak atlığ bulitsiz tepri. yerinde “in the cloudless heaven called Anabhraka” (Sanskrit 'cloudless”) Suv. 143, 11-12. Tris. V. BLDD bulrtlan- Refl. Den. V. fr. bulrt, “to be cloudy, overcast'| Survives in SW Osm. bulutlan-. Xak. xı kö:k bulıtlandı: gámati'l-samá' “the sky was cloudy! Kaş. II 264 (bulitlanu:r, bulitlanma:k): Kip. xv £ayyama bulutlan- Tuh. 27a. 8. Mon. BLG S balk See 3 balık. Dis. BLĞ (D) ba:lığ *wounded'; P.N./A. fr. *ba:, which is also the basis of 2 ba:ş and ba:lık-. Survives in NE, most dialects, palığ/palu: *wound, swelling' R IV 1168; Khak. palığ, Tuv. balığ. Türkü vir: ff. Man. (our souls, fighting with sin and devilry) balığ başlığ bolti “became wounded (Hend.)' Chuas. 1 9— 10: Xak. xı ba:lığ al-carih “vounded” Kaş. I 407 (verse); o.o. 7 242 (emleg-); 7 252 (ağrın-): K.B bu ödleg ok1 birle könli balığ “this man. whose mind is wounded by the arrow of time” 5430. 1 balık “fish”, S.i.a.m.l.g. including Yak. balık, Cuv. pulö/pola Asa. IX 278. Uyğ. vit ff. Man.-A kalti balak (s) suv İçre yüzerçe 'just as a fish swims in the water' M 1 17, 13-14; 0.0. do. 35, 16; 36, 20-1: Man. taluy ógüzteki balıklar “the fishes in the sea” TT III 9o: Bud. PP 17, 1 (udik), 58, 7 (ağna:-), Suv. 6or, 11; 603, 10: Civ. balık ötin “the gall-bladder of a fish” H I 155; kuduğ suvinda balık yok “there are no fish in the water of a well' TT VII 42, 7; a.o. do. 28, 46; in VIIJ P.3 and 9, a calendar text, balık (spelt with ?-), is prob. “the constellation Pisces” (a sign of the zodiac): Xak. xı balık ai-samak "fish Kaş. I 379 (prov.); 2.0.0; KB balık kudrugindin “from the tail of Pisces' 66; a.o. in the list of signs of the zodiac ıqı: xıı(?) Tef. balık “fish” go: xiv Muh. al-samaka bazlı:k Mel. 14, 18; 77, 6, Rif. 91, 180; al-hüt "Pisces” ba:lığ 79, 8; ba:lı:k 183: Caf. xv ff. balığ müh? “a fish” San. 127r. 9 (quotn.): Kom. xiv “fish” baluk CCI; Gr.: Kip. xir al-samak bazlık Hou. 7, 4: Xiv. balık al-samak; bahk bey al-büri ay amiru”l-samak “the mullet', that is “the chief of the fish” /4. 36: al-samah bazlık Bul. s, 1: xv ditto balık Kav. 63, 2; Twh. 19a. 8. 2 balık 'town'; the standard Turkish word in the early period, but n.o.a.b. except as a component in place-names. A very early l.-w. in Mong. as balagasun, Plur. balağad (Haenisch m—-——————— — —À—————— É OECEIZEEEESEJCTELP?ÉZÉT]DÓÓGÓ2mQÓEDIISHILLBGLIMBMDIMIMIEQIBEIRIHIRIRÍ'Á— 1Ó Ell 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 380 
     
   
   
     336 rz, Kore, 1077). [n the medieval period displaced by L-w.s, usually Pe. sar. Cf. kent, See Doerfer I1 712. Türkü viri (VU) Tofu: balikda: 7 N 4; Kam. balikka: Ongin 9; a.0. / E ız (én-): vin ff. Suğçu: balikda: Miran A.r4 (ET Y II 65); Koço: balikda: do. B.11: Man. (he does not stay long) bir balikda “in one town' M III zo, io (ii): Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A balık(da?) teğzindi “he vvandered about the town' M 7 32, 11: Bud. Kançanabatı balikta U //T 29, rz, (the people) menip balıkımtakı “in my town' U IV 8, 26; balik 'town' is common in PP and elsewhere: Civ. (a man whose head twitches on the right) irak balikka barir TT VII 34, s: baltk also occurs in USp. usually as a component in place-names: Xak. xı balık aj-/iign tea l-madina "a stronghold, town' in the language of the pagans (Hi-lugati'l-cáhiliyati'l-cuhalà) and Uyğur, hence Be:ş balık, the biggest Uyğur town, meaning “Five towns'; and another of their towns is called Yanı: balık, that is 'New 'Town' Kaş. 1 379: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. 'walled town' balik Ligeti, p. 138; R IV 1166: Çağ. xv ff. balığ şahr rea vellayat 'town, province', as in Xanbalığ, Besbalığ San. 127r. 9: Xwar. xii(?) baluk (sic) 'town' occurs 8 times in Og. 3 balık “mud”, pec. to Kaş., the morphological connection between this word and balcik, q.v., is obscure. Arğu:, some Oğuz xı balık a/-fin “mud”, some Arğu: pronounce it ba:lk with three consecutive unvowelled consonants (satcükin, i.e. counting the alif as a consonant); in Turkish only two consecutive unvowelled consonants are permissible, but in the language of the people of the Argu: there is an incorrect practice (rikka) Kaş. 1 379; a.o. I 248, 3 (yuğrul-). 1 bulak “a spring (of water)'; s.i.a.m.l.g. See Doerfer II 809. Cf. bipa:r, yul. Uy£. viri ff. Civ. kuduğ kazsar bulak öğen kazsar “f a man digs a well or digs out a spring or brook” TT VII 29, 2; a.o. do. zo: Xak. xı KB aka tinmaz artar bulaklar ara 'it does not cease to flow, but increases among the sptings' 6626: xiv Muh. al-'ayn "a spring” bula:ğ Mel. 77, 1 (Rif. 180 hawáliyu'l-'ayn “the surroundings of a spring” yu:la:k (sic); the words are more or less syn. but bulak is prob. the original text): Çağ. xvff. bulağ “a spring (Pinar) which bubbles out of the ground' Vel. 156 (quotns.); bulağ/bulak çaşma-f dö "a spring of water San. 141r. 15: Xwar. xiv bulak : “spring” Qutb 37; MN 134: Kom. xiv “spring” bulak/ bulax CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xur al-£adir “a pool bu:la:k Hou. 6, 19. VU 2 bulak n.o.a.b.; an Adj. applied to a horse; Kag.'s translation is the same as that of büktel; the word in Muh. may be 3 bulak. Xak. xı bulak at al-adakk mina'l-xayl "a broad-backed horse' Kaş. I 379: KB bulak semrise kör munar ham azar “if a broadbacked horse gets fat, it goes wild and bolts' 360o: xiv Muh.(?) (among the words applied to horses) al-sumiis “restive" bu:la:k Rif. 171 DIS. BLG (only): Çağ. xv ff. bulağ/bulak asbi R? bint-yi an çah bágad "a horse with cleft nostrils! San 141T. 15. S 3 bulak See bulğak. D boluğ Hap. leg., but see boluğluğ, apparently Dev, N. fr. bol-; “a state of (coming into) existence'(?). Türkü vii ff. IrkB 19 (1 ağan). D bulğa:k N./A.S. fr. bulğa:-, 'confusion, disorder; confused, disorderly'. Survives as pulğak/pulğa:k in NE several dialects R /V 1376 and Khak.; NC Kzx. bulğak and with some extended meanings in NC Kir. bulak and prob. in the phr. alak bulak 'confused', noted in Çağ, xv fF. San. 49v. 9 and SW Osm. fr. xiv onwards T TS Il 24; Ill 13. See Doerfer 11 768. "Türkü vini (the '"lTokkuz Oğuz were my people) tepri: yer bulğakı:n üçü:n yağı: boltr: “because of disorder in heaven and carth they became hostile” / N 4; a.o, II E 29: Uyğ. viu ff. Man.-A M III 9, 17 (i), etc. (telğek): Bud. él bulgakipa katilip “being involved in civil disorders! U JI 78, 35; 0.0. do. 87, 53 (telgek); TT IV ro, 17: Xak. xı bulğa:k “the panic (al-hazàáhiz) which breaks out in a tribe on the approach of their enemy": Bulğa:k a masculine Proper Name (verse bulğa:k translated a/-fitdn 'disorders") Kaş. I 467; in a grammatical para. III 320, 15 bulğa:- is derived fr. bulğa:nuk but the commentary suggests that this is an error for bulğa:k: KB bu bulğak küni "on this day of (political) disorder' 4121: xın(?) Tef. fitna bulğak 110: xiv. Mui. al-fitna bulğa:ğ Mel. so, rz: bu:lğa:k Rif. 146: Çağ. xv ff. bulğağ órgülük ve tafriqa ve tarac ve talan ve xaráb 'disorder, disintegration, pillage, devastation, ruin' Vel. 156 (quotns.); bulğağ/bulğak 7rq:/45 rea dşuftagi 'revolution, disorder, confusion” (quotn.) also used for munqalab wa aşufta (Pe. quotn.); various Pe. authorities quoted regarding the use of this word in Pe. San. i41 v. r: Kom. xiv bulğak “confusion”(?) CCG; Gr. 68 (quotn.): Tkm. “ihir (sic, ? read 'akir) turbid, muddy' bulğak (Kip. bulanak) Tul. 252. 8. ?E bulğanç this word is restored in the passage below as a parallel to tarkınç, it is a possible Dev. N. fr. bulgan- but would be Hap. leg.; the right reading is prob. bulğak. Türkü vii (gap] bul&amp;[anc oll [gap] oguzi: yeme: tarkınç ol “(his Türkü people?) are in disorder, and his (Tokkuz?1 Oğuz in a difficult mood' T 22. D bulğa:ş N./A.S. fr. bulğa:-: syn. vv. bulğa:k but perhaps with a hint of joint action. NE Sor pulğaş “a stick for stirring liquids' R IV 1378 is prob. not a survival of this word; Şor -S normally corresponds to an earlier -ç (see Radloff, Phosetik der nórdlichen Türhsbrachen, Leipzig, 1882, p. 188), so this word prob. represents *bulgagac, N.IL. in -ğaç. Xak. xı bulğa:ş "the disorder (al-fitna) which breaks out in a tribe because of the approach of an enemy” Kaş. 7 460. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 381 
     
   
   
      TRIS. Dis. V. BLĞD balık- morphologically obscure; perhaps Emphatic f. of *bala:- Den. V. fr. "ba:, cf. ba:li and 2 ba:g. Pec. to Xak. Xak. xr er balikti: curihial-racul “the man was wounded' Kaş. II 119 (balika:r, balikma:k:; in a para. saying that verbs in -k- fall into two classes: (1) verbs in which the Suff. is attached to add emphasis to verbs connoting defeat, e.g. bassik- (this seems to be a misunderstanding of the suffix -S1k-), (2) verbs, of which this is one, in which the -K- is an integral part of the verb (yahün asl li'l-bab)): KB balıkmış bar erse “if there is a wounded gman' (make sure that he is medically treated) 2402. bulğa:- acc. to Kaş., q.v., basically “to stir' (a liquid, etc.) and metaph. 'to confuse, disturb (someone), produce a state of disorder', but the second is the older and conimoner meaning. 5.i.a.m.l.g., in SE, sometimes, and SW Az., Osm., "Tkm, always as bula-, elsewhere as bulğa-, Türkü vim (in an account of a battle) bulğayu: "putting (the enemy) in disorder” Ix. 11: vin ff. Man. M II 45, 2-3 (öğür): Uyf. virt (he said) içre: ben bulğayı:n 'I will cause internal disorder! Su. S 4: virt ff. Man.-A (if the wind blows from the west it drives) ol bulğamakığ yaykanmakığ “those disturbances and storms! (eastwards) M III qo, 5-6 (i): Bud. bulğadım erser *if I have caused trouble! (to the innocent) U 77 78, 32; 0.0. do. 87, so (mis-spelt); TT IV ro, 14; IO, 17 (1 éD); Tis. 48a. 2; USD. 6o Ib. rr: Civ. (crushing red salt with camel's dung and) bor birle bulgap 'stirring it up with wine' Il 199; a.0. TT 163 (1 6:8): Xak. xı su:vuğ bulğa:dı: “he stirred (kaddara) the water'; and one says ol tutma:ç bulğa:dı: “he vigorously stirred (harraka) the futma:ç in the cooking pot (ctc.)'; also when one vigorously stirs anything, e.g. gruel and the like, so that the top and bottom (of the mixture) are both cooked; and one says ol er anın könlin bulğa:dı: “that man annoyed him and made him angry' (adcarahu wa ağdabahu), the origin of the phr. is that the man's physical condition is upset (yatakaddaru'l-tab') by eating food not properly cooked so that he nearly vomits (yatagayyd) Kaş. IJI 289 (bulğa:r, bulğa:ma:k), o.o. lI] agı, 2 (telge:-); 320, 13: Çağ. xv ff. bulğa(-dı) tolaşdur- ve bürü- "to cause to be confused (etc.); to wrap up”, bula-(-p)/bulğa(-p) bula- ve bulaşdur- Vel, 157 (quotn.)-8; bulğa-/ bulğat- (Caus. f.) d//7da hardan sea şürünidan tva àmixtan "to confuse, to stir up (mud), to mix' San. 140r. 27 (quotns.); bula- abbreviation of bulğa- 139v. r5: Xwar. xiv bulğa“to put (an army) in disorder' Qutb 37: Kom. XIV “to disturb, trouble' CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiv bulğaytı: (sic)/buléandurdi: kaddara I 36; Tkm. bula- xabbata '|-máyi' “to beat a liquid” (pne MS. adds ya'ni harrakahu); Kip. bulğa. 35. D bulğan- Refl. f. (normally used as Pass.) of bulğa:-, s.i.m.m.l.g. with the same range of BLĞ 337 meanings. "Türkü vir ff. Man. (seeing himself) kop kanka bulğanmıs (sic) “completely saturated with blood' M 7 6, 6, a.o. TT II 6, 9; Uyğ. vurff. Man.-A bulğanmakı yaykanmakı M III ro, 12 (i) (?error for bulğa:-, q.v): Bud. bulğanmış yavlak tüllerig 'disturbed and evil dreams' U 77 58, 1 (ii); a.o. do. 2 (iii); (the demons, hearing these stern words) artukrak bulğanıp “becoming still more agitated' U IV 8, 35; o.o. TT V 26, ror, VHI A.31 (1 €1): Civ. (the bile) küz rtuda bulğa:nur “is stirred up in the autumn season (Sanskrit L-w.) TT VIII 1.23: Xak. xı su:v bulğandı: “the water was stirred” (Zakaddara), and one says könül bulğandı: zalamatr'I-fabi'a “his physical condition troubled him' because he had eaten something with filth (gadar) in it; also when he vomited (gà'a) one says köpül bulğandı:: and one says beg anar bulğandı: “the beg was angry (ğadiıba) with him” (bulğanu:r) and onc says éd bulğandı: “the realm was in disorder” (tagatwetagat) (bulğanma:k) Kaş. 1I 238; o.o. I7 242 (telgen-); 777 21 (1 yarın): xu?) Tef. (of a wounded head) kanka bulğan- “to be covered with blood' rio: Çağ. xv ff. bulğan- (and bulğaş-) aíida şudan wa şürtda şudan wa ba-ham àmixtan "to be confused, stirred, mixed together” San. 139v. 18 (quotns.; translations of other forms rightly substitute amixta sudan for dmixtan): X war. xir bulğan-/bulvvan- “to be confused' 'Air 11, 48: xiv kanka bulğan-/bulğaş- Quib 37: Kom. xiv “to be troubled, confused' bulğan- CCG; Gr. 68 (quotn): Kip. xv 'alira (of water) “to be turbid' bulan- (and tolan-); Tkm. bulğan- (and tolğan-) Tuh. 26a. 3 (these descriptions should be reversed ?). Tris. BLG D balıkçı: N.Ag. fr. 1 balık, “fisherman”. "The only early occurrences are in translated Bud. texts, and not evidence that the Turks themselves fished in this period. S.i.a.m.l.g. Uy$. vr ff. Bud. (in a list of disreputable occupations) balıkçı PP r, 8; TT IV 8, 56; Suv. 602, 6: xiv Muh. sayyádu'l-samah ba:Ike: Mel. 58, r, Rif. 156: Kip. xiv. 'fisherman” balukçı CCI; Gr. D balıkçın Den. N. fr. 1 balık, 'heron', lit. “fish-eating bird”. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. where Red. translates balıkçın "tern, Sterna hirundo” and balıkcıl “heron, egret; bittern” Ardea, Botaurus. In SE Türki xvır (the “Five Language Mirror”) kök balıkçı (sic) was "the common heron, 2zdea melanocebhala), and ala balıkçı (s) ?'the purple heron, 4. purpurea', see E. D. Ross, 4 Polyglot List of Birds in Turhi, Manchu and Chinese, Calcutta, 1909, Nos. 32 and 33; and xx bilikei (sic) 'heron' Jarring 47. Xak. xi balikcin the name of a white bird called máliku'l-hazin 'heron', which hunts fish Kaş. I 512: Osm. xiv balikcir (sic?) prob. “heron” in two texts TS 7 72; II ror: xvi balığçıl (spelt)/balığçın in Rümi, paranda-i mühi “a fish-eating bird”, in Pe. bü-timàr ('heron') and  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 382 
     
   
   
       338 TRIS. Şam-xtvurak (ditto), in Ar. abii hazin, and in Greek şağnin (?corrupt, cf. saginétes 'netfisherman') San. 127r. 11. D 1 balıklığ P.N./A. fr. 1 balik; “full of fish”. S.is.ml Uyğ. vir balıklığ the name of a river Şu, S 10 (örğl:-): Xak. xi balıklığ öğüz reddi dü samak 'a river full of fish” Kaş. I 498. D 2 balıklığ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. 3 balık. Arğu: xi balıklığ is also (used for) ak -ardu'llati fihü wwahl *muddy ground' in the language of Arğu: Kaş. I 498. D boluğluğ P.N./A. fr. bolug; n.o.a.b. Xak. xt KH (the doorkeeper must decide) yarağlığ kayu ol asığlığ kayu boluğluğ kayu ol tusuluğ kayu “vhich (of them) is useful, which advantageous, which likely to develop (?), and which beneficial 2544. D bulğama: Pass. Dev. N. fr. bulğa:-, *gruel', lit. 'something stirred together'. In the medieval period replaced by parallel Dev. N. in -ma:ç (for a kind of food); survives in SW Osm. bulamac, 'Tkm. bulamaf/bulamak. See Doerfer 11 770. Xak. xı bulğama: 'gruel (al-'asida) "which contains neither sweetening nor oil” Kaş. I 491: (xiv Muh. harira 'gruel' bulama:ç Mel. 65, 14; bu:l$ama: Rif. 165: Çağ. xv ff. bulamaç/ bulamak “a kind of thin gruel (àg-i raqiqi) made with flour' Sar. r41r. 19: Xwar. xiv bulamak (sic) 'gruel' Nate. 107, 14; 108, 1-2; Kip. xiv bulğamaç (-c) al-'asida İd. 35; Bul. 8, rr (MS. yalfamac): xv xabiş va md fi ma'máhu "svveetmeat made of dates, cream, etc.", and the like bulamaç (-c) Tuh. 14a. 12). PUF bulguna: Hap. leg.; no doubt a l.-w. Malğüna is a perfectly regular, but rare, Ar. Pass. Particip. meaning 'tangled' (of trees, etc.), but it is unlikely that this would be converted into balğuna: in Xak., since in that language the assimilation to nasals is usually the other way; such a change might, however, occur in an Oğuz language. Xak. xı bulğuna: (so vocalized) “a red, pliant (rixw) tree the shape of a tamarisk (al-tarfà') eaten by camels'; malğuna: (so vocalized) dialect form of it (Inga fihi) Kaş. I 492. D bulga:üuk N./A.S. fr. bulğan-, although the -fi- is in this word a compound sound and not an original -fi- it followed the usual course of evolution to become -y- in Kaş. and usually -n- elsewhere; *mixed, turbid, confused', and the like. Survives in SW Osm. bulanik *turbid, cloudy"; "Tkm. ditto (and bulancak). Uyğ. viu ff. Man. bulkanyuk (sic) kopüllüg tinli$lar 'mortals with confused minds' TT III 162: Bud. bulğanyuk kópüllüg TT VI 65; vin: O.8 (spelt pues a.0. U I 14, 3 (çöbik): Xak. xı bulğayuk su:v a/-ma'u'l-kadir "turbid water' Kaş. III 179 (reading certain, in a chapter for words containing -y-); bulğa:nuk 777 320, 15 (see bulğa:k): KD tüzüldi süzüldi kamug bulğanuk “all disorders were adjusted and clarified' 5951; BLG 0.0. 2131 (Süz-), 3632: Çağ. xv ff. bulğanuk ab-i gil-ülüd 'imuddy watet' San. r41 v. 10: Kip. xv "kir (sic, ?rcad 'ahir) 'turbid, muddy' bulanak Tuh. 25a. 8 (later marginal note saying that bulanuk is morc correct; and see bulğa:k). D bolğusuz Hap. leg.?; Priv. N./A. fr. Particip. in -ğu: fr. bol-. Xak. xı KB billig baylık ol bir çığay bolğusuz “knovledge is wealth, it is (a guarantce of) not becoming poor' 313. S bulğayuk Sce bulğa:nuk. "rris. V. DLGD 1 balıklan- lIap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. 1 balık. Xak. xr kó:l balıklandı: "the lake was full of fish” (dà samak) Kag. II 265 (sec below). D 2 balıklan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Dev. N. fr. 2 balık. Uyğ. xı (balıklandı:) is also used of a place (al-matdi') when it "has a stronghold” (l/şn) in the Uyg. language Kaş. 11 265 (baliklanu:r, balıklanma:k). D 3 balıklan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. 3 balık. Arğu: xı (balıklandı:) is also used of a place (af-masudi") when it is 'muddy' (dà fin) in the language of Arğu: Kaş. 7I 265 (sce above). D baliksa:- Hap. leg.; Desid. Den. V. fr. 1 balık. Xak. xı er balıksa:dı: “the man longed for fish” Kaş. II] 334 (balıksa:r, balıksa:ma:k). Dis. BLG D béleg Dev. N. fr. 2 bele:- , lit. 'something wrapped up”, in practice “a gift', with the specific implication that it is one wrapped up to be transported. Survives in several minor NE and NC languages and NW Kaz. bülek. "The word is a l.-w. in Mong. as beleg (Koto, 1115, Haltod 282) and some NE occurrences may be reborrowings ft. Mong. See Doerfer I1 833. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (I have ventured to present) bélé&amp; ötüğüm “my humble. gift" Hiüen-ts. 1843 (see note thereon); o.o. 1859 (bekle:-), 1883, 2054: Xak. xı beleğ “a gift (hadiya) which a traveller brings (back) for his neighbours, or one sent from one place (bug'a) to another” Kaş. 7 385; bé:leg a/-hadiya I 408: xur(?) At. beleg 1dtim “1 sent as a gift' 79: xiv Muh. al-hadiya béle:à Mel. 51, 2; Rif. 149 (mis-spelt as a/-hudna tüle:g, -g marked): Çağ. xv ff. béleg hadiya wa narmbürca (first fruits"); the author of the Farlang-i Jahàüngiri described this word as Persian and quoted a verse illustrating it Sas. 149v. 3: Osm. xiv to xvi beleg “gift”, not noted later than xvi 7TS 7 87, II 125; III 79; IV gö, E belik See bilik. bilek “the wrist. S.i.a.n.l.g. vv. minor phonetic changes and extensions of meaning. Uyf. viti ff. Bud, (then the king's right hand)  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 383 
     
   
   
     DIS. bilekindin kesilip “being severed from his wrist' U IV 38, 135; alo, U II 25, 15 (siğın-): Xak. xı bilek mr'jamu'l-yad 'wrist! Kaş. I 385; o.o. 1 325, 9; 518, 12 (kavir-); II 148, 6; 214, zo (81t$ag-): KB 2310 (esri:): Caf. xv ff. bilek sá'id 'forearm' San. 149v. 3 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv bilek 'wrist' Qutb 32: Kip. xır al-sá'id bile:k Hou. 20, rz: XIV bilek a/-said İd. as: xw al-mafşal 'joint bilek Kas. 61, 2, zand 'wrist, forearm” (kol wa) bilek Tuh. 17b. 11. D billg N.Ac. fr. bil-; 'knowledge'. Very common in the carly period as the standard word for 'knowledge', and "also in a much wider range of meanings, some of which are very indefinite; the underlying connotation is perhaps “mental process” or the like. In modern times almost completely displaced by other Dev. N.s fr. bil- or l.-w.s, but survives in NE Alt, Tel. pilik R 7V 1339; Tuv. bilig (but Khak. bilis); SE Türki bilik Shaw 56 (but BS bilim; Jarring bilmeklik); NC Kzx. bilik exists but bilim preferred (Kir. only bilim); SC Uzb. as for Kzx.; NW Kk. bilik (but also bilim, which alone seems to be used in other NW languages); SW 'Tkm. as for Kzx.; bilik also exists in one or two XX Anat. dialects SD D 207. See Doerfer II 835. Türkü vin bilig bilmez kişi: 'ignorant people” 7 S 7, II N 5; afığ bilig (I7 biliğin) antn: öyü:r ermiş “they must then have thought up evil ideas" 7 S 5, I1 N 4; (my eye which secs has become as if it could not see) bilir biliğim bilmez teg boltı: “my mind(?) which knows has become as if it did not know" Il N 10; a.o. T 6 (but not T 7 where bilig eşi: is a mistranscription of bilgesi:): virt ff. min kişi: yüzi: biliğinçe: bir kişi: a:tı: (sic) bilig ol 'compared to knowing a thousand people by sight, (knowing) one man's reputation is (real) knowledge! Tus. Ill a. 4-6 (ETY 11 94): Man. anığ yavlak biligin “vith very evil intentions Chiuas. 50-1; bilge bilig *wisdom' do. 183; biliğimizni köpülümüzni *our minds and thoughts' do. 184-5; tepri aymış ötçe biliğçe “ın accordance with the guidance given to us by God” do. 326-7; o.o. M III aş, 16 (i) (2 üz), etc.: Uyğ. vru ff. Man.-A bilge bilig M 7 əş, 3 etc.: Man. bilge bilig TT III 32; in az bilig 'lust and öpke bilig 'anger' TT IJ 16, 26 and 34 bilig is really superfluous but might mean “mental process” or 'emotion': Bud. bilig is very common with the same wide range of meanings as in the Man. dialects; it often represents Sanskrit vijfdna 'consciousness'; see TT VI Index for a long list of usages: Xak. xı bilig al-'ilm 'knowledge'; hence one says bilig öğren :a'allami'l-ilim 'acquire knowledge': bilig a/-hikma 'wisdom'; hence one says Oza:kr bilge:le:r (sic, correctly) "wise. men (al-huhamd) of old”: biliğ ai-'ag! 'understanding; hence one says ofla: biliğsi:z "boys lack understanding! Kaş. I 385; I 261 (öğret-): 77 243, 8 (ük-) and many o.o.: KB biliğ is very common with the same wide range of meanings as in Kaş., e.g. 1493 BLG 339 (öğret-): xin(?) At. biliğ 'knowledge, wisdom, understanding! is common; 7ef. bilig (also bilmek, bilmeklik) ditto 102: (xiv Muh. see biliglig): Çağ. xv ff. bilig (*with -&amp;') bilmek ve idrüh (understanding”) Vel. 142 (quotns.); bilig 'Zim wa döniş 'knowledge' (Hend.); and metaph. pamd wa ta'lim wa trgád 'advice, instruction, guidance' San. 15or. s (quotns.): Xwar. xiv biliğ 'knowledge, wisdom' Qutb 32; MN 274: Kom. xiv 'knowledge” bilik CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv bili/bilü: (MS. belii:) al-'ilm İd. 35: Osm. xiv ff, bilü, less often bili 'knowledge', etc., is common till xv and occurs till xvit. TT'S 7 oo, 11 42; III 95; İV 100. bilik (?p-) “a vvick”, Survives as pilik in SE "Türki Shaw, BŞ, Jarring; SC Uzb. and NW Kk., and as bilik in NC Kir. Some other modern languages have bilte/pilte/melte, but it is doubtful whether this word, whicli seems to be Pe. (Steingass pilta) is etymologically connected. Xak. xr bilik (misvocalized belik) fatilatu'l-sirác "a lamp wick': bilik (bà' unvocalized) al-misbàár "a surgeon's probe' Kaş. I 385; o.o. I 267, 22 (ittür-; unvocalized); I4 323, 13 (kokit-; bilikni:). D bölük (bölök) Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. böl-, usually a N., 'section, part', and the like, sometimes, later, w. extended meanings, like “separate, different”. S.i.a.m.l.g. as bölük, less often bólek; 1.-vv, in Mong. as bölek (Haenisch 17), in Pe. as bolük, and in other languages, see Doerfer 11, No. 772. Türkü vii ff. Man. beş ye[girmi böllüğ xwaswanéft “the Xwastwaneft, fifteen sections” colophon of main text in von Le Coq, Chuastuanift, AKPAW, Berlin, 1910, p. 25, ir: Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. (the doctrine of the three treasuries and) iki yégirmi bölük yarlığ “the decree (stra) in twelve sections! TT VI zor, Sanskrit bodhyangd "the constituent parts of enlightenment” tuyu:nma:k bölökle:ri TT VIII A.ış, 21, 22; am$a “part, share” bölök (spelt p-) do. C.17; a.o. U II ss, 16: Civ. tastin kaç bölük yernin “of some sections of land outside (the town) USp. 12, 4; a.o. do. 29, ro: Xak. xt bölük al-tàyifa min kull haywàn "a (detached) group of any kind of living creatures', hence one says bir bölük ko:y “a flock (gafi') of sheep', and bir bölük kişi: “a group (fáyifa) of men” this is a collective noun (ism cam") like ai-qawm and al-ıbil in Ar. Kaş. I 385: xui?) Tef. bölük bölük “in groups, flocks” 108 (and see bulun): Çağ. xv ff. bölek firqa toa gurüh “group, band”, etc. (Rümi quotn.) also pronounced bölük San. r41r. 17; bölk same translation do. 141 v. 11; bölük (1) same translation (quotn.); (2) “a district” (rrahálli) composed of several towns and villages (parallel terms in India, etc. mentioned); but in Bábur bölek is always used for firga wa gürüh and bölük for 'villages' and 'province' (dihàát tva toiláyat) do. 141 v. 17: Kap. xiv bölük al-fariq mina'l-nás "a large group of people”: bölük (misvocalized befük) al-dafira mina”l-şa"r "a lock of hair” İZ, 35: xv cam" 'crowd, flock”, etc, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 384 
     
   
   
     340 bólek (in margin bölük) Tuh. rza. 1; dafira (mis-spelt zafira; note in margin mina'[-sa'r tca gayriht) bölük do. 242. 13. belgü: (?belgà:) “sign, mark” occasionally in a concrete, but usually in an abstract sense; 'distinguishing characteristic. An early l.-w. in Mong. as belge (Haenisch 14; see also Doerfer 1 96 with a long list of modern 'T'urkish and Mong. forms). S.i.a.m.l.g., usually as belğü/belgi, Cuv. palá/pallá Ash. LX 82-6; Yak. belie Pek.429, and perhaps bilge do. 464. Türkiü vin ff. kamu:ğ ta:şların kentü: kentü: erdemi: belgü:si: bar “all (precious) stones have their individual virtues and distinguishing characteristics! Toy. 12-14 (ET Y H 58): Uyğ. viri belğü:min bitiğimin anta: yaratıtdım “Iİ had my sign and inscription erected there” Su. E 8; a.o, E 9: vini ff, Man.-A ınça kaltı Xormuzta tepri belgüsince "like the distinguishing characteristics of the god Hormuzd' M 1 24, 10-11; a.o. do. 35, 2: Man. [bel]güsi ratnı “his sign is a yevvel” M İl 7, 3-4; 2.0. M III 39, 1-3 (adınçığ): Chr. (then the Magi seeing) ol tanlançığ irü belgü “that marvellous sign” U 7 8, 14-15: Bud. belgü is commonest in the phr. irü belgii “omen, sign” (see irü:), but also occurs by itself corresponding to Sanskrit /aRşana *distinguishing mark” TT VI 190; a.o. Suv. 73, 20 (adart-): Civ. busuş kadğu belgüsi "a sign of anxiety and distress” TT I 79; o.o. do. 62 (éncgülüg), 71 (adirtla:-); (now 1 will describe) sıçğan belgüsin 'omens from mice" VII 36, rı: Xak. xı belgü: a/-amára wa'l-"alama “sign, indication” Xaş. 1 427 (proverb): KB ukuş kimde bolsa bu ol -belgüsi "whoever acquires understanding, this is his distinguishing characteristic! 1864; (chosen among men) kisi belgüsi 'and an example to others” 5791; o.o. 18o, 4284, s108: xin(?) Tef. belgü "a sign" 97: Çağ. xv ff. bélgü (with -8-') nigüán ve "alama ve bilinecek şey 'sign, mark, something recognizable' Vel. 142 (quotn.); bélgü (spelt) tamga sta nişün wa "alümat (see tamğa:, quotns.); and metaph. (1) nişana-i tir "an archery target; (2) faxalluş “poetic pseudonym” (quotn.) San. 149v. 18: Volga Bulğar xiri-xiv the word often occurs on tombstones in this language in the form bü” làm wcázw yd”, the yö” is the 3rd Pers. Poss. Suff.; it is an open question whether this should be transcribed belwi: or belwüyi or belü:yi but the meaning in any case is 'his memorial , the best edition of these texts is G. B. Yusupov, Vvedenie v bulgaro-tatarskuyu eprgrafiku, Moscow-Leningrad, 1960; on this word see K. T'homsen, 'Zur wolgabolgarischen Epigraphie', Acta Orientalia XXVI 3-4. P. 189: Xwar. xiv belgü “sign, mark” DH 27: Kip. xiv belgü: záir 'conspicuous' d. 36 (mistranslation, deduced from preceding entry belgür- zakara). D bilge: Dev. N./A. fr. bil- ; primarily “a wise man', but in the early period apparently sometimes a specific title of office, 'Counsellor' or the like; also used as an Adj. N.o.a.b. See DIS. BLG Doerfer 11 836. Türkü viti bile: xağan lit. *wise kağan”, but prob. often regarded rather as a regnal title 7 E 3, 11 E 4; 1 E 23; bilge: "Tonukuk prob. “Counsellor "Tonukuk” rather than “vise "T” T r, etc.; bilgesi: cavuşı: ben ök ertim “it was I that was his Counsellor and his Army Commander” T 7; a.o. of this phr. Ix. 17 (çavuş), bilğe: kigi:g “vise men" I S6, II N 4; a0.0.: viii ff. yanı:lma:zu:n tép bilgeg urti: "he appointed a Counsellor who would not make inistakes” Tun. 1I a. 7; a.o. do. 9 (ETY 1I 94-3): Man. bilge bilig *wisdom' Chuas. 183: Yen, uz bilge: cagsi: Proper Name Mal. 31, 1 (see çanşı:), a.o.o.: Uyğ. virt ff. Man.-A bilge bilig M 7 23, 3; 24, 26, bilge beg do. 12, ro: Man. bilge bilig TT III 32; bilgeler 'counsellors' M 111 34, 6—7; 36, 5 (ti) (élgi:): Bud. bilge 'wise; a wise man' is very common PP 74, 2; 74, 4-6 ctc.; elçi bilgeler Kuan. 129, 130: Civ, futsi bilge “the wise master” (Chinese fu tzit, prob. Confucius) TT 7 106-7; tetik bilge kişi erser “if he is a quick-witted, wise man” VI 28, 53-4: O, Kir. ix ff. Bilge: in P.N.s Mal. 13, 3; 24, 6: Xak. xi bilge: a/-hahim “vise”: bilge: ali-'álim 'knowing': bilge: a[-'aqil “intelligent” (verse); hence a man is called bilge: beg 'a wise, knowing, intelligent chief"; and there was an Uyfur xdn called Kü:l Bilge: Xa:n that is "his intelligence is (as big) as a lake” ('agluhu ka'l-fadir; prob. a false etymology, see 2 kül) and one says böğü: bilge: a/-'aqi! Kaş. 1 428; about zo o.o.: KB bilge is common 158, 191 (bógü:), 263, 1678 etc.: xiv Muh. insün "alim bi:lge: er Mel. ız, 14; Rif. 87: Xwar. xiv bilğe *wise, wise man” Qutb 32: Kom. xiv ditto CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv. bilge: ai-'alím İd. as: Osm. xiv and xv bilge “vise man” in several texts. Z"T'S 7 99; İI 142. Dis. V. BLGD bölük- Hap. leg.; Intrans. f. of ból-. Xak. xt ko:y bölükti: şara ”/-ğanam qufdt “he sheep göt into (separate) flocks” , also used of . any living creatures which get into (separate) flocks and assemble in them (ta”a/labat) Kaş. 11 118 (bölüke:r, bólükme:k). D bilge:d- Hap. leg.; Intrans. Den. V. fr. bilge: (not, as Kaş. says, bilig). Xak. xr “oğlan bilgetti: 'agala'l-sabi wa —fafana “the boy was intelligent (Hend.)'; originally bilge:dt:, but assimilated (udgfma). Know that (-a:dtı:)/-e:dti: is a Suff. (harf) which is attached to nouns connoting natural qualities (al-tabayı") and thus verbs are formed. For example “beauty” (al-/musn) is körk and if you (want to) say that he was beautiful you add the Suff. e:dti: and say körke:dti: hasuna, and al-'agl is bilig, then you say oğlan: bilge:dti: that is "the boy was intelligent ("aqa/a): then the -8:- melts away (tadub) and the -dis assimilated in the -t- and -tt- comes out of it Kaş. İ1 340 (bilge:tü:r, bilgetme:k; sfc,? in error). S belgüt- See belgürt-.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 385 
     
   
   
       TRIS. BLG D belgür- Intrans. Den. V. fr. belgü:; 'to appear, become manifest”. Survives in NW Kaz. bilgir- R IV 1768 and SW Osm. belir-. In other languages the same meaning is given by belgülen- (not an old word) or other words like kórün-. Uy£. vri ff. Man. (buds) tuğar belgürer 'sprout and appear' Wind. 11: Chr. U I 8, 8-9 (antaça:): Bud. oğlum savı edgü yavlak belgürgince 'whether my son's word appear good or bad” PP 63, 2-3; Uyğur eli el(lig(? ortun uluşta tüşüp belğürüp “arriving and appearing in the royal central country (or in the royal palace and country?) of the Uyğur realm' U.Sb./43, 3-4; 0.0. TT VII K.3 (ükün, spelt bhe:kuor-); X 486; Suv. 75, 1: Civ. TT I 62 (ençgülüğ): Xak. xi Eg. belgü:rdi: zahara'l-amr “the: affair became manifest” Kaş. // 172 (belgüre:r, belgürme:k); a.o. 7 387, ro: KB (if you hide musk) yıdı belgürer “its smell becomes manifest” 312; tüzünlük senindin kelir belgüre “goodness comes and becomes manifest from "Thee” 6638: xiv Muh.(?) zahara belgürRif. 112 (Mel. 28, 13 görün-), al-zuhir belgürmek 37, ış, 124: Çağ. xv ff. bélgür-(-ür, etc.) belür- Vel. 141 (quotn.); bélgür- ('with -6-”) Intrans. V. meaning ma'lüm şudar “to become known' (N.B. false etymology fr. bil-), the two Rmi authorities and Taàli'-i Harawi took it to be a duplicate (muradif) of bildür- meaning fahmanidan “to inform', and Nasiri followed them; they were in error San. 148v. 25 (quotns.): Xwar. xıv belgür“to appear, become manifest” Qut) 29; Nahc. 16, 16; bélgür- Qutb 30; belür- do. 32; belür- -İbölgür- MN 116, etc.: Kip. XIV belgür- zahara ld. 36: xv naba'a 'to emerge' bülğür- (si) Tuh. 37a. 7: Osm. xiv. belür- “to appcar” common till xvi 775 7/7 81; IV 93. D belgürt- Caus. f. of belgür-; "to make manifest, display'. Survives in NW Kar. L. belgirt- R IV 1:61:3; Kaz. bilgirt- 1:768; SW Osm. belürt-/belirt-. Türkü vırı ff. Man. taştırtı belgürt(t)iler “they displayed openly” (the inner . . . of the mind) M III 19, 12 (ii): Uyğ. vir ff. Man.-A M I 11,5 (1 aç-), 21, 3 (ii): Bud. tözümin uğuşumın belgürti sözleser “if (I) openlv declare my origin and clan" PP öz, 1-2; (my dear son) köğüzümdin belgürtmis ağzımdın tuğmiS 'brought to light from my breast and born from my mouth' U III 36, 21-2; o.o. UIV 16,169and 173; TT V 6, 34, etc.; X 365: Xak. xi KB (this world adorns itself and displays itself) 6tinmiş kelin teg köpül beléütür “as a bride adorned displays her inmost thoughts' 3540 (so the Fergana MS., the other two MSS. have yilkitür here and in 3567, but this verb does not exist; the Fergana MS. omits 3566-7, and they are prob. spurious): xin(?) Tef. belgürt- “to display, make manifest” 97: Çağ. xv ff. bélgürt(spelt) Caus. f.; »ma'lim hardan "to make known' (false etymology, see belgü:r-) Sar. 149r. 22 (quotn): Xwar. xiv belgürt-/ belgüt- “to show, display” Qutb 3o; bélgürt  341 do. 32: Kom. xiv belgirt- ditto CCG, Gr.: Osm. xiv to xvr belirt-/belürt- ditto in several texts 77 17 127; III 81; IV 93. Tris. BLG D?F bile:gü: N.I. fr. bile:-; “vhetstone”, S.i.m.m.l.g. (not NE, SC). Cf. kadrak, nijda:B. Xak. xı bile:gü: a/-misann *whetstone” Kaş. I 447: Çağ. xv ff. bilew (spelt) sang-i fasün 'whetstone' San. 149v. 9; a.o. 281 v. 3 (kadrak): Kom. xiv ditto bilev CCT; Gr.: Kip. xin al-misann bile:vvü: Hou. 23, 19: xiv bilewü a/-misann; "Tkm. bilegü: d. 35. D bilekliğ P.N./A. fr. bilek, “having a . wrist. N.o.a.b. Xak. xr kü: çlüğ bileklig kişi: insan gawwi dü sá'td “a man with strong vvrists” Kaş. İ 509. D biliglig P.N./A. fr. biliğ “possessing knowledge”, etc. Survives only(?) in NE Tuv. biliglig 'educated' (but this may be a recent reconstruction). Uyğ. viii ff. Man. biligligim tüzünüm “my wise one, my good one” M II 8, ır (1); (bilgel bitiglig satu tiktipiz “you have set up the ladder of wisdom' TT III 47: Bud. bilge biliglig *wise' Suv. 127, 19; 354, 2: Xak. xı al-'álimu'l-'agilu'l-hakim "a knowledgeable, intelligent, wise man' is called biliglig kişi: Kaş. 7 510; KB biliglig, ditto, is common 168, 254, etc.: xiv Muh. sáhib "ilm bi:li:gli:g (-8-s marked) Mel. s, 7; Rif. 76; al-'álim 6, 9; 55, 8; 77; 152 (mis-spelt bi:li:g); gühibu'l-ra'y *with sound judgement! bi:li:g (sic, in error so, 9; Rif. 145 ö:ge:): Çağ. xv ff, biliglig “alım wa dànimand (wise); also used for dànigmandi 'wisdom' (i.e. the A.N. in -lik is); they also use bilimlig in these senses Saz, 150r. 8: Xwar. xiv biligliğ "wise! Qutb 32: Kip. xv 'arif 'knowledgeable' biligli Tuh. 24b. 13. D biliklik Hap. leg.; A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. bilik, Xak. xı biliklik (misvocalized beliklik) kebe:z qutra mu'adda li'l-fatila "cotton prepared for (making into) a wick' Kaş. 7 510. D belgü:lüğ P.N./A. fr. belgü:; “manifest, significant, possessing distinguishing characteristics', etc. Türkü vir ff. erde:mi: belgü:Jü:g savlar 'statements regarding the virtues and distinguishing characteristics! (of various jewels and (precious) stones) Toy. 4 (ET Y II 7): Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A (they are) beş törlüğün belgülüg 'significant in five ways' M I 24, 8: Man. M 7II 26, 11 (i) (odğuratı:), TT IX 29 (bekiz): Bud. TT VI 296 (odBurati); VIII 24.16 (bekiz): Xak. xt belgülüg ne: a/-say'u ”/- badiyu' I-zàhir 'anything manifest and conspicuous” Kaş. J 528 (prov., spelt belgü:lüg); o.o. spelt belgü:lüg I 384, zo (bitig); 77 ao, ır, IJI 160. zo: KB biliğsiz karağu turur belğülüğ “the ignorant man is manifestly blind” 179, 271; 0.0. 2286 (ayıklığ), 2458 (ünlüg), etc.: xı (?) At. bili&amp; bildi boldi eren belgülüg 'a man acquires knowledge and becomes  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 386 
     
   
   
       342 conspicuous' 93; Tef. denn “manifest, obvious" belğülüğ 97: Çağ. xv ff, bélgülüg zamgüdür wa nişündür 'branded, conspicuous' Sarı, 149v. 24 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv belğülüğ “manifest, visible! Qutb 29. D bilge:lig Hap. leg.?; P.N./A. fr. bilge:. Türkü vir ff. bilge:li: é yanı:lma:z "a man who has a (wise) counsellor does not make mistakes! Tun. IIa. 11 (ET Y II 95). D belgürtme: Pass. Dev. N. fr. belgürt-; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. belgürtme: etöz translates the Bud. technical term rirmánakáya “the: manifestation. body”, one of the three bodies or natures of the Buddha TT VIII C.20 (spelt peeigürtme:), Suv. 38, 13 ff. (a long passage on this subject). D biligsiz Priv. N./A. fr. bilig; 'ignorant, devoid of understanding', etc. N.o.a.b. Türkü vir biliğsi:z xağan olurmiş “xoğarıs who did not understand (how to govern) ascended the throne' 7 E s, II E 6: virt ff, Man. biligsizin 'through i ignorance" Chuas. 73; 0.0. do. 1 zo (öğsüz), M I s, 4: UyB. vir ff. Man. TT III 31-2 (üdür-): * Bud. biligsiz biliğ "ignorance! Suv. 133, 18; 136, 16; a.o. do. 384, 21-2 (tümğge:): Xak. xı oğla:n biligsiz là "aql fi'l-sibvàn “boys lack intelligence” 7 119, 24; 386, 1; n.m.e.: KB biligsiz “ignorant” 179, 271 (belgü:lüg); a.o.0.: xim(?) Td. bi-ğayr "ilm. biliğsizin 102: xiv Muh. bila "ilm bili:gsüz Mel. 10, 14; Rif. 84; al-cahil "ignorant, foolish' bili:gsiz 55, 7; 152: X war. xiv. biligsiz ditto Qut? 32. D belgü:süz Priv. N./A. fr. belgü:; “vithout a sign, mark, etc.” A in NC Kır., Kzx. belgisiz. Uyg. viu ff. Bud. kórksüz tuyuğsuz belğüsüz "without form, perception or distinguishing characteristic! TT VI 460; a.o. Tig. 24b. a: Xak. xi kança: bartrr belğü:sü:z translated fa-là yudrd ild ay ciha tattacih "and one does not perceive in Pod direction it (the cloud) goes' Kaş. I 354, 26; n.m.e.: KB bu tüş teg tiviglik keçer belgüsüz “this life passes away like a dream, leaving no trace' 1396; common as a rhyme 1532, etc.: xın(?) '"Tef. bi'l-Kayb “secretly” belgüsüzün 97. D bilegüsüz Hap. leg.; Priv. N./A. fr. bile:gü:. Uyğ. vii Man. bilegüsüz yiti vacır "the thunderbolt (Sanskrit eajra) that is sharp without (being sharpened on) a whetstone” M II 7, 8; 8, 9 (1). D biligsizlik A.N. fr. biligsiz; “ignorance”, used to translate Sanskrit avidhyd, same meaning. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. biligsizlik karapğu üze könülüm örtülü “my mind being clouded by the darkness of ignorance! Suv. ror, 16-17: Xak. xı biligsizlik kéte:r adfa'i'l-safah "an nafsik "drive ignorance away from yourself” Kaş. 7 440, 20; n.m.e.: xırı(?) Tef. biligsizlik ditto 1:02: Xwar, xIv ditto Quib 32. TRIS. BLG Tris. V. BLGD bélegle:- Den. V. fr. béleg; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı ol mapa: beleğle:di: "he gave me a gift (hadiya) Kaş. III 340 (belegle:r, belegle: me:k); a.o. 7 307, 17 (misvocalized). D belgüle:- Den. V. fr. belgü:; "to make manifest' and the like. Survives in NW Kk., Kumyk, Nog. belgile-; Kaz. bilgele-. Cf. belgürt-. Xak. xı KD éllg aydı uktum sözün belgülep “the king said "I have understood your statement which (you) expounded”” 792. D bilgelen- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. bilge:. Xak. xı er bilgelendi: ta"dqala”l-racul 'the man pretended to be intelligent; the better word for this (al-ahsan fi hada) is bilimsindi: (mis-spelt bilgrimsindi:) Kaş, 111 202 (bi!gelenü:r, bilgelenme:k). D biligse:- Hap. leg.; Desid. Den. V. fr. bilig. Xak. xı oğla:n biligse:di: "the boy longcd to be intelligent! (a/-"aq?) Kaş. 111 334 (biligse:r, biligse:me:k). Dis. V. BLLD bé:lel- Pass. f. of 2 be:le:-, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı er terke: bö:leldi: “the man was bathed (ğariqa) in sweat'; and one says oğla:n be:leldi: "the boy as fastened (şudda) in the cradle'; the first is Intrans. (/azim), and the second Pass. (mufta'add); and one says at ka:nka: bé:leldi: "the horse was bathed in blood', that is because of the great slaughtering Kaş. III 196 (bé:lelü:r, bé:lelme:k). D bilil- Pass. f. of bil-; n.o.a.b. Cf. bilin-. Uyğ. vitr ff, Bud, (immediately after he had left) özin kentü bililür “the matter became known spontaneously! FTücn-ts, 2097: Kip. xv (in a grammatical section) bilildi ki biy keledir “it becamc known that the beg was coming' Tul. 48b. 5. D bulul- Pass. f. of bul- ; n.o.a.b. Cf. bulun-. Uyf. virt ff. Bud. Sanskrit srámanyaphalam adhigatàm 'the fruits of asceticism are obtained! toyın tüsi bululmuş (spelt p-) erür TT VIII G.48. Tris. V. BLLD bala:la:- Den. V. fr. bala:; 'to give birth to or produce young”. S.i.s.m.l. R IV 1492. Xak. xi (in a grammatical section) “a nestling' is called bala:; and if you wish to say that a bird hes hatched out young (afraxa) you say kuş bala:la:dı: Kaş. 111 92, 1; n.m.e.: Çağ. xv ff. balala-(-p, etc.) Aug ce hayedn yavrula“of birds and animals, to produce young” Vel. 132 (quotns.): balala- bara gudágtan wa tatedlud hardan "umüm hayscánát a cántearán “to produce or give birth to young, a general term for animals and living creatures' Sam. 126v. 5 (quotns.): Kip. xv ofraxa balalaTuh. 7a. 2. Tris. BLM S bulamaç/bulamak- See bulğama:,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 387 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. BLN(Tris. V. BLMD?F bilemsin- Hap. leg.; Refl. Simulative Den. V. fr. *bilem, N.S.A. fr. bile:-. Xak. xt ol bice:k bilemsindi: “he pretended to whet ( yasunn) the knife without actually doing so” Kaş. II 260, 1; 262, 9 (in a grammatical section); n.m.e. D bilimsin- Hap. leg.; Refl. Simulative Den. V. fr. bilim (see bilig): Xak. xi «ol t$ bilimsindi: “he pretended to know (ya'rif) about the matter” Kaş. II 262, 13 (in a grammatical section); a.o. 7/7 202 (bilgelen-); n.m.e. v Dis. BLN belip 'panic, terror”. Survives in NE Alt., "Tel. pelin “a simulated disease! R IV 1244 and SW Tkm. belip “repugnance” and, until recently, Osm. belin “terror” elsewhere displaced by der. £s of kork- or ürk-. Uyğ. vin ft. (Bud. belin teg in U 77 25, 16 is a misreading of belipdek, q.v.): Civ. er quvvvvatı (so read for kut:i) belin suv quwwati terlp "the strength of a man is (his power to inspire) panic, the strength of water is its depth” TT VII 42, 4: Xak. xı belin “the panic (al-hazáhiz) which breaks out in a tribe on the approach of their enemy” Kaş. III 370 (cf. bulğa:k). bula:n “the elk'. Survives in NE several dialects pulan R IV 1374; Khak. ditto; Tuv. bulan, NC Kır., Kzx bulan all meaning “elk”, SC Uzb. bulan a folk-lore word for “a wild horse” Bor. 89; NW Tat. bolan 'stag'. Cuv. pálan Ash. X 105 normally means 'stag' but in some dialects 'elk'.. See SöcieröaR, p. 141, Doerfer H 810. Xak. xı bula:n “the name of a large wild animal which is hunted; it is in the Kipçak country. [t has one horn in the form of a vessel (a/-hubb) with a hollow top like a roof (a/-sanıd”) in which snow and water collect; the female knecls down to let the male drink out of her horn, and the male kneels down to let the female drink out of his horn' Kaş. I 413 (obviously 'elk'): Kip. xv yahmür *wild ass, onager' (sic) bulan Tuh. 39a. 7 (iv bulnak (v.l. bulanak) yar İd. 35 is perhaps a Dim. f. of this word). F bulan Hap. leg.; l.-w. fr. Chinese pu lang 'verandah' (Giles, 9,485 6,778). Cf. yaylik. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. (in instructions for building a house; at the front and the back and on both sides) bulay “verandahs” TT VI 85. D bulun *prisonet'; Intrans. Dev. N. fr. bul-, but the semantic connection is not very close. N.o.a.b. Cf. tutğun. Türkü vir oğlun kisi:si:n bulun kiflıp) “making his children and wife prisoners” İx. 5; a.o. do. 22(?): Uyğ. vir ff. Man. sizin men sizinte bulun boltum “1 am yours; I have become your prisoner' M III 24, 10-11 (i); a.o. do. 25, 9 (iii): Xak. xı bulun al-axid toa'l-asir 'captive, prisoner” Kaş. I 399 (verse); o.o. II 307, 7 (boşat-), III 63, 21 (yul-); 85, zo (yulun-); 97, 12. (yultur-): KB bulun 'prisoner' is | 343 common 1438, 2388, 2723 (umdu:ct:), 3636 (yul-), etc.: X war. xiv bulun “prisoner" Qutb 36; Nahc. 70, 6; 82, 15; 117, 4; 161, 4 (ak-): Tkm. xiv bulun al-Zára "a raid'; in Kip. al-barru' l-muttagil bi'l-cazira səa"l-ğanima wa'l-kasb "land adjacent to an island; booty, gain' İd. 36: Osm. xiv bulun in four texts TTS I 123; İl 175. bulun “corner, angle'; and, in the early period only, “a cardinal point, a quarter of the world'. Survives in NE several dialects R 7 1375 (p-); Khak. (p-); Tuv.; SE Türki; NC Kir. "Türkü vit tört bulun kop yağı: ermiş "the four quarters of the world were all hostile' IE2,II E 3; tórt bulupdakı: bodunığ 7 E 2, II E 3, etc.: vin ff. tört bulu:ptakı: edgü:si: uyu:rt: "his good and capable men in all directions' IrkB 28 (the reading bulu:pin in do. 13 is an error for bulu:pan): Man. tört bulupu£ (spelt bulunugug) yarutir "he illuminates the four quarters! Chuas. 11-12: Yen. tört bulupka: Mal. 31, 3: Uyğ. vini ff. Chr. U I 7, 16-17 (beşik), Bud. Sanskrit difam "point of the compass, quarter' bulun yıpa:k TT VIII A.1; o.o. of this phr. U T ız, 6-7; IV 20, 251; in the Tantric text TT VII 15 bulup means “a segment of the sky" and yıpak "direction, compass bearing” (see note thereon, p. 68); tört bulup PP 7, 2; o.o. U III ös, 4-s (ii) (sepir), etc.: Civ. ópdün kündün bulunda . . . kédin tağdın bulupda “in the east and south quarters . . . in the vvest and north quarters” TT 7 142-3 (bulun in H T 19 is the (Chinese?) name of some drug and not connected with this word): xiv Chin.-Usg. Dict. “the four quarters” tört bulun Ligeti 146 R IV 1375: Xak. xı bulun al-záwiya “a corner” Kaş. III 371: xm(?) Tef. bulup 'corner' rro (in 108 a phr. transcribed bir bólüp . . . bir bölün explained as ba'di .. . ba'di 'some (believed) and some (did not)' is prob. amisreading of bólük . .. bólük): Xwar. xın(?) kündünki bulupda “in the southern quarter' Of. 295: Kom. xiv “corner” bulup CCG; Gr. D bulunç Dev. N. fr. bulun- ; 'gain, acquisition”, and the like. Pec. to Uy&amp;. Uy. vit1 ff. Man.-A (whoever endures suffering for the sake of his body) anan utlis1 etózke ölmek artamak bulunçı ol “his reward is the acquisition of death and decay for his body” M III 11, 12-14 (ii): Bud. nom bulungipa teğürüp 'achieving acquisition of the doctrine" Suv. 154, 8; olo, do. 195, 20; 596, 8; TT VIII E.3 (alınçlığ), 9 (uçuzla:-), ro: Civ. bulunc [gap] TT VI 35, 70. Dis. V. BLND bilin- Refl. f. of bil-, often used as Pass.; “to know oneself, to know one's own (something Zcc.); to be knovn”. S.i.a.m.l.g., usually as Pass. and with some extended meanings. Türkü vı ff, Yen. altı: yaşımta: kan adirdim bilinmedim “in my sixth year I was parted from my father, I did not know him” Mal. 32, 16: Uyğ. viii ff. Man, bilinmedin 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 388 
     
   
   
      344 DIS. V. BLN(in a damaged passage) 'inadvertently(?)' TT III 49: Bud. kentü bilingey erinç “he will surely know. for himself? (without being told) PP 10, 1; bilin- is commonest in the sense of “to realize that (one has sinned)', e.g. yazukumnt bilinürbiz 'we realize that we have sinned' TT IV 8,64-5; 0.0. Suv. 137, 23 (agin-); r40, 1 and rr (kakin-) and many in TT IV, U IH 85, 17 ff: Xak. xı er rsgin bilindi: 'the man knew and understood ('arafa wa fatina) his (own) business'; and one says er ya:zukin bilindi: 'the man acknowledged (r'tarafa) his sin” Kaş. HI 143 (bilinü:r, bilinme:k), bilinü:r 'urifa "it is known' II 23, 18; ao. 228, ro: KB bilinğü muni “he must know this” 727 ; a.o. 969: xiri(?) At. bilig birle bilnür tórütgen idi 'the Lord, the Creator, is known by wisdom' 121; 7vf. bilin- “to be known' 102: Çağ. xvf. bilin- dönüsta şudan “to be known' San, 148v. 6 (quotns.): Xwar. Xiv ditto Quf? 33: Kom. xiv bilinmegen "not known (hitherto)! CCG; Gr. D bulun- Refl. f. of bul-; usually in Pass. sense “to be found”. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. with several meanings including “to be found' and, simply, 'to be' (cf. French se trouver). Uyg. vur ff. Civ. senin satmışın yer bulunup 'finding the land which you had sold” USSp. 24, 4-5 (dubious, this text is unsatisfactory); Xak. xı yitük bulundu: “the stray (etc.) was found” (zerecida) Kaş. II 143 (bulnu:r, bulunma:k); bulnur yücad 7/1 374, 6: KB bayusa tileki bulunsa tükel “if a man grows rich and acquires all that he desires! 1423; 0.0. 2066, 2332, 4235, etc: Çağ. xv ff. bulun-(-sa) olun- "to he” Vel. 154; bulun- bzdan wa mawcüd ca yüft sudan "to be; to he found" (Hend.) Sas. 139v. 7 (Rümi quotn.): Xwar. xiv. bulun- “to find for oncself; to be(?)” Qur 36 (Zaj. transcribes bolun-). D bulna:- Den. V. fr. bulun, “to capture, take (someone cc.) prisoner”, N.o.a.b. Xak. xi er yağını: bulna:dı: (the man captured the enemy” Kaş. 111 301 (bulna:r, bulna:ma:k), o.o. / 6o, 4 (özle:s), II 153, 8, (mistranslated. zeacada “to find”): KB köpül bulnasa boldı erksiz kişi *when his mind is captured, a man ceases to be his own master” 3855: Xwar. xiv bulna- “to take prisoner' Qutb 37. fa-usira "he ordered that he should be captured, so he was captured” Kaş, 77 350 (bulnatu:r, bulnatma:k). (Tris. BLN D belipci: N.Ag. fr. belip; survives only(?) in NE Dar. pilipdzi R IV 1:340. Xak. xı (after belip) and “a man who is scared” (al-nafür) of something is called belipci: kişi: Kaş. Hİ 371; n.m.e. D bilinçek Hap. leg.; Conc. N. fr. bilin-. Xak. xı bilinçek ne:y “the word for anything  stolen. which is subsequently found in the possession of the thief or someone else'; hence one says bilincek bildi: 'he recognized and found ('arafa tva teactída) the stolen object in the hands of the thief” Kaş. 7 510. D bulunçsuz Priv. N./A. fr. bulunc; 'undiscoverable, unattainable', and the like. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vii ff. Man. (my God . . .) bulunçsuzum “my unattainable one” M 77 8, 18: Bud. bulungusuz (sic) çıntamanı ertini “the unattainable jewel cintámani! PP 14, 7; bulunçsuz occurs several times in 77 VI, see p. 65, note 140. D belipdek Den. N./A.S. fr. bellp; 'terrifying, frightful?”. N.o.a.b. Uyf. vii ff. Bud. belipdek Hilimbi yek “the frightful demon Hidimba" U 77 25, 16:17; belipdek yavlak ün “a terrifving evil sound” U IV 20, 235; a.o. Suv. 188, rz. D bulupsuz Hap. leg. ; Priv. N./A. fr. bulun, 'without (remote) corners”, Uy£. viii ff. Bud. TT VI 427 (buçğaksız). Tris. V. BLND beliple:- Den. V. fr. belip; 'to be panicstricken, terrified', and the like. Survives only(?) in NE Alt., Te. pelipde- “to suffer from an imaginary disease! R IV 1244 and SW Osm. beliple-/belinle- “to be startled, to wake with a start”. Türkü viti ff, Man. belipledi anığ korkuti (sic) “he was panicstricken and very frightened' M 7 6, 9: Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. Sanskrit eyambitatvam me(?) “my terror” (?) pe:liple:me:k me:nip TT VII C.15; 0.0. U II 29, 17 ctc. (ürk-); U IV 38, 1375 Sut. s, ro (korkup beliglep); 141. 7: Xak. xı er belinle:di: “the man woke with a start (zcafaba) because he had been terrified" (bi-fasa" asábahu); also used of any animal when it is frightened (faza'a) of something suddenly and shies away and is scared (nafara) Kaş. III 409 (beligle:r, beliple:me:k): KB beliplep odundi “he woke with a start” 4963; 3.0. 4950: Xwar. xiv beliple- ditto Qutb 26 (mis-spelt baltpla-). Dis. V. BLRS belür- See belgür-. "Tris. BLR E bilerzüv See bile:zük. Dis. V. BLSD bilsik- Emphatic (?) Pass. f. of bil-; “to he known'. N.o.a.b. UyR. vr ff. Bud. Sanskrit jRátapurusgo 'a well-known man” bilsikmis kişi ya:guk TT VIII F7; Xak. xi anıp yasut r:şı: bilsikti: “his private affairs became known' ('urtfa) Kaş. TI 228 (bilsike:r, bilsikme:k); a.o. 7 21, ız. Dis, BLS D bilis Dev. N. (with some connotation of mutuality) fr. bil-; “an acquaintance, friend”.   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 389 
     
   
   
     DIS S.i.s.m.l. in this sense, and sometimes more generally for 'knowledge' and the like. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. yathá samstutikayd “like praisers' (perhaps taken to mean “like those who praise you”) kaltı: bilişipizle:rçe: TT VIII 4.3 (spelt piis); etaj jfiátvà yathübhütam "as if this man was known (to you)'(?) anı biliş (gap) do. E.s: Xak. xi biliş al-ma'rifa twahta hdühund şifa wa laysa maşdar 'acquaintance'; (al-ma'rifa) is here a common Noun and not an Infinitive Kaş. I 367 (i.e. 'acquaintance', not 'knowledge"); -ş is a Suff. in such words as bilis //-man yakün ma'ahu ma'rifa "for one with whom you are acquainted; l1 12, ış: KB (a new-comer always meets with difficulties) bilişi yok erse “if he has no acquaintances' 492; kişike kerek teğme yerde bilis “a man needs acquaintances everywhere! 497; 0.0. 524, 2251: Xwar. xiv bilis ditto Qutb 33: Kip. xırı (in a list of various kinds of people) al-ma'rifa bilis Hou. 32, 9: xiv ditto Bul. 9, 5: Osm. xivff. bilis “an acquaintance'; c.i.a.p. TT'S I 100; IJ 144; İİİ 94; IV 105. D bolus “help, helper'; Dev. N. fr. bol-; the semantic connection is tenuous, but cf. bolug-. S.is.m.l Xak. xı bolus al-i'àna bi'l-kalàm *helping with words'; hence one says ol mana: bolus kildi: a'ünani b?l-halüm Kaş. I 367: Kom. xiv 'helper' bolus CCG; Gr.: Kip. xv in a grammatical section under istiát 'calling for help” the recommended phr. are ma: (fr. mana:) bolusupuz/bolus eyleyipiz/madad eyleyipiz Tuh. 85b. 6. D buluş Dev. N. fr. bul-; survives in SW Osm. in such meanings as 'invention, discovery", Xak. xı bulus al-manfa'atu'llati yaciduhd”l-racul "ala f"l fa"alahu “the advantage which a man gets from something that he has done” Kaş. 1 367. Dis. V. BLŞD bilis- Recip. f. of bil-, "to know one another; to be acquainted with (someone, birle:).” S..m.m.lg. Xak. ol mepin birle: bilişdi: ta'árafa ma'i “he was acquainted with me” Kaş. II 107 (bilişü:r, biligme:k); o.o. II yı, iy, 188, ig (verse, Object in Dat.): KB bilişmez kişiler karağu sanı “people without acquaintances are like blind men” 493; bilişti yeme ol kişiler bile "he became acquainted, too, with people" 499; a.O. 2251: Xwar. xiv bilüs- (sic) “to be acquainted with (someone, birle)' Qutb 33. D bolus- Recip. f. of bol-; lit. 'to come together', but usually “to help (someone Dat... S.i.s.m.l. in NE, SE, NW in one or both meanings. Xak. xi ol mapa: boluşdr: ta"aşşaba İl wa arád 1 hatwà'i wa şücara li-acali ma" man yunátoini "he allied himself to me and desired my friendship and fought on my side against anyone who rose up against me” Kaş. II 108 (bolusu:r, bolugma:k); a.o. II rro, 3 (tüpür): Çağ. xv ff. boluş- Recip. f; ba-ham şudan wa büdan “to come or be together! Sam. 139v. 11: Kip. xur dáfara . BMG 345 müna”l-mudafira “to help” boluş- Hou. 41, 19: xiv bolustu: a'ána “to help”, bolus a'ím tea sd"id "help (me)! ; the origin is bol meaning sir 'become', fr. boldı: sgára, and the -sindicates reciprocal action, that is sáyara; and it was transferred (nugila) to the meaning sd'ada; the essence of the transfer of meaning is that whoever is with you makes it his business to give you his help İd. 35: xv Tuh. 85b. 6 (bolus). D bulus- Co-op. and Recip. f. of bul-; 'to find (something Acc.) together; to find one another', and the like. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. Türkü vir ff. Toy. III. 2v. 3-5 (1 a:): Xak. xr ola:r ikki: bir bi:rig bulusti: “those two found (tcacada) one another” Kaş. I1 107 (buluşu:r, buluşma:k): Çağ. xvffT. buluş- Recip. f.; ham-digar-rd dar-yáftan “to find one another” San. 139v. 11: Kip. xiv. buluş- ittafaqa “to make an agreement with one another” /d. 35. Tris. BLZ ?C bile:zük "bracelet”, Radloff's suggestion that this is a crasis of bilek yüzük is plausible; the connection with bilek is obvious, and the word is hard to explain in any other way. "The existence of forms with medial -r- is disconcerting, but they are all late (the Uyğ. occurrence is in an xvii MS.) and are prob. Sec. f.s. Survives in SE Türki bilezük: NC Kir. bilerik (sc); Kzx. bilezik: SC Sart bilerzik R IV. 1763; Uzb. bilaguzuk (sic); NW bilezik (Kaz. bélezék); SW Az. bilerzik; Osm., Tkm. bilezik. In some modern languages 'bracelet' is represented by other der. f.s of bilek, NE Khak. pilektes; "Puv. bilekte:s; NC "lob. bileklik R IV 1762. See Doerfer 11 765. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. (people find gold ore and smelt and refine it; and with the gold manufacture) bilerzükte (text bilerzüvte) ul[ati] esripü adruk adruk etigleriğ “various particoloured ornaments, bracelets and the like” Suv. 71, 18-19: Xak. x1 bile:zük a/-mi'sam "bracelet” Kaş. 1 518, rz etc. (kavir-); n.m.e.: xin(?) Tef. bilezük “bracelet” 101: xiv Muh. al-siteár “bracelet” bi:le:zü:k Mel. 53, 6; Rif. 150 (adding a/-xalxdl 'anklet" aya:k bi:le:züki:): Çağ. xv ff. bilerzik (sic) "a bracelet (dastira) that women wear on their arms” in Pe. dast-barancan, in Ar. simdr San. 149v. 2: Kip. xttl a/-sitcar bile:zü:k Hou. 17, zo: xiv bilezik ditto İd. 36: xv ditto bile:zük Kav. 64, 12; Tuh. 19b. 6: Osm. xv bilezik in a phr. TT'S III 94. Tris. V. BLZD bile:züklen- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. bile:zük. Xak. xı İşle:r bile:züklendi: "the woman wore a bracelet! (a/-sizodr) Kaş. III 205 (bile:züklenü:r, bile:züklenme:k). Dis. BMĞ F bamuk “cotton”, ultimately der. fr. Greek bombux “silk worm', but prob. acquired through some Middle Iranian language, cf. Pe. panba. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 390 
     
   
   
     346 DIS S.i.s.m.L., often much distorted and meaning “bird”s down' as well as 'cotton', e.g. NC Kir., Kzx. mamik/mamuk; SC Uzb. momik; NW mamik/mamuk; SW Az. pambığ, Osm. pamuk; Tkm. pa:mık. Oğuz xi bamuk (?p-) a/-qutn 'cotton' I 380; o.o. ba:muk (?p-) //İ 346 (uruğla:-, not described as Oğuz): xiv Muh. naddáf 'cotton carder' ma:muğ ça:lıçı: Mel, 59, 1; ba:zmuk ça:lıçı: Rif. 158; al-qutn mamu£ 67, 12; (and al-hallac cotton dresser pambu:kçı: 57,3): Çağ. xv ff. mamuğ panba "cotton" Vel. 381 (quotn.); mamuğ/mamuk panba San. 318v. 18 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv mamuk ditto Quib 109: Kip. xiv mamuk ai-qutn; Tkm. panpuk (with p- -p-) /d. 88. Mon. BN F 1 ban “a wooden writing tablet", l.-w. fr. Chinese pan (Giles 8,588 or 8,589); n.o.a.b. Uyf. vin ff. Bud. (write it on (birch) bark or (palm) lcaf, or paper or linen or) banda U I7 70, 5 (ii). F 2 ban “en thousand'; 1.-vv, fr. Chinese tan (Giles 12,486; pronounced something like mban in medieval NW Chinese). N.o.a.b. Uyğ. virt ff. Civ. (the murmur of pure water echoes) tümen ban yérde 'in ten thousand thousand places! TT 7 134-5; (you will meet people) mip bança ırak barmis "who have gone thousands and thousands (of miles) avvay” VII 30, 7. *3 ba:n See ma:n. 1 bap Hap. leg.; an onomatopoeic. "The combination b- - is very unusual in Xak., and this might be a l.-w. fr. Pe. büng 'noise, clamour”, Xak. xı oğla:n bar sığta:dı: "the boy sobbed' (bad buka") Kaş. İİ 355. x2 ban Sec map. ben the ist Pers. Sing. Pron. “I”. C.i.a.p.a.l. "The vocalization is irregular, the Dat. having apparently always had back vowels. in the other cases the vowel was almost certainly -e-, but spellings with -é- are fairly common in some languages; it is possible that in some languages, as in the case of sen, the vowel became -é- when the word was used as a Predicate. The word was originally ben, but except in the Oğuz dialects became men by assimilation at an early date; it is one of the criteria for differentiating betwecn "Türkü viit ff. Yen., and O, Kir. Ben now survives only in SW Osm,, in all other languages, including SW Az., 'Tkm., it is now men, "The original sound is preserved ir" Cuv. epfepé 'I Ash. III 20-1, but here too the base of the oblique cases is man do. VIII 190. Türkü vti ben (beni:, benip, bana:) is common, and the only form in T, and perhaps occurs in Ix. 27 (damaged); men (menin) is the only form in I and H: vun ff. men is common in IrkB; mapa: Toyok İVv. 3 (ETY II 180): Man. mén (Predicate) Chuas. 135-6: Yen. men Mal. 28, 7; 29, 1; 32, 7: Uyğ. vir ben occurs . BMG seven times in Su. and men once: ix men three times in Suci: vi ff. Man.-A, Man. Bud., Civ. men, often spelt men, möni, menip, maga are common and méndide (sic?) occurs once in U IV 48, 86 as Ahl.: O. Kir. ix ff. ben is common in Mal. (excluding the Türkü inscriptions); bana: do. 12, rr: Xak. xr men Pron. (frarf) meaning 'I' in the language of the Turks Kaş. 7 340; men, meni: (mén: twice in error?) menin, mana:, mende:, menden/mendin are all common: xtii(?) At. men, occasionally men, and oblique cases of both are common; Tt. the forms arc men, meni, menip/menim, mende, mendin zər: xiv Muh. the Turks of our country (i.e. Azerbayjan) change m- into b-, e.g. for “1”, men, they say ben Mal. 8, 2; Rif. 80; a.0.0.: Çağ. xv ff. the 1st Pers. Sing. Pron. is mén, Pe. man, Ar. and; they say mén men anam '| am I', olğaymen Pi-sateari *I shall he” San. rsr. 26: Oğuz, Kip., Suwárin xt convert every initial m- into b-, e.g. the 'Turks say men bardim and those tribes (al-firaq) say ben bardım Kaş. T ar, 15; ben Pron. (harf) meaning 'D; one says ben bardım in Oğuz, and the Turks say men bardım 7 339: Xvvar. xın both ben and men with corresponding oblique cases occur "A/Z 13-14: Xiv men Qutb 110, MN passim: Kom. xiv men with oblique cases is common CCI, CCG, Gr. 163: Kip. xiu men How. şo, 9; menüm s2, ro, maşa: sz, 15: xiv b- and moften interchange; for men aná they say ben in Tkm. /d. 36; men 'I' do. 88; ma't menim bile Bul. 14, 13; "İndi menüm katinda: do. ıq, 15; Hi benim][beni: do. 15, 4; and men do. 16, 6: xv men . Kav. 21, 1; oblique cases do. az, 6-8; aş, 6-14; in. Tuh. the forms, which occur scveral times, are men, meni, menden, ma'a: Osm. xvrr (after Caf. entry) the. Rrmi spell this Pron. with b- but use -m as a Suff. they say benem for manam and benim sultánım for “my Sultan! San. 15r. 27. 1 bey “a mole on the face”, S.i.a.m.l.g., as bep in SW Osm. and mey elsewhere. Uyğ. viri ft. Civ. men “mole” is common in TT VII, 37 (USp. 42); Xak. xı mey al-xál fi'l-wach "a mole on the face” Kaş. III 359 (verse): xtti(?) At. ya olar kızıl ey bu epke mep-e (glossed ber in one MS.) “or they are the red check and he the mole on the cheek" 26; Tef. men “mole" 222: xıv Muh. al-xàl mep Mel. 46, 9; Rif. 140: Çağ. xv ff. méy (spelt) xal San. 321 v. 4 (quotn.): Xwar. xi(?) mer “mole” Og. 58: xiv ditto Quib rro, rrr (men), MN 6, etc.: Kip. xiv mep (-5, marked) al-xal Id. 89: xv ditto Tuh. 14a. 4. : x2 beg See 1 mey. bp “a thousand”, A 1.-vv, in Mong. as mivğan (Haenisch 109) which confirms the fact that the vowel was originally -1- although it became -iata very early date in all languages. S.i.a.m.l.g., in SW Osm. bip; in Cuv. pin Ash. IX 215; elsewhere mig or the like, "Tkm. müp. 'Türkü vır bin 7 16, 18; bip 77 S 1; T 14: vit ff. (a hundred Spiraca) mir boltr: 'became 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 391 
     
   
   
     MON. V. BNa thousand' /rkB 32; a.o. Tun. HIa. 4 (ETY TI ga): (Man. minliğ tümenliğ kuvrağ *'communities of a thousand and ten thousand (people)! TT 71 8, $7): Uyğ. virt btp certainly occurs in Şu, E o, 11; N. 6 and prob. S 2; the rcading bip in the much damaged line between N and W is very dubious: viti ff. Bud., Civ. min is fairly common: O, Kir. ix ff. bin certainly occurs in Mal. 3, 5; 42, 2 and bip in 45, 8; other supposed occurrences are dubious or errors; Xak. xı min “a thousand' Kaş. 7/1 360 (prov.); a.o.o.: KB min is common rrr, 112, 284-5, etc.: xiri(?) 4t. min is common 8, 36, etc.; Tef. mip 224: xiv Myh. "a thousand" is mi: in Turkistan and bi:p in “our country” Mel. 8, 2; Rif. 8o (cf. ben); a.o. 82, 1; 187: Çağ. xv ff. min bip "adad ma'nàsina Vel. 384, min “thousand”, in Ar. alif San. 321v. $ (quotn.): Xwar. xiv mip Qutb 111; MN 5o etc.: Kom. xiv min CCG; Gr.: Kip. xin mi:n Hou. 22, 19: xiv min /4. 88; bin Bul. ış, 1: Xv min Kas, 38, 20; mip Kav. 6ob. 13: Osm. xiv ff. big c.i.a.p.: xviri bip (spelt) in Rümi “a thousand”, in Çağ. pronounced min San. 150r. 26. F bun l.-w. from Sogdian pwn 'basis, foundation'; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vtrr ff. Civ. kün tepri bun sani 'the basic number of the sun' TT VII 9, 13-14; a.o. do. 18. VU boy prob. a mere onomatopoeic; it is hard to explain the combination of b- and -p in Xak. in any other way. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı al-raculu'l-ca/zariyu'l-'abl "a thickset, big man” is called bop kişi:: bon abbreviation (qaşr) of (VU) şaban al-mirzabba 'sledgchammer'; and one says of the sound of a heavy object falling to the ground bor) etti: Kaş. II 354. bun “grief, sorrow, melancholy', and the like. S.1.a.m.l.g.; in SW only(?) in xx Anat. bun SDD 231. Türkü vir élte: bun yok 'therc is no distress in the realm' 7 S 3; a.o. do. 8; ne bup:: bar erteçi: ermiş 'what (cause for) distress would he have had?” T. 57: vı ff. Man. (if we have broken these commandments) mupumuz takımız tegip "because distress or compulsion(?) affected us” Chuas. zoo, mun üçün “because of (our) distress” do. 230; 8.0. 251: Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. ne muy tak bolti "what irresistible compulsion came into existence ?” (so that you had to send your son on a dangerous journey) PP 26, 1 (this seems the best translation here); a.o. Suv. 7, 11 (opar-): Xak. xi mup ta:ğ dirsu'l-hulum. wisdom tooth'; hence one says mun ta:ğ ündi: “the wisdom tooth has erupted' (this looks like the same phr. used metaph.): mun al-milna “distress, sorrow' Kaş. III 360 (prov.); (do not cross the Kara: Yalğa: pass) kara: mu:n (sic) kelmekince: 'unless an overwhelming calamity (al-dáhiyatu'l-iuzlima) approaches! II 33, 2; two 0.0.: K B (all suffering mortals were created by Him) mugi yok idi “he Lord who has no sufferings" 5; İsiznip künipe min artar mupt “the sorrows of the wicked man increase at the rate of a thousand a day” .347 349; mupum ham takım 39:; o.o. 3503, 3854: xırı(?) At. 3o (eğir-): Çağ. xv ff. mug balü ve mihna . . . buylu ve mihnatlu 'misfortune, sorrow . . . unhappy, sorrowful' Vel. 386; mun (spelt) dard wa ğam 'sorrow, grief? San. 320v. 22 (quotn.): Kip. xiv bun ('with back vowels') al-raculu'l-£imr "ignorant man, simpleton' /d. 37; mun (-9 marked) a/-hdca toa'l-darüra "need, distress” İd, 88: xv balid 'silly, foolish” (VU) mun Tuh. 7a. 9; sdc ma mugaffal 'simpleton' (VU) mur) do. 19a. 1 (if it were not for the statement “vith back vowels' all these words except one might be taken to belong to 1 bü:n): Osm. xiv to xvii bun 'pain, distress", common till xvi TT'S I 123; 11 175; İİİ 116; IV 131. VU 1 bü:n 'defect' and the like. In this meaning survives onlv(?) in NC Kir. mün; Kzx. min. It seems prob., however, that the Osm. word bón 'simpleton', in xIX spelt, or misspelt, bóp, is the same word with a rather different meaning, and the long vowel in Kaş. points more to -6:- than -ü:-. Uyf. viri ff. Man.-A M I əş, 32 (baga:): Bud. Suv. 135, s-7 etc. (kadağ): Xak. xı mü:n al-dà' toa'L-'ayb 'illness, defect'; one says mü:n(süz) kişi: al-raculu'l-salimu'l-qalb “a sound-hearted man” Kaş. III 140 (prov. containing mü:nsüz which should obviously be restored in -the preceding phr.): KB mün is common in antithesis to erdem; e.g. the king said 'I have grasped these virtues of yours (erdemlerin), now tell me münür bar mu have you any defects ?? 683; tiriğlikni mün kil “live to the full” 232; o.o. 533, 686 (érsellik), 720, 968: xiv Muh. al-'ayb mü:n in Turkistan, bü:n in *our country' Mel. 8, 2; Rif. 8o (cf. ben); 8.0. 52, 5; 148: Kip, (?T km.) xiv bün a/-'ayb İd. 36 (and see bug): Osm. xivíf. bón 'simpleton, idiot”, c.i.a.p. 77TS 7 118; II 108; Ill 112; IV 126. 2 bün 'soup, broth'. Survives only(?) in NE, several dialects min/mün R IV 2152, 2221; Khak., T'uv. mün; most modern languages use Pe. surba often changed to çorba. Uy£. viti ff. Civ. mün birle içğü ol “he should drink it with soup” H 7 111-2; 0o.o. do. 43; İİ 32, 17: Xak. xı mün a/-maraga 'soup, broth'; I have heard a Yağma: say mün keldür 'bring the soup', and it was brought with noodles (b”7-itriya), because that is what they meant. In writing the words (in this section) in Turkish script (i.e. Uyğur) it is necessary to insert a vowel letter (Aarfa'l-layn), but in speaking they are pronounced as 1 have written them (ie. with a short vowel) Kaş. 1 340; about a dozen o.o., usually spelt mü:n: Oğuz, Kip., Suvvarin xı the "l'urks call “soup” mün; and this group (a/-fabaqa) call it bü:n Kaş. 1 31, 18: xiv. Muh.(?) al-surbà 'soup' mü:n Rif. 165 (only): Kap. xii al-maraqa müyin (sic; also called su:rba: Pe. word) Hou. 15, 15. Mon. V. BND 1 ba:n- Refl. f., sometimes used as Pass., of ba:-; "to bind on oneself; to be bound". 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 392 
     
   
   
      348 MON. V. BNN.o.a.b. O. Kir. ix ff. Mal. 3, 2 etc. (k€:ş): Xak. xi ko:y bandı: “the sheep was bound' (rubita); also used of anything that is tied with a rope (sudda bi-twatàq); the -n- was changed from -1- Kaş. II 27 (ba:nar (?sic, the second consonant carries no vowel sign and has one dot above and two below), banma:k); er tulum mandi: labisa'l-raculu'l-siláh “the man put on weapons! do. II 3o (see 2 ban-): Xwar. xiv ban- “to bind (something Aec.) on oneself" Qutb 26. 2 ban- “to dip (something Aec., in a liquid, etc., Dat.)'. Survives as man- in SE Türki R IV 2015 (only) and NW Kaz., and as ban- in SW Osm. "There is a cognate word mal-, with the same meaning, in SE Türki, Share, Tarring, and NC Kir, Kzx. Xak. xt... and one says er etme:k sirke:ke: mandi: 'the man dipped (şabağa) the bread in vinegar and seasoned (f'tadama) it with it”, also used of anything that is dipped and seasoned Kaş. /T 3o (mana:r, manma:k): Çağ. xv ff. man- (spelt) “to dip” (furü burdan) bread and the like in water, sour milk, etc. San. 318v. 19 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv man- ditto Nahc. 301, 4: Kom. xiv “to baptise' man- CCG, Gr.: Kip. (?Tkm.) xiv banğamasa “to dip” İd. 35: Osm. xvri ban- in Rümi furü raftan "to go down, sink”, in Çağ. man- San. 127r. 21 (mistranslation due to the fact that in Osm. both ban- and bandur-, q.v., mean “to dip”). *bap- See map-. *baün- See mayıl, mayil-, mayış- and? *bafiak. bin- "to mount, or ride (a horse, etc., Acc.)”. C.ia.p.a.l.; in SW Osm, bin-, elsewhere min-/mün-. Türkü vırır boz atığ binip “riding the grey horse' 7 E 32; 10 0.0. in 7 and two in İx.: vin ff. (a thief) tutu:pan minml:ş *caught and mounted it" IrkB 16: Uy£. viii ff. Civ. münğü İki at 'two riding horses" USp. $3 (0), 5: O, Kir. ix ff. Mal. 41, 9 (altmış): Xak. xı er at mündi: “the man rode (rakiba) the horse (etc.)” Kaş, II 3o (müne:r, münme:k); a.o.o.: KB atın mündi keldi "he mounted his horse and came” 576; 0.0. 1388, 1608, etc. (v.]. min- in some cases): xın(?) Tef. min-/mün- "to mount, ride! 223227: xiv. Muh. (Zayd came) "Amrü atını: münğaç (s.c) “riding 'Amrü's horse' Mel. 14, 5; Rif. 9o (but binğaç), münip/mü:nip ış, ız, minip 92; n.m.e.: Çağ. xv ff. min(with -1-") sıvtodr sudan "to ride” San. 321r. 14 (quotns.): Xwar. xi bin- ditto “AZ 36: xin(?) min- Og. 16, 226; xiv min- Qutb 112, MN 49; mün- Qutb 112; Nahe. 23, 15; 39, 3-4: Kom. xiv “to mount' min- CCG; Gr. 165 (quotn.): Kip. xit! rakiba min- Hou. 33, 17: xiv min- ditto İq. 88 (and 36); Tkm. bindo. 36 (and 88): xv Kip. ditto min- Kav. 22, 20; Tuh. 17a. 13; a.0.0. bun- 'to be mentally deranged or disturbed', in the sense either of 'being senile, feebleminded' or of 'losing control of oneself, going  fighting mad", N.o.a.b., but the first vowel is fixed by munduz, q.v. Some conncction is also possible with SW xx Anat. bonul- 'to be feeble-minded” S DD 218 and bun- “to be dissatisfied' do. 232. UYĞ. viri ff. Man.-A M III 29, 3-4 (ii) (a:z-): Bud. TT VI 215 (ta:n-): Xak. xı karı: er mundi “the old man (etc.) was senile' Kaş. II 3o (muna:r, munma:k): KB ukuşluğ kişi kör karisa munar "an intelligent man swhen he grows old becomes senile! 294; a.o. 36oo (2 bulak): xırı(?) At. azu kutsuz ajun karipmu munar “or is this unhappy world old and senile?' 448: xiv Mnuh.(?) cuna "to be possessed by evil spirits, mad” mu:n- (and delü: ol-) Rif. 107 (only): Kip. (? T km.) bun- xarifa "to be senile” 7d. 36: Osm. xvin bün- (sie) in Ripmi xarif tea fartüt 'senile, a dotard' San. 141 v. 19 (there is no other trace of this verb in Osm.; it is translated as a Noun, and may be an error for 1 bü:n). VU *bóp- Sec müp-. Dis. BNA bepi: “oy” and the like. N.o.a.b.; to be carefully distinguished fr. bepgü: with which it is easily confused in some scripts. Türkü vim Elteriş xağan elinte: karıp edgü: beni: körti: “he grew old in the realm of Elteriş Xağan and experienced great joy Ix. 3: viii ff. Man. etóz mepisi 'bodily pleasures! T7 77 8, 43: Uyğ. vir ff. Man.-A M I 12, 10-11 (ortukluğ): Man. ertimlig mepike ilişmişke “to one attached to transitory pleasures" TT III so; a.o. 123: Bud. meni teğinmek emğek teginmek “to experience joy and sorrow' U II o, 29; vişaylığ mepiler 'sensual (Sanskrit l-w.) pleasures! do. 28, 2 (ii); 0.0. U III 43, 13; TT IV 12, 60; Pyahl, 8,8: Civ. TT 7 21-2 (bulduk-): Xak. xi KB mepiliğ turur kör meni yok çığay “the joyless poor man is joyful' 6370. *béfii: 'brain'. "This word occurs in a puzzling variety of forms which are best explained by assuming that they ultimately go back to *béfii Cf. bafiak. Survives in NE Alt., Kumd., Sor, Tel. me: R IV 2066; Khak. mí; SE Türki mipe/mipi/miy Share, DS, Şarring: NC Kir. me:; Kzx. mıy, SC Uzb. miya; NW Kaz. mi Kk. miy, Krım mep R IV 2079; Kumyk may/miy, Nog. miy; 5W Az., Osm. beyin, Tkm. beyni, Cuv. mime As). VIII 242 shows a complicated picture of crossassimilation. Uyf. vin ff. Civ. ularnın meyisin “the brain of a partridge' H 763; a.o. do. 89: Xak. xi mépi: drmağ "brain” Kaş. II 299 (Saçıt-), n.mze.: KB menesi tolu “vith a full brain' (i.e. intelligent) 57; ukuş orni üstün mepede (».1. mepide) turur “the seat of understanding is up in the brain! 1836: Çağ. xv ff. meyin/meyn magzs-i sar "the brain" San. 319r. 29; meye (spelt) ditto 321 v. ro: Xwar. xiv mépi "brain” Qutb 111: Kom. xiv “brain” mep CCI; Gr.: Kip. xin muxxu'l-dimág “the fleshy part of the brain' beyin Hou. 21, 11: xiv meyi al-dimag; Tkm,    
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 393 
     
   
   
     DIS. BND beyni /d. 8g: xv ummu'l-ra's 'the brain' (tópe; in margin) beyini uh. 4a. 13; duhmü l-dimağ "the soft material of the brain? méyini (in margin beyini) do. 15a. 12: Osm. xtv ff. beyni “brain” in several texts down to xvii and one later 773 1 94; I1 1533; İİİ 87; IV 98. ' Dis. V. BNAD büne:- Den. V. fr. 1 bü:n; rare but found with two different meanings: (1) 'to be, or find, defective"; (2) "to trim” (in the sense of removing defects). Survives only in the latter sense in NC Kzx. mine-. Uy$£. vu ff, Bud. (because he held these vitws) uzati yérer müneyür ertipiz “you blamed and found fault with him at great length” Hüen-ts. 1798: Xak. xı ol to:nuğ müne:di: “he cut the sides (qafa"a” H-afraf) of the garment in order to save in from unevenness (a/-inhiraf), etc.” Kaş. III 274 (müne:r, müne:me:k): xiv Muh.(?) "aba min nafsihi "to have a personal defect' müne:Rif. 112 (only): Kip. xiv (after bün a/-"ayö) hence one says büne- (and bünile-, sic?) "aba İd. 36. Dis. BNC D bunça: Equative f. of 1 bu:, "as many, or as much, as this; so many, or much”, and the like. S.i.s.m.l. as munga and the like, and in SW Osm. as bunca. Cf. anga: Türkü vir bunça: is fairly common, e.g. bunça: yérke: süledim “I made expeditions to as many countries as this” 7 S 4 (they had just been enumerated); 77 S 12 (bıç-), viri ff. Man. munca üküş tınlığka “so many living creatures” C/iuas. 119; a.o. do. gr: Üyğ. vri bunça: bitigig “so many(?) inscriptions' Şu. Sb.: virt ff. Man.) Bud.; Civ. munça is fairly common, e.g. M I 18, 3 (i) (adir-): Xak. xi KB munça bediz “so much adornment' 96: xm(?) At. nelük mölka munça köpül bamakın *why do you set your mind so much on wealth? 183; a.o. 429: Çağ. xv ff. munca (spelt) Tnqadr "this amount, as much as this” San. 320v. 10 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv münça “so many” Quib 111: Kom. xiv munga “so much”, etc. CCG, Gr. 165 (quotns.): Kip. xv "for so rhany years past” munca yıldan beri Tuh. gob, 12: Osm. xivff. bunca (in two XIV and xv texts munca) “so much, etc.; (occasionally) thus'; c.i.a.p. TTS I :24; /7 178, 698; 111 116; İV 131. D *bancuk See mançuk. boncuk (?bonçok) *bead, bead necklace'; in some early occurrences perhaps, more generally, “evvel”. The modern forms suggest strongly that the second vowel was originally -O-. Survives in NE Khak. moncik: SE "Türki monçak: NC Kir. mönçok, Kzx. monşak: SC Uzb. muncok: NW Kk. monsak; Kumyk mincak; Nog. moysak (sic): SW Az. muncuk; Osm. boncuk; Tkm. moncuk. Türkü vir ff. (a statement regarding the virtues) tórlüg moncu:ku:p taşları:n “of various jewels and (precious) stones” Toy. 349 2-3 (ETY II 57): Uy. viri ff. Man. yinçülüğ monçuklar 'pear] necklace TT 11 ış, 11-12: Bud. mani mönçük ertini "the Mani (Sanskrit) necklace(?) jewel' U IJ 37, 55: morvartit (fr. Greek margarites) moncuk “a pear! necklace' U III ış, 4 (ii); (my dear son I love you) ayadakı yinçü moncuk teg 'like a pear] necklace in the palm of the hand' PP 6, 8: o.o. TT V zo, 14 (in Note A 117); 26, 100: Civ. (if one burns and pulverizes) yılan başı moncuknti meaning obscure, “a necklace of snake's heads', or 'the beads in (or on) a snake's head” H I 13o: Xak. xi monguk kull xaraza mina'[-huli 'any bead used as a personal ornament': moncuk 'any kind of jewel, lion's claw or amulet (mina'l-cawáhir atv barátinr'l-asad awi'l-tamáyim) hung on the neck of a horse” Kaş. 1 475; o.o. I1 123 (sürül-), 777 121 (to:d): xın(?) Tef. moncuk “necklace” 226 (munguk): Çağ. xv ff. minçağ (sic, spelt) xarmuhra 'bead' San. 321 v. 3 (quotn.): Kip. xiv monçuk al-xaraz wa'l-fusiis "bead, the bezel of a ring”: also called boncuk (? in Tkm.) /d. 89: xv xaraz bonşuk Tuh. rab. 2: Osm. xvii boncuk in Rümi, 'bead' in Ar. xaraza San. 141 v. 20. VU *büngig See müncig. Tris. BNC C *bunculayu: See mungulayu:, Tris. V. BNCD *bancuklan- See mancuklan-, D *boncuklan- See monçuklan-. Dis. BND C buntağ Crasis of bu: and te:g, “like this”, cf. antağ with which this word is practically synonymous. As pointed out by T. Tekin in On Kök Türkic büntegi, C AJ VIII 196, there is one occurrence of this word with regressive instead of progressive vocalic assimilation. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SW as muntaf with minor phonetic changes ((-u-/-ı- ,-t-/-d3- ; -&amp;/-k[- y). 'Türkü viri nep yerdeki: xağanlığ bodunka: büntegi: bar erser “if a people ruled by a xağan in any country had a (xağan) like this” T 56—7: viii ff. Man. bu muntag tórlüg alp ada 'these kinds of grievous dangers! TT IJI 6, 22; o.o. 8, 38 and 45: UYĞ. viii ff. Bud. mundağ sakınç kılıp "thinking thus' TT V 8, 68-9; ro, 110; a.o.o.: Xak. xr Kaş. I 36 (1 0s); 7 64 (osug); I 160, 3; III 154 (sa:v); n.m.e.: KB kalı mundağ erse yorik “f his conduct is like this” 175; 0.0. 292, 727, etc.: xın(?) Tef. mundağ 'thus, like this” 225: Çağ. xv ff. mundak burçdlayın tea. bunug gibi Vel. 385; mundak (1) ingunin 'thus' (quotn.); (2) £n waqt "at this time”, mundakta dar in waqt (quotn.) San. 320v. 13: Xwar. xii mundağ/mundak “thus" "AF rz: xiv mundağ “thus” Nahc. 237, 3: 413, 5-6. F *banda:r(?) See mandarr. D *bunduz See munduz, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 394 
     
   
   
     359 DIS. V. BNDDis. V. BNDD “bağıt- Scc mayit-. D bupad- Intrans. Den. V. fr. bun, "to be distressed' and the like. Survives in SE Türki mupay- Sat 184 (only); NC Kir, Kzx. mupay- ; and presumably SC Uzb. munkay"to be bowed, bent'; and SW Osm. buga- but all authorities agree that this means “to be senile" and the like, which suggests a false etymology fr. bun-. Türkü vmi (the guide lost the way and was strangled) bupadıp xağan “the xagan, being worried (said 'advance at a trot) T 26: Uyğ. vit ff. Bud. U II 31, 47, etc. (2 adin-); U 111 72, 22 etc. (2 tapla:-): Xak. xı (in a prov.) er oğlı: mupa:dma:s "a son of man is not permanently at a loss' (/á yadtarr idlirür yabqá fihi; but uses his ingenuity and so gets out of his difficulty) Kag. II 84, 25; n.m.e.: KB (he came to the town but found no lodgings) mupadti muyanlikta tüşti barıp “he was at a loss, and went to a charitable institution and lodged there' 489; 0.o. 29 (elig), 492, 572, 3767 (ötüğçi:): xiv Muh.(?) iftaqara "to be poor, destitute" mu:pa:- (?, the entry is a muddle) Rif. 104 (only); a/-fuqr mu:ga:ymak 125: Çağ. xv ff. mupay- (spelt) malizün wa ğamndR şudan “to be sorrowful, distressed' San. 319v. 27 (quotns.). D *bepde:- See mende:-. D *bepdet- See mendet-. D 1 bandur- Caus. f. of 2 ban-; survives only(?) in SW Osm. bandir-, which is however syn. vv, 2 ban- and has no Caus. connotation. Xak. xi ol mapa: etme:kig ya:ğka: mandurdt: “he told me to dip (aşbağani) the bread in oil” Kaş. /7 197 (mandurur, mandürma:k): Osm. xvri bandur- furü burdan “to dip” Sar. 127r. 22 (Rümi quotn.). D *2 bandur- See 1 mandur-. D bintür- Caus. f. of bin-; 'to make (someone Dat.) mount' (a horse, etc. cc., or üze:). S.i.m.m.l. with the same phonetic changes as bin-. Türkü vir at üze: bintüre: 'telling (the men) to mount their horses! T 25: Xak. xı ol mapa: at mündürdi: “he told me to mount (arbabani) the horse (etc.) Kaş, I1 197 (mündürür, mündürme:k): xırr(?) Tef. mindür- ditto 224: xiv Muh.(?) ardafa "to mount (someone) behind (someone else on the same horse) bi:ndü:r- Rif. 103: Çağ. xv ff. mindür- Caus. f.; suwár hardan "to make (someone) ride” Sam. 321r. 23: Xwar. xiv mindür- ditto Quib 111. D *buntur- See muntur-. D *bepdes- See mepdes-. Tris. BND D *bupadinci$. See munpadınçığ. Tris. V. BNDD *bupadtur- See mupadtur.-. Dis. BNĞ *buüak 'dung', perhaps specifically "animal dung'. For the phonetic evolution cf. *béfii:. Survives only(?) in SE "Türki mayak 'shecp's and camels' droppings” Saro, Şarring. Uyg. viii ff. Bud. ud mayakı 'cow-dung' U I 29,6 (u:d): Civ. mayak 'dung' occurs several times in H 1 and 11 the animals concerned being pigeons, cows, camels, and wolves: Xnk. xi mayak 'dung' (ba'r), specifically of the camel; thence the word is used more generally (yusta'ür), and one says ko:y mayakı: 'sheep's dung'; it is not used of horses, for which the word is yundak Kaş, III 167 (prov.): mejek ('with -]-") ca'ru'l-kalb 'dog's dung'; hence one says 1t mejJeki: / 392 (presumably a further corruption of this word): Oğuz xi baynak al-fart *dung' Kaş. 111 175: Kip. xiii al-ba'r maya:k Hou. 15, 5. D *bapi&amp; Sce mapt£. D *bunuk See munuk. *buügak See muyğak. D *bunfa:n See munğa:n. Dis. V. BNĞE binik- Hap. leg.; there does not seem to be any doubt that this is a misreading of *tinikDen. V, in -1k- fr. ttn although this Suff. normally forms [ntrans. verbs. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (then that rich man's son Kaficanadeva) bodunin karasın emlep önedtiler biniktilar (read tiniktilar) 'treated the common people (in the realm of King Indrivaprabhà) and cured them and gave them rest” Sten, 598, 16-17. D *bupuk- See mupuk-. D *banfir- Sce mnnğır-. D *bupkar- See munkar-. Tris. V. BNGD bafiaka:- See mayaka:-. Dis. BNG ?F benek almost certainly l.-w. fr. Pe. banak “a small seed, pimple', and the like. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. benek “spot, speck, freckle”. Arğu and a few dialects (tva fi ba'di'l-luğa) xı benek al-habba 'seed, berry, pimple': benek a/-/a/s “a small copper coin! Kay. 7 386: Çağ. xv ff. benek “blotches and spots' (gül tva nişdn) which appear on the face as the result of drinking (and in Pe. (1) “a forest fruit also called bar; (2) a kind of fabric with a background of brocade and gold spots on it) San, 127r. 26: Kip. xiv. benek af-nugta "a. spot” İd. 36. bepgü: (?bepgö) 'eternal, everlasting'. An early l.-w. in Mong. as möpRe (Haenisch 112 mitipke, but the modern pronunciation (Haltod 508) is möyke). S.i.a.m.l.g. except SW. "The NE forms mönkü R 7V 2131 and Tuv.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 395 
     
   
   
      DIS. möpğe are reborrowings fr. Mong., elsewhere normally mepgi or the like; to be carefully distinguished fr. beni: with which it is easily confused in some scripts. Türkü vri bepgü: taş "memorial (lit. "everlasting”) stone" 7 S 11,422 N 8; 1 S i2(biti:-), I2 N 15; 8.0. 1 S 8, II. N 6 (1 €): vini ff. Man. mepigü tenri yerin "the country of the eternal gods! Ctuas. I 15; a.0. do. 1 29; M İİİ 15, 2 (i); mengü Zrvva “the eternal god Zurwan M III s, 8; Yen. bepgü:min tike: berti: “he erected my memorial” Mal. 28, 4; same phr. but bepü:si: do. go, 3; 0.0. 27, 8; 33, 3; 36, 3 (all bepgü:); 39, 1; 48, 6 (both bepkü:); mepkü: 39, s: Uyğ. viui ff. Man.-A meşiğü 31 1 ri, 19, etc. (öğrünçlüğ), o.o. do. rr, 16; 12, 11: Chr. mengü tepri U 7 7, s: Bud. yértincüdeki özüğ yaşığ menğü sakindipizlar "you thought that life (Hend.) in (this) world is everlasting' 7 M IV 252, 4; Mengü as a P.N. Pfahl. ız, 19: O. Kir, ix ff. bepü:sü: (sic?) Mal. 9, 3; n.o. 42, $(?), bepğü:m do. 13, 5; a.o, 24, 2; bepkü:min 2o, r: Xak. xı mepgü: al-şay”"ı” 1-xalid sea'[-xuli&amp;d "anything eternal; eternity'; both common N. (ism) and Dev. N. (maşdar), one says mepfiü: aju:n düru”l-xulüd “the eternal (i.e. future) world' Kaş. III 378 (verse): KB mengü (so spelt) “eternal” is common ro, 113, 115, etc.: xin(?) Tef. menfü ditfo 223: Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 110; MN 121; mepğü Nac. 281, 2-3: Kom. xiv menpgü/mengü[mengi CCG; Gr. 164: Kip. XII düma “to continue, endure! mengü kal(mis-spelt kol-) /Tou. 40, 3: xiv mengü: şu: má'u'l-hayat ay má'u'l-dawám “the water of life, that is, the water of eternity” /d. 89. Dis. V. BNGD *bünük- See münük-. Dis. BNL . D *bafil Sce mayıl, D *buplujs See muşluğ. Dis. V. BNLD *bantl- Sce manıl-. D *bafil- See mayil-. D binil- Pass. f. of bin-; (of a horse, etc.) “to be mounted, ridden'. S.i.s.m.l.g. as minil-/ münül-; SW Osm. binil-. Xak. xi at münüldi: “the horse (etc) was ridden' (rukiba) Kaş. II 138 (münülür, münülme:k). D *bünel- See münel-. D *bapla:D *bünle:D *bepletD *beplenSee mapla:-. See münle:-. See meplet-. See meylen-. Tris. BNL D "bepi:liğ See meni:liğ. D "bepi:lik See meni:lik.   BNS. 551 Tris. V. BNLD *bepi:le:- See 1 mepi:le:-. D *béfi:le:- See 2 mepi:le:-. Dis. BNR bipa:r (p-) "a spring of water. A purely Oğuz word surviving only in SW Osm. pipar/ upar. Cf. 1 bulak, yul. Oğuz xı mıpa:r aynu'l-má' "a spring of water' Kaş, III 376: 'aynu'l-má' is called mipar 711 363, a.o. III 280 (çokra:-, not an Oğuz word): xırı(?) Tef. mıpar ditto 224: Tkm. xii al-'ayn, 'aynu'l-máà' (kóz ; in Tkm.) bti:ya:r (spelt 5::ğa:r) Hou. 6, zo: xiv minar al-'ayn mina'l-má' İd. 88; anba'u'l-má' ditto b1pa:r (unvocalized) Bul. 4, 13: Osm. xır to xvi bipar, less often bupar (?pipar/pupar) “spring” is comtnon TTS I 96; Il 137; İİ 89; IV 100; xviit pupar (spelt “vith p- and -p-") in Rümi, çüh-i db cagma-i db “a well, or spring, of water'; and metaph. güşa-i çaşm "the corner of the eye" San. 141 v. 23. Dis. V. BNR?D *bapra:-, etc. See mapra:-. Dis. BNS D bensiz Priv. N./A. fr. ben; survives in SW Osm. normally meaning "without me, in my absence'. İt is possible that it occurs in the passage below with the meaning "without selfinterest'. Alternatively the word might be read as a Priv. N./A. fr. *man taken as a l.-w. fr, Sanskrit müna 'pride, insolence”. The meaning of the phr. is fixed by the context. Uyğ: viri ff. Man. asra mensiz (or mansiz ?) sakınçlarığ “humble (Hend.) thoughts” TT II 17, 68-9. : D bupsiz Priv. N./A. fr. bun, 'without care, anxiety, grief', and the like. N.o.a.b. Türkü vin (the Chinese give gold, silver, etc.) bupsız *without stint' 7 S 5, İT N 4; (you will live in comfort and) bupsiz boltaçı:sen 'will become carefree' I7 N 14; 0.0. I1 E 29 (2 ér-); T 48: vin ff. Yen. tamkalığ (si) yilki: bup[siz] er[ti:] “his branded cattle were innumerable” Mal. 26, 6; a.o. do. 7 (bakır): UyE. vri ff. Man.-A (you will live in that country at your ease and) mupsuzun “vithout a care' M III 30, 6 (ii): Bud. (rich men, paying no takes and) mupsuz taksız “not feeling anxiety or constraint' TT VI, p. 57, nóte 11, s: O. Far. ix ff. bupu:suz ulga:t(tjim “1 grew up without a care” Mal. 7, 2; a.o. do. 6, 3: Xak. xı KB (oh all-powerful, eternal) munsuz bayat “carefree God” 6; a.o. 28: xın(?) Tef. munsuz “careless” 226: Xwar. xıv (my son has become rich and I poor; my son) munsuz “carefree” (and 1 munluğ) Nahc. 286, 6; (I have become a king) ortaklarnıp ortaklıkındın müunsuz “not dependent on the companionship of companions” do. 401, 3. D *bünsiz See münsiz,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 396 
     
   
   
     352 Dis. V. BNŞD *bafig- See mayış-. (D) *bipes- See mineş-. Dis. BNZ bepiz 'the complexion'. Survives only(?) in SE Tar. menzi R JV 2084; Türki ditto BŞ 698 and SW Osm. bepiz. Türkü virt ff Man. tişi kigilernip körkin mepizin “the shape and complexion of women' M III 22, 7-8 (i); a.o. Chuas. 46 (2 ön): Yen. [gap] üz er yüzi: begler bepizi beğlik “the faces of the . . ., and the complexion of the begs is worthy of begs'(?) Mal. 26, 9 (a very obscure and damaged inscription): Uyğ. viui ff. Man.- A kórk mepiz tegsürmek “to change one's shape and complexion' M 7 25, 29-30: Bud. körki menzi U /// 23, 2 (ii), Suv. 60, 3; a.o. U IV 8, 15-17 (topa:): Xak. xi mepiz "the colour (/aron) of a man”, hence one says kizil mepizlig “vith red cheeks' (a/-wacna); the word is usually applied to (the colour of) the cheeks Kaş. HI 363; o.o. 1 60, 5; 65, 9 (ağduk), 486, 16: KB meniz is common; (plain and mountain high and low ground) yaşıl kök mepiz 'become green (Hend.)' 96 (exceptionally not used of the human face); (the king was angry) artuk karartti mepiz “and made his face even blacker' 629; 0.0. 733 (körk meniz), i::6 (ditto. following the Vienna MS.), 892, 3840 (ertini): xırı(?) Tef. mepiz 'look, appearance' 222: xiv RO. mepiz 'complexion' R IV 2081 (quotns.): Çağ. xv ff. bépiz (spelt, “vith -p-") güna ma başara 'colour, skin” San. 150r. 25; mépiz the same as bépiz 'skin and complexion' (simd) do. 321 v. 8: Xwar. xiv mepiz (1) 'colour, complexion”: (2) “resembling” Qutb 110: Kom. xiv “face” meyiz CCI; Gr.: Kip. xin laton sahna rcachi'l-insán "ala ayy sifa kánat “the colour of a man's face, however it is described' mepiz (spelt megiz), Tkm. be:piz (be:xngiz) Hou. 31, 9; 8.0. (nregiz) 19, 17: xiv meniz “the colour of the face” /4. 88: Osm. xiv ff. bepiz 'complexion” in several texts T'T'S II 128; I11 83, IV 94: xviii bepiz in Rrmi "colour, skin”, in Çağ. bépiz San. 127r. 29. *büfüz 'horn'. The various forms in which this word appears point clearly to an original -R-, cf. *béüi: Survives in NE mü:s R IV 2225 and Khak.; miyis R IV 2140 and Tuv.: SE Türki müpüz Shaw, BS; munuz Jarring: NC Kir. müyüz, Kzx. müyiz, SC Uzb. muğuz, NW Kk, Kumyk, Nogay müyiz/ müyüz; Kaz. möğez: SW Az, Tkm. buynuz; Osm. boynuz: and Cuv. máyra/ mayraka Ash. VIII 292. Uy&amp;. vii ff. Man.-A müyüz M I 16, 11-12 (kaç): Bud. müyüz U II 35, 21 (baka:) Civ. kilen keyik müyüzi teğ "like the horn of an unicorn (Chinese l.-w.) TT I 42; ingeknip koynnın (?so read) mipizin “the horn of a cow or sheep” H I 42; a.o. müpüzin do. 55 (0gi:-): Xak. xi müpüz “the: horn (a/-qarn) of any kind of animal”, müpüz müpüz “the name of a children's game” ' described at length) Kaş. II] 363 (prov.); o.o. DIS. V. BNŞI 37 (3 0S); III 226 (baka:): Çağ. xv ff. büpüz (spelt, *with -n-”) şöx-r haysedndt "an animal”s horn" also called buynuz and müpüz San. 141 v. 22; same entry reversed 142v. 26 (buynuz), 321r. 2 (müpüz): Kom. xiv 'horn" müz CCG; Gr.: Kip./Tkm. xii qarnu'l-baqar teca ğayrihi *horn of cattle, etc.” buynuz Hou. 14, 21: xiv müyüz al-qarn, Tkm. buynuz /d. 89; Bul. 8, 8 (eçkü:), xv qarı müyüz (in margin buynuz /uğa fihi) Tuh. 29b. 2; a.0. 14a. ro (eckü:). VUF banzı: Hap. leg.; no doubt, like other Gancak words a l-w. Gancak xi banzı: baqáyá'l-'inab bar"da”l-qitüf "ala”l""ariş 'stray grapes left on the trellis after the bunches have been picked” Kaş. 7 422. D *bepzeg See menzeg. Dis. V. BNZD benze:- Den. V. fr. bepiz but with little semantic connection; 'to resemble'. Survives only in SW Az. benze- ; Osm. begze- ; Tkm. mepgze-. Cf. 1 oxşa:-, yagza:-. Xak. xi bi:r ne:p bi:rke: menz:e:di: “one thing resembled (zaşabbaha) another” Kaş. lII 403 (menze:r, mepze:me:k): KB mugar menzeyü keldi sà'ir tili "the poet's tongue (i.e. statement) is like this" 441; o.O. 1306, 6147: xui(?) Tef. mepze- ditto 222: xiv Rbj. ditto R IV 2084 (quotn.): Çağ. xv ff. bépze- (spelt) şabih wa münand şudan "to resemble” San. rşor. 10; menze- (spelt) same as bépze- do. 321r. 24: Xvvar. xır bepzeditto “AZ 32: Kom. xiv ditto bepze- CC7, Gr.: Kip. Tkm. xiv menze- aşbaka ditto /d. 88; lafzu”l-muşabiha “a vvord for comparison' benzer Bul. 16, 4: xv in paras. on comparison bepzer and okşar in Kav. 28, ra ff. and menzer, owsar, and oksar in Tu. 44b. 6 ff. are said to be synonymous: Osm. xv benzer “it is as if .. ” TT IV 95; xviii benze- (in Rümi) şabih sca manand şudan San. 127r. 21. D benzet- Caus. f. of bepze:-; “to compare (something Acc., to something Dat.y. Survives in the same languages. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. Hüen-ts. 1889-90 (abamuluğ): Xak. ol bi:r ne:pni: bi:rke: mepzetti: “he compared (şabbaha) one thing to another” Kaş. Tİ 358 (menzetü:r, menzetme:k): KB mupar menzetü “making the follovving comparison” is a stock phr. 273, 319, 412, etc.: Çağ. xv ff. bépzet- Caus. f. tagbih hardan “to compare” San. 150r. 24; mépzet- ditto 321r. 25 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv megzet- ditto Qutb 111: Osm. xviii begzet- (spelt) in Rümi "to compare', in Çağ. bépzet- San. 127r. 18 (quotn.). Tris. BNZ D "büfüzğe:k See müpüzge:k. D *bepizlig See menizliğ. Tris. BNZD *bepizlen- See mepizlen-. D *büüüzlen- See müpüzlen-.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 397 
     
   
   
      MON. BR : Mon. BR ba:r Ka; 's definition of this word as a Particle (Rarf) connoting existence, or presence in a particular place, and as the opposite of yo:k, q.v., is very apt. İt is in fact nearly always used as the predicate of a sentence, the subject being either stated or inferred. İn this usage, therefore, it is of the nature of a Verb, but it cannot be conjugated and must be supplemented by an Aux. V., 1 er- or the like, if a mood ar tense form is required. Its use as . 8 Noun meaning 'existence' or 'property' (the latter meaning uncertain, if authentic, ? an abbreviation of barım) is unusugl. C.i.a.p.a.l.; one of the three basic wordf in which the initial has become v- in SW Az. and Osm. (but not Tkm.), cf. bar-, bér-. Türkü vir (because heaven so ordained and) özüm kutim bar ücü:n “because I myself had the favour of heaven” 7 S o, II N 7; similar phr. I E 29, II E 23; ol eki: kişi: bar erser “since there are those two men" T ro; similar phr. T 30, 57; o.o. £ S ro, II N 8; T 14: vin ff. JrkB 18 (connoting existence; 1 bağış), o.o. do. 32, 57; Toy. 14 (with Gen. connoting possession, belgü:): Man. (we knew) ne bar ermiş “vhat existed' (before there was a heaven and earth) Chuas. 163; o.o. do. 273, etc.: Yen. bar üçün Mal. 48, 1 and 2: Uyğ. ix bay bar ertim “1 was rich” Suci 5: vin ff. Man.-A evimde yeme üküş takığu kuşlar bar erür “in my house, too, there are many fowls' M I 37, 14-15, a.0.0.: Bud. (ever since heaven and earth were created) bay yeme bar yok çığay yeme bar “there have been rich and poor” PP 6. 1-2; and many o.o.: Civ. bar is common in its usual meanings, and, in contracts, in phr. like berğinçe bar yok bolsarmen “if I die before repaying it” USSp. r, 7-8: O. Kır. ıx ff. tört oğlu:m bar üçün “because I had four sons' Mal. zo, r: Xak. xı ba:r a Particle which connotes the existence (zotcud) of a thing and its being present in its place (kawnihi hadir fi mahallihi), hence one says sende: yarma:k ba:rmu: 'have you any money?” and the other says ba:r, 'I have”, it is the opposite (zaqid) of laysa in Ar. and yo:k in Turkish: ba:r ylgde: al-gubayrà'l-hibür "the greater jujube tree, Zizyphus rubra' Kaş. III 147 (the semantic connection of this phr. is not obvious, ba:r here may be a different word, perhaps a l.-w. fr. Pe. bar fruit); about a dozen o.o.: KB tórütgen baripa törümiş tanuk “the created is witness to the existence of the Creator” 15; fida kıldı barın nepin ham özin "he sacrificed his being, his property, and himself” s6, sözüp barı tök *pour out the essence of your words' 195; o.o. in the normal usage zor, 207, 735, etc.: xııı(?) At. (I did not exist and you created me) yana yok kilip ikinç bar kilursen “you then destroyed me and brought me into existence a second time” 10; a.o.o., Tef. bar “existent”, etc. go: xiv Muh. a lak faras? "have you a horse?! senin atın ba:rmu: Mel. 18, 2 etc.: Rif. 97; hüdir ba:r sa, 7; 151; na'am “yes” ba:r 56, o, 154: Çağ. xv ff. bar var hast ma'nasina “there is” Vel. 126; bar (1) mamcüd 2 BO4II25 ooo ON.  353 “present, existent, etc.; (2) "ast Sar. 120v. 27 (quotn. and several phr. bar plus Conjugational f.s of é- (1 er-)): Xwar. xii war "there is', etc. ' Ali 32, etc.; bar do. 47: xiv bar bol"to exist” Qutb 27; barım yokum “vhat I have and what I lack' do. 86 (s.v. yuku), bar “there is” MN 34, etc.; Nahc. 3, 11, etc.: Kom. xiv bar in the full range of meanings CCI, CCG, Gr. şo (quotns.): Kip. xiv bar rarocüd, its opposite (mugábaluhu) is yok ma" düm, neither is conjugated as a Verb İ4. 29: xv bar/ba:r mawcüd Kav. 27, 14-15 (phr.); matoctid bar Tul. 35a. 12; a.0.0.: Osm. xiv ff. var (with ard Pers. Pos. Suff. varısı) c.i.a.p. with a wide range of meanings, 'there is; existence; property; all”, etc. T'T.S 7 756 ff.; II 964 fT., III 742 ff., IV 815 ff. *ber (?bér) See berü:, bi:r originally the Cardinal Number “one”, later attenuated, through such phr. as bir ne: ... bi:r “one thing . . . another” to little more than an Indefinite Pron. Adj. 'a, an'. C.i.a,p.a.] Türkü vı bir is common, always as a Numeral, e.g. bir kişi: yanılsar “if one man goes astray” (they exterminate the whole family) I S 6, Iİ N s; bir todsar a:cuk ömezsen “once you are satisfied, you do not remember being hungry! 7 S 8, II N 6: vin ff. bir common as a Numeral IrkB 25 (bokursi:), etc.: Man. in a list of four seals in Chuas. 177 ff. they are enumerated as bir, ekinti, üçünç, tórtünc; bir ikintike savlaşıp 'conversing with one another” TT II 8, 55-6; 3.0.0. as a Numeral: Uyğ. vir bir iki atlığ “one or two horsemen” Şu, E 5; a.o.o.: vir ff. Man., Bud., Civ. bir as a Numeral is common: O. Kir. ix ff. bir otuz yaşımda: “in my twenty-first year” Mal. 15, 1; a.o.o.: Xak. xı bi:r al-mahid fi'l-'adad the Numeral “one”, hence one says bi:r yarma:k “one dirham" Kaş. III 121; very common as a Numeral and in the phr. bir . . . bi:rke: e.g. II] 403 (bepze:-) and bir ikindi: “one another”: KB bir is common (1) as a Numeral, e.g. uğan bir bayatka “to the one almighty God” 2; (2) more indefinitely meaning "a man” e.g. 339 (1 bo:r): xin(?) Az, bir is common as a Numeral, and in such phr. as udu biri birke "one after another” 14; bir ança bodun 'a few people” 123; Tef. bir (with ard Pers. Poss. Suff. biri/birisi) is common as a Numeral and in phr. like biri biri and bir ança 102: xiv Mud. al-vváhid mina'l-'adad bi:r Mel. 5, 14 ff.; Rif. 76, ahad bir 8:, 7; 186; afrada "to isolate' bi:r ketü:r- i04 (only): Çağ. xv ff. bir bir, 'adad ma'násina Vel. 137; bir (and birer) yak “one” San. 145v. ro: Xwar. xin(?) bir “one, a” is common in Og.: xiv bir "one, a; once” Qutb 33; MN, 5, etc.; birin birin “one by one” Qutb 33: Kom. xiv bir “one, a”, bir... bir “one . . . the other”, common CCI, CCG; Gr. 58 (quotns.): Kip. xiii táhid bi:r Hou. 22, 2; ba'du'l-fad “the day after to-morrovv” birisi: kün do. 28, rz, al-'awar bir közlü: that is *with one eye” do. 26, 9: xiv bir swàáhid ld. 29; Bul. 12, 10; waraga 'a page' in the phr.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 398 
     
   
   
     354 MON. (every time you write) bir waraga (I will give you a dirham') Kas, zi, 21; bir 'onc, a” is common in. Zu. F 1 borr "vine", l.-w. fr. Middle Persian bor, see Doerfer 1, p. 2; 11 78o. An early L-w. in Mong. as bor (Haenisch 19); n.o.a.b. Cf. çağır, sücig. Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. (if a man has a headache let him soak this dHhàramn) borka “in wine'; o.o. TT VIII J.11 (beğni:), H II 22, 26 (iğle:-), TT VII 24, iz, 25, 4; 27, 12, and many in H / and /T: Xak. xi bo:r al-xamr *wine' Kaş, II 121 (prov.): KB bir bor içse sevse “if a man drinks vvine and likes it" 339; 9-0. 798, 1334, 1434, 2091, etc.: Kom. xiv. “vine” bor CCI; Gr.: Kip. xirt al-xamr bor (also sücü:, ca:kir) Hou. 16, 3. 2 bor? See borca:. bür "a bud”. The only early occurrence is in a conjectural restoration, but see bürlen-. Survives, sometimes with somewhat changed meaning, in NE Alt., Sag., Tel. pür "leaf of a tree' (in Tel, also “bud”) R IV 1397 (ditto pürçük “bud” do. 1400); Khak. pür 'leaf'; 'T'uv. bürü "lea; NC Kir. bür "bud", Kzx. bür/büri "pine-needle" (bürşik “bud”. Uy. vin ff. Man. (plants spring up; their branches grow and spread out) [büri conjectured] bokuklanur '[their buds] swell' IWrzd. 9-10; Kom. xiv 'bud' bür CCG; Gr. Mon. V. BRbar- 'to go', often more specifically 'to go away' For its use as a Descriptive V. see v. G., ATG, para. 256; Prockelmann, para, 237 (4). C.i.a.p.a.l.; one of three basic words of which the initial has become v- in SW Az., Osm.; cf. ba:r, béir-. Cf. 2 ket-. Türkü vii bar- “to go” is very common, e.g. yer sayu: bardığ “you went to every country” / S 9, IT N 5; uça: bar- Honorific phr. for “to die”, see uc-; er- bar- "to behave in an independent fashion” see 2 er-: viii ff. beğ er yunti:paru: barmi:ş “a beg went to his stud” IrkB 5;. a.o.o.: Man. tepri yériperü baru umatın” "because they could not go to the heavenly country” Chuas. 85 (in v.l. C.'s edition of this text berü is often mistranscribed baru); yügürti bardı "he ran away! M I 7, 17: Yen. adrılu: bar- “to be parted (from one's friends, . etc.) and go away', i.e. “to die” Mal. 28, 6; 29, 3; erdemin ücün él ara:da: kara: xanka: baripan yalavaç barıpan kelmediniz “because of (your) high qualities in the realm you went to Kara Xan (i.e. the Karakhanid court), you went as an ambassador but did not come back” do. 3o, 4-5: Uyğ. vir (the Karluk with evil intentions) teze: bardı: “ran avvay” (from my rule) Su. N 11: vint ff. Man.-A (the 522nd year since the holy prophet Mani) tepri yerinerü bardukta *went to the heavenly country” M 7 12, 14; a.o.o.: Man. barku (sic) klöni) yol “the straight road to go” TT III 72-3: Bud. bar- is very common both for “to go”, e.g. keli barı kilip “making (the index finger) go to and fro (seven times)" TT BR V 8, s8: and “to go away! c.g. koltğuçilar yığlayu barsar "if the beggars BO away weeping! PP ro, 5-6: Civ. bar- is very common in both senses: O, Kir. ix ff, adrilu: barMal. 16, 2; 18, 2; a.0.0.: Xak. xi ol evke: bardı: "he went (dahaba) to his house” (or somewhere else) Kaş. 77 6 (barı:r, barma:k); over 100 0.0.: KB bar- is very common for 'to go' and 'to go away'; e.g. (the tongue depreciates a man and) barir er başı “off goes his head” 163; a.o. 375 (ÖÇ-), and occurs as a Descriptive V. c.g. (if be has done my work and) kórü bardi erse içim taşlarım “and has seen my inner (thoughts) and my outward (appearance)” 425: xin(?) At. bar- “to go (avvay)” 184, etc.: Tef. ditto gr: xiv Muz. madá "to go away! ba:r- Mel. 12, 5; 21, 7, Rif. 86, 115; a/-maşi “valking” ba:rğa:n 13, r, 88; a.o.o.: Çağ. xv ff. bar-(-ay, etc.) var- gitVel. 126; bar- (1) raftan "to go”, (2) sulüh kardan "to behavc” (cf. barış-) San. 120r. 2 (quotns.): Xvvar. xi11 bar- “to go”, etc. “AZ 26; var- do. 27: xiu(?) bar- ditto Og. 129, etc.: xiv ditto Qut? 27; MN 111, etc.; Nahc. ış, 16, etc.: Kom. xiv ditto CCI, CCG; Gr. 50 (quotns.): Kip. xır röha "to go away' barHon. qo, 12: xiv bar- dahaba İd. 29; kança: barursen ayra tadhab, also one says (by implication in Tkm.) warursen do. 75: xv bardahaba Kav. 8, 16; ráha do. 9, 18; (to illustrate 2 ok) barğın ok Tul. goa. 12 (in Tuh. dahaba and ráha ket-): Osm. xiv ff. var- “to go, go away', and in one or two idioms; c.i.a.p. TTS I 757; II 965; III 743; IV 817. bé:r- 'to give'; also used as a Descriptive V. connoting action for the benefit of someone else, see v. G. ATG, para. 255; DBrockelmann, para. 239b. C.i.a.p.a.l.; one of the three basic words of which the initial has become v- in SW Az., Osm.; (the Chinese) bérü:r 'give' (gifts of gold, etc.) ISs,IHI N 4; (Kül Tegin killed nine men and) ordu:$ bermedi: “did not surrender the camp' 7 N 9—(my ancestors Bumin. Xaganand Eştemi: Xağan ascended the throne and) türkü bodunın €li:n törö:si:n tuta: bérmis eti: bérmis 'took control of the realm and. unwritten law of the 'lürkü people and organized them” Z E 1, ITE 3; many o.o.: viii ff, kut bérgeymen "1 will give you the favour of heaven” IrkB 2; a.o. do. ay: Man. pus1 bérdimiz erser 'if we have given alms' Chuas. 140-1; 0.0. do. 231-3: Yen. bepgü: tike: ber- "to crect a memorial (to someone)' Mal. 28, 4: 30, 3: s, 9: Uyf. vii yiçe: işiğ küçiğ bergil “give und (your) services as before” Su. E 5; a.0.0.: vir ff. Man.-A esengüsin bérdi 'he gave him well-being' M I 12, 2—kapağın aça bérdi “he opened his door' (for them) do. 13. 12; 8.0.0.: Man. (PU) karmaşuhn berü yarlıkazun “may he deign to give absolution (L-w.)'! TT III 176; mm tüş bérür “gives seed and fruit! Wind. . : Bud, bér- is very common, both for “to pes e.g. (the beggars came and asked for more gifts) yeme bérdi “and he gave (them) again' PP 7, 4; and as a Descriptive V. e.g. cf. ba:r, bar-. Türkü vim:  —À——  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 399 
     
   
   
      DIS. (the notables) ópl oni kazğanç kilmak ayu bérdiler 'described (for him) various ways of making money” PP 13, 1-2; do. 60, 6 (ünde:-): Civ. bér- is very common in USp., esp. in the sense of “to repay' (a loan) r, 5, etc.: Xak. xi ol mapa: yarma:k bé: rdi: "he gave me (a"töni) a dirham" (etc.) Kaş. III 180 (bérrür, bö:rme:k), over şo 0.0. most spelt bé:r- but a few ber-: KB bér- is very common both for “to give” and as a Descriptive V. e.g. ayu bérdi yol “he told (them) the way (to salvation)” 37: xın(?) At. (all created things) senin barlıkıpka tanukluk bérür “bear witness to 'Thine existence” 5; p ber mana 314; a.o.o.: Tef. bér- is cofnmon in both usages 97: xiv Muh. (as an example of y4 pronounced -é:-) azi b€:r Mel. s, 7; Rif. 76; al-'atá bérmek (mis-spelt with -;mak) 36, ır, 122: Çağ. xv ff. bér-(-güni, etc.) vér- Vel. 136-8; bér- dadan “to give”, also one of the verbs attached to other verbs to give emphasis or embellishment (mubálaga yü tazyin) as in tuta bér- giriftan 'to take, grasp' and koya bér- rahá kardan “to concede' San. 144r. 16 (quotns.): Xwar. xiu bér-, less often ber“Ali 26-7: xim(?) carlığ bérdi "he gave orders” Oğ. 96; Oğuz xağanka soyurkap bérdi “he showed favour to Oğuz Xağan do. 121-2; 2.0.0.: XIV bér- in both usages Qutb 31; MN zff., Nahc. 21,8 etc.: Kom. xiv berin both usages CCI, CCG; Gr. 55 (quotns.): Kip. xır ad ber-/ber- Hou. 56, 11; talaga “to hand over” sa:lt: ber- 34, 18; a.0.0.: XIV bér- a"ta İd. 29; Bul. 21r: xv ditto Kav. 9, 18; 28, zo, a'tá ber- Tuh. sb, 15; a.o.o.: Osm. xiv ff. vér- (less often ver-) is not listed as such in 773 but various compound Verbs are, the oldest veribi- (verip 1d-) “to send” TTS I 76o, II 968 (once, xiv, béribl-); FİTİ 747; IV 819. D bu:r- Intrans. Den. V. fr. 2 bu:, “to steam; to be fragrant'. Survives only(?) in SE Tar. pura- “to smell' (Intrans. and “Trans.) R IV 1365; Türki puru- BŞ, bura-/buruJarring ditto. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud, Hüen-ts. 145-6 (kötl:-): Civ. (the cooked meat's) yıdı yıparı bura turur 'sweet odour (Hend.) is fragrant TT 1 193: Xak. xi yipa:r burdi: fahat ráyihatu'l-misk. “the fragrance of the musk diffused itself'; also used of anything sweet-scented which is diffused ( yatadawwa"); and one says sSu:v burdi: irtafa"a buxáru'l-mà wa gayrihi 'steam rose from the water (etc.)” Kaş. II 6 (bura:r, burma:k), yıpa:r bu:rdi: same translation; and one says su:v bu:rdi: same translation; also used of any fragrant odour (fib daki) which diffuses itself or steams III 180 (bura:r, burma:k si): KB ajun - barça bütrü yıpar burdi kin “the whole vvorld thoroughly diffused the fragrance of musk' 71; a.o. 1937:, Kip. xiv buri- (so vocalized) fa/a”l-mirk İd. 29. bür- “to twist, wind round, screw together", and the like. S.ia.m.lg. "The vowel was originally a front one, but there is great inconsistency in modern languages, having forms both with front and with back  several  BRA vowels, usually with slightly different mean355 ings. 'l'he modern forms are: NE Tel. (R IV 1397) and Khak. pur- (Tuv. bürge-); SE "Türki bura- Shaw; bur- BŞ, bürü- Jerringi NC Kir, Kzx. bür- and bura-; SC Uzb bur-; NW Kaz bör-, Kk., Nog. bur-/buraand bür-; SW Az. Osm., "Tkm. bur- and bürü-. Cf. tür-. Xak. xı ol yançuk ağzı: bürdi: zazoğ ra'sa'l-xarifa "he twisted up the mouth of the leather bag”, also used of anything similar like the waist-band of a pair of trousers Klan l-saráwil) Kaş. II 6 (büre:r, bürme:k): KB kişenin bür-e twist his hobbles tight' 66:15: Çağ. xvff. bur- (sic) biçidan wa tab düdan “to twist, wind up” San. I31V. 4: Xwar. xiv (VU) bür- 'to tvvist” / Qutb 38 (bur-): Kom. xiv “to twist! (VU) bürCCI; Gr.: Kip. xui fatala min. fatli'l-habl va gayrili "to twist (or spin, a rope, etc.)' bür(Imperat. -gül) Hou. 37, 9: xiv (VU) bürwaca'a batnuhu (to have a stomach-ache”) wa fatala İd. 29; fatala ma faraka ("to rub in the hands") bür- (Imperat. -$11) Bul, 7or.: xv bürfatala aw lawá (to twist") Kav. 9, 18; fatala (éy- (eg-); in margin) bür- Tyuh. 28b. 6: Osm. xiv ff. bur- (Infin. xvi -mak) “to twist; to have a stomach-ache; to divert in several texts T TS I 126; II 180; III 118; IV 134; bürü- “to wrap up” in several texts JI 187; III 24. Dis. BRA F bére: a measure of length; n.o.a.b., but a l.-w. in Mong. as bere (Ko. 1126) where it is taken as equivalent to Sanskrit yoyara “a mile of 8,ooo yards'. Obviously a ],-w., which, as it is certainly not Chinese and does not look Iranian, is prob. Tokharian. Phonetically the only suitable equivalent is B prere; A párra “an, arrow', which if taken to mean “a bow shot”, which is a unit of length at any rate in Çağ, (see atım), might have such a sense. "İhis explanation is not, hovvever, self-evident. Uyğ. viu ff. Man.-A yetmiş tümen bere süpü te£ “like a lance 700,000 bére long” M I. 20, 15-16: Bud. (on the bank of that river there is an iron tree) bir bere édiz “one bere high” TM IV 253, 64; o.o. do. 129, 131; TT IX, p. 22, note 77, s tümen bere in Hüen-ts. (unpublished fragment) translates Chinese *10,000 İl”, a [i is about 600 metres. ?D berü: (?bérü:) an Adv. used both of time and of space, meaning broadly 'to this side, on this side”, The phonetics of this word are obscure. So far as the first vowel is concerned the Türkü spellings of cognate vvords point more to -é- than -e-, and there are sporadic spellings with -é- later, but the evidence for -é- is not conclusive. 'T'he word does not occur in Türkü viri (the word sometimes so read in T 26, 28 is evirü:) and the spellings of cognate forms in "Türkü and Uyg. are more easily derived fr. *ber (?bér) than this word. It is, therefore, prob. that berü: is itself a der. f., a crasis of *berril:, that is *ber (?bér) with the Directional Suff. -rü: and this is corroborated by the fact that it is often used in antithesis to  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 400 
     
   
   
     356 DIS aparu:, q.v. S.i.a.m.l.g., usually as beri, See berdin, (?E) bırğaru:, bergerü:, berü:ki:, VU berye:. Türkü vii ff. Man. berü occurs several times of time in C/nas., antadata (?sic) berü "since then” 7 16-17: kertü teprig arığ nomuğ biltükümüzde berü “ever since we got to know the true God and the pure doctrine' 158; o.o. r9, etc. (sö:): Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-À (sufferings which we have endured) üküş ödte berü “for a long time past' M Tır, 17-18; a.o. do. 10, 5-6: Man. munçada berü “for so long” M II $, 8 (ii); a.o. M I 30 24-5 (adak): Bud. Sanskrit [an]agatapürvam “not having come before” öpre:tin be:rü (spelt ?-) ba:rma:tukuğ (ditto) TT VIII A.r, berü used of time is fairly common, 77 IV 4, 19; 6, 23; 8, 53; PP 56, 7 etc.—barça berü kelzünler “let them all come hither U II 21, 6; 0.0. Sut. 625, ro etc. (ayaru:): Civ. burunkı bu xanlar çağındın berü 'ever since the reigns (lit. times, Mong. l.-w.) of these former Xans' USp. 22, 39; 0.0. do. 31, 3; 120, 3; 77, 5 (read ozadin berü 'for a long time past'): Xak. xı keldi: berü: ca'a ilayná “he came towards us” T 219, 23; kópül berü: yaymadış (why) have you not turned your heart towards us? //T 245, 18; 0.0. 2 35 (2 aç), 11 259, 7 (kelimsin-), //T 212, ız (ku), n.m.e.: KB berü is common, both of time, e.g. tümen yılda berü “for the last ten thousand years” 84, and of space, e.g. berü kel 106; o.o. 486, 923: xın(?) Tef. tamı berüsi 'the front (top and bottom) of the wall' 91 (baru); berü of time gg: Xwar. xiv berü (with Abl.) “since, because of” Qutb 27 (baru); bérü ditto ar: Kom. xiv beri (with 45) “since” CCG; Gr. 56 (quotn.) böri: 'wolf'. C.i.a.p.a.l. except in SW Az., Osm. where 'wolf' is kurt, in Tkm. bó:ri (sic) is known, but is not the standard word. See Doerfer 11 784. Türkü vii (the army of my father the xağan) bóri: teg. ermiş “vas like a wolf' (and his enemies like sheep) 7 E ız, İİ E ix: viir ff. (a rich man's sheep) bóri:ke: soku:şmi:ş "encountered a wolf' IrkB 27: ÜUyğ. vir ff. Man.-A böri oğli “a wolf cub' M 78, 6, a.o. M III 11,9(i) (öpün-): Man. (a lamb which) bórike kedilip *is dressed (i.e. reborn) as a wolf' M I 18, 5; Er Böri Proper Name TT IX 114: Bud. (evil creatures such as) bars irbis bóri 'leopards, panthers, and wolves" TT VI 116: Civ. böri as an animal whose gall, bones, tongue, etc. are used in medicine is common in H 7: O. Kar. IX ff. yeti: böri: ölürdim “1 killed seven wolves! Mal. 11, 10; Çoçük Böri: Sapun Proper Name do. rz, r: Xak. xı bóri: a/-d”b *wolf' Kaş, III 220 (prov.); ten o.o. KB (he organized the realm, enriched the people and) bóri koy bile suvladi ol ódün 'the wolf then drank water with the lamb” 449; a.0. 1040: Çağ. xv ff. böri kurt, gurg ma'nàsma 'wolt' Vel. 148 (quotn.); böri gurg, in Ar. di'b San. 133r. 22 (quotn.): Xwar. xırı(?) erkek böri “a male vvolf” Og. 141; a.o.o.: xiv böri Qutb 36, MN 76; Nahc. 112, 10; 343, 7 etc.; börü Qutb 37: Kom. xiv “volf” börü CC7; bóri . BRA CCG; Gr.: Kip. xin al-di”b börü: (Tkm. kurt) Hou. 11, 3: xiv börü a/-drb İd. 30; a.o. do. yo (kurt), a/-di”b börü: Bul. 10, 6: xv ditto bö:ri: Kam, 62, 7; Tuh. 16a. 12. VU?D büri: Hap. leg.; the underlying concept seems to be 'somcthing screwed into something else”, if so, Dev. N. fr. bür-. Xak. xı büri: "ayru”l-sahm fi madxali'l-ru'z. “the head of an arrovv shaft in the entry to the socket (of the arrow head)”, hence one says basak büri:si:: büri: xaşab musnada fi fühdt”l-şirb mağrüza murakkaba ba"duha bi-ba'd kaylá yanşaqq fühdt hull şirb 'pieces of wood placed in the mouths of vessels and pushed in and fitted together so that the mouths of the vessels shall not be damaged" Kag. III 220. Dis. BRB D borba:ğ Hap. leg.; N.Ac. fr. borba:-. Xak. xr borba:ğ a/-mafl sea'l-taswif fi'l-umür 'dallying. and dilatoriness in dealing with affairs! Kaş. I 461. D borba:s N./A.S. fr. borba:-. Survives only(? in NC Kzx. borbas (of a man) 'flabby, inert”, (of ground) “soft, yielding". Xak. xı borba:ş rs al-amru'l-muxtalitu 'lladi là yu"raf maxracuhu “a confused affair of which the issue is unknown' Kaş. 7 459 (MS., in error, yorba:). Dis. V. BRBborba:- this V. and its der. f.s, except borba:ş, where a survival fixes the first vowel, are all Hap. leg. Cf. boyba:-. Xak. xı er ı:şığ borba:dı: sawwafa'l-raculu'l-amr wa lam yubrimhu "the man was dilatory over the affair and did not handle it efficiently! Kaş. III 275 (borba:r, borba:ma:k). D borbat- Caus. f. of borba:-. Xak, xı ol anin işin borbattı: atıqa"a amrahu fi tagwig tea tasteif “he got his (someone else's) affair into a muddle by dilatoriness” Kaş. /7 327 (borbatu:r, borbatma:k). D borbal- Pass. f. of borba:-. Xak. xi anın ı:şı: borbaldı: /agazewaga anrulhu "his affair got into a muddle” Kaş. II 228 (borbalu:r, borbalma:k). D borbaş- Co-op. f. of borba:-, with a connotation of action affecting the whole of the Subject. Xak. xi ış borbaşdı: ixtalafa'l-amr "the: affair (etc.) got (thoroughly) confused' Kaş. II 203 (borba:şur, borba:şma:k). Mon. BRC SF burç Sec murç. Dis. BRC D barça: Equative f. of ba:r , “all”, S.i.a.m.l.g.; in SW only 'l'km. One of several words with this meaning, cf. tolp, kop, F kamağ, köp, etc. See Doerfer II 683. Türkü vri ff. (and whatever evil blasphemies that wicked demon 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 401 
     
   
   
       DIS. BRC thought of) barça: [gap] “all of them” Toy. 777 1v. 2(ET Y II 179): UyÉ. viri barca: Şu. Sa. (damaged passage): viri ff. Man.-A (after a list of gods) bular barça “all these” M 7 zr, 3 (1): a.0. do. 6 (i): Man. işin barça kodur “he puts down his work completely! M 7 17, 2; (whatever things distress mankind) barça “they all” (arise from anger and perversity) T'T I1 16, 46; olar barca kamığun “they all together” 777 125; 0.0. do. 75, 104: Chr. (whatever children are under two years old) barçanı ólürüpler “kill them all' U 7 ro, 3: Bud. olarnı barça U III 28, 5; (giving alms) barçasın bérür erdi 'he gave them all away' do. 4o, 31; and many 0o.0.: Civ. (the wishés in your mind) barça kandı “are all satished' TT I 115; (if one mixes hoopoe”s bones and musk) yüzke barça sürtser “and rubs it thoroughly into the face” TT VII 23, 6; and many o.o.: Xak. barça: a Particle (harf) meaning al-Rull “all”, one says barça: keldi:le:r “they all came” Kaş. I 417 (verse); seven o.o.: KB kamuğ barça munluğ törütülmişi “all those created by Him are oppressed with care” 5; o.o. 266, etc.: xı(?) Tef. barça “all” gr: Çağ. xv ff. barça (and barı) cümdlesi "all of them” Vel. 128 (quotn.); barça (r) “ama “all” (quotn.) (and (2) “vhile it exists”) Sax, 121r. 16: Xvvar. xim barça “all” ' Ali $1; xiv ditto MN 119; Nahc. 379, 2: Kom. xiv ditto in several usages CC/, CCG, Gr. so (quotns,): Kip. xiv barça: al-kull İd. go: xv al-nàs kulluhum barŞa: (sic) kigi:le:r Kav. 39, 19; barça/barşa in grammatical section Tul. 82a. 4 ff. VUD borça: Hap. leg., Equative f. of 2 bo:r (?), which from the context must be something violent. V. ''homsen ( Turcica 94, note 2) suggested that there was an old word bor meaning “a storm', of which NE, NC bora- “to be stormy' R IV 1662 was the Den. V.; and it has been suggested that SW Osm. bora “a violent wind' is a later form. "This is not wholly impossible, but it is more probable that Osm. bora is a corruption of Greek boreas “nörth wind', and it is very odd that, if there really was a word bor meaning anything as ordinary as 'a storm', there should be no other trace of it. It is more likely that this is the Equative f. of 1 bo:r *wine' with the implication that too much wine leads to disorder. "Türkü viir Türğeş xağan süsi: Bolcu:da: otça: borça: kelti: “the Türgeş xağan”s army advanced from Bolçu: like a fire or .. ” I E 375; ILE 27. D borçı: N.Ag. fr. 1 bo:r; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vıri(?) Civ. borç Salğar “the wine merchant (or wine grower?) Salgar' USb. 53, 4, 3-4: Xak. xi KB (in a list of the kind of people the king dislikes) yava erse borçı yà kıyğan elig "if a man is a-reckless wine-bibber or crookedhanded” 8so, bor içme ayà borçı “do not drink wine, you wine-bibber' 2096: xır(?) At. (in a passage lamenting the decay of presentday morals) kim ol borçı erse kişi yégi ol, kerek erse yéglik yorı borçı bol “f a man is a wine merchant (or wine-bibber?) he is (reckoned) the most superior of mankind, if you   357 must be superior, go and become a wine merchant (or wine-bibber?)' 409-10 (two MSS. read borçı, in one glossed may-furüş "wine merchant', and this is clearly the better reading whichever the meaning of borçı, the other two read yüzel, in one glossed yüz alay(?); Arat preferred to read yüzgi translating it *two-faced', but the word would be Hap. leg. and this would not be the normal meaning of such a word). S bürçe: See bürge: ?D burçak perhaps Dev. N. fr. bu:r- in the sense of something fragrant, various kinds of pulse, usually *bean', sometimes 'pea'; and metaph, “a hailstone, a bead of sweat', and the like. S.ia.m.lg. except NE with minor phonetic changes. See Doerfer 11 73o. Uyğ. viit ff. Civ. burçak “beans”, sometimes specified as black, green, or red TT VII 14, 6o ff.; 16, ro ff., tuturka:nla:r burça:k (spelt p-) şeke:r 'rice, beans, and sugar' VIII I.13; burçakça “the size of a bean” H I 197; a.o. H JI 8, 32 (işle:-): Xak. xı burçak ak -lübiyà 'beans': burçak habbàtu'l-'araq 'beads of sweat! Kaş. I 466: Çağ. xv ff. burçak a kind of pulse (/rubibat) like chick-peas (nuxud) of a greenish (457) colour; in Ar. xullar (pea, bean, lentil' ; and metaph. tagarg-i kü(ik 'a small hailstone the size of a chick-pea” Sar. 132v. 15: Kom. xiv 'hail' burçak, 'vegetables" bircak (sc) CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiu al-barad *hailstone' burçak, which also means a/-himmaş 'peas' Hou. s, 8, al-himmaş burçak do. 9, 16: xiv burçak af/-barad İd. 30; al-kirsinna “chick-peas” burçak Bul, 6, 16 (but al-himmaş nuxut!): xv haşd “pebble” bursak Tuh. 12b. 11: Osm. xviii burçak (after Çağ.) and in Rürri, gawdàna 'cattlefood', in Pe. mulk (black beans and in Ar. culubán (peas, vetch”) Sar. 132v. 15. D bürçek Dev. N. fr. bür- in the sense of something twisted and curly; 'forelock' and the like. Survives in SW Osm. bürçek/ bürçük (also spelt with p-) 'curly hair”, and perhaps elsewhere; but NE pürçük, NC Kir. bürçük, Kzx. bürşik “bud” are Dim. f.s of bür and SE Türki burcek/bürcek: NC Kir. bürcók 'corner, angle' seems to be a Dim. f. of Ar. burc. See Doerfer Il 731. Xak. xi bürçek nàgivatw'l-insán wa sabibatu'l-faras “the forelock of a man or horse' Kaş. I 476: xıı(?) Tef. bürcek ditto 108 (bórgek): Çağ. xv ff. pürçük (so spelt) “a small flag ('aláma) in the shape of a ribbon (mangala) made of brocade (ibrişim) San. 132v. 17: Kip. xi ru'usu'l-ağşön “the tips of branches' bürçek which also means “tufts (al-surrüba) of silk, etc.” Hou. 7, 13: xiv bürçek al-ndsiya İd. 30: Osm. xiv ff. bürçek/bürçük (?p-) 'curl, forelock'; c.i.a.p. TTS I 133; H 187; IH 579 (p-); IV 643 (p-). F perçem See beçkem. ?F barçın “silk brocade”. N.o.a.b., but the standard word for “silk” in Cuv. where it is spelt purçın, purçin, purçum, purçun,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 402 
     
   
   
     358 porçüm, purcán, porçin, purcén Ash. 1X 309-10 (Quv. -€- is a sound like -Sy-). One of several words with this meaning; cf. ağız, éggii:tl:, çi:t, çıxansı:, 2 cikin, cuz, torku:, ka:fğar, kaçaç, kutay, xuhi, loxtay, züngüm. "The Turks did not manufacture silk brocade, and it is unlikely that there were many, if any, native words for it. Morphologically çıxansı:, kutay, xulim, loxtay, and züngüm look Chinese. Eşgü:ti: looks "Tokharian, since sk-, sk- are characteristic initials in that language. Barçın may be a Lev, fr. Tokharian A pa$im “treasure” (van VVindekens, op. cit. s.v. bokurst, p. 88). For the use of the same word for “silk brocade” and 'treasure! cf. afr. Uyğ. vurff. Bud. barçın Maitrisimit fragment 98 (TT VI, p. 8o, note 391, 17): Xak. xı barçın al-dibdc “silk brocade' occurs 15 times, / 153 (eşüklik), 175 (1 0p-), ctc.; n.m.e.: KB (the words of a wise man are) barcin tózi “like brocade' 555: xiit(?) Tef. istabraq “a silk garment embroidered with gold” barçın gr: xiv //1veh.(?) al-dibac ba:rçın Rif. 167 (only): Xwar. xvi ditto Nahc. 33, 1-2; Kip. xiv barçın dibác İd. 30. Tris. V. BRCD burcaklan- Refl, Den. V. fr. burcak; pec. to Kaş. Xak. xi ter burçaklandı: tafiabbaba l-"araq “the sweat formed drops';: also used of other liquids when they form drops Kaş. H 273 (burgaklanu:r, burçaklanma:k), 0.0. J 466, 9; 1I 279, zo. D bürceklen- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. bürcek. Xak. xı at bürçeklendi: nabatat şabibatu”l-faras "the horse grew a forelock'; also used when a man's forelock (nástya) grows Kaş. II 276 (bürçeklenü:r, bürçeklenme:k). E burçıntur- occurs in Suv. 136, 11 in a string of verbs meaning “to distress, hurt? irintürdüm burçınturdum örletdim emgetdim, comparison with other similar phr. shows that it is an error for busandur-, Mon. BRD VU bart n.oa.b. Xak. xi bart naytalu'l-şardb vea mihydl kull màyi' “a vessel for measuring wine or any other liquid” Kaş. 7 341; a.o. I 93 (agut): Oğuz xi bart al-küzw'lladi vugrabi' [-má! fihi "a mug for drinking water' 7 341 (mis-spelt vart in the MS.). VU 1 bert bürt a quasi-onomatopoeic; the nearest parallel seems to be SW Osm. pert pert/pert mert 'bruised'. Xak. xı one says bert bürt tuttr: axadahu min kull cánib faca'ata(n) "he took him by surprise from all sides” Kaş. I 341 (mis-spelt yert yürt). D 2 bert Pass. Dev. N. fr. bé:r-; lit. 'something given”, in practice some kind of a tax, prob. 'a head tax”. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. TT VI 11 (ért): Civ. in USp. 73, an agreement between two persons whose slaves had married without permission, it is provided that each party should receive the tax (bért al-) of his DIS. BRC own slave; a.0.0.; ért bért USp. 88, 41-2 etc. (ért): Xak. xi bért "the tax (a/-dariba) which a master receives from his slave each year”), it is more correct (a/l-actvad) to say bé:rt with -é:Kaş. 1 341. VU?D bürt perhaps Dev. N. fr. bür- in the sense of something that twists the victim. Xak. xı bürt al-cátíim "nightmare”, and one calls it (VU) kóti: (unvocalized) bürt Kaş. 7 341; a.o. İİ 10 (bas-). Mon. V. BRDbert- (:p-) 'to injure, hurt (someone, etc. Acc.) more particularly without breaking the skin. Survives only(?) in SE Tar. bert- "to cut, hack, incise” R 71” 1604 and SW Osm. pert- “to bruise, sprain”, Türkü viri ff. Man. (if through ignorance or wickedness) beş tepriğ .. . neçe sıdımız bert(t)imiz erser “ve have somehow injured or hurt the five gods! Chuas. 49-52; tepriler köpülin bert(t)ümiz erser do. 328-9: Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. köpülin bertmenler “do not break his heart” PP 8, 5; a.o.0. in PP: Civ. (gap) sıdı seni bertgeli 'itinjures(Hend.) you" TT717:Xak. xı ol anın eligin bertti: "hc bruised (arvta'a) his hand" ş also used of anything which wounds or breaks it without inflicting a visible injury (carahahu av kasara kasr ğayr mubin) Kaş. 111 425 (berte:r, bertme:k). VU bürt- 'to touch' and the like. In Bud. terminology bürtmek translates Sanskrit sparsa 'touching, feeling' one of the five senses. In TT VIII spellings with -ó- and -ü- both occur. N.o.a.b.; modern verbs of this form cannot be connected semantically, Uyğ. vi ff. Bud. Sanskrit sbysati “he touches' börte:r (spelt b-) TT VIII A.27; samıhrtya “having collected” bürtüp (spelt b-) yığıp do. C.8; (then 1 considered how perception arises, and after deep reflection 1 fully understood that it arises) bürtmekte ötkürü “because of touching (sparsa) U II 7, 18, o.o. U III 17, 15 (karva:-); TT V 24, 66: VI 158; X 445 (yumşa:k), Suv. 349, 2; 367, 13 etc. Dis. BRD bertü: Hap. leg., but cf. bertülen-, Xak. xi bertü: a/-qurtaq "a tunic” Kaş. 1 416. VU borta: Hap. leg., but cf. bortala:-; prob. al-w. Xak. xi borta: ruqáqátu'l-dahab 'thin sheets of gold” Kay. 7 416. D birtem Den. Adj./Adv. fr. bir; lit. "like one', it seems to mean something like 'completely, | wholeheartedly. — N.o.a.b. | Uyg. viri ff. Man.-A M HİT 32, 2 (v) (damaged passage): Bud. birök . . . birtem kötgeli umasar “if he is quite unable to depart” U 7II 76, 20; birtem ozup kutrulup 'being completely saved (Hend.) TT IV 12, 50; o.o. do. 59 (üzmele:-); V 24, 78 (egrik); Suv. 49, r: 618, 4 etc.: Xak. xı one says ol yumuşka: birtem bardı: “he went on the errand (/2”/-risála) devotedly and for a long time (mun  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 403 
     
   
   
     .MON. BRĞ 359 gapi'a(n) tawila(n)), as if he did not wish to : Uyğ- viri ff. Civ. bértürü yarlikadimiz “ve return” Kaş. 7 484: KB (i£ a man takes pleasure in drinking wine) söziksiz bu er boldı birtem yava 'undoubtedly this man becomes completely irresponsible' 339. D berdin (?bérdin). Adv. fr. *ber, see berü: lit. (situated) on this side", but normally uscd for 'south' as one of the cardinal points. N.o.a.b. Türkü vrir T 11 (öndün): Uy£g. vri (west of the Selene river and) Yılu:n Kol berdin sıpar “south of Yilu:n Kol Şu, E 3: viri ff. Man. M İİI 8, 8 (ii) (yırtın): Bud. bérdin TT VI 291 (05dün). PUF borduz Hap. leg.; l.-w. through some unidentified Iranian language, prob. Middle Pe., fr. Greek paradeisos "a park”. Xak. xi borduz al-fáliz 'kitchen garden; melon patch'; this is not a native Turkish word (fayr asliya) Kaş. I 457 (Ar. faliz fr. Pe, páliz, also fr. Greek paradetsos). Dis. V. BRDD burut- Hap. Jeg.?; Caus. f. of bur-. Xak. xı o:t eşiçni: burutti: “the fire made the pot (etc.) steam' (baxxarat); and one says oğla:n burutti: radama'l-sabi muntina() “the boy let a maladorous fart'; buritti: (sic?; only rü” vocalized) alternative form Kaş. II 302 (burutu:r, burutma:k, r4' not vocalized). VUD bürtül- Dass. f. of bürt-, n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vui ff. Bud. (then the Buddha washed the sick man and) tepri burxan yumşak kollın) tügi bürtülmişke *when his (body) hairs were touched by'the soft hands of the Buddha” U III 38, 33-4. D bertin- (?p-) Refl. £, generally used as Pass., fr. bert- , “to be injured', etc, Survives in NE Alt, Bar., Leb., Tel. pertin- “to be dislocated; to have a miscarriage” £ 7V 1237; '(Tuv. bertin- "to be injured' and SW Osm. pertin- “to be bruised, spraincd'. Uyğ. vut fI. Civ. (a remedy for a man who owing to a fall from a horse or a roof, or a flogging) İçi bertinmişke kan tomurmışka 'suffers from internal injuries or loss of blood' /7 7 181: Xak. xı eliğ bertindi: “the hand was bruised' (wata'at, sic) by a blow (şadma) and the like, and weakness and limpness (wal wa futür) appeared in it Kaş. İT 237 (bertinü:r, bertinme:k): Kip. xiv (bertük al-'udwu'l-mafkük “a dislocated limb”, hence one says) bertindi: wati'ald. şo: Osm. xiv to xvi bertin-(?pertin-) “to be dislocated or sprained' TTS 1I 132; IV 97. D bartur- Caus. f. of bar-; “to cause (someone Acc.) to go, or go away'. Survives in several NE languages as pardır-, SW Osm. vardir-. Xak. xr ol meni: evke: barturdi: “he made me go (adhabani) home (etc.)'! Kaş. II 171 ' (barturur, barturma:k). -D bértur- Caus. f. of bé:r-; "to cause (someone Dat.) to give (something Acc.), to cause (something Zcc.) to be given”. S.i.s.m.]. “VUD bortalanhave deigned to order that (this binding written command) shall be given” USp. 88, 47-8: Xwar. xırı(?) bérdürsün “may he order that (the whole world) shall be given (to your descendants)' Og. 327. D bertiş- (?p-) Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of bert-. Xak. xı ola:r bi:r ikindi:nip köplin bertişdi:le:r “they exasperated one another (taxaşand) and wounded (caraha) one another's hearts" Kaş, 11 203 (bertişü:r, bertişme:k). VUD bürtüş- Recip. f. of bürt- , "to come into contact with (something, birle)”. N.o.a.b. Uy£. viii ff. Bud, TT V 24, 71 (adruk). Tris. BRD VUD bürtüglüg P.N./A. fr. *bürtüg N.Ac. fr. bürt-. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (the king touched us) linxwa teg yumsak bürtüglüg oğlağu eligin “vith his delicate hand which is as soft as a lotus to the touch' U III 17, 14. D berdinki: (?bérdinki:) N./A.S. fr. berdin. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vini ff. Man. berdinki yirdinki (sic) yér suv 'the countries to the south and north' M III 8, 8 (ii). ' Tris. V. BRDVUD borta:la:- Hap. leg,, Den. V. fr. borta:; mis-spelt with initial t- on all three occasions. Xak. xı ol börk borta:la:di: "he fastened plates of gold (alsaqa rugáqgáti'l-dahab) on the cap” (etc.) Kaş. 11J 351 (borta:lJa:r, borta:la:ına:k, corrected fr. -ne:8). D bertülen- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. bertü: Xak. xi er bertülendi: “the man wore a tunic' (al-qurtug) Kaş. III zoo (bertüJenü:r, bertülenme:k). Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of borta:la:-. In one place the initial is t-, in another b-, in the third it is undotted. Xak. xt börk bortalandı: “the cap was gilded (dahhabat) with plates of gold” Kaş. III zoo (bortalanu:r, bortalanma:k).” Mon. BRĞ ?D bark perhaps Den. N. fr. ba:r; “movable property, household goods'; hardly ever used by itself, nearly always in the phr. ev bark 'dwelling and household goods'. This phr. survives in SW Osm. and Jarring records it in SE Türki as öybarka/öyvaka 'household', and also the phr. balabarka/balavaka “family, but otherwise bark seems to be extinct. Türkü vir in the accounts of the erection of Kül Tegin”s and Bilge: Xağan”s . tombs bark 'grave goods” is mentioned several times in association with bediz '(painted) ornamentation' (of the walls, etc.), e.g. apar adınçı:ğ bark yaratu:rtum 'I had various kinds of grave goods made for it” 7 S 12; o.o. I N 13 (ét-); I NE; TN 14; Hl. NE— sıpa:r süsi: eviğ barkığ yulığlı: bardı: 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 404 
     
   
   
      360 'one wing of his army went to pillage (our) tents and houschold goods' /7 E 32; 0.0. do. 34 and 37: vun ff. Man. (if we have found the light of” he five gods) evke barkka “to our dwellingr and household goods' CAuas. 235; o.0. do. 249; TT 11 8, 41-2: Uyf. viii evin barkın Su. E 2, 12(?): vur ff. Man.-A kalt yanı yémislik ev bark yaratırça “as one makes a new orchard or house and household goods' M I 14, 8-10: Man. (meditating on the transitoriness of the body) evtin barktin üntiler “they left house and home” TT 7/7 137-8; o.o. Wind. 32, 34; TT IX 62: Bud. evde barkta ada kılğuçı (devils) ^vho cause danger in the house and home” TT V ro, 84; 0.0. VI 61, 63 ctc.: Civ. (various kinds of property) evümdeki barkımdakı USp. 98, ıq: Xak. xi one says ev bark b5ayt va. dür “house and home”, bark cannot be used separately (yufrad), but only in (this) combination (muzdatcica(n)) Kaş. 1 348; (the enemy wished to sell) evin barkın diürahu ta 'agárahu “his houses and property! 7/71 333, 9 KB ev bark 4536, 4545, 4727: xın(?) Tef. ev bark “home” or: Çağ. xvíff. bark is used coupled (ba-tariq-? muzátcaca) with öy in the phr. öy bark xönumdn ta xdna sta atát al-bayt "house and furniture” San. 1211, 21. Dis. BRG barak “a long-haired dog”, Survives in NC Kir, Kzx.; some NW languages and SW Osm. in its original meaning and sometimes more generally for “shaggy, long-haired” of other animals, rugs, etc. See Doerfer I1 728. Xak. xı barak “a long-haired (ahíab) dog”, the "Turks believe that when a vulturc (al-nasr) gets old it lays two eggs and incubates them; and out of one of them there hatches this dog which is called barak, and is the swiftest and the best hunter of all dogs, and out of the other a chick, and this is its last brood ” Kaş. / 377: Kip. xv Kalb “dog” translated inter alia barak glossed in the margin “shcep dog” 7'uh. 30b. 10. D barig N.Ac. fr. bar-; except in the phr. eriğ barığ (see 2 erig) n.o.a.b., but see burığ. Xak. xi onc says ol barığ bardı: dahaba dahába(n) wa lam yu'arric "ala şay” “he went straight ahead and did not turn aside for anything! Kaş. I 371. S biruk See buyruk. D buriğ Hap. leg.; N./A.S. fr. bu:r-; misvocalized bari in the MS. Xak. xı burığ al-şay”ıc l-muntin 'something malodorous'; it is used in the Hend. (fi'I-izdrwac) sasığ buri&amp; Kaş. 1 372. ?D burki: “vrinkled” , n.o.a.b. "The morphological relationship between this and other connected words is obscure; burkif and burkit- look like Dev. N. and Caus. f. of *burk- and burkur- like a Den. V. fr. this word. The two groups can be joined only by assuming that this word is a Dev. N. fr. *burk- “to be wrinkled'. Uyf. viirff. Civ. koxşa:k bu:rki (spelt pu:rké) bolor “he be  MON. BRG comes weak and wrinkled! TT VIII L4: Xak. xı anything which has wrinkles (gudün) in it is called burkr: ne:p, for example a frowning face (a/-zcachı” l-"abis) with a wrinkled forehead Kaş. 7 427; a.o. / 18, 15. S borğu: Sce bo:rğu:y. D bırkığ Hap. leg.; (of a horse, etc.) “a snort'. Presumably Dev. N. fr. *birk- or Tbirki:-, the onlv cognate word is birkir-, q.v., and there are the same morphological problems as in the case of burkr: q.v. NE Tuv. bilia 'snort' is presumably a corruption of this word. Xak. xi bırkiğ “the snort (raxir) of a horse or donkey'; onc says at birkiği: Kaş, I 461. D burkığ Hap. leg.; completely unvocalized and the b- undotted (but, being betwcen birkiğ and başla:ğ, must be b-). Sce burki:, presumably Dev. N. fr. *burk-. Xak. xı burlag inziwa'wl-eild wa fayrihi “a wrinkle in the skin, etc.” Kaş, I 461. E barğan See bazğan. D barkin (?barkı:n) Dev. N./A. fr. bar-; the word is in a section of which the heading fw lánifr'lán. variousiy vocalized', requires a long vowel in the Suff,, which seems to be unique but is presumably a Sec. f. of -Bir:n. Pec. to Xak, Xak. xı barkın kişi: “a traveller (al-raculu'l-musáfir) whom nothing turns aside from his objective! Kaş, 7 440: KB (I treat all people alike, whether they are my son, or a neighbour, or stranger) kerek barkin erse kecigli konuk 'or 4 guest passing through and determined to push on” 817; kişi barkını “a man who has travelled widely' 4326; a.o. 4727. CF burxan compound of Chinese fu (Giles 3,589) and presumably xan. "The Chincse character was the one chosen to transcribe Buddha, and was pronounced approximately bur in. NW. China ín vir-vilr 'l'his word, corresponding properly to some phr. like Buddhardiğ, was the one chosen to represent Buddha in the earliest ''urkish translations of Buddhist scriptures, which must have anteceded the appearance of Manichacism among** the Turks, and was taken over by the Manichaean missionaries to translate words like 'prophet' applied e.g. to Mani himself. In the Moslem period, like 2 but, q.v. it came to mean “idol” and still survives in one or two NE languages purkan R IV 1386; 'Tuv. burğan “God” and in NC Kir. epics burkan 'idol'. See Doerfer lI 732. Türkü vri ff. Man. burxan, usually in the Plur., is common in Chuas., e.g. tepri yalavaçı burxanlar “God”s messengers, the burxans' 64—5, 69; “the burxans and the pure Elect! 133; the god Zurvan, the sun and moon gods, the mighty god and the burxans 173-5; tepri Mant burxan M III 15, 7 (i): Uyfi. vin fi. Man.-A tepri Mant burxan 4A [ ız, 13: Man. kapım Mani burxan 77 III 2 (and note); M III 36, 1 (9) (tepriken): Bud. burxan Buddha is very  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 405 
     
   
   
       MON. BRG common: Civ. buyanlığ kişi burxanlar birle tüz erür 'a virtuous man is equal to the Buddhas" TT VII 42, 2: Xak. xı burxa:n al-şanam 'idol'; and 'a painted idol' (a/-dumya) is called bediz burxan Kaş. 7 436; furxan (sic) evin yıktımız burxan üze sıçtımız "we destroyed the idol house and defecated on the idols” 7 343, 26; a.o. III 84 (yükün-): KB sığıl burxanın 'break his idol' s486: xii?) Tef. burxan/but burxan “dol” 112: Kip. xv zawba'a “devil” (yek and) burğan Tuh. 17b. 11. VU bo:rğu:y 'trumpet'; the phonctics are chaotic and it may well be 2 l.-w. Kaş. alone has final -y, Muh. may point to -0- and Kom. points to -u- in the first syllable, but it survives in some NE and NW languages as birği/pirği and in SW Az., Osm. as boru, See Doerfer lI 735. Uyğ. viu ff. Bud. borğu “trumpet" in Maitrisimit, see “Ali sı: Xak. xı bo:rğu:y (in a section for words ending in a long vowel followed by -y) "the trumpet' (al-sabbrr) which is blown Kaş. III 241: xın(?) Tef. borğu/ borku “trumpet” rtr: xiv. Muh. in Mel. 5, 9 ff, Rif. 75-6 there is a para. about three pronunciations of vocalic zedro, the first pronunciation is -u:- as in U:Z, U:r 'strike! and ” bu:z; the second is apparently short -u-, illustrated by a/-ğarb (corruption of al-darb “a blow") u:rğu:, a/-büq 'trumpet' borğu: and ahdab (?corruption of a/-axd) alğu: and seems to refer to the final -u:; the third is apparently -0- or -0:-, and is illustrated again by a/-ğarb (sic) o:rğu:, al-bzg bo:rfu:; alladi: o:$ and “arrovr” o:k. The text is obviously corrupt in places, but does secm to suggest a pronunciation bo:rğu:, a.o. sı, 3; 146: Caf. xv ff. VU borğu “a hollow twig (şax) which they blow like a fifc” (nafir) San. 132v. 25: Xwar. xın (VU) borğu *trumpet' Afi 51: xtv ditto Qutb 38; Nahc. 177, 3: Kom. xiv burğu "trumpet CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiv (VU) borgu: al-büq İd. 29; al-büq borğa: (sic); al-büqu'l-nafir tuc bırğu: (sic; lit. "brass trumpet") Bul. 6, 7: xv büq borğa (in margin in SW(?) hand bor) Tuh. 8a. r; (Osm. xvru burfu in Riümi followed by several translations in Sar. 132v. 25 has nothing to do with this word but is a Dev. N. fr. bur- for bür- which is still current with the same range of meanings). Dis. V. BRGD.burkit- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of *burk-(?); sce burkr, Xak. xi ol yü:zin burkitti: kalaha (sic) swachahu "he made his face stern' Kaş. II 339 (burkitu:r, burkitma:k). ?D birkir- (of a horse, etc.) to snort'; mörphologically obscure, see birkiğ. This and other cognate Verbs occur in several modern languages, NE Koib., Sag. ptrÉir-; Khak. ditto.; SE Türki purxura-/puxra- Shaw; purkuBS; burkura- Şarring, NC Kir, burkulda-, Kzx. birkiüda-; SC Uzb. piskir- (sic); NW Kaz. bırğılda-, Kk. pırkıra-/pıskır-, Kumyk piışğır-, Nog. pirxilda-/piskir-. Xak.xi at bırkırdı: gayara'l-faras “the horse   ,361 (etc.) snorted' Kaş. I1 171 (birkira:r, birkirma:k). D burkur- Intrans. Den. V. fr. burki:; 'to be wrinkled'. Pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı işle:r yü:zi: burkurdi: “the woman's face was wrinkled and drawn together' (émzauwd ... wa'ngabaga); also used of skin when it is wrinkled Kaş, JJ 171 (burkura:r, burkurma:k); essiz yüzi: burkara:r (sic) 'alas for his shrunken (sáhim) face' II 188, 12. Tris. BRG D baraklığ P.N./A. fr. barak; pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı baraklığ kişi: "a man who owns a long-haired (aab) dog” Kaş. I 497; a.o. 501, 13. ?E birfaru: (?bérgerü:) Hap. leg.; Directive f. of *ber; this is the only der. f. fr. this word with back vowels and is prob. mis-spelt. Uyğ. viii ff. Man.-A (in a passage about the effect of winds blowing from various quarters) bırğarudun sınar yél tursar “if a wind rises blowing from the south' M III 10, 14-15 (i). D barığsa:k N./A.S. fr. barığsa:- , “vishing to go away'. Pec. to Keş. and mentioned only in grammatical examples. Xak. xr Kaş. 1 24, 19; İİ 55, 11) 57, 2-3. Tris. V. DRGD barığsa:- Desid. Den. V. fr. barığ. N.o.a.b. Uy£. vir ff. Bud. (then he said “Tam going away'; and the oxherd said) neğülük barifsadigiz *why did you want to go away ?' PP 68, 8 (mistranslated by Pelliot): Xak. IX ol evke: barığsa:dı: “he wished to go (tamannö”l-dahab) to his house" (etc.) Kaş. III 333 (barığsa:r, barığsa:ma:K), a.o. I 281, 7: xiv. Muh.(?) aráda'l-mudiy “to vvish to go” ba:rığsa:- Rif. 134 (only). Mon. BRG berk “firm, stable, solid”, the original form of the word which also appears as bek (q.v.) fr. an early date. An early l.-w. in Mong. as berke (Haenisch 15) where it means rather 'difficult, severe”, and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. except perhaps NE where Tuv. berge is a reborrowing fr. Mong.; in some languages berik/bérik. In some languages berk and bek have developed rather different meanings, berk being only (of a door) “shut, fastened”, Uyğ. vır ff. Man, berk TT IX 109 (damaged): Bud. Sanskrit drka 'firm, stable' berk (spelt -) yarp TT VIII B.3; sihtra ditto, ditto but yarp do. 15; berklerde ariglarda (gap) *among firm, pure men' TT IV 6, 48-9 (in a parallel passage U II 84, 2 the first word is mistranscribed(?) beglerde): Civ. (let him hold this amulet) ayasinda berk 'firmly in the palm of his hand' TT VII 27,8: Xak.xr berk ner 'something solid, firm' (muhkam) the original (form) was bek and the -r- was added (zàyida) Kaş. I 349; a.o. III 445 (berkle:-): KB azığlığ eren berk tügünler yazar “a   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 406 
     
   
   
     362 man with long teeth can loosen tight knots! 283, bu erk birle beélik uli bolsu berk 'with thisauthority may the foundationofthe province become solid” 942; 0.0. 361, 701, etc.: xi(?) KBVP berk bu mulknı tutuğli kişi "a man who holds this kingdom firmly! 40: xin(?) Tef. berk “strong” (cord) gg: xiv Mu. al-mühkam berk Mel. 83, 14; Rif. 189: Çağ. xv ff. börk (with -k”) berk ve multkam Vel. 138 (quotn.); berk multam tea usturcár "firm, solid” San. 145v. 18 (quotns.): Xwar. xr(?) yaxşı berk (or berik?) baluk “a good strongly defended town' Og. r76-—vvith Mong. form and meaning bérke emğek 'severe pain” do. 24: xiv berk 'firm, firmly! Qutb 30; berk kıl- “to fasten” (a door) Nahe. 19, 12: Kom. 'firm, rigorous! berk CCI, CCG; Gr. 56 (quotns.): Kip. xiv berk a/-qazemi 'strong' İd. 3o: xv şadid 'steady, firm" berk Tuh. zob. 4; qawtwi (kati and) berk, the latter also al-sidda do. 29b. 9: Osm. xiv ff, berk 'fitm, solid", etc.; c.i.a.p. TTS 191; II 131; İİİ 83; IV gs. börk “a cap”. S.i.a.m.l.g. with minor phonetic changes, e.g. NC Kir. bórük. Sec Doerfer 11 737. Xak. xı börk al-qalansuwa "a cap” Kaş. I 340 (prov); II] zoo (bortalau-); 3sr (borta:la:-) a.o.0.: KB nece baş bedüse bedük bórk kedür 'the bigger a man's head gets, the bigger the cap that he wears' 435: xi(?) At. burun başka bórkni keder bas kerek “you must first have a head before you put a cap on it” 3oo: xiv Muh. al-qalansuwa bö:rk Mel. 66, ız, Rif. 166: Çağ. xv ft. börk kuláh “cap” San. 132v. 27: Xwar. xiv börk ditto Qutb 36; bórük Nac. 349, rz: Kom. “cap” börk CCI; Gr.: Kip. xv idqiya 'skullcap' bórk Tuh. 23b. 8: Osm. xiv bórk 'cap'; c.i.a.p. TT. I 118; II 168; III iiz, IV 126. Dis. BRG C birök Adv. or Conjunction; bi:r with ök (2 ok) attached. A word of very indefinite meaning used at or near the beginning of sentences; v. G. (.AT'G, para. 417) translates it “nun, aber! (well, but, however?); but it is doubtful whether it had even as precise a meaning as this. Except for one occurrence in Türkü, it seems to occur only in Conditional sentences, sometimes in the phr. apam birók (see apap). It is therefore often translated 'if', but this sense is inherent in the Verb even if birók is absent. N.o.a.b. Türkü viti ff. Man. birók follows a finite Verb and seems to qualify a Ger. in -üp followed bv another finite Verb M 7 6, r, it begins a Cond. sentence T'T II 6, zo, ro, 93: Uy£. vir ff. Man. apam birók followed by Cond. sentence TT III 64: Bud. birók introducing a Cond. sentence is common TT IV 6, 25; V 26, 92-3; 28, 121; VII 40, 22 etc.; VIII Bı, etc.: Civ. every major para. in TT I begins birök . . . atlığ 1rk kelser 'if the hexagram named . . . appears'; 8.0.0.: XIV Chin.-Uyğ. Dict. ju huo “f” (Giles 5,668 5,316) birók me U I s6 (s.v. birók). MON. BRG D bürük Pass. Conc. N. fr. bür-. Survives in SE Türki bürük 'pucker, gather' S/ram 48 (only). It is an open question whether börek, 'a stuffed pancake', is also a later form of this word. İt has no other obvious etymology, but is consistently spelt with -ó- in SC xix Xiva Vam. 245; several NW languages: SW Osm., "Tkm. Xak. xı bürük “any circular drawstring” (xayf mudagwtvar) like that in the mouth of a leather food bag or the top of the trousers and the like Kay. 7 385: (Kip. xiv börek *pieces of dough stuffed with meat'; and when it is eaten on a skewer it is called sig börek İd. so, similar entry, adding “if stuffed with sugar called çeker börek” Ju. 8, 12). berğe: “a whip'; an old word ending in -£e:. İt is suggested in TT IV, p. 18, note Baz that it is a L-w. fr. Latin virga "a rod, stick” obtained through Middle Pe. but there does not seem to be any trace of the word in Pe., and the theory is improbable. N.o.a.b., completely displaced by the syn. word kamcct:, q.v. Cf. kafil. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. temir berğe “an iron whip! TT V ro, 93; o.o. TT IV o, 7 (and see note thercon) etc. (bedük), Suv. s, 23 (biregü): Civ. kamçı börğe yep “bcing flogged” USp. ss, 34; 20. TT VII 42, 5 (beltir): Xak. xr berğe: “a rod or whip (a/-qadib swa'l-satwf) used to flog thieves or drive donkeys” Kaş. 1 427; a.0. III 323, 7 (cati:la:-): KB ayama oful kizka berge yedür 'have no mercy, whip your son and daughter' 1494; o.o. 893 (2 kr:n), 2296, 2580 (sön-), 2988: Xvvar. xın(?) Og. 24-5 (emfgek). D be:rgü: Dev. N. fr. bö:r-, 'something which ought to be, or is, given'. Survives in SW Osm. vérgü/vergl 'gift, tax”, Tkm. bergi 'debt'. Uyğ. vırı ff. Civ. (E bought a skin of wine) sekiz sitir kümüş bérgüke 'at a price of 8 səfir. in cash” Fam. Arch., l. 114: Xak. xi bé:rgü: al-davn "a debt; one says anip maga: bi:r at be:rğü:si:.ba:r "he owes me one horse! Kaş, I 427: Xwar. xin(?) (he made friends) yaxşı bergü birle “vith goodly gifts” Og. 122; a.o. 195. bürğe: an old word ending in -£e:; .'flea'. An carly (xiv) l.-w. in Mong. (see Haenisch, Sino-mongolische Glossare I (ADAW, 1957), p. 13, No. 179); survives as bürge and the like in SE Türki, NC Kir,, Kzx.; SC Uzb.; NW Kk. and in 5W Osm. pire, Tkm. büre. "There is an irregular form NW Kaz. borça, Krım. Kumyk bürçe, Nog. bürşe, and see below, perhaps an abbreviated Dim. f. Xak. xı bür£ge: a/-barğüt “fea”, and a light-hearted fickle (a/-tayyöş) man is called bürğe: kişi: Kaş, I 427: xiv Muh. al-barğüt bürge: (-8- marked) Mel. 74,6; Rif. 177: Çağ. xv ff. bürge (with -&amp;-") kayk 'flea', in Ar. bargüt San. 132v. 28: Kip. xir al-barğüt bürce:; Tkm. büre: Hou. ız, 2: xiv bürçe: ditto İd. 3o; ditto büre/bürçe: Bul. ır, 6: Osm. xiv to xvii. büre “Tea”, c.i.a.p. TS I 133; II 187; III 133; IV 140. PUD bürgü:ç Hap. lcg.; spelt vergii:( in the MS. but its position between bodraç (P.N.) 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 407 
     
   
   
       DIS. V. .and bósgec indicates initial b- and the meaning shows it to be a N.I. fr. bür-. There arc many words in SW xx Anat. with this meaning and termination der. fr. syn. verbs, see e.g. evirgec SDD 559. Xak. xi bürgü:ç “a piece of wood (xaşaba) shaped like a sword used to turn bread in the oven' Kaş. 7 452. D börkçi: N.Ag. fr. börk, “a maker or seller of caps”, Xak. xr börkçi: a/-qalanisi "a capmaker! occurs in a prov. quoted in Kaş. 7 26, 20; 11 41, 15; 52, 18; n.m.e.: xiv Müh. kuládüzi ditto börkçi: Mel. 58, 9; bö:rkçi: Rif. 157: Kom. xiv ditto bór(k)ci CCI; Gr. .D bürkek Hap. leg.; spelt w. y- in the MS. .but between tolkuk and bezge:k, Etymologically connected vv. bürkür-, q.v. Xak. xı one says kö:k bürkek boldı: dacanati'l-samá' "the sky poured down rain” Kaş. TI 289: xın(?) Tef. bürkük (sic) "spray” 113. D berklig P.N./A. fr. berk and practically syn. vv, it. N.o.a.b. Uy£. viri ff. Civ. berklig yek icgekler él tutğalır 'devils (Hend.) with firm grips grasp the realm" 77 7 166: (Xak.) . xın(?) At. bérimdin baxil elgi ked berklig ol “the miser's hand is very unyielding in the matter of giving! 254; T«f. berklig (of a cell) “closed, shut' 99: X war. xiv cünimğa berklig *with a firm grip on my soul” Quib 31. Dis. V. BRGD birik- Intrans. Den. V. fr. bi:r, "to come together, be united', and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. - "Türkü vir see biriki:: Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. terip yincée savlarda bilge biligleri birikmis ol, tepridem köpülke birikmekde , kök tepri yanın Kilmis ol “their wisdom has - been concentrated in deep subtle sayings, by uniting themselves with the divine mind they have acted like heaven itself! Hiien-ts. 126-30: Civ. iki kópül birikdi "the two minds have come together' 7T 7 136; o.o. VHI go, 4-5: Xnk. xi KD aya bir birikmez sana bir ndin 'oh! "Thou One (God), no other is joined to "Thee” 8; bu iki birikse bolur er tükel "if . these two qualities are joined together a man becomes complete (or perfect)” 225; 0.0. 343, 862, 1664: xm(?) At. İki nen birikse bir erke kalı “if the two things are joined in one man” 149: Çağ. xv ff. birik(spelt) meftahid şudan “to be united' San. 145r. 26 (birikil- is syn. w. birik- do. r4şv. 9): Xwar. xiv birik- ditto Quf? 33: Kom. xiv ditto CCG, Gr.: Kip. xv ittahada wa'lta'ama - "to be united (Hend.) birik: Tuh. sb. 7. . D berkit- Caus. f. of berki:- Den. V. fr. berk (which is not noted earlier than Çağ. . XV fl. Vel. 138; San. 144v. 29; Xvvar. XIV. , - Qutb 3o and Kip. xiv İd. 30, 34); “to fasten, : make firm, consolidate', and the Iike. Syn. w. beküt-, survives in SE, SC, where it is the preferred form, NW and SW. Xak. xi ol berkitti: ne:pni: “he fixed (a/ikama) the thing (or.affair) Kaş. II 340 (berkitü:r, berkitme:k): «B bu söz berkitü 'confirming this , Statement' 661; a.o. 794: XIIi(?) Tef. berküt— bürkür- (?p-) . Kaş. BRG- 303 “to fasten” (a door) go: Çağ. xv ff. berkit(with -k-”) berkit- Vel. 138; berkit- (and berkiştür-) Caus. f.; muhkam hardan “to make firm! Sam. 145r. 23 (quotn.): Xwar. berkit- xri “to strengthen' '4/i 54: Kom. xiv "to make fast, strengthen' berkit- CCI; Gr.: | Kap. xin qazcccd min taqmiyati"l-şay"i maşnü" "to fasten (a manufactured article)” berkitHou. 43, 8: xiv (under bek and following the entry of berki:-) and in the Caus. f. berkit-/ bekit- /d. 34. D bergek- Hap. leg.?; Pass. Den. V. fr. berée:. Xak. vii ff. Uyğ. berge kağal üze berğekip “being flogged with whips and willow rods' Suv. 117, 12-13. : D berkle:- Den. V. fr. berk, morphologically alternative to, and more or less svn. :w. bekle:-, N.o.a.b. Xak. xi ol tawa:rin berkle:di: a/Zraza mülahu wa hafazahu "he guarded his property closely and protected it”, also used for imprisoning (habasa) a man, etc. or protecting (hafaza) a thing; originally bekle:di: or possibly taken fr. the phr. berk y€:r "a secure (al-hariz) place” Kaş. 111 445 (berkle:r, berkle:me:k), berkle: ne:mni: istawligi l-gay'! “keep the thing secure! 446, 8: KB negü teg kişen ol seni berkleyü “vhat kind of a hobble is it that fastens you?” 7or (but in 7oo bekle:-): xin(?) Tef. berkle- “to fasten” (a door) gg: Kom. xıv berklep “firmiy” CCG; Gr. D berklet- Caus. f. of berkle:-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı (as a grammatical example of a Caus. f. of this shape) ol ne:p berkletti: “he gave orders for the protection (5/-i/z) of the thing” Xaş, HI 424, 4; n.m.e.: xin(?) Tef. berklet“to order (someone) to imprison (someone Acc.) 99. “to spurt, gush'. Etvmologically connected with bürkek. Morphologically difficult; it is possible that this is an Intrans. Den. V. and bürkek a Den. N. fr. *burk (?p-) which might be an onomatopoeic for the sound of spurting. The modern forms mostly lack the final -r-. Survives in NE Alt., "Tel. pürkü- pürkür- "to splutter' R IV 1399; Khak. pürgür-; SE Türki pürkü- Bö, pürk- Jarrig; NC Kir, Kzx. bürk-; SC Uzb. purka- ; NW Kaz. bórk-; Kk., Kumyk bürk-; Nog. bürkü-. Xak. xr kó:k bürkürdi: dacanati'l-samá' “the heavens poured down rain'; and one says yufuci: to:nka: su:v bürkürdi: raşşa”/-qaşşarı”l-mö” 'ala'i- tatob li-yabullahu “the fuller sprayed water on the garment to moisten it' (irregular; the Verb is Intrans., perhaps an error of the author's for *bürkürtti:);; and one says ka:n bürkürdi: "blood gushed (za'ara) from the wound" II iyo (bürküre:r, bürkürme:k): KB (some flowers stretch out their hands holding incense) kayu bürkirer (MS. in error büvkirer) kin ajun yid kopar “some spray musk on the world and the fragrance rises' 98; (the night was dark) 'abir bürkirer tef “as if perfume was being sprayed' 4892: Kom. xiv bürkür- “to splutter” CCG; Gr.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 408 
     
   
   
     364 Tris. BRG D berüki: (? bérü:ki:) N./A.S. fr. berü:; "(situated) towards this side”. N.o.a.b. Cf. (VU) beryeki:. Türkü viii T 45-6, which is much damaged, contains a list of peoples who submitted to ÍInel Kağan, 4s perhaps ends Saka: Tejlk Toxar sayu:(?) and 46 certainly begins anta: berüki: (PU) Suk başlığ Soğdak 'all(?) the Saka, Persians and Tokharians and on this side of them the Sogdians headed by (PU) Suk” (the previous reading yerüki: is certainly wrong and meaningless): Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. (faith) yiliktin süpüktin berüki 'from the (inmost) marrow and bones outwards' (i.e. all-pervading) Stt. 153, 2-3; a.o. TT IV 14, öz (ilkisiz). D biregü: Collective f. of bi:r; properly “one bv itself, single”, occasionally “one (of several).” S.i.s.m.l. in NE and NC only(?). Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. (several demons approached me) biregüsi bedük berge tutmuis “one of them held a great whip' (ikintisi . . . üçunçi . . . törtünçi) Suv. s, 22: Xak. xı KB bu kaç nep birikse blregü üze “if these few things come together in a single individual' 343; kamuğ dunya bolsa biregüke tüz “even if the whole world is equal to (i.e. no more important than) a single individual” (the world's share remains, his is no more than two cloths for a shroud) 1238: xın(?) Tef. biregü “a single (inan)! 103: Çağ. xv ff. birew bir hümse "one person” Vel. 139 (quotns.) (also ew bir himse, also used in the phr. bir ew do. 32 (quotns.)): birew (spelt) yaki “onc (man)” San. I435V. I5 (quotn.) (also ew şaxs "a person” do. sar. 27 (one of the same quotns.; the word had been completely forgotten, and was taken to be a compound with the purcly imaginary word evv)): Xwar. xii birevv "single" “A// z3: Kip. xiv. in İd. 114, zi ff. there is a list of collective numerals from ikegü: to seksegü, followed ” by 'the same suffix appears in biregü: meaning "solitary, by himself" (a/-munfarid bi-datihi). D biriki: 'united'; n.o.a.b.; Dev. N./A. fr. birik-. Türkü vit (listen all of you, my younger brothers, my sons) biriki: uğuşım bodunim “my united clan and people” I S r, II N 1; a0. 1 E 27, IH E 22 (1 0tt). D bergerü: (?bergerü:) Directive f. of *ber; see berü:, (?E) birBaru: Pec. to Türkü and used only for “southvvards”. Türkü vii (1 campaigned) bérgerü: 'southwards' (as far as the Tokuz Ersin, and almost as far as Tibet) T S 3; o.o. 7 S 2, /I N z, (ortu:); IE28,II E23; IL N 11. D birgerü: Directive f. of bi:r; 'at (or into) one place”, N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Man. TT III 96 (üçün): Bud. yığıltılar birgerü “they assembled at one place” U 123, 4; TT VIII C.12 (olur-); a.o.o. Tris. V. BRGD berğe:len- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of berge:le:-, Den. V. fr. berge: (which is first noted in TRIS. BRG xiv Muh. şaf"a “to slap! Rif. 111 only). Xak. xı tamar bergelendl: (misvocalized bür-) "the man's veins were distended (imtala'at) with blood” (i.e. so that they looked like a whip thong); and one says er bergelendi: "the man owned a whip (satcf) to drive cattle! Kaş. III 201 (bergelenü:r, bergelenme:k). D bürgelen- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. bürge: Xak. xi er bürgelendi: 'the man jumped with rage (wataba mtn ğadabihi) as if he were a flea! Kaş. II] 202 (bürgelenü:r, bürgelenme:k). : D bérigse:- Hap. leg., Desid. Den. V. fr. *bérig, N.Ac. fr. bö:r-, "to wish to give”, Xak. xı ol mana: tawa:r berigse:dl: "he intended and tried to give me property (etc.)' Kaş. III 334 (berigse:r, berigse:me:k). PUD ber£ese:- Hap. leg.; Desid. Den. V. fr. berge:; “to wish to flog'. 'This word possibly occurs in a rather obscure and damaged Man. document describing the sufferings of the wicked in hell. Uyğ. vnı ff. Man. (the demons in hell seize them; the . . . demons come) min...-k...perken (sic) urupan pirkeseyür (sic) "they wish to whip them, beating them with a... whip! M 7I 13, 8-9. Dis. BRL ?D birle: *with'; Gronbech in Der türkische Sprachbau, p. 35, describes this and üçün, üze:, and teg as the four old "l'urkish Postposns. also used as Advs.; he analyses it as bi:r with 'emphatic' Particle -la:, but there is no other trace of such a Particle. The word is obviously very old, and it seems more reasonable to analyse it as an abbreviated Ger. of a Den. V. fr. bi:r, birle:- which occurs as a V. meaning “to unite' (Trans.) in Xwar. Xıt1(?) a.o,o, "Vhe -r- began to be elided at an early date, producing the f. bile, but in somc modern languages this has been further abraded and words quite unlike the original have resulted; a long list of these forms will be found in N. F. Katanov, Opyt fssledovaniya uryankhaiskogo yazyka, Kazan, 1903, p. rSr. Broadly speaking in NE the” word survives more or less unchanged as in "Tuv. bile or grossly deformed as in Khak. minan, in SE Jarring records birle/bile/vile/birlen/ bilen/vilen; NC Kir. men/menen; Kzx. ben/pen/men, SC Uzb. bilan; in NW all the forms found in NC as well as more conventional ones; SW Az, Osm. ile; "km. bile/bilen. As a Postposn. birle: has much the same meanings (comitative, instrumental) as English *with'. At some unknown date, but as early as Xak. it came to be used as an Adv. meaning 'even', and in Osm., while as a Postposn. it is ile, as an Adv. it is still bile, see Deny, Grammaire de la langue turque, Paris, 1920, para. 437. Türkü vırr birle: “vith” occurs in a simple comitative sense, e.g. eçim xağan birle: “vith my uncle the xagan' I E 17, II E iş, or with the indirect Obj. after verbs like "to come to an agreement 1 S 4, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 409 
     
   
   
        DIS. V. BRL11 N 3 (tüzül-) and süpüs- “to fight” 1 E 35; I N x: viri ff. Man. sizni birle 'with you” (note the /cc., which suggests that birle: was still regarded notionally as a V.) TT II 6, 1; o.o. Chuas. I 2 etc.: Yen. iki: oBlin — birle: ölti: “he died with his two sons' (note Acc.) Mal. 31, s: Uyğ. vur Tatar birle: katı: tokt:dim “1 fought fiercely with the "Tatar” Su. E 6: vurff. Man.-A (however many physicians come) otin birle 'with their drugs (.4ec.) M I 15, 6-7; a.0.0.: Bud. birle, and in late texts bile/bilen is very common both in a comitative and an instrumental sense e.g. men Él-tüzmig birle 'I and El-tüzmiş” TT IV 4, 15, etc.; and (bend the two index fingers and) uluğ erpek uçı bilen tegür 'touch them with the tip of the thumb' TT V 8, 57: Civ. birle/birlen/bile/bilen all occur as Postposns. in both senses, e.g. erdemlig kişi ertini bile tüz erür “a virtuous man is comparable with a jewel' TT VII 42, 1, and eçkü süti birle yunsar “if it is washed with goat's milk' do. 23, 1; in do. 28 yekler bir[le] in 2, kişi bile in 5: Xak. xı birle: a Particle (harf) meaning 'with' (ma); one says ol menin birle: erdi: "he was with me” (note Ger.); and the -r- is elided from it for the sake of lightness (H'i-hiffa) and one says bile: Kaş. 1 430; over 100 o,o, of birle: and nearly 4o of bile all(?) as Postposns.: KB birle/bile (as the metre requires) are very common as Postposns. in both senses; bile “even” (Adv.) 2722 (arsık-): xın(?) Zt. birle is common, and bile less common as a Postposn. in both senses; Tef. birle/bile as Postposn. in both senses 101, 103: XIV Muh. “the Preposns. ma' and bi- are represented in Turkish by bi:le:' e.g. 'I went with so-and-so” te:wü:k bi:le: bardım and 'I struck so-and-so vvith a svvord” te:vvukni: kili:ç bile: u:rdum; “1 went with so-and-so” te:vvü:k bi:rle: (sic) ba:rdım Mel. r3, 7; Rif. 94: Çağ. xv ff. birlen/birle mean 'with' in conjunction with other words (ma' dar rawübit) San. 145v. 29 (quotn. for cach word); bile means (1) hamqunin “likevvise” at the beginning of a sentence, in Ar. kadálika; (2) when used after another word ma" (quotn.); (3) bà yakdigar *with one another, together' (quotn.) do. 149v. 25; another (Postposn.) is ile/ilen/ bilen/birle/birlen meaning Ar. ma" do, 16r. zo: Xwar. xır birle Postposn. in both senses ' Ali 7: xın(?) ditto Og. common: xiv birle/ bile ditto Quib 32, 33; MN 6, etc. ; birle Nahe. 2, 8, etc.: Kom. xiv birle CCI; bile CCI; CCG common as Postposn. in both senses Gr. 59 (quotns.): Kip. xii “the Ar. word a" is bile: in Turkish” Hou. 54, 3 (quotns.): xiv bile:/fbirle: ma" İd. 36; ma" bile: Bul. 14, 4 (quotns.): xv ma" bile Twh. 3b. 3, “they elide -r- and say bile for birle' do. 83a. 6; a.o.o.: Osm. xiv ff. the normal Postposn. in both senses was always ile, occasionally ilen TT.S I 371; II 523; III 361; IV 415; birle was common xIv to xvi and sporadic later 7 107; II 152; III 101; IV 111; also bile 7 97; II 139; III 91; IV 102; bile by itself and even in Hend. with ile occurs as an Adv. meaning 365 "together”, and less often as an Adv. meaning “also” or “even”. D barrlığ P.N./A. fr. ba:r, 'possessing (much) property, rich”. Syn. vv. ba:y and almost completely displaced by it, but survives in some NE dialects as parlığ/parlu: R IV 1156. See Doerfer 11 687. Xak. xı ba:rlığ er al-raculu'l-mutri (MS. in error mugri) dáü'l-màl "a rich man owning property' Kaş. İİ 438: xiv Muh. Mel. ss, 9 (ba:y): Çağ. xv ff. barlığ varlu ahçalu ma"nasına “rich, moneyed” Vel. 127 (quotn.), barlığ máldar wa ğani ditto San. 121r. 23 (quotn.): Kom. xiv “a rich man” barlu kişi CCI; Gr.: Kip. xri al-mutri di”L-cadda 'rich, prosperous' (opposite to 'destitute' yoklu:) ba:rlu: Hou. 26, 1:4: xiv barlu: fani ay dü mawcüd İd. 29: Osm. xiv and xv varlı/varlu “rich” in three texts T'T.S I 757; IV 817 (and see Vel.). DF borluk A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. 1 bo:r; 'vineyard”. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. borlukimni kózedzün “let him guard my vineyard” PP 73, 3; 0.0. do. 79, r, TT IV ro, 6: Civ. borluk 'vineyard' is common in (/55., e.g. 2, 4(utru:): xiv. Chin.-Uvyg. Dict. 'vineyard' bağ borluk, see 2 ba:ğ. Dis. V. BRLD barıl- Pass, f. of bar-; used in Kaş. to illustrate the point that a Pass. f. of an Intrans. V. can only be used Impersonally. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. varil- ; Tkm. baril-. Uyğ. viiI ff. Bud. Sanskrit (gap) yáto éyén ba:rılmig TT VIII 4.16: Xak. xı evke: barıldı: duhiba ila'l-bayt "a move was made to the house” Kaş. II 130, 28; similar phr. 139, 3: n.m.e. D béril- Pass. f. of bé:r- 'to be given'. S.i.a.m.l.g. Xak. xı apa:r yarma:k bérildi *the dirham (etc.) was given (dufi'a) to him” Kaş. II 131 (berilü:r, berilme:k): KB (if a madman strikes a man and he dies) ólüm yok anar ham bérilmez sésgi “there is no death (sentence) for him and no security is given for him” 295: xın(?) At. (there is a saying that) bérilse agar adamı (sic) iki kol dinár “fa man is given two handfuls of gold coins' (he asks for three) 311-12: Tef. béril- "to be given” (in some cases the recipient is the Subject and the thing the Object) gg: Çağ. xv ff. béril- dada şudan "to be given” San. 144v. 14 (quotn.): Kom. xiv beril- ditto CCG; Gr. 56 (quotn.): Kip. xv kulğa bir ótmek bérildi ('a loaf was given to the slave') is quoted to illustrate the use of Dat. for the indirect Object after a Pass. V. Tuh. 48b. 3. D bürül- Pass. f. of bür-; 'to be twisted, folded', etc. S.i.s.m.l. with the same phonetic changes as bür-. Cf. türül-. Xak. xi bitig bürüldi: inzazcà'l-kitáb “the letter (etc.) was folded up” Kaş. I1 131 (bürülür, bürülme:k): Çağ. xv ff. burul- (sic) biçida şudan “to be twisted' San. 141v. 14: Xwar. xiv (VU) bürül- ditto Qut 38: Kom. xiv burul- (sic) (of a snake) “to curl up” CCG; Gr. 69 (quotn.):   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 410 
     
   
   
     466 Osm. xv burul- (of a whirlpool) 'to twist (Intrans.) T TS IV 135. D bürlen- Refl. Den. V. fr. bür; 'to come. into bud”. Survives as pürlen- in several NE dialects R IV 1399 and Khak. Xak. xr yığa:ç bürlendi: "the tree came into bud (bar'amat) that is when it puts out its young shoots' (axracat "asalicaha) Kaş. II 237 (bürlenü:r, bürlenme:k): Kom. xiv bürlen[bórlen- “o sprout' CCG; Gr. 71 (quotn.). Tris. BRL DF borlukci N.Ag. fr. borluk; “vine grower, vine cultivator'. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. Kadını xan borlukçısı “the king of Kadini's wine cultivator” PP 72, 5; a.o. do. 79, 2: Civ. borlukçı “a vine cultivator' (not the owner of a vineyard) occurs 4 or s times in USp. D bórileyü: Hap. leg.; Ger. of a Den. V. fr. böri: which is prob. used only in this form. Xak. xi (the men howled) bó:rileyü: (sic) "like wolves! Kaş. I 189, 1; n.m.e. Dis. BRM D barim Den. N. fr. ba:r; 'property, wealth'. N.o.a.b. SW Osm. barım “At least, anyhow', etc. is unconnected with this word, but is a Sec. f. of Pe. bári, Cf. bark. Türkü vrir. (Kül Tégin's gold, silver) aBi:si:zn barımın "treasure and property” 7 SW ; (1 captured their. sons, wives) yilkrsrin barımı:n "livestock and property! 77 E 24; II S 3 (in 1 N 1 eviin barımı:n is a misreading of evi:n barki:n): virt ff. Man, yilkika barimka bulup “obtaining livestock and property! Chuas. 200, 250: Uyğ. virt (I carried off) yilkr:si:xn barımı:n Su. E 3; vir ff. Man.-A M. I 15, 4-5 etc. (at): Bud. U HH 76, 2 etc. (ağız): Civ. TT VII a4, 3-4 (ağın): O. Kir, ixff. tört adakçclığ” yılkım sekiz adaklığ barımın *my four-legged livestock, and my eightlegged property' Mal. ro, ro (obscure, perhaps wagons or tents?); similar phr. do. 11, 3; 42, 6. D bé:rim N.S.A. fr. bé:r-; lit. “a single act of giving”, but normally in the early period “a debt' (due to be paid) in antithesis to alim “a debt' (due to be received). S.i.s.m.l. sometimes as 'a form of tax' (cf. bért), sometimes as 'bribe', in SW Osm. (verim) 'output, yield, profit', and sometimes in the phr. alim bérim "commerce, exchange”, Uyğ. viit ff. Man. TT II 17, 85-7 (öte:-): Bud. TT VII 4o, 72-3, (ötek): Civ. bérim 'debt, obligation" occurs several times in USp.; it is commonest in relation to leases of land, vineyards, etc. in the phr. alim bérim 'receipts and outgoings': Xak, xi be:rim a/-dayı "debt” Kaş. I 409; o.0. II 185, 2 etc. (alım): KB 309 (alim): Xui(?) At. 254 (berklig). D bürme: Pass. Conc. N. fr. bür-; lit. 'something twisted or wound round something”. S.i.s.m.l. with the same phonetic changes as bür-. See Doerfer I1 783. Xak. xı bürme: al-nayfaqa *waist-band' Kaş. 11 94 (bürüş-), DIS. V. BRLn.m.c.: Çağ. xv ff. burma (sic) “a tie! (band) which thcy put round the top of a pursc, and when they pull it the top of the purse comes together and is gathered tight; also 'a sheaf' (dasta) of forage which they twist up and dry and feed to livestock in winter; also "a tap” (gir) which they fix in baths and places for storing water, and when they turn it water comes out San. 132v. 29: Kip. xv mancaniq 'balista, siege catapult” (VU) burma Tuh. 34a. 1. Tris. BRM D berimçi: N.Ag. fr. be:rim, 'debtor'. N.o.a.b. Türkü vırır ff. Man. Chuas. 309. (ötekçi:): Uyğ. vinff. Civ. USp. 57, 14 (alımçı:): Xak. xi Kaş. 1 75, 18 etc. (alımçı:): n.m.e. D barımlığ P.N./A. fr. barım, 'owning property”, N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff, Bud. bay barımlığ tınlığlar az "rich men and men of property are scarce” T'T' VI 024; a.0.0. of this phr. in TT VI. ” D barımlık Hap. leg.?; A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. barım, 'storehouse'. Uyğ. vii ff. Man.-A (give alms to the poor Elect, hunger and suffer pain yourselves and) tolturup ol mepülüg baramlık afilikipizka “store up (these alms) in that storehouse and treasury of” happiness” M TİL 11, 3 (ii). D berimliğ P.N./A. fr. be:rim. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. verimli 'productive, profitable. Uyğ. vin ff: Man. berimliğ “indebted”(?) TT III 160 (damaged): Xak. xı Kaş. 1 240, 4 (üzlüs-); n.m.e. Tris. V. BRMD barımsın- Refl. Simulative Den. V. fr. *barim N.S.A. fr. bar-. N.o.a.b, Xak. xt ol evke: barımsındı: “he pretended to go (yadhab) to (his) home but did not actually do so" Kaş. II 258 (barımsınu:r, barımsınma:k): o.o. /7 260, 22; 261, 27. Dis. BRN burun lit. “the nose' (of a human being or animal), 'the beak' (of a bird) and the like; hence 'a protruding natural feature, headland, peak (of a mountain); hence metaph. “in front, preceding”, .and by a further development "preceding in times, previous'. S.i.a.m.l.g., but not everywhere in the full range of meanings. Uy. viii ff. Man. burnında boz bulhit ünür 'a grey cloud rises from her nose' M I7 11, 19: Bud. kórtle buruni “her beautiful nose” U IV şo, şo, (the elephant) burun éligin isletip “putting the hand of its trunk to work' T T V 24, şr: Civ. bu kişi burunda etöz emğenmiş “this man at first had a painful body” TT VII 38, 46, biznip burun bérgüci (a servant) *whom we gave previously! Up. 14, 9: Xak. xi burun al-anf the nose'; burun ra'nu'I-cabal "the peak of a mountain; one says ta: buruni:: and “the first (al-atotval) of anything' is called burun; one says o1 mendin burun bardı: “he went ahead of me" (qudàámi); 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 411 
     
   
   
     TRIS.. this word exactly corresponds to the Ar. (a/-anf) in mcaning but not in sound Kaş. I 398; about a dozen o.o.: K B (the sun has returned and will be again in his position) balik kudrugindin kozt: burniga “from the tail of Pisces to the nose of Aries' 66; téve burni teg "like a camel's nose” 206; bu künde burun "before to-day' 220; o.o. 466, 1500 (Arat in error bürnü), 4077: xu(?) At. 3oo (börk), Tef. burun (1) “nose": (2) “first, before (of time)” rır: xiv Muh. al-anf buru:n Mel. 46, 16; Rif. 140: Çağ. xv ff. burun areal Vel. 148 (quotns. and other forms); burn (spelt) bini "nose” (quotn.) also spelt burun San. 133r. 2; burun (1) awwdl wa ibtidü wa mugaddim 'first, beginning, preceding' (quotn.); also called burna (for which there is a separate entry); (2) bini (quotn.); they call the nose metaph. burun because it is the outstanding (mugaddim) feature of the face, but the metaph. meaning is commoner than the real one; also called burn do. 12: Xwar. xiv burun “first” (Adv.) Qutb 38; MN 63; "nose” Nahc. 25, 11; 5o, 16: Kom. xiv burun 'nose; formerly, first, before" CCI, CCG; Gr. 60 (quotns.): Kip. xır al-anf burun Hou. 20, 4; qabl *before' (opposite to “after” sopra:) burun do. 26, zo: xiv burun a/-anf, also qabl and awwal İd. go: xv qabl burun Kan. 36, 17; qabl wa asetoal burun do. 53, 5; al-anf burun do. 6o, 13; anf burn (sic) Tuh. ab. 1; qabl burun occurs in do. 73a. 12 and elsewhere; it should also have appeared in 29a. 11 where the text now reads qreşaşa “nail-clippings (€. . .; qabi? burun. VU?D burun Hap. leg.; it is possible that this is merely another meaning of bürün which follows it, though the 'semantic connection is not obvious, but tbe fact that the second is described specifically (and exceptionally) as *with front vowels! suggests that they were pronounced differently. "This word can hardly be derived fr. bu:r- Xak. xi burun al-galwa l'i-ramy “the distance of a bow-shot'; one says burun attı: “he shot a (full) bow-shot' Kaş. III 370. D bürün Hap. leg.; Intrans. Dev. N. fr. bür-. Survives in NE Kumd. porop; Tel. poropt *turbid water R IV 1:270. Xak. xi bürüp *with front vowels' (bi-igmami'l-rà') tayhürw'l-mö” "a wave in water' Kaş. III 370. D birinç Ordinal f. of bi:r, “first”. As Kaş. points out, relatively rare, since at all times other vvords have tended to be used in this sense, e.g. in .the earlier period İlk/ilki:, baştınkı:, etc. and in modern languages the Ar. l.-w. awtoal. It is, however, the only word for “first” after a ten, i.e. eleventh, twenty-first, etc. S.i.a.m.l.g., except NE, in the longer form birinçı: and the like, which displaced birinç before xiv. Xak, xı birinç ne: “first” of something; a regular form but rarely used (luğa qiydsiya galilatu'l-isti'mál) Kaş. III 373: xiv Muh. al-awsoal bi:rinçi: Mel. 82, 7; Rif. 187: Çağ. xv ff. birinçi yakumin “first” San. 17r. 20: X war. xın(?) (she gave birth to three BRN sons) birinçisike “to the first of them” (she gave the name Kün) Og. 66; a.o. do. 85: Kip. xv (in the section concerning Ordinals) in the meaning of Badi “first” (only with tens in Ar.) you say birinck, and you also say birinci: for awwal when it is followed by ikincl: “second”: and one also says burunğı (misvocalized bmrindi) and / with a / Poss. Suff. burunğısı: (birrmngisi:) Kav. öy, 11 f; in a para. on the Ordinals in Tuh. 61b. r ff. it is said that neither birinci nor onunci can be used by themselves because -inci means 'follewing' and neither “one” nor “ten” can follow a previous number, but birinci can be. used in such expressions as on birinci; in 3b. ro, 62b. r atwwal is translated ilk. 367 D burna:ç Den. N. fr. burun, “a jug', with the connotation of one with a nose, i.e. spout. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. Sanskrit kalpihaghalaham “a jug for ritual (washing) yu:nğulu:k burüa:ç (spelt p-); paribhogaghataham “a jug for drinking (water) içgülük burha:ç (p-) TT VIII C.8; Chinese p'i ch'í *a crude earthenware vessel' (Giles 9,069 1,123) yif burnaç Hüen-ts. 2128 (mistranscribed and mistranslated). : Dis. V. BRND barın- Refl. f. of bar-; survives only(?) in ' SW Osm. barın- “to take shelter, to lodge". Xak. xı ura:ğuttın kam barındı: (lit. "blood went (of its own accord) out of the woman!) translated “a/-"adil gushed with blood; al-'ádil is the vein from which menstruous blood emerges! (barınu:r, barinma:k); and one says er evke: barındı: “the man pretended to go (yadhab) to the house (etc.) Kaş. HI. 141 (barınu:r, barınma:k): Osm. xıv (there was plenty of food on the table) anı yeyüpen barınır idi ol “he managed to get along by eating it” 777 I1 104 (this seems to be the sense). D bürün- Refl. f. of bür-, “to wrap (something cc.) round oneself". Survives only(? in SW Osm. Xak. xı ura:ğut yoğurka: büründi: “the woman wrapped herself (iltahafat) in the blanket and covered herself up' (taqanna"at), also used of other things Kaş. İl 141 (bürünü:r, bürünme:k): KB 236 should perhaps be read kamuğ edgülük kil sen edéü bürün “do all kinds of good and wrap yourself in goodness” (burun gives less sense); Çağ. xvíff. burun- (sic) “to wrap (pigidan) oneself in something San. 131 v. t5. Tris. BRN D bürünçük Conc. N. fr. bürün-, “a woman's cloak, or veil'! Survives only(?) in SW Osm. bürüncük. Xak. xı bürünçük ximáru'l-mar'a “a woman's cloak” Kaş. I 516; o.o. I zor (urun-); /1 151 (sarin-): xiv Muh. al-miqna'a "a woman's cloak or veil bürünçük Mel. 53, 6; Rif. 149: Çağ. xv ff. bürüncek (so spelt) (i) mi'car wa miqna'a-i zanán ditto (quotns.); (2) zir-pirak "a small turban' € / H —Á— 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 412 
     
   
   
      368 (quotn.) San. 133r. 16: (Xwar. xiv bürünçüklüg 'wearing a veil” Qutb 39): Kip. xtit ai-miqna'a bürünçük Hou. 17, 20. D burunduk Conc. N. fr. burun; lit. 'nosepiece" or the like, in practice 'leading-rein, nose-ring', and other similar devices for controlling animals, esp. camels. Survives in NE "Tuv. burunduk; NC Kir. murunduk; Kzx. murindik, NW Nog. burindik; (in SSV Osm. burunduruk; Tkm. burunhk), See Doerfer ]1 738. Xak. xı burunduk ai-zimám "leading rein! Kaş. I 501; a.o. II 16, 26 (tak-, described as Oğuz): KB ukuş ol burunduk understanding is the leading rein' (if a man leads with it he attains all his desires) 159: xiti(?) Tef. burunduk ditto 112: Muh. al-zimdm burunduk Mel. 70, 9; buru:nda:k (sic) Rif. 172: (Çağ. xv ff. burunduruk same meaning San. 133r. zo): X war. xiv burunduk “a camel's leading rein' Nahc. 162, 13: Kip. xin xifamı"l-camal "a camel's leading rein! burunduk 77ou. 14, 16: xiv burunduruk (one MS, more correctly ?, burundu:k) a/-bura "a camel's nose ring”, and in the Kitab Baylik burunduk zimámi'l-camal İd. 29; burundak (sic?) al-zimüm Bul. 7, 7: NV xizdm “a camel's nose ring” burunduk Tuh. 14b. 4: Osm. xiv ff. burunduruk (twice in xv and xvi burunduk) 'camel's nose ring, leading rein', etc.; c.ia.p. T73S I 127; II 182; III 119; İV 135. Tris. V. BRND burunla:- IIap. leg.; Den. V. fr. burun. Xak. xı ol anı: burunla:dı: “he hit him on the nose' Kaş, HII 341 (burunla:r, burun1a:ma:k). Dis. BRR D birer Distributive f. of bi:r “one each'; also used in the phr. birer birer 'every single'. Common in SW Osm. but very rare elsewhere. Uyf. vurff. Bud. ol linxwa sayu birer nğuluğ yılan bar “there is a poisonous snake in each of those lotuses” PP 38, 3-4; o.o. do. o, 8; 79, 4-6 (as-); TT VIII C.16 (uğur)— altun óplüg yinipizde birer birer tü sayu “every single hair on your golden skin” Suv. 348, 1-2: Civ. birer is common in USp., e.g. (I will faithfully repay the six sur) ay sayu birer yarım bakır kümüş asığı birle *with interest at the rate of one and a half copper cash a month” (i.e. 30 per cent per annum) 18, 4-5: (Xak.) xın(?) Tef. birer birer “one by one" 103 (s.v. bir): Çağ. xv ff. bir and birer have the same meaning, that is “one” Sar. 145v. 11: Xwar. xiv birer “every single one” MN 142, etc.: Kip. xv (in a note on the Distributive) a"ti ha'ulà dinára(n) "give them a dinár (each) bu:la:rğa: birer altun ber Kav. 68, 2; firádi “by ones” (teker and) birer Tu). 27b. 9; birer in the list of Distributives do. örb. r3: Kom. xiv birerde “sometimes” CCI; Gr. Mon. BRS F bars (p-) a very early Iranian l.-w., but from which lranian language it was taken is   TRIS. BRN uncertain. Properly "eopard' but in "l'urkish apparently also used for other large felines. One of the animals of the 12-year animal cycle and so, at any rate in this context, an early L-w. in Mong. S.i.m.m.Lg., but when, as in SW Osm., the form is pars no doubt a recent borrowing fr. Pe. and not a survival. Yolbars 'tiger', which s.i.a.m.l.g. except NE, SW, is a compound of yo:l, here metaph. 'streak, stripe', and bars. See Doerfer II 685. Türkü viru ff. bars yıl “the Leopard Year" İrkB, Postscript; o.o. do. 10 (esne:-), 31 (3 ep), 49 (eple:-): Uyğ. vir bars yilka: Su. E 7: viii ff. Man. Kutadmış Bars P.N. TT IX 114: Bud. bir tişi bars "a tigress” U III 63, 4-5 etc.; Suv. 609, 17 (no doubt the only word available to translate Sanskrit “tigress”), Kutlu&amp; Bars Tegin P.N. TT IV, p. zo, note B69: Civ. in the calendar texts TT V1I 4, etc.; VIII P. bars is used both for the third of the ten 'Stems' (ping, Giles 9,295) and for the third of the twelve 'Branches' (yin, Giles 13,246); in USSp. it occurs both in bars yıl and as an element in P.N.s: O. Kir. ix ff. (I killed seven wolves but did not kill) barsığ Mai. ır, ro, Küç Bars P.N. do. 14, 1; 17, 1: Xak. xr bars al-fahd hunting leopard, cheetah': bars “one of the twelve years in 'l'urkish'; a long account of the twelve-vear cycle follows: bars “any swelling (waram) on the body from the bite of a bug or flea or the appearance of an eruption'; one says anm) eti: bars boldi: tawarrama cilduhu “his skin was covered with swellings' Kaş. 7 344-8 (the last meaning presumably metaph. fr. the leopard's spots): xiv Muh. sanatu'l-nimr “the leopard year” ba:rs yı:lı: Mel, 80, rg, Rif. 186 (al-nimr also means “tiger, panther'; al-fahhád “a man who hunts with hunting leopards” pa:rscı: (sic) 58, 7; esri:ci: r57): Çağ. xvff. bars “an agile (cahanda) animal rather smaller than a leopard (palang) which they tame and use like hunting dogs for hunting wild animals', in Pe. yüz ('cheetah?), in Ar. /ahd San. 121r. 18 (quotn.): Kap. xiii al-fahd bars Hon. 11, 6; bars is also an element in several names of al-mamálik *Mamluks' do. 29: xiv bars al-fahd İd. 3o; al-fahd bars Bul. 10, 5: xv ditto Kav. 62, 6; Tuh. 27b. 13; Ak Bars P.N. do. 39b. 1. Dis. BRS S?F borsuk (?p-) See borsmuk, VU bursla:n Hap. leg.; the text of Kaş. is rather incoherent but it seems prob. that this is merely a jingle to arsla:n and not an independent word. Xak. xı bursla:n al-babr fi haqiqatp”l-luğa strictly speaking “tiger”, hence one says arsla:n bursla:n “lon and tiger”: bursla:n a masculine Proper Name, rea yacüz an yakün bursla:n taba"a(n) iVl-arsla:n /i-annahumà yudkarán ma'a(n) ma là yufrad bursla:n *bursia:n may be used following arsla:n because they are mentioned together, but may not be used by itself; and the best explanation (a/-aşahh) is that it is "tiger", H-annahu lazo hana taba'a(n) lamd cüza tasmiyatu'l-racul biht, because if it was (only)  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 413 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. BRŞa jingle then it could not be used as a Proper Name, because one does not say Aàdà'l-;ay' basan as one can say hasan basan (i.e. basan is a mere jingle and cannot be used otherwise) Kaş. Iİ 418. ?F borsmuk (?p-) "a badger'. In this form the word occurs only in Kaş., where it appears in a chapter devoted to Dissyllables containing three consecutive consonants, but is misvocalized. Its form is quite un- l'urkish and it is almost certainly a l.-w., perhaps fr. Tokharian where the initial would necessarily have been p-. S.ia.m.l.g., see Shcherbah, p. 139. An unusually large numbef of modern forms start vv. p- including NE Khak. porsix: NW Kk. porsik, Kumyk porsuk: SW Az. porsuğ, Osm. porsuk. "The aberrant Tkm. form torsik also has an unvoiced initial. "These are all consistent vv. the theory that it is a l.-w. w. initial p-, and so suggest that the modern V. borsi-/porsi- 'to smell foul' is a backformation fr. this word and not its origin. A l.-w. in Pe. and other languages, see Docrfer II 733. Xak. xi borsmuk (vocalized borsumaluk) duwaybba mitlu'l-wark (sic), wa bihi yudrabu'l-matal fi'l-siman “a small animal like the ?, used as a metaphor for fatness” Kaş. III 417 (al-tvark means 'hip-bone' and seems to be corrupt, perhaps read al-wabr 'marmot', al-waral "large venemous lizard', or ai-wwadak which properly means “fat” but may also have been used as the name of some fat animal): Çağ. xv ff. porsuk (so spelt) “an animal called in Pe. rüdak ("an animal found in Tartary of whose skin fur garments are made” Steingass), in Isfahöni (VU) xüxra and in Ar. (VU) wagaq and ibn 'irs (normally *weasel'); it is about the size of a small dog and has black and white stripes on its face and parts of its skin; they make fur garments of its skin; whenever they kill it, it is fat, and so long as it has not eaten carrion its flesh is wholesome food; two mitqal's of its flesh, salted, are a protection against unwholesome airs, and garments made of its fur beneficial in cases of gout, painful joints, and palsy' Sam. 132v. 22 (clearly "badger'; xüxra and toaşaq are unidentified): Oğuz xı (after Xak.) the Oğuz omit the -mand call it borsuk, but they insert -m- in başmak “shoe” (a/-m:das), which the "Purks call başak Kaş. III 417: Kip. xiv borsuk “an animal like a/-dabu' (the hyaena) with a foul smell” /4. 29; al-nims *weasel, ferret, mongoose' (küzen/) borsuk Bul. 1o, g. FC bursap the Chinese phr. fo séng (Giles 3,589 9,617) Buddhasangha "a Buddhist religious community'; generally used in Hend. w. kuvra:ğ, q.v. Pec. to Uyğ. Bud. Uy£. vii ff. Bud. bursar and bursar kuvrağ are common TT IV 6, aş, etc. (erksin-); Suv. 134, 4ff.; TT VIII H.2, s, 9; bursor dindarlar “the religious community and believers! U I7 77. 15. Dis. V. BRSD barsa:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of bar-, Xak. XI in a description of the Desid. f. it is said that 369 if one says barsa:dt: for “he wished to go”, is permissible (cd”iz) but that the normal form (for Verbs ending in -r-) is barığsa:dı: Kaş. I 281, 11; n.m.e. Dis. BRS D barış N.Ac. fr. bar- ; lit. 'going', but in the early period noted only in the phr. barış keliş *going and coming, social intercourse', and the like. S.i.m.m.l.g., usually only in the phr. barış kelis. In SW Osm. the usual Dev. N. fr. var- (bar-) is varış but barış is used for *mutual agreement, reconciliation. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. in keliş barış sav Hüen-ts. 293 (see note on p. 28) the first two words are an over-literal translation of a Chinese phr. hui hsiang (Giles 5,173 4,283) used to translate the Sanskrit word barındmand “the concept of transference (of merit), see Soothill and Hodous, 4 Dictionary of Chinese. Buddhist Terms, p. 205a; barış keliş arasında “between going and coming' de. 2089: Xak. xr al-daháb soa”l-maci “going and coming' is called keliş barış Xaş. I1 azo: KB olarka katılğıl keliş ham barış “make contact vvith them (the merchants) as they come and go” 4421: Çağ. xv fI. barış gediş gitmeh ma'násina “going” Vel. 162; barış xirüm wa raftür 'walking, going” (quotn.); also barış keliş raft u ámad 'going and coming” (quotn.) San. 121 v. 5. D beriş N.Ac. fr. be:r-, lit. 'giving', but normally used in the phr. alış beriş 'buying and selling, commerce'. This phr. s.i.m.m.l.g. and béris by itself “debt, payment of tax”, etc. in SE Tar. R IV 1600; Türki BS 67. Uyğ. viti ff. Civ. USp. rır, 3 (alış): Xak. xı Kaş. 162; KB 4421 (alış). D büriş Dev. N. (Conc. N.) fr. bür-, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı büriş “a wrinkle' (al-znziteá) in the skin or a garment Kaş. 7 367. Dis. V. BRSD barış- Co-op. f. of bar-; “to go together" and the like. S.is.m.l. in this meaning. İn SW Osm. both varış- “to visit one another” and barış- “to be reconciled, to make peace” survive, cf. barış. Xak. xı ola:r bi:r bi:rke: barışdı: “they went (dahaba) to (visit) one another”, also used for helping and competing Kaş. II 94 (barışu:r, barışma:k), a.o. II iro (kelis-); KB barışğu kerek kab kadaşlar bile “one must associate with one's family and kinsmen' 3209; a.o. 4569 (keliş-): xim(?) Tef. barug- (sic) “to go together' 91: xiv Muh. wáfaga “to agree' barış- (v.I. in error yarış-) Mel. 32, 1 (zeáfaqa wa saluha se:kleg(Hap. leg. Rif. 116): Çağ. xvff. barışRecip. f. bà yak digar şulh hardan wa sulik nik kardan "to make peace and improve relations with one another” Sar. r20v. 22 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv baris- 'to come to an agrecment, Jive in harmony! Qutb 27: Kip. xii istalaha "to make peace! ba:rış- Hou. 34, 11: XV ("to reconcile” (two people) in the sense of removing the unfriendliness between them is barıştır-), and for /ştalaha ma" ğayrihi you say barışwithout the Caus. Suff. Kat. 76, 16. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 414 
     
   
   
       370 D beriş- Recip. f. of bö:r-, "to give to one another” and the like. S.i.m.m.Lg. Uy£f. vur ff. Bud. TT VI 311 (icger-): Xak. xı ola:r bi:r bi:rke: ktz berişdi: "they gave (dafa"a) one another their daughters (in marriage); also used when they give one another (fa"dtü) something Kaş. II 94 (berişü:r, berişme:k): Kom. xtv “to help in giving” beris- CCG; Gr. 65 (quotn.): Kip. xiv bérismek a/-mu"dtd “to exchange gifts” /d. 29. D bürüs- Co-op. f. of bür-, s.i.m.m.l.g. sometimes with front and sometimes with back vowels; the modern V.s are often Intrans. and mean 'to be wrinkled' and the like, with a Caus. f. giving the "Trans. meaning. The vowel shift must go back some way, since in the MS. of Kaş. there are two separate paras., the first giving the "Trans. meaning with Infin. in -me:k and the second giving the Intrans. meaning with Infin. in -ma:k but the second must be a scribal error. Xak. xi ol mapa: bürme: bürüşdi: “he helped me to wrap round the waist-band'( fi kaf |-nayfaga); also used of anything which has a round opening and something surrounding it (lahu tadwir vea istidara) like the top of a leather bag and the like (bürüşü:r, bürüşme:k), and one says bürüşdi: ne:p inqabada'l-say' tva huma nalw kulühi'l-wach “the thing was drawn together, vvrinkled”, as the face in frowning (bürüşü:r, bürüşme:k, MS. -ma:h) Kaş. İl 94: Çağ. xv ff. buruş- (sic) piçida şudan “to be twisted, wound up'; also used in the sense of “to be shrivelled” (dar ham kagida şudan of the skin or hair owing to the heat of a fire, or 'to. be vvrinkled” (sikanc yaftan) of the face in old age San. 131 v. 15: Kom. xiv “vrinkled” (VU) buruşmış CCTI; Gr.: Kip. xv takarnaga (misspelt takarmaga) “to be wrinkled' (in margin "and also inqabada') (VU) buruş- Tuh. 10a. 10; 'abasa “to frown' (VU burtur-), Tkm. (burtar- and) (VU) burus- do. 26a. 1. Tris. BRS D barışlığ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. barış. Xak. xt Kaş. 1 370 (kelişl18). Dis. BRY VUD berye: Den. Adv./Adj. in -ye: fr. *ber (2bér); this Suff., which occurs only in this word, kuriya: and (VU) ytrya:, seems to be a Sec. f. of -ra:/-re: attached to words ending in -r, lit. “on this side”, but in practice used only as a cardinal point “in the south”. Pec. to "Pürkü. The first vowel is -6- once in / and three times in /T and -e- twice in J, in T 7, 14, and in Ongin 2. Türkü vırı bérye: ... yırya: IS, I1Ni,lEva,ll E12; Ongin 2; bérye: IS6; II N s; II E 36, 40; berye:... Önre: ..yirym: T 7; önre:...berye:... kuriya: s. yırya: T 14. Tris. BRY VUD beryeki: Hap. leg.; N./A.S. fr. bérye:; *e the difference in meaning fr. berü:ki:. rkü vir beryeki: bodun kuriyakı: (VU)   DIS. V. BRŞyiryaki: önreki: bodun “the people to the south, west, north, and east' T” 17. Mon. BS bas (p-) 'rust'. "his seems prima facie to be an Oğuz word which survives only in NW Krim R IV 1185; SW Az. Osm. pas; "Vkm. pos, but it seems possible that the Xak. word entered below, which has a similar meaning, is an earlier occurrence although it is quite clearly vocalized with a asra, there is no other trace of a word bis or bis. Cf. 2 tat, 6 kü:g. Xak. xı (VU) bis tufála kull nahy aw ziqq wa huwa şay" mitlu'l-qir “the sediment in any bag for making butter or wineskin'; it is a substance like pitch Kaş. I 328: xiv Muh(?) xabatu'l-hadid 'iron slag” bas (unvocalized) Rif. 160 (only): Kip. xiv pas ('with p-") al-sada' "rust” İd. 32: xv şada" (tat and) bas Tuh. 22a. ır: Osm. (xv paslu “mouldy” TTS III 575): xviii. pas (with p-") in Rmi, zang “rust”, in Ar. şada” San. 122v. 1. bu:s (p-) “mist, fog', and the like. Survives, usually meaning 'steam' in NE Sor pus R IV 1384; Tuv. bus; SE Turki bus; NW Kumyk . pus; SW Osm. pus. Cf. 2 bu: (not connected etymologically), tuma:n. Xak. x1 kó:k bu:s bold:: dacanati'l-samá mina'l-dubáb wa. nahtihi “the sky became overcast with mist and the like", and one says er kó:zi: bu:s boldi: “the man's sight became clouded (az/ama) by wind in his stomach" Kaş. III 124: Kip. xv nafas 'breath', etc. (tin and) bus Tu. 36a. 8; habáb 'fine dust” bus do. 37b. 12: Osm. xiv pus “mist, fog”, etc. in several texts T T'S I 581; II 773: xvii pus (with p-”) in Runi, “a mist (buxári) which rises from the mountains'; also hawá-i muhtabas “close weather', and metaph. “a morose man" (üdam-i mungabid) San. 134v. 6. Mon. V. BSbas- 'to press, crush, oppress, mnke a surprise attack (on someone .4cc.), and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. in a wide range of basic and extended meanings, e.g. “to print”. See basa: "Türkü vırr kirkiz boduniğ uda: basdirniz *we made a surprise attack on the Kirgiz people while they were asleep! 7 E 35; about a dozen similar occurrences: Uyğ. viu yelmesin menin er anta: basmış “my men made a surprise attack on his reconnoitring patrol there” Su. E 12: viti ff. Man. (the pure blessed ones) (?ayığlların bastılar "have suppressed their evil (desires) TT IJI 121; o.o. M IJ, 11, ız, TT II 17, 72-5 (1y-): Bud. (fold three fingers in the palm of the hand and) uluğ ernek üze bas “press the thumb on them” TT V 12, 120; o.o. TT VI 254-5, etc. (1y-): Civ. tamğalarımıznı basıp "impressing our seals” USSp. 21, 10-11; a.o. TT I 97-8 (tin): Xak. xı anı: bürt basdı: cazama 'alayhi'l-cátiim "he had a nightmare'; and one says beg €:1 basdı: "the beg oppressed (gahara) the province and treated it as if he were crushing iU (catama “alayhi), and one says beğni: yağı: basdı: "the enemy (etc.) made a night  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 415 
     
   
   
     DIS.:BSA attack on the beg! (bayyata'l-amir); and onc says er ktzif basdı: "the man copulated with (tasannama) the servant girl”, and one says ıt keyikni: basdı: “the dog caught the wild animal and brought it down' (axada . . . fa-şara"ahu) Kaş. II ro (basa:r, basma:k); five 0.0.: KB bodun basğuka “in order to keep the people in order” 217; (it takes a lion) bu kulan basğuka “to bring down this wild ass” 284; özin basğan er “a man who controls himself” gös, 0.0. 1053, etc.: xin(?) Tef. toafi”a "to tread underfoot” bas- gr: xiv Mu. ğŞamaza soa düsa "to press, trample on” ba:şMel. 29, 9; bas- Rif. rad başmak 34, 12; 119: Caf. xv ff. bás- bag- Vel, 128; bas- is one of the words used in phr. (alfaz-t mugtaraka) with a special meaning in each case; e.g. köpül bas- dil-áràám giriftan "to take away (a man's) peace of mind'; dusman bas- 'to conquer (ğdlib şudan) an enemy”, may basand uyku bas- “to be overcome (maglüb şudan) by wine or sleep”, ayağ bas- “to put (gudaştan) one's foot on something'; muhr bas- “to impress a seal”, toz bas- “to lay(furü giriftan) the dust”, and kayğu: bas- “to overcome grief! San. 121 v. 18 (quotns.): Xwar. xıl1(?) Og. 24-5 (1 emğek): xiv bas- “to tread on' MN 226: Kom. xiv bas- 'to crush', etc. CCG, Gr. sı (quotns.): Kip. xiu kabasa “to make a surprise attack” baş- Hou. 30, 5; 23, 5; dàsa mina'l-daws baş- do. qo, s: xiv bassara'a, and in the Kitab Beylik baş- dasa İd. 32: xv baş- bataha "to flatten', aw düsa aw kabasa Kav. 10, 9; 0.0. do. 75, 4; 77, 16; dása baş- Tuh. 15b. 13; darasa “to annihilate' (etc.) (yanş- and) baş- do. 16a. 9: Osm. xiv ff. bas- in a wide range of meanings, c.ia.p. TTS I 75; II 107; I11 67; IV 75. bus- (p-) “to hide, liein wait, lay an ambush(for someone Dat.)'. Survives in NW Kaz. pos-, SW Az., Osm. pus-, "km. bus-. See busuğ Xak. xı beg yağı:ka: busdi: daxala'l-amir fi kamini'l-'adusoto. “the beg laid an ambush for the enemy” Kaş. II ro (busa:r, busma:k), (vve attacked by surprise at night and) teğme: yapak busdimiz “aid ambushes on every side” I 434, 7 (and see bös-): xırr(?) Ar. amal asrasında busuğli acal “destiny lies in ambush beneath hope” 294: xiv. Muh.(?) axfà wa xaba'a “to lie hid, conceal oneself? bu:s(mis-spelt 5bu:c-) Rif. 102 (only): Çağ. xv ff. bus- kamin hardan wa dar güşa-i pinhán ştadan “to lay an ambush, to be in a secret hiding place” San. 134r. 19 (quotns.): Kip. xiv buskamana İd. 31: xw labida "to crouch” buşTuh. 32a. 12: Osm. xiv ff. pus- “to lie in ambush' in several texts T'T'S I 582; 11 773. VU bós- perhaps survives in SE Türki bös- “to drag (something) along the ground”, Jarring 59, but the semantic connection is dubious. In the section quoted below, the translation of which is imperfect, there is a confusion between bus- and this word. Xak. xı er kulin bösdi: “the man beat his slave severely” (daraba . . . mubáliga(n)) Kaş. II io (böse:r, bósme:k); ol kulin bösüğ bósdi: 371 ittaxada”l-hamin aca — kadálika ida daraba dirdba(s) "he laid an ambush, and also when he gave a beating' (actually “he gave his slave a severe beating") 7 385, ro. Dis. BSA D basa: Ger. in -a: fr. bas-. İn addition to its use as an ordinary verbal form, this word began at a very early period to be used as an Adv. or Conjunction, see v. G., A TG, para. 410. An early l.-w. in Mong. as basa “also, then, thereafter' (Haenisch 13). Survives only(?) in NE several dialects R JV 1193; Khak. paza; Tuv. baza used (1) as a Conjunction between two words “and”, (2) as an Adv. at or near the beginning of a sentence 'also, in addition, once more' (perhaps a reborrowing fr. Mong.) and NW Kaz. basa R IV 1527 where it is used at the end of a sentence after the Suff. -la/ -na, and means something like 'indeed, in fact, really'. Türkü vı üç Oğuz süsi: basa: kelti: "three Oğuz armies came to attack us” I7 E 32; tepri: Umay 1duk yer suv basa: bérti: 'the goddess Umay and the sacred land and water crushed them for our benefit" T 38: Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. Sanskrit anantaram “immediately thereafter' basa:(6-) TT VIII A.46-7, (bend the two index fingers, press the two. thumbs together and) anda basa “after that" (meditate on this dhàram) U I1 47, 73; 0.0. of anda basa do. 81,69; TT X 217; USp. 44, 1-2; 103, 13; yana munda basa “and after this” links two quotns. fr. Bud. scriptures TT V 26, 85-6—basa basa 'more and more, increasingly', e.g. basa basa seviglig kózin *with increasingly loving eyes” U IV 46, 49; o.o. TT V 24, 7o (odBur-); Suv. 17, 23—1ya basa (see 1y-) has much the same meaning, e.g. kamağ kutlar waxségler turkaru 1ya basa kóyü kózedü tutarlar 'all the benevolent spirits (Hend.) will always and more and znore keep and protect them' TT VI 48-9— in the form basasinda it has so far lost its original character as to be declined as a N., e.g. élig beg basasında yorıyu 'walking after (pursuing) the king” U IV 14, 141-2; (innumerable deities) tepri burxan basasinda bardılar 'followed the Buddha” TT X 142-3; a.o. do. 562-3: Civ. anda basa TT VIII L.34: Xak. xı basa: a Particle (harf) meaning ba'd “after”, hence one says men anda: basa: keldim “I came after him” Kaş. 111 224: KB bu iki basa tutsa “if he keeps these tvvo (the tongue and the throat) under control” 993— basa as a Conjunction 'then, next' is common, e.g. in the list of the Four Companions basa Farüq 53; basa "Utman 55—anipda basa "after him” 132—(in a list of four things) basası biliğ “the last of them is wisdom' 308— basa 'afterwards' 6140 (2 krn): xin(?) Tef. anlarda basa oz: Kom. xiv basa occurs several times as a Conjunction meaning 'but' or 'therefore, also” rather than “and”, which is dağı CCI, CCG, Gr. 52: Kip. xiv başa: is used in asking for more news ('inda'l-istizádati'l-hadit) like ihi in Ar.; and the «Kitáb» Beylik says “and among their Conjunctiong 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 416 
     
   
   
      372 (kalámihim faşila) is the word basa:, which sometimes means “then”” (ttmma) and sometimes “if not” (///a) and sometimes "likewise" (ayda(n)' İd. 32. D basu: Hap. leg.; as this is a dialect word, it is prob. a Sec. f. of some other Dev. N. fr. bas- (cf. basığ) rather than a Dev. N. with the unusual Suff. -u:. Xak. xi basu: a/-mirzabba fi luğa "a sledge-hammer' in one dialect Kaş. 111 224. S busu (p-) See busuğ. Dis. V. BSA?D *busa:- See busan- etc. Dis. BSB VU basbal Hap. leg.; an unusual form, possibly foreign. Cf. bistek, Xak. xı basbal cadba mina"l-ğazl “a single-spun thread' Kaş. I 481. Dis. BSD D basut presumably Dev. N. fr. bas-, although the semantic connection is not close; “support, help”. N.o.a.b. Uy. vir ff. Man. yetili iki yegirmili erkliğ küçlüğlerden küç basut kelzün “may strength and support come from the seven and the tvvelve independent mighty ones” M III 35, 20-1: Bud. otli suvlı bir ikintike küç basut bolup “vvhen fire and vvater strengthen and support one another” TT VI 326; art basut bol- “to back and support (someone Dat.) Suv. 127, 21; 409, ır: Xak. xr basut al-zahir wa'l-mu'àqeintel-müşfiq “a backer and sympathetic helper” , basut a/-;i'ána “help”, hence one says ol mapa: basut berdi: a"dnani? "he helped me'; the two meanings are closely rclated (garibán) Kaş. I 354; xa:ndin basut tilerler "they ask the xan for help” 7 459, 7: KB (he sought for outstanding people ) ózipe basut kilsa “to give him support” 419; bu işke basut barça andın kelir “all the support for this task came from him" 2502. VU?F bista: Hap. leg.; neither the f orm nor meaning of the word suggest that this is a native Turkish word; the urban context indicates rather that it is a l.-w., prob. Iranian. NW Kaz. biste “a small settlement, a quarter of a town! R IV 1784 can hardly be the same word. Xak. xi (in a note on a verse quoted under yarış- in which this word appears) bista: the word for "a person whose business it is to accommodate merchants! (mudif ii'i-tácir); the merchant puts up in his house, and he buys the merchant's wares, collects his sheep 7plies his other needs. 'Then, when his ^. he takes one in twenty of his sheep. "stom in 'luxsi Yağma:, and di it myself Kaş. III 71; syllable unvocalized) Hap. . Cf. basbal and bilik. uantity (qit'a) of carded  DIS.  BSA cotton destined for spinning': Argu: xi bistek al-fatila “a vick” Kaş. I 476. Dis. V. BSDD basıt- the oldest Caus. f. of bas- with the less common quasi-Pass, meaning; 'to allow onesclf to be attacked, etc.” N.o.a.b. Cf. bastur-, bassık-, basur-. Türkü vir (stay where you are, organize reconnoitring patrols and İookout posts properly) basıtma: “do not let yourself be taken by surprise' T 38: Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. (innumerable human beings) 18 ağrığka basıtıp "letting. themselves fall victim to disease (Hend.)' (lie without hope or confidence) Suv. 587, 1: Civ. kişi küçi korasar yat kigike basıtur “if a man's strength diminishes, he lets himself be oppressed by strangers” TT I 56-7: Xak. xı KB kişig satğamasa küvezlik bile basıtmasa özde kiçiğke küle "he must not trample on people in his pride, or let himself be oppressed by unimportant people vvith a smile” 707; (attack the enemy, do not let him take your property) uzatsa basittip “if you procrastinate, you will have let yourself be beaten' 2369. D bastık- Pass. f. of bas- with the rare Suff. -tik- (cf. bulduk-) which should perhaps be explained as the Emphatic f. in -k- of basit-. N.o.a.b. Uyf. vin ff. Bud. (faith, because it has strength) tört törlüğ şımnularka çalsıkmaz bastıkmaz “is not struck down or overcome by the four kinds of evil spirits (Ahrimans) TT V 22, 28-9; iğ ağrığka bastikmak “to fall victim to discase' VII 40, 134. D bastur- the normal Caus. f. of bas-; with a similar wide range of meanings. S.i.a.m.l.g. Xak. xı beg oğrı:nı: basturdt: “the beg gave orders that the extremities of the thief should be seized and that he should be held down' (bi-qabd atraf”l-lişş sca. bathihi); also used of pressing down (taqula) anything to prevent it from rising or turning over (a/-uuhrüd swa'linqilab) Kaş. HH 171 (basturur, basturma:k): Çağ. xv ff. bastur- Caus. f.; drdm dádan tva galib süxtan wa mağlüb süxtan wa bü gudagtan va furü giründan wa muhr xadan, this incoherent list attempts (rather ineffectively) to turn the various meanings of bas- into Caus. f.s San. 122r. 23. Tris. BSD D basutçı: N.Ag. fr. basut, 'supporter, helper'. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. basutgisi kim erür “vho is its supporter?" U 77 8, 21; o.o, do, 9, 5 (esin); 9, rr, U Hİ 14, iş (ii) (edgü:lük); TT V zz, zo (artukrak): Xak. xı KB bu erdi basutçı köni dinka kök “he (Fürüq) was the supporter and root of the truc faith' 54; basutçı kerek erke yarıçılar “a man needs supporters and helpers” 427; 0.0. 428-31. VU?F bustuli: entered twice in Kaj., in the first case the only entry under the heading  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 417 
     
   
   
     DIS fu'luli, in the second one of five words under a similar heading of which the second vowel is not marked but was perhaps -a- or -i-. N.o.a.b.; prob. a foreign word; there is no common word for this vegetable in the modern languages. Xak. xi bustuli: a/-sarmaqu'lladi yu'kal 'edible orach or mountain spinach ( Atriplex hortensis) Kaş. 1 451; 493. Dis. BSG D basığ Dev. N. fr. bas-; the Uyğ. word is transcribed basik in USp., but -1K isnotan Uyğ. Suff. Prob. n.o.a.b. SW Osm. bastk 'compressed, low' is a survival of/the cognate form *basuk, Pass. Dev. N./A.; NE Kumd., Tel. pazik 'gait', R IV 1194. might come fr. either. Uyğ. viii ff. Civ. basığ some kind of tax, the exact nature of which is uncertain (see Caferoğlu in T M IV, p. 36); it occurs in association vv. Salığ in USğ. 14, 14, w. various taxes in do. 88, 44 (tütün), and by itself in do. 112, 5: Xak. xi basığ mağallıcl-tabyit Lyuqal inserted in error] wa'l-axd "ala ğirra “the place of a night attack and taking by surprise'; one says ol ant: basığı:nda: (sic) tutti: "he caught him at an opportune moment by a night attack” (f? awàánihi baydata(n)) Kaş. I 372. D busuğ (p-) Dev. N. fr. bus-; “ambush”. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. pusu; cognate fs w. the same meaning are NW Kumyk pusğun, SW Az. pusğu. A l.-w. in Pe. and other languages, sec. Doerfer 11 7az. Xak. xi busuğ al-kamin 'ambush' Kaş. 1 372; a.o. I 407, 27: KB (the age of sixty now calls me saying “come here”) busuğ bolmasa bardım emdi naru “if it docs not turn out to be an ambush, I am going there” 366; o.o. 1381, 2370; 4826 (ödsüz): xiv Muh. al-kamin busuğ (MSS. in error yagug) Mel. 47, 10; Rif. 145: Caf. xv ff. busu kamin San. 134v. 10 (quotn.): Kip. xır a/H-kamin busu: Hou. 14,9: xiv busu: ditto /d. 31; busu: do. 33: Osm. xvi pusı koy- “to lay an ambush' TTS JV 643. D basğuk Conc. N. fr. bas- connoting something massive and oppressive. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. (the four quarters of the world burst into flames) uluğ bedük taflarnin basğukları yémrildi “the massive crests(?) of the great (Hend.) mountains were smashed” U IV 40, 164-8; in TT X 366 (damaged) basğuk seems to mean “the club, or mace” (of a demon). D basğa:n See bazğa:n. [Y Dis. V. BSG'D basik-/bassik- Kaş. is no doubt right in saying that the longer form is the original; Emphatic Pass. f. of bas-, "to be attacked by night, crushed, etc... N.o.a.b.; cf. basıt-. Xak. xr kişi: yağı:ka: basıktı: translated bayyata'l-'adusew “ala:a”l-qarım “the enemy attacked the people by night” (properly “the people were attacked by the enemy by night); originally bassıktı: with a tagdid on . BSN ^ 373 the sin Kaş. II 116 (basika:r, basıkma:k), er yağı:ka: bassıktı: (written with two sin) bayyata'l- 'aduwtw 'alà'l- racul wa axada 'alayhi II 228 (bassıka:r, bassıkma:k ditto); a.o. II 16s, 7: KB (oh slave of passion) ölümke basikma kelir alğalı “do not be caught by surprise by death; it is coming to take you' 5145; 0.0. 679, 5196. D busuk- (bussuk-, p-) Hap. leg.; Emphatic Pass. f. of bus-. Xak. xı er busuktt: uxida'l-racul fi'l-kamin "the man was caught in an ambush' Kaş. 1I 116 (busuka:r, busukma:k). Tris. BSG D basa:kı: N./A.S. fr. basa:, “next, following”. N.o.a.b. Xak. xi K.B “Ali erdi munda basakı “Ali was the next after him" 57: Kıp. xiv. başağı: kün 2a"q ğad “the day after tomorrov” Id. 33; ditto Bul. 13, 6 (vocalized başğı:). D busuğçı: (p-) N.Ag. fr. busuğ, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı K.B (when your black hair and beard have turned white) anunğu busuğçı ölümke tükel “you must prepare yourself completely for dcath the ambusher' 1103. Dis. BSG VUD bösüğ Hap. leg.; Dev. N. fr. bös-, “a severe beating”. Xak. xı Kaş. 7 385 (bós-). VUD bósge:c Hap. leg.; Conc. N. fr. bös-, presumably with the connotation of something beaten flat. Cf. bósge:l, Xak. xi bósge:c al-rağif "a flat loaf” Kaş. 1 452. Tris. BSM D basımçı: Hap. leg.; N.Ag. fr. basım, N.S.A. fr. bas-, which has not yet been noted in the early period but s.i.s.m.l. R IV 1531; presumably 'oppressor' or the like. Xak. xr K B (some are thieves, cheats, cut-purses, and svvindlers) kayusı basımçı ölütci Kiruk “some are oppressors, murderers, and cripples (Y 1737. Dis. BSN VU basan Hap. leg.; this word must be a basic one, if vocalized correctlv, and is not connected with the later forms of basğa:n collected under bazğa:n. The difference between basan and yo:ğ is that the first means 'food prepared for the deceased' and prob. buried with him, while the second means a funeral meal or wake provided for the mourners. Xak. xı basan ?7a"öm yuttaxad IPL -mayyit ba”d mü dafanühu “food prepared for the deceased after they have buried him”, and one says yo:ğ basan Kaş. I 398. D basınç N.Ac. fr. basın-, “oppression” and the like. N.o.a.b. Türkü vir ff. Man. TT II 6, 6 and 15 (ıyınç): Uyğ. viii ff. Man. M HII 37, 14 (ii) (ry1nc): Xak. xi KB (he lifted from people) kamuğ küç basınç “all high-handedness and oppression” 1771. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 418 
     
   
   
       374 DIS D busanç N.A.S. fr. busan-; grief. N.o.a.b. Türkü vir ff. (a man was sorrowful and the sky cloudy; the sun rose among the clouds and) busa:nc ara: meni: kelmi:ş “in the midst of grief jov came” IrkB sz. Dis. V. BSND basın- Rcefl. f. of bas-; with a wide range: of meanings comparable to those of bas-, some unusual for a Refl. f. S.i.s.m.l.g., but ? not in SE, SC, SW. Türkü viri (why should we be afraid because (the enemy) are many?) az teyin ne basınalım “vhy should we be downcast because (we) are few?' T 39: vrir ft. (a came! fell into a bog) basınu: yeml:ş özi:n tilkü: yemi:ş "while he was sinking he eat, but a fox eat him” /7RB 46: Man. (all the 'Türk people will sin against God) kanyuda dındarlarığ [gap] basınğay ólürgeyler “and wherever [they find?) Elect they will oppress and kill them”: Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. TT VI ro (ayin-): Xak. xr ol eriğ basındı: istad'afa'i-racul wa qaharahu “he despised the man and oppressed him” Kaş. II 142 (basinur, basınma:k: K B (if the king calls for you, mend your ways, do him service and) basinma ant 'do not treat him with disrespect” 1504; (the fame of an enemy whom you have not met face to face spreads far and wide) kórüsse basınur kórügli karak 'when you see one another, the sccing eve despises him” 2368; 0.0. 646, 4085: Xwar. xiv. basın- “to treat with disrespect” Quib 28. D busan- Refl. of *busa:-; “to grieve, bc sorrowful', and the like. Morphologically *busa-: might be a Den. V. fr. bu:s, but the semantic connection is not close. 'This word and the other Der. f.'s of *busa:- are pec. to "Türkü and Uvg. but the first vowel is fixed by TT VIII. Uyf. vur ff. Bud. Sanskrit na focate “does not gricve, is not distressed" bu:sa:nma:sa:r (p-) TT VIII 4.36; ulus barça tégin üçün busanur “the whole country grieves because of the prince” PP 27, ” 1-2? 0.0. dö, 40, 4; 54. 3-4; T T .X 524; USp. 97, 25 (amru:); rozb. 15; Hiüen-ts. 63, etc.; Suv. 624, 16 (busrul-). Tris. BSN D basınçak N./A.S. fr. basın-, survives only (?) in NW Kaz. basimgak (sic) 'importunate, troublesome”. Xak. xj basınçak er a/-raculu'l-mustad'af “a man who is despised' Kaş. I sor: KB 9iri-12 (satğa:ğ): xiv Muh. (?) mustad'af basınçak (-c-) Ref. 149 (only). : Tris. V. BSN. D basindur- Caus. f. of basin-; syn. w. Dasıt-, “to let oneself be oppressed”. N^o.a.b. Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A M III 30, 3-5 (ii) (éndür-): Bud. (if a son or daughter of good people) yekke içgekke basındurmış bolsar "lets himself be oppressed by demons (Hend.) TT VII 40, 367. D busandur- Caus. f. of busan-, “to make (someone) grieve, be sorrovvful”. N.o.a.b.  . BSN Uyf. vn: ff. Man. TT HH 16, 42-4 (empet-): Bud. Suv. 136, 11 (E burcindur-). Dis. BSR basar lap. leg. and so perhaps a l-w.; “garlic” is normally sarmusak. Cf. basarlığ. Xak. xı basar tünu'l-cabal “möuntain garlic' Kaş. I 360. D basruk Pass. N./A.S. fr. basur-; lit. 'pressed. down', but. more commonly. 'something put over (something else)". Survives onlv(?) in SW "Vkm. basrik “a horse cloth' R IV 1535: Xak. xr basruk /aqál küll şay” "a burden on anything” (with a prov. saying that the earth's burden is the mountains and the people's burden the 2egs) Kaş. I] 466: Çağ. xv ff, basruğ xargaáh esbübi “tent gear" Vel. 128; basruk (spelt) "a cover (büşiş?) which they put over a tent, hut, or horse to protect it against the wind and rain' Sam. 122V. 4. Dis. V. BSRD basur- morphologically a Caus. f. of bas-, but semantically syn. w. it; 'to press down, weigh down (physically). Survives in NE pazır-, same meaning Alt., Sor, "Tel, R 717 1196 and Khak.; SW "Tkm. basir- “to cover? (ctc). Uyğ. vir ff. Man.-A basurup M 7178, 17 (damaged): Civ. kartka basurğu ol “one must press (a substance just described) on the ulcer H 7 180: Xak. xi tenri: ta:ğ birle: yé:rig basurdi: “God pressed down (toaffada) the earth with the mountains'; also used of anything which is put under something heavy (taqil) Kaş. 11 7; (basurur, basurma:k): Kip. xiv basur- “to heap coverings (Reffara”l-taffiva) on something, that is to cover it, to fasten the covering and press it down' (bálaga fiha) İd. 32. D busar- Intrans. Den. V. fr. bu:s; Hap. leg. but Jd. 32 records a ip. xiv Dev, N. busarik translated “dust which comes from a long way off”. Xak. xı kö:k busardr: gámati'l-samá 1a qüma”l-dabüb "the sky became cloudy and the mist rose” Kaş. JI] 78 (busa:rur (sic), busarma:k). Tris. BSR D basarlığ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. basar, Xak. xı basarlığ ta:ğ cabal dit tüm "ammountain with garlic on it” Kaş. 7 494. Dis. BSŞ D busuş Dev. N. fr. *busa:-; 'gricf, sorrow', and the like. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. Man, kop busuşı sakınçı “all their grief and anxiety” M HİT 26, o (i): Bud, busuş kadğu emgek 'grief, distress, and pain” (representing Sanskrit foka barideva duhkha) U İİ ir, 6, busuş sakınç TT X 107; o.o. USp. 97, 22; Suv. 545, 14-15: Civ. éldin xandın busuş bar 'there is grief from' (?concerning) the realm . and xan” TT 1 60; o.o. do. 79 (belgü:), etc.  |  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 419 
     
   
   
     MON,BS$ Dis. V. BSS' D basış- Co-op. f. of bas-, s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xr ol mapa: uyma: basigdi: “he helped me to: compress (fi talbid) the Türkmen felt out of . which boots are made'; also used of anything that has to be squeezed (yuctam) to reduce its swollenness or hardness Kaş. 77 100 (basışu:r, basışma:k). D busuş- (p-) Hap. leg.?; Recip. f. of bus-. Xak. xr begle:r busuşdr: “the öegs laid ambushes for each other" Kaş. 71 101 (busuşu:r, busugma:k). Tris. BS$ D busuşluğ P.N/A. fr. busus; 'griceved, sorrowful, unhappy”. N.o.a.b. Türkü vir ff... IrkB s2 (bulith]): Uyğ. viurff. Bud. busuşluğ is common in PP, both by itself and in the phr. busuşluğ kadğuluğ 'sorrowful and distressed", busuşluğ sakınçlığ 'sorrowful and anxious” U JJ zi, 4(ata:), TT X 62-3; korkınçlığ busuşluğ 'frightened and unhappv' Kuatt. 43-4: Civ. busuşluğ kadğuluğ TT I21.. D busuşsuz Priv. N./A. fr. busuş, 'free from grief and sorrow'. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-À (may our minds remain) turkaru busussuzun kadğusuzun 'completely free from sorrow and distress! M 1 29, 29: Man. ditto M II/ 36, 2 (ii): Bud. busussuz sakınçsız bolğı 'become free from sorrow and anxiety' 77 .X 324-5: Civ. busuşsuz (mis-spelt bususuz) bolur TT VII 34, ız. Mon. BS baş/ba:ş Preliminary Note. Although Kaş. spells both “head” and "toound” ba:s this is certainly an error. “Head” is bas in Yakut, Pek, 388 and baş in SV T Rm. and *swwound' is ba:s in Yakut, Pek. 390, and ba:ş in Tkm. 1 baş properly “head” in an anatomical sense, but also fr. the earliest period used metaph. in the sense of the 'head' (of an army), the 'beginning' (of something) and for geographical features. C.i.a.p.a.]l. See Doerfer 11 697-8, 704. Türkü virt (more than a hundred arrows hit his armour and quilted coat) yéizipe: (?so read) başına: bir t(egmedi::] "but not one reached his face or head” I E 33— geographical; 1duk baş “the holy summit'(?) II E 25; (PU) tamağ iduk baş I N 1; I1 E 29; (PU) cus başı: I N 6; TI E 3o: vin ff. . kamu:ş a:ra: başım “my head is among the reeds” IrkB 10; bu irk başı:nta: “at the beginning of this omen” do. 57: Man. eki ağuluğ yol basıpa “to the beginning of the two poisonous roads” Chuas. 125-6; bastan (sic) adak(k)a teği “from head to foot” M I 5, 13; o.o. de. 6, 1; TT IJI 8, 67: Uyğ. viu geo- . . graphical; ıduk baş Su. E 9; ötüken yış basrnta 'at the summit(?) of the Otüken mountain forest” do. E 9; arkar başı: “the mountain sheep's head” do. S r, keyre: başı: : do. E. 6; N 6; sip başı: “the colt's head” do.  :375 E 3, 4: viii ff. Man.-A (the poison which he emitted) öz başına tegdi “fell on his own head” M I 20, 2-3; (he cut off) şımnu başın “the demon's (Ahriman's) head' do. 20, 14; a.o. do. 20, 17: Bud. bas is very common both in an anatomical sense, e.g. basin tópitip 'lying face downwards' PP 19, 4; and in a metaph. sense, "the top (of a pole)! USSp. 104, 12-13 (ığaç), A:cna:ta Kaudinyé arhant ba:şın .. arhantla:rığ “a hundred arhats with nata Kaundinya at their head” TT VIII II.7; ağır iş küdüğlerde an başı “the very first of (these) important acts” TT V 20, ro: Civ. baş is common (1) anatomically e.g. kayu kişi bas ağrığ bolsa "whoever gets a headache! TT VII 27, rz and (2) metaph. e.g. ağrığdın başı yötül “the beginning of the illness is a cough” TT VIII M.26; and in a curious phr. (1 have hired a plot of land for 10 fags of cotton-seed) bu on tar kebezni küz yapida başı taşı birle bérürmen 'I will deliver these to taşıs of cotton-seed in full on the first day of autumn” USp. 2, 7: O. Kir. ' the theory that there is a special letter repre: senting baş in P.N.s in Mal. 2, s and 49, 2 is an error; the “letter” is p 1k or p ki, but the inscriptions in question are very corrupt: Xak. xı ba:s (sie, see Preliminary Note) al- -ra's “a head” Kaş. HI 151; the word, often spelt baş with Suffs. occurs over şo times, usually in an anatomical sense, but also metaph. in such phr. as 1vr1k başı: “the neck of a jug' I 100, 6; erdem başı: tt:l ra'su'I-manqibatil-lisán "the beginning of virtue is the tongue' 7 107, 9: KB bas is common (1) anatomically e.g. başım kesmesüni keseyin tilim “1 will cut out my tongue so that they may not cut off my head” 166; (2) metaph. for “leader” e.g. başı erdi öpdün kamuğ başçıka (Muham' mad) “vvas the leader in front of all (other) leaders! 45; (3) metaph. for “beginning”, etc. (I cannot conduct all the business of the state , myself) mapa er kerek tir (?read bir) bilir iş başın 'I need a man who knows how to start work (properly)” 422: xır(?) At. baş is common, e.g. “head” 300 (börk)— köpül bamakir bil xata”lar başı “knovv that fixing your mind (on something) is the prime mistake” 220; başı bardı xayrnın sopt barğust “the beginning of good fortune has (already) gone away, and the end of it will (soon) go” 391: Tef. baş (1) “head” (anatomical); (2) “leader”, (3) 'summit" (of a mountain); (4) numerative altı baş kişi - "six (head of) mer”) (5) in a phr. (let us see his army) başımız közimiz birle *with our own eyes” 93: xiv Muh. al-ra's ba:s Mel. 14, 18; ” 46, 2; Rif. 91, 139; o.o. (anatomical) 46, 2; 47, 12; 53, 6: 64, 12; 75, 35 139, 141, 150, 163, 178; quilatu'i-cabal "the summit of a mountain' da:ğ ba:şı: 74, 13; ta:ğ ba:şı: 178; a/-rawwás 'cattle dealer” ba:ş sa:tıcı: 57, g(only): Çağ. xv ff. baş töben sar-à-zir wa sar nigün "head dovrnvvards” San. 124r. 8: Xwar. xit baş “head” ' Ali 18: xır(?) baş is common in Oğ. baş kesdi 59; tağ başıda 174; kanğa başıda “in front of the wagon' 278: xiv ditto ' Qutb 28; MN 49, etc.; Nahc. 98, 5 etc.: Kom. Xiv “head” (lit. and metaph.) baş CCI, CCG; u————————Á—Á—m———s!————"'ce LLL SERRE 220 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 420 
     
   
   
     376 MON. BS Gr. sz (quotns.): Kip. xttt al-ra's ba:ş Hou. 19, 18: xiv. ditto. /4. 31; basbarmak (ric under -s) al-ibhám “the thumb” do. 31; ra'si ba:sum ud. 16, 10: xv al-ra's ba:s Kar. 43, 11; 6o, 10; Tul. 16b. 7 (and olo), al-ibltám ba:ş barmak Kar. ör, 3. : D 2 ba:ş presumably Den, N. fr. “bar, scc ba:lığ, "a wound' and the like. Survives only (?) in Yakut and SW Tkm., see above; elsewhere displaced by l-w.s like Mong. yara and Ar. caráhat, ctc. Türkü viir ff. Man. tört yépirmi törlüğ baş kiltimiz erser "if we have inflicted the fourteen kinds of wounds' Chuas. 52-3: Uyğ. viti ff. Civ. baş kilsar “if one makes a (surgical) incision! TT VII 21, 2 (sec kana:-): Xak. xr ba:ş a/-cirdha "a wound' Kaş, III 151 (prov); 717 3o1 (tügne:-) and nearly 20 o.o. translated a/-ctrália, al-curh *wound', al-garlia 'ulcer': KB berge başı “the wounds inflicted by a whip' 2580; (do not be angry with me) kópül kilma baş “do not wound my mind” 3965; a.o. 6287: xm(?) Ar. 140 (1 ok): Xwar. xiv bas *wound, wounded" Qutb 28; (he spoke with lamentations and tears and) bağrı başı birle "with an ulcerated liver* Nahc. 182, 16: Kip. xir (“head”) ba:ş wa hüqca”l-cüurh ca: Jaca! [-dummal also. wound" and 'boil' Tou. 19, 18; a.0. do. 33, 5: xiv bacs al-curh ma ba:s al-xurác "abscess” İd. 31; al-curh ba:ş Bul. ro, 2: Osm. xiv ff. ba:ş "wound, ulcer'; common until xvi, occurs rarely in xvit. T TS I 76; H 108, HI 68; V 76. bé:s “ve”: c.i.a.p.a.l. Türkü vi beş is common (spelt bes in T 49; Ix. 17 and once in 77); vun ff. Man. beş tepri "the five gods! C/as. T 1, 8: Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-A, Man., Bud., Civ. beş, consistently so spelt, is common: O. Kir. ix ff. beş, with the special letter for -é- occurs in Mal. 25, 4 böş Kirk “thirty-five” (years of age) and do. 45, 2 bés yaşımta: “in my fifth vear'; in do. 11, 9 the photograph shows that the line begins yeğirmi: yaşımda: “in my twentieth vear'; the supposed preceding word bes (so spelt) is wronglv deduced from a flaw in the stone: Xak. xi bé:s a/-xamsa fi'l-'adad 'ive! Kaş, İİİ 125; a.o.o.: KB beş 1432: xlv Muh. xamsa be:ş Mel. 81, 6; Rif. 186: Çağ. xv ff. bés beş "adad Vel. 139; bés[béser 'adad-i panc 'five! San. 147r. 14: Xwar. xiv beş (bd' maftüha, và, şin) namüz “the five (daily) prayers” Nahe. 240, 6: Kom. xiv beş CCĞ, Gr.: Kip. xin xamsa bö:ş Hon. 22, 5: xiv bés xamısa İd. ar, Bul. iz, 11: XV xamsa b€:ş (fatha ya) Kav. 39, 4; 65, 6; beş Tuh. 6ob. 7 a.o.o.: Osm. xiv ff. the spelling beş seems to be standard in xiv, and xv and occurs sporadically down to xvii. T'TS II 154; Hİ 104; İV 113. bos/?bo:s basically 'not subject to external control, free” (not very different fr. erklig). with extended meanings like “empty” as opposed to “full”, and 'soft' as opposed to "hard", "The original length of the vowel is uncertain ; Kaş. lists both forms, but it is short in SW 'Tkm.; it does not seem to exist in Yakut, S.i.a.m,l.g, with minor phonetic changes. Türkü vu ff. Irh B 29 (ut-): Uyğ. viit ff. Man. M 1 17, 2 fF. (işsiz): Bud. (then you must imagine that various cakras) bu burxan etözin bos kılmışın "have set frec this Buddha-body” TT V 6, 46; o.o. TT IV 6,33 etc. (irinçü:): Civ. (if a man's voice failsor) edğüti boş ünmeser “vill not come out well and freely! H. I 146: Xak. xi bos ytlki: a/-dábbatu'l-musayyaba "an animal that is allowed to go frec' (cf. 1duk); hence onc says ol isle:r bos ckildi: omitted» fa//aqa”l-mar”a ka-annahu ahmalahd "he divorced the woman, as if he let her go frec'; and one says 0l kul bos kildi: "he emancipated (a'taqa) the slave! ; and a/-lınrr *frce' is called bos, as in the prov. bos ne:pke: idi: bolma:s “a thing which is allowed to go frce. (al-muhmal) has no owner! Kaş. 1 330; bo:s kisi: “a free (/mrr) man": bo:ş ura:ğut “a divorced (/dliq) woman': bo:ş elig yad fariğa mina'l-'amal wa'l-mál “a hand. without work or property': bo:ş et “soft (yaxır) meat, also used of soft ground: ho:ş at “a loose (mütlaq) horse”: and one says bo:ş ev “an empty( farig) house”, and vessels and tools that are not in use (al-fárifa mira'l-amal ) are called bo:s III 124: KB bos üzad kişi barca edgü kuli “a frec, independent man is the servant of all good (men?)' 2307: xiri(?) 4t. tili boş kişi "a man with an unbridled tongue! r37: Xiv Muh. al-xali 'empty' (opposite to 'full' do:lu:) (nemesiz; one MS.) bo:s Mel. s4, 9 (Ef. 151 ata:siz); Aurr (opposite to 'slavc' kul) bo:ş Rif. ısı (only): Çağ. xvíT. boş (r) xai (quotn.); (2) sust "soft, idle', ctc. Sam. 135v. 17: Kom. xiv bos “empty” (space) CCG; Gr.: Kip. xir a/-farığ (opposite to “ful”: tolu:) bo:s sa huwa'l-xáli wal-talaq ("divorce") Hou. 27, 17: xiv bos şafr (empty”) va xali: bo:ş (with back vowel") »muntaliq 'released, set free” /4. az: xv xáli boş Tuh. rab, 6; xala, tafarrağa "to be unoccupied (boşan- and) boş bol- do. iqb. 12; xdba “to be disappointed” boş kayıt- do. 15a. 8; farığ boş do. 28a. 2; “soft” (yas and) bos do. 31b. 7: Osm. xiv ff. bos noted in several phr. T'T'S 7 114; II 161; III 108-9. Mon. V. BSbış- (p-) "to come to maturity, ripen', with some extended meanings, both Intrans. and "Trans. ; vowel originally 1-, but -i- also occurs as early as "Türkü. S.i.a.m.Lg.; the vowcl is a back onc in NE, SE Türki (in suffixes) and NC Kir, but a front one elsewhere. The initial is p- in an unusually wide range of languages, NE (not significant); SE Türki BS. 120; NC Kzx. MM 256; SC Uzb. Bor. 328; NW Kaz., Kk, Nog.; SW Osm. and some "Tkm. forms. See Doerfer H 845. Türkü vil ff. (it rained) tarığ bişdi: (sic) “the crops ripened” JrkB s3: Uyğ, vir ff. Man. (VU) bisip M III 28, 6 (iii) (damaged): Bud. önre ağundakı kilinç tüşi bişmakın “the maturing of the fruits of things done in a former existence” Tig. soa. 5-6; a.o. U IV so, 124 (étil-): Xak. xı eşiç bışdı: “the pot boiled (adrahat) and the broth was cooked' (tubixat) ; and one says yé:mis bışdı: “the fruit ripened” | i |  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 421 
     
   
   
       DIS. V. BSA(nadicat); and one says er kimiz bişdi: “the man stirred (harraka) the kumis so that it should mature” (li-yudrik) Kaş. H iz (bişa:r, bışma:k), et bişdi: “the meat was cooked" (intabaxa) III 321, 8; 0.0. I 169 (1 01-); İT 120 (titil-); 771 382, 2: KB (hear the saying of) könli bışmış kişi “the man with a mature mind” 6165; (if one eats) eve bısmış aşnı “food cooked too quickly! 632: xiv Muğ. al-nádic "ripe” (opposite to 'unripe' ci:g) bigmisg Mel. 56, 7; Rif. 154: Çağ. xv ff. biş- (sic, sec bisur-) Intrans.; puxta gudan “to be cooked" and tadakkur yáftan "to remember' San. 146v. 24 (quotn.; the second meaning, otherwise unknown, is picked up by th following entry bışkar- “to remind”, supported by two quotns. fr. Name”, but also otherwise unknown): Xvvar. xiv biş- (sic) "to be matured” Qutb 34: Kip. xiii 'cooked (al-maibüx) meat bişmiş et Hou. ış, 16: xiv. blg- infabaxa, one says aş bişti: "the food is thoroughly cooked' (istawwa) İd. 32; tatabbaxa wa intabaxa biş- Bul. 8sr.: xv ag bişmişmi: dür “is the meat thoroughly cooked ?' (1stawàá) Kav. 15, 19; a.o. do. 42, 16: Osm. xiv ff. biş- (?piş-) "to be cooked, to ripen', etc.; c.i.a.p. TT'S I 109; II 154; III 104; IV 154. bus- (?p-) “to be irritated, annoyed”, Survives in SE Türki pus- SShato 59 (only, but BŞ. 129 lists the Refl. f. pusun- and Jarring 233 the Dev. N. pusuk). Uyğ. vii ff. Civ. TT VIII I.6 (isirken-): Xak. xr men bu: r:sdin buşdum “1 was irritated (dacirtu) by this affair Kaş. II 12 (buşma:zmen (sic, error for buşa:rmen), busma:k); two o.o.: KB buşar ödte beglerke barma yağuk “do not go near begs when they are irritated' 779, 783; 0.0. 324, 335 (utunluk), 795 (ilen-), 3965, 4292: xıu(?) At. sz (arsla:n): xiv Muh. al-dacar wa'l-fayz “to be irritated, furious buşmak Mel. 34, 16; Rif. 120; dacira wa kasila (to be lazy") buş- in margin Rif. rır (only): Çağ. xv fi. buş- Zalzatla tand ol-, . hah-... ve incin-, bi-hudür ol- "to be angry and rude, to push . . . to be hurt and irritable" Vel. 152 (quotns.); buş- ziyan rasidan “to be injured, damaged' Sar. 134v. 13 (quotns.): Xwar. xır puş- (sic) “to be irritable” “Ali 48; xiv bus- ditto Qutb 36 (bog-), 38: Tkm. xiv buş- igtáza “to become angry” in Kip. yigir«(Hap. leg.?) İd. 32: Osm. xiv ff. bus- (once in xvı puş-) “to be irritated, angry'; common down to xvr TTS I 128; II 183; III 120; IV 643. Dis. BSA D 1 buşı N./A.S. fr. buş-, 'bad-tempered, irritable. Pec. to KB. Xak. xı KB buşı bolsa yalpuk biliğsiz bolur “if a man becomes bad-tempered, he loses his sense of judgement' 334; bus: bolma 1414; olo. 850, 906, 1997, 4292. F 2 busi (p-) 'alms'; the Chinese phr. pu sözl (Giles 9,479 9,934), same meaning, borrowed by Turkish Buddhists and from them by the Manichaeans. Common in Uy£., and sometimes spelt with the original p- but not noted 377 later. Türkü vii ff. Man. puşi bérdimiz erser “if we have given alms” Chuas. 140-1; a.o.o.: Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-A edğü kilinçiğ buşı küçün kilzun “may they do good deeds by the strength of (giving) alms'! M TİT 11, 1-2: Man. arığ busi (sic, Man. Syriac script) "bérelim “et us give pure alms” M /T 29, 8-9; o.o. do. ro, M I 32, ız: Bud. barça bust berin “give it all as alms” PP r6, 6; o.o. do. 46, 6 etc.; USp. 103, 19-20 (1 idi); U 7II ız, 8; U IV 36, oz etc—ol bodisavat sizlerke korkunçsuz buşı béréey “that bodhisattva vvill give you the gift of freedom from fear ” Kuan. 52; a.0. 153. Dis. V. BŞAD başa:- Den. V. fr. 2 ba:8; “to wound, make incisions', and the like. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı ol yığa:çığ başa:dı: “he made incisions (ittaxada huzüz) in the wood'; also used of anything else when one cuts it (ğazzalın), also used when one dovetails pieces of wood (twada'a'l-xagab musannada ba"diha "ala ba'd) Kaş. III 265 (başa:r, başa:ma:k): Xwar. xı(?) a word apparently spelt öaşdı but transcribed by Arat başadı occurs five times in Oğ. usually in the phr. Oğuz kağan başadı “Oğuz kağan attacked', or thc like. It cannot bg a misreading of basdı since the phr. başadı basdı occurs in 294, and seems to be a survival of this word. D bosu:- (? boso:-) Den. V. fr. bos; properly 'to free, liberate', with some extended meanings. S.ia.m.lg., usually as boşa-, with several Trans. and Intrans. meanings. Türkü viii ff. Man. beş teprig boşuğalı “in order to liberate the five gods' Chuas. 9; yazukumuzni . . . boşuğalı kolmadımız erser “if we have not prayed (God) to release (us from) our sins” do. 287-9: Uyğ. vut ff. Bud. . yazukumuzni bosuyu yarlikazunlar “may they deign to release (us from) our sins” TT IV 12, 36; tsuyumda yazukumda bosuyu bérzün same meaning Kuam. zoo: Xak. xi ani ó:zi: bosu:di: istatlagat tabi'atuhu "his bowels were opened'; and one says tügün . boşu:di: “the knot came untied” (scahana); and one says at bogu:dx iínhalla'l-faras. mina'l-sva taq “the horse got loose from the tether'; and one says xa:n yala:vvaçığ boşu:di: adana'l-malik bi-rucu'i'l-rasül ila mursilihi “the king gave the ambassador leave to return to (the king) who sent him”, and, in Arğu:, er ura:$utin boşu:di: “the man divorced (tallaga) his vvife” ç this verb is both Intrans. and "Trans, Kaş. III 266 (boşu:r, bosu:ma:k): xiv Muh. a"taqa sta talaqa ( ?read tallaqa) tva taraha “to release, to hand over (or ?divorce), to give up” bo:şa:- Mel. 23, 3; Rif. 104; halama fi nawmihi "to have a nocturnal emission” bo:şa:- 108 (only); al-mutlaq 'released” bo:şa:mı:ş sr, 11; 147: Çağ, xv ff. boşa- (and bosan-) sust şudan, xali şudan “to be weak, lazy; to be empty” San. 135r. 2 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv boşa- “to release' Nac. 7, 17: Kip. xiv. boşa- ta/laqa İd. 32; Bul. 59v.    
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 422 
     
   
   
     378 "DIS  Dis. BŞÇ D başçı: N.Ag. fr. 1 baş, "eader, supervisor', and the like. S.i.s.m.l. Xak, x1 KB kalı edéü bolsa bodun başçısı “if therc is a good leader of the people” 894; o.o. 45 (öpdün), 4439 (igdisci:): xiv Muh.(?) (in a list of words for craftsmen, etc.) a/-ra”s 'foreman" ba:şçı: Rif. iss (only): Çağ. xv ft. başçı 5a/ad ta dalil na: ráhnumá "guide, leader Sa». iz4r. 10: Xwar. xiv başçı "leader! Qutb 28. "ris. BSC DF busict: (p-) N.Ac. fr. 2 bust; “beggar, mendicant; one who collects, or lives entirely on, alms”. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vr ff. Bud. toğa yok çığay buşıçı men “1 am an infirm and destitute beggar' PP 67, 3-4; bu busici braman “this mendicant Brahmin' U [II 15, 18; o.o. do. to, 4-5 (kolunguct:); 22, 9. Dis. BSD ?C bastak survives only in NW Kaz. baş baştak 'leaderless! and the like; otherwise n.o.a.b. The SW Osm. phr. tek basipa, “all by oneself, all alone', suggests that this is a Compound of 1 bas and 1 tek with phonetic assimilation, Xak. xı baştak (MS. bagrak, but as the word precedes basmak this must be an error) er al-raculu'l-hásir wa ğayruhu “a bare (or unarmed) man”, etc. Kaş. 7 466: Kip. xın af-"üri müna"l-ahl sca. ğayrihim "a man without family ties! ba:ş da:k (two words) yani bi-ra'sihi that is “on his own (head)” Hor. 25, 5. VU baştar llap. leg; possibly a 1-vv, Arğu: xı baştar a/-müncal “a sickle” Kaş. I 455. Dis. V. BŞDD basad- Intrans. Den. V. fr. 1 bas; 'to bea leader, at the head of (a body of men)”. Occurs only twice, but clearly legible. Cf. basla:-. "Türkü viri Ku Sepü:n başadu: tórt tümen Sü: kelti: 'an army of 40,000 men came with Ku chiang-chün (Chinese 'general') at their head” /1 N 8; (goo men) Lisün tay sepü:n başadfu:) “vith Li Hsün-tay at their head” do. 11. D boşut- (?bosot-); Caus. f. of bosu:-; "to release', etc, "The spellings boşat- in the MS. of Kaş. are due to the scribe; it must originally have been bosut-. S.i.a.m.l.g., usually as bosat-, with the same range of meanings. Uyğ. vin ff. Civ. (out of the six sitrr and six bahır due to the beg we have received five sitir and five bakir) bir sitir bir bakir kümüşni beg bosut(t)u "the beg has renounced one sitir and one bağır” USD. 125, 3-4: Xak. xr ol tağa:r boşattı: “he emptied (a/fzağa) the sack of its contents', also used of any container (zarf) when it is emptied of what had been stored in it; and one says ol tügün boşattı: "he untied (azoğd) the knot', etc. ; and in Arğu: one says Ol urn:ğut hoşattı: "he divorced (allaqa) the woman'; and one says o1 bulunuğ . BŞÇ boşattı: “he released (atlaqa) the prisoner”, also used of anyone who released (fakka) someone from fetters or bonds Kaş. II 306 (boşatu:r, boşatma:k, sic everywhere); bu: ot karın boşutğa:n (s) “this drug purges (yashil) the stomach'; also used of anvthing when it frequently reduces the strength of a thing by loosening it (vim. qutotoata'l-gay" bi'l-hall) I $14; a.o. 1 210, 21 (td-, rhyming with aşut-, taşut-): KB özi katmis emdi bosutgu kerek 'he is constipated, we must now loosen his bowels' 1059: Çağ. xv ff. boşat- Caus. f., sust kardan wa xáli hardan “to weaken, to empty” Sar, 135v. 1: Kom. xiv "to release; to forgive (sins)! bosat- CCTI, CCG; Gr. 65 (quotns.): Kip. xv fa//aqa boşat- Kar. 78, 8; farrağa boşut- (sic) do. 78, 11: Osm. xv ff. bosat- 'to empty' in one or two texts TTS II 161; IV 120. Tris. BSD D baştınkı N./A.S. fr. Abl. of 1 bas; “first”. Pec. to Uyğ. Uyf. viii ff. Bud. baştınkı asanki içinde “ın the first asamkheya! TTV 20, 7; 4.0. Suv. ir, 1i: Civ baştınkı yıl "first year” TT VIH 18, 7; 2.0.0. Dis. BŞĞ D 1 basak Dim. f. of 1 bas; lit. 'a small head", at first specifically “an arrow-head', later 'ear of corn', etc, S.i.a.m.l.g, with. various phonetic changes (b-/m- ; -ş-/-s-/-3-). Xak. xı başak nay/a” Hşahm wa. sinüməl-rumh "the iron hcad of an arrow or lance” Kaş. I 378; four 0.0.: Çağ, xv ff. başak ok demreni 'arrow head” Fel. 128 (quotn.); basak (1) paykàán ditto (quotn.); (2) xüşe "car of corn' (quotn.) . San. 124r. 4: X war. xiv başak 'ear of corn' . Qutb 28, 'arrow-head' MN gr: Kip. xiv başak a/-sunbula “an ear of corn'; one says başak dermakka: (sic, in error) bardı: "he has gone to pluck cars of com” Id. 32; (Tkm. demren) al-nasl, in Kıp. başak do. so. 18 2 başak See başmak, F başık (paşık) the Man. Sogdian word p'fyk '"hymn', occurs occasionally in Man. texts... Türkü viu ff. Man. (in the title, mainly Sogdian, of a hymn) paşı:k Toy. 7 v. 5 (ET Y II r77): Uyğ. vin ff. Man. alkis paşık sözlegüğ 'reciting praises and hymns” TT III 161; o.o. M I 9, 1; 10, 1 (i); ro, 1 (ii); M İİİ 26, 11 (ii). D bışığ (p-) N./A.S. fr. bış- 'ripe, mature; ripeness, maturity”, etc. Survives only(?) in NE several dialects pijJik R. IV 1323.. Türkü virt ff. Man. (in a list of twelve virtues) çının bışığın ermek “to live in truthfulness and maturity” M III 17, 12-13 (i): Uyğ. viti ff. Bud. (Sanskrit lost) bısığ (p-) e:rse:r se:nip TT VIII A.19: Civ. bışığ slpir 'ginger' Hİ 4, etc. (Sipir q.v.); (in an adoption agreement; let the adopted boy). köni bişığ tapinzun “serve faithfully when he reaches maturity(?)” USp. 98, 8; yiğ etler tegişilip bışığ boldi “ravv meats have changed and become fully EmEE——————— —sá— qs e SeHIHRÉRURQINUR LR IGLRRRSRRINÍIILHH ILL . 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 423 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. BŞĞcooked' TT T 192: Xak. xi bişiğ as a/-[a'ámu' l-matbüx "cooked food'; and anything cooked is so called, hence 'a baked brick' (al-acurr) is called bışığ kerpiç "a baked mud brick” (/abin); (in margin in second(?) hand) bışığ süçü:g 'cooked wine' Kaş. I 372; several o.o.: KB biliglig biliğ bérdi tilke bışığ 'wisdom gives the tongue maturity' 168; bolur ötrü işler bütün ham bışığ, biligliğ kişiler bışığ yér aşığ “then his actions are proper and well thought out; wise men cat their food well cooked” 330; a.o. 4480: xiv Muh.(?) lahm matbüx blgi:g (sic) et Rif. 164: Çağ. xv ff. bışığ/bışık musa "cooked” San. 147r. 20; (VU) bişi (or bigrfia) ndrld-t küçük “small bread rolls', which they cook ín butter do. 1471. 9: Ya&amp; ma: xi bışık et 'cooked meat, etc., the Yağma: form of bışığ (mis-spelt başrk in the MS.) Kaş. 1 379: Xwar. xiv bisig "cooked, matured' Qutb 34: Kom. xiv “ripe, cooked” bişi CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiv bişi: “hin loaves' (ruqdq) well known among them İd. 32: Osm. xiv ff. bişi “cakes cooked in butter"; c.La.p. TTS I 108; İl 154; IH 104; IV 114; xviii (after Çağ.) and the Rim? call a cake made of dough beaten up with an egg and baked iu butter bişi/bişme Sar. 147r. 19. D buşak Sec. f. of *busBak Dev. N./A. (connoting habitual action) fr. bus-; Ka;'s ex. planation is confused and erroncous. N.o.a.b. Oğuz (and others, «a fayruhu) xi busak “an irritable (a/-dactir) man” Kaş. 1 378; (under the heading /a"//Şan) words of this form are N./A. of Habitual Action corresponding to the: Ar. form rmif'ál . . ., and most of the Oğuz and Kipçak turn the -n into -k and omit the -É-; for example (the Turks) call “an irritable man” buşğa:n and the Oğuz say buşak 7 154: Kip. xiv buşak al-raculu'l-katirul-ayz "a badtempered man”, from buş- iğtaza İd. 32 D boşuğ (?boşoğ) N.Ac. fr. boşu:-, n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vr ff, Bud. eliğ begdin boşuğ bulup öz uluşıpa bardı “he received from the king permission to leave and went off to his own country” U III 67, 1-2 (iii); arumaduk tsuy irinçülerimin boşuğ kolup 'asking for forgiveness for my sins (Hend.) which have not been purged” TT IV 12, 5o: Xak. xi boşuğ “the permission (al-rdn) for the return journey', which is given by a Sultan to an ambassador who has been sent to him; and the gift (a/-cd'iza) which is given to the latter is also called this. "This is analogous to the Ar. word a/-sufra which primarily means 'food prepared for a traveller', and then the leather cloth on which the food is laid out is also called sufra. Similarly a neighbour who goes to visit (another) neighbour far away, when the time for his return comes sends out an invitation, all the neighbours and others are invited, and he asks their permission to return, giving the neighbours gifts; this is called boşuğ as ta'amu'l- -idn “the food for permission! Kaş. 7 372: KB boşuğ bergü 'giving (the ambassadors) permission to depart' 2495: Kom. xiv “release” . boşov CCG; Gr. 379 D buşuğ Hap. leg.; N.Ac. fr. buş-. Xak. xr one says buşuğ busd:: dacira dacara(n) "he was bad-tempered, irritable! Kaş. I 373. D boşğut (boşğot) 'instruction, teaching”, and the like; Dev. N. fr. *bosggu:-, which is morphologically a Den. V. fr. boşuğ with a . very tenuous semantic connection. Neither this nor cognate words (boşğut-, boşğun-, etc.) are noted later than Xak. but the -0- is .fixed by TT VIII spellings. Türkü vrrı ff. Man. adınağuka boşğut boşğurmakın sever “he loves to give instruction to others” M Ill 21, 1-2 (ii); edğü boşğut bos(gap] TT HI ro, os: UyÉ. vini ff. Man. “Tokharian 'upright behaviour and knowledge' çaxşapat boşkut (sic) TT IX 33: Bud. nom boşğut boşğundaçı erser “if they are persons being instructed in the (true) doctrine” TT V 22, 46; ' 0.0. do. 24, $2; 26, 83; Sanskrit fruta “tradition, ' instruction” boşğut (spelt poşkodh) biliğ TT , VHI D.27; boşğut alıp “receiving instruction” USp. 45, 6: Xak. xı boşğut al-tilmid fi l-hirfa “an apprentice to a craft” Kaş. 1 451. ,E başğa:k Sec sapğa:k, D başğıl Hap. leg. (so is bagil); Den. N./A. in -É1l (connected with colours) fr. 1 bas. 'Xak. xı “a quadruped with a white head” (dascátu'l-arba' ida abyadda ra'suhu) is called başğıl yılkı: Kaş. 7 481; basil ko:y a/-aşqa" müna”l-ğanam 'a sheep with a white spot on its head”, in one dialect( fi luğa) 7 392. ' D başğa:n Hap. leg.; presumably Den. N. fr. 1 baş. The roz/ varied fr. about rz ounces to 5 pounds avoirdupois in various places and periods. Xak. xı başğa:n “a large fish (a/-samak) weighing between 100 and so ratls; used as a simile for the head-man (Kabir) of a tribe, one says bodun başğa:nı: that is “the head (ra'is) of a tribe” Kaş. 7 438. Dis. V. BŞĞ: ?D *bosBu:- See hoşğut, boşğut-, etc. D boşğut- Han. leg.; Caus. f. of *bos£u:-. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. bu da:rnı boşğu:tup “teaching this dhárag?!? TT VIII K.7. D 1 boşğun- Refl. f. of *bosgu:-; “to learn, receive instruction'. Pec. to Uyg. where it is fairly common. Uy£. vini ff. Bud. birök bu nomuğ esidip boşğunsar tutsar "if they hear this doctrine, learn it and keep it TT . VH 40, 40-1; o.o. do. 145 (üzeliksiz), TT V 22, 46 etc. (boşğut), U I 13, 7; İT 34, 4; Tis. 47b. 5; $uv. 2,9; 17, 14; 136, 4- 6 (1 eri); 447, 16 etc. (D) 2 boşğun- Hap. leg.; Kag.'s explanation is morphologically impossible unless the " insertion of -É- by a false analogy can be assumed. Xak. xı er elpi: boşğundı: “his hand was empty (inxala'at) and stopped work' (fatara 'ani'l-'amal); also used of a man himself; the origin of that (verb) is boşundı: Kaş. II 238 (boşğunu:r, boşğunma:k). 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 424 
     
   
   
     38o DIS. V. BSGD başğar- "Trans. Den. V. fr. 1 baş, the original meaning must have been something like “to begin; to lead, guide”, but in the medieval period there was a wide development of mcanings, of which the commoncst Is now “to complete', i.e. 'to guide to a successful conclusion'. "The only early occurrence is unintelligible. S.i.m.m.l.g. usually as bagkar- ; SW basar-. Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. (your commands have been obeved; if you wanted a male child, you got one; if you wanted property, you obtained it; illness (Hend.) has disappeared) kónek yasğaç başğardı “the pail and rolling board ... (?Y TT I 11: Çağ. xv ff. başkar(-ursén, etc.) syn. w. basla-, yol góster- 'to show the way, guide'; bir igi bagar- ve becer*to complete a task successfully Vel. r3o (quotns.); başkar- (r) ancám dadan "to com- : plete” ; (2) mutascaccih süxtan”to direct towards'; (3) baladi tva. ráhnumá'i hardan “to guide'; (3) rdhi kardan "to travel" San. 123r. 26 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv başar- “to bring to a conclusion! Qutb 28: Kip. xiv başar- ('with back vowels") atamma wa dabbara "to complete and settle (something)! /d. 32 (phr): xv dabbara wa dawlaba (sic, ?meaning) başkar(in margin basar-) Tuh. 16a. s. D boşğur- Caus. f. of "boşğu:- "to teach, instruct. N.o.a.b. Türkü vir boduniğ ecüm apam törü:si:nçe:yaratmış boşğu:rmış "he organized and instructed the people in accordance with the customary law of my ancestors! £ E 13, I1 E 12; a0. 1 S 7, II N 5 (ölsik): vitt ff. Man. M IH 21, z (ii) (boşğut): Bud. U Hİ 8o, 1-2 (üjek) a.o.o. Tris. BŞĞ D boşu:ğu: Hap. leg.; Dev. N. fr. bosu:-. Xak. xi at boşu:ğu: boldi: “t became time to release (sdra ated iflaq) the horse (etc.) from its rope' Kaş. / 446. D boşğutçı: N.Ag. fr. boşğut, 'teacher, instructor'. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff, Bud. nom boşğutçılarka tıdığ kildimiz erser “if we have obstructed the teachers of the (true) doctrine' TT IV 6, 48; a.o. V 21, 56. D boşğutluğ (bosgotlof) P.N./A. fr. boşğut, (pupil; under instruction”, N.o.a.b. Uyğ. virrff. Bud. Sanskrit saikşa “pupil” bos£otlo&amp;(p-) TT VIII A.46; bodisavtlarığ boşğutluğlarığ [kutluglarig] ólürdümüz erser “if we have killed the Bodhisattvas, pupils, and blessed ones” T TV 6, 36-7. D başaklığ Hap. leg.?; P.N./A. fr. 1 başak, Xak. xı başaklığ süpü: “a lance with an iron head” (sind), also used of an arrow with an iron head (rag!) Kaş. I 497. D busaklik Hap. leg.?; A.N. fr. busak, which is properly Oğuz. Xak. xi KB busaklik bile erke övke yavuz 'anger and irritability are bad for a man' 332. Tris. V. BŞĞD boşğutlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. boşğut, mis-spelt with t- in the MS. Xak. xr s er boşğutlandı: "the man had an apprentice' (tilmid) Kaş. II 270 (boşğutlanu:r, boşğutlanma:k). D başıktur- Caus. f. of "başık- Intrans. Den. V, fr. 2 ba:s; “to wound'. (Xak.) xiu(?) At. 140 (büt-). D başakla:- [lap. leg.; Den. V. fr. 1 basak. Xak. xı ol süpü: başakla:dı: "he fixcd an iron head (rakkaba"l-sinan) on the lance! Kaş. IHI 337; (başakla:r, başakla:ma:k). D bışığla:- Map. leg.; Den. V. fr. bişiğ, Xak. xı ol et bışığla:dı: “he cooked (fabaxa) the meat', etc, Kiş, Z/İ 335 (bisigla:r, bışığla:ma:k). D başaklan- Hap. leg.: Refl. £. of basakla:-. Xak. xı süpü: başaklandı: “the lance acquired an iron head” (sind), also used of an arrow when it acquires an iron head (zas/) Kaş. H 264 (başaklanu:r, basaklanma:k). Dis. BŞG beşük “cradle". S.i.a.m.l.g. with some phonetic changes; usually beşik, but in SE "Türki böşük/büşük. Türkü vrr 7 S 6, II N s (ufus): Uyğ. vur ff, Chr. (he broke off a lump of stone for those Magi) taş böşiknin bulunın tamin üzmiş tef “as if he had broken off the corner and side wall of the stonc cradle” U 7 7, 16-18: Xak. xı bé:sik mahdwu'l-sabi “an infant's cradle! Kaş. 7 408; 7 o.o., mainly with üğri.- and its der.f.s spelt bö:şik (twice), bésik (twice), beşik (three times): xiv. Muh,. al-mahd”pesşik Mel. 68, 12; Rif. 169: Çağ. xv ff. bésik ga/rudra 'cradle', in Ar. mahd San. 147r. 22 (quotn.): Kip. xit “a child's cradle! (af-maid) beşik (unvocalized) Hou. 48, 8; n0. do. 11, 22 (bit): xiv beşik “a small cradle! (maid), and in Kitab. Beylik al-sarir "cradle” Id. 32; a.o. do. 19 (ügrümük): xv al-mahdu ladi yurba fihi l-atfal “a cradle in which infants are kept! beşik Kav. 64, 10; taxt “bedstead” (tapcak and) becik (glossed taxtu l-eculitd) Tuh. Sb. 12. PU böşük a word, like tüpür, concerned with inter-clan marriage customs. In the end both words came to mean no more than “a person who actually is, or properly could become, a relation by marriage', but in the Mong. translation of the same text as that translated in TT VI the phr. corresponding to tüpür böşük in l 308 is quda anda which is explained as follows in Sam. 284r. s, quda is *a tribe to which daughters are given in marriage! and anda (which also means more generally "friend, companion") is “a tribe from which daughters are taken in marriage". If the parallel is exact böşük must originally have had the latter meaning. İt also occurs in the phr. adaş böşük and bağır böşük both meaning “blood relations and relations by marriage”. This word is not mentioned in the useful summary of terms of relationship, L. A. Pokrovskaya, "Terminy rodstva v tyurkskikh yazykakh” in Jstoricheskoe razvitie lehsiki   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 425 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. BSLtyurkshikh yazykov, Moscow, 1961. Pec. to Uy. Uyf. viri ff. Bud. (the people of this country all look on one another as equals) tünür böşük bolusup kız berişip bağır böşük edgü öğli bolurlar “they are free to intermarry, they give one another their daughters in marriage, they are blood relations and relations by marriage, and are mutually well disposed” TT VI 308-9 (and see note thereon and o.o. in Index); (his father the king had asked the king of that country for the hand of his daughter for the Prince) tüpür böşük bolmis erdi “they had become members of families who were free to intermarry! PP 64, 6 (and see footnote); adaş bósük U III 33, 17; U IV 46, ss (ata:-); bağır böşük T'T VI 10s, etc. (bağır). PU böşğe:l Hap. leg.; the general form of this vvord, vvhich is listed betvveen bitmül and boğrul is certain, but, since its semantic con. nection seems to be with either bösğe:ç or bişi (bışığ) its spelling may be incorrect. It is morphologically obscure and is perhaps an honorific word. Xak. xi bósge:l ai-ruqàqa mina'l-xubz “a thin loaf of bread', bi-lugati'l-Xágàniya Kaş. 1 481. Tris. BŞG D bése:gü: Collective f. of bö:ş , “five together". Survives in NC Kir. beşö:, Kzx. beseü: SC Uzb. besóv. Uy£. vri ff. Bud. (faith, effort, understanding, contemplation, and knowledge) bu bésegü “these five things” TT V zə, 17: Çağ. xv fT. bésew panc tà 'five together! San. 147r. 185 (quotn.): Kip. xiv (in a list of Collectives) bé:gegü /d. 114, 21. D bésiklig Hap, leg.; P.N./A. fr. bé:sük. Xak. xı besiklig (sıc) ura:ğut imra'a dat radi" wa mahd “a woman with an infant and a cradle! Kaş. I 509. Dis. BSL S başıl See başğıl, D başla:ğ N.Ac. fr. başla:-, “beginning”. N.o.a.b.; the word spelt öaşlağ in Kaş. is an error for bosla:$. Uyg. vr ff. Man. uluğ başlağ atlığ yılnıp ikinti yılında “in the second year of the regnal period of “the Great Beginning" ' T 7I D 18o in TT İİ, p. 17 (this seems to represent Chinese shang yüan, the period A.D. 760-1): Bud. Sanskrit ddau “at the beginning' (balşla:ğında: TT VIII 4.42; (faith) kamağ edgü nomlarnip başlağı tetir “s called the beginning of all good doctrines! TT V 24, 63: Civ. Sógün teğme baş başlağ içinde "in the regnal period of “the Chief Beginning" called shang kuan! TT VII 1, 1 and 71 (A.D. 1368). D I başlığ P.N./A. fr. 1 baş, “having a head” and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. various phonetic changes and often extended meanings. Türkü viri başlığığ yükündurmiş tizligig sókü:rmis 'they made those who had heads bow them and those who had knees bend them' 381 IE2,II E3; 0.0. I E 15, 18, I] E 13, 16; İT N To: anta: berü:kl: Suk(?) başlığ Soğdak bodun “on this side of them the Sogdian people with Suk(?) at their head” T' 46: virt ff. altu:n başlı:ğ yılan “a golden-headed snake' JrkB 8: Man. on yılan başlığ erpekin *with ten snake-headed fingers! Chuas. 53-4: Uyğ. viii ff. Civ. başlığ begler preceded by P.N.s “the begs with (so-and-so) at their head” Usb. 21, 6, 22, 5; 65, 3: Xak. xı Kaş. III 227 (böke:). D 2 başlığ P.N./A. fr. 2 ba:ş, 'wounded'. N.o.a.b. Türkü vii ff. Man. Chuas. I 9-10 (ba:lığ): Xak. xr başlığ kózüg al-'ayna'I-carhi 'the wounded eye” Kaş. II 172, 12; n.m.e.: Xwar. xiv yetmiş iki yerde başlığ boldı “he was wounded in seventy-two places” Nahc. ı84, g: Kıp. xıv başlı: eyle- caraha “to vvound” İd. 31: Osm. xiv to xvi başlı *wounded' in several texts T'T'S 7 8o. D başlık A.N. (sometimes Conc. N.) in -lık fr. 1 bas. S.is.m.l. with a wide range of meanings 'beginning; leadership; headgear”. In the early period hard to distinguish fr. 1 başlığ, the occurrence in Uyg. is suspect, the word to be expected here is başla:ğ. See Doerfer 11 7o1. Uyğ. viuff. Bud. az kılınç yeme ne başlıkın(?) kayu basutein belgülüg 'erür “and lust, frorh what beginning and through what supporter does it appear?' U II 9, 10-11 (in parallel passages tıltağın occurs instead of başlıkın): (Xak.) xiv Muh.(?) (among words for horses) ai-sabiq “the winner in a race' başlık Rif. 171 (only): Çağ. xv ff. başlığ (sic) sardür wa ra'is *commander, chief” San. 124r. 13 (quotn.): Xwar. xin(?) sen munda beglerke başlık bolğıl “become the head of the 5egs here” Og. 245: Kip. xiv başlık a/-malih “king”, originally büdşühlih a Persian word İd. a1 (false etymology): Osm. xvin başlığ (after Çağ.) and in Rümi kallagi-yi licam “the headstall of a bridle'; and there is also a (prob. Çağ.) saving başlığ başığa bolur “every man is his own master' San. 124r. 13. D bosla:g Dev. N./A. fr. bosla:-, not noted elsewhere in the early period, but surviving in SW Osm. for “to loosen, let go, abandon”. N.o.a.b. Xak. xi boşla:ğ (misvocalized başla:6) ney al-say'w'l-muhmal 'anything let go, abandoned'; hence one says boşla:ğ (ditto) yılkı: dàbba muhmala "an animal which has been turned loose” Kaş. 1 461: KB boşlağ yügürme özün "do not run loose by yourself” 1505; a.0. 4061: xiti(?) Zt. 135-6 (1:4-). D bosluk A.N. fr. bos; s.i.s.m.l. with several related meanings. Xak. xı K B (if greed makes a man its slave) anın boşlukı kör ölüm birle ol “his emancipation comes (only) with death' 2616. Dis. V. BSLD 1 basla:- Den. V. fr. 1 bas; properly "Trans. “to begin, to lead', but often used without an Object and practically Intrans. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 426 
     
   
   
     382 S.i.a.m.lg.. with various phonctic changes. See Doerfer 11 700. Türkü viri only the Ger. baslayu: occurs, e.g. (my father the xagan died) başlayu: kirkiz xağanığ balbal tikdim “as a start I erected a memorial stone (representing) the Kırğız xağan” I E 24, II E zo, I N 8 (akit-) a.0.0.: vin ff. Bilt:g Köpü:l Sapu:n başla:p kelti: 'Bilig Konül Sagun arrived leading (a party)” Tun. IV 2-3 (ETY II 96): Yen. otuz eriğ başlayu: "leading thirty men” Mal. 32, 12: Uyğ. vui ff. Bud, ep başlayu tuğdukta “the very first time that he was born” Sut. 348, 6-7; kuşala sitibala başlap altun uruğları birle “vvith its golden seeds, beginning with kuşala and sifibala” (Sanskrit 1.-w.s) TT VII 40, 126-7: Civ. özüne öp işin baslagll “begin with the work which confronts you” 77 I iso; (if you count the years of a male for divination purposes) yekni başlap sanağu ol "you must begin your count with the demon (step) do. VII 12, 1-2; ol ra:şığ başlap (-) otuza:r sa:n bér 'when beginning the zodiacal sign, allow 30 sán (?degrees) each' do. VIII L.20; a.0.0. O, Kir. ix ff. kirk yil él. tutdum bodun basladim 'for forty years I held the realm and led the people' Mal. 45, 4 (Shcherbak's revised text): Xak. xı er ı:ş başla:dı: *the man began (bada'a) the work' (basla:r);. and one says Ol yo:l başla:dı: dailla'l-fariq 'he showed the way', and one says ol sü: başla:dı: “he commanded (gáda) the Army” Kaş. III 291 (başla:ma:k): KB (let the gatekeeper get up early and) kapuğ başlasa 'supervise the gatc” 2536: xiv Mu. ibtada'a "to begin” başla:- Mel. 21, 12; Rif. 102: Çağ. xv IE. başla-(-p) ibtidà eyle-. . . tva kulavuz ol-, vol góster- “to begin . . . to guide, show the way' Vel, 129 (quotn.); başla- (r) şurü" kardan "to begin”, (2) müfamaccih süxtan "to direct towards'; (3) öaladi hardan “to guide'; (4) vahi hardan “to travel” San. 122v. 11 (quotns.); a.o. do. i23r. 26 (başğar-): Xwar. xiv başla- "to begin” Quib 28; MN 60, etc.; Nahc. 7, s: Kom. xiv başla- “to begin, to lead' CCI, CCG; Gr. s2 (quotns.): Kip. xı al-şurü" “to begin” ba:şla:- Hou. 35, 15: xtv (ba:ş “head”, hence) başla- ibtada'a fd. 31:: xv “for the concept of “to begin (I?'l-suri?) to do something, etc.” they use basla- following . the Infin. in the Dat,” Kav. 30, 7 (quotns.): tbtada'a soa anga'a (ditto) başla- Tuh. 6b. 3, a.o.o.: Osm. xiv başla- (normally “to begin? . "to lead, guide' in several xiv and xv texts T"T'S IH 115; HI 72. D 2 başla:- Den. V. fr. 2 ba:ş, "to wound'. N.o.a.b. (Xak.) xiv Muh.(?) caraha "to wound' ba:şla- Rif. 107 (only); a/-macri ba:şlamış . 146: Kip. xiii caraha ba:şla- Hou. 35, 15. D başlat- Caus. f. of 1 başla:-, “to order to begin”, etc., with some extended meanings. S.is.m.l. See. Doerfer Il 699. Xak. xr men anar r$ baslattim 'I ordered him to begin (5i-ibda") the task' Kaş, II 341 (başlatu:r, başlatma:k): Çağ. xv ff. baslat- Caus. f.;: “tö order to begin, direct, guide, or travel' San. 123r. 25: Kip. xv (in a list of Caus. f.s DIS. V. BSLformed by adding -t- to the verb) istabda'a başlat- Tuh. sab. 9. D başlan- Refl. f. of 1 bagla:-; normally “to begin' (Intrans.); occasionally (of a crop) 'to form ears', and the like. S.is.m.l.g. Türkü viti ff. başlandı “here begins! followed by a noun indicating a subject to be discussed Toy. Y(ET Y 11 $57); Toy. 1 v. title (do. İİ 176): Uyğ. vii ff. Man. ditto M 77 7, 1; İİ 31, o (1): Xak. xı er t:gka: başlandı: axada'l-racul fi'l-'amal sva zahara amruhu “the man began the task and his action became visible (?) ş and one says ko:y ta:ğka: başlandı: “the sheep was driven (rzságat) towards the mountain'; and one says tarif başlandı: "the crop formed ears” (tasanbala) Kaş. 1I 238 (başlanma:k; Aor. omitted in MS.): Çağ. xv ff. baslan- Refl. f., “to begin; to be directed, guided, or sent” San. 123r. 21 (quotn.): X war. xiri(?) Og. 266 (urus): xiv baslan- “to begin” Quib 28. D boslun- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of *bosulPass. f. of boşu:-. Uyğ. vı ff. Civ. kim boşlunu umasar “(a woman) who cannot give birth to her child” H 7 ro? Tris. BŞL D busilik Hap. leg.?; A.N. fr. 1 buşi: "bad temper'. Xak. xı KB 335 (élet-). E buşulğa:n in Xaş. 111 53, 26 is an error for yuşulğa:n. Tris. V. BSLD boslaglan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. boşla:ğ. Xak. xr er rsgda: boşlağlandı: 'the man acted recklessly (fahatomara) in the matter, and did not take advice! Kaş. II 272 (boşlağlanu:r, boşlağlanma:k, prov. (boxsuklan-), correctly spelt 5o- everywhere). Dis. BŞM ?D başmak 'shoe, slipper” , prima facie a Dev. N. fr. *bas-, possibly a Co-op. f. of ba:giving the sense of something tied together, or tied to the foot. Its relation to 2 başak is obscure. Survives in NW Kaz., Kumyk, Nog. (fr. which it has become a l.-w. in Russian); SW Az., Osm. Tkm., and the Den. V. başmakta- “to sole (a boot, etc.)” in NC Kir. The origin of the Çağ. second meaning “a one-yearold calf” which survives in NC Kzx., NW Kk. baspak is obscure. See Doerfer II 144, 841. Oğuz xı başmak al-mik'ab "a low shoe, slipper” Kaş. 7 466: Çigil xr başak al-mik'ab; the Oğuz and Kipcak insert -m- in it and say başmak (Ar. parallels of inserted -n- quoted) I1 378; a.o. HI 417 (borsmuk): xiv Mh. al-tumşah “a Baghdad sandal” başmak Mel. 67, 9; Rif. 167 (also al-askáf 'shoemaker' başmakçı: 56, 12; 154): Çağ. xv ff. basmak: (1) güsüla-i yaksá!a "a one-year-old calf'; (2) kafş 'shoe, slipper' San. 124r. 16: Kom. XiV “shoe" basmak CCI; Gr.: Kip. xin al-sarmüca “slipper” başma:k (and izlik) Hou. 19, 5; xiv basmak al-madüs 'slipper',    
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 427 
     
   
   
      D18. V. BSRoriginally bagmak la. 31 (false etymology fr. bas-): xv al-sarmüca başmak Kav. 64, 2 zarmüza başmak Tuh. 18a. 5-6; madds "iere do. 348. 2: Osm. xiv ff. bagmak (sometimes spelt paşmak) 'shoe, slipper, sandal”, c.i.a.p. TTS I So, Il 115; IH 72; IV 83; (xvii after Çağ., and in Rümi “a kerchief (dastmáli) that women tie over their heads' San. 124r. 16 is a misreading by the author of yaşmak). Tris. V. BSMD başmaklan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. başmak, Oğuz xi er başmaklandı: “the man wore high-heeled shoes” (ui-zarbül) Kaş. II 274 (başmaklanu:r, başmaklanma:k). Dis. BŞN D beşinç the original Ordinal f. of be:ş, *fifth'. This shorter form n.o.a.b.; the longer form bésinci: first appeared in KB metri gratia and was universally adopted in the medieval period. S.i.a.m.l.g. (some NE forms. are irregular). Türkü vir beşinç 'fifthly' (we fought the Oğuz at (PU) Ezgenti: Kadaz) I N 7; lağzın yıl beşinç ay “in the fifth month of the Swine year” II S roş vir ff. beşinç ay Tun. IV 1 (ETY HH 96); Man. beşinç 'fifthly' Chuas. 37; M 11I 19, 2: UyÉ. viri bésine ay Su. E 3, 4, 9: vii ff. Man. beşinç Wind. 44: Bud. ditto PP 18, 2; TT V 10, 113; 24, 54: Civ. böşinç ay common in USp.: Xak. xı bé:sing a/-xámis “fifth” Kaş. I 132, 5; III 449, 4: KB sevük yüz urundi beşinçi Sevit “fifth Venus showed her lovely face” 135: xiv Muh. al-xámis bö:şinç Mel. 82, 9; Rif. 187 (with a refce. to the longer form): Kip. xv al-xümis bé:sinci Kas. 67, 16; (in a list) beçinci (sic) Tuh. 61b. 2. E başnak See baştak. Dis. V. BSND bosun- (boşon-) Refl. f. of bosu:-; “to free oneself, to be freed”, and the like. S.i.m.m.l.g., usually as bosan-. "Türkü vri ff. Man. teprigerü bardaçı boşuntaçı “going to. heaven and freeing themselves (from sin?) Chuas. 225-6, 234-5; the refrain at the end of each section, of Chuas. is yazukda boşunu , ötünürbiz “vve pray to be freed from sin” do. 1 37, etc.; o.o. do. 268-9; TT II 8, 46: Uy£. vir (I settled down there and spent the winter north of the Ötüken) yağıda: boşuna: boşunladım “having rid myself of the enemy I lived at case(?)' Su. E 7: vii ff. Man.-A yazukda boşunmak bolzun M 7 28, 23; 2.0. do. 29, 32: Bud. ökünü boşunu 'repenting and freeing ourselves (from sin) TT IV 4, 7 and 13-14: Civ. (fire has entered the mind, anxiety exists) boşunğuluk “one must. free oneself from it” TT I zo: Xak. xı ko:y boşandı: “the sheep was turned loose (istaflaga) and released (ğulla) from its tether” . (boşanu:r(?), boşunma:k (s/c)), and one says tüğü:n boşandı: “the knot came untied” (sahat), and one says ura:ğut boşandı: “the woman.was divorced” (tulliqat) in the incor  383 rect (rakika) dialect of Arğu: Kaş. II 142 (bosunu:r, bosunma:k; in this case the -Şşis unvocalized, the spellings boşan- must be due to scribal errors, cf. bosut-); a.o. 77 238 (boşğun-): Çağ. xv ff. boşan- San. 135r. 2 (boşa-): Kom. xiv bosan- “to free oneself, be freed' CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiv bo:ganintalaqa "to be released”: also used for “the divorce of a woman (f? talaqi 'I-mar'a) İd. 32: Osm. xiv boşan- “to be freed' in three texts; xvI "to be emptied” TT'S I 114; II 161; IV 120. Tris. BSN VUF? büşinçek Hap. leg.; prob. a L-w. Gancak xı büşinçek 'ungüdu'l-'inab “a bunch of grapes! Kaş. I 506. D boşunçsuz Hap. leg.; Priv. N./A. fr. *bosunc Dev. N. fr. boşun-. Türkü vırı ff. Man. mundağ boşunçsuz yazuk yazintimiz erser “if we have committed such unpardonable sins' Chuas. I 35 (so read). Tris. V. BSNPUD boşunla:- Hap. leg.; this word is reasonably clear in the photograph, except that the -1- might be -a:- ; in either event the obvious explanation is that this is a Den. V. in -la:- (or -a:-) fr. *bosun Intrans. Dev. N. fr. bosu:-. If so, it must mean something like “to live at ease'. Uyğ. vii Şir. E 7 (bosun-). Dis. V. BSRS başar- See başğar-. : D bışur-(p-) Caus. f. of biş-, lit. "to cause to mature”, usually “to cook', but with several other meanings. S.i.a.m.lg. vv. the same phonetic changes as bış-. Uy£. virt ff. Bud. [gap] bışurup yégeymen “İ will cook and eat' U İV so, 128; ao. U İİİ 65, 3 (i): Civ. soğannı bışurup “cooking an onion” H 7 128; o.o. do. 178; II 24, 48, Xak. xı ol et bisurdi: "he cooked (fabaxa) the meat (etc.)" Kaş. II 78 (bisurur, bisurma:k): KB eşitmiş sözini bigsurd: uzun “he reflected for a long time on the words that he had heard” 4883: xiv Muh. tabaxa buşur- Mel. 28, 8, (VU) bisur- in margin Rif. 111 (bula- in text); a.0.. 132 (only): Çağ. xv ff. bişürbuxtan "to cook'; although the Dev. N. bışığ *cooked' ends in -£, and therefore the verb ought to have back vowels (qaf? başad), in fact the forms actually used are irregular San. 145v. 8 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv bişür- “to cook' Qutb 34: Kom. xiv 'to cook, bring to maturity" bişür- CCI; bisir- CCG; Gr. 6o (quotns.): Kip. xim tabaxa büsür- Hou. 34, s: AN bişir- ditto İ4. 32; bişür- Bul. s7v.: xabaza wa sawwü'l-ta'àm “to bake, 3. food” bişir- Tuh. 15a. 6, sawwà bişir- (and tüzet-) do. 20a. 2; (abaxa wa xabaza wa satctoá bicir- (in margin bigir-) do. 24a. 6: Osm. xiv ff. bişür-, less often bişir- “to cook; bring to maturity”, c.i.a.p. T TS 7 104; 11 154; III 105; IV 114 (read pigür- [pisir-). .  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 428 
     
   
   
     384 D buşur- Caus. f. of buş-, “to irritate, annoy (someone Zcc.)'. N.o.a.b. Xak. xi ol meni: busurdt adcarani "he annoyed me” Kaş. II 78 (busurur, busurma:k): KB (these begs are like lions) buşursa keser baş “if you annoy them, they cut off your head' 784; a.o. 794: xin(?) At. (avoid misplaced humour) uluğlarni buşrup sapa bu mizöh “this humour which makes the great angry with you” 347. D bışrıl- (p-) Hap. leg.?, Pass. f. of bişur-. Xak. xı bışrılu:r yakrı: kaya:k (mis-spelt hiya:h) "the suet and skin of milk are cooked' (yufbax) Kaş. IH 32, 3; n.m.e. D buşrul- Hap. leg.?, Pass. f. of buşur-. Uyğ. viu ff. Bud, etózim busanur buşrulur *my body is distressed and annoyed' Suv. 624, 16. D bışrun-(p-) Refl. f. of bışur- , pec. to Uyğ., where it seems to mean 'to assimilate (a doctrine), to learn its essential meaning”. Uyğ. vitr ff. Man. (anger obliterates) köpülteki alku anunmış bigrunmis nomlarığ “all the doctrines which they have prepared for themselves and assimilated in their minds' TT H 17, 60-3; edğü nomlarta pisrunu 'assimilating good doctrines TT III 138: Bud. Sanskrit samddhim bhávayatah 'practising meditation” dya:nığ pışrunda:çının TT VIII 4.39; 0.0. Suv. 136, 18-19 etc. (Öğretin-); TT V zo, 8; U II 33, 2 etc. Tris. V. BSRD bışrunul-(p-) Pass. f. of bigrun-; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vin ff, Bud. Sanskrit paripsrnà subhavit '(if it is) completely and well practised” tolo tükel uz bışrunulmış (5-) erser TT VHI B.g-10; ekàmíabhávita "having formed his being in one single part” 1 bólók(p-) üze: bisrunulti (5-) do. C.17. i Mon. BY ba:y “rich, a rich man”. S.i.a.m.l.g.; in some vvith extended meanings like "a member of the upper classes” and 'husband'. See Doerfer II 714-15. Türkü vii çığat bodunığ bay kiltim 'I made the poor people rich” I S ro, Il N 3; o.0. I E (16), 29; II E 14, 23: Vir ff. bay er kofit: “a rich man's sheep” IrkB 27: Uyğ. ix bay bar ertim “1 was rich (Hend.)' Suci s: virrff. Bud, bay yeme bar yok çığay yeme bar “there are rich and poor" PP 6, 1; o.o. do. 13, 6 etc.; TT VI o24, etc. (barımlığ): Suv. 192, 5; USp. 102b. 7: Civ. (if a man cuts his hair on the Mouse day) bay bolur "he will become rich” TT VII 33, 3; o.o, do. 33, 17; 37, 3 and 8 (USP. 42, 2 and 7): O. Kir. ix ff. bay seems to be an element in a P.N. Mal. 17, 1: Xak. x1 ba:y al-£ani “rich” (and ba:y yığa:ç a place-name) Kaş. III 158; two o.o.: KB tili çın bütün ham közi kópli bay “his tongue was truthful and reliable, and his eye and mind rich” 407: xir(?) Tef. bay "rich, a rich man” 89: xiv Muh. al-ğani ba:y Mel. 12, 15; Rif. 87; bay/bayan/barlu: ss, 9; ba:y (mis-spelt ba:n) 153; al-muhtagam “disD1S. V. BSRtinguished' ba:y şo, 6 (Rif. 145 atlığ): Çağ. xv fL bay (1) fani, (2) one says bay bér- babüd dádan wa nist hardan "to throw away, squander'; (3) in the Mongolian terminology (iştilah-i muğuliya) the urnará-i büy are a class of officials who enter judicial decisions in the day books, review them monthly, and raise objections to any that are contrary to the law (quotns.); bay xatun 'a bird also called bay kuş”, in Pe. cuğd 'owl'; .. . bay kuş cugd San. 127v. 18: Xwar. xiv bay “rich” Qutb 25; MN 104, etc.; Nahc. 250, 3: Kotn. xiv “rich” bay CCI, CCG, Gr.: Kip. xır al-ğani ba:y Hou. 26, 13; al-qubaysa "the small owl' ba:y kuş do. 10, s: xiv ba:y al-ğani İd. 37: xv ditto Kav. 23, 14; sa'id 'prosperous' bay Tul. 19a. 1: Osm. xiv ff. bay “rich”, occasionally *a man of distinction'; c.i.a.p. TT'S I1 83; HI 118; İİİ 73; IV 85. 1 bo:y 'fenugreek, Trigorella foenum graecum'. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. boy otu. Ofuz xı bo:y 'edible fenugreck' (al-hulba) Kaş. III 141: xiv. Muh. al-hulba bo:xy Mel. s, iz) 6,3; 38, 1; Rif. 76, 181: Çağ. xv ff. boy... . (2) the name of a plant called in Pe. janbalila ('fenugreek") and in Ar. hulba; boy oti ditto San. 142v. iz: Kip. xiv al-hulba boy Bul. 7, 1: Osm. xiv boy 'fenugreek' in several texts, mainly Ar. and Pe. dicts. TTS II 163; IV I21. S 2 Bo:y See 1 bo:d. S böy See 1 bö:ğ. Mon. V. BYVU *boy- See “boyum, boymaş-, etc. Dis. BYA baya: 'recently; in the immediate past'; very rare in the early period, and survives only(?) in SE Türki, NC Kır., SC Uzb.; NW Kaz. "The Uy£. occurrence is in the Dim. f. *bayakifia:; the Osm. f. is a crasis of baya: and 2 ok, which still survives in Tkm. and xx Anat. SDD 17s. See bayakı:, Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. bayakıya tuğmış kün tepri emdi són ündi (so read) “the sun which has just risen has now at last climed (the sky)” U II 88, 77-8: Xak. xı Kaş. 1 37 (2 ok): Osm. xiv to xvi bayak same meaning in several texts TTS 1 84; II 120. i S boya See boduğ. S biye See bé:. Dis. V. BYAD bayu:- Dev. N. fr. ba:y, “to be, or become, rich". S.i.a.m.l.g. except SE, SW. Xak. xr er bayu:dı: “the man (etc.) was rich” (ğana) Kaş. ITİ 274 (bayu:r, bayu:ma:k), a.o. do. 406, 5: KB (if the begs are good) bayur bodni “their people become rich'; o.o. 256, 291 (bodun), 737, 1423, 5523: xiv. Muh. istafná "to become rich” bayr- Mel. 22, 9; Rif. 103: Çağ. xv ff. bayı- ğan? şudan San. 127v. 5: Kip. xiv 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 429 
     
   
   
     DIS. ba:yt- istaínà İd. 37; istağnd wa agfa'a (to increase one's property) bayı- Bul. 26v.: xv the Den. V. fr. bay is bayı- Tuh. 83b. ro: Osm. xiv to xvi bayı- “to become rich” in one or two texts TT.S 184; II 121; İİİ 75. — S boya:- See 2 bodu:-. Dis. V. BYBVU boyba:- Hap. leg.; syn. w. borba:-, but the position of the two verbs in the text excludes the possibility that either can be an error for the other. Xak. xı ol ı:şığ boyba:dı: *he was dilatory a ie a the affair, and careless about it” (agfalÁhu) Kaş. İH 310 (boyba:r, boyba:ma:k). Tris. BYB VU?D baybayuk Hap. leg.; Havas translates al-tunawwit “a yellow bird of the passerine family which suspends its nest from the boughs of trees; if amended to *boybayuk this might be taken as a Dev. N. fr. boyba:- with a ref. to the bird's careless nesting habits. Xak. xı baybayuk 'al-tunawwif which is a bird that sings melodiously and builds its nest slung from the bough of a tree in the shape of a basket” Kaş. III 179. Dis. BYD baya:t “God”, The distribution of this word is astonishingly limited; apart fr. its survival in SW xx Anat. SDD 176, where it is very rare, it is n.o.a.b. It can hardly be connected with Bayat the name of one of the Oğuz tribes, mentioned in Kaş., San., and other authorities. See Doerfer 11 819. Cf. tepri:. Arğu: xı baya:t ismu'llàh ta'álà "the name of God most high” Kaş. 111 171: KB bayat atı birle sözüğ başladım “1 have begun my story with the name of God” 124 (this was the original position of this verse; it was later repeated as verse r, but not in the Fergana MS.); a.o. 1021; bayat and uğan are the standard words for “God” in K B: xin(?) At. bir bayat 'the one God' 19, 283; a.o. 246 (but 1 begins lláhi); Tef. bayat 89: Çağ. xv ff. bayat xuda "the Lord” Vel. 133; bayat (1) xudümand ditto San. 128r. 3 ((z) and (3) are the tribal name): Xwar. xiv bayat “God” MN 145: (Kip.) xiv bayat (mis-spelt bayar) the name of God most high in the language of Uyğur and they are Turkistan (sic) Id. 37: Osm. xvi bayat is mentioned incidentally in one text as “a name of God in Turkish” T'T'S IIl 75. Dis. V. BYDD bayut- Caus. f. of bayu:-, “to enrich, make rich”. S.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı tepri: meni: bayuttu: "God most high enriched me” (anani) Kaş. II 325 (bayutu:r, bayutma:k; kasra also placed below the -y-): Xwar. xiu (VU) bayitditto “47 31: xiv bayit- ditto Qutb 25: Osm. XIV and xv ditto in three texts T'T[:S II 121; III 75. 8011125 BYL 38s Dis. BYG C bayak See baya: and baya:ki:. bayık “true, reliable'. Specifically Oğuz, survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. SDD 176. Cf. cin. Oğuz xı bayik só:z al-kalàmu'l-sádiq “a true word" Kaş. İİİ 166: xiv Muh.(?) al-tiqa trustworthy, honest' ba:yık Rif. 147 (Mel. sz, 1 doğru:): Xwar. xii bayık 'certainly' ' Ali 35: xiv ditto Qutb 25; MN 224: Osm. xiv ff. bayık “true, certain', and the like; common to xv; sporadic till xvi T T'S 7 84; İl 120; İH 75; IV 86. S biyik See bidik. Tris. BYĞ D baya:kı: N./A.S. fr. baya:; properly “previously mentioned, former, recent'; also used as an Adv. Survives in the same languages as baya: and one or two more in the same groups, sometimes with extended meanings, e.g. SW Osm. bayağı “common, ordinary, rough, coarse”, presumably through an intermediate meaning 'old-fashioned'. Uyf. vir ff. Bud. bayakı beş ujek “the five previously mentioned letters! TT V 8, so; bayakı teg etöz tegsürüp 'changing the body in the same way as before” do. ro, 100, and 115: Xwar. xır bayağı değ “as formerly' “Al 18 and şo: xiv bayakı “formerly” Qutb 25; Nahc. 55, 7, 413, 6: Kip. xv sá'a mádiya “the past hour" bayak Tuh. 19b. 12; mádi (biltr i.e. “last year) min sd"a bayak do. 35a. 9: Osm. xri to xvi bayağı 'former, previous' is common TTS 1 83; İİ 119; İİ 74; IV 86. D baya:ğut Dev. N./A. fr. *baya:-, Den. V. fr. ba:y, “a rich merchant', standard translation of Sanskrit íresthi. Pec. to Uyğ. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. şireşti bayağutlar ufusinda tuğmakı 'rebirth in a family of rich merchants (Hend.)” U 77 36, 36-7; uluğ bay bayağutlar do. 97, note r, 5; o.o. U III 8o, 20; USp. 102b. 7 etc. (bedük); Suv. 597, 22 etc. Dis. BYG S beyik/biyik/büyük See bedük. Dis. BYL ?F boyla: a high title, the exact significance of which is uncertain; except among the ProtoBulgar, n.o.a.b. Among the Proto-Bulgar, where the word goes back to the earliest period, at least to early ix, the boyla: seems to have been next in rank to the xağar, see O, Pritsak, Die bulgartsche Fürstenliste und die Sprache der Protobulgaren, Wiesbaden, 1955, pP. 40, etc. The Western authorities point firmly to -0- as the first vowel. "The word is very old, prob. pre- Turkish and possibly Hsiung-nu, but has not yet been traced in Chinese texts regarding that people. Türkü virr Tonukuk Boyla: Bağa: Tarkan 77 S 14; T 6: Uyğ.ıx Boyla: Kutluğ Yarğan Sci 2. S boyluğ See bo:dluğ. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 430 
     
   
   
     386 Dis. BYM VUD *boyum See moyum. buymul originally “having a white neck', but except in Kaş. consistently used as the name of a bird. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. buymul “the hen-harrier, Ctrcus cyaneus, or marsh harrier, Circus ceruginosus! (Red. 413). The Caf. word küykenek/kükenek, with which San. identifies this bird, is a l.-w. fr. Mong. küyhenek, which E. D. Ross in A Polyglot List of Birds in Turhi, Manchu and Chinese, Calcutta, 1909, No. 64 kókeneh (sic) tentatively identifies with 'the kestrel, Cerchneis tinnunculus. "Türkü viu ff. kök buymu:l toğan kuş men “1 am a grey falcon with a white neck'(?) IJrkB 64: Xak. xı buymul at 'a horse which has white on its neck' (fi 'unugihi baydd), also used of sheep, etc. Kaş. III 176: Osm. xvrff. buymul occurs in several texts, mainly dicts., usually as a bird name, but in one with Kag.'s meaning of a goat TTS II 164 (boymul); IV 122 (ditto): muymoul xvi ff. in dicts. translating words meaning 'kestrel' and 'sparrow-hawk' IJ 700: xvii muymul (spelt) in Rim? is küykenek, that is a bird like a sparrow-hawk (başa), hi dum-i ü-rü ba-dum-i büşa [abt mi-kunand "whose tail they fix like the tail of a sparrowhawk(?) Sam. 321r. 8; o.o. 307v. 25 (kükenek, same translation); 311r. ro (kiüykenek, ditto). Dis. V. BYMVUD *boyma:- See boymaş-. VUD *boymal- See moymal-. VUD boymaş- Recip. f. of *boyma:-, Den. V. fr. *boyum (bofium), sec moyum. N.o.a.b. Xak.xr rg kamuf boymaşdı: “the whole affair (etc.) was complicated" (ixtalata) Kaş. III 194 (boymaşu:r, boymasma:k); yip boymaşdı: i/táta'l-gazl fa-là yanşarih “the cord was tangled so that it could not be straightened out” I7 227, 6. Dis. BYN E bayın in Kaş. III 20, 13 is an error for yipin (yipgin) and in Bul. 56v. for boyın. S beyin/beyni See *béfii:, F buyan a metathesis (cf. kon ^ koyun) of Sanskrit bunya merit; meritorious deeds; the happy condition which results fr. meritorious deeds'; a Buddhist technical term, which became a l.-w. in Mong. (the occurrence in Xwar. is prob. a reborrowing fr. Mong.) and became muya:n in Xak. N.o.a.b. Türkü vitr ff. Man. Chuas. 141-2 (büğte:): Uyğ. vil ff. Man. ol buyanipiz tüşinte “as a revvard for those meritorious deeds of yours” TT III 105; o.o. M I 3o, 7-9 (umt-); TT III 169 (68-), LX 96: Bud. (striving after) buyan edgü kılınçlığ işke “meritorious deeds and good vvorks" TT IV 12, 53; similar phr. V 6, 40; 8, 74; VII 40, 19 etc.; Suv. 151, 6; 584, 12 2.0.0.: Civ. phr. like buyan kilDIS. BYM 'to perform meritorious decds”, buyan edgü kılmç and buyan asilur “merit increases! are common in 77” / and VII: Xak. xı muya:n al-tarvdb "recompense, esp. for good deeds' Kaş. III 152; a.o. do. 179 (muyancilik): KB kişiler arak1 muyan edgülük 'meritorious deeds and goodness among men' 3499; o.o. 3976, 5161, 5292, 5733, 6287: xiv Muh.(?) al-tawáb mu:yam Rif. 138 (Mel. 44, 15 alğış): Xwar. xııı(?) tamğa bizke bolzun buyan kök bórl bolzunğul uran “let merit be our tapığa and “the grey vvolf”” our battlecry (Mong. l.-w.)' Oğ. 88-9. boyın “the neck', sometimes specifically “the back of the neck'. S.i.a.m.l.g., usually as boyun, but with initial m- in NE, NC. Uyğ. vit ff. Bud. Sanskrit grivayági "on the neck' boyninda: (p- TT VIII G.66; sığun befginir boyının kesip “severing the neck of the chief of the maral deer” U JV 38, 133; öğüğ boyun kilip “making thought the neck TT V 24, 48: Civ. kulğak boyin tólep(?) seems to mean *'offering his ear (to commands) and his neck (to work)' U.Sp. 98, 27-8: Xak. xı boyin “the neck (raqaba) of a man etc.'; and the pommel (şa"ira) of a sword is called kiliç boynı: and that of a knife biçe:k boynı: Kaş. III 169; over 20 0.0. sometimes spelt boyun/boyu:n in the MS.: KB boyun is common, ror (eg-), 286 (bic-), 45o (ef-), 1037, 1431, 1437, 2154 (ükek), etc.: xını(?) Tef. boyun “neck” roz?: xiv Mu. al-'unug bo:y Mel. 47, 7; Rif. 141: Çağ. xv ff. boyn/boyun gardan 'neck' San. 142v. 27 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv boyun 'neck' Qutb 37; MN 2354: Kom. xiv ditto CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xı a/H"unuq boyun Hou. 20, 8: xiv ditto İZ. 37; damana "to guarantee' boyından (mis-spelt baytadan) ol- Bul. şöv.: xv al-raqaba boyun Kan. 6o, 16; Tuh. 16b. 7; “üqda "ioint” (9) boyun do. 24b. 7: Osm. xiv ff. boyun ” c...a.p. in several phr. including boyun ol“to guarantee; to undertake (to do something Dat. TTS I 115-16; II 164-5; İİ 109-16; IV 123. S 1 boyun See bodun. S 2 boyun See boyın. S baynak See T“bafak, D 1 boynak (?boynok) Dim. f. of boyın, survives in NC. Kir, moynok (1) “a narrow pass'; (2) "a camel's neck, or the skin on it”, Kzx. 'moynak (2) and “a nickname for a dog”. "The semantic connection of Kaş.”s second meaning is obscure. Xak. xı boynak al-taniya frl-cibal “a narrow pass in the mountains'; boynak a/-"azaya dàábba "a large lizard, an animal” Kaş. III 175. S buynuz See "bünüz. Dis. V. BYNS beyen- See begen-. D boyna:- Den. V. fr. boyın, survives only (?) in NC Kır. moyno- “to be obstinate or (of   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 431 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. BYRa horse) refractory. Xak. xı keldi: maya: boynayu: "he came to me with pride and haughtiness” (ma' "utuww oa tayh) Kaş. T 226; tün kün tapın tepri:ke: boynamağıl “vorship God day and night and do not be proud” (1a ta"tu) HI 377, 13; n.m.e. D boynat- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of boyna:-. Xak. xı ol oğlannı: boynattı: “he urged his son to be proud of his work' ('alà "uturru fi'l-amr) Kaş. 11 357 (boynatu:r, boynatma:k). Tris. BYN DF buyançı: Hap. leg.?; N.Ag. fr. buyan. "Türkü vii ff. Man. Chas. 66—; (bügteci:). D boyunduruk Conc. N. (N.I) fr. boyun (boyın), “a yoke (put on the neck of a draught animal)”. S.i.a.m.l.g, with some phonetic changes, m- in NE, NC. Uy£. vii ff. Bud. (Sanskrit lost) yoğun könöllög boyontoroki(p-) erse:r “if he has deep thoughtfulness as a yoke! TT VIII 4.33; kaltı uluğ kaplınıp boyundurukti yok erser “if a great wagon has no yoke” T'T V 26, 114-15: Xak. xı boyunduruk al-samiqdn “the yoke', that is a piece of wood which rests on the neck of the two oxen Kaş. III 179: Çağ. xv fi. boyunduruk 'a wooden implement which farmers put on the necks of their cattle when ploughing”, in Pe. yüğ, in Ar. zir San. 143r. 3: Kip. xir al-nüf wa huwa'l-nir boyunduruk Hou. 9, 9. DF buyanlığ P.N./A. fr. buyan; n.o.a.b. Uy&amp;. viii f. Man, buyanlığ sumer tağığ turğurtupuz “you have raised a Mount Sumeru (i.e. a vast amount) of merit” TT III 54; a.o. do. 163: Bud. buyanlığ bilge biliglig yiviglerim bützünler “may my equipment of merit and wisdom be completed' Suv. 354, 1; 8.0. USp. 89, t. DF *buyanlik See muyanlık. DF buyansiz Hap. leg.?; Priv. N./A. fr. buyan; without merit'. Üyğ. vir ff. Civ. TT VII 42, 2 (1 bo:k). Tris. V. BYNDF buyanla:- Hap. leg.?; Den. V. fr. buyan. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. méni kolulayu buyanlayu yarlıkazun “may he deign to examine me and find me meritorious(?)' Kuan. 197. D boyunla:- Den. V. fr. boyun (boyın), “to strike on the neck”. S.i.s.m.l. in NC, NW but with different meanings “to accept responsibility, to admit a fault', and the like. Xak. xı Kaş. III 145 (şa:b): Kip. xit şafa"a “ro strike on (the back of) the neck” boyunla:Hou. 32, 14: Xiv ditto İd. 37; Bul. 54v.: XV "annaqa “to seize by the neck' (kuçakla-) in margin boyunla- Tuh. 25b. 8. Dis. BYR S bayrak See batrak. D buyruk Pass, Dev. N. fr. buyur-, lit. “commanded (to do something); in the early . 387 period a title of office, apparently a generic term for all persons commanded by the xağan to perform specific duties, civil or military. In the medieval period, perhaps because Ar. and Pe. titles of office came into use, it came to mean "order, command”, S.ia.mlg. except NE in this sense. See Doerfer 11 8rş. Türkü vii (in a series of invocations, "listen . . .") berye: şadap: ıt be&amp;ler yirya: tarxat buyruk begler “in the south the şadab:its and begs, in the north the tarxarıs, officers, and begs' 1 S r, Il N r, Türges xağan buyrukr “the "Türgeş xağan”s officer I E 38; in II S 14 (damaged) ulayu: buyruk “ali the officers' occurs twice and ic buyruk 'domestic officer" once; o.o. / E 3, II E 4 (erinç), 1 E s, 19; II E 6, 16: Uyğ. ix Kutluğ Bağa: Tarxan Öğe: buyruki: men '] was K.B.T.Ö”s officer" Suci 3: vin ff. Man. kóni buyruk (spelt buryuk) "the upright officer M 1I 12, 6: Bud. ötrü élig beg buyrukların okip “then the king summoning his officers” U TV 28, 23-4; in the third Pfahl among a list of officials, etc. Koço buyruki “the governor of Kogo' 21, another buyruk 23; o.o. PP 8, 7 (inanç), TT VII A.ız, U İl 44, 4(i); Tis. 23b. 3; USp. 97, 30 etc.: Civ. (PU) Buşaçı buyruk beği bolmışda . . . Otçı buyruk begi bolmisda USp. gr, 1-2 and 27; the context suggests "when Buşacı/Otçı became the local governor'; ao. TT I 64 (tevliğ): Xak. xi biruk 'the name of the man who puts the notables in their order of precedence ( yunzilu'l-ahabira fi marátibihim) in the presence of the king'; originally buyruk, meaning 'order, command' (al-amr) because he gives them orders about this Kaş. I 378: xiu?) Tef. buyruk “order, command' 110: Çağ. xv ff. buyruğ/buyruk amr u farmán "order, command' (quotn.); also the name of the brother of Tayar Xan, the ruler of the Nayman, whom Çingiz Xan fought and defeated at the beginning of his career San. 142v. 20: Xwar. xiv buyruk 'command' Quib 37: Kom. xiv ditto buyruk/buyuruk CCI, CCG; Gr. 68 (quotns): Kip. xin al-amr wa'l-marsüm fa command, a written order” (VU) buyruk Hou. 43, 22: xiv buyruk al-amr 1d. 37; al-marsüm buyruk (and a/-amr farma:n) Bul. 6, 13: Osm. xiv ff. buyruk (the form buyuruk also occurs fr. xv onwards) c.i.a.p.; in one or two Xiv texts it still means 'officer', but “order” is the normal meaning fr. xtv onwards TTS I 13021; II 184; İİ 121-2; IV 136-7. S bayram See badram. Dis. V. BYRbuyur- “to order, command'; s.i.a.m.].g. except NE. Considering the history of buyruk this must be a very old word, but the pattern below suggests that it was obsolete in many languages in xı. (Xak.) xu(?) KBVP 4o (yarağlığ): xi?) Tef. buyur- “to order (someone Dat., to do something Znfin.)' 110: xiv Muh. amara “to order” biyu:r- Mel. 23, 7; Rif. 104; taqaddama "to command” biyu:r24, 9; (mis-spelt ya:rur- in 106); rasama (to 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 432 
     
   
   
     388 DIS. V. BYRorder in writing!) tea faqaddama bu:yur- 26, 11; 109: Caf. xv ff. buyur- amr. farmüdan "to issue an order” San. 142r. 26 (quotns.): Oğuz xı ol apar ayla: buyurdt: "he ordered him (amarahu) thus' Kaş. III 186 (buyurur, buyurma:k): Xwar. xiv ditto AZN tr etc.: Kom. xiv ditto CCI, CCG, Gr.: Kip. xin rasama mina'l-marsim buyur- Hou. 35, 7: amara mina'l-amr buyur- do. 43, 21: XIV buyur- amara İd. 37; rasama buyur- Bul. 4$r.: XV rasama wa amara buyur- Tuh. 17b. 4: Osm. xiv ff. buyur- 'to order' in several texts. 7 TS 1H 122; İV 137. ' Tris. BYR S buyurçin See budursi:n. Mon. BZ ba:z 'peace, peaceable'. Survives, in this sense, only(?) in NW Kar. L., "T., Krım R IV 1541; Kow. 166. Although ya:t ba:z certainly meant 'stranger, foreign' it seems doubtful whether ba:z by itself ever did; it is more prob. that it actually meant 'friendly', with 'alien' understood. Türkü viii baz occurs only in the phr. baz kil- “to pacify, subjugate', e.g. (he captured all the peoples in every direction and) kop baz kılmış “pacifted them all” 7 E 2 (H E 3); o0. 1 E 15, 30; İl E 13, 24; Baz Xağan P.N. J E 14, 16; 1 E ız, ış: Xak. xt ba:z al-acnabi wa'l-farib 'stranger, foreigner'; hence one says ya:t ba:z yadıldı “the strangers were separated, segregated” (zafarraqa) Kaş. 1H i48; ao. HII 159 (yat): KB yat baz yalavaç 'foreign (Hend.) ambassadors” 2495; o.o. of yat baz 2534, 2548: Xwar. xiv baz 'peace, peaceable” Qutb 29: Kip. xiv ba:z al-sul]t “peace” (also bazlaş- ?stala]ia) İd. 30. 1 béz “a swelling on the surface of the body which does not break the skin, tumour, boil', and the like, as opposed to kart 'one which does break it, ulcer. S.ia.m.lg. in this sense, and, more generally, "a gland”, Xak. xr bé:z "a swelling (a/-Qudda) which develops between the skin and the flesh' Kaş. III 123: xiv Muh. be:z al-ğudda is mentioned twice in the Chapter on phonetics, once as an example of a word in which yd" is pronounced as -6:- Mel. s, 7; Rif. 76; and once as an example of a/-ımdla, which has the same effect s, 15; 77: Çağ. xv ff. bez 'new flesh which grows beneath a wound, and superfluous záyid) flesh which grows beneath the skin', in Ar. £udda San. 121v. 15; mez similar translation do. 318v. 1: Kip. xiv bez al-gudda ld. 30: Xv ditto Tidi. 26b. 7. S 2 béz[bez See bó:z. biz 1st Pers. Plur. Pronoun, *we'. C.i.a.p.a.l. '['wo usages can be distinguished (1) as Subject of the sentence, in which case it comes at or near the beginning of the sentence, and, if followed by a Verb in the tst Pers. Plur., is really superfluous; (2) like ol, q.v., as a sort of copula, in which case it comes at the end of the sentence following the Predicate, which it links to the Subject. ''his Subject is sometimcs also biz, Türkü viri xağan at bunta: biz bértimiz "vee gavc him hereupon the title of xağan” 1 E zo, II E 17; biz az ertimiz “ve were few' 71 E 32; kaltaçı: biz özçe: tagin tutmış teg biz 'we shall remain (unable to move); we are, so to speak, held closely(?) by a stone" T 13; and many oo. esp. in oblique cases: viri ff. Man. biz arığ biz “xe are pure” TT I] 6, 2: UyB. viri ff. Bud. (if there have been no evil deeds) kim biz kilmadımız "which we have not done" TT IV 6, 23-4; biz followed by two P.N.s do. VII 40, 7; a.o.o.: Civ. biz, esp. followed by two or more P.N.s is common in USp.: Xak. xi biz a Particle (arf) meaning nahnu “ve”, one says biz keldimiz “ve have come" Kaş. 1 325; many o.o.: xIi(?) Tef. biz is common as Subject of the sentence and in oblique cases; there is a curious form in the phr. biz ol miz “it is we' (who receive the inheritance) 100: xiv. Muh. bi:z nahnu is given as an example of a word in which the yd” is pronounced as in Ar. Mel. s, 17; Rif. 76; a.o. 12, 8; 86: Çağ. xv ff. biz (r) mà "vve”, in Ar. nahnu, (2) at the end of the sentence as a copula with the same meaning (quotn.) San. 146r. 24; a.0. t5v. 2: Xwar. xiv biz “ve” Qutb (not indexed); MN passim: Kom. xiv biz and oblique cases CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xii biz “ve” Hou. so, 9; oblique cases 52, 10 ff.: xiv biz nahnu, also called miz İ4. 40; a.o. do. 36 (under ben); nahnu hiz Bul. 16, 6; ma"and bizim bile: do. 14, 4: XV bizni: etc. Kav. 32, 11; as, 6 f. ; in a list of Pronouns Tu. 39b. 11 ff. bo:z 'grey', both generally and more specifically as the colour of a horse's coat. À very early L.-w. in Mong. asboro(Haenisch 19). S.i.a.m.l.g. w. some phonetic changes (b-/p-; -z, -S). See Doerfer H 786. Cf. ça:l, “Türkü vii boz at "a grey horsc” Z E 32, 33, 37; Ix. 4: vir ff. boz buli:t “a grey cloud” [rk B 53: Uyğ. vini ff. Bud. (of à dying man) altın erini boz bolup "his lower lip becomes grey” St. 595, 15: Xak. xr bo:z at al-farasu'l-aghab, laysa bil-afsah "a grey horse, but not of a light shade(?)'; this word is used of any animal when (its colour) is between white (a/-abyad) and roan (al-aggar); and one says bo:z ko:y “a brown (al-aşhab) sheep! Kaş. İH 122; bo:z kuş al-bàztyu'l-abyad “a white falcon” H 12,9; a.o. JII 224 (1 buğa:): xiv Muh. (among the colours) a/-ramddi 'ash coloured” bo:z Mel. 68, 4; Rif. 168: Çağ. xvff. boz (1) rang-i habüdi mayil ba-safidi "a blue colour tegding towards white'; (2) metaph. asb-i mila “an indigo-coloured (ie. dark grey) horse' San. 134r. 6: Xwar. xii(?) (of an old man) moz Sach “grey-haired” Og. 312: Kom. xiv “grey” boz ax CCI; Gr.: Kip. xi (among colours of horses) al-aghab bo:z; al-axdar “dark-coloured” temür (VU, unvocalized) bo:z ya'mi aşhab hadidi 'iron-grey' Hou. 13, 4; (among the names of mamlüks) bozğuş, properly (roa”/-şahih) bozkuş fayr aşhab do. 29, 8: xiv bo:z ("vvith back vovvel”) a/-aşhab İd. 3o; al-farqadün (the two calves") “beta and   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 433 
     
   
   
     MON. V. BZgamma in Ursa Minor” İki: boz af Bul. 2, ız (see note p. 22): xv (after “ice” bu:z) also *white' (al-abyad) of horses, mules, and asses Kas, 58, 5; a.o. do. so, 4; (among colours of horses) al-abyad wa'l-asghab boz, al-axdar temir boz (and kir at) Tuh. 4b. 4. 1 bu:z “ce”, S.i.a.m.l.g.; in most languages with m-; Tkm. bu:z. Xak. xi buz (bi'l-işba" 'with back vowels") al-camd “ice” Kaş. III 123 (prov.); 1 186 (erüş-) and five o.o.: KB buz kar toli “ice, snow, and hail' 6013: xiv Muh. al-tilc (properly 'snow') bu:z Mel. 79, 12; Rif. 184; ditto in a list of words in which wát is pronounced in the sanfe way as in Ar. s, 9; 75: Çağ. xv ff. buz... . yax “ice”, also pronounced muz, in Ar. camd San. 134r. 7A, muz yax, in Ar. camd do. 319v. ro (quotn.): Xvvar. xın(?) muz “ice”, esp. in the phr. muz tağ occurs several times in Oğ.: Kom. xıv “ice" buz CCG, Gr.: Kip. xii af-calid “ice” buz Hou. ş, 9: xiv bu:z (misdescribed as “vith front vowel") al-calid İd. şo, al-calid buz Bul. 3, 4: XV ditto Tuh. 11a. 9; al-bard “cold" bu:z Kan, 58, s. D 2 buz Imperat. of bu:z-, used in the phr. üz buz in Türkü and Uyf. See 2 üz. F bö:z 'cotton cloth'. A L-w. ultimately derived fr. Greek fiosos (bussos) "linen', but the route by which it reached 'lurkish is obscure, see W. Bang, Vom Kókturkischen zum Osmanischen IV (A.P. A.W. 1921), p. 14, note 2. S.i.am.l.g., in nearly all languages with -ó-, but in one or two pronounced bez and in 'Tkm. biz. "These forms may be due to the late Greek pronunciation of the word, visso, or the form which it took in Arabic bazz (bezz) UyB. vun ff. Bud. (write the dadrani on birchbark, palmleaves, paper, or) bózde “on cloth" U 71 zo, s (ii); o.o. PP 2, 4 (bodut-); TT VI 391-2 (ésgü:ti:); JJüen-ts. 1810, 2047: Civ. böz kapçukta urup 'putting it in a small cotton bag” /1 7 og, böz “cotton cloth', and more precisely “a bale of cotton cloth' is very common in USp.: Xak. xı bö:z (hi'l-igmám 'with a front vowel") al-Rirbás 'cotton cloth! Kaş. III] 122; nearly 20 o.o.: (however great a treasure of gold and silver you heap up) sana tegéüsi ol iki bóz ülüş 'the share of it that will come to you (in the end) is two cotton cloths (for a shroud)' 1420: xitt(?) At. (rich brocades are scarce) ucuzi böz Ok 'what is cheap is cotton cloth' 480; 8.0. 354 (untt-): xiv MuA.(?) af-qutn "cotton” bö:z Rif. 167 (only): Çağ. xv ff. böz (imale ile, *with -6- not -ii-") "very thick cotton cloth' (penbe bez) Vel. 150 (quotn.); böz hirbds, in Ar. bazz San. 134r. 4 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv kefenlig bóz 'cotton cloth for a shroud' Nahe. 131, 10: Kom. xiv "cotton cloth' bóz CCG; Gr.: Kip. xit ismu'l-xurtiq wa'l-qumág "a word for strips of cloth and cotton-stuffs” böz, Tkm. bé:z Hou. 19, ro: xv xirqa 'piece of material" bóz Tuh. rab. 7; şaqqa mina'l-tiyüb "a strip of clothing material' bóz (in margin béz) do. 21a. 2: Osm. xiv to xvi bez 'cotton cloth' in several texts TTS /7 157; IV 117: xvi 389 (after Çağ.) and in Tkm. and Rumi bez San. 134r. 4; bez ('in Rümi' ?omitted) kirbàás, which they also call bóz; in Ar. bazz San. 146r. 24. Mon. V. BZbez- originally 'to shiver, tremble, shudder'; in the medieval period it came to mean 'to shudder at the sight of (something) and thence 'to feel aversion from (something), to lose one's taste for (something)', and the like. Survives in these meanings in SE Türki; NC; SC Uzb.; some NW languages, and 5W Osm., 'Tkm. Cf. titre:-. Türkü vir ff. Man. anın korkdi bezti “he was therefore frightened and trembled' TT 7/7 6, 32: UYĞ. vin ff. Bud. (as the hour of death approaches, he lies on his bed and) tolp etözi titreyür bezer “his whole body shivers and shakes” U 7/7 43, 28-30; a.o. IV 48, go: Xak. xı er tumTuğdın bezdi: “the man shivered (irta'ada) because of the cold (etc.) Kaş, 71 8 (beze:r, bezme:k); a.o. I 38s (bezig): Xwar. xiv bez- “to be tired of (something 452)” Qutb 31; “to shiver' Nahc. 152, 15: Kom. xiv "to renounce, relinquish' bez- CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiv bez- fabarra”a minhu "to clear oneself from something, feel an aversion from it”, derived from the Pe. word bazar (error for bi-zür) al-mutabarri', with the -r omitted İd. 31 (the phonetic resemblance between bez- and bi-zár is quite fortuitous): xv tabarra'a bez- Tuh. 10a. 2; fami'a “to feel aversion' bez- do. 24a. 7 (yarSt-, q.v., is written in a second hand both below bez- and in the margin). buz- (?bu:z-) “to destroy, damage', and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. with -u- except in 8W Osm., "Tkm. where it is -o-. Türkü vırı alti: cuv Soğdak tapa: süledimiz buzdimiz “ve campaigned against the Sogdians of the Six Districts (Chinese 1.-vv, chou) and routed them” 7 E 31; evl:n barkrn buzdim “1 destroyed their dwellings and property” II E 34; 0.0. I E 34; I1 E 24, 25, 37, 39: Uy. vil ff. Bud. varhar sangram buzdumuz söktümüz erser 'if we have destroyed and pulled down monasteries (Sanskrit Hend.) TT IV 6, 39; 0.0. U H 53, 4 (iii); TT X 190; commonest in the phr. buz- artat- e.g. órtüg tıdığlarığ alku emğekliğ tuğumlarığ buzdaçı artatdaçı “destroying and putting an end to coverings, obstacles, and all painful rebirths” U II 33, 5-6, o.o. Suv. 134, 20; TT V, p. 14, note A23, rı etc.; the words read tini bosup “his breath is laboured” in U III 43, 31 should prob. be read tini buzup: Civ. yürek sikilmak "heart disease” and tin buzmak (sic?, see above) are associated in H I 1-5: Xak. xı ol ev buzdi: “he destroyed (hadama) the house (etc.)” Kaş. II 8 (buza:r, buzma:k): KB buşı bolsa begler buzar beğlikin “f the begs become bad-tempered it destroys the rule of the begs' 1414; o.o. 1180 (étiglig), 548, 882 (erinc), $263, 6056 (etçi:): xiv. Muh. abtala sca nahaba "to render worthless, to plunder' bu:z- Mel. ər, 14 (only); 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 434 
     
   
   
     399 manhüb 'plundered' bu:zmiş Mc. şr, r1 (manhübu"1-ğaüra bu:zukmri:ş Rif. 147): Çağ, xv ff. buz- xardb hardan “to ruin, destroy” San. 133r. 25 (quotns.): Xvvar. xın(?) (yanı) üç buzğuluk kildi “he broke the bow into three pieces” Og. 343-4 (text uncertain): xiv buz- “to destroy, ruin, break” Quib 36; MN yy: Kom. xiv ditto CCI, CCG; Gr. 7o (quotns.): Kip. xiu şarafa min şarfil-dahab tea fayrihi "to give exchange in the sense of giving exchange for gold etc.'(?) buz-, also al-nahb "to plunder” and al-istilab “to carry off” Hou. 35, 20: xiv buz- ('with back vowel") axada'l-gay' ğürata(n) “to take something in a raid', also nagada "to pull down, break” /d. 30; nahaba buz- Bul. 85r.: xv buz- axraba wa afsada (to corrupt, ill-treat') Kat. io, 4; axraba buz- Tuh. 6b. 13. Dis. BZA VUD buzu llap. leg.; unvocalized; Brockelmann and Atalay transcribed bizi:, but there docs not seem any basis for this; the likeliest explanation is that it is a Dev. N./A. in the sense of “damaging, spoiling', and the like, fr. buz-. Xak. xi buzi: “the black (a/-sarodd) which appears on the surface of bread owing to burning! (mina'l-ihtirág); hence one says etme:k buzi: boldi: “the surface (al-twach) of the bread was burnt' (zitaraga) Kaş. III 223. Dis. V. BZAS beze:- no doubt a crasis of bedze:- (q.v. and also bedzet-); “to ornament, adorn', and the like. S.i.s.m.l. in all groups except SE. Xak. xı ol evin beze:di: "he painted (zagaga) his house” (or something else) Kaş. 71] 263 (beze:r, beze:me:k): K B yaşıl kök bezedin tümen yulduzun "Thou hast adorned the blue sky with countless stars” 22; o.o. 386, i724 (bediz), 51:108: xın(?) Ar. bezeyin kitab "let me adorn the book” (with praise of my king) 43; a.o.o.: Caf. xv ff. béze-(-di etc.) beze- va'ni seynet et- “to ornament, adorn” Vel. 140; béze- arastan ditto San. 146r. 5 (quotns.): X war. xiv ditto Qutb 31: Kip. xiv beze- zayyana “to adorn” İd. ao: Osm. xiv ff. ditto; c.i.a.p. 7TS I 95; İT 135; İİİ 88; IV 99. Dis. BZC DF bözçi N.Ag. fr. bö:z "a weaver, or seller, of cotton cloth'. S.i.s.m.l. Uyğ. vin ff. Civ. epçi karabas bözçl '(my) female slave, a weaver' USp. 73, 4: Çağ. xvff. bözci hirbösbaf "a cotton cloth weaver' San. 134r. 11. Dis. V. BZDS bezet- (beze:t-) Sec. f. of bedzet-, q.v.; “to order to ornament” etc, N.o.a.b. Xak. xi ol evin bezetti: “he ordered the painting (bi-tanqiş) of his house” Kaş. TI 305 (beze:tü:r, bezetme:K), o.o., same translation, 7I 318, 11; 319, 4: Çağ. xv ff. bézet- Caus. f.; ördsta hardan "to have (something) ornamented' San. 146r. 24. MON. V. BZD bezit- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of bez-. Xak. xı tumluğ anı: bezitti: “the cold made him shiver' (ar'adahu) Kaş. II 3os (bezitü:r, bezitme:k) (and see bezge:k). Tris. BZD D bezetiğse:k Hap. leg. and noted only in a grammatical section; Dev. N./A. fr. a Desid. Den. V. fr. *bezetig, Dev. N. fr. bezet-. Xak. xı ol evin bezetigse:k “he longs to have his house painted ("a/d tanqişr l-bayt) and wishes for it” Kaş. II 319, 9. Dis. BZG D buzuk Pass. N./A.S. fr. buz-; 'spoilt, ruined, destroyed', and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g., sometimes with the metaph. meaning (of a man) 'dissolute'. See Doerfer 11 787. Xak. xı buzuk ev “a ruined (al-munhadim) house”, and anything broken (maösir) or ruined is called buzuk Kaş. I 3;8: KH (understanding) sınukuğ sapar ol buzukuğ éter 'mends what is broken and puts right what is ruined” 1858: Çağ. xvff. buzuğ wayrána 'ruined, desolate” Vel. 150; buzuğ/buzuk roayrana San. 134r. 15 (quotn.): Xwar. xın(?) buzuk in Og. 367 is the name of one half of the Oğuz confederacy, the other being Uc ok; as usual it is explained by what is no doubt a false etymology. Acc. to Arat, op. cit. note 367, this name occurs only in the Oğuz Xan legend; it is gnentioned in the same context in Sam. 134r. 17: Kip. xiv buzuk “a word applied to someone (or something?) who is regarded as vile and strange (al-mustahcani'l-mustagrab), and whom they consider dumb' (axras (sic), perhaps a corruption) Jd. 31: Osm. xvii bozuk in Rümt “a kind of musical instrument with six or seven strings! San. 134r. 17; a.o. same meaning T'T'S HI 166; bozuk in its usual meaning seems to be common. PUD buzğak Dev. N./A. of Habitual Action fr. buz-; this seems the likeliest transcription of a word pec. to Ulyğ, Civ. and used only in the phr. tin buzğak 'shortness of breath' (cf. buz-). Uy£. vii ff. Civ. tin buzğak H I 6o, 162, 164 (1 ót-). D bazğa:n “a blacksmith's hammer'; thus spelt twice in Man.Uyg. texts in which sayır is unlikely to represent -S- and also in Kaş., but the obvious explanation is that it is a Dev. N./A. of Habitual Action fr. bas-, the -shaving been (exceptionally) voiced by the -É-. "The translation in Kaş., al-fats “myrtle berries', is no doubt an error for ai-fittis 'blacksmith's hammcer'. See Doerfer 11 692. Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-A M I 8, ro (0D); 2:0. do. 18, 6 (ii): Xak. xr al-fats (unvocalized, read a/-fittis) bazğam 1 18, 8; bazğa:n (mis-spelt baréa:n) al-fats (read al-fittis) I 438: xiv Muh. mütraqa kabira "a large hammer! yaltçuk (Hap. leg.) ba:sğa:n Mel. 61, 8; the. same but the first word unvocalized and with b- for y(? read baltaçuk “small axe") and ba:sğa:n only in margin Rif. 160: Kip. xiv basan a word for a dog, derived fr. bas- gará'a "to | | 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 435 
     
   
   
       DIS. V. bring down', because it brings down wolves İd. 33 (etymologically the same word). Tris. BZG (D) buza:ğu: “a calf'; a very old word ending in -ğur, An carly l.-w. in Mong. as bura'u (Hacnisch 22). S.i.a.m.l.g. often much distorted, e.g. NE Khak. pizo; Tuv. biza:; SE Türki mozay, see SAtcherbak 100, where the suggested connection with bo:z is very improbable; Cuv. páru Ask. X 133. Ct. ta:dun, tüge: Türkü vin ff. (a dappled white cow was on the point of calving . . .) ürü:n esri: erkek buza:ğı: kelü:rmi:s “she gave birth to a white dappled bull calf” IrkB 41: Uyğ. viui ff. Man.-À kuz1 buzafu “a lamb or a calf M 18, 4; 18, 3: Bud. (Sanskrit lost, but the context is with clephants) bu:za:fula:rindin(p-) TT VIII C.6; a.o. PP 7, 3-4 (öntür-): Xak. xı buza:ğu: ai-'icl “calf (prov.): buza:ğu: tili: al-cirdawn “a mole (or rat?) , it is a small animal (drteaybba) Kaş. I 446, three o.o.: xiv Muh. al-'icl bi:za:ğu: (v.]. buzavv) Mel. 71, 1 (only): Çağ. xv ff. buzağu/buzağ (sic)/buzaw (all spelt) baça-i göt wa gáwmig wa kargadan "the young of a cow, buffalo, or rhinoceros” Sam. 134r. 8 (quotn.): Xwar. xin(?) Og. 263 (u:d): Kom. xıv “calf” buzaw CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xii al-'iclu'l-gagir "a small calf' buza:ğu: Hou. 14, 19: xv buzavvu “a small calf”, also called buzafu:; in the Kitàb Beylik the same translation and also wwaladu'l-ayyil "a young deer” İd. 31; "a large calf” buzağu: Bul. 7, ro, “a young deer” bızavvu: do. 10, 15: xv “a small sucking calf” buzağu: Kav. 62, 3: Osm. xiv to xvi buzağu 'calf'; once in xv buzağı TTS II 185; iv 138. : Tris. V. BZGD buza:ğu:la:- Den. V. fr. buza:ğu:, (of 28 cow etc.) "to calve'. S.i.s.m.l, vv. phonetic changes. “Türkü vri ff. ürü:p esri: inğek buza:ğu:laçı: bolmr:ş “a white dappled cow was on the point of calving” JrkB 41: (the form is grammatically impossible, ? error for buza:ğu:la:daçı:): Xak. xr Keş, III 91 (yéni:-). Dis. BZG D(S) bezek (beze:k) N.Ac. (and Conc. N.) fr. beze:-, q.v.; “ornamentation, painting, etc.; an ornament. S.i.s.m.l.g. in all groups except NE. See Doerfer 11 741. Xak. xi bezek a/-nag$ "ornamentation, painting; an ornament, picture” in onc dialect Kaş. 7 385; beze:k huma (omission in MS) I 4rz, o.o. Il 99 (bezeş-): KB bu kókteki yulduz bir anca bezek 'of these stars in the sky some are ornaments' (and some guides . . .) 128: xin(?) At. ağız til bezeki "the tongue is an ornament of the mouth” rşş, a.o.: Çağ. xv ff. bézek firüyig "ornamentation” San. 146r. 27: Xwar. xiv. bezek (sic) "an ornament” Qutb 31 (and bezeklig 'ornamented"); Nahe. 38o, o: Kip. xiv bezek al-zayna "ornamentation” İd. 30: BZL391 Osm. xiv ff. bezek “ornament, decoration”: c.L.a.p. 7TS 194; II 134; 111 88; IV 98. D bezig Hap. leg.; Dev. N fr. bez-. Xak. xı beziğ a/-ri"da 'shivering'; hence one says ol bezigğ bezdi: “he shivered” Kaş. 7 385. D bezge:k Dev. N. connoting Habitual Action fr. bez-; 'ague, malaria'. S.í.a.m.l.g. except NE (in SW only Tkm.). See Doerfer II 825. Uyğ. vir fi, Civ. bezgek em “a remedy for aguc” H I 102; ao. İl 1o, 74: Xak. xı bezğe:k al-ri"da "shivering” Kaş. H 289; (after bezit-) hence al-humma"l-nafıd “fever accompanied by shivering” is called bezğe:k /] 305: Xwar. xiv bezgek “fever, ague' Quib 30; bézgek do. 3:1: Kom. xiv “a cold fever' bezğek CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv bézgek al-hummö”l-barida “a cold fever İd. 31. Dis. BZL D bu:zluğ P.N./A. fr. bu:z; 'icy, containing ice”, and the like. S.i.s.m.l. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. (the ninth and tenth months) karlığ buzluğ öd bolur 'become the time of snow and ice” Suv. 590, 4-5: Civ. (a man suffering from sunstroke) küçe:k bu:zluğ (5-) yeplağ ic[zün ?] “should drink heavily iced ?' TT VII I.10 (the third word is Hap. leg. and phonetically obscure, perhaps a 1.-w.). D bu:zluk A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. bu:z; “an icehouse'. Survives with the same meaning in SW Osm. and Tkm. (bu:zluk). See Doerfer II 586. Xak. xı buzluk al-macmada 'an ice-house” Kaş. 7 466: xiv Muh. al-matlaca "ice-house” bu:zluk Mel. 77, 10; Rif. 181. Dis. V. BZLD(5) bezel- (beze:1-) Pass. f. of beze:-; “to be ornamented, painted”, etc. N.o.a.b.; in modern languages bezen- is used in this sense. Xak. xı ev bezeldi: “the house (etc.) was painted” (nuqişa) Kaş. II işı (beze:lü:r, bezelme:k): xrır(?) Tef. 72 (edlet-): Çağ. xv ff. bézel-(-ip, etc.) bezen-, miüzeyyen ol- "to be ornamented, adorned' Vel 1:41; bézeldrüsta sudan ditto San. 146r. zo (quotns.). D buzul- Pass. f. of buz-, "to be destroyed, damaged', and the like, S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. the same phonetic changes as buz-. Türkü vin ff. Man. tepri tamğası buzulti erser “if God's seal has been broken' Chuas. 188-9: Uy. vr ff Bud. ynlki pret bu:zlur (pu:slur) tamu:da: 'animals and ghosts are (?will be) destroyed in hell” TT VIII N.rr: Civ. in a calendar text Chinese fp'o “destruction” (Giles 9,410) is translated buzulmak TT VII 11, 7: Xak. xi ev buzuldi: "the house fell into ruin' (xariba); also used when someone has destroyed it (hadamahu) (buzulur, buzulma:k), this verb is Intrans. and Pass.; and one says er buzuldr xuriba málu'l-racul "the man was (financially) ruined” Kaş. 71 131: KB buzulmasu beğlik bedüklük bile “may (your) rule and greatness not be destroyed”  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 436 
     
   
   
       392 DIS. V. DZL941; 0.0. 882 (erinç), 5726: Çağ. xv ff. buzulxarab şudan “to be ruined, destroyed! San. 133v- 13 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 36; Nahe. zı, 13: Kip. xiv (after buz-) the Pass. f. is buzul- in both senses uxida gárata(n) “to be taken in a raid' and nuqida "to be pulled down, broken” 7d. 3o: xv xaruba buzul- Tuh. 15a. 10. VUD bozla:- (?bo:zla:-) (of a camel), “to bellow', with some extended meanings; Den. V. fr. *bo:z, a different word from bo:z “erey”. S.i.a.m.l.g. except perhaps SE; the first vowel is -u- in NE, and -0- (in "km. -0:-) elsewhere. Xak. xr titir bozla:dt: 'the she-camel (etc.) bellowed' (ragat) Kaş, 111 291 (bozla:r, bozla:ma:k); a.o. 7 120 (apra:-): xiv. Muh. (?) "acca”l-camal “of a camel, to bellow' bo:zla- Rif. r12 (only); 'acicu'l-camal bo:zlamak 124; ruga'w'l-camal bo:zla:zmak 176: Çağ. xvff. bozla-(-di) “of mourners, to groan and lament with a melancholy voice" (quotn.); the word is used in this sense and also of a camel, “to bellow' V/e/. 150; bozla“of a female camel, to bellow, when calling its young”, in Ar, ani and metaph. “of möurners, to lament in a melancholy voice' Sar. 133v. 19 (quotns.): Kip. xiv bozla- ragZ'l-camal İd. 31: XV ba'ba'a “to gürgle” bozla- (also calida “to be frozen”, i.e. buzla-, Den. V. fr. Dü:z) Tuh. 8b. 7: Osm. xiv and xv bozla- (once bozula-) “to bellow' in one or two texts T'T.S I 117; HH 166. VUD bozlat- Hap. leg. ?, Caus. f. of bozla:-. Xak. xi ol botu:nt: bozlattı: “he made the camel colt (etc.) bellow' (arğa) Kaş. II 341: (bozlatu:r, bozlatma:k). Dis. BZN S bozun Sec bodun. ES buzunu (Tef.) Sce yodun D(S) bezenç (unvocalized in the MS., but no doubt to be so read) Dev. N. fr. bezen-. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı bezenç “a hank (şa/hraca) of silk or thread'; bezenç “the name of a plant (abt) with a red stem and leaves, which grows among the vines and is eaten as a drug! Kaş. III 373. Dis. V. BZND(S) bezen- Refl. f., often used as Pass., of beze:-; 'to adorn oneself; to be ornamented, adorned'. S.i.s.m.l. in all groups except NE, usually as Pass, Xak. xr ura:ğut bezendi: “the woman adorned herself! (tabarracat) ; and one says ev bezendi: “the house was ornamented' (zaxrafa); the -n- (in the latter instance) was changed from -1- Kaş. II 142 (bezenü:r, bezenme:k); a.o. // 155 (kozan-): KB bezenmek tiler dunya “the earth wishes to adorn itself” 64; bezenmiş kelin teg “like a bride adorned” 3567; a.o. 67: Xwar. xiv bézen- (sic) “to be adorned” Qutb 31: Kip. xiv bezen- izdàna "to be adorned' İd. 3o: xv tazattwaga “to be ornamented' bezen- Tuh. IO2. 5; zwteteiqa ditto do. 18a. 13: Osm. xiv ff. bezen- 'to adorn oneself, be adorned', etc.; c.La.p. T'T'S I 95; II 135; İH 88; IV 99. Dis. V. BZSD(S) bézes- Co-op. f. of beze:- ; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı ol mapa: bezek bezeşdi: “he helped me to paint ( f? agg) the thing”: also used for competing Kaş. II 99 (bezeşü:r, bezeşme:k): Çağ. xvff. bözeş- “to be adorned (drdsfa şudan) together" San. 146r. 23. D buzuş- Co-op. f. of buz-; survives only (9) in SW Osm,, TVkm. bozus- “to quarrel, be estranged”, Xak. xı ol mapa: ev buzugdi: “he helped me to demolish: fi had) the house”: also used for competing Aug. 77 og (buzuşu:r, buzusma:k).   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 437 
     
   
   
       Preliminary note. Znitial g- is not very common in Turkish as an original initial. Although there s good evidence that both unvoiced € and voiced C extsted in the medial and final positions, there is no evidence that there was ever a voiced initial C-, see Studies, pp. 167, 170. There are many Secondary initial C-s, &amp;- se and V-s in some modern languages, usually representing an original y-, less often an original S- or t-, with some interchange between the three. Conversely in some languages Ç- has become S-. There are in Mong. and Pe. a good many words swith initial C- which have become l.-w.s in Turkish and have erroneously been regarded as native Turkish swords. Mon. CA VU Çı: as such Hap. leg., but perhaps connected with çiğ, q.v. If as seems probable 2 çı:k- is derived from this word it must have had a back vowel, see also çı:la:-. Xak. xı çı: al-nadá 'moisture'; hence one says çi: yé:r ard nadiya "moist ground” Kaş. III 207. çu:/çü: N.o.a.b. Xak. xr çüt(/çü:) “an Interjection (arf) attached to Imperatives both positive and negative in order to strengthen them” ('alá ma'nà ta'hid); hence one says kel çü: “come at once!" and barma: çu: “do not on any account go”. "The word is not used except in conversation (f7”/-xftab) Kaş. III 207: Su:(/sü:) an İnteryection which alternates (yanüb) with çu:(/çü:), one says barğıl şu: “go at once” and kel şü: “come at oncc' 7/1 211. Mon. CB çap Onomatopocic; Kaş. is usually the only carly authority for such words, but they are common in modern languages, though not always entered in the dicts. Xak. xi cap çap hihaàya 'an wag'i'l-siyát doa”l-şibi”l-şıfah "an onomatopoeic for the blow of a whip and smacking the lips'; hence one says ol erük çap çap yezdi: "he eat a peach smacking his lips' Kaş. 1 318. ça:v originally 'fame, good reputation! with a favourable connotation, later 'reputation' (good or bad), and finally merely 'rumour, noise', perhaps owing to confusion with onomatopoeics like cap. Survives in NE Alt., Leb., Tel. cap R III 1915; Tel. cu: do. 2164; Bar. tsap IV 196; NC Kir. çü:, SW xx Anat. çav SDD 310. (Türkü vim çav, read in T 7, Ix. 17 is an error, see çavuş, ix ff. Yen. ditto): Xak. xı yadsu:n çavı:p bodu:nka: "so that he may spread your fame (ş/fah) among the people” Kaş. 7 45, 22; kalsun çavın yarınka: “so that your name (ismuk) may remain: until the morrow' İT 250, 5; n.m.e.; INITIAL DENTIPALATAL AFFRICATE  KB çav 'fame, reputation! is common, both by itself (737, 1693, etc.) and in association with kü: (87, 102, etc.) or 1 a:t (1924, etc.): xiu(?) KBPP atı çavı 28: xiv Muh. (among the words pronounced with -v in T'urkistan and -W in “our country”) al-sawt 'fame' ça:v/ça:vv Mel. 8, 1; Rif. 79: Çağ. xv ff. çavv dtvdza (the quotn. indicates '(bad) reputation") San. 209v. 9 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv cav “fame” MN 46 etc.: Kip. xiv çavv (c-) al-dacic 'bustle, uproar” /d. 47: Osm. xiv to xvii. çav initially “reputation' (neutral), later hardly more than 'news'; common till xvi TTS I 150-1; II 214-15; III 141-2; İV 158. F çavv 1.-vv, fr. Chinese chao “a paper currency note' (Giles 514); appears as a unit of currency in late (?xii-xiv) Uyg. Civ. documents; also used in Çağ. since such notes were issued by the Mongols in their western dominions. N.o.a.b. Uy$. vii ff. Civ. çavv is common in USp. and, like ch'ao, seems to mean sometimes an actual currency note and sometimes 'expressed in notes and not coin' (kümüş), e.g. I2, 5 altı yüz yastuk caw “notes for (or a sum of) 6oo yastuks”, 12, 6 bu çavnı “this sum” rs, 8 yégirmi yastuk çun tun bavv çavv 'notes for twenty yastuks in heavy current copper coin' (Chinese cung t'ung pao, Giles 2,880 12,294 8,720); the word transcribed çuv in 54, 9 etc. is the same word: Çağ. xv ff. çavv “an oblong piece of paper which circulated instead of gold in the dominions of the Mongol xars with a special mark and the name of the pödişalı inscribed on it", "They conducted business with it. Wassaf in the second volume of his History in an account of the çazo which were current in the reign of Gayxatü Xan says that the shape and appearance of the gate were as follows: around the face of an ohlong piece of paper were written a number of words in Chinese characters, and at the top '/à ilah illa Allah, Muhammad rasülu'llàh, a metallic coin” and below that was written írmeim nur(i (a corrupt Mong. phr.) in an oval below the centre; they were in denominations from half a dirtam to ten dinárs and have become obsolete San. 209v. 10. çıp (?çı:b) Hap. leg.; perhaps the basic word of which çıbik was a Dim. f. Xak. xı çıp 'any thin slender branch' (gusn), abbreviated (maqşür) from çıbık, just as “a ball” is called to:b, abbreviated from tobik Kaş. 7 318. € (?çiv) Hap. leg.; onomatopoeic. Cf. çıfı:la:-. Xak. xr çif “an onomatopoeic (hihaya) for the gurgling (£alayas) of wine in a jar and the like” Kaş. 1 332. F çıxvv (?c10) Hap. leg.; prob. a L-w. fr. Chinese chio (Giles 2,215) 'horn, corner'; “three chio' and 'four chio! are common phr,    
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 438 
     
   
   
     204 for “triangular” and 'rectangular' in Chinese. Uyf. vir ff. Civ. (as for the golden food-vessel (küzeç) it is a solid vessel) tört uluğ çıvvlarda beigülüg idiş ol "it is a vessel distinguished by its four great corners! TT 7 189-91. F 1 çuv Hap. leg.; l.-w. fr. Chinese chou *district' (Giles 2,444). "Vhis identification was made by S. G. Klyashtornyi, Drevnetyurkshie runicheskie pamyatniki, Moscow, 1964, p. 94. Türkü vir alti: cuv Soğdak “the Sogdians of the Six Districts' 1 E 31. SF 2 cuv See çavv, çö:b originally 'sediment, dregs', and the like; hence, more generally, 'something worthless, rubbish', and hence, more specifically, “splinters, bits of chaff, straw', and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. in the last meaning, with some phonetic changes. See çöbik. UYĞ. vri ff. Bud. kalınçu çöb öd “the period of residues and dregs' Hien-ts. 2011 (see note thereon, the Chinese original reads /istang yür chih mo “the end of the period of formalism', i.e. the beginning of decadence): Xak. xi dürdiyir l-xamr “the dregs of wine', also "akar kull şay” “the residue of anything; hence "the dregs of the population” (Auftálatu'l-nàs) are called çöb çeb (so vocalized) kişi:le:r, (cip follows here); çöb “any piece of noodles” (tutmüt), one says bir çöb yé:gil “eat a little noodles”, also used for pieces of vermicelli or macaroni (al-latit tva'l-1triya) Kaş. 1 3185. çö:b tufl bull şay” wa 'agiruhu "the sediment and expressed juice of anything'; one says üzüm çö:bi: faciru'l-'inab 'grape juice'; ya: çö:bi: 'akaru'l-duhn “the sediment in oil'; bo:r çözbi: durdiyu'l-xamr "the dregs of wine' (etc.); tutma:ç €ó:bi: “the word for any piece of the dough of macaroni or vermicell! IJI 119; 8.0. 77 346 (suvlat-): Çağ. xv ff. çöp (with -p") xöşdk 'rubbish' Sam. 211v. 3 (quotn.): Kom. xiv tirki çöbü “the residue of a sacrificial offering” CCG; Gr. 76 (quotn.): Kap. xiv çöb (c-) qaşş 'rubbish' Id. 41: Osm. xv and xvi çöp “rubbish” and the like in several phr. 7 T'S IV 182 (the supposed occurrence in lll 160 seems to be an error for Pe. çüb 'a stick”, a word sometimes confused with this one). Mon. V. CBçap- an onomatopocic verb (cf. cap) with several meanings both Trans. and Intrans., the only connecting link between which seems to be that they all describe noisy action. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. some phonetic changes and several different meanings. Xak.xı er suvda: çapdı: “the man swam (sabaha) in the water'; and one says ol atnı: çıbık birle: çapdı: “he struck the horse lightly (dara5a . . . xafifa(n)) with a stick'; and one says çomak tat boynun çapdı: “the Moslem struck the neck of the unbeliever” in Uyğ., and one says er evin çapdı: “the man plastered (/ataxa) his house with clean mud” Kaş. 77 3 (çapa:r, çapma:k): ÇÖb” MON.CB a.o. İİ 149, 12 (çapın-): KB (some birds rise, some settle) kayusı çapar “some swim' (and some drink water) 73: xın(?) Tef. çap- (1) "to strike (with a whip)'; (2) “to hurry (Intrans.)' 357: Çağ. xv ff. cap-(-t1 etc.) (r) segirt- "to run, gallop'; (2) bag hes- "to behead” Vel. 228-9 (quotns.), çap- (with ç- -p-”) (1) tüxtan ba-ma"na dawidan "to gallop'; (2) dawünidan "to cause to gallop'; (3) táxtan ba-ma"nd fárat hardan “to raid, plunder'; (4) “to strike with a sword, to wound, to sever with a single blow' San. 203v. rı (quotns.): Xvvar. xiv çap- “to hurry; to strike; to sever” Qutb 39:* Kip. xiv çap- (with -p-") daraba tva qata"a bi-marra toahida “to strike; to sever with a single blow' İd. 41: xv “to drive (sága), in the sense of driving livestock' sap- (sic) Kav. 78, 3: Osm. xiv ff. cap- (1) “to attack, raid', common in XIV and xv, sporadic later; (2) “to gallop” and more generally “to hurry' fr. xv onwards; (3) “to make (a horse) gallop' fr. xvi onwards TTS I 147; ll 210; İİİ 140; IV 156. *cijv- Sec civgin. Dis. CBA VU?F cava: Hap. leg.; prob. an Iranian l.-w. cognate with Pe. cawán “young”. Xak. xı çava: min asmá'i'l-fityán "a boy's name” Kaş. İİ 225. PU?F civi: Hap. leg.; the single kasra under the word might belong either to the c- or to the -v-; possibly an Iranian l.-vv, with an initial dental converted to an affricate, cf. Iranian daeta 'demon' (Pe. dev). Xak. xi civi: “the word for a class of demons' (rizbr'l-cinn). "Yhe 'l'urks assert that when two: communities (cam'ayn) fight one another, before the battle the demons which inhabit the territories (roilava) of these two communities fight one another furiously on behalf of the human owners of the two territories; and whichever of them wins, the victory goes to the owner of that territory on the next day; and whichever of them is defeated on that night, defeat comes to the ruler of the community of the territory inhabited by that class of demons. On the night before the encounter (al-ma"ad) the Turkish armies hide themselves and go into their tents to take cover from injuries by the arrows of these demons. "This is well known (ma"riif) among them Kaş. Ill 225. VU?F?S cuvi: Hap. leg.; a Khotanese word might be native Saka, the language of that area, or corrupt Turkish, as the Türkü order of precedence seems to have been xağan— şad (and tegin)—yabğu: (q.v.) it is possible that this is a corruption of the last word. Xotan xı çuvi: “a title (/agab) given to à man who is two steps below the xaqan (ba'da'l-xüqdn bi-daracatayn) in the order of precedence( fi rasm) of Xotan; tea li'l-turk rasm fihi “the Turks have a (similar) order of precedence" Kaş. Hİ 225. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 439 
     
   
   
     DIS : Dis. CBC S çepiç See çepiş. VU?F çovva:ç “a royal parasol'. No doubt a L.-w., esp. considering the -vv-, but of unknown origin. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı karvvı: (misvocalized Aurzwi:) çovva:ç kürüldi: nujirat fihà qubbatu'l-malik "the royal parasol was set up there'; this is a parasol made of silk for the kings of the "Pürks under which they seek shade in the summer heat and take shelter from rain and snow Kaş. İ 195, 1 (s.v. urul-); o.o. 14 7, 24 (kur-); 19o, 11 (kurtur-); 1J/J 60, 1 (yas-); n.m.e.: xiv Rbj. çol ediz kókni üstide çovvaç (?sic, R. cawac) kildi “he made the high heaven a parasol over him” R IV 5g. PU?F çavlu: Hap. leg.; completely unvocalized; entered under Z between sünzi: and kenzi: which suggests that the -j- ought to be -Z- and the initial some letter later than sin, perhaps káf; prob. al.-w. Xak. xı cavju: "a tree with a red trunk and branches and bitter red berries which grows in the mountains"; it is al-'anam (translated in the dicts. 'a tree with red fruit'" to which the fingers of young women are compared Kaş. 7 422. Dis. CBD S caput See çapğut. VU?F cüwit some kind of dye-stuff prob. mineral, perhaps a coloured earth; note that Kaş, describes it as a generic term, not tied to a particular colour. Prob. a l.-w., but of unknown origin. Survives only(?) in NE Tel. çibit “ochre” R //T 2155 and SW Osm. civid/ Civit 'indigo'. For the last meaning cf. maraz. Uyğ. viri ff. Civ. (as a remedy for weak eyes) cüvitni suvka simlep kinlep alinka sürtser edğü bolur “if you crush (?, Hend.) a blue(?) dyestuff in water and rub it on the forehead they get better" I7 7 157-8: Xak. xı kizil çüvvit a/-zincarf 'cinnabar'; al cüwit al-isranc "red lead, vermilion'; kö:k çüvvit al-lüzamard 'lapis lazuli'; ya:şıl çüvvit a/-zincár 'verdigris'; sa:rığ Ççüvvit al-zirnix 'vellow arsenic”, çüvit a dialect form (/uğa fihi). Know that çüvvit is a generic term (ism cámi') for all these dyestuffs (al-alwàn), it is differentiated by mentioning the individual colour with it Kaş. IJI 162: (Çağ. xvff. çevvek ('with -k”) reng 'colour'; for example kara çevvek “black coloured”, kizil cewek “red coloured', also used for a cloth which women wear on their heads, and a fabric (qumüş) if it is of one particular colour Vel. 236 (quotn.), cewek /awn ta rang 'colour' (quotn.), also used for zangin 'coloured' (quotn.) Sam. 209v. 18; çevvek is otherwise unknown and perhaps an error for this word): Osm. xvin çivvit (spelt) in Rümi, 'indigo' (nil) with which they dye clothes San. 222r. 8. Dis. V. CBDD çapıt- Caus. £. of çap-, n.o.a.b. Cf. çaptur-. Xak. xt 1t kişi:ke: çapıttı: Jramala'l-kalbu"ald”l-insan li-ya' addahu "the dog attacked . CBĞ .395 the man to bite him' (this is the clear meaning of the Ar., but the meaning to be expected is *he egged on the dog to bite the man"); and one says beg anın boynin çapıttı: “the beg ordered that he should be struck on the neck (bi-darb 'unugiht) in Uy&amp;. Kaş. 11 298 (capıtu:r, capıtma:k): Xwar. xiv çapıt- "to make (the heart) beat” Qutb 40. D çaptur- Caus. f. of çap- , s.i.s.m.l, with the same range of meanings as çap- turned into Caus. Cf. gapit-. Xak. xı er kulin suvda: çapturdı: “the man made his slave swim (asbaha 'abdahu) in the water'; and one says ol anın boynip çapturdi: “he ordered that he should be struck on the neck', in Uyğ., and one says ol evin capturd:: “he gave orders for the plastering (bi-tamtwih) of his house with clean mud” Xaş. I] 180 (çapturur, çapturma:k): xın(?) Tef. çaptur- 'to make (a horse) gallop' 357: Çağ. xv ff. captur-(-dı) segirtdir- ditto Vel. 228 (quotn.); çapturCaus. f.; (1) dawünidan ditto; (2) tàxt farmüdan “to order to raid or pillage' San. 204r. 18 (quotns.): Osm. xiv ff. captir- with the same two meanings in several xiv and xv and one xix text T TS ID147; İl 211; HI 140; IV 157. Dis. CBG çabak (?1 çapak) a small freshwater fish, usual “the bream' (Abramis brama). S.La.m.lg. with much the same meaning; l.-w. in Russian, chebak 'bream'. See Doerfer HI ro61. Xak. xi çabak “the name of a kind of small fish (samak şiğör) in the Turkish lake” (bi-buhayrati'l-turk); hence a despicable (a/-nadl) man is metaphorically called cabak er Kaş. 1 381: Çağ. xvff. çabak (so spelt) máhi-yi riza "a small fish” San. 204r. 28. S 2 çapak See çelpek, çavığ “a whip-lash'; in /7 210, 18 spelt çağığ, no doubt in error. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı çavığ "adabatu”l-şazıt “a whip-lash' Kaş. I 374; 0.o. II 210, 18 (cermes-); 231, 1 (cermel-). D çıbık Dim. f. of cip; “a rod or stick', esp. a flexible one. S.i.a.m.l.g. with a rather wide range of phonetic changes, in SW Tkm. çı:bik the Osm. form çubuk prob. due to a supposed connection with Pe. yub, same meaning. See Doerfer I1] 1059. Uy£. xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. chih “a branch' (Giles 1,873) €ibik. Ligeti 151; R III 2099: Xak. xt q1bik al-qadibu”l-ratl mina'l-agsán "a fresh stick (taken) from tree branches! Kaş. I 381; a.o. Il 3 (çap-): Çağ. xv ff. çubuğ/çubuk “a fresh twig (saxea); a thin, flexible stick' (qub) San. 211 v. 13: Xwar. xin(?) dalni cubukr "a willow shoot' Og. 3o: Kom. xiv 'twig, rod” çıbuk/çıbux CCG; Gr.: Kip. xi al-ğuşn wa'l-qadib ci; b1ik Hou. 7, 11: xiv. çibik a/-qadib İd. 41: Osm. xv çıbuk börk “a tall pointed cap'(?) 7TS III 149. çıvğa: See çıvğaçıt. PU çufğa: (?çuvğa:) an old vvord ending in -ğa:: the -f- in all the spellings is prob. an 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 440 
     
   
   
       396 error for -v-. N.o.a.b. Xak. xrqufga: 'a horse which a fast post-rider (al-baridu'l-musri") takes on the road and rides until he finds another” Kaş. 7 424: Oğuz/Kıp. xi çufğa: al-dalil sca'l-qá'íd "a guide, leader', and in the prov. kalin kula:n çufğa:sız bolma:s “there i$ no herd (xuntila, mis-spelt) of wild asses without a guide and leader' (dali! toa hadi) Kaş. I 424. ?D çapğut perhaps Dev. N. fr. çap-, but the semantic connection is remote. Survives only(?) in NC Kir. çapan çapkıt “outer clothing; çopkut "body armour', and SW Osm. caput 'rag, patch; gore, gusset'. "The original meaning may have been 'a quilted coat”, cf. yalma:, See Doerfer III 1082. Xak. xı çapğut a/-haşiya "a padded garment Kaş. I 451: Kip. xiv caput (c-5-) al-hudma “a patched garment" İd. 41. Dis. V. CBGD cavik- Intrans. Den. V. fr. ca:v; “to be, become, famous”, N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vri ff. Bud. utmis cavikmis vacir psaklığ “the victorious and famous varra-crowned' (Sanskrit and Sogdian l.-w.s) U II 59, 4 (iii): Xak. xi er cavikti: şara [r'l-racul sit “the man became famous! Kaş. II 117 (gavika:r, çavıkma:k): KB ajunda çavıkmış “famous all over the world' 406; similar phr. 1928; isizke cavikmis kisidin yira 'kcep away from a man who is notorious for his vvickedness” 4238: Xwar. xiv cavuk- “to be famous' (and cavuktur- “to make famous') Quib 42. Tris. CBG D çıvğaçı Hap. leg.; N.Ag. fr. çıvğa: which survives only(?) in SW Osm. and xx Anat. where it, and the Sec. £.s in the latter (çıvka, çıvğar, civkar, etc.), have a wide range of meanings, 'thin, weak' (Red.); “a cow's horn' (Sami), 'thin; shoot, sucker', etc. (SD D 346). "The N. Ag. by its context obviously relates to catching birds, possibly by some sort of trap contrived by using thin twigs under tension, Uy. vir ff. Bud. (if we have been butchers, poultry-keepers, pig-keepers, or fishermen) keyikçi ançı tuzakçı boltumuz erser torçı çıvğaçı kuşçı (iterçi, q.v.) . . . boltumuz erser “if we have become wild game (Hend.) hunters or trappers; if we have become bird netters, bird snarers (?), wild-fowlers. . .' TT IV 8, 56-8. PUF ctbika:n, etc. lit. “a jujube fruit, Zizyphus vulgaris; hence metaph. “an inflamed boil or ulcer'. No doubt a l.-w., prob. of Indian origin, which explains the variations in spelling. In the medieval period the -k- was voiced and ultimately elided. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. çıban, Tkm. ct:ban “"boil, ulcer'. See Doerfer TI rrsr. UYĞ. vin ff. Civ. (VU) çubakan “ulube fruit! H JI zz, 39: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. 'jujube fruit' çobuğan Ligeti 153; R HI 2185; 'sweetmeat' çıbıyan do. 151; 2154: Xak, xr (under the heading fataldnifa"ildn -K-) çıbıka:n a[-unnáb. "the  DIS.  ChG jujube fruit'; çıbıka:n af-dumial 'a boil', it resembles a jujube fruit in its redness Kaş, 7 448: xiv Muh. al-dummal qiba:n. Mel. 65, 3, Rif. 164: Çağ. xv ff. ciban (spelt) “a boil or pustule (qar/ra) which appears on the limbs' San. 215v. 14: Xwar. xii(?) (they eat and drank various kinds of food and wine) çubuyanlar kımızlar 'jujube fruits and. koumiss' Oğ. 93-4: Ktp. xit al-dummal (ba:g); Tkm. €1ba:n (vocalized çaba:ı) Hou. 33, $: xiv çıba:n a/-dummal İd. 41; Bul. 10, 2. Tris. V. CBGD çıbıkla:- Den. V. fr. cibik; s.i.s.m.l. with some phonctic changes, usually for 'to beat with a stick”. Xak. xr ol atın çıbıkla:dı: “he beat his horse with a freshly-cut switch" (bi-qadib nà'im) Kaş, III 337 (Çibikla:r, cibikla:ma:k). Dis. CBG ?S cewek See çüvit, VU cibek pec. to Kaş. and used only in the phr. cibek kırğu:y a/-vu'yiá prob. “the merlin), as opposed to kirfu:y, by itself, a/-başıq “the sparrow-hawk'. There is an entry (VU) çüpek şikdra-t nar “a male bird of prey” in the Calcutta. Dict. (R III 2201), but it does not occur in any other Çağ. authority, and its origin is obscure. Xak. xı çibek kırğu:y (misvocalized 2arğu:y) al-yu”yu” Kaş. I 388; 2.0. (Ç- unvocalized) 777 241 (kırğu:y). PU çübek Hap. leg., but such words are often omitted in the dicts.; perhaps an earlier form of the syn. word çük which s.i.s.m.l. including SW Osm. See Doerfer III 1140. Xak. xi çübek /aysalatu'l-sabi “a boy's penis” Kaş, I 388: (Kip. xiv çük a/-dakar müqabili H-farc “penis” opposite to “vagina” İd. 44). D çöbik Dim. f. of çö:b. N.o.a.b. "The passage in U 7 14, 3, left untranslated there, is discussed in a note in U 77 gr, where it is pointed out that bés çöbik is a translation of the Chinese phr. “the five cho, impuritics" (Giles 2,409), sec Soothill and Hodous, AA Dictionary of Chinese Buddhist Terms, London, 1937, p. 448a. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. bu kelyük bulğanyuk :bés çöbik yavlak ödteki 'living in this present confused evil period of the five impurities! U 7 14, 3 (cf. similar phr. under cà:b): Xak. xı şöbik (sic) “the: debris (al-samac) which is thrown away . after fruit has been eaten'; the ş- is changed from ç- Kaş. I 390. F çavvğa:n See çöğen. " D çivgin Dev. N./A. fr. *civ-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xi çivgin as al-ta'dmu' l-náci wl-musammin *wholesome fattening food”, and one says çivğin ot “a plant which fattens cattle” Kaş. I 443; a.0. 1 443, 23 (kevgin). 'Tris. V. CBGD çivginlen- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. çivgin, Xak, xı ol bu: aşığ civginlendi: "he  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 441 
     
   
   
       DIS reckoned that this food was nourishing for the body and wholesome' (muxsib li'l-badan nöcü) Kaş. 11 278 (civginlenü:r, civginlenme:k; in all cases a damna is inserted over the -£by a later hand, in addition to the original kasra). Dis. CBL 1 çavlı: “a falcon', precise variety uncertain. It occurs, mis-spelt culi, in the xviii Manchu, etc. Five Language Mirror, see E. D. Ross, A Polyglot List of Birds in Turki, Manchu and Chinese, Calcutta, 1909, No. 61; Ross could not get any specific meanigt fr. the Manchu and Chinese equivalents and the "Tibetan khra-£ur "a falcon” and Mong. şophur harçiğay “gerfalcon, goshawk' are equally vague. Survives in SW Osm. çavlı “a young, untrained falcon'. Cf. cibek, çağrı:, toğan, turumtay, kirgu:y, la:gin, sıpkur. Türkü ix ff. Yen. çavlı: occurs in an obscure context in Mal. 48, 6: Xak. xı çavlı: al-sáhin 'gerfalcon, or peregrine falcon” Kaş. 7 431: KB (in a list of begs) kayusı 1nanc beğ kayu çavlı beg kayusı tégin beğ (?corrupt, see tégin) kayu çağrı beg 4068; the çavlı beg and çağrı beg were prob. both keepers of the king's falcons: xiv Muh.(?) dakaru'l-bàz *male falcon' çavlı: (mis-spelt czkah:) Rif. 175 (only). F 2 ça:vlı: Hap. leg.; no doubt a l.-w., prob. Iranian, cf. co:vlt.. Gancaki xr ca:vli: “the rinds (gajr) of peaches and nuts which are used to light fires' Kaş. III 442. VUF ço:vlı: presumably the same as, or cognate to, Pe. gáwli “a winnowing-fan of reeds' (Steingass); "a sieve for sifting cereals' (B. V. Miller Persidsko-russkii slovar', Moscow, 1953). Gancákl xı co:vli: (vocalized gazweli: in second hand) misfát tutmác "a strainer for tutmaç), it is (made of) thin rods plaited together, and made like a ladle (a/-miğrafa) Kaş, HI 442: Kip. xui mirafatu'l-tumác ça:vvlı: Hou. 17, 10. D ca:wliB. P.N./A. fr. ça:v: 'famous, renowned'. Survives only(?) in NE, several dialects çaptığ/çaptu:/tsaplu: R III 1926; IV 196. Xak. xi KB tümen mir külüg çavlığ ersiğleriğ — 'innumerable famous (Hend.) heroes' 4525: xiv Muh.(?) sáhib sit "famous” ça:vluğ Rif. 145 (only, mis-spelt ça:kluğ): (Çağ. xv ff. çağlın (sic) muta'ayyin ve nümdür 'distinguished, famous” Vel. 233 may be a corruption of this word). Dis. V. CBLD çapıl- Pass. f. of çap-, s.i.m.m.l, with the same range of meanings as çap- in the Pass. Xak. xı anm evi: çapıldı: “his house was plastered (fuyyina) with thin clean mud” (çapılu:r, çapılma:k), also used in Uyğ. when a man is struck on the neck Kaş. İT 119: (xin(?) Tef. çapalu- "to be pulled apart, to disintegrate”, 357 may be a mis-spelling of this word): Çağ. xv ff. capil- (1) darcanida şudan "to be made to gallop'; (2) táxt şudan . CBN . 397 "to be pillaged'; (3) “to be wounded (zaxmdár) by a sword blow and the like" San. 204r. 17: Xwar. xiv capul- (sic) "to be driven, set in motion' Qutb ao: Osm. xiv capil- “to be pillaged” in one text TS 7 146. PUD çavla:- Hap. leg.; the ç- carries a fata in the Perf. and a damma in the Aor. and Infin.; it lies between çığla:- and çınla:-, it is clearly a Den. V., but as there is no obvious base with -v- it is possible that this is an error for -k-, or -É- misvocalized; cf. 2 çığlan-. Xak. xı et çavla:dı: "the meat was spoilt” (uhmuqa), that is when it is not cooked soft (lam yana""am tabxuhu) Kaş. III 296 (çovla:r, çovla:ma:k). D çavlan- Refl, Den. V. fr. ça:v, “to be, or become, famous, renowned'. Survives in NE Bar. tsaplan-, same meaning, R IV 196; and SW Osm. çavlan- “to be noised abroad'. Xak. xı er çavlandı: gara lül-racul sit “the man became famous” Kaş. II 245 (çavlanu:r, cavlanma:K), in an excursus on Refl. Den. V.s fr. triliteral Nouns, III 199, 24ff. it is said that er sa:vlandı: “the man quoted proverbs! and er ça:vlandı: “the man became famous! are impossible forms, but that if someone uses them, no one blames him; as both Verbs are known to have existed with a short vowel in the first syllable the point seems to be that if Verbs are formed from monosyllables with a long medial vowel the vowel is shortened: AK kelir kut kişike ati çavlanur “good luck comes to a man and his name becomes famous” 740; a.o. 2050: Osm. xiv çavlan- “to be famous! in one text TT'S I 150. Tris. CBL PU(D) çobulmak Hap. leg.; the word occurs in the middle of a long string of words ending in -lik, and it is perhaps an error for *cobumlik, but there is no obvious etymology for either word. 'l'he place mentioned is no doubt that listed in / 98 as “the name of a town near 'Taràz', but the alif is not vocalized in either place. (Xak. ?) xı çobulmak “apple segments' (faliqu”Etuffah) in the language of (VU) Athk Kaş. I 503. Tris. V. CBLD çıfı:la:- (? çıvı:la:-) Hap. leg., Den. V. (irregular) fr. gif (?çıv). Xak. xi küp çıfı:la:dı: hadara'l-dann “the jar made a noise' (?when tapped or when boiling); also used when fruit juice is boiled (ğa/4) and a bubbling sound (azis) is heard because of its boiling Kaş. III 325 (gifrla:r, çıfı:la:ma:k). Dis. CBN SF çıban See cibika:n. çıbun See sipek PU çupan an early vvord meaning “minor official, village headman”, or the like. "The earliest occurrences are in Protobulğar ix (?) see Gy. Moravcsik, Byzantoturcica, Budapest, 1943, [T 121 (s.v. Covrayoş), with a full ununun, M SERE XXI 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 442 
     
   
   
     398 DIS bibliography and O. Pritsak, Die bulgarische Fürstenliste . . . Wiesbaden, 1955, pp. 85 ff. "This word became a l.-w. in Hungarian and some Slavonic languages as Zupan (jupan) and the like, 'district head'. Tt is unlikely that it is connected with Pe. grpán (sec. f. sabün| şubün) 'shepherd' which became a l.-w. in Russian as chaban, s.i.a.m.l.g. except SE as a ].-w. in various forms, and is sometimes confused with colpan, q.v. Xak. x (PU) cupan "aton "arif" l-qarya "the assistant to a village headman” Kaş. I 402: (xiu(?) Tef. çoban 'shepherd' 360: Çağ. xvíff. çupan ("with -p-”) sabán San. 211 v. 7 (followed by several phrs.): Xwar. xiv çoban 'shepherd' Qutb 44). Dis. V. CBND çapın- Refl. f. of gap-; s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xt er atın çapındı: “the man whipped (sáfa) his horse'; and one says er suvda: çapdı: “the man swam (sabaha) in the water', and çapındı: is also so used (/uga fihi) Kaş. I1 149 (çapınu:r, çapınma:k): Kip. xiv çapın- hamala "ala şay” daf"a wáhida “to make a single attack on something” 7d. 41: Osm. xiv to xvi çapın(1) “to hurry, bustle'; (2) “to attack (something Dat.) in several texts TT. 7 146; İT 210; III 140; İV 156. Dis. CBR çava:r 'kindling'; n.o.a.b., but see çava:rlığ. Cf. otun. Xak. xı çava:r “the kindling (al-darm) with which a fire is lit'; and one says in a jingle (f?'l-izdiwác) çava:r çuva:r Kaş. I 411; 8.0. 7 17, 16. PU çöpür 'goat's hair” with some extended meanings; as there is no trace of a Den. Suff. -ür, this word cannot be derived fr. çö:b, and this raises the question whether the meaning 'rubbish, debris' is not due to a false etymology. Vocalization uncertain since the word survives as çupur “goat”s hair” in SE Türki, and cöbür/çöpür/çüpür 'goat's hair; rubbish' in SW xx Anat. SDD 284, 38o, 388. Xak. xı (PU) çöpür ga'aru'l-ma'z 'goat's hair', and “rubbishy goods' (al-xurtt mina'l-mitü") are called çöpür çepür as a jingle Çala fariqi'l-itbà) Kaş. 1 363: Çağ. xvff. çöpür (^with ç- -p-”) (1) miy-i buz wa güsfand 'goat's hair; sheep's wool'; (2) camgal wa bişa-i pur diraxt 'jungle; a thicket of trees" San. 211 v. iz: Kip. xiv (PU) çöpür (c- -5-) al-qaşş bi-wasax 'rubbish in dirt” İd. 41. PU(D) copra: as such n.o.a.b.; Kaj.'s translation is almost the same as that of opra:k, which suggests the same kind of connection as that between çevür- and evir-, but there is also a semantic connection with çö:b and çöpür, and the later form of this word seems to be (VU) cüprek which s.i.s.m.l. in NE, NC, NW with either -ü- or -1- in the first syllable. Uyf. virt ff. Civ. (in a Hist of goods exempted from taxation; millet, cotton, wine) €opra perhaps “used clothing! USSp. 88, 41: Xak. xı çopra: a/-xalaq mina'l-tiyàb *worn, or tattered, clothing" Kaş. 1 421: (Kom. xiv . CBN 'swaddling clothes” çüprek CCG; Gr.: Kip. xit. al-şiqqa tca'[-xirqga. “A picce of cloth; a ragged garment' cüprek (c- -5-) Hou. 19, 8). Dis. V. CBRçevür- “to twist, or turn (something Zcc.)'; practically syn. vv. evir- and tevir-; as the latter, q.v., is not noted after xiv or this word before xı, it is possible that this is a Sec. f. of tevir-. Survives in NE Bar. tsü:r-; SW Az., Osm. çevir-, and perhaps SE "Türki (Sharm 101 only). Xak. xt er ok çevürdi: “the man turned (naqara) the arrow on his (thumb) nail” (nagara means “to turn as on a lathe"); also used of anything when you rotate it (datowartahu) on your left thumb nail; and one says ol çığrı:nı: çevürdi: adára'l-bakra "he turned the pulley” (etc) Kaş. 1] 82 (çevüre:r, çevürme:k), bu er ol telim ok cevürge:n "that man is constantly turning arrows, that is rotating them on his thumb nail' 7 522: xın(?) Tef. cevür- “to turn away (the face)” 357: xiv Muh. dára "to turn (Intrans.)' çe:wür- Mel. 26, 1; Rif. 108; al-dawràán çe:vvürmek (-mak in error) 37, 12; 123: Caf. xv ff. çövvür- (spelt) Caus. f.; gardünidan "to twist, turn (something) San. 221v. r9 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv çevür- ditto; also “to translate” Qutb 43; MN 335; Nahc. 412, 6-7: Kom. XIV "to tum” çövür- CCI; Gr.: Kip. xv dawwara mina”l-idüra şevvir- (mis-spelt sewir-) Kav. 77, 17. VUD çıbırt- Caus. f. of an Intrans. Den. V. fr. cip; survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. cibart-/cibert- SDD 255, 270; the -bcarries a kasra in all places, but a fatha, as in the modern verb, might have been expected. Xak. xı ol oğlun çıbırttı: daraba waladahu bi-qadib na'im "he beat his son with a supple rod” Kaş. III 430 (çıbırtu:r, çıbırtma:k). PUD çobart- Hap. leg., presumably Caus. f. of a Den. V., but the base, which can hardly be any word listed above, has not survived. Xak. xı oğrı: erig çobarttı: (misvocalized çobratti:) “the thief stole (salaba) the man's property, to the extent of stripping him naked" (hatta a'ráhu) (çobartu:r, cobartma:k); and one says çobartu: sı:di: “he robbed and stripped him” Kaş. III 429. D çevrül- Pass. f. of cevür-; survives in the same languages. Xak.xı çığrı: çevrüldi: “the pulley turned” (dárat); also used of anything when it revolves (fstadara) Kaş. ll 230 (çevrülü:r, çevrülme:k): KB 744 (evril-): Çağ, xv ff. céwrül- (spelt) gardidan "to turn, revolve” San. 221 v. 29 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv çevrül- ditto Qur 43; MN 49, etc.: Osm. xiv and xv çevril- “to turn back, return; to be roasted on a spit” in two texts 773 1 156; Il 225. D cevrüs- Co-op. f. of cevür-. Xak. xı ol menirp birle: ok çevrüşdi: "he competed with me in turning (f? fangir) arrows'; and also in turning anything that revolves (fi 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 443 
     
   
   
     | | | EE EE EE EE EE LEALLEEEICEEISEEESEEALSLESLCSEUIIESSS EE PEL LLL  TRIS. CBŞ . 399 idára kull şay” mudawwar) Kaş. II 208 (çevrügü:r, çevrüşme:k): Osm. xvi çevriş(of an ear) “to be twisted, crumpled' 77S I V 166. Tris. CBR D çava:rlığ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. çava:r. Xak. xı cava:rlığ yé:r “a place with kindling' (darm) Kaş. 1 495. Tris. V. CBRVUD çöpürlen- Refl. Den. V. fr. çöpür, survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. çöpürlen(of a tree) “to put out shoots! SDD 381. Xak. xı eçkü: cópürlendi: nabdta ga'ru'l-ma'z “the goat's hair grew' Kaş. // 266 (çöpürlenü:r, çöpürlenme:k). Dis. V. CBSD capsa:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of cap-. Xak. xı ol suvda: çapsa:dı: “he wished to swim (ya"üm) in the water' Kaş. II 284 (çapsa:r, çapsa:ma:k). Dis. CBŞ , çavuş originally the principal military officer of a xağan, "army commander', and the like, the military counterpart of bilğe:, As time went on the post gradually lost status; in the medieval period no standard translation is possible since the çavuş was at various times the principal escort of the sovereign, a member of the corps of royal sergeants-at-arms, and a police officer in government offices and provincial headquarters. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. where it now means '(military) sergeant; (civil) door-keeper or messenger in government offices and the like”, See Doerfer 111 1055. Türkü vrir bilge:si: çavuşı: erti: “he was his Counsellor and Army Commander' Ix. 17 (and see alp), a.o. T 7 (bilge:) (these passages are mistranscribed and mistranslated in the current editions): viii ff. Yen. Çavuş Tun Tarxan bepüzsi: tike: bertimiz 'we have erected a memorial stone to the Army Commander Tun Tarxan” Mal. 3o, 3 (there mistranscribed): Xak. xr çavuş aí/adi yusazowi'l-sufüf fi'l-harb wa yaz'u'l-cund 'ani'l-gulm “(the officer) who marshals the ranks in battle and restrains the army from (committing) atrocities! Kaş. 7 368: xiv Muh. (in a list of titles of office, etc.) sdwü; ça:vuş (mis-spelt ça:huş) Mel. 57, ış, Rif. 156: Çağ. xvf. çavvuş (spelt) (1) çübdür “mace-bearer” which is a word for the yasawul (mounted macebearer) and égik akası (door-keeper) (quotn.); (2) "a man who goes ahead of a caravan and acts as their guide (baladi) and announces the departure and the stop for the night”), in Ar. qü”id (quotns.) Sam. 209v. 22: Xwar. xiv çavvuş 'mace-bearer, herald” etc. Quib 42: Kip. xiv ça:vvuş (z-) huroa”lladi yaşih amdma"l-malih bi'l-ta'zim wa'l-ihtirám “(the officer) who goes before the king and calls for honour and respect! İd. 47. çepiş 'a kid more than half grown'. Survives in NC Kir. çebiç, Kzx. şıbış (sic); NW Kk. şıbış, SW Az. cepis; Osm. cepic; Tkm. çebiş. See Shcherbak 120. "Vhere is a syn. Pe. word çabişlçabuş and Shcherbak may be right in suggesting that this is an Iranian l.-w., since the Pe. word is cognate to Latin caper, Celtic kapero-s, while the word bas no obvious Turkish etymology. Xak. xr çepiş “a kid (min avladı”l-ma"z) when it has reached the age of six months” Kaş. 1 368: Kip. xırı “a kid (al-cady) one year old” ce:pic (-ö-) Hou. 15, 9: xiv çepiş (c-2-) rcaladu'l-mi'zà'l-cafr “a fully grown kid” fd, 41: Osm. xiv and xvi çepiş *kid' in two texts T TS 1 151; IV 162. çeviş “device, method of doing something'; syn. vv, 1 a:l and used only in the Hend. al çeviş. N.o.a.b. but cf. cevislig. Uyf. vi ff. Man. M Il 44, 4 (i) (1 a:l): Bud. Kuan. 98 etc. (1 a:l). VU 1 çavşa:p Hap. leg.; morphologically parallel to c1vga:r but with no known origin. Cigll xı çavşa:p (-/-) “the shears (al-migas;s) with which sheep are sheared” (yucazz) Kaş. IH 385. VU 2 çavşa:n n.o.a.b.; the Kip. word, there transcribed with front vowels for no stated reason, is obviously a later form of the same word with an extended meaning. Xak. xı çavşa:p (ç- unvocalized) al-a'mag 'blearyeyed” Kaş. III 385: Kap. xiv çavvçan (c- -c-) al-qubayşa "the small ovvi” (cf. ba:y) İd. 47; al-qubayşa ditto (vocalized çreyan) Bul. 12, 2. D çıvşa:n Hap. leg.; Dev. N./A. fr. civga:-. Xak. xr çıvşa:n (-f-) çağır al-'asiru'l-gàrig *sour wine! Kaş. 111 3585. Dis. V. CBSS çavşa:- See çaxşa:-. (D) çıvşa:- Hap. leg.; "to be, or become, sour; to ferment”, prima facie Den. V. fr. "çıvış. Spelt guvga:- in the MS., but the -1- is fixed by the der. £s. Xak. xı çağır çıvşazdı: (çu-) “the wine fermented (Zalá) and threw up a scum'; and one says karın çıvşa:dı: (gu-) “the food burnt (lada'a) the stomach and turned it sour' (hammada) Kaş. III 286 (çıvşa:r, ctvsa:ma:k; both gu-). D çıvşat- Caus. f. of çıvşa:-, Xak. xı er (MS. ol) çağır çıvşattı: (guv-) “the man fermented (hammada) the wine (etc.)'; and one says sirke: karın çıvşattı: “the vinegar made the stomach acid” (hammada), also used when it is poured on the ground and makes it acid (ağlat) Kaş. 11 336 (Çıvşatu:r, çıvşatma:k). Tris. CBŞ D çıvşa:ğun Dev. N./A. fr. çıvşa:-, 'sour, acid”. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. (in a poem about foods appropriate to the four seasons; in winter let them eat cold fatty sweet food) çıvşağun “as acid” Suv. sor, 21; Civ. (thirst is caused by) ağır çıvşa:ğun şor aştın *heavy, acid, salt (Pe. l.-w.) food” TT VIII 1.12; a.o. do. 19 (odğurak). 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 444 
     
   
   
      400 D çevişliğ Hap. leg.?; P.N./A. fr. çeviş. Uy£. viir ff. Civ. allığ cevislig 'resourceful (Hend.)' TT 7 26 (alta:-). Tris. V. CBSD çepişlen- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. çepiş. Xak. xı oğla:k çepişlendi: sara'l-cady min çunlat”l-cada" "the kid got into the category of half-grown kids, and was reckoned as such”: this is when it has reached the age of six months Kaş, JI 266 (cepislenü:r, çepişlenme:k). Mon. CC VU çe:) “an iron nail; as such Hap. leg., but there are several syn. modern words clearly derived. fr. it; NC Kir. çeğe, Kzx. sége; SC Uzb. çeğa, NW Kaz, Krim, Kumyk çüy, Kk. see; SW Osm. civi; 'T'km. çüy. 'lhese forms suggest that the vowel was originally -é-. As regards the final, strictly 'non-'l'urkish', -j this is more likely to be a Sec. sound than an indication of foreign origin. If so, it was prob. dissimilated fr. -c and the evolution may have been *eé:c — Qé] 7 çöv — çeğ/çüv 5 çüy. Xak. xt qé:] (with -]) ai-mismàr mina'l-hadid “an iron nail”, and “a rivet on a breastplate” (qaf?rı”/-dir') is called cé: Kaş. HI 123. Mon. V. CCVU cij- Hap. leg.; the -j- is prob. a Sec. sound, see cé]; the İnfin. here has -ma:k, that of the Caus. f. -me:k; it is not clear which is an error. As the word precedes Cöl- the vowel should perhaps be fat/ia, see cijtür-. Xak. xı yağırlığ at çıldı: (^with -3-”) “the galled horse lay down' (inxafada) when someone wished to mount it, fearing for its back; and any galled animal does the same when someone wishes to put a load on it Kag. 11 9 (çılar, cijma:k). €0j- as such Hap. leg.; at any rate in later times practically syn. w. SeS-, q.v., which makes it difficult to separate modern forms of the two words, but this one at any rate survives in SW. Az., Osm., "Tkm. çöz- “to untie, unravel'.. The -j- is no doubt a Sec. sound, perhaps dissimilated fr. -c-, cf. ç€:), in which case the original form may have been *có:c-. Xak. xı ura:ğut yıp cójdi: (^with -]-") “the woman pulled on (cadabat) the thread'; also used of anything that can be stretched (yumkin ttálatuhu) by pulling, like a cord or a sheep's entrails Kaş. I7 9 (çöle:r, cójme:k): Çağ. xv ff. çöz- az ham darburdan wa az ham wà hardan sva paráganda kardan “to take off, pull off, disperse” San. 212v. 27: Xvvar. xiv çöz“to loosen, untie' Qutb 44: Kom. xiv çöz- “to pull” CCG, Gr.: Kip. xiv çöz- (c-) naqada'l-ğazl “to untwist, untie a thread” /d. 43. Dis. CCA PU çiçe Hap. leg.; occurs only in the following passage, where its meaning and nature, perhaps a Ger. in -e:, are undiscoverable, Xak.   TRIS. CBŞ xı KB (the King asked, 'When is he coming? Where can 1 meet him?” Ögdülmiş replied) keçe yaruk dunya menzi tünerse çiçe "Late, when the bright colour of the world turns to night, . . .' 5018. Dis. V. CCDVUD cijtür- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of çı)- (sic), q.v. As this word precedes cójtür- thc vowel should perhaps be fatha. Xak. xi bu: yük atığ cijtürdi: “this load and its wcight made the horse's back collapse! (axfada zahra'l-faras), as a galled horse, etc. behaves when he is loaded and lies down Kaş. 71 18o (cijtürür, cijtürme:k, sic). D çöltür- Caus. f. of cój-, q.v.; survives in SW Osm., "Tkm. cózdür-. Xak. xı ol yip: cójtürdi: (with -j-) “he had the slack cord pulled out” (amadda); also used for pulling out the entrails of a sheep Kaş. II 180 (çöltürür only). Dis. CCG €ocuk 'sucking pig'; in this form survives only in SW Osm. çocuk “child”, but a Sec. f. çoçğa/çoçka and the like, 'sucking pig; pig (in general)”, which looks like a Mong. corruption of this word but is not in fact a l.-w. in Mong., appeared in the medieval period and s.i.a.m.l.g. (in SW only xx Anat.). O. Kir. ix ff. Cocuk bóri: sapu:n, if correctly read in Mal. 12, 1, must be a P.N.: Xak. xı çoçuk al-xannüş (sic) 'sucking pig” Kaş. 1 381: Çağ. xv ff. cocğa (so spelt) baya-f xük 'sucking pig' San. zi2r. 12: Kip. xit al-xanniüis çoçka: Hou. 11, 13. : Dis. CCG çeçek 'flower', hence metaph. 'a skin eruption”, esp. 'smallpox'. An early l.-w. in Mong. as gegeg. S.i.a.m.l.g. usual as çeçek, occasionally çeçek, SW Az., Osm. çiçek, See Doerfer YII 1073... Uy&amp;. vini ff. Bud. çeçek is used as the equivalent of Sanskrit Puspa; Chinese /ria (Giles 5,002) 'flower', sometimes by itself TT V zo, r, Suv. 137, 18; 173, 5 etc. and sometimes in the Sino-Turkish Hend. xwa cecek U JI] 46, 11; TT V ro, 104-7; Suv. 183, 14 etc.: Civ. Kir Çeçek “Desert Flower', P.N. USp. 54, 3: Xak. xi çeçek al-nür (sic) wwa'l-zahr lover, blossom'; çeçek (mis-spelt cekek, cim maftüha read as kàf) al-hasba 'scarlet fever' in Çiğil Kaş. I 388; I 437, 4 etc. (ükül-) and 6 o.o.: KB usually çö:çe:k in the Fergana, çeçe:k in the Cairo, and çeçek in the Vienna MS., is common, 70, 79 (oyna:-), 829, etc.: xıı(?) Tef. çeçek ditto 358: xiv Muh. al-ward "rose" çö:çe:k Mel. 78, s, çeçe:k (c-c-) Rif. 182: Çağ. xv ff. €écek (so spelt) (r) şigüfa 'flower'; (2) metaph. abıla “small-pox”, in Ar. cadari San. 2161. 11 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv çeçek 'flower', and specifically “rose” Qufb 43; MN 87, etc.: Kom. xiv. “floveer” çiçek CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xii al-zahr çeçe:k (c-c-, unvoculized) How. 7, iz: xiv Cécek (c-c-) ditto İd. 42: xv al-azhár  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 445 
     
   
   
     MON. CD Ségek (sic) Kom, s, 6; zahr çeçek Tuh. 18a. 9; 35a. 6. (D) cecée: Hap. leg. Xak. xi cecge: Auffu'l-nassác "a wcavet's reed' Kaş. 1 429. Tris. CCG D qéceklig P.N./A. fr. çeçek, “flovvery, covered with flowers'. S.i.s.m.l., sometimes with metaph. meanings like 'pock-marked'. Uy. vir ff. Bud. xvvalığ ceceklig yer “a place covered with flowers (Hend.)' U 777 56, 4 (i); a.o. TT V 12, 123 (Oleplig): (Xak.) xin(?) Tef. çeçeklig "flowery" (garden) 358. D céceklik A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. çeçek, 'flower garden'. S.iss.m.]l. Uyf. virrff. Civ. US. 15, 5-6 (altın): Xak. xr çeçeklik “the name of the place where flowers (a/-zahr) grow' Kaş. I şo8: KB (the nightingale sings a thousand songs) çeçeklikte 78: a.o. 5972. Tris. V. CCGD ç€çeklen- Refl. Den. V. fr. çeçek, (of a bush etc.) “to flower'. S.i.s.m.]. Uyğ. vii ff. Civ. TT VIII P.24 (erük, spelt ce:ce:kle:nür): Xak. xi yığa:ç céceklendi: (sic) “the trec (etc.) flowered' (tawarrada) Kaş. Il 266 (çeçeklenü:r (sic); çeçeklenme:k, unvocalized): xın(?) Tef. çeçeklen- ditto 358: Kom. xiv "to flover' ciceklen- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xv “to flower' (azara), that is to have flowers şişeklen- (sic) Kav. 59, 8. Dis. V. CCLD çöğ)ül- Pass. f. of çöl- ; survives in SW Osm., "Tkm. çözül- “to be untied, disentangled', etc. Xak. xi yip çölüldi: (*with -)-”) “the slack cord was pulled out” (or stretched, £mtadda) ; çölüldi: is also used of glutinous substances like thick syrup and chewing-gum (al/-rubb toa”l- ilk) when they are pulled out Kaş. 17 132 (çöyülür, cójülme:k): Çağ. xvff. cózül(spelt) az ham wá sudan sva paráganda şudan *to be pulled off, dispersed' San. 213r. 6. Tris. CCL €ica:lak “the little finger'; a specific name for this finger is lacking in some languages, e.g. in Uyğ. it is called kiçiğ erpek; but this word survives in NE Alt. çıçalık R III 2094; Kuz., Sag. çumçalçak do. 2188; Khak. çımalçıx Bas. 326; Kiz. Simalcax do. 329; SE Türki çımçılak/çimçilak Shaw 104, Jarring 70: NC Kir. çıpalak/çıpanak: Kzx. şınaşax, SC Uzb. gcimcgalok/Jimjiilok; NW Kk. şunatak, Kumyk çınaçay, Nog. şınatay, Tat. çençe: SW Az. cecele; (Osm. serce parmak 'sparrow finger', perhaps a corruption of this word, based on false etymology; Tkm. külembike not related). It is difficult to explain some of these forms without assuming an original *cimega:lak, but the word is obviously related to çıça:muk, q.v. Although -lak and -muk are possible Turkish suffixes the words give rather the impression of L-w.s fr. some other language, possibly 401 monosyllabic, but not Chinese, where although 'finger' is chih (Giles 1,791) any words like "ittle' qualifying it would necessarily precede and not follow it. Xak. xı ctca:lak al-xinsir “the little finger' Kaş. 1 487: xiv Muh. al-xingir çı:çala: Mel. 47, rı, çıçalak (c-c-) Rif. 141: Çağ. xvff. çıncanak (so spelt) anguşt-i kügak “the little finger', in Ar. xingir San. 221r. 21: Kip. xi al-xinşir çızçala:k Hou. zo, 16: xiv (Tkm.) cece: (c-c-) al-xingir, in Kip. çıçalak (c-c-, vocalized çıç/ak) İd. 42: xv al-xinşir şuluk (sic) barmak Kav. 61, 4. Tris. CCM €1ca:muk “the ring finger'; n.o.a.b., the normal phr. for this finger is atsız barmak (see atsız). Cf. çıça:lak, Uyğ. vir ff. Bud, (in order to make the »mudrà called 'fastening the vajra') uluğ epreklerin suk epreklerin çıçamuk epreklerin kavşurup tike ückil kilu “ioin the thumbs, index fingers, and ring fingers, hold them upright, and make a triangle TT V, p. 16, note Aşq, 8: Xak. xı çıça:muk a/-birşir “the ring finger', wa hadd galla mà yu'raf, this word is little known Kaş. I 485. Dis. CCR SF ça:çır See 1 ça:tır. Mon. CD 1 çat onomatopoeic, normalİy for the sound of a blow; cf. çap. S.i.m.m.l. in such forms as çat, cet, cit, cit which are used either singly, reduplicated, or in combinations. Xak. x1 cat çat hikáya "an waq' “an onomatopoeic for (the sound of) a blow'; hence one says çat çat urdı: “he beat him noisily” (mugageteata(n)) Kaş. I 320. F 2 ça:t Hap. leg.; “a well'; l.-w. fr. Sogdian €” t, same meaning. Cf. kuduğ. Oğuzxı ça:t al-bi'r “a well Kaş. III 146. €1t originally prob in a physical sense “a fence'. The vowel was original -1-, but, as frequently happens, later became -1-.. S.i.a.m.Lg., usually as çit or cet used either for physical objects “hedge (e.g. of thorn bushes), wattle fence, hurdle', etc. or for 'boundary, edge (e.g. of a river, a blanket, etc.)', and the like. See Doerfer 111 1152. UyÉ. vir (I had my throne set up (étit-) there) çıt anta: tokrtdim “1 had a stockade driven into the ground' (I spent the summer there, 1 established the frontier (yaka:) there) Su. E 8; fgapitsiz başı: citimin yayladım “1 spent the summer at my stockade at İ ]tsiz Bagi:' do. S 2: Xak. xı çıt al-xugg mina'l-qagab | asoi'l-gavok. “an enclosure (?, normally 'hut) of reeds or thorns” Kaş. I 320: Çağ. xv ff. cet (sic "vvith €-") kanár "edge, boundary', and the like; the 'Turks of Kaşğar pronounce it çit San. 20sr. 3; çit (^with ç-”) in the language of Kaşğar, kanár do. 216r. s: Kip. xiv cet (c- so vocalized) al-darz "a seam! İd. qı: Osm. xvur çit... and in Rümi, "an enclosure or fence (/isár sea há'it) made of sticks and reeds' San. 216r. 5.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 446 
     
   
   
     402 F cl:t *flowered silk” and the like; a l.-w. prob. ultimately der. fr. Sanskrit citra 'variegated (fabric etc.)', perhaps through some Iranian language, cf. Pe. git, which usually means *chintz' (a corruption of the same word) or similar cotton fabrics. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE as cit/sit but some of these words may be direct borrowings fr. Pe. See Doerfer I11 1153. Cf. barçın etc. Xak. xı çi:t ism dibác gini lahu teagy manqüş “a word for Chinese silk brocade with an embroidered ornamentation' Kag. III 120. Mon. V. CDçat- basically "to bring together, join (something Aec., to something else Dat.), with various special applications. Survives as çatin SE Türki, SC Uzb.; SW Az., Osm., ''km.; the Çağ. Sec. f. survives in NC Kır. çıtı-, Kzx. şıt- “to knit (the brows), frown'. (Xak.) xın(?). At. 20s (“to frown', alın): Çağ. Xv ff. çat- (spelt) “to join together (ba-ham paywastan), to fasten (bastan) two things to one another, to bring together' (sar ba-ham dteardan) San. 204v. 15 (quotns.)—çıt- (spelt) rü turuş kardan wa inqıbdd-i wach "to make a sour face, to frown', the verb does not convey this meaning if used by itself, the noun “face” must be mentioned do. 215v. 18 (quotn.): Oğuz xı er oğla:k kuzrka: çattı: "the man put (qarana) the kid in with the lamb (etc.)” Kaş. II 294 (cata:r, çatma:k, verse): Xwar. XIV çat- “to join, add”, kaşın çat- “to frown' Qutb 41: Kip. xiv çat- (c-) cama"a bayna'l-darzayn "to join two edges in a seam'; and one says ka:ş çat- 'abasa ay cama"a”l-hücibayn "to frown, that is knit the brows' İd, 41: Osm. XVI ff. çat- “to fasten', etc. in several texts TTS I 149; II 214; IV 158. Dis. CDA VU?F çatu: Hap. leg.; this is the original form of the word in the MS.; the svá:w was turned into a qöf by a second hand, and it has so far been indexed as çatuk, cf. botu:. Morphologicall it could be a Dev. N. fr. çat-, but as this would be semantically suitable only for the Sec. meaning 'knife-handle' it is prob. a Chinese l.-w.; the second syllable looks like t'ou (Giles 11,441) often used as a suffix to form Conc. N.s. Xak. xr catu: "the horn of a sca creature (qarı samak bahri) imported from China”, it is also said that it is the root of a tree ('irg sacara); knife handles are made from it, and poison in food detected by it; broth or other food is stirred with it in a bowl, and the food (if poisonous) boils without (being put on) a fire; or this bone is put on the bowl and sweats without there bcing any steam Kaş. III 218. Tris. CDB E çatı:ba: Hap. leg.; this word occurs in a list of disyllabic words of which the order is determined by (1) the last consonant, (2) the first, and (3) the second and comes between kirpi: and VU kenbe: "The -ba:/-be: is MON. CD certainly correct, the other letters all errors. 'T'he initial must be k- (Ràf misrcad as cim maftüha, cf. çeheh for çeçek where the opposite error occurs); the second consonant lies between rd” and mür, and as there is a superfluous 'tooth' in the word was prob. -s-. Kes-, q.v., Sometimes means “to levy, or assess, taxes'; -be: is not a Turkish Sutf. but *kesbe: might be a Sec. f. of kesme:, which does not occur in the meaning given, but etymologically could. Cigil xr çatı:ba: (?*kesbe:) “the word for a fine (zahn) which the headman of a village ("azifu”/-qarya) collects from anyone who does not turn out to dig a canal or the head-works of a subsidiary channel” (al-nahr va ra'sUl-girb) Kaş. I 416. Dis. CDG D 1 çatuk (?catok) Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. €at-; 'joined to something else”, with various extended meanings. S.i.a.m.l.g., except NE, in forms of which the commonest is catak and others çatık, çıtak, citik, cituk and a wide range of meanings. Uy£. vii ff. Civ. ötrü ol lesp ça:tık titiğ teg kuriyur “then that mucus dries like clinging mud” TT VIII 1.7: Çağ. xv ff. çıtuk (spelt) saxs-i munqabid turş-rü “a frowning sour-faced individual" San. 216r. 6 (quotn.): Kip. xiv gatuk (c-) kaslu: magrünu'l-hácibayn with knitted eyebrows' İd. 41. E 2 çatuk See catu:, Dis. CDG ?F çetük '(feinale) cat”, "The various 'T'urkish words for 'cat' are collected in SöcierbaR, P. 129. Some of them, e.g. maçı:, VU mö:ş, and mişkiç, are demonstrably 1.-w.s, and it is likely that the rest, including this one, which has no obvious etymology, are also l.-w.s. "The 'Turks prob. did not meet cats early enough to have their own word for them. (Xak.?) xiv. Aluh. al-sinnür “cat” çetük Mel. 72, 6; çe:tük | Rif. 174: Oğuz xi çetük al-hirra 'female cat", (VU) küwük (unvocalized) çetük a/-daywan "tom cat” Kaş. 7 388; a.o. IIT 127 (mó:s): Xwar. xiv çetük '(femalc) cat” Qutb 42: Kip. xir al-qift "tom cat” (ma:çı:, also called) çe:tük Fou. ır, ır: xiv. çetük (c-) al-qitt İd. 42; Bul. 10, 10: xv al-qitt setük (sic) Kav. 62, 3; sinnür (maçı and) çetük Tuh. 19a. 11: Osm. xiv ff. çetük, occasionally çetik, “cat”: common till xvt, occasionally later T T.S 7 155; 11 222; Hİ 147; IV 165: xvii çetik (spelt) in Rümi, gurba 'cat', in Ar. hirra and sinnür San. 205r. 14. ?E çetke:n Hap. leg.; the ordinary word for *bridle rein” is tiz&amp;in, which occurs twice in Kaş. but not as a main entry; if it had been a main entry it would have come between terkin and Taşken (place-name) two places before this word. It is possible that the text is in disorder and that tizgin has dropped out and its translation been attached to this word, which may originally have been given another meaning or perhaps merely inserted in the  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 447 
     
   
   
      MON. CĞ text to match the translation. Xak. xi cetke:n 'inánu'l-licám 'bridle rein! Kaş. I 443. Dis. V. CDLD çatla:- See çatı:la:-. Tris. V. CDLD çatı:la:- elongated Den. V. (cf. toki:la:-) fr. cat; 'to make a cracking sound', and by extension 'to break with such a sound' or more generally "to split, break” (Intrans.). The more regular form çatla:- is noted in the medieval period and survivfs in SW Osm., "Tkm., and with phonetic changes in such words as NW Kk. satna-. See şekirtük. Xak. xı berge: çatı:la:dı: “the whip cracked' (sáta); also used for any similar sound Kaş. JII 323 (çatı:la:ma:k only): Caf. xv ff. çatla- ə ç-”) tarkidan “to crack, burst San. 2057. : Kip. xiv catla-. sazewata bi-farqa"a “to make a cracking sound” İ4. 42. Dis. CDN ça:dan 'scorpion'. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE with some phonetic changes usually as çayan/ çıyan, in SW Tkm. icyan (sic) and SW xx Anat. çayan still mean 'scorpion' but in Osm. çıyan now means 'centipede' and the Ar. l.-w. 'agrab is used for 'scorpion'. Xak. xı ca:dan al-"aqrab Kaş. I 409; a.o. 111 367, 8: KB çadan "the constellation Scorpio' 140, 4889: xiv Rig. ditto (in the quotn. fr. KB) R III 1903; Muh. al-'agrab caya:n. Mel. 74, 3; Rif. 177; ditto as a sign of the zodiac 79, 5; 183: Çağ. xv ff. çayan 'Scorpio' Vel. 237; çayan (spelt) 'scorpion; the sign of the zodiac Scorpio' (quotn.); also spelt çıyan San. 210v. 14 (quotn.); çıyan ditto do. 222r. 13 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv çayan “scorpion” Quib 40: Kip. xı al-'aqrab (bó:y) also called çaya:n (unvocalized) za huwa umm arba'a wa arba'in "the latter also means "“centipede” ” Hou. 11, 17; Xv 'agrab çıyan (later vocalized cayan) Tuh. 258. 12: Osm. xv in the phr. in one text yüanlar ve 'aqrablar ve çayanlar presumably “centipede” T TS 17 225: xvur çayan ...And in Rmi "the animal called in Pe. hazar bd or şad bd centipede' San. 210v. 14 (quotn.). ço:dın s.i.a.m.l.g. with a bewildering variety of spellings—front and back vowels; -y-/-8-/ 8-İ- -Y&amp;-|-Y&amp;—from one of which came the ie chugun in Russian. This and all the modern words mean 'cast iron' or the like. "This is, however, likely not to have been the original meaning; al-gifr normally means *copper' (which is not in point here, since *copper' was bakir) or 'brass', and the latter, or rather “bronze”, is the likeliest material for a cooking pot in xt. See Doerfer III 1149. Xak. xı ço:dın al-qrtr 'bronze'(?); hence one says ço:dın eşiç qrdr min qifr "a bronze(?) cooking pot' Kaş. I 409: Çağ. xv ff. çoyın (spelt) corruption (mulharraf) of çodin (almost the only mention of -d- in San.) that is dan-i nö buxta 'unsmelted (sic) iron' . 403 San. 215v. ir: Kom. xiv çoyun “bronze” CCG, Gr. Dis. CDR F 1 ca:tir l.-w, ultimately derived fr. Sanskrit chattra “a (royal) umbrella'; this meaning, for which çovva:ç, q.v., is an alternative, has survived sporadically but the usual meaning is “a (canvas) tent”. The channel through which the word reached Turkish with this change of meaning is uncertain, prob. some Iranian language. A 1.-vv. in Russian as shater (shatyor). S.i.a.m.l.g. with some phonetic changes (ç-/ -, -t-/-d-), in some perhaps direct borrowings fr. Pe. or Russian. See Doerfer III 1042. Uyğ. xiv. Chin.-Uyg. Dict. 'sunshade' kün çatırı R ITİ 1903; chang fang “tent” (Giles 409 3,440) çatır Ligeti 150: Xak. xı ça:ztır al-xayma “a (canvas) tent”, ça:çır al-xayma Kaş. I 406: xii(?) Tef. çadır ditto 355: xiv Muh. al-xayma ça:dar (sic) Mel. 76, 11; ça:tır Rif. 180: Çağ. xvff. çadır “a tent (xayma) made of canvas” (kirbás) ; and one made of sticks and felt is called ak öy or alaçuk San. 205r. 19: Oğuz xı (after ça:çır) and the Oğuz call it ça:şır Kaş. I 406: Xwar. xiv çadır “tent” Qutb qo: Kom. xiv “tent” çatır CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiv çatır (c-) al-zalála *sunshade' İd. 42: xv izar "a woman's cloak” çatır Tuh. 4b. 12: Osm. xiv çadır dut- “to pitch a tent” TTs II 198 (and some xvih phr.). F 2 ça:tır (?ça:dır) “sal ammoniac, alkali", and the like. No doubt a l.-w. fr. some Iranian language, cf. Pe. nişddur, same meaning. Survives in SVV Osm. çadır uşağı “güm ammoniac” and xx Anat. çıtır/çotur “alkali” etc. SDD 343, 374. Uy. viu ff. Bud. in an unpublished translation of a Chinese sütra the phr. Jut ho (Giles 5,155 3,936) 'ash river” (in hell) is translated çadar (or çatar?) öğüz TT Index 18, footnote (also çadırlığ öğüz), a.0. TT IV, p. 15, footnote l. 4: Civ. cadir "sal ammoniac' as an ingredient H 7I 18, 33: Kuga: xi ça:tır a/-nüşddir (sic) “sal ammoniac” Kaş. I 4o6 (Tokharian vvas probably extinct in Kuga: by xı, perhaps an Iranian dialect). çotur s.i.s.m.l. in most groups meaning 'pockmarked; flat-nosed; stocky ; müla and the like. Xak. xı “a man of bad character” 0700000 is called çotur kişi: Kaş. 1 363. Tris. CDR DF çatırlığ P.N./A. fr. 2 ga:tir; n.o.a.b. Uy. virff. Bud. (the sinners)) çatarlığ ögüzde tüserler “fall into the river of ashes' TM IV 253, 49 (Uy&amp;-A form); a.o. see 2 ça:tır.. Mon. CG ça:ğ/l çak onomatopoeics, cf. çap, cat, çı:k, etc. 'lhese and similar onomatopoeics, often reduplicated, s.i,s.m.l. Note that çağ "time, a point in time, a period of time” which occurs in USp. 22; Og. 18-19, etc.; Vel. 232; San. 207v. 15 and later authorities is a Mong. l.-w.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 448 
     
   
   
     404 MON. c6 (Haenisch 25, Koto, 2105) which is not found in Turkish before the Mong. period, when it displaced ó:d, q.v., in most languages. Xak. xt ça:ğ ço:ğ kopti: hácati'l-galaba sca”l-calab “a hubbub (Hend.) arose”, and one says cof: koptı: “a hubbub arose” Kaş. JJ] 128: çak çok an onomatopoeic (/iikáya) for (the sound of) breaking (kasr) something, for example breaking fire-wood, bone, nuts, and the like; hence one says çak çok etti:, çak another onomatopocic for a sound (kdya şart ayda(n)), one says ol anı: urdt: çak etmedi: “he beat him, but he did not bear a grudge or cry out” (md ta'allama tva mü saha) Kaş. I 333: Osm. xv and xvr çağ çağ an onomatopoeic for the sound of running water in several texts TTS H 200; İİİ 134; İV 151 (this is one of several similar onomatopoeics, most are longer, e.g. çağıl çağıl). 2 çak originally an Adv. meaning 'exactly, precisely'; in this sense it may be merely an extended meaning of 1 çak, cf. English colloquial “bang in the middle' for çak ortasinda; see Deny, Grammaire de la langue turque, Paris, 1920, p. 634, note 1 which discusses this word but contains some errors. Later it seems to have become an Adj. meaning *precisely right” (English colloquial “bang on”), and even a Noun meaning “vigour” and the like. It survives as an Adv. in SE Türki çağ BS 235; NC Kir. çak, Kzx. şak, NW Kk, Nog. Sak; SW Osm. çağ/çak, Tkm. ça:ğ, and in its extended meanings in some of these languages and some NE R III 1831; IV 191, 93o. Xak.|xr çak harf yu'abbar bihi "an 'aynil-gay! wa nafsihi “an indeclinable referring to one particular thing and no other'; hence one says çak ol atnı: tut£il “take that particular (bi-'aynihi) horse'; and one says çak amaçnı: urğil "hit that particular (hi-'aynihi) target! Kaş, 1 333: Çağ. xv ff. çağ ("time', i.e. the Mong. l.-w.) and also they use it of exposing to heat and putting back into shape (yerine getürmege) a bow which has lost its curve Vel. 232 (quotn. in which çağ éte dür means “he recurves” (the straightened eyebrows)); çağ (with ç-”) (1) 'time'); (2) sahil sea. durust 'perfect, sound” San. 206v. 9 (same quotn.); çak syn. w. çağ . . . dürüst do. 207v. 15; P. de C. 276 quotes fr. Bübur bir yérni cag krlıp atmaydurlar “they do not shoot at any particular place”: Xvvar. xıv çak (and der. f.s) occur in several phr. in which it means something like “the right amount' e.g. uyatsızlıknı aşurdiı çakındın “he was excessively immodest', öz çakıp bil 'know how far you can go” Qutb ao: Kom. xiv “his strength' çağı CCG, Gr.: Kip. xiv lammá “vhen” -ta:/-te: and also çak, these come only at the end of a word e.g. “vhen he came” kelmiste:, *when he spoke” ayla:dı: (sic, ?read sóyle:di:) çak, when he sat downp' oturdi: çak Bul. 15, 13: Xv the word (lafza) corresponding to lammd is Sak; you say for “İT arrived as the bey stood up” bi: şak turdı: men yetiştüm meaning that my arrival was not a minute later than his standing up . . .; some of them do not use this word şak but use instead the verb with the Suff. -ğa:ş/-ge:ş/-ka:ş Kav. 21, 10: Osm. xiv ff. çağ/çak/çax 'exactly, precisely' before the word qualified; c.i.a.p. TTS I 141; İl 201; İH 136; İV 151; in one xvI dict. (771) Pe. zeif 'pure, unadulterated" is translated çak (as well as the Ar. l.-w.s şafi, xaliş, girf). 1 çı:ğ usually translated 'reed', which is the most convenient word, but prob. used indiscriminately for several kinds of stiff steppe grasses which, botanically speaking, are grasses and not reeds. Şarring 70 translates it "a grass or rced, Arundinella nebalensis, used for making baskets and mats'.. It was also used fr. an early period for artifacts made fr. such grasses, 'reed-curtain' and the like, S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE with some phonetic changes (C-/S-; -1-[-i-; -ğ/-y). Became a l.-w. in Russian as chit and in Pc. as (iq (Steingass 396) fr. which it passed into Hindustani, ZImglice "'chick', a reed curtain. Sec Doerfer HI 1155... Uy. viii ff. Bud. (in a list of offerings) bir çığ iki xwa 'one reed and two flowers! T'T VII 24, 10: Xak. xi çıığ “a plaited curtain! (girdim) made as a shelter (sutra) for tent dwellers out of southernwood, Aözotanum (qaysşüm), this is a plant thinner and suppler than a reed (ai-qaşab) Kaş. III 128: Çağ. xv ft. çığ ("with ç-”) "a mat” (Faşira) woven out of reeds (Ramış) and thread which they put on tent walls Vel. 245 (quotns.) ; çığ (with ç-”) "a screen” (Adi) in the shape of a curtain (barda) made of reeds (nay) and. thin sticks which is hung over the door of a house or tent San. 218v. 18 (quotns.). F 2 €r£ “a Chinese foot', about 35 cm.; l.-w. fr. Chinese ch'rh (Giles 1,992; Middle Chinese (Pulleyblank) cyeR). | N.o.a.b., but SE Türki çi "a Chinese foot! BS 254 is a L-w. fr. the modern form of the same word. UyÉ. viri ff. Bud. (in a list of forms of fraud) çığın tsunin “in (measurements of) feet and inches" U 77 77, 25; 86, 42; Suv. 135, 8; tört çığ 'four feet' (prescribed as the length and breadth of a picture) do. 544, 5: Xak. xt çı:ğ the word for “the 'l'urkish cubit' (gird" türki), it is about two-thirds of the (ordinary) cubit; cotton cloth is measured (yudra') by it among the nomads Kag. III 128. S 3 çığ See çiğ. (S) çek hardly more than a Sec. f. of 1 and 2 çak, Itsurvives as an onomatopoeic in some NE languages and NC Kir. and as an Adv. meaning 'exactly, completely' in some NE, SE, and NC languages and SW xx Anat. The Exclamation çık used to drive away dogs noted in San. 219v. s and İd. 44 is no doubt the Imperat. of c1k- and not this word. Xak. XI one says to a man when one is frightening him çı:k et köreyin şil bi-satet xafi hattd ara caladatah fihi “call out in a subdued voice so that 1 can see hovv determined you are about it Kaş. HI 130: Osm. xiv and xv çik “exactly" in two texts. T T'S 7157; IV 168.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 449 
     
   
   
        MON. V. CGçoğ, etc. Preliminary note. 7/rose words of this general form which can be specifically identified are listed below. There may be in Uyg. other Chinese 1.-to.s tohich have not yet been identified, e.g. in USp. o PU çok loohs like the name of some hind of tax. : ço:ğ originally 'glowing heat, flame'; hence metaph. 'splendour, glory'. S.i.m.m.l.g. with phonetic changes (c-/S-; -ğ/-k, etc.). Cf. yalın. See Doerfer İİ 1138. Uy. vil ff. Man. (you shine) çıxşapatlığ tduk cof yalın üze 'with the holy splendour and glory of the commandments! TT LX 18-19: Bud. (then those demons when they saw King Caştana”s might) çoğın yalının kutin kivin: "his splendour (Hend.) and the divine favour (Hend.) which he enjoyed' U IV ro, 51; Sanskrit £reyo “the best” cob yalınığ TT VIII D.17;a.o. U III 71, 12; cof yalınlığ 'flaming' USb. 46, 2: Civ. kün cogi "the heat of the sun” TT VIII I.23: Xak. x1 ço:ğ sagru'l-gams wa lu'übuhà (read Iuhàbuha) “the scorching heat of the sun and its blaze'; hence one says kü:n ço:ğı lu'abu (Inhábuyl-gams; ço:ğ lahabu'l-nàár “the blaze of a fire”, after the wood has become red hot Kaş. III 128: KB (God sends one enemy against another) kesti çoğı "and cuts off their heat' 144; (if he has subjugated the enemy and) kiterse çoğı “taken the heat out of him” 1926; a.o. 318: Çağ. xv ff. cof (c-) kor . . . axgar ma"nasina "a red-hot ember” Vel. 250 (quotn.); cog (^with ç-”) axgar San. 213r. 22 (same quotn.): Osm. xiv çok 'glow' in one text T'T.S II 240. 1 çu:ğ 'bundle' and the like; the difference betwcen this and 1 ba:ğ is obscure, perhaps this meant primarily the actual bundle and ba:ğ the cords, etc. with which it is tied. Survives in NE Leb. çuğ "wrapping, shroud” R III 2169; Tel. cu: 2164; Sor su IV 1095 and SW xx Anat. çuğ “a shcaf of corn' SDD 386. Uyf. vin ff. Bud, Suv. 165, 20-1 (1 ba:ğ): Xak. xı çu:ğ (bi'l-gamma, "with -u-, not -o-”) "aybatı”l-mita" “a bag for merchandise” Kaş. İlI 128: KB 5549 (öruş): xii(?) Tef. bu çuk (s/c) batman altun “this sack of gold” 360 (gok): Xwar. xiv eyeri bağı çuğı barça altun “his saddle, cords, and packages were all gold'(?) Qutb 44: Kom. xiv çov CCG, 114, 27r.; Gr. transcribes the German as eyn galeme "a noise', but the facsimile shows eyn galadeine ?'a bundle. ' PUF 2 çuğ no doubt, as suggested in the note mentioned below, l.-w. fr. Chinese cho 'muddy, clouded' (Giles 2,409; Middle Chinese (Pulleyblank) cek). Uy&amp;. vir ff. Bud. (just as the water-clarifying jewel called udakaprasada) çuğ suvuklik süzgeli umusi “can clarify muddy liquids'; (so also faith) kértgüncsüz töz üze bulğanmış cuj bolmış kópülüg süzer 'clarifies the mind which has become confused and clouded by reason of faithlessness” T'T V 26, 100-2 (and see note thereon); çuuğ (sic) suvığ “muddy water! Suv. 74, 22 (sergür-). 495 VU ço:k Hap. leg.; may survive as çak “bad, useless! in NW Kaz. R III 1831, but obviously not connected with the Adj./Adv. çok “many, much”, which first occurs in Xwar. Oğ. 227, is noted in Çağ. San. 212r. 17; 214r. 1; Kip. İd. 44, 78 (köp): Kav. 24, 14; and Osm. fr. xiv onwards T'T'S II 238-9; III 156; IV 177 and survives in NE Sag. R III 2004; SE "Türki, some NW languages, and SW Az., Osm. Ofuz xi ço:k er al-raculu'l-nadl "a vile, cowardly man” Kaş. III 130. Mon. V. CĞçak- like 1 çak of an onomatopoeic character and used to describe action of a violent character, physical or mental, e.g. 'to strike fire (with a flint and steel); (of a snake or scorpion) to bite, sting; to slander, decry, betray. S.ia.m.lg. with a wide range of meanings, e.g. for SW Osm. Red. 707 distinguishes ten meanings. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. U İl 10, 23-4 (1 ür-): Xak. xı ol ikki: kişi: ara: çakdı: “he made mischief (ağrd) between the tvvo men”, and one says ol çakma:k çakdı: qadaha”l-zand "he struck the steel (on the flint Kaş. II 17 (çaka:r, çakma:k), o.o. II 23, 18 (tutun-): III 26, z: xiv Muh.(?) al-si"aya "to slander, decry” çakmak Rif. 120 (only): Çağ. xv ff. cak-(-t1) Zamz et-, kol- "to calumniate, seek out(?)” Vel. 234 (quotns.); çak- (with €-") (1) gazidan "to bite or sting', of a snake, scorpion, and the like; (2) bad-gi'i sua si'àyat kardan 'to abuse, slander'; (3) fulad dtaş xana “of a steel to strike fire”, in Ar. gadàha; (4) qadh-i qadaha ya'ni çakmak zadan "to strike a strike-a-light” (quotn.); (s) duruxşidan "to shine, flash” of fire, or lightning, in Ar. ramid, találu', and lama'án San. 206v. 26 (quotns.): Oğuz xı ol só:züg anın kula:kka çakdı: “he drummed (ballaga) the words into his ear Kaş. II 17: Xvvar. xin(?) (if anyone disobeys me, I take him as an enemy) çımad çakıp çeriğ çekip “hcaping reproaches (Mong. l.-w.) on him and leading out an army” Oğ. 112-15: Kom. xiv “to calumniate, accuse' çak-/çax- CCI; Gr.: Kip. xii qadaha ('l-zand), and also şaka ğayrahu "to complain of someone” to a minister çak- Hou. 37, 9: XIV çak- gamaza “to calumniate' Id. 44: xv tgtaká “to complain of” şak- (sic) Kav. 9, 12; 74, 9: Osm. xiv to xvi çak- “to calumniate; to betray (a secret /icc.,, to someone Dat); kulağa çak- (cf. Oğuz xı) TT'S T 143; 11 203. çığ- "to tie up (a parcel etc.) ; in Kaş. syn. vv. ba:-. Cf. çiğ-. N.o.a.b. but the Dev. N. çığı/çıkı “a parcel' occurs in SW xx Anat. SDD 332,334. Xak. xi ol türgek çığdı: "he tied up (şadda) the parcel (etc.)” Kaş. II 14 ” (çığa:r, çığma:k), a.o. 7 210, 23: Kip. xiv çık- (c-) sarra şay” fi şay "to wrap something in something else” Id. 44. 1 cik- “to go out; to come out”. S.i.a.m.l.g. with a side range of extended meanings esp. in SW. It is no doubt fortuitous that neither çık- nor çıkar- are noted before xi. The theory propounded in Og., p. 27, note 27 that  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 450 
     
   
   
     406 that is a crasis of tasik- is quite unconvincing. Xak. xı er evdin çıkdı: “the man. went out (xaraca) of the house (etc.)” Kaş. 11 17 (prov.; no Aor. or Infin.); 77 116 (taşık-) and about a dozen o.o.: KB €1k- “to go out, come out” is common $87, 213, 394, 951, etc.: xin(?) Tef. çık- ditto 358: xiv Muh. xaraca çıkMel. 25, 13; Rif. 108; al-tuli' (of the sun, etc.) to rise' cikmak Mel. 35, 1; Rif. 120: Çağ. xv fF. çık-(-ku, ctc.) çık- Vel. 241; çık- (with €-") bar ámadan "to come out, rise! San. 218v. 29 (quotns.): Xwar. xim) çık- "to go out "Ali 26: xii(?) avka çıkti "he went hunting" Oğ. 27; 0.0. rat, 196; xiv çik- ditto MN 88: Kom. xiv ditto çık/çıx- CCI, CCG; Gr. 59 (quotns.): Kip. xttt xaraca çık- Hou. 33, 16: xiv ditto İd. 44; al-sahru'l-xáric “he outgoing month” çıka:n ay Bul. 13, 11; şa"ida “to rise' (ağ- , in margin) çık- do. ssv.: xv /ala"a wa xaraca Sik- (sic) Kav. 9, 12, a.0.0.; Tuh. 15a. 4; raqá "to ascend slowly! çık- do. 17b. 11; şa"ida çık- do. 23a. 3; a.0.0. D 2 çı:k- Hap. leg.; Intrans. Den. V. fr. ci. Xak. xı to:n çı:kdı: “the garment absorbed moisture” (a/l-nada), also used of anything which absorbs dampness (al-nudutetea) from the ground Kaş. 171 183 (grka:r, ci: kma:k). çok- originally (of a bird) "to swoop down (on something Dat.); to peck, peck out' with various extended meanings. S.ia.m.lg.; the modern phonctics are confusing; it is nearly always lengthened to coki-/coku- (şokı-/ şoku-, etc.) but in NC Kir. both çoki- and €uki- occur with slightly different shades of meaning and in Kzx. şok- and şuk-. "There do not seem to be any other genuine occurrences of -u- in the verb (both Uzb. -ü- and Kaz. -u- represent earlier -0-) but tbere is what seems to be a Dev. N./A. in -r meaning *hole, cavity, depression; hollovved out, deep” which first appears in Çağ. San. 214r. 6 and Kip. İd. 44; Tuh. rib. iz, 12b. ir and s.i.a.m.l.g. as cukur (sukur, etc.). See Doerfer 111 rogg. This must surely be der. fr. this Verb; so too is SE Türki çokur “pitted with small-pox', unless this is a Sec. f. of cotur. Uyf. vin ff. Bud. PP 2, 8 (ud): Xak. xi kuş çokdi: “the bird swooped' (ingadda) Kaş. II 1; (çoka:r, çokma:k, verse, see eS): Çağ. xv ff. çok (also -un, -tı) darbla bir yeri urub çuhur et- "to strike a blow at a place and make a hole'; çok- (-mak, -ti, -uğaç, -ardın) cam" ol- "to come together, assemble' (quotns.) Vel. 251; çoku-/çokuş- (spelt) káwidan sea gawd hardan “to dig out, hollow out; to peck, peck out” San. 213r. 28 (quotns.; adding that Vel.'s translation "to come together” is an error): Osm. xiv to xvi çok-/ çox- (1) (of a bird) "to swoop down on” (a fish); (2) (of a group of persons) 'to swoop down, attack”, (3) (once; of an insect) “to sting" (? error for çak-), in several texts T'T'S 7 164; II 240; HI 1357. çu:k- Hap. leg.; the vocalization seems to make it impossible to regard this as a crasis of MON. V. CĞa Den. V. in -k- fr. co:$.. UyB. viriff. Bud. Sanskrit adipito (spelt àdipito) 'ignited, set on fire" cu:kup e:mge:nip T7 VIII C.s. Dis. CGA D or F çaha: (or çehe:) Hap. leg.; most Gancak words are certainly 1.-w.s; if this word had back vowels it might be regarded as n corrupt Dev. N. fr. çak-. Gancak xi (h does not properly occur in Turkish but . . .) yuqöl li'l-zand (a strike-a-light') (VU) çaha: /uğa Gancah vahih Kaş. 1 9, 11 (rahik normally means 'with front vowels', but prob. here means 'incorrect"). ?8 çağı:/çoğr: onomatopoeic, prob. an elongated f. of ça:ğ. N.o.a.b. Uyf. viii ff. Bud. alku tigi çoğı “all sounds (Hend.)' Sut. 166, 6: Xak. xı €ofr al-calaba "uproar, hubbub' in all "Turkish languages except Arğu: which has çağı: Kaş. IJI 225; 0.0. of çoğtr I 41, 11 (algak); III 128, 3 (ça:ğ): 234, 16 (çamı:): KB çoğı “a noisy quarrel 318, 2651, 4232: xin(?) Tef. coft 'a loud noise; quarrel' 360: Osm. xiv to xvt su çağusu “the sound of running water! in one text; çoğu 'uproar, noise' in three 773 I 141; Ill 150; IV 177. Tris. CGB VU?F coku:bari: Hap. leg.; headed fa'ilali; no doubt a L-w., possibly Iranian. Xak. xı çoku:barı: finu'l-büjaga 'clay for making crucibles” Kaş. 111 243. Dis. CGD S coğdu: (?s/c) See yoğduz. Dis. V. CGDD çaktur- Caus. f. of cak-; s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı ol cakmak cakturdi: agdaliahu'l-zannad (sic) "he made him strike fire”, also used when one provokes a quarrel (azoqa"a"l-taşücur) between two men and makes mischief (ara) between them Xaş. II i8: (çakturur, cakturma:k). D 1 çıktur- Hap. leg.?; Caus. f. of 1 cik-, instead of the usual form çıkar-. Xak. xı ol anı: evdin çıkturdı: “he ordered. that he should be put out (5i-ixrdcihi) of the house (etc.)' Kaş. II 181 (çıkturur, çıkturma:k). D 2 çıktur- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of 2 çı:k-. Xak. xı ol to:nin çıkturdi: “he put his garment in a moist (nadi) place for it to get wet" (hattá nadiya) Kaş. II 181 (çıkturur, çıkturma:k). D çoktur- Caus. f. of çok-, survives only(?) in SE Tar. “to plunge (something) in water" R III 2010; the alternative form çokuts.i.s.m.]. Xak.xrol kuşüğ ka:zka: çokturdi: “he sent his falcon (bàüzivahu) to svvoop Çala” l-inqidad) on the goose' (Kaş., as usual, 'duck', etc.) Kaş. JI i81 (cgokturur, cokturma:k).   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 451 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. Dis. CGG E çağığ See çavığ. Dis. CGL (D) çığıl onomatopocic for a clattering sound, related to ça:ğ, etc. his and cognate forms cağıl/çağıl/çakıl/cığıl survive in SW Az., Osm., Tkm., xx Anat. both as onomatopocics and as Nouns for clattering objects like *pebbles'.. Xak. xr ok ké:s içre: çığıl gil kildt: 'the arrows rattled (satowata) in the quiver' (etc.) Kaş. 7 393. D çaklığ words of this form,with the usual phonetic changes (ç-/ş-) ^ J- -ğ-: -1-/-t-ş “18/-u:, etc.) s.L.a.m.l.g. with a wide range of meanings perhaps going back to different origins, but the words below seem to be P.N./A.s fr. 2 çak. Uyf. vii ff. Civ. (a grape stuffed with various drugs is to be wrapped in paper, buried in hot ashes, and administered) edgüti çaklığ çın bolmisda 'when it has been thoroughly cooked” H I 151: (Xak.) xi(?) Tef. (a place) bir kisi oltur çaklı “vith room for one man to sit”, : yeyür çaklı “enouph for (a whole family) to cat" 356: Çağ. xv ff. (a space) mig sipihr çağlık “as big as a thousand terrestrial spheres! Vel. 232 (s.v. çağ), çağlığ (1) qadr wa miqdür wa andáza '(having a specified) quantity, number, or size” (quotn.); (2) srhhat wa durusti (having) health and soundness” San. 206v. zr: Kom. xiv ança çaklı “having such and such a quantity'; (of a sin) keçer çaklı “venial” CCG; Gr. 73. D çoğluğ P.N./A. fr. ço:Ğğ , 'fiery, flaming', and the like, Survives in NE çoktığ/çoktu: R 7/7 2009-10; NC Kir. çoktu:, Uyğ. viii ff. Bud, uluğ çoğlığ yalınlığ “the great splendid resplendent” (Buddha) U 77 sə, 5 (ii), similar phr. U 111 39, 235 67, 4 0), TT VIII F.16; X 61-2, etc. (D) çoğla:n Hap. leg. ; ism is presumably to be taken as meaning “title” rather than 'Proper Name”, Perhaps a corrupt derivative of ço:ğ 'splendour'; hardly to be connected vv. çoğla:-. Xak. xı çoğla:n min asmá'i'l-akábira Qarluq 'one of the titles of notables of the Karluk (tribe)! Kaş. 7 444. Dis. V. CGLD çakıl- Pass. f. of cak-; s.i.a.m.l.g. w. some phonetic changes and a wide range of meanings. Uy£. xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. "the lightning flashed” oot çakıldı R İTT 1846; Ligeti 186: Xak. xı çakmak cakildi: qudiha'l-zand "the strike-a-light was struck'; and one says ta:g çakıldı: "the stone was struck and sparks flew'; and one says (? in Oğuz) só:z kulakka: çakıldı: “the word was poured (subba) into his ear' Kaş. II 133 (çakılur, çakılma:k, in a verse çakıldı: kızıl ot “sparks flew (from the horse”s hooves)': Caf. xv ff. çakıl- (spelt) (1) gazida şudan "to be bitten or stung'; (2) sí'áyat harda şudan “to be slandered”, (3) duruxşida şudan dtaş wa barq '(of fire or CĞL-. 407. lightning) to flash", in Ar. iltimd" and imdd San. 207r. 26 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv cakmak çakıl- Qutb 41. D çığıl- Hap. leg.; the whole entry is unvocalized and a superfluous er has found its vvay into the text, but the original can be restored fr. the translation; Pass. f. of çığ-. Xak. xi [er] boğ çığıldı: şuddati”l-rizma bi'l-tináb "the parcel was tied with rope (and the like)” Kaş. TI 133 (cii&amp;ilur, çığılma:k). D çıkıl- Pass. f. of 1 çık- used only as an Impersonal V.; survives in the same idiom in NC Kir. çığıl-, SW Osm. çıkıl-, Xak. xi evdin çıkıldı: “an exit was made (xurica) from the house (etc.)' Kaş. HI 133 (çıkılur, çıkılma:k). DF çığla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. 2 çı:ğ. Xak. xı ol bö:z çığla:dı: “he measured the cotton cloth in Turkish cubits” (57-dira" turki) Kaş. III 296 (çığla:r, çığla:ma:k) D çoğla:- prob. an abbreviated form of çoğıla:-, q.v., rather than a Dev. V. fr. “çoğ as a Sec. f. of ça:ğ. Xak. xı çoğla:dı: like çarla:dı: (q.v.) fi siyah”l-fil, “of the trumpeting of an elephant' XKaş. III 295 (çoğla:r, çoğla:ma:k): KB kelir çoğlayur az öçer terk üni (this world) “comes and shouts a little, but its voice quickly dies away' 5314: (X war. xii co£las- “to shout to one another” "47 40). D çuğla:- Den. V. fr. çu:ğ, "to wrap, pack up', and the like. Survives as such in NE Leb. çuğla- R III 2170; Tel. cu:la- do. 2175; the central consonants were metathesized in the medieval period and the metathesized fom. with some phonetic changes, s.i.m.m.l.g.; i SE Türki both forms occur çuğla-/cuğla- ] çulğa- Jarring 77, 97. Xak. xı ol to:nu£ çuğla:dı: “he tied up the garment and wrapped it and made it into a parcel' (dabbara . . . wa 'abbühu wa razzamahu) Kaş. Iİ 295 (çuğla:r, çuğla:ma:k): K B (true words are harsh) iri çuğlamış “he has wrapped up the harshness' 3847: xiv Muh. çuğla:- Mel. 35, 1 (1 bük-): Çağ. xv ff. culğa- (with ç-”) piyidan “to wind, vvrap” San. 214r. 28: Xvvar. xir çulğa“to wrap' “AH şo: xiv ditto Nahc. 8, 8: 9, 9 DF çığlat- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of çığla:-. Xak. xı ol bó:z çığlattı: “he told the man to measure the cotton cloth in Turkish cubits'; a Turkish cubit is two-thirds of an (ordinary) cubit Kaş. II 345 (çığlatu:r, çığlatma:k). D çuğlat- Caus. f. of çuğla:-, s.i.s.m.l. as çulğat-. Xak. xı ol to:mn çuğlattı "he ordered (someone) to vvrap up his garment” (the translation hamala min £ayri tawwbihi is corrupt) Kaş. II 345 (çuğlatu:r, cuglatma:k). D çaklın- Hap. leg.; vocalized gaklan-, but obviously Refl. f. of çakıl-, “to flare up”. Kag.'s translation is very free. Xak. xı özüm menin budursı:n oti: anip çaklınu:r (çaklanu:r) it describes his love and says “my heart is like a quail and revolves (on a spit) over the 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 452 
     
   
   
      408 fire of love for him” (yataqallab "ala nür hubbihi) Kaş. 1 $13, 5; n.rm.e. DF 1 çı:ğlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of çığla:-, the word is actually. spelt çığlandı: but is quoted in a para. regarding the meanings of Hefl.. Den, V.s fr. 'triliteral' words, which implies çı:ğ. Xak. xı böz çığlandı: duri'a'l-hirbás 'the cotton cloth was measured in [Turkish] cübits” Kaş, 117 198, 19; n.m.e. D 2 çığlan- Hap. leg.; vocalized çağ/ar- but this must be an error. This is clearly a Refl. Den. V. of 3 çığ (çiğ) and syn. with çılanq.v., so is anachronistic in Kaş., as there is no Aor. or Infin. it was prob. inserted by a later hand. Survives in NW Kaz. çıklan'to be moist, wet! R 7/7 zo6o. Cf. çavla:-. Xak. xi et çığlandı: falahroaca"l-lahm "the meat was half cooked' (i.e. still moist) Kag. Il 245. D çoğlan- (ço:ğlan-) Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. ço:ğ. Kaş. xı o:t çoğlandı: “the fire was scorching hot” (r/tahaba); also used of the sun when its scorching rays (lu/iábihiá, misspelt /u'übicid) fall Kaş. Tİ 245 (ço:ğlanu:r, ço:ğlanma:k sic). D çuğlan- (çu:ğlan-) Refl. f. of çuğla:-, Kag.'s translation in the main entry is metaph. S.i.s.m.l.g. as çulğan- “to be wrapped', etc. Xak. xı sü kamuğ çuğlandı: cá'a'l-eund bi-qaddihi wa qadidihi “the army came in a solid mass”, also used of things of any kind when they gather together (fa'allaba) Kaş. II 245 (çuğlanu:r, çuğlanma:k), (in the same para. as 1 çı:ğlan-, q.v.) tava:r çu:ğlandı: (sic) ruzima'l-mitá' “the merchandise was packed up” HI 198, 18: xiv Muh.. laffa (? luffa) "to wrap up (? to be wrapped up)” çuğlan- Mel. ar, r (only; Rif. trş sce saru:-): Çağ. xv ff. çulğan-/çulğaş- picida şudan “to be wrapped San. 214v. 9: Xwar. xiv çulğan- “to be wrapped (in something Dat.)'! Qutb 44 (also çulğatıl-, and çulğaş- “to curl up like a snake"): Kom.xiv “to be wrapped'(inswaddling clothes) çulğan- CCG, Gr. 77 (quotn.). Tris. CGL VF çığrlva:r obviously a l-w. prob. Iranian, since -v'àr is a common Iranian suffix. It seems clear that this mcans 'cross-bow'; cross-bow arrows are shorter than ordinary arrows, and this explains Kag.'s translation. "The cross-bow was not a native Turkish weapon. In the form in Mult. -m- may be a scribal error for -vor a Sec. sound, Xak. xi çığılva:r okr: al-husbána ava hiya'l-sihámwu'l-qisár "short arrows" Kaş. I 493 (verse): xiv Muh.(?) qarısı? l-carx 007 çığılma:r (unvocalized) Rif. 173 (only). Tris. V. CĞLD cafiula:-/cogi:la:- Den. V. fr. caBt:/cofi:; n.o.a.b., but the shorter form çağla- occurs in SW Osm. and longer forms like cagida-, çakılda- in several modern languages. Xak.   DIS. V. CGLxı er çoğıla:dı: "the man screamed and shouted” (şaxaba . . . tea şaha) (çoğıula:r, çoğıla:ma:k), also pronounced. çağızlazdı:, one says Su:v çağızla:dı: "the water babbled” (xarra), lağızla:dı:, şağı:la:dı: both dialect forms (/uga) (sagrla:r, şağı:la:ma:k) Kaş. III 324 (verse containing cofrla:di; şaxaba and lağızla:dı: (blood flowed) bi-xarir ha-xarir”l-ma”): xiv Muh. xariru” İ-mda” su: çaBilamak Mel, 73, 13; Rif. 176. Dis. CGM D çakma:k Conc. N. fr. çak-, “a strike-alight, flint and steel”, S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE which uses forms of otluk (cf. 1 otluğ). See Doerfer MI 1007. Xak. xi çakma:k “the strike-a-light' (a/-zamd) with which (fire) is struck; it is both a Noun and an Infin. like camd and camid (sic) in Ar. Kaş. I 469; o.o. II 17 (çak-), 133 (çakil-), etc.: xiv Muh. al-mıqdaha “a steel” cakmak Mel, 58, 14; Rif. 169: Çağ. xv ft. çakmak fi/ad-i dtaş-zana “a steel for striking fire", in Ar. qaddáha and müqdaha San. 207v. 21 (quotn.): Xwar. XIV ditto Qutb 41: Kip. xii al-zinád çakmak İd. 15, 17: xiv çakmak (c-) al-gaddàha ld. 44: XV al-zinád şakmak (sic) Kav. 64, 8. VUF çukmi:n Hap. leg.; l.-w. fr. Chinese, the second syllable perhaps man 'steamced dümplings” (Giles 7,639). Xak. xı çukmi:n 'a loaf (xubz) made in the shape of a cake' (al-ha"R) and cooked in steam in a cooking pot; it is the most wholesome (arra) form of bread Kaş. 1 444. çağmur 'turnip, Brassica rapa; although this spelling is pcc. to Kaş. it is prob. the original one, cf. yağmur. Survives as camfur in SE Türki 'turnip' Shaw 96; Jarring 64; “radish” BŞ 230 and SW xx Anat. 'turnip' SDD 246, but in most languages displaced by Pc. şalcam. Xak. xı çağmur a/-lift 'turnip' Kaş. I 16, 21; çağımur a/-şalcam, çamğur the same, metathesized 7 457. Tris. V. CGMPUD çokmaklan- Hap. leg.; as this word occurs between tığraklan- and çamğuklanthe ç- and -klan- can be taken as certain, but there is no semantic connection with çok-, the semantic connection is rather with çığ-, a connection with çu:ğ is morphologically impossible, but note the Xwar. meaning of çulğaş- (cu:Blan-). Xak. yılan çokmaklandı: “the snake curled up and wound itself up” (tarahlat . . . «a istadárat) Kaş. İT 275 (çokmaklanu:r, çokmaklanma:k). Dis. CGN çığa:ü 'poor, destitute”. Survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. cigan (sic) SDD 258. Türkü vin yok çığaü boduni$ kop kuvratdum çığan bodunığ bay kıldım 11 collected. all the destitute poor people; I made the poor people rich” 7 S ro, II N 8; two o.o.: viti ff. çığaf er oğlı: IrkB. 30: Uyğ. vir ff. Man,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 453 
     
   
   
      DIS. CĞR . 409 yok çığay M İİİ şs, 10; ao. TT II 142: Bud. yok çığay PP 5, 5; 6, 1, et; TT V zz, 40 (üdrül-), çığay U TT 29, 14; 31, ar, etc.; U TİT to, 4; U IV 34, 47: Civ. çığay kalançı bodun “the poor people who pay kalan (taxes)! USp. 77, 5: Xak. xı the people of Arğu: substitute s/n for yd" . . . thus for *poor' (al-fagir) the Turks say çı:ğa:y, and they say çı:ğam Kaş. I 31; çığa:y al-fagir III 238 (verse containing yok çığa:y), three o.o.: KB çığay as opposite to bay 313, 1923) 0.0. 1034, 1112 (üle:-), 1564 (ağız): xiu(?) Tef. çığay 'poor, poor man” 358: xiv Muh.(?) al-faqir q1ka:n (sie, ?error,for çığa:n) Rif. 153 (only); R?ğ. çığay díto R HI 2109 (quotn.): Çağ. xvff. çığan (so spelt) muflis *poor' San. 218v. zo (quotn.): Xwar. xin(?) Oğuz xağan mundin kop çığay emgek çekip turdi “because of this (his favourite horse having run away) Oğuz Xagan was very wretched and distressed! Og. 234-5: xiv çığay “poor” Qutb 45: Kip. xit al-fagir (yoksul and) çığa:y (vocalized çağa:y) Hou. 26, 13: XIV çığan (c-) al-baxil *miserly' 1d. 43: Osm. xiv al-baxil cığan (sic): xv cığan kul “a wretched slave” (as opposed to a gracious God) T TS IHI 129. 1 çıkan “the son of one's maternal aunt". N.o.a.b., cf. yégen. Türkü vı çıkan "Tonyukuk a:ti$ bermiş [the xagan] 'gave him the title "Cousin "Tonyukuk”” Ix. 7; a.o. do 2: Xak. xı çıkan ibru'l-xàála “the son of one's maternal aunt” Kaş. 7 402: Çağ. xv ff. çığan (with ç-”) xala-zada San. 218v. 21. ?F 2 çıkan the passage below relates to the person sent to arrange Kül Tegin”s mausoleum, to ornament it, and to erect a memorial stone; it is unlikely that the Emperor's cousin would have been sent for such a menial task and this is prob. a Chinese 1.-vv. Türkü vii Tavğaç xağan çıkanı: Çan Sepün kelti: “Chang ehiang-chün the Chinese Emperor's (than came” I N 13. ?E çokan this word occurs twice in the same phr. in much damaged passages; the word to be expected here would be çığan and this may be a misreading of that word. "Türkü vii ff. Man. égil çokan kişilerke [sap] "to ordinary poor(?) people” M IH ıt, 14 (i); (6811 çokan Kisi[gap] do. 36, 11 (ii). Dis. V. CGND çakın- Refl. f. of çak-. Xak. xi er ó:zipe: çakma:k çakındı: "the man struck the steel (on the flint) for himself” (Kaş. translates “pretended to strike', but this disregards ö:zipe:) Kaş. II 149 (çakınu:r, cakınma:k). Tris. CGN D "çığaflık See çığaylık. F çıxansı: Hap. leg.; Chinese 1.-vv., prob. representing chih han ss “embroidered Chinese silk” (Giles 1,891 3,836 10,259): cf. barçın etc. See Doerfer 111 1132. Xak. xi (under the heading fa'alli) çıxansı: harir şini munaqqaş 'embroidered Chinese silk” Kaş. 7 489. Dis. CGR çağır Kag's alternative translation “unfermented grape juice' may be the original meaning, but otherwise it is always 'wine', or in modern times some other intoxicating liquor. Survives in SE Tar. cegir R III 1958; "Türki cáfir Tarring 68; NW Karaim çağır R HI 1845-6; Kow. 176; Kumyk çağır, Nog. şağır, SW Az. çaxır, Osm., Tkm. çakır. Cf. bo:r, süçiğ, sorma:. See Doerfer 111 10go. Xak. xr çağır a/-"aşir “unfermented grape juice'; çağır a/-xamr “vine”, this word is one of those with two opposite meanings (mina”l-addad) Kaş. I 363 (the third çağır is an error for çığır), three o.o.: xin(?) Tef. çı:kır (so spelt) “vine” 359: xiv Muğ. al-xamr ça:ğır Mel. 63, 7; Rif. 151; Rbj. ditto R III 1848 (quotn.): Çağ. xv ff. çağır/çakır süci “vine” Vel, 233 (quotns.); çağır (spelt) şardb *wine' San. 206v. 23 (quotns.); çakır (spelt) xamr wa şarab do. 207v. 23: X war. xiv çakir 'wine" Qutb 41: Kom. xiv “vine” çağır CCI; Gr.: Kip. xir al-xamr (bor .. . süçüz . . .; and also) ça:kır which is Mong. (ta. huwa br'I-Muguli) Hou. 16, 5: xv al-xamr şa:ğır (sic) Kav. 63, 5; 78, ro: Osm. xiv to xvI çağır (once, xvi, çakır) “vine”, in several texts TT. I 140; İl zoo. çakır “blue, blue-grey' prob. originally of the eyes, later used more generally. S.i.s.m.l. In Osm. this word was also used, generally in the phr. çakır doğan, for “the merlin, stone falcon, Hypotriorchis aesolon' fr. xv onwards; Osm. lexicographers generally consider that it is the same word, but it is almost certainly a corruption of Ar. sagr, which is itself a corruption of Latin sacer “saker falcon'. See Doerfer 111 1090. Xak. xt çakır al-azraq *blue-grey' Kaş, / 363 (prov., "a grey (al-azraq) dog is worth as much as a horse, but a wall-eyed (al-axyaf) horse is not worth as much as a dog): xin(?) .Tef. çakır közlüğ “grey-cyed” 355: Çağ. xvff. çakir kanat (grey vving”) "a kind of duck” Vel. 234; çakır (spelt) azraq çaşm 'mrey-cyed' .... çakır kanat “the name of a kind of water-fowl' Sarı. 207v. 23: Kip. xiv çakir közlü: dü “ayrı zarqa İd. 44. çığır “foot-path, narrow track", and the like. Survives in SW Osm. çığır translated in Leh. Osm. 370 “a track or path through the snow, the track left by an avalanche' (which perhaps links with the translation in Saz.), Tkm. "a boundary, frontier. Xak. xı çığır (misvocalized çağır) al-zaqab, that is a narrow, small path (a/-tariq) Kaş. I 363: Çağ. xv ff. çığır (spelt) 'snow (Parfi) which has become hard owing to wind action'; also “a hide(rist) and the like which has shrunk (xwudrád ba-ham kagid) owing to exposure to heat' Sar. 218v. 23. D çukur See çok-. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 454 
     
   
   
     410 ?F çağrı: a falcon, prob. specifically “the merlin, stone falcon, //ypotriorchis aesolon' ; cf. çakır. İt is possible that this, too, is a corruption of Latin sacer, but, if so, the channel of transmission is obscure. Cf. çavlı:, toğan, turumta:y, la:çın. Xak. xi çağrı: al-şaqr "a small falcon'; and a man is called çağrı: beg after it Kaş. T 421; o.o. 1 421, 17; İİ 343, 16; IH 332 (tarasla:-): KB çağrı beg 4068 (see çavlı:): xiv AMuh.(?) al-bázi 'falcon' çağrı: (vocalized cağırı:, in margin karçağay) Rif. 175 (only). (D) cifrt: basically 'something which revolves', hence 'mill-wheel; pulley; the celestial firmament”, and the like, as such, pec. to Kaş., but a syn. word çığrık/çıkrık appears m the medieval period and s.i.a.m.l.g. except NE, usually meaning “cotton-gin”. Both words scem to be Dev. N.s fr. *cifir-. Xak. xı çığrı: al-falah, one says kó:k çığrı:sı: falakı”l-sama “the heavenly firmament', and çığrı: is falakı”l-tühün wwa'l-nà'ür “a millwheel, water-wheel', and the like, and şihricatu'l-ibrisam 'a spool(?) of silk”, and also any *pullev' (bakra) Kaş. 1 421; 0.0. 11 82 (cevür-); z3o (çevrül-), 241 (tegzin-); 303 (ud-): xiv. Alfuh.(?) al-düláb "reel, water-whecl', etc. çıxrık (mis-spelt eigrik) Rif. 162 (only): Çağ. xv ff. cikrik (spelt) "a wheel (çarx?) on which they spin cotton and silk and wind it on to reels! (dülabha), also called çıkir San. 219v. 7: Xwar. xiv. çıkır 'spinning-wheel' Qutb 46, (PU) çığrı:k (ç- unvocalized), meaning uncertain, ends the description of a hideous old man, 'how shall I describe that gwrik?, perhaps a different word do. qo (ragrik): Tkm. xut. dülábu'l-quin. *cotton reel' cikrik (vocal. ized cakrik) Hou. 17, 6: Kip.(?) xiv çikrik (c-) “the wheel (al-dilàb) on which thread is spun” İd. 44. çakrak Hap. leg. and not a main entry, perhaps mis-spelt; there is no widely distributed word for 'bald' in Turkish. Xak. xt (there is no grass on a scree on the mountains) cakrak bile: uvut bolma:s /a aya” ma'a'l-raculi'l-aqra' "a man is not ashamed of being bald' Kaş. 1 469, 12. S çığrık/çıkrık See çığrı:. D çığruk Hap. lep.; the ç- is unvocalized, but there is no doubt that this is a Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. ciBru:-. Xak. xı çığruk yér al-ardu'l-murakkalatu'l-sufba *ground which has been trampled on until it is hard” Kaş. 7 469. Dis. V. CGRçakır- “to call out, shout', and like. Not recorded before xır, but see çakrış-, which suggests that this was originally an Oguz word; it s.ha.m.lg., however, as çağır-/çakır-, etc.; in NE only in Bar. (Xak.) xin(?) Tef. çağır-/çağur-/çakur- "to call out, shout, plead” 355-6: xiv. Muh. za'aqa “to shriek, cry out” ça:ğır- Mel. 26, 15; qa:kir-. Rif. 110; şüha ditto 27, 13; 111; al-şafir "to whistle" ça:ğırmak 75, 11; (sikri;zrmak 176); o.o. Rif. DIS, CGR 124, 176: Xwar. xut çağır- “to call out” "Ali 27: (xiv çakır- "to proclaim' or çakırt“to order to proclaim'? Quib 41): Kom. xiv 'to call out” çağır-, (of a cock) 'to crow' çakar- (sc) CCG, Gr. 72 (quotns): Kip. xır za'aqa çağır- Hon. 34, 13; şüha mina'l-şiydh çağır- do. 41, ro: xiv çağır- şaha İd. 43: XV 'ayyata voa farowaga “to shout and make an uproar” (kişkir- and) şa:ğır- (sic) Kar. 78, 10. D çıkar- Caus. f. of çık- , “to bring out, send out”, and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv, some phonetic changes and extensions of meaning, esp. in SW. Cf. ciktur-. Xak. xi men anı: evden çıkardım “1 brought (or sent, axractuliu) him out of the house" (etc.) Kaş. 77 83 (çıka:rur (sic), çıkarma:k): KB tilinde çıkarma yarafsiz sözüp “do not let a useless remark escape your tongue' 169; tepizdin çıkarmasa yinçü kişi 'if a man docs not bring up a pearl out of the sea” 212; (Aytoldi) çıkardı tobik 'brought out a ball” 622; o.o. 1916 (bakir), etc.: xın(?) Tef. çıkar- ditto 359: xiv Muh.(?) xala"a “to take off, throw off" çıkar- Rif. 108 (only): Çağ. xv ff. çıkar(-Bal) çıkar- Vel. 241 (quotns); çıkar(spelt) Caus. f.; ba-dar áwardan "to bring out), and idiomatically 'to give one's daughter to a suitor' San. 219r. 15 (quotns.): Xwar. xii çıkar- "to bring out” "AİF 27: xiv ditto Qutb 46: Kom. xiv “to bring out, draw out” çığarCCI, CCG, Gr. 78 (quotn.): Kip. xii xala"a çıkar- Hou. 33, zo: xiv ÇığaTr- axraca; the -É- was changed from -k-; the original form (aşluhu) was çıkdur- because it is the Caus. f. of cik- 1d. 43: xv axraca gikar- (sic) Kav. 69, 4; qala'a ('to send away, dismiss"), axraca, atla"a (to bring up, vomit) çıkar- Tul. 30a. 9; a.0. 54b. 11. ?D çığru:- Hap. leg., but sce çığruk, çığrut-, prob. a Den. V. fr. çığır. Xak. xı yér çığru:dı: talabbadati'l-ard. tea. salubat min katra vahl tva maşy 'alayhi “the ground was trampled down and hardened because of a great deal of stamping and walking on it”, also used of anything which was originally soft (fihi raxátwa) and subsequently becomes hard Kaş. III 280 (çığru:r, çığru:ma:k). çıkra:- "to squcak, grate', and the like, Sur"vives onls(?) in NE Tel, cikira- R III 2058. Xak. xı ttg çıkra:dı: "the teeth. grated” (şarra), and one says kapuğ çıkrazdı: “the door creaked” (sarra); also used when a man shouts in a quarrel (saa fi xuşüma) and the like Kaş. HI 280 (çıkra:r, cikra:ma:k). çokra:- (of liquids, primarily those which are thick) “to bubble, boil'. Survives in SW Osm. and xx Anat. SDD 36s. Uyğ. vir ff. Man.-A (in the human body there are many thoughts and ideas which) cokrayurlar kamsayurlar "are (constantly) bubbling and stirring" M 771 9, 15 (i): Xak. x1 eşiç cokra:di: "the cooking pot boiled' (galat) with something thick (faxrmn) like a meat and grain stew or porridge; but if it boils with something thin (raqiq) one says  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 455 
     
   
   
       TRIS. V. CGR- 41t kaynadı: not çokra:dı:, and one says mipar çokra:dı: "the spring bubbled up” (fara) and its vvater became like the boiling of a pot Kaş. IH 28o (çokra:r, cokra:ma:k): Kip. xiv €okra- (c-) (of a cooking pot) to boil (Zalat) with something thick (galiz) in it /d. 44: Osm. xv and xvi gokra-''to bubble, boil', esp. metaph., in several texts 773 7 165; I1 241; II 158; IV 178. D *cakrad- Hap. leg.; Trans. Den. V. fr. çakır, the -d- was assimilated in the Perf., and as in some other cases Kaş. has carried the resultant -t- through to other conjugational forms, prob. in error. Xak. t er kó:zin cakrattı: the man rolled (gallaba) his eyes and turned them round (adárahá) so that he showed the whites! (fa-ca'ala ka'annahu azraq lit. “made them as if they were grey ) Kaş. 11 334 (çakratu:r, çakratma:k). D çığrut- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of çığru:-: the vocalization in the MS., as shown below, is chaotic, but this must have been the original form. Xak. x1 ol yé:rig çığırttı: “he trampled (rakkala) on the ground with his feet and made it hard” (sallabahà); also used of anything when one forcibly applies pressure to it (şaddahu bi-quwwa) and makes it hard, e.g. lo our in a sack when one compresses it; and one says er oğlın tışta: çığırttı: 'the man hardened (şa//laba) his son with hard work' Kaş. II 333 (çığrıfutu:r, çığrı/utma:k , both hasra and damma on the rà"). D çıkrat- Hap. leg., Caus. f. of çıkra:-. Xak, xı ol ttsgm çıkrattı: "he ground (aşarra) hıs teeth'; similarly one says buğra: ti:şın çıkratti: “the camel stallion gnashed his teeth' (qaşafa . . . bf-ndbihi), also used of the creaking (al-şarir) of a door or a pen Kaş. II 334 (çıkratu:r, çıkratma:k). D çokrat- Caus. f. of çokra:- , “to boil' (a pot, or something in it, Acc.). Survives in SW Osm. and xx Anat. SDD 366. Uy&amp;. vmi ff. Civ. kógürcgen mayakın kara mén birle çokuratıp “boil dove's dung with black — (Chinese 1.-vv.)” H I 40; o.o. do. 47, 98, 1 (ésic): Xak. xı eşiç çokrattı: "he boiled (ağla) the pot” (etc.); it is used of boiling anything with a little water and a large quantity of spices and grain (afáwih wa hubüb) Kaş. II 333 (çokratu: r, cokratma:k): Kip. xiv bu etni: çokrat 'boil (agli) this meat İd. 44. D çakrış- Recip. f. of caktr-; s.i.s.m.l. with some phonetic changes, e.g. çakırış-. Oğuz xi bo:y bir bi:rke: çakrışdı: “the tribe shouted (şdha) to one another” Kaş. JJ 209 (çakrışu: T, çakrışma:k): xin(?). Tef. (VU) ça:krış- “to call out to one another” 356. D çıkraş- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of çıkra:-. Xak. xı trg çıkraştı: sarrati'l-asnán. “the teeth grated (against each other)”, also used of several of any kind of things when they grate (against each other) Kaş. 77 209 (no Aor. or Infin.).  D çrkrış- Hap. leg.(?), Recip. f. of çıkar-. Xak. xi (ola:r) bkr bi:rnip oğrıltıkın çıkrışdı: (vocalized (rkarigdi:) "each of them took it upon himself (zarcalld) to disclose (ixrác) the thievishness of the other'; also used of ixrác of anything when (two people) compete or help one another Kaş. 17 208 (çıkrigu:r, çıkrışma:k). D çokraş- Co-op. f. of çokra:-, survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. SDD 36s, with metaph. meanings. Xak. xr tepizle:r çokraşdı: "the salt marshes bubbled' (ğalat), also used of several things (şay” Ratir) when they bubble or əə (mca) together; hence one says kişi: bi:r bi:r içinde çokraşdı: “the people jostled (mdca) one another” Kaş. TI 208 (çokraşu:r, çokraşma:k). 'Tris. CĞR VU?F çuğurda:n Hap. leg., listed under fa"allan after the heading D which makes the form reasonably certain. İt does not, however, look "Turkish, and the last syllable looks like the Pe. suffix -dàn "containing". It may be a hybrid with a corruption of cukur hole as the first element. Xak. xı çuğurda:n a/-curuf "a river bank undermined by water' Kaş, T3ıə. D çağırlığ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. çağır. Xak. xı çağırlığ er “a man who owns unfermented grape juice' ('agir) Kaş. 1 494. D cokrama: Intrans. Dev. N./A. fr. cokra:-; pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı çokrama: yul a[-'aynu "Efaumiratı”l- farizatu'l-mà' “an abundant spring spontaneously flasing with water* Kaş. I 492; a.o. 11I 4 (yul). Tris. V. CGRD çağırla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. çağır. Xak.xı ol üzümni: çağırla: di: “he took grape juice ('agir) out of the grapes"; E also used for "to drink (şariba) grape juice' Kaş. İİ 331 (çağırla:r, çağırla:ma:k). D çığırla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. çığır, cf. çığru:-. Xak. xı (ob) yérig çığırla:dı: “he made a small path (abda'a . . . fariqa) on the ground, and beat it out vigorously' (?, Zagmara fiha), also used when snow covers the ground and a man treads out (abda'a . bi-riclihi) a path over it Kaş. I71 331 (çığırla:r, çığırla:ma:k). D çağırlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of çağırla:-. Xak. xı er çağırlandı: “the man owned grape-juice or vvine” Kaş. /I 267 (çağırlanu:r, cağırlanma:k). D çığırlan- Hap. leg.: Refl. f. of çığırla:-. Xak. xı yér çığırlandı: "paths and narrow tracks appeared (badd . . . furuq 1a mafürib) on the ground” Kaş. II 267 (çığırlanu:r, çığırlanma:k).  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 456 
     
   
   
     412 Dis. CGS D çoğsız Hap. lcg.?; Priv. N./A. fr. ço:ğ, "without glory'. Uy£. vin ff. Bud. Sis, 299, 10 (térinsiz). Tris. CGS D çoğısız Hap. leg.?; Priv. N./A. fr. cogi. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. tigisiz çoğısız arığda “in the silent (Hend.) jungle" U IJI ro, 13. Dis. CĞŞ D çıkış Dev. N. (N.Ac.) fr. çık- , lit. 'coming out), with a wide range of applications. S.i.a.m.l.g., the commonest meanings being “expenditure” and “sunrise”, Xak. xı çıkış a/-manfa'a 'profit'; one says ol sta: çıkiş yok “there is no profit in that undertaking” (al-'amal) Kaş. 1 368: KB (oh you who waste vour life eating and drinking, prepare for the reckoning and) çıkış yol tile 'seek for a way out” 5277; (the third is a shrewd treasurer) kiriş ham çıkış bilse kaznak tolur “if he knows what is coming in and going out, the treasury fills! 5913: xiv Mwuh.(?) al-xarc 'expenditure' (opposite to a/-dax! “income” ki:ri:ş) çıkış Rif. işi (only): Çağ. xv ff. çıkış (spelt) mağall-i xurüc az tangndy ba-fada-i masi" "the exit from a defile into a broad open space” San. 219v. ri (quotn.). F çaxşu: Hap. leg.; l-w. with extended meaning fr. Sanskrit cakşu "eye", Xak. xı çaxşu: a/-xudad “box thorn, Lycium', which is used to treat ophthalmia (ramadı”l-"ayıı), ğayr aşliya, not an original (Turkish word) Kaş. I 423. D çaxşa:k Conc. N. fr. çaxşa:-. Survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. where it occurs with a surprising range of phonetic changes (-a-[-e-]-1-; -6-/-k-/-v-/-y-/zero) usually meaning 'stony ground'. Xak. xi çaxşa:k al-radrád “a scree', on the top of a mountain (prov. çakrak): Karluk xr çaxşa:k faliqu'l-nitgnig tca'l-zabib 'dricd split apricots and raisins! Alaş. I 469. Dis. V. CGSD çakış- Recip. etc. f. of cak-; s.i.s.m.l, in SE, NC, SW with a wide rangc of meanings derived fr. those of çak-, Xak. xı ol mana: çakma:k çakışdı: “he helped me to strike (fire with) a strike-a-light'; also used for competing Keş. I1 104 (çakışu:r, çakışma:k): Çağ. xv ff. çakış- (spelt) ba-/tam xwurdan wa tadádud kardan 'to clash with one another and show mutual enmity” San. 207v. ro. D çıkış- Co-op., etc. f. of çıK-, s.i.a.m.l.g. except NE with a wide range of meanings. Xak. xt ola:r ikki: evdin çıkışdı: "they two competed in leaving( f? xerc) the house”, also used for helping Kaş. 1/7 1:04 (Çıkışu:r, çıkışma:k): Çağ. xv ff. çıkış- "to come to an agreement (xteug bar-dmadai) vvith one another' San. 219r. 22. DIS. C68 D çaxşa:- Den. V. fr. çakış, Dev. N. fr. çak-, which scems to be recorded only in SW Osm. Xak. xi ta:ş çaxşa:dı: satwwata'l-radrád “the scree clattered'; also used for the clinking (tcastoás) of personal ornaments (Auli) and other similar sounds Kaş. III 286 (çaxşa:r, caxsa:ma:k): xin(?) Tef. “to whisper' (teasteasa) is translated cafsa:-, prob. a scribal error for çakşa:- ass: Osm. xv €axsa- (of the foundations of a building) 'to collapse with a clattering noise” in one text TT III 136. Tris. CGS F caxsa:pat, etc, the Sanskrit word sihsápada became a l.-w. in Sogdian as cyf'58, no doubt originally in translations of the Buddhist scriptures, and from Sogdian became a l.-w. in “Turkish, usually with the same spelling except for the last letter. It was adopted by the Manichaean missionaries, with other Buddhist technical terms, to translate “commandment, but in Buddhist terminology was often also used more vaguely to translate “good behaviour”, Sanskrit £//a, see T'T VI, p. 66, note 157; it was adopted, for some obscure reason, as the name of the i2th month of the Uyğ. calendar, see Doerfer 11, 627. Türkü vin ff. Man. on çxşapt “the ten commandments' Chuas. rg1-2; a.o.0.: Uyğ. vin ff. Man. yazınçsızın ermek çxşaptğ “the commandment to be without sin” TT /II 134; 2.0.0.: Bud. Sanskrit fila çıxşapat TT VIII 4.33; Sila çaxşa:pat do. 4.44; çaxşa:pat 'commandment! de. H.8; yazınçsız arığ €xsapat tutmak üze 'by keeping the commandment (to be) sinless and pure' Ste. 205, 15-16; o.o. spelt çxşapt TT V 22, 37-9, etc.: Civ. çaxşpat/çxşapt [ay] “the twelfth month” TT VII 1, 18; 24, 15; çaxşapt/çaxşapat/ çaxşaput ay is common in USp.: xiv Chrn.Uvg. Dict. “the twelfth month” çaxşaput ay R İV 1839; Ligeti 150. Dis. CGY VU 1 çığay llap. leg. as such; the context indicates that it means some kind of textile fibre. Perhaps survives in SE "Türki çiğe *wild hemp, a cord made of wild hemp' S/taw 104, DS 255, Jarring 72. UyB. viri ff. Bud, amari tinliğlar çğay (sic?) epirer yun epirer kentir epirer 'some people spin wild hemp(?) or cotton(?) or hemp' PP 2, 2-4 (and sce bodit-). S 2 çığay See cigafi. VU çoğay occurs only in a place-name. İt is discussed at length in K. Czegledy, “Coyay-quzi, Qara-qum, Kök-öng” Acta Orient. Hung. XV 1-3, 1962, where it is suggested, on the basis of investigations of previous scholars, that it is a Common N./A. related to Osm. çoğa/çoğay 'shade, shady'. This is possible, but, if so, it is odd that it is so poorly attested. “Shade” is normally köll:ğe:. Türkü vri bérye: çoğay yış (PU) tügültü:n yazı: konayın “let us settle down in the south in the Çoğay mountain forest and the Tügültü:n  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 457 
     
   
   
       MON. V. CG- 413 (q.v.) plain” 7 S 6, 1I N s, Çoğay kuziu:n kara: kumığ olurur ertimiz 'we were established on the northern side of Çoğay and the Kara Kum” T 7. Tris. CGY D(S) çığaylık A.N. fr. 2 çığay (çığafü), *poverty'. N.o.a.b. Xak, xi KB bor içse açıldı çığaylık yoli “if a man drinks wine, the way of poverty has been opened (to him)” 2096: xın(?) At. 187 (1 azuk), 1:88, 303: Osm. xv cığanlık (sic) “meanness” in one text 7 T'S III 130. ” Mon. CG F çe:ğ Hap. leg.; prob. al.-w. Xak. xı ge:$ “a woven cotton fabric with a striped pattern (nasic qun "ala hay'ati'l-burd) of which cloaks (al-dutur) worn by the Yeme:k are made" Kaş. İİ 155. 1 çek in the Hap. leg. phr. çek çük, prob. a mere jingle. Xak. xı çek çük a/-xurfi mina'l-mitá' 'rubbishy goods” Kaş. 1 334. D 2 çek as such n.o.a.b., but see çekleş-, no doubt the Imperat. of çek-, lit. *draw (one of a number of objects used in casting lots)". Çağ. xv ff. çek (with -k”) qur'a “a lot' (in casting lots) Vel. 235 (quotn.); çek (spelt) qur'a San. 208r. 3 (same quotn.). ?S çiğ 'moist, raw', and the like. This word does not appear till the medieval period, and its phonetics are most obscure. The oldest word with this meaning is €E, q.v., but if çığlan-, q.v., is really part of the original text of Kaş., çığ must be equally old; the back vowel also occurs in Xwar. and some Kip. texts, but çiğ is equally widespread in the medieval period. Both forms s.i.a.m.l.g. It is difficult to reconcile all these forms; çiğ may well be a Sec. f. of çığ: it is, however, difficult on chronological grounds to describe Çı: as a Sec. f. of that word. (Xak.?) xiv Muh. al-ni *raw' (opposite to 'cooked' pışmış) ci:g Mel. 56, 7; Rif. 154: Xwar. xiv çik (sic) tdevv, moisture; moist' Qutb 45: Kom. xiv “dev” çiğ CCI, CCG, Gr.: Kip. xii al-lahmu'l-ni *raw meat” ci:ge:t (in one word) Hou. rs, 19: xIV çik al-nadü *moisture' . . . çik (with -k”) al-ni; and one says çiket (in one word) al-lahmu'l-ni; and an inexperienced (a/-ğamr) man is called çik İ4. 44; al-nadà çık Bul. 3, 3: xv al-nada şik (sic) Kav. 54, 8; ni (VU) cl Tu. 36b. ro: Osm. xvi çiğ davar “an unbroken horse' in one text 773 I7 233: xvii çih (spelt) in Rümi, şabnam wa taragsuh-1narm 'dew, gentle drizzle' San. 222r. 9. 1 çik a technical term in the game of knucklebones, opposite to 2 bö:ğ, q.v.; acc. to Red. and Yudakhin 'the concave side of a knucklebone'; see also the monograph on this game in SDD VI 20ff. Survives in NC Kir. çik/çiğe and SW Osm. Red. 746; xx Anat. SDD 273, 334, 349. Xak. xt Çik an Indeclinahle (Aiarf) used in the game of knucklebones (bi'I-ka'b); when (the knucklebone) has fallen on its belly (/i-batnihi) one says çik turdi: Kaş. 1 334: 2.0. İİİ 130 (2 bó:g). 2 çik Hap. leg.; a quasi-onomatopoeic Exclamation. Xak. xı çik çik “a word used for calling (du'à) kids, and also when they are driven (siqa) Kaş. 1 334. D çök the Imperat. of çök-, but listed separately in Kaş. and other dicte. as an Exclamation, and even used as a Noun in compound Verbs like çök et-, cök tüş-. S.ia.m.lg. except NE. See Doerfer III 1141-2. Xak. xi çök çök “a word used to make camels” kneel down' (yunàx bihi'l-ba"ir) Kaş. 1 334: Çağ. xv ff. çök ('with ç-”) a Dev. N. for firü nişin 'sitting down', in Ar. qu"üd and rusüb San. 214r. 22: Osm. xiv to xvi çök ur- “to kneel down'; in several texts TTS II 244; III 159; IV 180. ?S çük See çübek. Mon. V. CGçek- the original meaning is obscure; the prevailing meaning is now “to pull”, but it very soon developed many extended meanings, both "Trans. “to borrow (money), to suffer (pain), to smoke (tobacco)' and Intrans. “to withdraw'; in Rep. Turkish over 30 shades of meaning are distinguished. S.i.a.m.l.g.ş in NE only(?) in Tuv. Xak. xı ol bitiğ çekdi: mzagata'l-kítàb "he put the diacritical marks (ruqfa) on the writing; and one says ol atın çekdi: faşada 'irqa'l-faras “he bled his horse” Kaş. II 21 (çeke:r, cekme:k): xı(?) Tef. çek- “to pull (a garment Acc., over one's head Dat.): xiv Muh.(?) al-natf “to pluck out (hair, etc.” çekmek Rif. 121 (only): Çağ. xv ff. cék- (-megüm dür, etc.) çeh- Vel. 241-2; €ék- (with ç-”) kaşidan “to pull” San. 219v. 13 (quotns.): Xwar. xin(?) çeriğ cekip “calling up an army” Og. rış, 2.0. 235 (1 emgek): Kip. xiv çek- (c-) cadaba “to pull” /d. 44: xv wazana ası cabada (metathesis of cadaba) “to weigh, or to pull” sek(sic) Kav. 9, 7; 75, 11; 78, 3; cabada aw carra (to drag) çek- Tuh. 12a. 4: Osm. xvi ff. çek- “to pull, to weigh'; in several texts T'T.S II 216; HİT 143; İV 161; and used to translate tart- in Vel. çiğ- “to tie up, fasten, knot'. "The vocalization of this V. and some der. f.s is chaotic in Kaş., prob. owing to some confusion with cek-. Syn. vv, ba:- (and bağla:-) and çığ-. Survives only(?) in SE Türki, Shaw, BŞ, Jarring. Xak. xı ol türğe:k ba:ğın cigdi: (vocalized çegdi:) "he made fast (şadda) the cords round the parcel” Kaş. IJ 21 (çiğe:r, çiğme:k unvocalized): K B 6110 (üzepü:). çök- “to kneel down', esp. of a camel, but also of human beings, and more vaguely 'to sink, subside, collapse', and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. some phonetic changes (ç-/Ş- : -k-/-8-, etc.). Cf. 2 sök-. Türkü vırı ff. Man. kópülüm çökti kor[kti] “my heart sank and was afraid” 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 458 
     
   
   
      414 TT II 8, 48: Uyğ. xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. "to kneel' çök- R //7 2034; ZLigeti işa: Xak. xt ol beğke: çökdi: "he knelt (cata) before the beg” (etc.), and one says tevey çökdi: “the camel knelt down' (2araRa), and one says temür suvda: cókdi: 'the iron sank (rasaba) in the water' (etc.) Kaş. II 21 (çöke:r, çökme:k): xın(?) Tef. tizin çök- "to kneel' 360; Çağ. xv ff. çök- (spelt) fizi mişdstan "to subside” San. 214r. 20: Xvvar .xiv çök- “to kneel; to collapse! Qutb 44: Kom. xiv “to kneel' çök- CCG; Gr. 76 (quotn): Kip. xim baraka'l-camal tewe: cókti: Hou. 14, 15: xiv. çök- (c-) catá'l-insàn İd. 44: xv şök- (sic) *to kneel (baraka) on both front knees! Kar, o, 6; 76, 3; baraha çök- Tuh. 8b. 6; catd (bağdaş oltur-; in margin) çök- do. 12a. 10. Dis. CGE S cigi: Sce ylgi:. PU?F cüge: Hap. leg.; the -£- is so marked in the Fergana MS.; the word must mean something Jike 'cloak' and may be an early corruption of Pe. çüxd “a woollen cloak', which appears as a l-w. ia.m.lg. except NE, SE in various forms including çoğa/çuğa, Xak. xı KB kadaşını kördi uzatu yatur cügesin töşenmiş yépin yastanur “he saw his friend İying outstretched, covered vvith his cloak vvith his sleeves as a pillow' 5974. D çöke: Dev. N. fr. çök-. Survives(?) in SE Türki çöke “the beam of a weighing machine' (i.e. the part that sinks) BŞ 268; 'chop-sticks' Jarring 76 (prob. a corruption of a Chinese phr) and SW Osm. çöke “the breast of a camel' (which touches the ground when it kneels), Uyğ. vi ff. Bud. kilğuluk çöke yanın "the kind of obeisance which should be made” U II 41, 21: (xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. chu 'chop-sticks' (Giles 2,563) çöki Ligeti 154). Dis, CGD çiğit “cotton-secd”, Survives in SE Türki, Shaw, BS, Şarring, SC Uzb.; and SW Osm. (where it is also spelt çığıt and also means "a freckle”), "Tkm, (where it is also used for melon, pomegranate, etc., seeds). See Doerfer IH 1108. Arğu: xt cigit Jrabbi'l-qutn 'cottonseed' Kaş. I 356: Çağ. xvff. cigit (spelt) panba düna 'cotton-seed' San. 220r. ro: Kip. xiv. cléit. Jubbw'l-qutn. “cotton-seed” İd, 45: Osm. xiv ff. çığıt “a freckle or other spot on the face”, c.i.a.p. TTS 7 157; 77 227; III 149; IV 167: xviu. çığıt (spelt) in Rümi, 'spots' (dünahd) which appear on the face of a pregnant woman; a corruption of çiğit 'cottonseed' San. 218v. 22. D çöküt IIap. leg.; Dev. N.A. fr. çök- with a connotation of having collapsed or the like. cf. cóÓkütlük, Xak. xi çöküt kişi: “a man (etc.) who is short of stature' (a/-gasir) Kaş. I 356. PU çüğde: "the projecting bone behind the ear, processus mastoideus'. N.o.a.b. Uy. vini ff.   MON. V. CGBud. Sanskrit kamidusahkam, meaning unknown (adjacent words refer to elephants) cügte:sin TT VIII C.6 (-t- in these texts often represents -d-); Civ. cügde tepreser asığ bolur “if the mastoid process twitches, it will be profitable TT VII 34, 7: Xak. xi çüğde: (spelt çüğdey, which might represent cügde:, as in the heading to the section /fa'ley (i.e. fa'le), fa"lü, fa'li, or be a misvocalization of çügdi:) a/-xusd, that is the projection (al-fa's) in the skull behind the car Kaş. 7 418. D çiğdem presumably Den. N./A. fr. çiğ which etymologically should mean 'moistish' or the like. Survives in SW Osm. meaning 'crocus, Crocus sativus'. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. özlerdeki özeklerdeki yava çiğidem (sic) 'fungi(?) and crocuses(?) growing in valleys and small valleys! TT V 28, 122-3 (see note thereon). ?F çikte:n Hap. leg.; prob. a Chinese l.-w.; there are other commoner words with this meaning. Xak. xi çikte:n ğöşiyafı” l-sarc 'saddle cover” Kaş. I 435. Dis. V. CGDD çökit-/çöküt- Caus. f. of çök-, pec. to Uyğ., cf. çöktür-, çökür-. Uyğ. vı fTL Bud. op tizin çökitip “bending his right knee' U TT 47, 78; iki tizin çökütü olurup “sitting cross-legged” U Ii] 28, i2; o.o. U IV 36, 106; Suv. 36, 17 (opdunki:), USp. IOI, 7. D cektür- Caus. f. of cek-; survives in much the same languages with the same wide range of meanings. Xak. xı (ol) apar cekig çektürdi: anqafahu nugafa'l-kitáb "he told him to put diacritical marks on the writing'; and one says ol atın cektürdi: “he had his horse bled (afsada) because of sore hooves (al-rahga) etc.” Xaş, II 18: (çektürür, cektürdi:): Çağ. xv ff. çektür- (spelt) Caus. £.; kagánidan “to order to pull” San. 219v. 28: Kap. xv (in a para. on the Caus. f.) istacbada ditto çektirTuh. ssa. 2. D çiğtür- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of çiğ-. Xak. xı ol tügü:n cigtürdi: “he ordered that the knots on the parcel (etc.) should be tightened' (bi-sadd) Kaş. II 180 (çiğtürür, cigtürme:k, so spelt everywhere). : D çöktür- Caus f. of cók-; cf. çökit-, çökür-. Survives in the same languages and with the same range of meanings as çök-. Xak. xr ol anıp tevesi:n çöktürdi: “he made his camel kneel” (ístanáxa ba'irahu); one also says ol kümüş altu:ndun çöktürdi: axlaşa”/-dahab mina'l-fidda bi'l-idába :wa arsabahu fi'l-ard “he separated the gold from the silver by smelting and precipitated it in earth” Kaş. II 181: (cóktürür, cóktürme:k). Tris. CGD D çökütlük Hap. leg.; A.N. fr. çöküt. Xak. xı çökütlük qaşrı”/-cutta 'shortness of stature" Kag. I so6.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 459 
     
   
   
     HE ə RSEN CE   DIS; CGN , 415 Dis. CGG E çekek See çeçek. D çekiğ Dev. N. fr. çek-, pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı çekiğ nuqağı”l-kitab 'diacritical points in writing': çekiğ 'ardu'l-sabi fi şigarihi “the penis of a boy when he is small” Kaş. IJ 287; o.o. II 107 (çekiş-), 149 (gekin-); ı8r (çektür-). çekik “the lark, Alauda'. Survives only in SW Osm. çekik Red. 727, which shows that the last letter was -k. Xak. xı ceklk /d"ir Ra”l-toaş" a"ram ya'lafu'l-harra "a speckled bird like the soaş" (prob. a specific tgrm, but the dicts. translate “small bird, fledgeling"), which frequents stony ground” Kaş. II 287: Osm. xv and xvi çekik/çekük translates Ar. şifrid and qunbura "lark' in three dicts. TTS 1I 217. (D) çekük Hap. leg.; this might well be a genuine Turkish word der. fr. cek-; there is a syn. Pe. word çahuş and it is cominonly believed that xiv Muh. çeküç Mel. ör, 8; Rif. 160: Çağ. xvff. çeküç/çeküş/çöküç/ çöküş Vel, 234; San. 208r. 10; 214r. 26: Kom. çakuç CCI; Gr. (in both the Turkish and the Pe. vocabularies): Kip. xii çe:kü:ç Hou. 23, zo: xiv çeküç İd. 44: xv çeküş Tuh. 34a. 4: Osm. xiv and xvi çeküç TTS I 152; İL 143 are Pe. L-w.s. Çeküç is obviously not a "Turkish form but might be a corruption of çeküş, this word looks much more 'l'urkish than Pe., and the explanation prob. is that there were two Dev. N.s fr. çek-, çekük, and çeküş, both very local words meaning "sledge-hammer, blacksmith's hammer', of which the first survives only in Kaş., while the second became a 1.-vv. in Pe. and was reborrowed in the medieval period. It still survives in NW Kaz. çükeç, Kk. şökkiş, Kumyk cóküg; Nog. şökiş. Cf. bazğa:n. See Doerfer İH 1105. Oğuz xt çekük a/-mifraqa “sledge-hammer, blacksmith's hammer! Kaş. II 287. D çökük (cökök) Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. çök-. Survives in SW Osm. “collapsed, sunk, precipitated", etc. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. Sanskrit Iinàbhifamki(ta) 'swaying and doubtful cókóg (sic?) bol&amp;oka:(p-) sézéklég TT VIII 4.18 (lit. perhaps 'fearing that one will collapse"): Çağ. xv ff. çökek firi nişasta wa rásib 'sitting; sinking', also in the meaning of durd tva löy ta rüsüb 'sediment, lees, precipitate! Sar. 214r. 24: Osm. xvi ff. cókek (1) 'sediment, etc.'; (2) 'treacherous, boggy ground'; (3) “a place where camels kneel to rest”, common TTS I 166; II 243; IIl 158; IV 179. Dis. V. CGLD çekil- Pass. f. of çek-, s.is.m.l. Xak. xı bitig çekildi: nuqifa E-kitab “the writing (etc.) was marked with diacritical marks” Kaş. II 133 (çekilür, çekilme:k): Çağ. xv ff. cékil-/ çekin- kaşida şudan "to be pulled' San. 220r. 1. D çigil- Pass. f. of çiğ- ; survives in SE Türki Shaw, BS, Şarring. Xak. xı tügü:n cigildi: “the knot was tightened' (iştaddat), also used of a rope when it is knotted (in"aqada) Kaş. II 134 (cigilü:r, cigilme:k). D cekles- Hap. leg.; Recip. Den. V. fr. 2 cek. Xak. xı ol menip birle: çekleşdi: qdra"a ma"i müna”l-qur"a "he drew lots with me” Kaş. II 210 (çekleşü:r, çekleşme:k). D çiğliş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of çigil-, with the connotation of collective action. Xak. xr tügü:n kamuğ ciglisdi: “the knots were all tightened' (iştaddat) Kaş. II 210 (çiglişü:r, ciglisme:k; everywhere vocalized (igilig-). Dis. CGN çekün Hap.leg. Xak. xi çekün tealadu'l-wwabr “the young of the marmot” Kaş. 1 402. E cigen in KB 61:0; read çiğğen and see üzepü:. ciğin/çikin Preliminary note. There is some confusion about scords of this form. There was almost certainly in the medieval period a Dev. N. fr. çiğ-, çiğin “a knot! noted in XIV Rbg. R III 1:954 (quotn.) and Cag. XV ff. Vel, 242, although San. 220r. 24 says, rather unconvincingly, that this is a mistranslation. This word now seems to be obsolete. There was also a sword çiğin meaning "the upper part of the shoulder between the neck and the shoulder-blade' (Red.) (perhaps etymologically the same word in the sense of “the part twhich ties the neck to the shoulder-blade') noted in Cag. Vel. 242, San. 220r. 22, current in Osm. fr. the earliest period and still current there and in Tkm., and in Az. as çiyin, Kaş. lists two words of this form meaning respectively “a kind of plant' and "a hind of silk fabric'. San. has two parallel entries, but in each case quotes alternative forms with -e- in the first syllable, which suggests an original -é-. In the latter case the word survives zütth -1- so this is unlikely. İn the former San. lists different plants with -k- and -$- in the middle. As no such plant names seem to survive, the number of plants involved, and the pronunctation, remain obscure. PU 1 ciki:n name of a plant or plants n.o.a.b. Xak. xi ciki:n “a plant (nabt) which grows among the vines, forms ears (or blossoms, musanbala(n)), and is eaten by cattle” Kaş. I 414: Çağ. xv ff. çikin (spelt in full *with -&amp;-', but -k- intended, see below) (1) sabza wa giyüh "green vegetable or grass” San. 220r. 19 (quotns.) .. . çiğin (^with -&amp;-") (3) “black seeds (dünaha) which grow among the rice fields and have sharp ends (or beards, dum) like rice” . . . (a) the name of a plant called usfüxüdüs "French lavender! used as a laxative, and to strengthen the heart and reduce anxiety(?) 220r. 22; çekin same translation; çeğin (with -6-”) (1) only 208r. 15-16. ?F 2 ciki:n survives in NW Kaz. cigin “gold embroidery' R III 2114. Prob. a Chinese l.-w.; 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 460 
     
   
   
      416 the second syllable might. be cn (Ain) “gold” (Giles 2,032). Xak. xi çiki:n al-ibrisam 'silk'; hence one says çiki: n yıpı: “silk thread" (xayt): çiki:n xiyátatu'l-dibàc müuqarqama(n) bi'l-dahab 'embroidered brocade embellished(?) with gold (thread)! Kaş. I 414 (the dict. meaning of mugarqam is “of a child, ill-fed', which is inapplicable here, but the meaning is clear): Çağ. xv ff. çikin (spelt as 1 cikin) (2) bütaha ki az ibrisam düzand 'floral designs embroidered in silk”, also spelt çekin San. 220r. 19; çekin same translation 208r. 1 F çöğen l.-w. fr. Pe. çaregön “a stick with a curved end”, and more specifically “polo stick'. S.is.m.l. both as cógen and in its original form çatıgün, or its form in Ar. catckan. Xak. xı çöğen a/-sgawlacán “a” stick with a curved end, polo stick” Kaş. 7 402; o.o., spelt çöğe:n I 187 (egis-); 223 (egtür-), 242 (ümleş-): (Xwar. xiv çavvğan Qutb 42); Osm. xiv and xvi çöğen “polo stick'; in two texts T'T.S I 166; 11 243. çikne: (or çiğne:?) n.o.a.b.; al-mimlaqa, etymologically “a smoothing implement', is used both for “a mason's trowel' and “a stone roller. Yağma: xı çikne: a/-minlaqa Kaş, T 435; 2.0. (not described as Yagma:) III 301 (cikne:-). t Dis. V. CGND çekin- Refl. f. of çek-, s.i.m.m.l.g. usually for "to draw back, withdraw (Intrans.)'. Xak. xı er bitiğke: çekiğ çekindi: “the man made it his business to add the diacritical marks' (bi-naqti”l-nuqat) Kaş. II 149. (çekinü:r, çekinme:k): Çağ. xv ff. San. z2or. 1 (cekil-) Osm. xvi ff. çekin- “to long for (something Dat.) in several texts T T'S II 216; IV 160. D cigin- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of cig-. Xak. xı ol tü:gün (mis-spelt yü:gön) cigindi: 'the man made it his business to fasten up the parcel and knot it” (bi-sadd . . . sea. "aqdihi) Kaş. İl 149 (çiğinü:r, ciginme:k; ç- unvocalized everywhere). D? Fçikne:- Den. V. fr. 2 çiki:n , n.o.a.b, It is hard to sce any semantic connection between Kag.s two translations. Not connected with SW Osm. cigne- (ciyne-) which is a Sec. f. of çeyne:-. Xak. kı:z çikin cikne:di: a/-cöriya xöfat ğazla”l-dahab 'alá'l-dibác bi-tagwir “the maid sevved gold thread on the brocade in an ornamental design”, and one says er çikne: çikne:di: /ttaxada”l-racul li'l-ard mimlaqa “the man applied a roller (?; see çikne:) to the ground” Kaş. 111 301; (after 2 çiki:n) one says çiki:n çikne:di: qarqama "l-dibàc "he embellished(?) the brocade” 7 414, 27: KB anar torku idtim tiken çiknemiş 'I sent him a piece of brocade embroidered with thorns” 3846. Dis. CGR ?F ceker Hap. leg. in the phr. yandak ceker “manna” (see yandak) is prob. a corruption of Pe.şakar 'sugar'.  DIS.  CGN çiğir Ilap. leg.?; onomatopoecic. Xak. xi çiğir cigir "the sound (saret) made by the teeth. when there is grit in the bread and the teeth grate on it” Kaş. 7 363. PU çekrek (or cegrek?) n.o.a.b., cf. cekreklen-. Uyf. xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. pu chén *a cotton shirt' (Giles 9,479 604) çekrek Ligeti 150; R HII 1959: Xak. xi çekrek qabd füqi(n) min şüf yalbasahı”l-"abid “a loose(?) woollen gown worn by slaves! Kaş, ] 477 (owing to an error in the printed text qabd has been taken as a 'l'urkish word attached to çekrek but it is clearly the first word of the translation; the meaning of faqi(n), so spelt in the MS, is obscure, as it has several meanings). ; Dis. V. CGRD çökür- Caus. f. of cók-; “to make (a camel or person) kneel' with some extended meanings. S.i.s.m.l. ; cf. çökit-, çöktur-, sökür-. Xak. xı ol tevey çökürdi: “he made the camel kneel' (amáxa); also used when one makes a man kneel (actá) on both knees Kaş. II 84 (çökürür, cókürme:k): KB (God will cure you of this disease) könülün çökürme “dö not be dövvncast” 1109; a.o. 1581: xii(?) At. biligsizlik erni çökerdi (s) kodi "ignorance makes a man downcast' 102: xiv Rbğ. çökür- “to cause (the moon) to sink” R III 2038 (quotn,): Çağ. xv ff. çöker- (so spelt) fir? nisándan "to cause to kneel, to suppress” San. 214r. 7 (quotn): Osm. xiv ff. çöker- (occasionally çökür-) “to cause to kneel” etc.; c.i.a.p. TT.S I 166-7; 11 244; III 159; İV 180. D cigre:- Den. V. fr. cigir; in this sense Hap. leg. There is no semantic connection with Çağ. xv ff. çikre- "to lie awake at night” Saz. 220r. 2, which survives in NW Kaz. çikrey- R III 2112 and SW Osm. çiğre-/çikre- or with SW 'Tkm. çiğre- (of the weather) "to turn cold”, Xak. xı etme:kte: ta:ş çiğre:di: translated "the teeth grated (sarrat) because of a stone in the bread” Kaş. I7] 28o(cigre:r, çiğre:me:k). 'Yris. CGR PU(D) cekürge: onc of several old names of animals and insects ending in -£e:; “İlocust”, later also “grasshopper”. S.i.a.m.l.g. w. a wide range of phonetic changes, -K-/-ğ-/-vv-, etc., and esp. later in the word, where except in SW Osm. (but not Az. or ''km.) -rg- is replaced by -rtk-; indeed this may be the original pronunciation, although it is not the oldest recorded. Cf. sarıçğa:. Xak./Oğuz xı çekürğe: a/-carad “locust” in Oğuz, but among the Turks “(a locust) before it flies” (i.e. “a hopper”), it is used as a simile for a large group of families (a/-“/ydl) or a large army; one says gekürge: teg sü: “an army like a horde of locusts in density' (katàáfata(n)) Kaş. I 490: xui(?) Tef. çekürge ditto 357: Çağ. xv ff. çeğürtke (spelt) malax "locust'; also pronounced céwürtke Sar. 220r. 15; céwürtke spelt) »alax do. 222r. s: Oğuz xr see Xak.:  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 461 
     
   
   
       | | MON. V. CL- 417 Kip. xitt al-carád (şarınçka:), Tkm. (PU) çekürğe: (c-; unvocalized) JJou. ro, 18: xiv (PU) cekürge: (c-; so vocalized) al-carád 14. 45; ditto, but -Q- so written Bul. ir, 1: xv carüd çeğertke (in margin in second hand Tkm. cekürge) Tuh. rıb. 5. Tris. V. CGRPU çekreklen- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. çekrek: everywhere with damma on the cim, but in view of the Uyğ. spelling of cekrek this must be an error. Xak. xi kul cekreklendi: "the slave owned a woollen garment (//56s min şüf) and wore it” Kaş. İl 277 (çekreklenü:r, cekreklenme:k; see above). Dis. CGŞ OD) çeküş See çekük. F çiğşi: L-w. fr. Chinese £ə”ü shih (Giles 12,412 9,893; Pulleyblank's Middle Chinese tsyek gyi), “District Magistrate'; this title seems to have been bestowed by the Chinese Emperor on some Turks who embodied it in their names as çiğşi (see H. W. Bailey in JRAS, 1939, p. go). Türkü vir ff. Urupu: "Todu:n Çiğşi:: Çik Bilge: Çiğşi:, Kül Çiğşi: in the Miran document (ETY H 64): Üyü. vir ff. Man. beg totok cigsi (a list of titles, not a P.N.) M III 41, 4 (iv): Civ. Kutluğ Turmis Kadir Cigsi USp. 92, 1 (perhaps two names not a single one): O. Kir. ixff. Kutlu:ğ Çigşi: ben 'Iwas Kutlu:ğ Çigşi: Mal. 19, 1; İnançu: Külüg Cigsi: ben do. 24, 5. Dis. V. CGSD cekig- Recip. (etc.) f. of cek-; s.i.s.m.l. with several meanings. Xak. xı ol mapa: cekig (mis-spelt çikig) çekişdi: “he helped me to add the diacritical marks” (f: nagti'l-nugat); also used for competing Kaş. II 107 (çekişü:r, çekişme:k): Çağ. xv ff. çekiş- Recip. f., “to have a tug-of-war (kaşd-haş) with one another; to pull (kagidan) together” San. 219v. 29: Kip. xv tfacüdaba “to pull against one another” şekiş- (sic) Kav. 70, 5; İdmd wa cábada "to pull with, pull against one another” çekiç(sic) Tuh. 392. s: Ösm. xiv ff. çekiş- “to pull against one another”, in several texts T'T.S Il 152; III 143; IV 160. Mon. CL Ca: originally "of a mixed black and white colour'; hence 'grey' particularly of hair; and hence in some languages 'grey-haired, elderly (man). S.ia.m.lg. See Doerfer İİ 1049. Ct. bo:z. Xak. xı ça:l ko:y al-amlah mina'l-ğanam “a black-and-white sheep” Kaş. III 156; KB (God created me . . .) kara kuzğun erdim kuğu kıldı çal 'I was as black(-haired as a) raven; He has made me as grey (ie. white-haired as a) swan' 1098: xiv Muh.(?) (in a list of words for the ages of men) al-kahl “elderly” ça:l Rif. 143 (Mel. 48, 17 o:rta:): Çağ. xv ff. çal "of a beard, containing both black and white, in the sense of di-muy (Pe. “grey”, lit. *with two (colours of) hair”) Vel. 236; 8641126 çal (with ç-) riş-f dü-mü "a beard of two colours” in general, and "a horse vvith a coat of mixed red and white' in particular San. 208v. 8 (Pe. quotn.; other meanings, not noted elsewhere, (2) “camel colt' ; (3) 'butter-milk'): Kip. xii in the list of the colours of horse's coats, al-çal, as an Ar. word, is described as ma"rüf *well-known' Hou. 13, 7: Xiv çazl (c-) al-farasu'l-agqaru'l-máyil ila'l-humra Ca roan horse verging on red' /d. 45. çi:1 Kaş. gives two meanings for this word, the second perhaps a metaph. usage of the same word. 'The first survives only in SW Osm. çil "a spot, freckle; spotted, leprous”, and the like, and perhaps Tkm. çi:l “a ridge defining the boundaries of an individual field in a cultivated area”. There is another word çil meaning 'grey partridge, francolin, hazel hen', and the like (perhaps an extended meaning of the same word in the sense of “a spotted bird”), which occurs in xiv Muh. Mel. 73, 1; Rif. 175; Xwar. xiv Qutb 43; Kom. xiv CCT, Gr.; Kip. xiv. Íd. 45; Bul. 11, 12; Osm. xiv TTS I 162 and s.i.a.m.l.g. except SE. Xak. xr çil atarw' l-darb fi'l-cild “the mark of a blow on the skin”, i.e. “a bruise' Kaş. I 336; çi:l “the mark of a blow on the body” (fi'l-badan) III 134: Caf. xv ff. çil marz-: hardü "a ridge round a flower-bed' Sar. 220r. 29: Oğuz xı ci:l al-qubh "ugliness” Kaş. IH] 134: Osm. xvt çil at translates Pe. abraş "a dapple-grey (horse)' in one dict. TTS IV 175; xvi eil ...and in Rumi abraş "leprous, dappled, etc.” San. 220r. 29. F çöl “desert” (Mong.) See cülig. Mon. V. CLçal- originally “to knock (someone ee.) down, to throw (him) to the ground'. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE with a wide range of extended meanings; in SW Osm. Sami distinguishes nearly twenty. Uy£. viri ff. Bud. çalmış erdi yalın otuğ ters körümlüğ tağda "he has beaten out the flaming fire on the mountain of false omens” Hüen-ts. 1911-12; o.o. TT Vİ, p. 73, note 308, 3o (2 bodu:-); Suv. 625, 12: Xak. xı ol anı: çaldı: "he knocked him down' (şara"ahu), and one says ol só:z meninp kulakka: çaldı: samma'ani'l-kalám "he made me hear the statement” (prov.): and one says (9) to:nuğ ta:ş üze: çaldı: “the fuller beat (daraba'l-qassár) the garment on a stone” (verse) Kaş. Iİ 23 (Aor. and Infin. entered erroneously as çaka:r, çakma:k): KB tutup çaldı yerke ağır iğ kelip "a serious illness came, gripped and prostrated him' 1056; çal başın "put your head to the ground' 1392; a.o. 6177: xin(?) Tef. yerke çal- “to throw to the ground'; çal- “to play (a musical instrument) 356: Çağ. xv ff. cal- (with Ç-") nateáxtan “to play (a musical instrument)” San. 208r. 16 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv çal- ditto; "to throw to the ground” Qutb 4o: Kip. xın şabbaba bi'l-şabdba “to play the flute' düdük çal- Hou. 41, 7: Xiv çal- (c-; *with back vowel) naqara'l-daff awi'I-rubüba "to play the tambourine, lute, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 462 
     
   
   
     418 or other musical instruments' (al-maláhi) İd. 45: Osm. xiv ff. çal- c.i.a.p. with a wide range of meanings, 'to strike, strike down, strike off, play, rub on (ointment, etc.), mix”, etc. TT.S I 145; İT 208; III 138; IV 154-5. Dis. CLA VU cla: Hap. leg. in this meaning; cile/cile noted in various meanings fr. Çağ. onwards are not connected semantically. Xak. xı çıla: "fresh horse dung (rarof) in a stable! Kaş. III 233. Dis. V. CLAVU çı:la:- Den. V. fr. çı:, "to moisten'. The Infin. is given in the MS. as -me:k, but as çılat-, çılan-, çılaş- all have -ma:k this is presumably an error. Survives only(?) in SVV xx Anat. çile- “to drizzle, to be moist' SDD 3so. Cf.2 çığlan-. Xak. xı (ol) to:nuğ çıla:dı: "he moistened (vaddd) the garment' (etc.); originally çı:la:dı: but abbreviated Kaş. IH 271 (çıla:r, çile:me:k sic): Kip. xiv (VU) çıla: (sic) tallu'l-matar “gentle rain'; and one says çıladı: mafara talla(n) "it rained gently! like çısdı: already mentioned İd. 45. Dis. CLB VUF çulvu: pec. to Manichaean "Türkü and no doubt a l.-w., prob. Sogdian, but not identifiable as such. "The contexts point clearly to 'blasphemy'. Türkü vırı ff. ne: yavlak çulvu: sakı:ntı: “vhat evil blasphemy did (the wicked demon) think ofl” Toy. III v. 4-7 (ETY 11 178): Man. muntağ uluğ culvu sav sö:zledimiz erser “if vve have spoken such great blasphemies” Chrnas. I 33-4; a.o. do. 21. çalpak, çelpek Preliminary note. Kaş. distinguishes between these two words, but the meanings are very close to one another, and nearly all later forms of the latter have back votvels. İt is therefore no doubt a Sec. f. of the former. D çalpak N./A.S. fr. çalpa:- (this V. has so far been traced only in SW xx Anat. 'to thin thick. dough by moistening it with water' SDD 299, but cf. calpay, çalpaş, calpas-); 'filth, filthy'. Survives in NE Tuv. çılbak *filthy'; SW xx Anat. çalpak “a hole filled with water' SDD 299; çılpık "frozen ground becoming muddy in the sun” do. 336; çilpek "a mud stain on a garment; çilpik “ce, hoarfrost' do. 351 (some of these have other unrelated meanings). Xak. xı çalpak a/-qadar wwa'l-vwasax dirt, filth'; calpak ts al-amru'l-muxtalit “a muddled affair” Kaş. 1 470: Çağ. xv ff. calpaw/calpuk (both fully spelt) "a place which has become muddy (gil wu xalab şuda) after a fall of rain” San. 208v. 19. S çelpek “mucus discharged by the eye'; except for SW Osm. çelpik Red. 728 (only) all modern vvords vvith this meaning have back vowels, SE cilpik Sharo (only); capak Sharo, MON. V. CLBS; NC Kir. £ilpak; SW Osm. çapak, In the meaning “a thin flap of bread cooked in oil, which first appears in San. and links with the meaning of calpa:- in SW xx Anat., the word survives in NC Kir. çelpek, Kzx. selpek; SC Uzb. calpak. Xak. xı çelpek £amagu'l-'ayn “mucus discharged by the eye” Kaş. 1 477: xiv Muh. al-ramaş “dry mucus on the eyelids” çılpuk Mel. 46, 15; Rif. 140 (unvocalized): Çağ, xv ff. çılpık (spelt) cirk-i cagm ditto (and çılpıklık köz “an eye discharging mucus”) San. 220v. 11; çelpek (spelt) “a kind of thin bread fried in oil' do. 208v. 18: Kip. xiv capak (c-b-) ramagu'l-'ayn İd. 41: Osm. xviii çapak (spelt) in Rrmt, çirh-t çaşm, in Ar. ramaş San. 204V. 12. D çalpap Hap. leg.; Dev. N. fr. çalpa:-. Xak. xı çalpan al-teahl "liquid mud” Kaş. HI 385. colpan 'the planet Venus'; not noted before XIV but no doubt older, although the word for "Venus” in the idiosyncratic 'Türkü vırı ff. document Toyok 8 (ETY II 58) is the Sogdian l.-w. naxı:d and in Xak. xı KB sevit, q.v. S.i.a.m.l.g. with some phonetic changes (ç-/Şetc.) but in SW Osm. çoban yildizi “the shepherd”s star”, no “doubt owing to a false etymology. Uyğ.xıv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. “Venus” çolpan Liget: 153; R III 2025: (Xak.) xiv Muh. kawkabu'l-subh “the morning star”, i.e. Venus ço:lpa:n (-b-) Mel. 79, ro, Rif. 184: Çağ. xv ff. çolpan (spelt) the star called in Rümi kerván htran, in Ar. gi'rá, and in Pe. hürmün huş San. 214v. 18 (quotn.; there is a curious mistake here; the Rümi phr. does mean 'Venus', the other two “Sirius”): Kip. xiv çolpan (c-b-) al-zuhra “Venus” İd. 45; kamphabı”l-şubh çolpa:n (c-b-) Bul. 2, 13: XV katwkab ... Ykm. çolpan Tu. 3ob. 3. D çalpaş Hap. leg., Dev. N. fr. çalpa:-. Xak. xı çalpaş “the viscous excretion (ma Aöna min luzüca) of fruit which sticks to the clothing andi hands! Kaş. I 460 (vocalized in error ralbuş). Dis, V. CLBçalpa:- See çalpak. D çalpaş- Hap. leg.: Recip. f. of çalpa:-. Xak. xı ola:r ikki: çalpaşdı: "the two (men) quarrelled and treated one another rudely (tacádalà :wa taxaşand) over an affair ; also used of things when dirt settles on them (irtakabahá qadar) Kaş. TI 207 (çalpaşur, çalpaşma:k). Tris. V. CLBD çelpeklen- Refl. Den. V. fr. çelpek, survives only(?) in SW Osm. çelpiklen- same meaning, Red. 728 (only). Xak. xı kó:z çelpeklendi: “the eye discharged mucus” (ğarızşat) Kaş. II 277 (çelpeklenü:r, celpeklenme:k); 2.0. İl 279, 14. D çalpaşlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. çalpaş. Xak. xı elig çalpaşlandı: 'stickiness wns smeared (talatfaxati'l-luzticát) on the hand 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 463 
     
   
   
        DİS. from eating. fruit and the like" Kaş, II 271 (çalpaşlanu:r, çalpaşlanma:k, vocalized -pug- everyvvherc). Dis. CLD D cildeg Dev. N. in - fr. *cilde:-, Den. V. fr. çi:l, the alternative form is a very early example of the sound change -ğ -yzero. Xak. xı çildeğg qarğ yaxruc fi xauri”l-xayl minhu” l-qayh ma"İ-midda fa-yukwáà ba"dahu “an ulcer which forms on the chest of a horse; it exudes pus and matter and is then cauterized' Kaş. I 477; çilde:y “an ulcer which forms on the chest of a horse/and is cauterized until it heals” (&amp;kattd yabra') Yu 240. D cilteg N.Ac. fr. cilte:-; used only in Hend. vr. aya:ğ, with which it is no doubt more or less syn. Uy£. viu ff. Bud. ayağka çilteğke teğimliğ “vorthy of honour and respect U 1I 77, 18; 86, 35 (a less common variant of ayağka tegimlig, see aya:ğ), o.o. of ayağ cilteg USp. 101,8; Suv. 444, 5: Civ. TT 1 114 (ornan-). çaldır onomatopoeic; survives in NC Kir. çaldur, Xak. xr ok késgte: çaldır caldir etti: “the arrows rattled (taqalqgala) in the quiver'; also used when the grass rustles (satetwata) when the wind blows over it Kaş. I 457. S çilde:y See cildeg. Dis. V. CLDD çılat- (çı:lat-) Caus. f. of çı:1a:- ; survives in NW Kaz. Xak. xr ol kepe:k çılattı: “he ordered that the bran (etc) should be moistened' (bi-tandiya); originally çı:lat- but shortened Kaş, 77 310 (çılatu:r, çılatma:k). E çalda:- See çalra:-. D *cilde:- See cildeg. çilte:- used only in Hend. vr. aya:-; cf. çilteğ , n.o.a.b. Uy£. virrff. Bud. (even when name and fame, gain and acquisition come to them of their own accord) kamağka ayafÉuluk çilteğülük bolğaylar “they will honour and respect all men” vv. 195, 21-2. çaltur- Caus. f. of cal-; s.i.s.m.l. with several meanings. Xak. xı ol anı: calturdiz: agra'ahu iyühu “he made him knock him down'; and one says ol yitük çalturdı: “he ordered that the strayed animal should be called” (or searched for, ör-nişdan) Kaş. 11 182 (calturur, çalturma:k): Oğuz xı , . . also, in Oğuz, used of any statement when it is forced on the hearing (rniidzya li'l-sum'a) do. D çaldra:- (sic in a section for Dis. V.s containing three consecutive consonants) abbreviated Den. V. fr. caldir; survives in NW Kaz. R III 1889; the further abbreviation çalra:- is Hap. leg. Xak. xı ta:ş çaldra:dı: "the scree (al-radrád) made a clattering noise' (sawtvata); also used of other similar things like chains when they fall to the ground and  CLĞ 419 make a noise Kaş. III 447 (çaldra:r, çaldra:ma:k; everywhere misvocalized ça/dıra:-): ok ké:ste: calra:dr "the arrows rattled (tagalgala) in the quiver'; also used of any similar sound (şarot) Kaş. III 281 (çalra:r, çalra:ma:k, both vocalized çılra:- in a second (?) hand). Mon. CLG çalk Hap. leg.; onomatopoeic. Xak. xı one says çalk culk badar (sic?; unvocalized) kildi: soakazahu "he thumped him”, it is an onomatopoeic (Aikáya) for the sound of thumping Kaş. 7 349. çulk Hap. leg.; a quasi-onomatopoeic Adv. Xak. x1 çulk esrük (mis-spelt eskürk, which is perhaps a corruption of esrü:K) al-sakránu'l-tafih “incapabiy drunk' Kaş. 17 349. Dis. CLĞ D çalığ N.Ac. fr. cal-. In Kaş. this word is entered not in its proper alphabetical order but as an appendage to Soruf; it is not, however, likely to be a later addition to the text. The only certain survival of this word is NE Alt. çalu: "a shaman's drum” R /7/ 1884. There are several medieval vvords assembled belovv which seem rather to represent a parallel (Pass.) Dev. N./A. in -uk, which survives in NE Alt, Tel, çalık 'enterprising (trader); unruly (horse); dangerous (disease) R 7/7 1880; SW Osm. calik with several meanings. It is unlikely that these words are corruptions of Pe. çdlak 'nimble, quick”, but this may be a L-w. in some modern languages. Xak, xi çalığ nigdànu'l-dalla ayda(n) “also (i.e. as well as soruğ) calling (or searching for) a strayed animal'; also used when a matter of importance to the chiefs (muhimm li'l-umaràá') arises, and they send to the villagers and nomads and tell them to come to them Kaş. I 374: xiv Muh. al-mugáfil "careless” (opposite to al-sgdhi toa'l-házim “vvakeful, resolute' ayık) çazlık Mel. ss, 1; Rif. 152: Çağ. xv ff. çalığ/çalık ('spelt with both c- and ç€-”) “a skittish, fast (calf wa tund) horse”, it is a corruption of (Pe.) £ülàk San. 209r. 2 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv çalık 'violent, impulsive' Qutb qo: Kom. xiv 'bad-tempered, violent! calix CCG; Gr.: Kip. xii al-mu'arbid dü'l-garr “quarrelsome, malicious' ça:lık, the opposite to ça:lık is yawa:g; it is also a word used of horses Hou. 25, ro: xiv çalık (c-) “restive” (a/-camüh) of a horse; it is used as a masculine Proper Name ("a/lam) and also for “vounded with a svvord” (a/-qari" bi'l-sayf) İd. 45: Osm. xvi ff. çalık "quicktempered; restive', esp. of a horse; common TTS I 144; H 205; III 138; IV 153. (D) çoluk (çolok) prob. Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. *col-; originally *with one arm', that is with the other missing or paralysed. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE as çolak and the like, often with the more general meaning 'crippled, lame'.: Cf. çolku:y. See Doerfer III 1111. Uy. vni ff. Chr. çoluk M IIÍ 49, 4 (axsak): Xak. xi çoluk (sic in MS., not folak as in printed text)  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 464 
     
   
   
       426 DI$ al-aqta" "onc-armed” Kaş. I 381: Çağ. xv ff. çolak (with ç-”) “a man with a defective arm' (az dast ma"yub) San. 214v. 16. çulik a kind of bird; survives in SE Türki çulluk a name for several kinds of 'plover' Shaw 212; SW Osm. çüHük 'woodcock'; su çulluğu "common sandpiper, great snipe'; küçük çulluk 'green sandpiper; common snipe' Red. 740. As Kaş. describes it as a *water-bird', prob. originally 'sandpiper' or “snipe”. Xak. xı cultk fayir fi'l-mà' muballaq "ald qadari'l-fáxita "a spotted black-and-white water-bird about the size of a ring-dove' Kaş. I 381. çalkan apparently survives as çalkan “stinging nettle' in several NE languages and NC Kir. Xak. xı çalkan “the spread of an injury and its transfer (ta'diyatu'l-curh wa sirüyatuhu) from one place to another, for example if the leg is swollen and the glands in the groin are affected” Kaş. I 441. çalğa:y survives in NW Kaz. çalğıy 'goose-feather” R 111 1887. Xak. xı çalğa:y qawádim riş "l-tüyir “the front feathers of a bird” Kaş. İİİ 241. (D) çolku:y Hap. leg.; der. fr. *col-, cf. çoluk, but there is no other example” of a suffix -ku:y. Xak. xr çolku:y etük “a boot of which the heel is worn down (tzxaraga) on one side” and one calls a man “vith a defective arm' (al-axraqi”l-yad) çolku:y eliğ Kaş. III 242. Dis. V. CLĞS çulğa:- See çuğla:-. S çulğan- See çuğlan-. Dis. CLG VU cilik Hap. leg.; onomatopoeic syn. w. 2 çik, the ç- is unvocalized, but no doubt -ishould be restored. Xak. xı one says in calling (fi du"a) kids cilik çilik Kaş. 7 388. PU cülig this word has been read in Türkü vit Z E 4, I1 E s in the list of countries which sent representatives to FEştemi Xagan's(?) funeral; it begins "from the east, where the sun rises” Bükli: (PU) Cülig el Tavğaç Tüpüt, etc. Henning in "The Date of the Early Sogdian Letters', BSO.AS XII 6or ff. showed that Bükli: meant “Korea”, Tavğaç is of course “China” and Tüpüt “Tibet”, as the list is presumably in a strict geographical order, the entry between Korea and China must be some unidentified *realm' (el) between Korea and China, perhaps one of the minor kingdoms in Korea. 'The word looks like a Chinese representation of some name like cfi li(g). It has been read as cóllig and explained as a P.N./A. fr. çöl meaning 'belonging to the steppes', but this is impossible since çöl is a Mong. word which is not traceable as a l.-w. in Turkish earlier than Çağ. xv ff. Vel. 252; San. 214v. 15. "The word is perhaps to be connected with the equally unexplained word  . CLG (PU) çülgi: in Türkü vri (I searched for a guide and) cülgi: Az eri: bultim 723. Az is a tribal name (sce a:z Preliminary note), so çülgi: is prob. a place-name. “1 found an Az man from Çülgi:.” "The suggested translations “distant” and 'strange' are purely hypothetical since they do not rest on any solid etymological basis. çilğü: Hap. leg.; perhaps a Den. N./A. fr. çi:l, cf. 2 a:1, Xak. xr cilgü: at “a chestnut (al-aşqar) horse” Kaş. 1 430. PU çülgi: See cülig. Dis. V. CLGVU?D çülük- pec. to Kaş., who in JI 119, ro and 166, 1 says that it is a basic V. and not an Intensive Pass. f. like basık-. On the second point he is no doubt right, but it is more likely to be an Intrans. Den. V. fr. *cül than a strictly basic V. Xak. xı er rgr:. cülükti: rattat hi'yatu'l-racul “the man's things (Kaş. clothes) were shabby' Kaş. JI 118 (çülüke:r, cülükme:k); a.o. do. 77 166, r. Dis. CLM D çalma: Pass. Conc. N. fr. çal- with a range of meanings hard to connect with the basic meaning of that V. S.i.a.m.l.g. w. meanings varying from language to language, the commonest being “a lump of earth or dung; a turban; a lasso'. Xak. xı çalma: a/-madar “a clod of earth or clay'; and “the lumps of dung' (al-Rirs) which are collected from sheep-folds and camel stables and dried to burn in the winter are called çalma: Kaş. 1 433: Çağ. xv ff. calma: (spelt) 'a striped or fine muslin cloth ( fita ca dastari) which they wrap round their heads' ; and in the idiom (ba-15tiláli) of the people of Iran 'a kind of bottle (magraba) sewn together from leather (talátin; sic) which they fasten to the pommels of their saddles on expeditions and drink from' Sam. 208v. 24: Kom. xiv “turban” çalma CCI; Gr.: Osm. xvı çalma “turban” in one text T TS 7I 207. Tris. CLM VUF culi:ma:n Hap. leg.; no doubt a l.-w. Gancak xi çulrmamn rs. al-amr lá yu'raf maxracuhu “an affair the outcome of which is unknown'; its original meaning was mustanga'u'l-mà “a pool of stagnant water' Kaş. I 448. Dis. CLN D çalan Hap. leg.; Dev. N. fr. çal- , not connected with the çalap in several NE and NC Janguages which is a Sec. f. of yalan (yalın). Xak. xi “a noisy, talkative man” (al-raculu'l-saxxádbu' l-ka tiru'l-kalám) is called çalap ba:şı, . . . çalap yér 'saline (al-sabxa) black earth on which there is no vegetation, as if it had been burnt” Kaş. HI 371. VUF çalın Hap. leg.; no doubt a Chinese 1.-vv., the first syllable perhaps cA'a. "tea" (Giles 208).  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 465 
     
   
   
       MON. CM (421 Xak. xı al-qag'atu'l-stniya "a Chinese bowl' is called çalın Kaş. 7/1 371. Dis. V. CLND çalın- Refl. f. of çal-, s.i.a.m.l.g. except NE with a wide range of meanings. Xak. xı at çalındı: “the horse was emaciated (Aazala) because of bad grazing' . . ., and one says er ö:zin y€:rke: çalındı: “the man threw himself to the ground” (sara'a . . . ila”l-ard) or "pretended to throw himself" Kaş. /7 149 (çalınu:r, çalınma:k): Çağ. xvfT. çalın-/çalıl- nawáxta şudan (of an instrument) “to be played' San. 208v. 1 (quotn.: Qğuz xi sö:z beğ kula:kına: çalındı: “the word — reached (balaga ila) the beg's ear' Kaş. II 149: Xwar. xin(?) (I require you) baş çalunğuluk (sic) "to bow your heads to the ground' Og. ro8: xiv calin- “to be played” Qur? 40. D çılan- (çı:lan-) Refl, f. of çı:la:- , survives as çılan- in NC Kır., NW Kaz. and as çilenin SW xx Anat. SDD 3so. Xak. xı çılandı: ne: “the thing was moistened by the damp' (nadiya . . . mina'l-rutüba); originally çı:landı: (çılanu:r, çılanma:k), and one says at çılandı: “the horse sweated' ('araga) Kaş. II 150: Kip. xiv (VU) çılan- iöralla “to be wct, soaked” /d. 45. Dis. CLRS çalra:- Sec çaldra:-. D çalrat- llap. ley. Caus. f. of çalra:(çaldra:-), the [nfin. is unvocalized, the Perf. and Aor. vocalized çılra?- apparently by a second hand. Xak. x1 ol okin ké:ste: calratti: "he made his arrows rattle (savw:wata) in the quiver'; also used of anything when one rattles with it (agalqala bihi) Kaş. 11 333 (çalratu:r, calratma:k). Dis. V. CLSD çalsık- Hap. leg.; Emphatic Pass. f. of çal- , “to be thrown down'. Uy£&amp;. viii ff. Bud. TT V 22, 28-9 (bastik-). Dis. CLS D çalış Dev. N. fr. çal-, survives with various meanings NE Kumd. 'cross-eyed' R III 1882; SE "Türki 'wrestling BŞ 249; Şarring 64; NC Kir. "resembling; semi-; cross-bred; thoroughbred (horse); NW Kaz. *crooked'.. See Doerfer I1 1051. Xak.xrqalis al-mugára'a "a wrestling match” Kaş. 1 368: Çağ. xv ff. çalış ZEüşiş “effort, endeavour” (a long para. saying that the author of the Farhang-i Şahdngiri described the word as Pe. and quoted Pe. verses, suggesting a different meaning, but that küşiş would be a morc appropriate one); çalış (spelt çalr:ş, not ça:lış) “anything cross-bred” (du-tuxma), that is with a father and mother of different races (cirs), also called şalğurt (pec. to San.) and, if a camel, besrek (Mong. l.-w.) San. 208v. 27: Kom. xiv 'cross-eyed' çalış CCI; Gr.: Kip. xii al-harb *battle', etc. ça:lış Hou. 14,8: xiv al-munadila wa'l-murámát 'shooting and throwing things at one another” çalış (c-) Bul. 9, ro: Xv munádila çalış Tuh. 33b. 13: Osm. xiv and xv çalış 'war, battle! in several texts TTS Il 206; III 138. Dis. V. CLSD çalış- Recip. f. of çal-, si.am.lg. vv. a wide range of meanings of which “to fight one another', and “to strive, make efforts, be industrious” are the commonest. Uyğ. xiv Chin.-Uvyg. Dict. "to bow the head, kotow' baş çalış- R III 1882; Ligeti ıso: Xak. xı kapuğ çalışdı: "the component parts (suda") of the door came apart” (inifaracat), also used of patches on a bowl (ru'ubu'l-qag'a) and the component parts (mafásil, mis-spelt muqdşil) of a saddle Kaş. II 108 (çalışu:r, çalışma:k), a.o, II 114, 5: xiv Muh.(?) in Rif. 107 both cá'a "to be hungry! (an error) and cála "to wheel about in battle” are translated ça:lış-: Çağ. xv ff. çalış- ba-ham nawáxtan "to play (instruments) together” and metaph. Rüşidarı "to strive” San. 208v. 4: Kip. xii qütala mina'l-mugátila "to wage war with one another” ça:lış- Hou. 43, 7: Osm. xiv to xvi galis- “to fight one another”, in three texts 7775 II 206; IV 154. D çılaş- (çı:laş-) Co-op. f. of çı:1a:- ; survives in SE Türki. Xak. xi ol maya: otçılaşdı: “he helped me to moisten the forage' (fi balli'i-'alaf), etc. ; originally çı:laşdı: but used in this form Kaş. II 108 (çızlaşur, çızlaşma:k sic). Mon. CM cam pec. to Uyğ. viu ff. Civ., USp., where it is common, usually in the phr. cam çarım kil- “to lodge an objection' to the performance of a contract, the terms of a will, and the like. Cam might well be a Chinese l-w., but çarım, which is used only in this phr., could not be. See camguk, camla:-, çamsız. VU?D 1 cum as such Hap. leg., but prob. the basis of SW Osm. çimlen- “to sprout, as moistened seeds' and cimlendir- 'to make (seeds) sprout by moistening them before planting! Red. 747. Although Kaş. describes this as something less than a word in its own right, it looks like an ordinary Adj. and, if so, a Den. N./A. fr. c. See 2 eim and cóme:rük. Xak. xı çım a Particle (Jjarf) used in the case of the excessiveness of a thing (inda mubálağati”l-şay)) and its description in respect of moisture (bi'l-rutiba) or being raw (mi); hence one says cum yi:g et “very (cidda(n)) raw meat', and çım öl to:n “a very wet garment” Kaş. I 338. VU?D 2 crim “turf” and more particularly *peat'. S.is.m.l. in SE, NC, SC, SW. The spellings çım in NC Kir. and şım in Kzx. suggest that this is etymologically identical w. 1 çım. Xak. xi cim 'peat' (al-til), that is what is cut out of the ground and dried and used to feed a fire, because vegetation and 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 466 
     
   
   
     422 MON. CM rOOls are incorporated in it; onc says çım bicti: "he cut. peat! Kaj. 7 338; KB 974 (1 óyük): Kip. xiv (VU) cim (c-) a/-qulla"a mina'l-tin ca fihà'l-nabát "a lump of mud with plants in it” /d. 46. S 3 çim See 2 cip. Mon. V. CMçom-/çöm- Kuş. distinguishes both here and in the der. f.s between çom- “to sink in (water, etc. Loc.)' and çöm- “to dive into (water, etc. Dat.), but it seems impossible to trace this subtle correlation betwecn vowel and meaning in modern languages. S.i.a.m.l.g., the prevailing pronunciation being çom-, there are some very odd forms in some NC, NW languages which seem to be due to contamination by the syn. Mong. L-w. suggu- (Kor, 1537, Haltod 387). Uyf. vir ff. Man. kün teprice co[ma bata] yarlıkamışı üçün "because he has deigned to sink and descend like the divine sun” M III 33, 1-2 (iii): Bud. TT VI 195 (v.1), etc. (bat-): Civ. kün cogi çom(m)a:kta: ó:tgürü: (ó:dhhüri) 'exactly when the sun's heat sinks! TT VIII I.23: Xak. xı oğla:n suvda: çomdi: "the boy sank (ğ4şa) in the water' (çoma:r, comma:k), and one says ördek suvka: çömdi: “the duck -dived deep (ğasşa . . . fazwga(n) mubáliga(m) fihi) into the water' (çöme:r, cómme:k); the Infin. of this V. has -me:k and that of the first has -ma:k so that the distinction (a/-farq) between the two may be known Kaş, /T 26; a.o. of çöm- 7 qor, 11: xiv Muh. sabaha "to swim' (VU) com- Ael. 27, 3; Rif. 110: Çağ. xv ff. çom- (-ğay, ctc.) suya dal- "to dive into the water' Vek 253 (quotn.); çom- 5a-zir-i db “rü raftan sea ğüta zadan ditto San. 214v. 26 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv atım os sazğa (VU) çomdiı “my horse sank into the marsh' Qutb 44: Kip. xv ğafasa "to dive' (VU) çomTuh. 27a. 2. Dis. CMA cami: Hap. leg.; a mere jingle, not to be connected w. cam, Xak. xı one says (ol) çoğu cami: kildi: calaba ta şaxaba "he shouted and made a hubbub'; çamı: yusta"mal muzdatcica(1) “is used as a jingle' Kaş. III 234. Dis. V. CMD?E çombur- Hap. leg.; an unusual form, prob. a false transcription of comtur-, q.v. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. (the bull came out first and) teğinin çomburu (?çomturu) yatğurup *making the prince sink to the ground and lie down' (stood stamping with his four feet and overshadowing him) PP 65, 3-4. Dis. CMC ?F çömçe: 'Jadle, scoop', etc.; prob. a l.-w. fr. Pe. çamça, same meaning; such l.-w.s are common in Oğuz, see óren. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE; in SW Az. çömçe, Osm., Tkm. çemçe, in other languages metathesized as çömüç, çümüç, etc. Cf. kamıç, kaşık, Sec Doerfer III 1121. Oğuz xi çömçe: o/-miğrafa "ladle' Kaş. 1 417: xiv Muh.(?) (in the list of domestic equipment; al-migrafa kamıç) (VU) cumcáh (cf. kamic NW) (VU) çömüç (c- -c; unvocalized) Rif. 169 (only): Çağ. xv ff. çemçe “a large spoon (qdşiq) made of wood or brass with which they stir broth' (ag) San. 209r. 19; çömçe “a large spoon made of wood or brass with which they stir a pot' (dig); also spelt çemçe do. 215r. 21; çömüş “a kind of ladle (kafgir) carved out of wood, with which they pull food out of the pot' do. 215r. 25: Kom. xiv. "ladle, skimmer' cómic CC7, Gr.: Kip. xin. al-miğrafa çemçe: (sic) Hon. 17, 10: xiv çömçe: (c- -c-) al-mağrüfa (sic) İd. 46: xv müğrafa çömçl (sic) Tuh. 34a. 6: Osm. xiv to xvi? çömçe 'ladle', etc.; in several texts TTS I 167; Il 245; IV 181. Dis. V. CMDD comtur-/cómtür- Caus. f. of com-/cóm- ; cf. çomur-, and sce E çombur-. Survives in NE Alt, Leb., Tel. comdir- R III 2033; SE Türki çumdur- (sic?) Shato 100 (only); NC Kir. çumdur-. Xak. xı ol anı: suvka: comturdt: anqalahu fi'l-iàá' “be plunged him into the water' (çomturur, comturma:k), çömtürdi: (çömtürür, çömtürme:k) Adga aq"ar minhu frl-maql "this (implies) plunging more deeply than the other” Kaş. II 182. Dis, CMĞ ?F çomak originally “a cudgel' and the like, and more particularİy “a mace” used in battle. Survives in the last sense in SE Tar. R III 2032; "Türki Shaw, BS, Şarring and SW Osm. "The mace was not originally a "Purkish weapon and it is likely that the vvord vvas also used by pagan "Turks for “Moslem” because the foreign religion and weapon reached them together. In U II 26, 16; 27, 23, etc., an Indian(?) 1.-vv, lurzi is used for 'macc'. In the medieval period another word for 'mace' appeared, çokmar noted in Çağ. xv fF. San. 214r. 5; Kip. xii ff. Hou. 13, 17; İd. 44; Kav. 63, 19; Tuh. 16b. 5; 33b. 12, and Osm. xv TT'S III 158, and s.La.nil.g. as çokmak, cokman, çokmar, coman, comar. İt is prob. that both çomak and çokmar, etc. are l-w.s etymologically connected, but their origin is obscure. Sce Doerfer I1] 1120. Xak. xi çomak al-'agá “a stick, cudgel': comak al-muslim | among the Uyğur and pagans generally ('ammati'l-kafara); one says çomak eri: "a Moslem' (lit. "a man with a mace'?) Kaş. I 381; a.o. İl 3 (çap-): KB ay ersig çomak “oh valiant Moslem' 4701: xiv Muh. al-dabbüs “a mace” çoma:k Mel. 71, 8; Rif. 173: Çağ. xv ff. comak (^with c-") "a cudgel” (güb-dasti) of which the head is carved in the shape of a mace(gurz) ; in Ar. dabbiis San. 215r. 18: Kip. xir. al-dabbüsu'l-xagab "a wooden mace' coma:k /Tou. 13, 17: xiv çomak (c-) “a wooden cudgel ("aşd) with a rounded head like a mace” İd. 46: xv dabbüs (inter alia çokmar...) çomuk (sic) Tuh. 15b. s: Osm. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 467 
     
   
   
        2-22...  DIS. V. CMR- 423 xiv ff. comak “mace, club”, in several texts TTS 1 165; II 241; İV 179. S çomuk See çomğuk. ?D çamğuk Hap. leg.; perhaps a Den. N./A. fr. cam. Xak. x1 'a backbiting and trcacherous (al-nammóàru' L-muxranbaq) man) is called çamgğuk er Kaş. I 470. VU?D çomğuk prima facie a Dev, N./A. fr. çom-, this etymology is obviously appropriate for the only(?) modern form of the word SE "Türki çumığak “the little grebe, Podiceps minor", Shaso 212, but less appropriate for the earlier meaniwg; the context in KB seems to require 'blackbird' or the like. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı çomğuk al-a'sam miünael-ğirban “a white-footed crow (or raven)” Kaş. 1 470: KB kara çomğuk ötti sata tumşukın, üni oğlağu kız üni teg yakın “the blackbird(?) sings vvith his coral beak, his voice is like the voice of a delicate maiden' 77: Oğuz xı (after Xak.) the Oğuz elide the -&amp;and say comuk; they do this in all Nouns with four consonants containing -i$- or -8Kaş. I 470. S çamğur Sce camur. (Tris. V. CMGD çamğuklan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. çamğuk, the ç- of the Perf. and Aor. (but not the Infin.) was vocalized with a kasra, prob. by a second hand. Xak. xr Xisl: çamğukHandı: “the man became a slandering backbiter and malicious (gattát nammám şarir), criticizing (yadumm) everyone! Kaş, 11 275 (çamğuklanu:r, çamğuklanma:k). Dis. CMG VUD çimgğen 'meadow, peat', and the like; as such n.o.a.b.; in the MS. the cim carries a damma, but this is an obvious error, since this is clearly a Den. N. fr. çim (2 çım) also translated a/-fil in Kaş. Survives in SE Türki çimen BS, Şarring, and SW Az., Osm., Tkm. cemen. These latter are commonly regarded as l.-w.s fr. the syn. Pc. word yaman, but, as they have a good Turkish etymology, the Pe. word is prob. a Turkish l.-w. Sce Doerfer 111 1124. Xak. xr cImgen (MS. gómgen) al-rasod tva'l- til Àmeadow, peat! Kaş. I 443: (Çağ. xv ff. cemen/cemender 'a sluggish horse', corruption of Pe. çamand, and in Pe. femen means 'vineyard, garden, green meadow' San. 209r. 21): X war. xiv çimğen 'meadow' Qutb 44; MN 88, etc.; çömen do. 45 (çümen): Kip. xiii al-murc *meadow' (VU) çöme:n (unvocalized) Hou. 8, 19: xiv çömen (c-) al-murc d. 46; al-murc wa'l-hagig ( grass”) çöme:n Bul. 3, 12. . Dis. V. CMLD çamla:- Den. V. fr. cam; “to lodge an objection! to the terms of a contract, etc.; syn. w. cam çarım kil- but less common. Pec. to Uyi£. Uy£. vrir ff. Civ. bu yerke kim kim-me bolup çamlamazunlar "let no one raise an objection to (the sale of) this land” . . . çamlasarlar Malov, Pamyatniki drevnetyurkshoti bismennosti, Moscow, 1951, p. 206, 17-18; çamlağuçı USSp. 16, 22; a.o.o. Tris. CML VU?D çomi:lh: Hap. leg.; although the morphology is obscure this could semantically be connected with com-, perhaps a Sec. f. of çomiığlı: 'sinking'. Xak. xt one says of a man when he is dozed (sadira tarfuhu) with the heat çomr:lı: boldi: that is sadira ta fatara "he was dazed and limp' Kaş. 1 448. ?F cüme:li: “an ant”, a queerly shaped word, prob. a l-w. since there are two other old words for “ant” kumursğa:, karınçğa:, q.v. Survives only in NE Bar. tsümöldü R IV 214; Leb., Tuba çıbalı 777 2099; Tel. çımalı Ill 2103; SE Tar. çümüle R II] 2204; "Türki ditto BŞ, Jarring; SC. Uzb. cumoli. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. (birds, flies, mantises(?)) çümeli “ants” (beetles, etc.) U /7 35, 23: Çiğil xı cüme:ll: al-naml "an ant' Kaş. 1 448: Kip. xv (PU) murabba" çümeli Tuh. 332. 7 (the Ar. word could be transcribed in several ways, but the word it obviously resembles is Russian muravei "an ant”, whatever the etymological origin of that word may be). Dis. CMN S çömen See çimğen. Dis. CMR S çamrak See 2 ça:r, Dis. V. CMRD çomur-/çömür- Caus. f. of çom-/çöm-, survives in SW Osm. çomur- Red. 740 (only). Cf. çomtur-. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. suvda yekler urup kemi suvka comurur 'demons in the water strike the ship and make it sink in the vvater” PP 17, 6-8; a.o. Hüen-ts. 301-4 (batur-): Civ. (in a list of ingredients for an offering to a demon, together with meal, pieces of meat, green beans, etc.) bir comurmis Suv perhaps “a full vessel of water TT VII 25, 11 (very dubious, prob. mistranscribed): Xak. xr ol anı: suvka: comurdi: *he plunged him in the water and ducked him' (ğattahu . . . wa maqalahu) (çomurur, comurma:k); and one says çömürdi:, çömürür, çömürme:k, this means “plunging deeper” (atmaq minhu fi'l-att) Kaş. 11 8s: xin?) "Tef. suvğa (VU) comur- 361: Çağ. xv ff. çomur- (spelt) Caus. f.; ba-àb firü burdan wa Şülamar sáxtan “to plunge (someone) in the water and make (him) dive' San. 215r. 10 (quotns.). D çomruş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of çomur-. Xak. xı ol menin birle: suvda: çomruşdı: "he competed with me in plunging (/7 £aff, someone) in the vvater” , also used for helping Kaş. H 208 (çomruşu:r, çomruşma:k).  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 468 
     
   
   
      424 TRIS. Tris. CMR VU?D çömerük (?çimerük) llap. leg.; morphologically an Intrans. Dev. N./A. fr. a Den. V. in -er-; the obvious connection is vv, çim (1 cim); for the erratic vocalization cf. €imgen. Xak. xr çömerük kişi: a/-raculu'l-a"maş, "a man with watery eyes” Kaş. 7 488. Dis. CMŞ D çamsız Hap. leg.; Priv. N./A. fr. cam. Uy$£. viri ff. Civ. bu bitiğdeki cawnt bitig yosunca neğüke me tildamayin çamsız köni berürbiz “xe undertake to pay the sum mentioned in this contract according to the terms (Mong. l.-w.) of the contract without seeking any prctext (to refuse) and without objection! US. 12, 14-16. Dis. V. CMSD çomuş-/çömüş- Recip. f. of çom-/çöm-, pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı ol menip birle: suvka: çomuşdu: "he competed with me in diving (/El-inğimas) into the water', comusgu:r, çomuşma:k, and one says çömüşdi:, çömüşü:r, çömüşme:k (mis-spelt -ma:k), this also means ingimás but deeper (ag'ar minhu) Kaş. IH iiri. Tris. CMS D çomuşluk Hap. leg.; A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. a Dev. N. fr. çom- which seems to survive only in SE "Türki çömüş 'bathing' BŞ 269; al-kanif, lit. “a secluded place”, usually means “privy, lavatory, wash-house', and the like. Xak. xı çomuşluk a/-kanif Kaş. I 503. Mon. CN F çan L-w. fr. Chinese chan "a wine cup” (Giles 300); n.o.a.b. Uy£. vir ff. Civ. birer çan xuma yağın “one cup a day of linseed (or millet, Chinese L-w.) oil' £ 7 64; olo, do. 122-3. ?F çap 'bell, eymbals”, and the like; so obviously onomatopoeic that it is impossible to say whether it is a native word or a l.-w. fr. e.g. Chinese where chiéng (Giles 695) means: 'gong', or Pe. rang (the origin of Ar. şanc) 'harp, lute, cymbals', etc.; the Xak. word at any rate scems to be a l.-w. S.i.s.m.l. in NE, SE, NW, SW as qan/say, etc., usually meaning 'bell'. "Vhe word has no connection with çap 'dust', a word of unknown origin in several modern languages. Cf. 1 çip, konrafu: See Doerfer I1] 1128. Uyf. vini ff. Bud. (the sound which comes) silkmis uluğ çanıpızdın "from the great bell which you have shaken” Suv. 490, 17: Xak. xi car a/-şanc (see above) Kaş. III 357: Kip. xv culcul “a bell hung round an animal's neck! cap Tuh. 11b. 2. F cun 'true, genuine; truth', and the like; a L.-w. fr. Chinese cliét, same meaning (Giles 589). S.ia.m.lg., as çin/çin, etc. Türkü vir ff. Man. AM HI. 17, 12-13 (i) (bişiğ): Uyé. vir ff. Bud. Sanskrit safyandmena "by  CMR having the name “truth”” çın kertö a:tlığ üze: TT VIIJ A.16; çın kertü “truth, truthful, true” (Hend.) do, H.3; U III 7o, 6; TT V zz, 24; 28, 127; Suv. 137, 8-9; 192, 21, etc.—çın kişi tétir “is called a truthful man” TT V 26, 113; (these words of mine) kalti kün tenri teg çın ol “are as true as the divine sun” Hiüen-ts. 324: Civ. çın “(of a statement) true; (of a document) genuine! is common in USp.: Xak. xi çın al-şidq "the truth'; hence one says çın só:zle:r "the words are truc (yaşduq), and çın aydın “you spoke the truth' (sadaqta) Kaş. I 339: Çin sö:z “a true (al-sidq) vvord” and €rn kişi: "a rcliable, truthfal (al-aminu'l-sádiq) man” HI 138; alo. I 398 (bütün): KB ol kóni çın kişi “that honest, truthful man" 863; bütün çın bağırsak 'reliable, truthful, and compassionate” 763; 0.0. 60, 336, 868, etc.: xiu(?) Tef. çın “truth, truthful'; çın ok “truly” 359: xiv Muh. şadaqa ern ay- (or ayt- ?) Mel. 28, 1; Rif. 111: Çağ. xv ff. çın gerçeh “true” Vel. 244 (quotn.), çın (with. ç-”) röst dadd-i dürüğ “true”, opposite to 'lie' San. 221r. zo (quotn.): Xwar. xiv çın ditto Qut? 45: Kom. xiv “true, genuine' çın CCG; Gr. 78 (quotns.): Kip. xit! (al-şidq kérti:) and al/-şıdq is also called çın, but not everyone knows the word /7ov. 27, 4-8: Osm. xtv (f. çın "true, correct” is noted in various phr. down to xvi and çın seher "the true dawn! down to xvi 7737: 163; 11 235; İT isa, IV 175 (çin everywhere). 1 çın onomatopocic for a ringing sound and the like; n.o.a.b. Cf. çan, çınra:-, Xak. xi one says kula:kim çın etti: jannat. uduni “I had singing in my ears'; also used for the sound made by bells on animals! necks, brass basins(sasetu' l-calacil sea'l-tagt), and the like... (2 €19 follows; in the following entry the cim seems to carry a kasra and the rür a fatha, perhaps çap was intended), and one says kula:kım (VU) cag etti: and this is more correct (a/şal) than the first Kaş. I7I 357. 2 €19 an İntensifying Particle, perhaps merely a special usage of 1 ctr. Medieval qum, which survives in NC. Kir. çım (ak); Kzx. sim (kara) seems to be a later form of this word. Xak. xr and one says çıp tolu: kó:l "a lake full (mal'àn) of water', also used of anything which is completely full (imtala'a ğaya fihi) Kaş. HI 357: (iv Muli.(?) (sadidu'l-abyad "intensely white" a:p a:k); abvad sádic “plain white' cim a:k; ("intensely black” kap kara:); xálisu'l-sawád “pure black” çım kara: Rif. 168: Kıp. xiv çım ak al-abvadu'l-yagag 'snow white'; erm sadid 1d. 46). VU cop Hap. leg.; it is possible that this is identical with cor 'big', a l.-w. fr. Chinese chung 'heavy, important), etc. (Giles 2,880), which is first mentioned in Çağ, xv ff. San. 215v. I and survives in SE, NC, SC. Xak. xı çon et a/-habr mina”l-lalım "a lump of meat without bones or fat” Kaş. III 357. Mon. V. CN S cun- Sce yun-.    
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 469 
     
   
   
      DIS. V./'CNÓDis. CNC çanaç Hap. leg.; morphologically a Dim. f. in -aç but not semantically connected vv. the can listed above, although this is a possible etymology for çanaç “a leather bottle' in SE "Türki, HS 239 and NC Kir. Xak. xı çanaç 'an effeminate and cowardly person (al-muhanrat wa'l-cabán); anyone who has no competence in affairs but shows languor and remissness” Kaş. 1 358. F çançu: Hap. leg.; l.-w. fr. Chinese chan chou (Gtles 295 2,468), same meaning. Xak. xr cançu: “a rolling-pin (a/-əitmala) used to flatten dough for making modulun Kaş. I 417. S cinçü: See yingu:, Tris. CNC D çanaçlık Hap. leg.; A.N. fr. çanaç., Xak. xı çanaçlık (unvocalized, nin undotted) al-xurq wa'l-tahnit 'stupidity, effeminacy” Kaş. I 503. PU çınçırğa: Hap. leg; completely unvocalized, the mark on the second letter looks more like a cazın than a dot, in which case the word should perhaps be read çıpçırğa: and taken as an earlier form of cipcik/cupcuk 'sparrow' noted in xiv Muh.. Rif. 175 (only): Çağ. xv ff. Vel. 247; San. 211 v. ro: Kom. xiv CCI; Kip. xit to xv. in all authorities and surviving in some modern languages. An old animal name ending in -ğa:, Xak. xi (PU) çınçırğa: al-'usfür 'sparrow' Kaş. İİİ 242. Tris. V. CNCD çanaçla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. çanaç.” Xak. xı ol anı: çanaçla:dı: "he attributed weakness, effeminacy, and languor (al-da'f rea”l-tahannut wa'l-wahn) to him” Kaş. III 330 (cənaçla:r, canaçla:ma:k). Mon. V. CND *cand- Sce çantur-, çandış-. Dis. CND F çıntan (çından) 'sandal-wood'; l.-w. ultimately der. fr. Sanskrit candama "Santalunı album, the sandal-wood tree”, through some unknown intermediary. N.o.a.b, Türkü vırır çıntan ığaç kelürip “bringing sandal-wood' II S 11; vin ff. çıntan iğaç üze: olu:ru:pan 'sitting on a sandal-wood tree”" Irk&amp;B 4: Uyğ. viti ff. Bud. (in a list of 32 plants and the like, mainly 1.-xv.s) kizil çıntan “red sandal-wood' Suv. 476, 4: Civ. çından, sometimes specified as 'red' or *white', is an ingredient in several remedies in H 7 and //: Xak. xı çında:n al-şandal 'sandal-wood': çında:n at “a reddish bay (al-ward) horse” Kaş. 1 436; a.o. İİ 122, 24. Dis. V. CNDD çantur- (çandtur-) Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of kçand-. Xak. xt ol anı: bu: i:şka: canturdi: “he urged him to refuse to take part in ("a/a”/425 -tba” fi) this business", originally candturdi: (misvocalized finduturdi) Kaş. TI 182 (çanturur, canturma:k). D çandış- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of *cand-. Xak. xı ola:r ikki: çandışdı: “those two vvere rude to one another (faxdşand) and each opposed (a'rada) the other” Kaş. 77 207 (çandışu:r, çandışma:k). Dis. CNĞ çanak originally something like “a hollow conical object'; survives in SE Türki “the hopper of a flour-mill”, NC Kir. “eye socket; cotton boll; bean pod; grave shaft'; SW Az., "Tkm. “a wooden bowl'; Osm. “an earthenware bowl'. See Doerfer 111 1125. Xak. xi çanak “a wooden cone” (a/-maxrüt) like a saltcellar (read al-mimlaha), etc. Kaş. I 381; o.o., both translated a/-qaş"a “a bowl, III 31 (yofri); rog (yalğan-): xır(?) Tef. çanak “bovT 356: xiv. Muh.(?) (al-qaşa aya:k) al qa'b "a woodeh bowl çana:k Rif. 170 (only): Çağ. xv ff. çanağ/çanak (“vith ç-”) kása “bovl” San. 209r. 28 (Rümi quotn.): Oğuz xı çanak al-qag'a Kaş. 1 381: a.o. 1 84 (1 ayak): Xwar. xiv çanak 'bowl, dish” Qutb 4o: Kom. xiv ditto CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xır al-zabdiya “an earthenware bowl' cana:k Jot. 17, 9: xiv çanak (c) al-qaş"a İd. 46: xv al-zabdiya sanak (sic) Kav. 64, 7. çanka: n.o.a.b.; prob. a l.-w.; al-dáhür is not listed in the ordinary dicts. Xak. xı çanka: al-dühür, that is “a kind of game trap” (a/-maşayid) Kaş. I 427: Çağ. xv ff. çanka (spelt, by implication, vv. c-) gangal 'claw, talon” San. 209V. 3. Dis. V. CNĞDF çınık- Intrans. Den. V. fr. çın, apparently survives in NC Kır. çınık-, Kzx. şınık- “to become hard, strong” and Kar. L. T.; Kaz. çınık- “to become accustomed to (e.g. hardships)” R III 2072; IV 205; Kore. 179; presumably by some such evolution of meaning as “to be tested and found sound”. Xak. xı sö:z çınıktı: tahaggaqa'l-xobar rca”l-kalám "the news, or statement, was confirmed' Kaş. Hl 117 (çınıka:r, çınıkma:k): Kom. XIV “to be tested and found genuine' çınıkCCG, Gr. 78 (quotn.). DF çınğar- (cqin£ar-) Trans. Den. V. fr. €rn; 'to investigate, or check the truth of (something cc.) , n.o.a.b. Uyf. vir ff. çınğar- “to investigate” is occasionally used by itself e.g. TT V 24, 76 (adirtla:-) but usually in the Ger. f. in such phr. as çırığaru sakin- 'to meditate deeply' do. 22, 15-21; çınğaru kör- “to look fixedly (at something)' U II 24, 4; U İİİ 36, 17; 40,41 530 4 (i0; TT X 459, 481 and çınğaru bil- “to know. for certain' (as the result of investigation) Suv. 597, 1; in the first case it is used in the Hend. tétrü çınğaru: Xak. xı ol bu: ı:şığ çınÉardr zafahhaşa aşla”l-amr wa haqqaqahu “he investigated the origin of the affair and checked it”, originally çınğardı: with -1: 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 470 
     
   
   
      426 Kaş. 11 182 (only çı:nğarma:k sic): Kip. xiv (çandar- (sie, ?error for çındar-) £aqaşşd “to study a question deeply', one says çandaru: (sic?) sorgt! *question him searchingly'), and in Kitab Beylik çınkardı: (c-, sic) tafahaqa (sic, ?corrupt; ?fafdhama “to try to understand”) İd. 46. Dis. GNG PU çöDek flap. leg.; this word, capal (Hap. leg.) and terpek (q.v.) are included in a Subsection al-£unna (i.e. with -g-) of a Section containing words with five consonants of the form fa'al'al like simürgük; there is perhaps a serious error somewhere. Cf. könek. Cigil xt ÇöDeK al-'ulba "a leather milking pail Kaş. II 290. VU çünük *plane tree'; n.o.a.b.; cf. çaru:n, displaced everywhere, except in NE where there is (?)no word for 'plane tree', by Pe. çinar. Uyğ. xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. ch'un "a longlived tree' (several varieties) (Giles 2,856) şünük Ligeti 199; R IV 1109: Xak. xi çünük sacaru'l-dulb “the plane tree, Platanus orientalis Kaş. I 388: “the plane tree' is called şünük, the S- being altered from €- I 390. Dis. CNL 2 PU çanal Hap. leg.; sec çönek regarding spelling. Xak. xı çapal er “a wicked (a/-şarir) man” Kaş. II 290. VU cipil Hap. leg. ?; onomatopoeic; cf. 1 çip, etc, Xak. xı one says yügü:n çınıl çınıl etti: "the bridle jingled (şarozcata), also used for any similar sound Kaş. 777 366. VU çaplı: maplı: Hap. leg., no doubt a meaningless jingle; cf. SW xx Osm. çatal matal the name of a similar children's game SDD VI 46. Xak. xi cagli: mapli: "the name of a children's game (7a775), called in Ar. al-datwdá(t) 'see-saw' Kaş. İİİ 379. VU ceplik Hap. leg.; the word lies between tüplük and kóplek but is completely unvocalized; presumably an A.N. (Conc. N.) of unknown origin. Xak. xr ceplik al-/ağ/ab *bindweed, Dolichos lablab! Kaş. III 383. Dis. V. CNLD çınla:- Den. V. fr. cin; s.i.s.m.l. (not SC, SW) meaning 'to speak the truth, behave correctly'. Cf. çınık-, çınğar-. Xak. xı ol işığ çınla:dı: haqqaqa”l-amr "he confirmed (or verified) the affair” Kaş. III 296 (çınla:r, çınla:ma:k). D çınlat- Caus. f. of çınla:- , s.i.s.m.]. Xak. xı ol anın rsin çınlattı: “he ordered that what he (i.e. someone else) said ot claimed (idda"a) should be verifted” (or, confirmed, bi-taşdiq) Kaş. II 345 (çınlatur, çınlatma:k). Tris. V. CNLD capt:la:- Den. V. fr. an extended form of çap, survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. cenile-/   DIS. V. CNGcepile-/cepilde- (of a doy) “to yelp, howl' SDD 324. Xak. xi 1t çapızla:dı: “the dog howled (harra) when it was beaten'; this is used for a sound other than a bark (şazotuhu düna”l-nubah), and one says to a man when he has used abominable language (şarna"a bi-kalámihi) telim çanı:la:dıp şağabta hafira(n) rea şihta "you have stirred up a lot of discord and made a loud noise' Kaş. /77 404 (çanpı:la:r, çanı:la:ma:k). Dis. CNR D çıpra:k Dev, N, fr. çıpra:-. Survives in SC Uzb. çinkirok 'strident, squeaky' (but çinkirik "a scream" seems to be a separate Dev. N. fr. çinkir- (çıpra:-)) and SW Osm. çınğirak (sic) “a small bell'. Xak. xı çıprak ü:n “a loud, clear (a/-cahirı”l-şafi) sound” Kaş. III 383: xiv. Müh. al-şanc 'cymbals', etc. çı:pıra: (sic) Mel. si, 4; Rif. 148: Çağ. xv ff. çınkırak/çınkıravv (spelt) caras "a bell” San. 221r. 22. Dis. V. CNRD çınra:- Den. V. fr. çıpır an onomatopoeic cognate to 1 çın noted only in NE Tel. R HI 2068, and as çınğır/çınğır çınğır in. SW Osm. S.is.m.]. in NE, NC, NW, and SW "Tkm. as çınır-/çipkir-/çinkir-, etc. Xak. xı ol kopra:ğu: çıyradı: “the bell on the horse's neck jingled (sgazwwata) and the bridle rattled (şal/şala) Kaş. IIl 4o2 (gigra:r, çıpra:ma:k, the ol is superfluous; cf. Ciprat-): Kip. xiv (under konraw) çınradı: is used for 'to ring, buzz' (mrna'l-fanin) ; our şayx Faxru'l-din informed us to this effect Id. 75: Osm. xiv to xvirt çıpra- “to ring, jingle', etc.; in several texts T TS I 160; İT 231; İİİ 151; IV 171. D çınrat- Caus. f. of çıpra:- ; now obsolete? Xak. xı ol konra:ğu: cipratti: "he made the bells on the horse's neck jingle and the bridle rattle' Kaş, I7 358 (çınratu:r, çıpratma:k, same translation as cigra:- but here clearly "Trans.): Osm. xiv to xvi çıprat- “to make (something) ring, jingle'; in several texts TTS I 16o; II 282; III isi, IV 171. Tris. CNR D çıpartğu: (?misreading of çıpratğu:) Hap. leg.?; Dev. N. (Conc. N.) fr. çıprat-, “a bell'. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. PP 79, 4-6 (as-). Dis. CNS F çanşı: L-w. fr. Chinese ch'ang shih 'remembrancer, annalist' (Giles 450 . 9,893) appears as a title in several Turkish names. “Türkü vii ff. Yen. Uz Bilge: Çanşı: Mal. 31, 1: Uyğ. vin ff. Man. Bilir Caps1 M III 46, 4 (iii): Bud. Çanşı occurs at the end of several P.N.s in Pfahl. 22, 5; 23, 14-20: Xak. xı Capst: the name of an amir of Xotan; that country was conquered because of him; it is said that he was overthrown (maqlfb, or read mağlüb “conquered” ?) by Camşid Kaş. III 378.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 471 
     
   
   
       EE NE ———u  MON: CR 427 F capsu: Hap. leg.; no doubt a Chinese l.-w. Xak. xi çanşu: “a small tunic" (al-qurtuq) Kaş. III 378. Tris. CNŞ (D) çeniştürük Hap. leg.; Conc. N. fr. *cenig, which might be a Dev. N. fr. *cen-, but there is no trace of cither word. Ey its description this might be 'the lichee'. See çeniştürükse:-. Xak. xı çeniştürük “a trece fruit (haml şacar) like a nut (af-banadıq), red and white'; it ripens at the beginning of the summer and is eaten Kaş. 7 530. Tris. V. İNŞD çeniştürükse:- Hap. leg.; Desid. Den. V. fr. çeniştürük, quoted only as an example of the Desid. f. Xak. xı er çeniştürükse:di: “he longed for the well-known fruit' (tamar); it is spherical (?huwa bi'l-küra, ?l.-w. fr. Pe. kura) like a Chinese nut (al-banádig sini, or “like a nut, Chinese (by origin)) Kaş. 7 280, 4 (completely unvocalized in the MS.); n.m.e. . Mon. CR 1 car in the onomatopocic jingle çar qur, which survives in SW Rep. “Turkish in such phr. as çar cur et- "to squander, dissipate", 'The phr. was no doubt colloquial and is not noted in the Osm. dicts. Sce sar, which is said to be a Sec. f. of car and is an onomatopoeic with a slightly different meaning. "This entry is appended to that of Sar, and so is out of its alphabetical position in the MS. Xak. xt one says Ol çar cur yé:di: “he eat everything that he found and left nothing” Kaş. I 323. 2 carr in the phr. ça:r çarmak which seems to be a mere jingle, perhaps in children's language; pec. to Kaş. Xak. xi "young children” (ai-daràdiqu'l-atfál) are called ça:r çarmak Kaş. 111 148; (between çaxşa:k and çığruk) ça:r carmak a/-darddıq wa'l-atfál; one of them is a jingle (//5d") of the other; çamrak is an alternative form (luğa fihi) I 469. 1 cer Hap. leg.; it is hard to sec what hikdya means here; it can hardly mean 'onomatopoeic', perhaps “a word used only to form Den. V.s'. Cf. çerlet-, çerlen-. Xak. xı cer “a kikdya for great bodily vveight” (Çar fiqal”l-badan), hence one says er çerlendi: "the man”s body was heavy' (fagala). A Xökani word Kaş. I 322. 2 cer Hap. leg.; “time”, cf. ö:d, it is possible that this was the Oğuz equivalent of özd, which is not recorded in any Oğuz language except xx Anat., but if so it was displaced by l.-w.s like tcaqt and zamán at an early date. Oğuz xı çer al-wagt “time”, hence one says bu: çerlikde: kel “come at this time” (i.e. "novv”) Kaş. I 323. 3 cer (?cer) Hap. leg.; it is prob. that this is merely an Oğuz form of yér "place", and that Kag. gave it this meaning owing to the erroneous belief that itis connected with cerig, a word almost certainly older than the Oguz sound-change y- 5 c-, Oğuz xi cer “the opposite of something' (qubalatu'l-say') ; hence one says anip evi: bu: cerlikde: 'his house is opposite this thing” (ric, but ?'his house is in this locality"); hence cerig is used for “the two battle ranks! (saffavi'l-harb) because they confront one another (yataqdbalan) Kaş. 1 323. 1 çır an onomatopocic, survives, with slightly different shades of meaning in NC Kır. çır and SW Osm. çir Red. 743 (only); it is possible that SVV Osm. çır/çir “sparrovv” is an extended meaning of this vvord, and that the Çağ. vvord belovv has the same meaning. Xak. xı çır "an onomatopoeic for the sound (Aal/-şarct) produced by tearing (min mazq) a garment, etc.; hence one says anın to:nim cir yırtti: “he tore his garment with this sound” (müuşatıwita(n) lahu) Kaş. I 323: Çağ. xv ff. çır “the name of a bird which flies about in large flocks' (fawc fatwc) San. 218r. 2 (quotn.). VU 2 cir Hap. leg.; 'fat'; the words used to translate it suggest a rather more solid commodity than ya:ğ, al-dasam seems to mean “dripping” or more generally “fat”, a/-şalım is usually 'suet', but al-simliáq normally means “the pericranial membrane', here perhaps more generally “membrane”, and af-samın is more usually 'clarified butter! than 'fat' proper. In the absence of any known connecting link the resemblance to Russian z/ür "fat, suet” is prob. a mere coincidence. Xak. xi çır “fat" (al-dasam), one says eşiçte: çır yo:k “there is no fat in the pot'; its origin is “the membrane on suet' (a/-sımiğdq müna”l-şahm), hence one says bu: ette: çır yo:k “there is nothing in the way of suet or fat (şay” müna”l-şahım toa'l-samn) on this meat” Kaş. I 323. 1 co:r a Turkish title rather rare in Turkish texts and perhaps commoner in the Chinese records where it is represented by cho (Giles 2,421). İt is stated in the Chiu T'ang Shu (see Liu Mau-tsai, Die chinesischen | Nachrichten zur Geschichte der Ost- Türken (T'u-hiue), Wiesbaden, 1958, p. 158) that Kutluğ Xağan, before he became xağar, was a hereditary todun cor, and his brother, who became Kapğan Xağan, is always called by the Chinese Mo-cho (see op. cit., Passim) which appears in Tibetan script as hBug-Cor, and perhaps represents. *Bógó: Ço:r. There is also a reference (op. cit., p. 170) to the “Çor of the five To-lu (Tölis) tribes of the Left Wing of the Ten Tribes (ie. the Western Türkü)”. A ço:r therefore seems to have been something less than a xağar and more than a beg, perhaps the head of a small confederation, cf. elteber, 1 irkin. As regards the pronunciation, the Middle Chinese pronunciatiort of c/to, though uncertain, is likely to have been nearer chor than chur and the Tibetan transcription for points in the same direction. Türkü vii (VU) Tadık Çor 7 E 32; Tardu:ş Inançu: Çor 7 N 15; Kül Çor the leader of the Tarduş begs 11 S 13; Igvara: Tamğan Çor Yabğu: Ongin 4; Ix. is a memorial to Küli Cor and  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 472 
     
   
   
     428 MON. CR  Yégen Çor is mentioned in fx. 21, 26: viri ff. (PU) Unağan Çor Miran A.2. (ETY I1 64): Yen. El çor Mal. 32, 8. Uyğ. viri ff. Man. M II 7, 1 ff. is described as a poem by Afrin Cor Tégin: Bud. Inal Çor P/ahl. 24, 35 (a rather later document, perhaps here a merely honorary title): O. Kir. ix ff. Külü:g Çor Mal. 7, r, Elçi: Çor Küç Bars do. 14, r. VU 2 ço:r Hap. leg. Xak. xt ço:r ura:ğut al-ratqü mina'l-nisà' "a woman with a tight vagina”: Oğuz xı the Oğuz call “dense vegetation” (al-nabtu'l-multaff) ço:r ot; the first (i.e. Xak.) meaning comes from this Kaş, IJI 121. VU cur Pec. to Kaş. Xak. xi cur cur “an onomatopoeic for the sound of milk falling from the udder into the pail'; also used of any liquid when it makes a noise (sawwata) Kaş. I 323; çürçür (among the words with four consonants) one says tevey emifgi: çurçur “an onomatopoeic for the fall of milk into a deep dish' (fi'I-cafna) (lit. “the gurgling sound of a camel's udder”) 7 485. VU çür Hap. leg.; cf. asığ, which seems to have displaced this word completely. Cf. çürlet-, çürlen-. Xak. xi çür al-manfa'a 'advantage, profit! Kaş. 7 323 (and see çürle:-). Mon. CRD cart Hap. leg.; the jingle is prob. the original form. Xak. xr “the crumbs and fragments (düqdq . . . «ca rudadihi) of anything are called çart curt; hence one says bizin anda: bi:r çart al&amp;u:miz ba:r “he has a fragment (e.g. of bread, kisra) which we are entitled to receive' Kaş. I 341. çırt an onomatopoeic with a series of not very closely related meanings. NC Kir. çırt tükürün- is exactly syn. w. the Xak. phr., but otherwise Kir. çırt and Kzx. şirt, SC Uzb. çirt mean “a cracking noise” (but Uzb. cirt pirt is syn. vv. cart curt above), NW Nog. Sart et- means 'to snap the fingers' (cf. cert-) and SW Osm. cirt (sic), Red. 655, "a screeching noise'. Xak. xi when a man spits through gaps in his teeth (bazaga . . . min xilál asnönihi) one says çırt so:dti: Kaş, ] 341: Çağ. xv ff. çırt karindan yel çıkmağa dérler. the word for "breaking wind' Vel. 241. Mon. V. CRDçert- an onomatopocic word meaning basically 'to make some kind of noise while doing something'; cf. çırt, S.i.a.m.l.g. (in SW not Osm.) usually for “to snap (the fingers), to pluck (a stringed instrument)”. Xak. xı ol çertti: ne:pni: aflata Hşay” “he let the thing drop”: and one says ol yarma:k u:çın çertti: "he clipped (kasara) the edge of the silver coin'; also used when you clip the edge of anything else Kaş. III 426 (çerte:r, certme:k): Çağ. XV ff. çırt- (sic, ?in error) (1) midrab zadan 'to ply the plectrum', in Pe. zaxma; (2) 'to use a razor on the limbs'; (3) “to split (şikastan) kernels and seeds containing kernels with the teeth', in Ar. talabbub; the V. cannot be used alone but must have an appropriate Object San. 216v. 13 (quotn.): Kom. xiv “to snap the fingers! cert- CCG; Gr. Dis. V. CRDD certil- Pass. f. of cert-; s.i.s.m.l, Xak. xi çertildi: ne: fáta'l-jay' “the thing slipped, escaped, passed by”, and the like Kaş. /T 229 (çertilü:r, çertilme:k , prov.; sec erdemsiz); 0.0., same translation, 7 103, 4; JI 148, 9; III 41, 21. Dis. CRG çaruk a kind of footwear; more specifically 'a rough, home-made boot', as opposed to etük 'a professionally made boot'. Survives in the same meaning in NC Kir.; SW Az., Osm., Tkm. as Qarik, Note that çaruk | (caruk) in Xwar. xin(?) Og. is a Sec. f. of yaruk. See Doerfer III 1044. Xak. xi çaruk al-hidà' "a sandal, rough boot' Kaş, 1 38r (prov.; also “a tribe of "l'urks residing in Barçuk”): Çağ. xvfl. çaruk (spelt) “a sandal (afzar) with a leather sole and an upper made of cordage” Sar. 205v. 29: Kip. xiv çaruk (c-) “a sandal (ai-/udád') made of hide, used in snow and worn over the felt stockings (or boots?, al-cawárib) İd. 42. çırğu:y noa b.; the meaning in KB “is obscure; perhaps a metaph. for someone who takes in but does not give out. Xak. xı çırğu:y "ayr nasli'l-sahim, "the midrib of an arrow-head': cirBu:y “the loop (a/ 'urtva) through which the belt passes on either side of a robe” Kaş. IJI 241; KB ay çırğuy ay mupluj ay tügmis eliğ “oh . . ., miserable, close-fisted man' 1673. Tris. CRG D çarukluğ P.N./A. fr. çaruk, survives in SW Osm. çarıklı, Xak. xr çarukluğ er "a man wearing sandals! (miuhtadi) Kaş. I 497 (also the namc of an Oğuz tribe). D carukluk Hap. leg.; A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. €aruk. Xak. xr çarukluk “a piece of leather (al-qidd) for making sandals' Kaş. 1 503. Tris. V. CRGD çarukla:- Den. V. fr. caruk; survives in NC Kar. çarıkta- “to wrap (an unshod horse”s hooves) in (something before riding over rough ground); to circle (when flying)'., Xak. xı ol ada:kın çarukla:dı: "the man put on "Turkish sandals” (hadà . . . bi-hidö” türki) Kaş. IH 337 (çarukla:r, carukla:ma:k). D çaruklan- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of çarukla:-. Xak. xı er caruklandt: “the man wore sandals, or became an owner of them” Kaş. II . 266 (caruklanu:r, caruklanma:k). Dis. CRG cerig originally prob. 'troops drawn up in battle order', a rather more restricted concept than 'army', which was süz, but when sü: became obsolete it was used more generally EMEEMMEE———— — —s)"j——!]Às—se— iL SXHHTHERREEEE 2-22 Ç 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 473 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. CRLfor “army, troops', etc. Kag.'s derivation fr. 3 cer is morphologicallv impossible. An early l.-w. in Mong. (Haenisch 26); s.i.a.m.l.g. with minor phonetic variations, but now become obsolete in some SC, NW languages. See Doerfer III 1079. Türkü vri süpüs bolsar çeriğ éter erti: *'when there was a battle he arranged the troops in battle order” 7x. 9: Uyğ. viri cerig etdim Su. £ 3; a.o. do. 4 (1 u:ç): viri ff. Bud. adımlarnın süsin cerigin tıdmak sergürmek kKkilurmen “İ bring about the obstruction and halting of the others' army and troops” U II 69, s (ii); o.o. do. 74, 4 (i) (süz), Ste. 409, 11: Ciy. ópdün cerigdin at alğalı kelgücl “cominf from the eastern army to collect horses! USp. 53 (i) 2-3; o.o. do. 104, 19-20; TT I 39 (kólün-): Xak. xt çeriğ saffu'l-harb 'battle ranks! Kaş. I 388 (prov.); İT 95 (ülker) a.o.o. with the same, or a similar, translation: KB çeriğin söküp “breaking the (enemy's) ranks' 2268: xıı(?) KBVP uruşlar ódinde çeriğg tüzgüni *putting the ranks in order in time of battle' 44; 0.0. do. 38, 45: xin(?) Tef. cerig “army” 358: xiv al-'askar "army, troops! ceri: Mel. 50, 8; Rif. 145 (reading 'askaru'l-harb): Çağ. xv fT. cérik (^with -k”) laskar “army” Vel. 240; San. z16v. 6 (quotns.): Oğuz xı çeriğ “the ppposite (qubála) of anything” and “the time (svaqt) of anything' Kaş. I 388 (no other trace of such meanings, see 2, 3 cer): Xwar. xiu(?) çeriğ is the standard word for "army, troops" in Og.; Sü: does not occur: xiv ditto Quib 42; MN 72: Kom. xiv “army” ceri CCI, CCG; Gr. 74 (phr.): Kip. xui al-'agkar Se:ri: (sic), also called Sü:, hence sü: başı: “the head of the army” Hou. 14, ro, (in the list of P.N.s) Bekcerl: either “strong army” or “chief of the army”, a phrase (?, huma luğa) do. 30, 3: Xiv çeri: (c-) al-'askar, also called çeriğ İd. 42; al-'askar ceri: (c-) Bul. 6, 10. çörek “a round loaf of bread'; more restricted in meaning than etmek. S.i.s.m.]. in NW and SW usually for “cake, pastry. See Doerfer III 135. Xak. xı çörek al-qurs "a round loaf ' of bread” Kaş. 7 388: Çağ. xv ff. çörek ot siyüh düna 'coriander seed' in Ar. habbatw'l-satoda San. 212v. 23 (the same phr. occurs in Osm. and this should perhaps have been labelled Rmi): Kip. xin al-qurg çörek Hou. 15, I9: XIV ditto İd, 42; çörek al-baqsimátu'l-sigdr "small biscuits' do. 43; al-stiniz 'coriander seed! có:re:k oti: Bul. 7, 2: Osm. xiv çörek "a round loaf of bread'; c.i.a.p. 7TS 7 168; İl 246; III 160; IV 182. VU çörgü: Hap. leg.; on the analogy of bütgü:, q.v., which follows immediately out of alphabetical order, it has been suggested that the missing word is 'to urinate'. Xak. xi one says to a boy when he is asked 'whether he wants to or not” (kaf bihi am 18) çörğü: bar mu: Kaş. 1 430. Dis. V. CRG- : D cerges- Recip. Den. V. fr. çerig: pec. to Kaş. Xak. xi İkki: sü: cergesti: isfaf/a 420 fariqd”l-qital “the two battle formations formed up in battle ranks! Kaş. 7] 209 (cergesü:r, çerğeşme:k, verse); o.o. / 442, 8 (same verse); 7 179, zz and II 283, s (both the same verse, of flowers growing up in rows); I7 303, 9 (of stars). Tris. CRGD çergüçi: Hap. leg.; N.Ag. fr. *cergli:; this word and a parallel Den. V. occur in a passage lamenting the oncoming of old age between the sentences "whatever youth collected for me, old age has come and taken away. İt will come to you too” and “İ have become the prisoner of years and months to my sorrow'. 'There is no real clue to their meaning, but they might mean 'mourner' and *mourn' or the like. Xak. xı KB aya cergüci kel méni cergüle 373. Tris. V. CRGD çörekle:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. çörek. Xak. xı ol u:nuğ çörekle:di: “he made a round loaf (garasa) from the flour” Kaş. II 340 (çörekle:r, cörekle:me:k). D çergüle:- See cergüci:. Dis. CRL D cerlig Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. I cer; difficult to connect semantically w. that word, but cf. çerlet-. Xak. xı a/-axfaş "a man with weak sight' is called kö:zi: çerliğ Kaş. 7 477. D1,2cerlik See 2, 3 cer. Dis. V. CRLD çarla:- Den. V. fr. 1 çar, but with a rather wider meaning; survives in SW Osm. carla(sic), same meaning. Xak. xı oğla:n çarla:dı: “boy sobbed” (baká); and one says yana:n çarla:dı: “the. elephant trumpeted” (saha) Kaş. III 295 (çarla:r, çarla:ma:k, and see çoğla:-): Çağ. xv ff. carla- (or carla- ?, not spelt) şadö zadan wa nidü wa dümdüz hardan "to call out, shout”, and the like Sar. 205r. 23: Xvvar. xri çarla- ditto ' Ali 48: xın(?) çarla“to call to, summon' Oğ. gö, 332, 358. VUD çürle:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. çür. Xak. xı (after çür) hence one says ol andın ne: çürle:di: ndla minhu manfa'a "he obtained a benefit (or profit?) from him” Kaş. 7 323; n.m.e. D çarlat- Caus. f. of carla:-. Xak. xı ol oğla:nığ çarlattı: “he made the boy sob' (abka), also used for making an elephant trumpet Kaş. II 344 (çarlatu:r, carlatma:k): Çağ. xv ff. çarlat- (or carlat- ?) “to order to call out” (sadà zadan) San. 205v. 6. D çerlet- Caus. Den. V. fr. 1 cer; apparently survives in SW xx Anat. SDD 327. Xak. x1 ot anın kó:zin çerletti: “the drug injured (afsada) his eye”, also used for making a man heavy (arala) through the consumption of  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 474 
     
   
   
     450 D1$. V. CRLcoarse (ğaliz) food and the like Kaş. /T 345 (çerletü:r, cerletme:k). VUD çürlet- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of çürle:-. Xak. xı ol andın ne: cürletti: "he urged someone to pilfer (qaffa) something from his (someone else's) property! Kaş. II 345 (cürletü:r, cürletme:k). D cerlen- Refl. Den. V. fr. 1 cer; cf. cerlet-. Apparently survives in SW xx Anat. SDD 327. Xak. xı er ó:zi: çerlendi: “the man was ill (""ralla), and his body was heavy' (taqula); and hence one says anın kö:zzi: çerlendi: "his eye suffered from ophthalmia” (ramadat) Kaş. II 244 (çerlenü:r, cerlenme:k; these two erroneously vocalized (1-); a.o. 7 322 (1 cer). VUD çürlen- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of cürle:-. Xak. xı ol andın ne:p cürlendi: "he drew a profit (carra . . . manfa"a) from him” Kaş. II 245 (çürlenü:r, çürlenme:k). D çarlaş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of çarla:Xak. xt oğla:n çarlaşdı: bakat”l-şibyan "the boys sobbed (together)”, and one says yana:nla:r çarlaşdı: “the elephants trumpeted (bakat . . . ya'ni şahat , together)" Kaş. TI 210 (çarlaşu:r, çarlaşma:k). z Dis. CRM çarım See çam. VU çura:m Hap. leg. Xak. xr çura:m “a shot (ramya) with a light arrow'; it is longer (ab'ad) than a standard shot (a/-ğalta), a man shoots it İying on his back (mustalgà) so that it may go further (yakun amdá tea ab'ad); and one says cura:m oki: for the arrow used in that kind of shot Kaş. 7 412. S carmak See 2 car. Dis. V. CRMçerme:- 'to twist up (something); roll up (one's sleeves, etc.)'. S.i.a.m.l.g.; in SW Osm., 'Tkm. çerme- (but in Osm. the metathesized form çemre- is commoner), but in all other languages where it survives, including SW Az., cırma-. Not noted in Xak. although der. fs are. Çağ. xv ff. çırma-(-p) sar- ve bağla"to wrap and tie up” Vel. 240 (quotn.); çırmabiçidan “to twist, wrap up” Sam. 217r.: 12 (quotns.): Kom. xiv “to wrap up” çırmaCCG, Gr.: Osm. xiv çerme- “to roll up (one's skirts, etc.)” in one text; xvi ff. cemreditto, in several T'T'S II 217. D çermet- Caus. f. of çerme:-, s.i.s.m.l. with similar phonetic changes. Xak. xı alp er atin cermetti: 'the warrior had his horse's tail plaited with a silk ribbon' (armala . . , bi-harira), this is one of the distinguishing marks ("alamüt) of warriors; also used of anything which is twisted and plaited (yurmal maftüla(n)) like the lash of a whip which is plaited with leather thongs (yulaff bi-qidd) Kaş. ITI 349 (çermetü:r, çermetme:k): Çağ. xv ff. çırmat-/çırmaştur- Caus. f.s, biydndan "to have (something) twisted or wrapped up' San. 217v. 16 (quotn.). D cermel- Pass. f. of cerme:-; s.i.s.m.l. with similar phonetic changes. Xak. xi çavığ cermeldi: 'the whip-lash (etc.) was twisted and plaited' (/usewiya ma rummila) Kaş, II 231 (çermelü:r, çermelme:k): Çağ. xv ff. çırmal-/çırman-/çırmaş- pigida şudan "to be twisted, or wrapped up” San. 217r. 27 (quotns.): Kom. xiv “to be wrapped up” çırmal- CCG; Gr. D cermes- Co-op. f. of cerme:-; s.i.s.m.l. with similar phonetic changes. Xak. xr ol mapa: çavığ (mis-spelt çağığ) çermeşdi: "he helped me to plait(f? /aff) the vvhip-lash” Xaş. II 210 (çermeşü:r, çermeşme:k): Çağ. Xv ff, San. 217r. 27 (cermel-). Dis. CRN VU çaru:n Hap. leg.; cf. cünük, Yağma: xı çaru:n şacarıcl-dulb 'plane tree, Platanus orientalis! Kaş. I 414. VU çırıp Hap. leg.; an onomatopoeic, cf. 1 cir, 1 çın. Xak. xi çırıp "an onomatopoeic for the sound made by a brass basin (al-tast) and the like” Xaş. III 370. F çurniı: 'powder'; l.-w. ultimately der. f. Sanskrit cfrma, same meaning. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. (in medical prescriptions) rasayan çurnı 'rasáyana powder! TT VII 22, 1; TT VIII M.19-20 (antağ), common in H İ and II: Xak. xı çurni: “a laxative drug (datwá mushil) compounded by Turkish physicians' Kaş, I 43s: KB (in a verse with. several unidentified drugs) ya curni ögit “or have a powder ground” 1064; a.o. 2887 (Kay.'s translation should perhaps be adopted here). Mon. CRS VU cars Hap. leg.; onomatopoeic. Xak. xı one says ol ant: cars cars urdi: darabahu “ala cildihi bi-şatot "he beat him noisily on his bare skin” Kaş. I 348.” Dis. CSD çasut See casut, Dis. CSM ?E çüsüm See çüşüm. Dis, V. CSRçasur- See çaşur-. Mon. CŞ VU çaş 'turquoise'; n.o.a.b., displaced in about xiv in all languages by the Pe. 1.-vv, firüza. Xak. xı çaş al-fayrüsac 'turquoise' Kaş. I 330 (verse); o.o. II 79 (saşur-), II 192 (kontur-): xiv Muh. al-fayrüzac çaş (c-) Mel. 75, 8; ça:ş (c-) Rif. 178. çiş originally a quasi-onomatopoeic; survives in SW Osm. as a common N. for 'urination, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 475 
     
   
   
     MON. CZ  defecation”. Xak. xı çiş çiş “an expression used by a woman when making a boy (etc.) urinate” ('inda ibálati'l-gabi); also used by a horseman when making his horse urinate after a journey Kaş. IJ 331. Mon. V. CS*cag- See çaşut, çaşur-. S çeş- See seş-. Dis. V. CSAD çişe:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. çiş. Xak. xı oğla:n çişe:di: “the boy drinated and defecated'; this word is used only of children Kaş. III 267 (no Aor. or Infin.). Dis. CŞD PUD çaşut the exact pronunciation (-Ş- or -8-) is uncertain since the Uyf. script is ambiguous and the Kip. and Osm. forms may have been altered to conform to a supposed etymological connection with Ar. cásüs; the meaning too may have altered for the same reason. Active Dev. N. fr. €çaş-, cf. çaşur-, q.v. The meaning in UYğ. can only be conjectured, but as both words are used in Hend. with yopa:ğ/yona:-, 'delation' or “false accusation' seems the likeliest. Uyğ. vırı ff. Bud. (in a confession of sins; if İ have spoken lies or) çaşut yopağ kiltim erser 'practised delation or false accusation” U /7 76, 6; çaşut casurdimiz yopadımız erser TT IV 8, 71 v.l. (see note thereon): Civ. til talasur çaşut yopa£ tigilegir “there is a battle of tongues, and: delations and false accusations are whispered' TT I 74: Kap. xiv çaşut (c-) al-cüsüs 'spy'; it is a “Turcisized (mutarrak) form of the Ar. word ld. 43: Osm. xiv ff. çaşut(rare)/çaşıt “spy”: in several texts T'T.S I 148; Iİ 212 (the word still survives in Osm. and xx Anat. çaşıt 'mischief-maker, trickster' SDD 307; çavşut “spy” do. 312). Dis. V. CSDD çişet- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of cige:-. Xak. xı ura: gut kençin çişetti: “the woman made her child urinate and defecate” Kaş. II 307 (çişetü:r, çişetme:k). Dis. CŞG VUF çüşek Hap. leg.; the obvious translation of bi”l-suğdiya is ün the language of Suğd”, but it is doubtful whether in xr this means what we call 'Sogdian'. Suğd xı çüşek al-ri'y *pasturg land” Kaş. I 389. ?F çeşkel survives as çaşxal 'pot, pan” in G. Jarring, Uzbek Texts from Afghan Turhestan, Lund/Leipzig, undated, p. 182, but prob. an lranian l.-w. Gancak xı çeşkel al-xazaf (mis-spelt cazaf) tca'l-burmatu'l-a'gár. (?rend, with Atalay, we'l-a'sár) "an earthenware or stone cooking pot or pieces of such pottery' Kaş. I 482. 431 , Dis. CŞM PU ?F çüşüm 'mulberry'; survives in the SE “Turfan dialect as cücem/yücem, A. von le Coq, Sprichwórter und Lieder aus der Gegend von Turfan, Leipzig, r910, p. 89. The Üyğ. texts are all late and the second consonant could be read as -)-. "The relationship between this word and üjme:, q.v., is obscure; both are prob. l-w.s; they can hardly go back to one original but might have been borrowed fr. different Iranian dialects. Uyğ. vırı ff. Civ. çüşüm kuruğ üzüm suvi “a decoction of mulberries and raisins' H I 83; çüşüm sögütninp yürün kasıkı “the white bark of a mulberry-tree'.do. 191: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. *mulberry-tree'! qusum (sic) R III 2182; çüşüm (?çöşöm) Ligeti 155. Dis. CSR SF ça:şır See 1 ca:tir. Dis. V. CSRD çaşur- presumably Caus. f. of “çaş-, cf. çaşut, q.v. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. (if I have lied or) çaşurdum (mistranscribed çağurdum) “delated” (or used rough, harsh language) U II 85, 23; (if we have lied or) çaşurdumuz yopadimiz erser 'delated and made false accusations! 77 IV 8, 71 (for v.l. see cagut); çaşut casurmamak “not to delate' (or use rough, harsh language) Suv. 220, 2. Dis. CYD VU?F çıydam the Ç- is vocalized with both fatha and kasra; survives in NC Kir. çiydan (sic) 'a shepherd's woollen overcoat with a felt lining; Kzx. ceydem (sic) “an open-necked shirt” R IV 66 (only); the word has a foreign look. Xak. xi çıydam “the name of a thin felt (libd), which is used to make raincoats (al-mamátir) and to stuff mattresses (yuhgà bihi'l-furş) Kaş. III 176. Dis. CYN S çayan See ca:dan, S çoyın See ço:dın. Mon. CZ çuz 'brocade' or the like. One of numerous words with this meaning, see barçın, but unlike most of them not demonstrably a 1.-vv. N.o.a.b. Xak. xr quz diböc sini mudhab humr wa athami 'Chinese gold brocade, red and black' Kag. 7 325: KB (anything that is worthless lies on the ground) ağı cuz ağır boldı törde yatur “silk and gold brocades have become precious and lie on the place of honour” goz? 0.0. of ağı cuz 1426, 4773, 5367; çuz ol bu örüm ton ağılar teni “this woven garment is gold brocade, the equal of silk brocades” 4768: xin(?) Aft. cuz atlas bolur kız “gold brocade and satin become costly' 48o: Kom. xiv "light taffeta” cuz CCI; Gr.: Kip. xin al-atlas “satin” quz; al-sandalat (sic, I——— MÀ Á——À ——— i ESSSSHMBHEBEBESILEEMBEPEEI E S" fee $ UN, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 476 
     
   
   
     432 precise meaning obscure, perhaps “taffeta”) yupka: çuz that is “thin satin” Hou. 19, 6. Mon. V. CZçız- originally “to scratch', hence “to draw a line" or more generally “to draw'; s.i.a.m.l.g. except NE; in NC and some NW languages çız-/sız-, the latter commoner, SW Osm, (only) çiz- (sic), with these and some extended meanings. Uy£. viri ff. Bud. (he took a white stone) yer çızıp 'scratched lines on the ground' (and cast lots) Hiien-ts. 36: Civ. nigán çızıp bitig bérdim 'I have given (this) document drawing (my) personal sign on it” USf. 3, 16: (Çağ, xv ff. sız- naqş kardan “to draw, paint San. 251v. 24): Xwar. xiv €1zZ- “to draw (a MON. CZ picture, etc.)” Qutb 46: Kom. xiv “to write' çız- (or ?çiz-, and yaz-) CCI; Gr.: Kip. xın kataba "to write! çız- ("with back vowel"); Tkm. ya:z- Hou. 33, 12; xaffa mina'l-xaff "to draw a line” çız- (and ya:z-) do. 39, 20; 0.0. 45, 16 fİ.: xiv ÇIZ- xaffa İd. 43: Osm. xvin ÇİZ- ('with -1- not -€-”) in Emi, xaff haşidan "to draw a line” San. 218v. 9. S çöz- See çöl-. Dis. V. CZDD çızdur- Caus. f. of çız-, s.i.s.m.l. w. the same phonetic changes. Uyğ. vinff. Civ. vusin çızdurup “having their magic figure (Chinese l.-w., fu) drawn' TT VII 26, 8.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 477 
     
   
   
     INITIAL DENTAL PLOSIVES Mon. DA VU ti there is no doubt that this word exists, since it begins a line in 77 III, but it is very rare and n.o.a.b.; from the context 'continuously' or the like. See tudin. Uy£. vun ff. Man. ti turkaru mepilikin 'continuously and completely in happiness! TT III 110; alo. do. gö (üçün)/ Bud. Suv. 594, 3-4 (ornağlığ). VU'?F to: Hap. leg.; prob. a Chinese l.-vv., but cf. (VU) töp, Chinese £”ang 'soup' (Giles 10,751) was prob. pronounced to in NW China in vı ff. Xak. xı to: (bi'l-ijbá' “vith a back vowel") the word for 'flour (dagiq) cooked in the manner of al-talbina (bran, milk, and honey soup"), poured over boiled wheat ('alà xadima; in the MS. mis-spelt xadibilir), fermented and then drunk” Kaş. 111 207. tü: specifically “the hair of the body” (as opposed to saç “the hair of the head”, kil "hair” generally, and esp. “a stiff hair, bristle”, and yü:&amp; 'feather') but also occasionally used for 'feathers', and in Xak. as a Numerative. Kaş.”s other translations are peculiar to him. In Uyi. consistently spelt tuu; tügl in U III 38, 33-4 (bürtül-) is prob. a misreading of tüsi, but the word did become tüğ in the medieval period (exceptionally, this is certainly the later not the earlier form) and s.i.a.m.l.g. as tüg/tük; SW Osm., Tkm. tüy. Türkü vir ff. (I am a golden-winged eagle) tanım tüsi: takı: tüke:mezken 'although my body feathers are not yet fully grown' IrkB 3: Uy£. vun ff. Bud. (he was terrified and) tü tübleri yokaru turup “the roots of his body hair stood up” U II 29, 17-18; tü köz kaşı kapakı közünü turur “her hair, eyebrows, and eyelids are clearly visible! TT X 436-7 (so read); birer birer tü sayu 'every single hair” Suv. 348, 2; a.o. TT V 12, 117 (evin): Civ. (if a man rubs the ashes of a dog's tooth on himself) tü ünmez bolur “the body hair does not grow' TT VII 23, 3-4; esgek tüsi *donkey's hair” H1 1 104; o.o. do. 116: xiv Chin.-Uyğ. Dict. "hair" tük tülük (sic?) R III 1530; Ligeti 271: Xak. x1 tü: sa'ru'l-badan 'the body hair”: hence one says bi:r tü: sag şu"ayra “one small hair”: tü: a/-/azın “colour” ; hence one says tü:deş to:nla:r 'garments of onc colour ('alà lawn seühid): tü: siyatu'l-xayl "a horse's coat'; hence one says atm ne: tü:lüg "vhat (coloured) coat has your horse?” Kaş. İL 207; a.o. 11 24, 4: tü: tü: çeçek çerğeşü:r 'flowers of every kind (min kull cins) grow in rows' I 179, 22 and 11285, 5: KB tümen tü Cécekler 'innumerable flowers! 70; tümen mip tü erdem "innumerable manly virtues! 304; (my fiftieth year has come and) kuğu kildi kuzğun tüsi teg başım “and has made my head which was like a raven's feathers like a swan's!' 365; 0.0. 1106, 1512, 1979: xin(?) Tef. tüğ "body hair” 318: Çağ. xvíff. tük (rhyming with Zük') mü "hair, in Rümi tüy San. 183r. 4: Xvvar. xin(?) bedeninün kamağı tüg tülüklüğ boldi “the whole of his body became hairy' Oğ. 14-15: Kip. xv riş 'feathers' (yup and) tüg Tuh. 16b. 13: Osm. xiv and xv tü 'body hair' in several texts T TS I 704; II 692; IV 769: xvi tüg once (1I); xvin tüy (s) in Rümi, müy "hair", also called by them tüğ San. 188r. 15; a.o. do. 183r. 4. Mon. V. DAt6:- (dé:-) specifically “to say”, not “to speak”, which is ay- or sózle:-; in the early period necessarily accompanied by words in oratio recta; in some cases the words spoken are followed by tép leading up to some other word; tép tédi is common in Uy£. Bud., e.g. TT V. "The word does not necessarily imply actual utterance, and in phr. like tép sakmtım, “1 thought that), tép is barely more than inverted commas expressed as a word. In course of time té:- came to be used in various idioms without words in oratio recta, e.g. SW Osm. demek ki “that means that . . .' and Türkcede buna ne dersiniz “vhat do you call this in Turkish?” S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. initial d- even in languages which have few initial d-s;the only exceptions are those languages like Xakas which devoice all initial plosives, even b-. Türkü vırı té:- “to say”, spelt indiscriminately t6:- and te:- even in the same line, is very common; one unusual form used as a kind of written inverted comma is generally transcribed téyin/teyin, but in fact it seems to be a Participle replacing *tégen and should be transcribed teyen: vırı ff. té:-, usually spelt té-, occasionally te- is common in IrkB, other documents, and Man. texts: UYĞ. viri té:-, so spelt, is common in $u.: vir ff. Man.-A; Man.; Bud. and Civ. té-, so spelt, is common; in TT VIII except for one example of tiand one doubtful one of te-, it is consistently spelt té-: Xak. xı ol mapa: andağ té:di: hadà qala li “this is what he said to me” Kaş. Ill 247 (t&amp;r, t6:me:k), many o.o.: KB téis common, esp. in such phr. as negü tér eşitğil "hear what (so-and-so) says” followed by a passage in oratio recta 216, etc.: xırı(?) At. té-, "to say”, in some MSS. te-, is common; Tef. té- “to say” (with the words spoken); to call (something Dat., something); also in the phr. tép ay- “to say" (with the words spoken) is very common 291: Çağ. xv ff. dé- guftan “to say” San. 227r. 7 (quotns.; listed among words beginning with déy-[diy- it is explained that this has been done, although the yd in dé- merely represents -€-, since the der. f.s are spelt déyil-, deyiş-): Xwar. xi dé- “AH 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 478 
     
   
   
     MON. V. DA 434 s ff., 26: xiri(?) te- (perhaps to be transcribed de-) is common in Oj., esp. in the phr. tep tedi: xiv té- Qutb 176; dé- MN 77, etc.; té47, etc.: Kom. xiv the normal word for “to say' is ayt- (ayit-), but dep/dey following quotns. are common, other forms very rare CCG; Gr. 81 (quotns., q.v.): Kip. xiu qala (ayt-, and one says) de:- Hou. 43, 3: Tkm. xiv dedi: göla, and one says ne: dedi: “vhat did he say ?'; Imperat. dé (spelt deh) ld. 48 (the last words to distinguish this V. fr. did- (tit-)): Kip. xv qdla (ayt- and) de- Tuh. 29b. 12; in 82b. it is said that the normal word for “to say” is ayt-, but in some dialects (”Tkm.) de-/dé- : Osm. xiv ff. de- is c.i.a.p., but T'T'S lists only the Ger, deyü (often spelt deyü) for written inverted commas 7 200; /7 291; III 190; IV 217. VU to:- “to close, block”, and the like; hitherto transcribed tu:- which is the pronunciation suggested by tuyuk, q.v., but, as it is the basis of tod-, tok, and tol-, to:- is more probable. N.o.a.b. Türkü vır (there is only one road over the Kögmen mountains and) tomış teyen eşidip “I have heard that it is blocked” T 23: Uyğ.vır ff. Man. tamu yolun totupuz "you have blocked the road to hell” TT III 14: Xak. xı ol ağzın to:dı: kazama fahu "he closed his mouth'; also used for blocking up a hole (idà sadda hull taqb) Kaş. III 247 (to:r, to:ma:k): K B (geese, ducks, swans, and sandgrouse) kaliki tod: 'fill the air” 72; (the sky let its forelock fall and) yaruk yüz todi “obscured its bright face' 5824. Mon. DB ta:b 'scar, mark on the body', and the like. 'The question of the survival of this word is obscure. "There is a Pe. word tab meaning, inter alia, 'furrow, wrinkle', which occurs as a ].-w. in some modern languages and might be confused with it. Kaj.'s second quotation looks more like an onomatopoeic for the sound of a beating and the like, and an onomatopoeic tap with this sense occurs in Kom. xiv CCG 143, 415 146, 13 (not in Gr.) and some modern languages. "This word, however, seems to survive in SC xix Ózb.(?) ta:p 'trace, footprint, mark, scar! Vam. 253 and NW Kaz. tap 'blot, stain, dirty mark” R III 945. Xak. xı ta:b “a scar' (al-nadab) on the skin from the mark of a wound or blow; and one says ol anı: ta:b ta:b urdi: "he hit him quickly and from every direction' (sazi'a(n) min küll ab) Kaş, Haas: Xwar. xiv (of a cow) tanında ak tab bar taki kara tab yok turur 'there are white patches on its body, but no black patches' Nahc. 340, 17 f£: Kip. xiv. tap (“vith -p”) kalima yugàál bi-ma"nö”l-kaff tap ur ay ukfuf 'ani'l-darb “slapV İd. 61. .tap N./A. meaning 'satisfaction, sufficiency , satisfactory, sufficient', and the like. Survives only(?) in NE Kaç. tap 'suitable, congruous'; Alt., Tel. tap-pile, or tabipca (Kil) (do) as you wish' R III 946; Tuv. ditto. Uyğ. vii ff. Man. TTIX 41 (bedüttür-): Bud. kaltı tapınça “to his satisfaction, as much as he wished' U /7 28, 2; 30, 32; tapınça ditto Suv. 136, 1; 487, 8: Civ. ópdün kédin yér öz tapınça 'east and west the land is as you yourself wish' TT I6; a.o.o.: (if a man cuts his nails on a Swine Day) tavar tap: bolur “he gets satisfaction in his possessions” TT VII 32, 18; köpülinçe tapinca USp. 98, 23: Xak. xı tap a Particle (barf) meaning 'suflicient, satisfactory'; hence one says bu: aş mapa: tap “this food is sufficient for me” (hasbi), and one says tap boldi: kafá, "it was sufhcient' Kaş. I 318: KB ukuşluğ kişike ési tap ukuş “to a man of understanding, understanding is a sufficient companion; o.o. 318, 4762-7, 6078: xin(?) Az. (put grecd of riches out of your heart) kedim birle tap tut karin toklukin 'be satisfied with clothes to wear and a full belly" 186; o.o. 277-8: Tef. tap 'sufficient, sufficiently! 285: Xwar.xin(?) atam çımad etüp érse menüy tapum érürmü “if my father gives disagreeable orders (Mong. l.-w.), is it any satisfaction to me?” Og. 187-8: xiv apar tap bolur ópin rahatlardın "he is satisfied with it without other comforts” Nalic. 439, 1t. tev 'trick, device'; practically syn. vv. 1 a: and cevis, q.v., but always used in a pejorative sense; in Uyg. only in the Hend. tev (VU 2) kür. Cf. tevlig. N.o.a.b. Uyf. vurfk. Man.-A M III 9, 11-12 (ii) (2 a:r-): Man. M II 5,(8-10 antağ): Bud. tev (kür) yavlak sakınç “tricks (Hend.) and evil thoughts U II 23, ız: Xak. xı tev (spelt tef) al-mahr twa'l-hila 'trick, ruse' Kaş. I 332 (prov.). to:b “a ball”, Kag.'s etymology is of course erroneous, see tobik, S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE(?), usually as top. See Doerfer 11 948. Xak. xi "a ball” (al-kura) is called to:b, itis an abbreviation (qaşr) of tobik Kaş. III 119; alo. I 318 (çıp): xiv Muh. al-hura to:p Mel, 63, 12 (only): Çağ. xv ff. top güy-i mudatwroar "a spherical ball”, in Ar. kura; and they use it metaph. for "a cannon” (tópi) which they fire in the direction of the enemy, in Ar. madfa" San. 167v. r: Kom. xiv 'ball' top CCG; Gr.: Kap. xiv fob (sic?, between tap and fap- with -p- marked in both) a/-Rura İd. 61: xv kura tob Tuh. 31a. tr. S top See tolp. VU tóp perhaps survives.in NC xix Kzx. tüp *gruel; porridge' (Russian Aas/ra). Xak. xı tóp *boiled wheat' (xadima) mixed with barley dough (or yeast? xamir), wrapped in felt, left in a warm place to mature, and eaten later' Kag. I 318. tü:b (d-) originally “the root of a tree or plant'; hence metaph. "the foundation (of a structure); the bottom (e.g. of the sea); the ancestry or origin (e.g. of a man)”. S.i.a.m.l.g., usually as tüp, but NE Tuv. düp; SW Az. dib, Osm. dib/dip; ''km. düp. Cf. tö:z, 1 kök, yiltiz. See Doerfer 11 995. Uy&amp;. vitr ff. Man. (after a list of four great sins) tübinde ol ok ma ölmeki bar “in their roots mum———————— —ms—á— ——À má ]on—e—— lo HH REEERR RN IIILIIIIIRI..,. Q. ııı ıı 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 479 
     
   
   
     EEEMEE———————— —— DIts—í—í—TU— "€ n EPEEEZLJCLILIEEIOEOE|.LOQILDRCILLLLILLLLTLUIHIIIOMEQNUMHBRIA E Nl DIS; DBA 435 is precisely their death" M 77 ır, 8-9; a.o, TT 11 $2-3 (Il-): Bud. Sanskrit jatibhavantadaríi 'seeing the end of birth and existence' tuğum ajunnu:p tüpin (?for tübin) körte:çi TT VIII A.47; altın tüb avis tamuka 'down to the Jowest avici hell” Suv. 133, 16; ep tübinde "at the last, in the end” TT VII 40, 143; 0.0. U H əş, 17 (tü:), Hüen-ts. 154 (üzlünçü:): Civ. kulak tübi tepreser “if the root of the ear tvvitches" TT VII 34, 10; til tüpl (?for tübi) 'the root of the tongue' TT VIII L1; 0.0. H I 162, 165, 191 (buda:) Xak. xi tü:b “the root” (aş?) of any tree; one says yığa:ç tü:bl: “the root of a tree'; tü:b “the foundation” (uss) of a wall; one saf/s ta:m tü:bi: 'the foundation of a wall: one also says tü:b for “the ancestry of a man” (aglz'l-insán), hence one says tü:blüg eren “a well-born (agi!) man” Kaş. III 119; (thc pot says) tü:büm altu:n *my bottom (asfal) is gold” 7 52, ro, kaya: tübi: (sic) “the foot (asfal) of the rock” 7 73, 9; (hit a Persian in the eye and) tikenig tübre: "a thorn bush at the roots” (a/-aş)): 11 280, 14 2,0. III 123 (tö:z): KB (a man's mind is like a bottomless sea) biliğ yinçü sinı tübinde yatur “visdom lies like a pearl, on its bottom" 211; (the sun is stable) bu t&amp;bit tédüküm tübi berk bolur 'by "stable" I mean that its foundation is firm' 833; söz tübi aşlı “the foundation (Hend.) of a statement” 999; (if you take a vvife, take one: socially inferior to yourself) bedük tübke yakma “do not go near a noble family” 4479; o.o. 506 (u:1), 889, 1140 (1 u:ç), 1704, 441 1, etc.: x1(?) K BVP 11 (tlz-): xin(?) Tef. tüb 'the root (of a tree); the bottom (of a well)' 316, 319: xiv Muh. “the root (asl) of the tongue” dil tü:bi: Mel. 47, 3; Rif. 141 (ti:]); sadru'[-bayt "the front(?) of a house” éw ti:bi: 179 (only): Çağ. xv ff. tüp dib, either “the root" (dib) of a tree or of anything else Vel. 201 (quotns.); tüb zir wa bix wa bin 'bottom, root, foundation” San. 167r. 26 (quotns.): Xwar. xit düb “root (of a tree), foundation” "Ali sz: xıv tüb 'bottom' (of water) Qutb 189: Kom. xiv “root, foundation beneath” tüb CC7, CCG, Gr. 26o (quotns.): Kip. xin. aslu'l-şacara tib Hou. 7, ır: Xiv dib ai-qa'r “the bottom' İ4. 47: xv qa'ru'l-jay' wa asfaluhu tüb (in margin, in second hand, dib) Tu. 29b. 4; 2.0. 73b. 9: Osm. xiv to xvi dib “root” in several texts, but dib in dib dede “ancestor” looks more like a jingle TTS I 209; 11 3oz, İH 196; IV 227. Mon. V. DB1 tap- "to serve”, in the sense both of serving a human master, and serving God, i.e. worshipping. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. tap“to worship'. Türkü vırı ff. Man. TT II ro, 79 (ağırla:-): Uyğ. ix (my sons, grow up like my teacher and) xanka: tap 'serve the Xan' Sucí 9: virt ff. Civ. ündedeçi til ağız tapğay “the vociferous tongue and mouth will serve' (sic?) TT I 108: O. Kir. ix ff. xanım elimke: tapdım 'I served my Xan and my realm Mal. 13, 2; 0.0. do. 3, etc. 46, 2: Xak. xı kul tepri:ke: tapdı: "the servant served (or wor shipped, 'abada'l-'abd) God”, and one says ol xa:nka: tapdı: "he served (xadama) the king" (etc.) Kaş. II 3 (tapa:r, tapma:k), yalguk tapar karınka: "man serves (yaxdum) his belly! IJI 222, 1: KB tapuğçıka tapsa uguzluk bolur “if a man serves a servant he gets no value for it” 3750: Çağ. xv ff. tab- (so spelt) parastidan 'to worship'; der. fr. tabuk San. 15ov. 8: Xwar. xiv tap- “to worship' Qutb 167. 2 tap- “to find”, S.i.a.m.l.g., the only word for 'to find' except in SW Osm. where bul-, q.v., is commoner. Uy£. vırı ff. Man. kutğarğu tınlığlarığ tapdukta 'when you found mortals to save” TT III 61; a.o. do. 168 (amril-): Bud. U TT 36, 43 (bul-): Civ. neme tapmaz “he does not find anything! TT VII 28, 40; tavar tapar “he attains wealth' do. 29, 16; (if you seek for wealth) buldup taptın “you attain it (Hend.) TT Tir: Xak. xı ol ne:pni: tapdı: “he found (tacada) the thing”, which was lost Kaş. I1 3 (same para. as 1 tap-); a.o. I 425, ız (2:12:): xiu(?) Tef. tap- “to find, attain” 285: xiv Muh. wacada da:p- Mel. zo, 1; Rif. gg (tap-); lahiqa “to reach' da:p- zo, 1 (ılıq yet-): Çağ. xv ff. tap- (^with -p-") yáfian "to find” San. 150v. 8; a.o.o.: Kom. XIV “to find” tap- CCG; Gr. 235 (quotn.): Xwar. xıı(?) tap- “to find” Og. 3, a.o.o.: xiv ditto Qutb 167; Nahc. 343, 4: “to obtain" MN 140, etc.: Kip. xiv fap- (with -p-") wacada İd. 61; Bul. 88v.; tap- iltaqd “to meet; hence beyni: tapğıl “meet the beg” İd. 61; a.o. do. 36 (bul-): xv tap- roacada av iltaqd aw şadafa Md . Kav. 10, 10; wacada tap- Tuh. 38b. 6. tav- See tavış-. tep- (?d-) “to kick (someone Acc.)', hence “to stamp, clap”, etc. S.ia.m.lg.; in SW Az. tep-; Osm. tep-/dep-; "Tkm. dep-. Uyğ. vini ff. Bud. (my own evil deeds) başda tepdi “have kicked me on the head” U IV 38, 1515 2.0. III 14, 3: Xak. xr ol kulin tepdi: “he kicked (rakala . . . bí-ríclihi) his slave" Kaş. 11 3 (tepe:r, tepme:k); o.o. 7 386 (tepig); 526 (örtğü:n), etc.: KB çıkar su kayuda adak tepseler “vvater comes out wherever they tread” 974: xiv Muh. rafasa "to kick” depMal. 26, ır, Rif. 109 (tep-): Çağ. xv ff. tép(*with -p-") /akad zadan wa bd zadan “to kick" San. 188v. 1 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv tép- ditto Qutb 176: Kip. xui rafasa tep- Hou. 34, 13: xıv ditto İd. 37; dep- ('with -p-”) rafasa do. 47: xv tep- rafasa Kas. 9, 3; Tuh. 17b. 3. tev- 'to impale' (on a spit) and the like. N.o.a.b. Xak. xi ol etiğ sı:şka: tevdi: “he impaled (nazara) the meat on the spit' (etc.) Kaş. II 15 (teve:r, tevme:k); tevdi: etni: “he impaled (şakka) the meat on a spit' I 401, 7; o. do. 9: Kip. xiv dew- xamaşa “to scratch', one says yüzin devvdi: “he scratched his face” d. 51. Dis. DBA D tapa: Ger. fr. 2 tap-; normally a Postposition meaning “tovvards", but there are 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 480 
     
   
   
     436 DIS traces of its use as a Common N. Survives in NW Kaz. taba R III 959 but there following the Dat. Cf. taparu:. Türkü vir tapa: is fairly common, e.g. (I campaigned) yırğaru: Oğuz bodun tapa: 'northwards towards (i.e. against) the Oğuz people” 7 E 28: Uy£. vir tapa: is fairly common, e.g. Çİk tapa: yoridim “Iİ marched towards (against) the Cik' Su. E 7; a.o. do. E 10(1: d-): vit1 ff. Bud. tapa is common, e.g. içğerü kanı xan tapa kigürdi 'he brought him into the palace to his father the king” PP 25, 2-3; o.o. do. ör, 4; U 1123, 11; 24, 3; U İİİ 36, 17; TT .X common: Civ. i$ tapa körsersen “if you consult (the omens) concerning an illness! TT I 77, 98; :8.0.0.: Xak. xı tapa: a Particle (/arf) representing “to” (2/4), one says menip tapa: keldi: “he came to me”: tapa: a Particle meaning “dislike, aversion” (al-ram); hence one says ol anın tapa:sr kildi: ca"ala lahu mda yarğamuhu "he did what he disliked to him” Kaş. III 216; several o.o. in the first sense: KB isizler yakın bolsa be£ler tapa 'if evil men are near the begs' 889; 0.0. 578, 5446: xın(?) At. 449 (ük-); Tef. tapa “to, towards" 280. xiv Rbğ. Tà'if tapa “in the direction of “T3”if” R III 959. Xwar. xii ditto “A/ 22: xiv ditto Qutb 67; Nahc. 78, 14; 102, 9; 139, 6-7. F dawa: the two meanings are unconnected; the first seems to represent Ar. dawd 'drug', etc., a lw. in many modern languages; the second is inexplicable. Xak. xr dawa: 'the fruit of the tamarisk (hamlu'l-tarfa') which is used by dyers”: dawa: 'flocks ('amita) of wool which are twisted into a rough rope, put on the distaff, and spun' Kaş. III 237. D tapı: 'satisfaction' and the like; prob. tap with the 3rd Pers. Poss. Suff. regarded as a Common N. Pec. to Xak. Xak. x1 tapı: 'satisfaction! (a/-rida) with something; hence one says bu: t:gta: anın tapı:sı: kere:k "he ought to be satisfied with this affair'; and one says bo:dı: tapı: er racul rab"a “a man of moderate stature” Kaş. III 216: KB tapuğ beg tapis! üze bolmasa ff the service is not to the beg's satisfaction” 84o, a.o. 843, (hovvever decrepit this good man may be) tapı men bulayın (so read?) bu edgü eşi “1 shall find satisfaction in this good companion' 924. S teve: (deve:) See tevey. tüpi: originally merely “a high wind', later "a high wind carrying snow or dust'. Survives onls(?) in SW Osm. tipi 'snow-storm', but 'Tkm. tüveley 'dust-storm' is clearly a der. f. Xak. xı tüpi: al-rihu'l-' aif “a high wind' Kaş. III 216 (verse); I 219 (ağtar-) a.o.o. in the context of a high wind clearing the sky or fanning the flames: Kip. xim al-sáfí mina'l-filc wva ğayriht "a high wind driving snow, etc.” (VU) tipi: (unvocalized, -b-) Hou. 5, 12: xiv tipi: (-5-) “vind (rif) coming with snow' İd. 37; dipl: (with -p-") ditto do. 47. töpü: (töpö:) “the top”, more esp. of a natural feature (mountain, etc.) or a man's head; hence, . DBA by extension, “a hil”. S.i.a.m.lig,, the forms varying fr. NE, NC töbö through SE tópe; NW töbe to SC Uzb. tepa; SW Az, Osm. tepe; Tkm. depe. See Doerfer II 872. 'Türkii vitt (reaching down) tepri: töpüsinde: “from the height of heaven” I E ri, II E ro: Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-A otka örtenke tópün tüşünür (s) 'fall headlong into fire and flames! M I 9, 13-14; o.o. do. 17, 19-20; 20, 3: Man. tópüsin toptaru 'turning him head downwards' M İİ 13, 5; alo. TT IX 16: Chr. (the Magi) tópün tüsüp yüküntiler 'fell on their faces and worshipped' U 7 8, 16-17: Bud. töpüsi üze yükünüp U II zo, 23-4; Sumer tağnın töpüsinde “on the summit of Mount Sumeru” U I 23, 4-5; tópün yatğururlar “make them lie on their faces! TM IV əsə, 34; olo. U II qo, 107-8 (ucrug); TT V 8, so, etc.: Civ. topuz künde töpüde bolur "on the Swine Day it is in the top of the head' TT VII 19, 13: Xak. xi töpü: quilatu'l-cabal "the summit of a mountain'; hence one says ta:ğ töpü:si:: töpü: hàmatu'l-insán "the crown of a man's hcad” Kaş. 111 216; töpü: ağdı: “he climbed the hill (al-quff) I 309, 16; a.o. İİ 79, 18 (alın): xını(?) Tef. tepe/töpe “the summit (of a mountain)' 299, 309: xiv Muh. al-hüma tö:pe: Mel. 46, 2; Rif. 139: (under 'kinds of ground") murtafi” va "alı "high! tepe: 74, 11; 177: Çağ. xv ff. töpe (with -p-”) (1) "a tall hill” (tall-i buland); (2) "the top of the head' (farq-t sar) (quotn.) San. 167v. 22; tépe (with -p-”) same translations do. 189v. 10: Xwar. xiv tópe 'the top (of the head, of a mountain)! Quib 185, 189 (tübe), Nahc. 283, 11: Kom. xiv “the crown of the head” tebe CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xur al-tall tepe: (-b-) Hou. 6, 16; mugaddamu'l-ra's *the front of the head' tepe: (-5-) do. 19, 18: xiv tepe: (-5-) al-tall İd. 37; depe: ('with -p-?) yáfüxu'l-ra's “the crown of the head”, also al-tall do. 47; a.o. do. 22 s.v. altağ :ş al-tal'a "a height” töpe: (-5-) Bul. 3, 10 (in do. 3, 16 ita 'whá “the cover (of a storage pit)' is translated foba:; the f- implies back vowels, but this is no doubt meant for töpe:): xv ummu'l-ra's “the brain! tópe: (-5-) Kav. 60, ro, Tuh. 4a. 13 (in margin beyini), tail töpe do. 8b. 9 (in margin depe, tepe), kurcam, “heaps (of earth, etc.)' tópe do. 31a. 9; teastu'l-ra's “the middle of the head” töpe do. 38a. o. Dis. DBC VU?F tapça:n/tapçan prob. a l.-w. of unknown origin; it is likely that both forms are Gancak. N.o.a.b. Xak.(?) xı tapca:n "a thing in the shape of a tray (al-xiteán) with three legs (al-qawa' im); one climbs on it when picking grapes in order to pick the bunches that are out of reach (from the ground)! Kaş. I 435: Gancak xı tapcap “a thing in the shape of a tray with three legs, on which the vineyard keeper (read al-náfür) climbs when picking grapes to reach the bunches' III 385: Kip. xiv tapçan (-)c-) (VU) al-nalit a word with several meanings; the verb means “to Scratch, cut, carve'; possibly '(grape) cutting. İd. 61. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 481 
     
   
   
     DIS. DBĞ 437  Dis. V. DBCtevçi:- Hap. leg., but see tevcit-. Xak. xı ol to:nuğ tevçi:di: “he tacked (şamraca) the garment”, that is sevved it loosely (xiyáfa ğayr mü akkada) Kaş. ILI 276 (tevçi:r, tevçi:me:k). D tevçit- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of tevcl:-. Xak. Xi 0l to:nin teveitti: “he ordered that his garment should be sewn loosely (read mugabbala(n) for mugabbaka(n)) and tacked' (mugamraca(n) Kaş. H 329 (tevçitü:r, tevçitme:k). S tapçur- See tapşur-. / Tris. DBC D tüpi:çil Hap. leg.; mentioned only in a definition of the suffix -çıl/-çil as forming Adjs. (sifa) connoting the possession of something in excessive quantities. Hitherto mistranscribed ?üpgil, but a Den. N. in -çil fr. tüpi:, correctly spelt in the MS. Xak. xı for example, the expression for al-mirwàüh that is "a place where there are excessive gales' (hubübu'i-ri) tüpl:gil yér; tüpi: means *wind' and -çil is added to it to connote a large quantity (al-katr) Kaş. III 56. D tapçalığ Hap. leg.?; P.N./A. fr. "tapça:, which seems to be the Equative f. of ta:b meaning something like “bruise, disfigurement; bruised, damaged' Cf. tapçasız. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. Sie. 135, 13-14 (arta:k). D tapçasız Hap. leg.?; Priv. N./A. fr. *tapca:; 'unbruised, undamaged'; cf. tapça18. Uy. vii ff. Bud. (that blessed individual) inça kalti cambunad altun incip ertipü kirsiz tapçasız ertipü arığ süzük ertipü amrançığ ertipü seviğliğ erür “s very clean and undamaged like jambiünada gold, very pure (Hend.), very lovable, and very lovely' U II 37, 60-3. Dis. V. DBDD tepit- lap. leg.; Caus. f. of tep-; the more normal Caus. f. teptür- does not scem to be noted earlier than Çağ. xv ff. tépdür- Sar. 188v. 16 and s.i.s.m.l. in SE and SW. Uy£. viii ff. Bud. barğaymen anda srinalandrm sangramig tepitip kum Kicmik kilgaymen 'I will go there and make (mv elephants) trample down the monastery (Sanskrit l.-w.) of Srinálandáráma and will turn it into sand and dust' Hüen-ts. 321-3. Dis. DBG D tapığ N.Àc. fr. 1 tap-, “service” and the like. "Fhe word fairly soon became tapuğ by labial attraction, and the Uyğ.-A form tapağ is not uncommon in Uyg. Bud. Survived until xix in SW Osm. as tapu, but then became confused with tapu “land certificate', a corruption of Greek topos, and is now obsolete. See Doerfer 11 849. Uyğ. vir [long gap] ancip kelti: eki: kizizn tapığ bér [long gap] 'thus he came and gave(?) me his two daughters to serve me” Su. W 4-5: viri ff. Bud, bu tapığı yarayur “this service of his is advantageous' TT V 28, 126; bu yağışlığ tapığımıznı teğürüp (so read for feginib) 'offering this our service, accompanied by libations' St. 29, 8-9; tapağ/tapığ uduğ PP so, 4-5 etc. (uduğ): Civ. él uluslar tapığı yüğerü kelti üşkünde “the respectful service of realms and countries has come into your presence! TT / r, burxanlarka tapığ kil *worship the Buddhas' do. 131: Xak. xi tapu£ al-xidma “service”: tapuğ al-tà'a 'obedience (to God), hence one says tepri: tapuft: “obedience to God” Kaş. I 373; III 252 (6te:-); a.0.0.: KB kayust ytdi birle tapnur tapuğ “some (flowers) show their respect with their perfume' 97; o.o. 101, 840 (tapi:), 841, 4232, etc., all of service to a human master: xu(?) KBVP tapuğ kılğuka “to one who serves him” 48: xi(?) Tef. tapuğ “service” (to a human master) 286: xiv Muğ. xadama tapu:ğ kıl- Mel. 16, 14; Rif. 94 (al-'abd "slave” tapuk 52,5; 148 (mis-spelt)): Caf. xv ff. tapuk xidma ve tabu “service” Vel. 160 (quotn.): tapuğ/tapuk sıcda wa barastiş “vvorship” (to God), and metaph. (1) “a kind of obeisance' (ta'zim) which is prescribed in Turkistan and the dominions of the Mongol xörs (described at length); (2) xidma wa bandagi 'service' San. 151 V. 4 (quotns.): Xwar. xiti(?) tapuğ in Og. seems to mean something like “nearness”, e.g. tapuğunlarka men yürür bola men "1 shall be walking near (or in front of) you' r45; o.o. 149, 159, 224: Xiv tapuğ “service” Quib 168; MN 148, etc.: Kom. xiv “honour, respect tabux CCG; Gr.: Kip. xır xadama ta:pu: (-b-) et- Hou. 37, 8: xiv tapu: ("with -p-”) al-xidma, one says tapu kil- ca'ala'l-xidma İd. 61; xadama ta:pi: (-b-) et- Bul. 44r.: xv xidma tapu (-b-) Tuh. 14a. 8; xadama tapu (-5-) eyle- do. 15a. s. D tobik Dim. f. fr. to:b; properly “a ball”, but more often used metaph. for 'a rounded protuberant bone', usually 'ankle-bone', or 'knee-cap'. S.i.a.m.l.g. with minor phonetic changes, in NE, NC “knee-cap”, usually "ankle-bone” elsewhere. Uyğ. vii ff. Civ. in a list of parts of the bodv in which the soul lodges(?) the first item is missing, then come tag tobikta, the calf, the loins, the mouth, the hands (or arms?), ic tobikta, the palm of the hand, (missing), the tip of the (missing); lit. the two phr. mean 'the outer, and inner, protuberant bones”, but “ankle-bone” and 'wrist-bone' seem to be implied TT VII zo, 3-11; in a similar list regarding the position of moles the order is “the loins, the sexual organs, below the navel, above the navel, the lips, tobik üze, the thumb”, in this case "on the vvrist-bone” seems likeliest do. 37, ro: Xak. xı tobik “the ball (al-kura) which is struck with a polo-stick'; tobık süpü:k a/-kurdis mina'l-ta"üm "a (cooked) bone with meat on it” Kaş. 7 380; T 190 (iliş-) and rr o.o. meaning “ball”: KB çıkardı tobik “he brought out a ball” 622; a.o. 647: xiv Muh.(?) 'aynu'l-rukba 'knee-cap' to:bu:á Rif. r42 (only: Çağ. -——— əsçx€çxqĞx(exkxxx-nvc€6emecşxsxc-sccnTnxx-———rxxvxvxXvXvV)——.X.—.—.———————— E E ÇNÇNÇNÇ, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 482 
     
   
   
     438 xv ff. topuk ('with -p-'") gözak-f bö 'anklebone”, in Pe, pafül, in Ar. ka'b San. 167v. 22: tofuk (sic) (1) gird ma mudasewar. circular, spherical'; and metaph. (1) qubba-i xayma 'the ball on the top of a tent” (quotn. Oğuz náma); (2) tappa teca kuh-t kügtk “a hill or small mountain'; (3) güzah-i pa also called topuk do. 18or. 3: Xwar. xtii(?) the word read taguk in Oğ. (362), 365 is an error for topuk, see quotn. in San.: Kip. xın a/-Ra"b tobuk (misvocalized tabuk) Hon. 21, 7: xiv tobuk a/-ka"b ld. 61: xv al-ka'bán, which the vulgar call 'the foot's nipples! (bazzu'l-ric)) tobul: Kat. ör, 7; ka'b tobuk Tu). 3ob. 6 (margin). tavğaç the name of a Turkish tribe transcribed in Chinese t'o po (Giles 11,336 9,335; Pulleyblank, Middle Chinese t'ak bat); the emperors of the Yüan Wei Dynasty which ruled China fr. A.D. 386 to 53s belonged to this tribe, and the 'lürkü, who presumably first came into contact with China during this period, called China Tavğaç. Apart fr. the references in Chinese texts, the name is first mentioned in literature by a Byzantine chronicler, Theophanes Simocatta, who wrote in the second quarter of vil and mentions Taugast (pronounced Tarmgast) as "a famous city inhabited by the people called "Tourkoi” (see Gy. Moravesik, Byzantoturcica, Budapest, 1943, II 255). This form proves that the word was at this period pronounced Tavğaç and should be thus transcribed in the "Türkü texts. It would, however, be rash to analyse it ctymologically as a Dev. N. in -ğaç fr. *tav-, since this Suff. normally forms N.Ls. Türkü vri Tavğaç is common in /, //, T for “China” and *Chinese' (emperor, people, etc): vir ff. Man. tavğaç yérinte “in China” TT JI 6, 13: Uy. vin tavğaç xanı: “the emperor of China” Su. W 3; (1 had Bay Balik built on the Selene: river) soğdak tavğaçka: “for the Sogdians and Chinese' do. WW. 5; a.0.0.: vini ff, Bud. tavğaç élinte “in the Chinese empire' U L13, 4; 0.0. do. 14, 2 (t1; TT VII 14,2 etc.: O. Kir. (when I was zo years old) tavğaç xanğa: bardım “1 went to the emperor of China” Mal. 11, 9: Xak. xr tavğaç the name of Ma Sin, which is three months” journey farther than Şin. Sin was originally ( fi'l-asi) three (parts): Upper (a/-'wiyd) in the east Tavğaç, Middle (a/-masfi) Xıta:y, and Lower (al-sufla) Barxa:n, that is in Kásgar; but at the present time (a/-dn) Tavğaç ıs known as Ma Şin and Xita:y as Sin: Tavğaç ay Uyğur qeahsa Tat, xa Şini waltwa Tavğaç "Vavğaç” means Uyğur, which is the same as Tat (q.v.); and “Chinese” is Tavğaç: and any manufactured goods (al-magnii/át) when they are old and important are called Tavğaç edi:, as one says in Ar. şay” "ddi, and the kings are called after it Tavğaç xa:n, that is “an important old-established king”: and one says as a linked phrase (br/-izdicde) Tat Tavğaç meaning *Persians and “TFurks”: but in my view what I have said above is more correct (a/-aşahh) and is well known in the Moslem countries, and there (?outside the Moslem countries) DIS. DBĞ tbat phrase is used, and both of them are acceptable (hasan): "Tavğaç (VU) yoda:si: “a tree the leaves of which are like the leaves of a lily (al-siisán), used for medical purposes' (yutadüud bihi, the phr. might mean literally *a Chinaman's thigh") Kaş. 7 453: KB 68 (arkış): xin(?) KBPP (the author of the KB completed his book in the province of Kaşğar and presented it to the king of the East) Tavğaç Buğra Xan 25-6 (the same title, with some additions, occurs in the heading of Chap. IV (63 ff.) of the Fergana MS.; Tavğaç was a frequent component in Karakhanid royal titles). Tris. DBG D tapığçı: N.Ag. fr. tapif; "servant. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vinff. (she said) teğreki tapığçılarka "to the servants in her entourage” U JI 22, 2; tapağçıları (sic) TT X 249; 8.0. U 11] 83, 9 (udufcu:): Civ. tevlig kürlüg tapığçı “a deceitful (Hend.) servant TT I 182; o.o. USp. 91, 8 and ro: Xak. xi sizip tapuğçı: xádimuk "your servant! Kaş, T 376, 12; n.m.e.: KB tapuğçı 'servant' is common 99, 590, 842, 1554 (İğdiş), 3750, etc.) sometimes replaced rretri gratia by the cognate form tap£uci, e.g. 4014: xın(?) Tef, tapuğçi/ tapukçı 'servant! 286: Çağ. xv ff. tapuğçı/ tapukçı xidimatkar "servant” Vel. 160; tapukçı ("with -p-”) parastij kunanda wa xidmatkar *worshipper, servant" San. işrv. 10: Xwar. xiv tapuğçı “servant" Quib 168: Kip. xiv tapuct: (with -p-”) al-xádiin İd. 61. D tapığlığ P.N./A. fr. tapığ, n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir Man.-A M I 27, 2(1:a:tlığ): Bud. azkıya tapığlığ tavar 1dtimiz “vc have sent some trifling articles as a token of respect” JJiien-ts. 2025-6: Xak. xr tapuğluğ er insán dit xidma qadima “a man of long servicc” Kaş. I 495. D tapığsa:k Dev. N./A. fr. a Desid. Den. V. fr. tapığ, 'dutiful' and the like. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. (sons and daughters will be) tapığsak 'dutiful' (or “obedient” to their parents) TT VI 107; o.o. do. 278, 348: Xak. xı tapığsa:k er "a man who loves serving" (mulibb li'l-xidma; followed by a muddled and incorrect etymological explanation) Kaş. “77 168; toyın tapuğsa:k teprl: sevinçsiz 'thc unbelieving pagan wishes to serve (muta'abbid) God, but God is not pleased” JJI 377, 2: xın(?) Tef. tapuğsak 'devout' 286: Çağ. xv ff. tapuğsak syn. w. tapuğçı San. 151V. 10. D tapuğsuz Priv. N./A. fr. tapuğ (tapığ), pec. tq, KB? Xak. xı KB (my master) ağırladı ménteg tapuğsuz kuluğ “has honoured an undutiful servant like me” 389; 8.0. 646 (açın-). Dis. DBG : D tepiğ (d-) and tepük (d-) there is a clear etymological distinction between tepiğ N.Ac. and tepük Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. tep-, but there is some confusion betvveen the tvvo, (The first  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 483 
     
   
   
      DIS. V. DBL- 439 Kap. word below is a Sec. f. of *tepge:k Dev. N./A. in -ğe:k (connoting habitual action).) N.o.a.b. See Doerfer 11 869, 871. Xak. xi ' tepük “a thing cast from lead (yuşdğ mina'l-usruf) in the shape of the spindle whorl of a distaff which is wrapped in goat's hair or the like and used as a toy by boys who kick it about': and one says 0! kulin tepig tepdi: “he gave his slave several kicks” (ra&amp;la) Kaş. I 386; a.o. 7 27, 13: Çağ. xv ff. tépük ('with -p-") lakad “a kick' San. 189v. 8: Kip. xiv depek (“vith -p-”) al-raffás “a kicker'; one says bu at depekdür “this horse is a kicker" İd. 47: tepük (-5-) “A toy (ba) with which children play' do. 37. VU tüvek Hap. leg.; “a blow-pipe'; cf. tüveklik Xak. xr tüvek the translation is in disorder and corrupt; ?read /ihd gacari'l-xilaf ta liha'l-qadibil-rajb. yunza' (wa. yutaxxad) mitla'l-sabir, yurmü bihi'l-'ugfür. bi”l-banddiq wa kadülika yutaxxad min(hu) al-qanát "the bark of a willow-tree or a freshly cut branch stripped off (and made) into the shape of a trumpet; small birds are shot with it with pellets; in addition tubes are made from it' Kaş. I 388 (al-qanát has several meanings; if min and not minhu is correct the last words would mean “in addition it (i.c. a blow-pipe) is made from a reed"). Dis. V. DBGD tübger- (d-) Trans. Den. V. fr. tü:b; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. kertüke tegser yórügüg tübgerser sav tübi ertmez “if you attain the truth and base the explanation on it, the basis of your words does not pass away' Hüen-ts. 2116: Xak. xı ol r:şığ tübgerdi: tafahhaşa "an asli'l-amr wa'ttaba'a atarahu “he investigated the origin of the affair and fol- lowed up its traces! Kaş. 77 179 (tübgerür, tübgerme:k). Tris. DBG VUD tüveklik Hap. leg.; A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. tüvek, Xak. xı tüveklik “a twig (gugn) suitable for the manufacture of a pellet-shooter with one's breath (marmd”l-banddıq bi'l-nafs) with which small birds are shot' (yudrab) Kaş. I so8. Dis. DBL F tawil ].-w. fr. Ar. fabl, “a drum', no doubt acquired through some (?lranian) intermediary; survives in SW Az. tebil, Osm. davul, Xak. xı tawil (or tawul, the tám carries both kasra and damma) 'the drum' (al-tabl) which is beaten for the falcon when hunting; I1 reckon that it is taken from the Ar. word, the /- being changed to £- because the two sounds are near one another (examples of similar sound changes in Ar. are given) Kaş. III 165. PU toplu: Hap. leg.; this word has no obvious etymology to suggest its pronunciation. Xak. xi toplu: al-qabr, "the grave; when a man is cursed (subba) one says toplu:ka: tol MAY the grave be filled (/i-yamtala) with him” Kaş. 1 430. : D tapla:ğ N.Ac. fr. tapla:- , "satisfaction” and the like. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. bu nom ertininip uğrayu tüz taplağın sözledükda "when speaking of the particularly impartial(?) satisfaction (given by) this precious doctrine' TT V 26, 86; o.o. Hüen-ts. 2061, 2088: Xak. xı tapla:ğ al-ridà bi”l-şay satisfaction, gratification about something! ; one says bu: işda: senip tapla:ğınp ba:r mu: "are you satisfied, or gratifted, about this affair?” Kaş. I 462. D tabluk Hap. leg.; spelt tablu:k, but this is perhaps an error; the Section is headed *fa'lal, fa'làl with various vowels' ; A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. ta:b. Xak. xı tabluk a/-şuqüq fi'l-ard 'cracks in the ground” Kaş. I 467. D tevlig P.N./A. fr. tev; “deceitful, tricky'. Except in Xak. always in the Hend. tevlig kürlüg; n.o.a.b. Türkü vir tavğaç bodun tevliğin kürlüğin üçü:n "because the Chinese people were deceitful and tricky” 7 E 6, Il E 6: Uyf. vır ff. tevliğ kürlüğ savlarığ 'deccitful and tricky words! U II 85, 16; a.o. TT IV, p. 18, note A72, 3: Civ. tevliğ kürlüğ buyruk “a deceitful, tricky official” TT I 63-4; a.o. do. 182 (tapığçı:): Xak. xi tevlüğ a/-muhtdl wa'l-xaddà' 'artful, deceitful” Kaş. 7 477; a.o. 177 33, 26: KB oğrı tevliğ “an artful thief” 313; 1737 (kunuk). D tüblüg (d-) P.N./A. fr. tü:b; “having a root and the like. S.i.s.m.l. w. the same phonetic changes. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. kópül tüblüg kópül tózlüg 'rooted in the mind (Hend.) TT V 20, 9; a.o. do. 24, 68; töz tüblüğ kapığığ “the door of fundamental things” do. 26, 82; a.o. U III 33, 15 (6tiğ): Xak. xı Kaş. III 4o, 16 (yıldızlığ): KB (a man who has (influential) supporters becomes powerful) bu küçlüğ kişi kutka tüblüğ bolur “this man when powerful becomes fundamentally fortunate! 1699; (even if fortune sometimes stays with the ignorant man) biliglig bile turğa tüblüg erip “it will stay firmly based with the wise one” 1710. Dis. V. DBLD tapil- Pass. f. of 2 tap-; 'to be found'. S.i.a.m.l.g., often as tabil-. Xak. xı tapıldı: ne:p “the thing (which was [ost) was found” (mucida) Kaş. II 119 (taplu:r, tapulma:k sic): Çağ. xv ff. tapil- (with -p-") yafta sudan “to be found” San. Tşır. 9 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv tapil-/tapul- ditto Qur5 168, Nahc. 408, 7. D tepil- (?d-) Pass. f. of tep-, “to be kicked, trampled”, and the like. S.i.m.m.l.g., often as tebil-; SW Tkm. depil-. Xak. xr tepildi: yér 'the ground (etc.) was kicked' (rukila) Kaş. II 119 (teplü:r, tepülme:k sic): Çağ. xv ff. tepil- /akad zada şudan “to be kicked' San. 151r. 9 (quotn.). 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 484 
     
   
   
      440 DIS. V. VU tupul- usually “to pierce (something cc.) in spite of its apparently Pass. form. N.o.a.b.; for pronunciation see tupulğa:k. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. (in a long metrical passage about medical treatment; "the physician must know the eight kinds of virtues (of remcdies?), by being a master of all the drugs with knowledge held together(?). If he does not sec the appropriate time for using them") yaruk yasuk tuupulu (sic) ötrü uyar emlegeli igin kemlerin tmliğlarığ 'penetrating the light (??), then he can treat men's illnesses and diseases! Suv. 893. 13-15: Xak. xr ol ü:t tupuldi: saqa5a”l-naqb “he pierced a hole! (later. revocalized nuqiba”l-naqb, presumably because it looked Pass.); (Oğuz follows) Kaş. 77 119 (tuplu:r, tupulma:k); kó:k tupulğa:n aí-sumám “a mountain swallow'; it is the name of a bird; it is said that it has steel (ai-fülád) in its wings and strikes the summit of a mountain and penetrates ( yanfud) through to the other side; this was told me by a man from whom I received many favours; and one says bu er ol çeriğ tupulga:n “this man is always piercing (hattàk) the (enemy” s) ranks'; its origin is the phr. temür tupuldi: “the iron pierced (taqaba) because of its strength and hardness" I $19: KB kayu tağ kazar körse tuplur kayaf 'some men, you sce, dig into mountains and pierce rocks! 1734; titimlig kerek ham tupulsa çeriğ “he must be destructive(?) and pierce the (enemy's) ranks! 2328: Oğuz xı er to:nin tupuldi: 'the man took off (naza'a) his clothes” Kaş. I7 119. D tapla:- Den. V. fr. tap; “to be pleased, satisfied (with something ce.) , and the like. N.o.a.b.; the modern verbs of this form seem to be Den. V.s fr. tap as an onomatopoeic for a tapping or dripping sound. Türkü vırı üze: . tepri: 1duk yer suv /İ?eçim xalğan kuti: taplamadı: erinç “heaven above, the sacred land and water, and the divine favour [?enjoyed by my uncle the xağar) were apparently not pleased" 7/7 E as: vur ff. tapla:du:kimi:n tutarmen “1 take what I please” /rkB 3: Man. (the holv jak will hear this and) nen taplamağay “vill not be at all pleased” TT H 6, 26; kün ay tepri taplamaz işiğ neçe işledimiz erser “if we have done things which are displeasing to the sun and moon gods! Clas. rt4—16: Uyf. vitr ff. Bud. (1 will sce thc suitors;) men kentü özüm ök beglig taplağaymen “1 myself will be satisfied with a well-born one” U 77 21, 8: tégin alkuni taplamadi teg taluy öğüzke kirmişiğ tapladı “the prince, while he dislikcd all (the other suggestions) liked (the idea of) embarking on the ocean' PP 15, 2-4; o.o. TT V ro, 112 (ağırla:-), U III 25, 4; 36, 2 etc.: Civ. seni kamağun tapladı 'thev were all pleased with you” T'T I go, o.o. do. 128 (altinki)): Xak. xi ol to:nug tapla:dı: “he received (qaö7/a) the garment (etc.) and was pleased with it” (zadiyahu) Kaş. III 293 (tapla:r, tapla:ma:k): KB kamujf sözniyığsa ukuş taplamaz “if a man heaps up a lot of words, the understanding is not pleased” 185; beği taplasa tapğı acti  DBLkapuğ “if his beg is pleased, his service has opened a door” 843; 0.0. 848, 1431, 1610, 3984, etc.: xn1(?) Tef. ditto 286: Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 167; MN əşi. D tevle:- Hap. leg.?; Den. V. fr. tev. Türkü viii ff. Man. nece tevledimiz kürledimiz erser “if we have been somewhat deceitful and tricky! CöAvas. 111. D topla:- Den. V. fr. to:b, survives in SC Uzb. tüpla-; NW, SW all languages topla“to collect, gather together (Frans.)". Cf. yığ-. "Türkü vir topla:- “to crumple (something soft) into a ball” T' r3 (ucuz): viu ff. IrkB so (ócürgü:). D tüble:- (d-) Den. V. fr. tü:b; survives in NE Bar. tüple- 'to lay a foundation; to reach the bottom (of something); to investigate thoroughly! R 717 1596. Cf. tübğer-. Xak. xı ol işığ tüble:di: fahaşa "an aşl”l-amr wa baha tahu "he investigated the origin of the affair and searched it out” Kaş. JI] 293 (tüble: r, tüble:me:k): Kıp. xıv tible- aşşa/a "to trace the origin (of something)" İz. 37. D taplat- IIap. leg.?; Caus. f. of tapla:-. Xak. xr men anı: bu: rgka: taplattım “1 satisfied him (argayfuhu) over this affair! Kaş. 11 341 (taplatu:rmen, taplatma:k). D tüblet- (d-) Hap. leg.; Caus. f. öf tüble:-. Xak. xı ol bu: ı:şığ, telim tübletti: "he had this affair thoroughly investigated” (afftaga . katira(n)) Kaş, III 342 (tübletü:r, tübletme:k). VUD tuplun- 1lap. leg.; Refl. f. of tupul-. Xak. xı ta:m tuplundi: “the wall (ctc.) was pierced” (MS. yafqab, error for fuqiba?) Kaş. II 242, (tuplunu:r, tuplunma:k). / D tüblen- (d-) Hap. leg.?; Refl. f. of tüble:-. Xak. xı yığa:ç tüblendi: “the tree took root” (or was firmly rooted, ta'assala, MS. in ciror ta”accala), and one says er tüblendi: “the man became vvealthy” (fanratozoala), also used of anything that takes root (MS. in error ta'accala) Kaş. 11 242 (tüblenü:r, tüblenme:k). D taplas- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of tapla:-. Xak. xt ola:r bu: rsgi$. kamuğ taplaşdı: "they were all pleased (rag??) over this affair Kaş. I] 206 (taplaşu:r, taplaşma:k corrected fr. -mek in the MS.). D tübleş- (d-) Co-op. f. of tüble:-. Xak. xi ola:r bu: ışığ tüblesdi: “they investigated the origin (fafahhaşü 'ani'l-agl) of this affair together' Kaş. 17 206 (tübleşü:r, tübleşme:k corrected fr. -ma:k in the MS.). Tris. DBL ?D tavilku: 'Spiraea', perhaps specifically Spiraea. altaica; according to Yud..a shrub with particularly strong branches used to make bows and the like, botanically distinct fr. “the jujube tree (or shrub), Zizyphus', but not     
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 485 
     
   
   
        DIS. V. .unlike t. For the form cf. avilku:; -ku: is not a recognized Turkish suffix, but this word and tavılğu:ç must have a common origin, possibly foreign. Survives in several NE dialects as tabılka/tabılkat/tabılğı R III 972; Khak. tabılğı, NC Kir. tabılğı, Kzx. "tabılğı/tobulğu: SC Uzb. tabula; NW Kum. toburğu. A ].-w. in Russian as favolga (and tavolozhnik). 'Türkü viri ff. bir tavilku: yüz bolti: “one Spiraea became a hundred” (a hundred S. became a thousand, and a thousand S. ten thousand) JrkB 32: Xak. xı tavilku: dialect form (luda) of tavılğu:ç 'jujube tree" Kaş. I 489: Çağ. xv ff. tobulğu "the name of a hard red-coloured tree (difaxt . . . sulb wa surx-rang) from the branches of which they make handles for whips' San. 167v. 21. ?D tavılğu:ç Hap. leg.; cf. tavilku:. Xak. xi tavılğu:ç al-tabarxin (mis-spelt al-tayarxün) "the jujube tree, Zizyphus' Kaş, I 488. VUD tupulğa:k Dev. N./A. connoting Habitual Action fr. tupul-; lit. “constantly piercing', in practice (1) 'colic' (i.e. a constant piercing pain); (2) certain vegetables with a pungent odour. Survives in SW Osm. topalak 'globular; a globular lump'; topalak ağaçı “the buckthorn, Rhamnus chlorophorus globosusş , topalak köki “muskrootş the root of Nardostachis fatamansi or Cyperus bulhosa” Red, 1249, in the last meaning also "Tkm., the first meaning, and perhaps the vocalization, due to the erroneous supposition of an etymological connection with to:b. "The first vovvel in TT VIII is -u- and this was prob. the original pronunciation, since SW -o- often represents an original -u-, cf. toğ- for tuğ-, but later forms like topalak may represent an earlier topolğa:k. Uyğ. vı ff. Bud. tupulğak 'Cyperus?' occurs in Suv. 476, 3 in a list of 32 vegetable drugs, mainly l.-w.s: Civ. (a remedy) tupulğa:kka: “for colic'; tupulğak eneğüke em 'a remedy for colic (Hend.)' H 1185-16; (red and white sandalwood, Costus root) tupulğak 'Cyperus' (yellow incense) do. or: Xak. xi tupulğa:k al-su'd Cyperus: tupulğa:k a/-qiiatc "colic” Kaş. I soz: Çağ. xv ff. (VU) topalak (“vvith -p-”) “a root (bix) the size of an olive or bigger, black vvith a white inside and sweet-smelling, called sud in medical terminology and muşk-f zamim, *muskroot', in Pe.; it is diuretic, dissolves stone in the bladder, clears the veins, heals wounds, and is beneficial as a potion or poultice for scorpion stings' San. 167v. 6: Kom. xiv tobalak 'globular, a lump'(?)) CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv (VU) topalak (*with -p-") a plant (nabát) with a sweet scent and a seed (abb) the size of a pea (al-hummus) called al-su'd; women, are named after it /d. 62: ((VU) topalan (?Sec. f. of topolğa:n) a/-mağş fi'l-batn 'colic' do. 62); al-su'd (VU) toplak (sic) Bul, 3, 14: Xv sud (VU) topalak Tu. 19a. 5. Tris. V. DBLPUD tapa:la:- Den. V. fr. (PU) tapa: which —— — survives as taba: 'taking pleasure in the misDBN- 44t fortunes of others” in NC Kır., Kzx., and NW Kaz. (R IJI gör), a word which it is not easy to identify semantically with tapa: above. Survives as tabala- in the same languages. Xak. xi ol anı: tapa:la:dı: 'ayyarahu wa aşmata bihi "he insulted him and took pleasure in his misfortunes” Kaş. III 322 (tapa:la:r, tapa:la:ma:k): xiv Mu. al-jamáta (taba: Mel. 84, s, Rif. 190); taba:lamak rz4 (only). D töpü:le:- Den. V. fr. tópü:; s.i.m.m.l.g. vv. some phonetic changes, generally meaning “to strike, hit', not necessarily on the head, perhaps owing to some confusion with tep-. Xak. xı ol yağını: töpü:le:di: "he struck the enemy on the head” ('alà hàmatihi) Kaş. LT 322 (tópü:le:r, tópü:lezme:k): Kip. xiv depele- (“vith -p-”) qatala "to kill” 1d. 47: Osm. xvii tepele- (so spelt, but with -mak inerror) in Rüni, farq zadan "to hiton the head” , and metaph. “to kill, destroy” San. 151r. 27. D. tevlüglen- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. tevlüğ (tevlig). Xak. xı er tevlüglendi: “the man reckoned himself to be among the deceivers (min cumlati'l-muhtálin) and behaved like them” (tatarraga bi-tariqihim) Kaş. 11 277 (tevlüğlenü:r, tevlüğlenme:k). Dis. DBN taban “the sole of the foot'; s.i.a.m.l.g. vv. various extended and metaph. meanings. 'Taban the name of a plant in Uyg. viti ff. Civ. H Il 14, 125 is no doubt a l.-w.; and daban “a mountain pass” in the Uyğ. xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. (R 111 964) is a Mong. l.-w. Xak. xı taban xuffu'I-ba'ir Kaş. 1 400; 405, 3 (the natural meaning of this is “a camel's hoof” but see tabanlığ): xiu. Tef. iki daban (sie) astı kibi “like the bottom of the two soles of the feet' 116: Caf. xv ff. taban başira-f ba *the sole of the foot'; in Ar. 'agb (properly *heel") San. 151r. 28 (quotn.); a.o. do. 85v. 27 (see uldap): Kom. xiv “the sole' (of the foot or a boot) taban CCI, CCG; Gr. 231 (quotn.): Kip. xır a/-qadanı "the foot' taba:n Hou. zı, 8: xiv taban akmasıel- (so read for axmas) qadam “the firm part of the foot” /d. 61: xv batnu'l-ricl "the bottom of the foot' taba:n Kav. 61,9:qadam taban Tuh. 28b. ız. PU tobun Hap. leg., but cf. tobunluğ, which is not ascribed to any particular language. Perhaps der. fr. to:b. Bi-lufa Ug xi tobun ku'buratu'l-ta'àm “a jump of food” Kaş. I 400. D töpün Sec tópü:. Dis. V. DBND tapın- Refl. f. of 1 tap-, (r) "to serve, or worship (God Dat.)'; (2) 'to serve (a human master Dat.Y. S.ia.m.lg. except NE, but normally only in the first sense. In the early period usually in Hend. vv. udun-. Türkü virt ff. Man. yekke tapıntımız erser “if we have worshipped demons” Chuas. 152; a.o. do. 148-9 (udun-): Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. tapin- (by itself) 'to worship (God); to show respect to  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 486 
     
   
   
      442 (an individual)" is fairly common, c.g. PP 71, 2; U 1 30, 9; TT IV 10, 24; V 8, 73, etc.; tapin- udun- is very common U // 40, 105 etc. (udun-): Xak. xı men tenri:ke: tapindim “1 obeyed (afá'tu) God, and followed His commandments'; and one says ol beğke: tapındı: “he served (xadama) the beg! Kaş. II 140 (tapinu:r, tapınma:k, verse) and over a dozen o.0.: KB tapin- “to serve” (a human master) is common 97 (tapığ), 5238. 595 (uğurluğ), 597, 615, etc.: xir(?) Tef, tapin-] tapun- "to worship; to serve! 286—7 (and some der. f.s): xiv Rbğ. tapin- “to worship" R JII 970 (quotn.); Muh. xadama tapin- (-b-) Mel. 25, 15; Rif. 108: Çağ. xv ff. tabın- (sic) "to bow in prayer, to worship, to prostrate oneself' San. 151r. 7 (quotn,): Xwar. xiv tapun- "to worship' Qutb 168; Nahc. 405, 10-11: Kom. XIV 'to worship, adore tabun- CCG; Gr. Sat (quotti.). D tepin- (d-) Refl. f. of tep-; s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı er atın tepindi: “the man urged on (rakada) his horse with his feet'; also used when a man moves (/iarraka) his feet for something Kaş. II 140 (tepinü:r, tepinme:k). D tevin- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of tev-; 'to interlock', or the like. Xak. xı er eligin uvundt: tevindi: “the man was distressed (ihtamma) about some affair and wrung (dalaka) his hands in shame and regret! Kaş. II 147 (tevinu:r, tevinme:k). E topt-. Sce tüpir-. Tris. DBN D tabanlığ P.N./A. fr. taban, s.i.s.m.l. both in its lit. meaning and metaph. for 'robust, energetic'; it is possible that this is the intended meaning of the Xak. phr.; al-xuff means both “a camel's hoof” and 'footwear, boot; it seems unnecessary to describe a camel as having hooves, and improbable that it should wear boots. Xak. xi tabanlığ (sic, misprinted fadarlığ in printed text) tevey ba'ir dátu'l-xuff Kaş, I 499. PUD tobunluğ Hap. leg.: P.N./A. fr. tobun, q.v. Xak.(?) xi tobunluğ tarığ al-burr dürl-hu"bura *wheat containing lumps” Kaş. I 499. Tris. V. DBND tapındur- Caus. f. of tapin-; survives in NW Kaz. tabındur- “to subjugate' and the like R TI 970. Uy£. vi ff. Bud. TT VI 266 (uduntur-): Civ. kelin alsa tapindurmaz “if he gets a daughter-in-law he cannot make her respect him” TT VII 28, sr: Xak. xı KB (I was too precipitate in making you my confidant without knowing you and) tapindurmadin “vithout making you respect me” 634; 8.0. 1755. D tabanla:- Den. V. fr. PUT survives in 'to SW Osm. tabanla-; Tm. da:banla:trample down, press down; to put a roller (on a field)”. Xak. xı tewey (sic) tabanla:dı: "the DIS: V. DBNcamel kicked him with his hooves' (rakalaAiu bi-xuffhi) Kaş. II 342 (tabanla:r, taban1a:ma:k). Dis. DBR tavar (d-) originally '"livestock', a meaning which comes out clearly in the phr. ed tavar “inanimate and animate property" (see ed), and from an carly date, since livestock. was the commonest form of property in "Furkish society, “property” in general and even specifically *merchandise, trade göods”. As Ar. mál is equally ambiguous, the exact meaning in some medieval texts is obscure. An early l.-w. in Mong. as fabar (Haenisch 143) and Russian as tovar, both in the second sense. 'l'he first was prob. rehorrovved in NE Alt., Leb., Tel. tabar R IJ] 966 and the second in several modern languages in the Soviet Union; but the word scems to survive genuinely in SE Türki tavar “silk goods, trade poods (penerally)'; SC Uzb. tovar (perhaps the origin of the Russian word); NW Kk. tawar 'goods' and SW Osm. davar 'livestock'. Uyğ. vin türges karluki (sic, ?irregular Ger.) tavarı:n alıp “1 seized the livestock of the "Türgeş and Karluk” (pillaged their devellings and returned home) Su. S s: vini ff. Bud, tavar by itself secms to mean primarily 'property' U II 86, 41; U IH 81, iq, Hiücn-ts. 2026 (tapığlığ), tavar is common, see ed: Civ. ed tavar is fairly conimon, scc ed; in 77 VII tavar is commoncr than ed tavar and seems always to mean 'property'; in the commercial docts, in USp. tavar, which occurs ,occasionally, seems to mean specifically *merchandise, trade goods': xiv Chin.-Uyg..— Dict. "satin" tavar Ligeti 2601: Xak. xr tavar al-sil'a má şüa) wa. şamata “property noisy and silent (ie. animate and inanimate) Xag. I 362 (verse); tava:r al-sil'a tva I-màál I 411; over so 0.0. of tavar/tava:r translated a/-mál, al-aşyd” (things), al-mità' (imerchandise”) and over a dozen (not all Oğuz) of tawar/tawa:r: KB tavar iscommon, usually in the phr. nep tavar *property, goods', sometimes associated with altun 'gold' and kümüş “silver” 485, 1112, 1786, 3982, 4372, etc.; eliğ kısğa tuttum tavar térmedim 'I have not been grasping, . I have not accumulated property! 6079: xitt(?) At. several o.o. of tavar 'property, wealth'; Tef. tavar but more usually tivar (spelt fi:far) "livestock, property 280, 303: XIv Muh. al-mal davva:r Mel. 68, 11; Rif. 169: Çağ. xv ff. tawar a generic term for all “livestock and quadrupeds” (sutür wa çörpüyan), and in Mong. qumóág; 'merchandise, piecegoods' San. 165v. 7: Oğuz xı (after Xak.) and the Oğuz and others (toa gayruhum) say tawar with -w- Kay. I1 362: Xwar. xiv mül tavar *property, wealth' Quib 174, Nahc. 236, 6: Kap. xiv al-mazági cattle dawar Bul. 7, 5 Xv bahima 'quadruped' tawar (vocalized futwar with d- added below in a second hand) Tu. 7b. 7; in de. 13a. 13 há'if 'wall is sitnilarly translated (representing Pe. ditwür) with bahima dirwar added in a second hand in the margin: Osm. xiv ff. davar 'livestock',  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 487 
     
   
   
       DIS. V. and more specifically 'animal to ride'; c.i.a.p. TTS I 181; II 262; İİİ 169; IV 192. PU tovur See tovra:-. D tavra:k (d-) N./A.Ac. fr. tavra:-; 'speed, hurry; quick". Survives in NE several dialects tabirak/tabrak R 7/77 971, 981. Uyğ. vitt ff. Bud. yél teg tavrak yügürüp 'running quickly like the wind' 77 X 295; a.o. do. 115; ne yeme tap ne yeme tavrak 'how surprising and swift' Hüen-ts. :895; terk tavrak 'hurriedly (Hend.)' U III 22, 1 (iii) (and do. 56, s (i) terkin); Suc. 179, 13; 248, ış etc.: Civ. érte kün tavrak buyan kil *hurry to do good early in th morning” TT I 171-2; 8.0.0. : XIV Chin.-Uvg. Dict. 'go quickly" tavrak barğın (sic) Ligeti 261; R III 981: Xak. x1 tavra:k al-sur'a “speed, hurry'; hence one says tavra:kin kel 'come quickly'; and this word is “made an Adj. (şifa), one says tavra:k s:şçı: "a quick (musri) worker Kaş, I 468; o.o. I 156, 4 (aktt-) and three more: KB kisi 1tdt1 tavrak "he sent a man quickly! 5954; yeme tavrakın “do not bolt your food” 4132: Xwar. xır(?) Og. 114-15 (astur-). D topra:k Dev. N. (Conc. N.) fr. topra:-; lit. 'something dry', in practice 'dry ground, soil, earth, dust". S.i.a.m.l.g. w. minor phonetic changes, and occasionally some metaph. meanings like "province, countrv'. Uyğ. vin ff. Man. TT II! 27 (batil-): Bud. tozi (oozr) toprakı “his dust (flend.) U !I 39, 89; toprak in a Chinese type date represents £'u “earth” (Giles 12,099) as one of the five elements Pfahl. 6, 1; 2.0. Suv. 528, 23: Civ. toz toprak özin söndi: “the dust (Hend.) settled of its own accord' TT ”7 s-6, toprak “earth” do. 45; toprak as one of the five elements occurs several times in TT VİT and is an ingredient of several remedies in H I: Xak. xı topra:k "dust, soil' Kaş. 7 467; 1 267 (1 ağnat-), a.o.o. translated. ai-turáb or al-ğubür “dust”: KB toprak as one of the four elements (with fire, water, and air) 143: xıır(?) At. (when he lies and) toprak içine kirip 'goes underground" 308; Tef. toprak a/-turab 309: xiv Rbg. sv. 14-15 (uğra:-), Muh. al-turab topra:k (-5-) Mel, 25, 1; Rif. 178: Çağ. xvff. toprağ/ toprak xdz "earth, soil' San. 167v. 16(quotn.); tofrağ/tofrak same as toprağ/toprak do. 179v. 28: Xwar. xiv toprak ditto Qutb 180; MN 7, etc.: Kom. xiv “dust, dirt” toprak CCI, CCG, Gr.: Kip. xır al-turáb toprak (-5-) Hou. 5, iş: xiv toprak ("with -p-") ai-turab İd. 61; Bul. 4, 10: xv ditto Kav. 58, 11; Tuh. 8b. 9. D tevre:n Hap. leg.; Dev. N. fr. tevir-, but the long -e:- is unusual. Xak. xr tevre:n *threads (xuyit) which are gathered together and twisted (yuftal) to make waistbands for trousers or cords for slings' Kaş. 7 436. 00 Dev. N. fr. tepre:-, n.o.a.b. Uy£. vii Bud. yér tepreşi “an earthquake” U IV 18, 193: Kip. xii al-haraka “mövement” (opposite to 'rest' örü:) tepriş (sic, perhaps correct) Hou. 26, 21. /DBR443 Dis. V. DBRtevir- "to twist, turn (something 4cc.)'; practically syn. vv. evir- and çevir- and perhaps an older form of the latter, q.v. N.o.a.b. Uy$. viri ff. Bud. nom tilgenin tevirer “he turns the whecl of the law' TT VI 455: Xak. xı er tava:rığ evürdi: tevürdi: qgallaba'l-raculu'l-mità' wa taşarrafa fihü :a ca"ala gahrahá l-batn “the man turned over the goods and disposed of them and turned them upside down'; evürdi: is the main verb (as!) and tevürdi: a jingle (£o5a") Kaş. II 81 (tevüre:r, tevürme:k); a.o. / 157, 17 (evir-): Kom. XIV “to twist, turn tüvür- CCG; Gr. VU tuvir- the main entry is out of place among verbs with -t- as the second consonant, but the word rcappears in a gramm. section on Aor. forms in the same spelling. It looks like a Caus. £, or a Den. V. in -r(cf. tüpir-), but there is no trace of a possible base. Pec. to Kaş. Xak. at kula:kin tuvurdiı: (sic) “the horse pricked (aşarra) its ears (etc.)', that is, raised them when it noticed something Kaş. /1 73 (tuvi:ra:r (sic), tuvirma:k); at kula:k tuvurdi: . . . tuvura:r/ tuvira:r (both kasra and damma marked) II 161, 20 ff. D tüpir- Intrans. Den. V. fr. tüpi:, n.o.a.b. Uyğ. viti ff. Bud. tepri tüpirer korkinçiğ yéltürür 'the skv is cloudy and it blows a terrible gale” PP 18, 2-3 (Pelliot read zoğrnar in error): Xak. xr tüpi: tüpürdl: (sic) "the wind blew' (habbat) and scattered the dust Kaş. II 71 fpes. r, tüpirme:k; prov. see acil-). tavra:- (d-) “to hasten, be in a burry'; n.o.a.b., but see tavran-, etc. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (Sanskrit lost) terk tavra:dı (spelt -tr) “he hastened” TT VIII D.1: Xak. xi er tavra:dı: mütl tiára:di: (q.v.) “the man was sturdy"; (in a verse) er at menin tavrayu:r al-ricál tea L-xayl yaştadd lihámuhum bi "because of me the flesh of men and horses becomes strong' Kaş. III 278 (tavra:r, tavra:ma:k; between toğra:- and (VU) tovra:- but everywhere mis-spelt yavra:-). tabrı:- (or taprı:-) Hap. leg., but see tabrıt-, tabrış-. Xak. xı tevey tabrı:dı: “the camel jumped. about” (soa taba), not used except of a camel jumping about Kaş. II] 277 (tabrti:r, tabri:ma:k). tepre:- (d-) 'to move, stir, shake', and the like (Intrans.). "This verb and/or its der. f.s s.i.a.m.l.g. except NE; in most NC, NW languages, and SW Az. terbe-, SW Osm., 'Tkm. depre-. Uyğ. viti ff. Chr. (the star stood still) tepremedin “vithout moving' U 7 6, 9: Bud. (theold man) tepreyü yorryu urnadt "could not move or walk' PP 37, 2-3; a.o. do. 80, 5; (then this brown mother earth six times) " tepredi kamşadı 'moved and swayed' TT X 1:64; 0.0. of this phr. U III 46, 5; Suv. 184, 9: Civ. kedirti tepremiş . . . ópdürti tepremiş “that moved in your rear . . . that moved in front of  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 488 
     
   
   
     444 you" TT I 122-3; o.o. do. 204-5 (alkin-); TT VII 34, 2-3 (1 bu:t): Xak. xı tepre:di: ne:p “the thing moved' (taharraka) Kaş. III 277 (tepre:r, tepre:me:k): KB (the sun is in Leo) bu burc tepremez “this sign of the zodiac does not movc' 834; 0.0. 1026, 2387: xu?) Tef. tepre- "to move' 286 (tebre-): xiv. Rog. baccğa tepredim “1 went on the pilgrimage to Mecca” R III 1123; Muh.(?) harraka (Trans. in error) tepre:- Rif. 130 (Mel. ditre-): Çağ, xv ff. tépre- (with -p-”/ tépren- “harakat hardan tva cumbidan “to move' Sam, 188v. 17 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv tepre- "to move, set out” Qutb 174: Kip. xv taharrak anta "moveV tepren (sic with -p', i.e. Plur.) Kav. 77, 11. D tevri:- Sec tenri:-. topra:- Hap. leg. , but sce topra:k, etc. Xak. xı ot topra:dı: “the plant became dry (and withered hagim)' Kaş. II 277 (topra:r, topra:ma:k). VUD tovra:- Den. V. fr. (VU) tovur of which there is no other trace; pec. to Kaş. Xak. xi uşa:k ne:p tovra:dr "the small thing became big" (kaburat), for example young sheep when they become big; taken fr. the phr. tovur (so read) yinçü: "large pearls” Kaş. III 279 (tovra:r, tovra:ma:k; corrected fr. -me:k or vice versa?); a.o. IJI 41 (yunçiğ). D tavrat- (d-) Caus. f. of tavra:-; (1) 'to hurry, hustle (someone /4cc.)”, (2) “to twist, spin”. Survives in NE Kumd. tabrat- “to turn (something) on a spit”. "The second meaning should connect this word with tevir-, but the vowels make this impossible; the connotation seems to be “to make (something) move fast”. Türkü vırı ff. Man. (he appointed one man over each ten men and) edgü kılınçka özüt faşına) tavratğuçı kildi “made him an urger to (do) good deeds and (attend) the feast of the souls" TT IJ 1o, 92-3; o.o. do. 88-go (ötle:-), 76-7: Xak. xı er tavrattı: “the man hustled' (someone, 'accala) (tavratu:r, tavratma:k) and one says ura:ğut yip tavrattı: 'the woman span (/afalat) the thread, and twisted it' (agárat/te, mis-spelt ağdzatahu)-Kaş. II 330; ódleg küni: tavratu:r 'time/fustles (man; yusrt") along” IJ 335, 3; tavrat^ 'accala is one of the verbs used to illustrate conjugation in /7 360 ft: KB (if one does not treat the diseasc) ölüm tavratur "dcath hurries one away' 4616; a.o. 4693: xiv Muh.(?) fatala tavrat- (-f-) Rif. 113 (Mel. 29, 13 ka:t-). D tabrıt- (or taprıt-?) Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of tabrı:- Xak, xı er teveysin tabrıttı: “the man made his camel jump about” (azofaba) also used with other subjects besides “man” Kaş. II 329 (tabrıtu:r, tabritma:k; the translation makes the form certain, but the rü” is vocalized with fatha, and the Infin., completely unvocalized, has -me:K). D tepret- (d-) Caus. f. of tepre:-; “to move, shake, disturb (something ce.,). Survives in much the same languages and with the same DIS. V. DBRphonetic changes. Uyü. vil ff, tepretü umadin yaturmen '[ lie unable to move (my body) U JH 37, 35; ertipü tepretti titretti 'greatlv stirred and shook' (my mind) TT X Aşı: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. 'the wind set in motion! yel tepretti R III 1124: Xak. xı ol tepretti: ne:yníi: “he moved (fiarraka) the thing' (tepretü:r, tepretme:k); and one says er yağı:ka: tepretti: "the man attacked (amala . . . "ala) the enemy” Kaş. II 329; tepret- Aharraka is one of the verbs used to illustrate conjugation in /7 360 ff.: KB tepret tilig "set your tongue in motion' 774; a.0. 2536 (turğa:k): xmrff Tef. tepret- "to move, shake', etc. 292 (tebret-): xiv Muh.(?) harraka tepre:t- (-5-) Rif. 107 (only): Çağ. xvff. tepret- Caus. f. mutaharrik hardan wa. cunbünidan "to set in motion' Sam. T89r. 15 (guo): Xwar. xiv tepret- ditto Quib 174; tépret- do. 176: Kom. xiv ditto tepretCCI, Gr.: Kip. xi harraka tepret- (-b-) Hou. 39, 14; hazza . . . tea huma ”l-tahrik iPi-şay” “to shake (something)' do. 44, 7: xiv İd. 8 (1 u:ç): xv harraka tepret- (-5-; “vvith a soft (muraqqaqa) ra”) Kav. 77, 10; ditto Tuh. 13b. 13: Osm. xiv ff. depret- 'to move, shake'; c.La.p. 778 1 195; 71 283; III 184; IV 210. D toprat- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of topra:-. Xak. xı ko:y otuğ toprattı: "the sheep eat down all the vegetation until none of it rc- . mained on the ground, and made the dust blow off it" (ca"alat tuhibb. münhiei-haba”) Kaş, II 330 (topratu:r, topratma:k; MS. in error -me:k). D tevril- Pass. f. of tevir-; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff Bud... (understanding. how samsára turns (evril-) this way) 1naru tevrilmekin emğeksiz uçuz ukar “he understands painlessly and easily how it turns that way' U 1H 1I, 10-12; 8.0. Suv. 133, 22 (arkuru:). D tavran- (d-) Rcfl. f. of tavra:-; properly “to hurry, be quick”, but with extended meanings. Survives in NW Krım (R III 1647); SW Osm. davran- 'to stir oneself; prepare for action; take pains; resist; behave", Türkü viti ff, Man. (in a list of virtues) sevinmek tavranmak “to be cheerful and zealous(?)” M IH iş, xi (1): Uy£. virrff. Man, tafrantı (sic) TT Hİ isi (damaged): Bud. in the Nidána cycle tavranmak corresponds to Sanskrit saıskara, Chinese /sing (Giles 4,634) for which 'moral action' seems to be the best translation U İT :3, 2 (i0; TT VIII Az, tavranu 'hurriedly'(?) U JI 29, 19; otuğ Gcürgeli tavranurça *when hurrying to put out a fire” Suv. 141, 9-10; o.o. TT VI 021-2 (ermegü:): Xak. xı er tavrandı: “the man seemed to be hurrying ( yasta'cil) on a journey' Kaş. II 24o (tavranu:r, tavranma:k). . D tepren- (d-) Refl. f. of tepre:- , “to move', etc. (Intrans.). Survives in much the same languages and with the same phonetic changes. Xak. xı teprendi: ne:p “the thing moved” (taharraka) Kaş. II 24o (teprenü:r, teprenme:k): K B kamuf teprenigli "every moving 4  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 489 
     
   
   
         DIS (i.e. living) creature! 1021, 4417; alo, 1852: xiv. Hbg. tepren- (of dry bones, or a mountain) "to stir R III 1124: Muh.(?) taharraka tepren- (-b-) Rif. 13o (Mel. 4o, 19 ditren-): Çağ. xv ff. San. 188v. 17 (tepre:-) Xwar. xiv tépren- (of the heart) “to beat” Qut) 176: Kip. xiv tepren- (-5-) taharraka ld. 37; depren(with -p-") ditto do. 47; ditto tepren- (-5-) Bul. 38r.: xv ditto Tuh. ga. 13: Osm. xiv ff. depren- “to move, stir', etc.; c.i.a.p. TT.S 7 194; İl 282; İTİ 184; IV 209. : D tabrış- (or taprış-) Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of tabrr-. Xak. xi tevey kamuğ tabrışdı: “the camels all jumped about together" (qafazat, mis-spelt qafarat) Kaş. Il 217 (tabrışu:r, tabrışma:k, mis-spelt tabrag-). D tepreş- (d-) Co-op. f. of tepre:- , s.i.s.m.l. with the same phonetic changes. Uyğg. viti ff. Civ. teprili yerli tepreşdi “heaven and earth shook together' TT T 92: Xak. xi kişi: kamuğ tepreşdi: “the people all moved (together)' (taharraka); also used of any things that move (together) Kaş. II 204 (tepreşü:r, tepresme:k; verse); a.o. 1 88, 2 (imrem): Osm. xvi depreş- “to move together” TTS II 283. D topraş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of topra:-. Xak. xi yér kurup topraşdı: “the ground dried (yabisat) for lack of rain until dust (a/-haba) almost rose from it” Kaş. 11 206 (topraşu:r, toprasma:k). Tris. DBR D tapa:ru: tapa:, q.v., with the Directive Suft, attached; syn. vv. tapa:. N.o.a.b. Xak. XI one says Ol menin tapa:ru: keldi: hadarta ilayya "he came into my presence'; and one says ol anın tapa:ru: bardı: “he went into his presence'; tapa: is a Particle (harf) meaning ila 'to', and the - ru: is a Suff. Kaş. 1 445) o.o. III 69, 1; 440, zo: KB hácib taparu “to the Chancellər” 521; a.o. 5830: xıri(?) Az. uluğluk taparu eliğ sundukun “if you have stretched out your hand to greatness” 286: Tef. taparu ditto 286 (tabaru): Xwar. ditto Qutb 167. D tava:rgi Hap. leg.; N.Ag. fr. tava:r; “an animal for carrying merchandise. Xak. xi Kaş. UI 149 (ta:z), n.m.e. PU tepirtsiz Sec tigirtsiz. D topra:klığ P.N./A. fr. topra:k, n.o.a.b. 'There is no doubt that the first vowe] was normally -0-, but since toz is correctly spelt it seems likely that the -u- represents a local dialect pronunciation, not a simple error. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. Sanskrit vigatarajá 'whose dust (uncleanness) has disappeared”lgap lış toz tupra:klığla:r TT VIII A4.6-7: Civ. əm tupra:klağ [gap] 'dusty and earthy' do. I.18. D toprağa:n Hap. leg.; Dev. N./A. connoting Habitual Action fr. topra:-, the word is so spelt in the MS. but the vowel points are . DBS 445 slightly misplaced, and the word has been transcribed topurfa:n. Xak. xi toprağa:n ye:r “soft (a/-/ayna) ground', that is bare ground (ai-batna) from which the dust (a/-habd”) rises when it is trodden on Kaş. 1 516; (there are no homes in the grave, and) toprağa:nda: av bolma:s “there is no wild game on bare ground', they only inhabit places where there is vegetation and water do. 516, 16. D tavarlığ P.N./A. fr. tavar, q.v., where the ambiguity of a/-mdl, both “cattle” and *property', is pointed out. N.o.a.b. Xak. xt tavarlığ er racul dü màl Kaş. I 495: xut(?) Tef. tıvarlığ (sic, spelt tt:farlig) “vealthy” 303: xiv Muh. bi-màl tava:rlığ (-f-) Mel. 6, 4; Rif. 77; dü mül ditto ro, 9 (spelt tufa:rlig); 83. D tavarluk Hap. leg.; A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. tavar. Xak. xi tavarluk al-xizána 'storeroom, treasury! Kaş. I 503. 'D teprençsiz (d-) Priv. N./A. fr. “teprenç N./A.S. fr. tepren-. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vii ft. Bud. teprençsiz burxan “the immovable (or unshakeable) Buddha” TT VI 412; (that mighty Buddha) teprençsiz yarp oluryuk ol “sits immovable and firm' TT X 335-6. D tavarsa:k Hap. leg.; Desiderative Den. N./A. fr. tavar. Xak. xı ol er ol tavarsa:k “that man craves (muhibb) for property” (al-mdül) Kaş. 1I 56, 2 (in a grammatical para.). Tris. V. DBRD tavratış- Hap. leg.; mentioned only as an example of the Co-op. f. Xak. xı ol anın birle: tavratışdı: “he competed with him in swiftness of foot (f?'l-'acala) to see which of them could go quickest” Kaş. 1I 363, 6; n.m.e. D tepretiş- (d-) Hap. leg.; given as an alternative example with tavratış-. Xak. xı ol yığa:ç tepretişdi: “he helped to move (fi'I-tahrik) the tree”, or “competed with him” Kaş. Il 363, 2; n.m.e. Dis. DBS F tevsi: 'dish, plate', and the like; 1.-vv. fr. Chinese tieh tzü, same meaning (Giles 11,123 12,317; Pulleyblank, Middle Chinese dep tsi); this is more plausible than Sir Harold Bailey's suggestion (BSO.AS, 1963, p. 85) that the word is Iranian, see Doerfer 1 123. A l.-w. in Mong. as tebşi (Kos. 1703). The word survives in various NE dialects R III 1115-17 (in forms which suggest that they are reborrowings fr. Mong.), SW Az. tepşi R III 1117 looks the same, but Osm. tebsi/tepsi may be a genuine survival. Uyğ. virt ff. Man.-A tevsi kovğası. “his dish (or trough?) and pail' M I 36, 20 (in a damaged passage relating to catching fish): Xak. xr tevsi: a/-xiwün “a tray standing on a foot” Kaş. I £5 a.o. III so, 26 (ayaklığ): Xwar. xiv tépsi (-b-) 'dish' Qutb 176: Kom. xiv “dish” tepsi CCI; Gr.: Kap. xv sahn “dish” tepsi (-5-)  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 490 
     
   
   
       446 DIS: DBS Tuh. 22b. r: Osm. «xvin. tebsi (spelt) in Rumi, "a small tray (sini) which they call macmü"a ("a set of trays”) San. 151 v. 15. D tapsiz Hap. leg.; Priv. N./A. fr. tap. Uyğ. vini ff, Bud. (in a list of diseases) tapsiz bolmaklığ 1gig “the disease of loss of appetite' U 7I 68, 1 (iii). D tübsüz (d-) Priv. N./A. fr. tü:b; survives in SW Osm. dibsiz/dipsiz 'bottomless', and metaph. 'unfounded, false". Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. Sut. 136, 21; 430, 7-8 (ulsuz): Xak. xı KB (man's mind is like) tübsüz tepiz “a bottomless sca” 211; a.o. 1164: Caf. xv ff. tüpsüz dibsiz Vel. 201 (quotn,, tüpsüz tépiz); tübsiz “very deep, bottomless' Sar. 167v. 17 (same quotn.). Dis. V. DBSS tepse:- See tepze:-. S tepset- See tepzet-. Tris. DBS D tapısız Hap. leg.?; Priv. N./A. fr. tapır. Xak. xı KB kalı kılsar begler tapisiz tapuğ “if a man does service which does not please his masters” 1611. Dis. DBŞ D tapış Hap. leg., at any rate in this sense; N.Ac. (with a connotation of mutuality) fr. 1 tap-. Xak. xr tapış 'mutual trust (a/-mutcákala) between two men, or two others” Kaş. I 367. tavış “a sound”, and more specifically “a soft, not a loud, sound”. S.i.a.m.l.g. xw. a wide range of phonetic changes, t-/d- and a/1/o in NC; -b-/-v-/-vv- and -1-[-u-. See Doerfer II $62. Xak. xi tavuş (sc) al/-hiss wa'l-haraka 'slight sound, movement! Kaş. I 367: tavvuş (sic) same translation, dialect form (lua) of tavig (si) III 165: xın(?) Tef. tawis “sound” (yani ün 'voice') 280: Çağ. xv ff. tavvuş ayak üvàázi “the sound of footsteps' Vel. 180 (quotns.); tawus "a sound” (sadá) in general and "the sound of footsteps” in particular San. 165v. 18 (quotn.). Dis. V. DBSD tapis- Recip. f. of 2 tap-; lit. 'to find onc another”, hence "to mect'. S.i.s.m.l, in several] meanings of which this is the commonest. See Doerfer 11 847. Uyf. vri ff. Civ. bodun birle tapışıp “consulting with(?) the community” USp. 24, 4; tuşup tapışıp “meeting (Hend.)” do. 43, 5; (my Chinese boy has disappeared) kaç künde tilep tapışmadın turur [gap] “I (or we) have looked for him for several days but not found him” do. r16, 3-4; taşdın ünse tavar tapışur “if he goes abroad, he finds vvealth” TT VII 28, 27-8; o.o. do. 16, 49 (in these instances there is no visible Recip. meaning): Çağ. xv ff. tapış-(-ur) buluş- "to find one another” Vel. 161: (quotn.; tapis- (spelt)  Recip. f. hamdigar-rd yaftan "to find one another” San. 151r. rz: Kom. xiv “to discuss" tabuş- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv. tapış- (-8-) talaqd “to meet one another” Jd. 6r. D tavış- Recip. f. of tav-; the only authority for the existence of these words is the passage in Kaş. below; it is perhaps significant that Kaş. uses taşarrafa also in the translation of tevit-, but apart fr. the difference in vocalization there are great difficulties about deriving tevir-, with its close association with evirfr. *tev- and the association between the two words is prob. fortuitous. [t is equally difficult semantically to derive tavış fr. tav-. Xak. xı (those two are constantly selling and buying (satışğa:n alışğa:n) merchandise), and in another dialect (/uga) one says satışğa:n tavışğa:n, taken fr. the words sattı: ğd"a “he sold', and tavdiı: zaşarrafa "he was in possession of” Kaş. I 518-9. D tepis- (d-) Recip. f. of tep-; 'to kick one another”. S.i.s.m.l. Xak. xi ol menin birle tepisdi: rákalani bi'l-ricl "he competed with me(?) in kicking! Kaş. 11 87 (tepişü:r, tepişme:k), a.o. /7 113, 16. D tevis- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of tev-; consistently spelt tüvis- in the MS., ?in error. Xak. xı ol menin birle: et tevişdi: “he competed with me in arranging (/T nazm) the meat on the spit also used for helping and for other things Kaş. II 102 (tevişü:r, tevişme:k). tevşe:-, tüvşe:- Preliminary note. 7)e vocalization of these V.s and their Der. f.s is chaotic; they should perhaps be reversed; tüvse:- and its Pass. f. precede tevşe:- and its Pass. f. in the MS., but the Caus. f. of the latter precedes that of the former. “ ?D tevşe:- Hap. leg., but see tevşet-, etc, , Den. V. fr. *tevig, perhaps a Dev. N. fr. tev- in the sense of “interlocking”. Xak. xı yr:p kamuğ tevşe:di: “the thread was all tangled (tagatotuaşa) and mixed up (fxfalata) so that the end of it p could not be found” Kaş. /İT 286 (tevsge:r, tevse:me:k). VU?D tüvşe:- N.o.a.b.; presumably Den. V. fr. VU *tüvis. Xak. xı anın teri: tüvşedi: (sic) "he was beaded with sweat (zağabbaba 'araquhu) because of working! Kay. IJI 286 (tüvşe:r, tüvşe:me:k): xiv Muh.(?) ibtalla “to be moist, soaked” tüvşez- (-f- ; unvocalized) Rif. 102 (Mel. 21, iş öli:-). D tevşet- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of tevge:-. Xak. xı ol yı:pığ tevsetti: "he tangled (sat:waga) the thread when he could not find the end of it”, Kaş. 11 336 (tevşetü:r, tevgetme:k).: VUD tüvşet- IIap. leg.; this is mutilated in the MS.; the following sentence is added after the Infin. of tevşet-, but it should clearly be a separate para. Xak. xr ol anıp terin tüvsetti: (tevşetti:) 'he made him work (a'yàá/i)) until he was beaded with svveat”, “also (ğaddliha) Kaş. II 336.   Mou E USER Lo   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 491 
     
   
   
     DIS. D tevsel- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of tevşe:-, Xak. xr yip tevşeldi: (tetşüldi:) “the thread (etc.) was tangled (//tatta) owing to its being handled a great deal” Kaş. II 236 (tevşelü:r, tevşelme:k, spelt tüv;el-). VUD tüvşel- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of tüvşe:-, the collocation with uvşal- which is ultimately der. fr. uvuş, confirms the theory that this verb .is der. fr. *tüvig which, taking all the meanings together, seems to have meant 'a small pellet, bead of sweat' and the like. Xak. xı etme:k uşaldı: tüvşeldi: (fevşeldi:) “the bread (etc.) vvas crumbled” (futta), uşaldı: is the main Verb (ag/) Kaş. Fİ g35 (tüvselü:r, tüvşelme:k, spelt £etşeliü-r, tevşülme:h). D tevşen- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of tevşe:-, lit. “to entangle oneself (with something). Xak. xı er rgta: telim tevşendi: (teoşındi:) “the man occupied himself (ftamala) with the affair and was very active” (taharraka katira(1)) Kaş. II 241 (tevşenü:r, tevşenıne:k, spelt tevşünü:r, tevg.nme:k). D tapşur- Caus. f. of tapış- , “to hand over, entrust (something cc. to someone Dat.). S.i.a.m.l.g., except NE?, with the same meaning. Kag. is the only authority for the Sec. f. tapçur-. Uy£. vir ff. Civ. Budaşırı baxSika tapsurup berdimiz “ve have handed over the property to Buddhasri the baxşı” USp. 14, 16; a.o. do. 17, 16: Xak, xi men oğulnı: ana:sipa: tapçurdum “1 have attached (a/haqtu) the boy to his mother and made him her companion” (a/şaqtuhu bihà (MS. bihi)); the original form (al-asl) of the -€- was -$S-; also used in other contexts Kaş. II 175 (tapçurur, tapcurma:k): xiu(?) Tef. tapşur- “to entrust” (with Acc. and Dat.) 287: Çağ. xv ff. tapşur- (spelt) sipurdan “to hand over, entrust” Sar. rşır. 14 (tapşurulteslim olun- “to be handed over” Vel. 160): Xvvar. xiv tapsur- ditto Qutb 167; Nahc. 4, 16; $, 10; 161, 6. . Tris. DBŞ (D) tavışğa:n “hare”, an old animal name ending in -ğa:n. This word has a very long history; it was a pre-vilI l-w. in Kitan as (PU) taoli, see V. S. Starikov and V. M. Nedelynev, —Predearitel'noe soobshchenie o deshifrovhe kidanshogo bistma, Moscow, 1964, p. ro, fr. which it passed into Mong. as taolat (Haenisch 145); these words represent, of course, the L/R Turkish form "tavılğa:n. It was one of the animals of the tvvelve-year cycle in "Turkish and Mong. Survives in SE "Türki tawskan, etc. farring, p. 297, and in several SC, NW, SW languages, see Shcherbak, p. 136. "The SW Az. form is dovşan and in Osm. and Tkm. both t- and d- are noted, the former prevailing; initial d- is therefore improbable. In other languages the word for *hare' is koyan (?kodan). See Doerfer 11 966. Türkü vir keylk yeyü tavışğan yeyü 'eating wild game and hares” 7 8: vri ff. 2rkB 44 (üpüg-): Uyğ. vt tavışğan yıl “in the DBY 442 Hare Year” Su. E 8: vini ff, Civ. tavışğan (once spelt tavicgan in TT VII) 'Mare (year, day, etc.)' occurs in USp. 86, 87, 108; TT VIII P.1, 36 and is common in TT VII; hare's gallbladders, brains, and hair (for burning) occur in prescriptions in H 7 25, 89, 116: xiv Chin.Uyğ. Dict. *hare' tavışğan Ligeti 261: Xak. xı tavışğa:n al-arnab “hare": tavispa:n yilt: "one of the twelve years in Turkish: tavugBan (sic) ógüz the name of a river which flows past ("a/d) the town of Uc Kaş. 7 513; in J 525, zs tavuşğa:n (sic) is given as an example of a Common Noun in which -ğan is nota Dev. Suff.: xiv Muh. al-arnab (ko:ya:n in text; in margin) tawsga:n Mel. 72, 10; taviska:n (-/-) Rif. 175; sanatu'l-arnab tavvışğa:n yı:lı: 80, 1:r9; tavisfa:n: (-f-) yılı: 186: Caf. xv ff. tavvuşkan “the animal called tavşan Vel. 180; tawuskan xargüş *hare'; also the name of one of the Turkish years: abbreviated form tavvşan Sar. 16sv. 20: Tkm. xır al-arnab tavvşa:n Hou. 11, 5: Xıp.(?) xtv ditto . . . also called dawusgafan (so vocalized) Bul. ro, 6: xv ditto favvşa:n Kas, 62, 7, Tuh. 4b. 8 (and see koyan). D tavışsız Hap. leg.?; Priv. N./A. fr. tavig. Uyğ. vil ff. Bud. ünsüzin ünüp tavışsızın taşıkıp “getting up silently and going out noiselessiy” U 77 76, 3. Tris. V. DBŞD tavışğa:nlaş- Recip. Den. V. fr. tavışB2:n; Hap. leg., quoted to illustrate the meaning of verbs of this form and prob. only used in the Ger. Xak. xr. ol at yarışdı: menin birle: tavışğa:nla:şu: “he had a horserace vvith me for the prize of a hare, and the competitor who outlasted the other got it” Kaş. II 226, 16. D tavışla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. tavış. Xak. xi tavışla:dı: (tuvugla:di:) ne:np bada fi”l-şay” hiss wa haraha “a slight sound and movement were noticed in the thing” Kaş. III 355 (tavış1a:r, tavigla:ma:k; spelt tavijugla:-). Dis. DBY tevey (d-) “camel”, "There is real doubt about the original form of this word; the oldest recorded form is teve:, but it became an early, First Period, l.-w. in Mong. as temeyen|teme'n (Haenisch 148; Studies, p. 234) which presupposes a final -y. Kaş.”s main entry, I11225, is spelt clearly tevey and occurs in a Section headed 'fa'al, fa"il, fa"ul with various vowels on the second consonant, the third being aif, todto or yü”. Nearly all the words in the Section end with long open vowels, e.g. tapa:, tapı: and it could be argued that tevey was intended to be an “Arabic” spelling of teve: like mard, which also has a final yd”, but this is improbable in itself and inconsistent with the simultaneous spelling of the Oğuz form deve: with final alif. It seems clear therefore that Kaş. meant the word to be pronounced tevey, and this was prob. the original form. S.i.a.m.l.g.; see Shcherbak, p. 103; the NW 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 492 
     
   
   
     448 DIS Bashkir, "Vat, and SW Az., Gagauz, Osm., and "Vkm. forms mentioned there all begin with d-, which was prob. the original initial. See Doerfer I1 1015. Türkü vri T 48 (egri: teve:i: vini ff. teve:si:perü: barmi:ş “(a man) went t: his camels” JrkB 5; alo, do. 46 (2 titig): Uyğ. Hnn if. Civ. various parts and excretions of the camel (teve) are mentioned in prescriptions H | 54, 6o, 71 (üğre:), 98: xiv Chin.— Uyğ. Dict. 'camel' teve Ligeti 264; R III 1127: O, Kir, ix ff. Mal. t1, 9; 46, 3 (egri: teve:): Xak. xı tevey al-ibil 'camel', with -v-, used both as a Sing. and as a Plur. Kaş. I7 225 (and see Ofuz); (the Oguz and related tribes turn all t-s into d-s) for example the "Turks call “the camel' (a/-ba'ir) tevey and the Oğuz, etc. dewey / şı, zo, they call al-ibil tevey and the Oğuz dewe: 7I 195, 25; the "Turks call a/-ba'ir tévey with a kasra on the td”, and the Oğuz and tribes that I have mentioned with them say tewe: (sic) with a nagb (i.e. fatha) on the td” HT 139, 7; the word is common, but the vocalization is chaotic, feti: as often as tevey; there are three occurrences, no doubt errors, of tewey in Xak. texts: KB téve (sic) burnı teg “like a camel's nose” 206: xın(?) Tef. te:ve: (-f-) “camel” 292: xiv Muh. al-camal dewe: Mel. ış, 11; t€:vve Rif. 92; al-ibil sva l-camal tewe: 7o, 7; dö:vve: 172: Çağ. xv ff. téwe deve Vel. 199 (quotn.); the word as such is not listed in San., but two Çağ, phr. containing téwe are listed in 203r. 2-3 and two Rami phr. containing déwe in, 227r. 4-5: Oğuz xı (after Xak. entry) “rhe Ogu?-call it (al-ibil) dewe: Kaş. III 225; olo. 1 31, 2) II 195, 25; İİİ 139, 7 (see Xak.): Xwar. xiv téve “camel” Qutb 178; Nae. 133, 7: 415, 3: Kom. xiv 'camel' töve CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiu al-camal tewe: Hou. 14, 13: Xiv dewe: ditto 7d. 51; Bul. 7, 5: xv ditto Kav. 39, 7; 61, 20; . camal tówe Tuh. 11b. 8. Dis. DBZ ?D tepiz lit. “salty ground, a salt pan”, hence metaph. 'envy' and the like. Bang's suggestion in “Das negative Verbum in der Turksprachen,, SPAVV, 1923, p. 114 that it is a Dev. N. in -iz fr. tep- is possible, but there is no obvious semantic connection. N.o.a.b. Uy$. vir ff. Civ. tepizdeki teve mayakı 'camel's dung on salty ground' H 7 98: Xak. xı tepiz a/-sabxa 'salt pan; salt marsh': tepiz (bà' unvocalized ?) kişi: "an envious (al-hasid) man”: wu yuqal lPl-harda"a ami ”l-himli”iladi la yastaqirr rühibuhu and “a pack saddle or load on which the rider cannot settle comfortably" is called tepiz yük (?s/c; the only vowel on these words is a damma on the bd” which is prob. an error; the word seems to be used metaph, for 'awkward, uncomfortable") Kaş. 1 365:.0. II 208, rə (Çokraş-): KB tepizlik bolur bu kapuğda üküş tepiz kayda erse tütüş ol uruş “there is a great deal of envy behind these (palace) gates; wherever there is an envious man there are (constant) disputes and quarrels! 4247; a.o. 4254: Kip. xiv tépiz al-ardu'l-sabxa İd. 37; al-sabxa tepiz Bul. 3, 9. . DBY D tapzuğ Hap. leg.: Dev. N. fr, tapuz- , note that the quotation contains a different word. Xak. xı tapzuğ “a riddle' (a/-algiza) which is used to test (the intelligence) (ynulde? brhà); one says tapuzğuk (sic) tapuzdim “1 asked a riddle” Kaş. / 462. Dis. V. DBZD tapuz- Caus. f. fr. 2 tap-; pec. to Kaş.: there is at any rate one word for “riddle” der. fr. 2 tap-, NC Kir. tabigmak; SC Uzb. topigmok; see also tapuzğuk, but in other modern languages quite different words are used. Xak. xı ol mapa: só:z tapuzdi: ai-ğaza flayya”l-halam mina l-alğüza “he asked me a riddle" Kaş. I7 86 (tapuzur, tapuzma:k), o.o. 7 462 (tapzuğ), II 164, 25 (tapuzğuk). D tepze:- Den. V. fr. tepiz; n.o.a.b. Xak. xi ol anı: tepze:di: fasadahu "he envied him” (tepze:r, tepze:me:k) . . . ol anı: tepse:di: same translation, dialect form (/uğa) under -z(fi'l-zày) Kaş. III 283 (tepse:r, tepse:me:k), tepze:di: hasada is derived fr. tepiz al-sabxa J 19, 10; o.o. of tepse:- hasada I1 463, 10; 155, 17 (umunçluğ): KB kişi tepsemegil "do not envy people” r302; 0.0. 974 (1 öyük), 4248-9, 4254-5: XIu(?) Tef. tepse- "to be envious' 299. : D tepzet- Caus. f. of tepze:-, pec. to Xaş. Xak. xı ol meni: bu: r:şka: tepzetti: “he incited me to envy ('ald'l-hasad) over this affair' Kaş. II 335 (tepzetü:r, tepzetme:k); ol meni: tepsettl: “he incited me to envy'; luğa fi'l-zày H 336 (tepsetü:r, tepsetme:k). D tepzeş- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of tepze:-. Xak.xı ola:r kamuğ bu: r:şka: tepzeşdi:ler: “they all envied one another (fa)ıdsadü) over this affair' Kaş. 17 206 (tepzeşü:r, tepzeşme:k). Tris. DBZ D tapuzğu: Hap. leg.; Dev* N./A. fr. tapuz-, in the actual quotation an Adj., in spite of the translation. Xak. xı tapuzgu: ne:n al-algüza “a riddle' (lit. “a puzzling thing? Kaş. 7 489. D tapuzğuk Dev. N. fr. tapuz-; “a riddle'. Survives in NE Tuv, tabizik R 7/7 973. Xak, xı tapuzğuk al-alfüza "a riddle' Kaş. I soz, (in a para. on verbs ending in -z- which are not Caus, f.s, which is in this case an error) tapuzğuk tapızdı: (sic) alğaza” Halğüza II 164, 25; a.o. I 462, 6 (tapzuğ). D tepizlig Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. tepiz; the passage is in Man. Syriac script which makes the -P- certain. Türkü vırı ff. Man. (just as if one sows sced) tepizliğ yerde “on salty ground' (it does not come up) M III 14, 4 (iv). D tepizlik A.N. fr. tepiz; 'envy'. Pec. to. Xak. Xak. xi tepizlik a/-hasad 'envy'; one says ani tepizliki: kimke: talka:r *whom does his envy injure?' (yağırr) Kaş. I 506: KB 4247 (tepiz), 4250 (possibly spurious).  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 493 
     
   
   
          MON. V. DD- 449 Mon. DC tu:ç (tu:c) an alloy of copper, no doubt in an early Turkish context “bronze” (copper and tin) rather than “brass” (copper and zinc). Ar. terminology on this subject is very inexact, if the dicts. are to be trusted; sgabah, sufr, and nuhás al seem to mean basically “a yellow metal” and are translated indiscriminately "copper” or 'brass'; quluzz the one word translated “bronze” as well as “brass” does not appear below, "The word also exists in Pe. as £üc, but clearly as a "Turkish L-w. S.is.m.l in SE, NW, SW; in Osm. tuc and more recently tunc a modern Sec. f. Xak. xi tu:ç al-şabahı”l-aşfar Kaş. III 120; a.o. İİ 353, 5 (yalrit-): xiv Müuh. al-şabah toa'l-gufr. tu:c Mel. 75, 6; Rif. 178: Kom. xiv "bronze" tug CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiv. fuc al-nuhàs İd. 62; al-nuhas (bağır and) tu:c Bul. 4, 9; a.o. do. 6, 7 (bo:rğu:y): Osm. xivff. tuc “bronze”, c.i.a.p. TT'S 1 699; II 904; III 685; IV 759: xvii tuc, in Rümi, “a kind of filizz 'copper alloy” which they call rzzy 'brass' Sar. 169v. 18 (a list of Pe. meanings of tüc follows). Dis. DCA S tuçı See tutşır. Mon.DD 1 tat the basic meaning of this word, which is translated very variously, seems to have been not so much 'stranger', which is 1 ya:t, as “an alien', prob. a subject, but in any case inferior. Radloff (/11 899) says that he had personally heurd of it only as applied to a section of the "Tatar population in the Crimea; his quotn. fr. Budagov goes back to Vel. As regards SW Osm., Leh. Osm. 286 (repeated in R I11 899 and Sami 370) says that it was a word applied to the old [ranian and Kurdish populations of provinces absorbed into the Ottoman Empire and hence came to mean 'miserable, destitute'. Türkü viu oğluna: tatrpa: tegi: bunu: körü: bilip “see and know this (all of you) down to your sons and alien subjects(?)' 1 S 12; I4. N 15: Xak. xı tat among the Turks generally “a Persian” (al-fárisi); hence the proverb tatığ kö:zre: tikenig tübre: “hit a Persian in the eye and a thorn-bush at the roots”: tat among the Yağma: and Tuxşı: kafara Uyğur "a pagan Uyğur”, I heard this from them in their country, and there is a phr. current there tat tavğa:ç “Uyğur and Chinese”, they have this same proverb similarly explained, because they do not trust them; just as the right thing to do to a thornbush is to cut it down at the roots, so also the right thing to do to an Uyğur is to hit him in the eye. And they have another proverb tatsız türk bolma:s başsız börk bolma:s “there are no Persians except those mixed up with Turks (sic, là yakünu'l-fárisi illa wa yuxdlitu”l-turk), just as there is no cap unless it has a head to be put on” Kaş. II 280; a.o. 7 453 (tavğaç) and several others translated a/-farisi, káfir, or Uyğur: Çağ. xv ff. tat "a class of serfs (ri'àyà) who do not live in towns and, 8641125 without being actual slaves (Rul), are in the service of landed gentry (akàbir); also used of a class of unemployed roughs (bi-kàár levend) Vel. 162 (quotn.); tat fírga-i tücik "a clan of Persians” San. 152r. 5 (quotn.); Kip. xiv tat al-falláh “a peasant” (one MS. adds “Arab and Persian") İd. öz, ta:t al-musta'rab 'assimilated to the Arabs' (perhaps an error for a/-mustağrab 'foreigner') Bul. 5, 9: xv hadari 'villager' (şart .and) tat TuA. rab. 3, fallah tat do. 27b. 8. 2 tat (?d-) 'rust'; survives in NE, several dialects (R 177. 898), and Khak. tat; Tuv. dat; SE Türki dat BŞ 326, tat Jarríng 297; NC Kir, dat, Kzx. tat/tot; NW Kk. tat; Kumyk, Nogay tot. Initial d- is very unusual in those languages where dat is used. Cf. bas, 6 kü:g. Xak. xi tat (with fatha, and damma added above) “rust” (a/-fab") which attacks swords and the like Kaş. IJ 281 (prov., see 1 tatik-): Kip. xv Tuh. 22a. 11 (ün). S3tat See tatij. tiit "arch-tree'.. Survives in all NE languages R III 1334 including Khak. and Tuv. (dit), but not elsewhere (NC Kar. tit *mulberry-tree* is a Sec. f. of Ar. 227). UyB. vurff. Civ. tit sögüt 'larch-tree' TT I 163 (butik), VII 29, 17: Xak. xı tit “the larch (a/-sanazbar) tree which grows in the mountains! Kaş. 11] 120. to:d “the bustard, Otis spp.'. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. to:y. Xak. xı to:d (mis-spelt bo:d, and immediately following that word) al-hubári "bustard”: to:d (also spelt bo:d; it is possible, but improbable, that that spelling is correct) moncuk “beads (xarazát) made of solid perfume and musk (sukk wa musk) which are worn by women' Kaş. 1II 121; Gigil xi to:y a/-hubari, luğa fi'l-dàl Kaş. III 142: KB (in a list of eight game birds) toy 5377: Çağ. xv ff. toy (2) tüğdari “bustard”, also called toy kuş San. 188r. ro Kip. xii. al-hubàri toy How. 10, s: xiv toy al-hubruc “bustard” İd. 67; doğ (sic) al-hubàri do. ag (Bul. 12, 2 has al-huböri b.rğa:t.y, which is obviously corrupt; reading td” for bd” and zoğu for rö” it becomes to:ğa:tay, which looks like a Sec. f. of Mong. tofodak (Kot. 1807); do, under döl-ğayn and so not a mis-spelling, may have some Mong. connection); Osm. xivíff. toy 'bustard' in several texts T'T.S 7 696. PU tot peculiar to Uyğ. Bud. and used only in the Hend. tot uçuz: presumably 'worthless' or the like. See (PU) tota:-. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. bu muntağ tot uçuz savlarin “these so worthless words! U IV 8, 31-2; o.o. U /T 77, 19; 86, 36. Mon. V. DDtat- (?da:d-) “to taste" (Trans.); for the -a:see ta:tığ, ta:tur-. The relationship between this V. and tatı:- “to be tasty” (Intrans.) is obscure. Except in NE where they have been displaced by the Mong. 1.-vv. amda- and the like, either or both s.i.a.m.l.g., but not necessarily as Trans. and Intrans. respectively. In  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 494 
     
   
   
     450 SE "Türki tati- is both Trans. and Intrans., and in NC Kzx. tat-, but in Kir. tat- is Trans. and tati- Intrans.; in SC Uzb. both tot- and totl- are both; in NW languages tat- is the usual form; SW Az. dad-; Osm. tat- (tadbefore vowels) and 'l'km. da:t- (da:d- before vowels) are Trans. only. Uy£. vii ff. tili... tatığ tatar “his tongue tastes (various) tastes" TT VI 174; tatmış tatığığ “the taste which he has tasted” do. 176: Civ. [gap] çığ ta:tir TT VIII 1.6 (if this is to be restored as açığ ta:tir 'it tastes bitter', it prob. belongs to tati;-): Xak. xi KB (he brought out various foods and drinks and) ayur azkina tat 'he said “taste a little” ” 5440; (he said the morning prayer and) tattı aş-a 'tasted food” 5829: xin(?) Tef. tat- “to taste (Trans.) 289; At. 209 (1 açığ) a.o.o.: xiv Muh. dáqa “to taste” da:tMel. 26, 5; tat- Rif. 109; tata"ama ditto ta:t106 (only): Çağ. xvff. tat-(-ay) £ad-(-ayın) Vel. 162; tat- çaşıdan “to taste' San. 151 v. 8 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv ditto MN 362: Kom. XIV 'to taste, or savour (something)' tat- CCI, CCG, Gr.: Kip. xui düqa ta:t- JIou. 40, 9: xiv tat- güqa İd. 64: xv ditto Kav. 77, 18; dàqa tat- Tuh. 16a. 3; 16b. 2; fa"ima ditto do. 23b. 9; 24a. 5. tét-, tid-, tit-, tit- Preliminary note. 7t is reasonably clear how many Verbs of each of these forms there are, but, as they are usually graphically indistinguishable, it is often difficult, and damaged passages like U III 25, 15 (1) and "TT 1]] 1:2 impossible, to determine which Verb is concerned. D 1 tét- (d-) Caus. f. of t6:- with the idiomatic use of Caus. as Pass.; “to be said to be, to be called'; almost always in the form tétir “is said to be, is called”. Pec. to Uyg. UyÉ. vitt ff. Man. edéü tétyük nomluğ [ertinig] “the precious doctrine called "good" ” TT III 108: Bud. tétir is very common in texts like TT V 4 fl, e.g. tiz yokaru bölke tegi suv uluğ tetir “from the knee up to the vvaist (the element of) vvater is said to be predominant” do. 3, aş 0.0. TT IV 4.3: VH ao, 71; Suv. 110, 6; PP r1, 4; 38, 8, 74, 6; tetirsiz "you are called' U 7 23, 11: Civ. tétir is common ih texts like TT VII 14. t : 2 tét- (té:t-) pec. to Xak., but cf. té:tik, té:til-, tétin-, tétrü:; it is difficult to fit the first two in semantically with the rest, and they may be derived fr. some other V., perhaps “teti:-. Xak. xr kul begke: tétti: “the slave resisted (or opposed, qáwarma) the beg' (followed by two illustrations of tétrü:) Kaş. 1I 292 (tete:r, tétme:k): KB (I was friendly disposed to you but) mapa tétgü teg sen adın boldi söz "you seem to be hostile to me and your tone has changed' 1083. : tid- (?ti:d-) “to obstruct, restrain', and the like. S.i.s.m.l, (not SE or SW) usually as. tiy-., "Türkü vri ff. Man. nomuğ tórüg yadturmatin tidtimiz erser 'if we have failed to disseminate and have obstructed the doctrine MON. V. DDand rules" Chuas. 74-5: Uyğ. vin ff. Man. ayığda yaratındaçılarığ tidtipiz “you have restrained those who fall into evil ways' T'T III 74-5; a.o. do. 112(?): Bud. yarlığ bolzun tidmazun “et there be an order, let them not obstruct me” PP 19, 1; o.o. do. 27,3; 40, 7: 51, 6 (mistranscribed); U 77 69, s (ii) (cerig); U III 49,25; 51, 19; TT X 106, 496, etc.: Civ. kün ay yarukin tida katığlanur “he strives to obstruct the light of the sun and moon' TT 1 27; a.o.o.: Xak. xı ol ant: titti: masa"ahu "he prevented (or hindered) him”, originally tidti: but assimilated to -tt- (udjma tea şudda) Kaş. İl 292 (tida:r, tidma:k); ol ani: tıydı: mana'ahu; originally tidti: but. modified (xuffifa) 111 244 (tiya:r, tiyma:k); ol anı: aşka: trdtr mara"ahn D'l-fa'àm “he prevented him from (getting) food” 7/7 439 (ti:da:r, tt:xdma:k): KB (on your journey) kereklikni alğıl kereksizni tid “take what you need and discard what you do not' 1445; yırak idmasa tidsa yığsa eriğ "he should not send (the troops) far (from the 'camp) but restrain and concentrate them” 2347) o.o. 4671, 5292, 5439, 5581, 6182, 6472: xif1(?) At. sógüng kelgü yolni akilik tiyur "liberality blocks the road by which abuse comes' 232: xiv Muh.(?) mana'a tiy- Rif. 115 (only); a.0. 121 (mis-spelt): Çağ. xv ff. tty-(-1p, etc.) man" eyle- Vel. 199 (quotns); tiy- ("with -1y-”) man" kardan San. 203r. 4 (quotns.): ii Xwar. xiv tid-/tiys “to restrain, hold back” Qutb 192: Kom. xiv ditto tiy- CCI, CCG; Gr. 261 (quotn.): Kip. xv 'atewaqa “to impede, hinder” tıy- Tu). 26a. 11. D tit- (?d-) “to tear to pieces" and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NW(?); in NE Khak., NC Kir. tit-; NC Kzx. tüt-; SW Osm. dit-; "Tkm. dit-/tüyt-; elsewhere tit-. See Doerfer II 996 and titimlig. Xak. xr ol et titti: mazzaqa'l-lalma'l-muharrá "he tore the boiled meat to shreds', also used when one tears a garment to shreds (mazzaqa famziga(n) báliga(n)) Kaş. II 292 (tita:r, titma:k): Caf. xv ff. tit- "to tear something to pieces ((izi pàára pára hardan) with the hands”, and “to separate' cotton lint, etc. from the seed Sar. rgor, r: Kip. xin matafa "to pluck out” (feathers, hair, etc.) tit(- Bil) Hou. 36, 20: xiv did- (^vith back vovvels”) "to pluck' (zafaja) wool, cotton, and the like; Imperat. did İd, 48: xv naásala wa nasara “to unravel, pluck out” (VU) tit- Tuh. 37a. 1 (if with back vowel it would prob. be spelt f1t-). : 1 tit- “to give up, renounce'; pec. to Uyğ. Bud. Cf. 1dala:-. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. Sanskrit tyaktvà 'having given up' titip TT VIII D.22, 40; jaháti “he glves up” tite:r do: 39; (in a list of virtues) titmek 'renunciation' TT V 24, 61 (and see note thereon); o:o. TT V 26, 107-8, etc. (1dala:-); Kuan-sfi-im Pusar 70, 7-11 (yüze:gii:); U IV 48, 82-3, etc. : VU 2 tit- (?tót-) 'to ache, throb'; pec. to Kag. where it occurs twice in different spellings. The main entry opens the list of words of this form, is vocalized with damma and has 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 495 
     
   
   
        DIS. DDA . 451 the Infin. in -Fia:h, but the Dev. N. is vocalized with kasra and ends in -i$. "Vhe -18 can hardly be a mistake and, since Infin. terminations tend to be erratic, it can be taken as certain that this V. had a front vowel, but the position of the main entry before tut- suggests that the damma is correct and the word may have been tót- or tüt-. Xak. xı ba:ş tötti:(?) “the wound ached (amadda) because of a blow' Kaş. II 291 (tóte:r, tótme:k spelt -ma:k); one says ba:g titig titti: 'the wound ached a great deal” (amadda ayya imdád) I 386. D tö:d- (?d-) “to be full, satiated', and the like; apparently a der. f. in -d-"(see v. G. ATG, para. 153 and cf. yo:d-, yü:d- and perhaps ko:d-) fr. to:-, which in this case seems to be a Pass. Suff. S.i.a.m.l.g., usually as toy-; SW Az. Osm., Tkm. doy-. Türkü vin bir todsar acsik ómezsen 'if you are once satiated, you do not remember being hungry' I S 8, Il N 6: Uy£. vir ff. Bud. za paripüryate “he is not satiated" todma:sa:r (spelt tot-) TT VIII C.g9: Xak. xı meniyp karın to:dti: “my stomach was satiated” (gabi'a) Kaş. IIT 439 (to:da:r/to:du:r “both forms” (lufatayn), to:dma:k); karın toydı: sabi'a'l-batn; originally todti: with the -d- changed to -yin colloquial speech (5bi-Iugati'l-qaswer) HI 244 (toya:r, toyma:k); the Cigil Turks say karin todtı: gabi'a'l-batn, and they (the Kipçak, Yeme:k, Suvva:r, Bulğa:r, and tribes in the direction of Rüs and Rüm) say tozdı: with -zI 32, 1652.0. 11 324, 22: KB kara karnı todsa “if the common people”s stomachs are full” 988; o.o. 923, 3602, 3611 (arpa:) 3766, 4769: xut(?) At. hariş todmaz “the miser is never satisfied' 305; a.o. 255; Tef. toy- "to be satiated, full' 306: xiv Muh. şabi"a to:y- Mel. 27, 9; 41, 10; Rif. 110, 131; al-şab" to:xymak 36, 7; 122: Çağ. xv ff. toy-(- mafur) toy- (i.e. doy-) Vel. 226; toy- sir şudan "to be satiated' San. 187r. 24 (quotns.): Xwar. xiii doy-/toyditto “AH 3o, 56; xiv toy- ditto Qutb 181: Kip. xiv toy- şaği"d İd. 67; (tok al-şa"bün) "the Perf. is toydı:, the regular form (giyásuhu) should be tokdi:, but I have never heard it” do. 65; şabi"a toy- Bul. 4ov.: xv ditto. Kav. 74,8; Tuh. 21b. 75. tut- “o hold, grasp, seize', and the like. C.i.a.p.a.l. sometimes with idiomatic meanings. "The initial d- in early Osm. is not confirmed elsewhere. Türkü vii tut- is common; e.g. üt you stay in the Ötüken mountain forests) epgü: él tuta: olurtaçı: sen “you will sit (on the throne) and hold the realm for ever" I S 8: vui ff. İrRB 3 (tapla:-); ol taşı:ğ özl: üze: tutsa:r 'if a man keeps that stone on his person” Toyoh 17 (ETY II $58); a.o.o.: Man. igid nomuğ törüğ tutuğma: “holding to a false doctrine and rules” Chuas. 128-9; a.0.0.: Uyğ. vir tut- occurs in several damaged passages: vill ff. Man. küyü közedü tutmaklari bolzun “may they watch over us (Hend.) and keep us” M I 3t, 4-5 (1)? a.o.o.: Bud. tut- “to keep, hold', etc. is common, see e.g. Index to TT I-V: Civ. tut- is common, e.g. TT 134-5, 41 (bek); bor sirkesin ağızda tutup “holding wine vinegar in one's mouth” H 7 7o: Xak. XI it keylk tutti: "the dog seized (axada) the antelope” (etc.); also used for anyone who seizes something; and one says ol maşa: eliğ tutti: hafala bi "he gave me a guarantee” Kaş. II 292 (tuta:r, tutma:k), 7 45, zı (ağırlığ) and many o.o.: KB amul tutgil óg “keep your mind at peace” 25; bu söz €şke tutğıl “keep this saying as a companion” 165; o.o. 99, 183, 306, 540 (ağır), 750 (t:d-), etc.: xırr(?) At. tut- is common; Tef. ditto 312-13: xtv Muh. qabada “to grasp! dut- Mel. 30, 5; 40, 7; qabada va amsaka (to take hold of") tut- Rif. 114, 129; lázama "to cling to” dut- 3o, 15; 115: Çağ. xv ff. tut-(-kusı, etc.) dut- Vel. zor, tutgiriftan voa dàgtan "to seize, hold' San. 168r. r (quotns.): Xwar. xııı dut- ditto ' Ali 26, 30: xır(?) tut- (or ?dut-) Oğ. rrr, etc.: xiv tutditto Qutb 187; MN 35, etc.: Kom. xiv ditto tut- CCI, CCG; Gr. 258 (quotns.): Kip. xıl azmsaka tut- Hou. 35, 5: xiv tut- changed fr. tut- ditto İ4. 62; amsaka sva dabata "to hold fast” tut- Bul, 24r.: xv amsaka tut- Kav. 74, 6; masaka tut- Tuh. 35; a. 9, a.o.o.: Osm. XIV-XVI and ?later dut- with various idiomatic meanings TTS I 233; Il 330; İTİ 215; IV 252. VU tót- See 2 tit-. PS tüt- See tüte:-. Dis. DDA VU tada: Hap. leg.; perhaps a l.-w., cf. tadu: Xak. xı tada: al-baym wahwa qifa mina'l-ard qadr madda”l-başar min 'ajr xatazodt “the amount of land within eyeshot from ten paces” Kaş. III 220 (i.e. everything in sight as far as the horizon). : F tadu: 1.-vv, fr. Sanskrit dhátu “an element in nature; an elementary constituent of the body”, N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viii ff. Civ. (PU) tadu “nature” H II 30, 149; 22, 15: Xak. xı tadu: tab'u'l-insán wa tabi"atuhu "the nature and natural elements of a man” Kaş. 1II 220; KB bu tört ég mapa tört tadu teg turur tüzülse tadu. çın tiriglik bolur “these four Companions (of the Prophet) to me are like the four natural elements, if the natural elements are in harmony life becomes upright” 60; o.o. 882, 10541055 (için, arta:-); 6006. dede: a quasi-onomatopoeic pec. to the Oğuz-Kıpçak group; originally 'father' (cf. English colloquial *daddy"), later, when displaced in this meaning by baba (another quasi-onomatopoeic) 'grandfather; old man, dervish”, and the like. Survives in these meanings” only(?)) in SW Osm. See Doerfer III 1179. Oğuz xı dede: al-àáb 'father' Kaş. HI 220: Kip. xiv dede: a/-cadd abi”l-ab “paternal grandfather” İd. 48; dede: (misplaced under dal modu) al-cadd, also called ata: do. sr: xv (al-cadd óbüge, Mong. l.-w.) al-cadda 'grandmother” dede Tu. 11a. rr: Osm. xiv ff. dede not listed in TTS, but the title of the well 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 496 
     
   
   
     452 DIS known xiv (or xv) character Dede Korkud: xvii dede in Rümi 'paternal or maternal grandfather, also used of ascetic holy men and dervishes Sar. 223v. r. VU tuda pec. to Uyg., and used only in the phr. ada tuda, see ada:; prob. a mere jingle with that word and not an independent word. Dis. V. DDA?S tati:- "to taste (Intrans.), to be tasty'. The relationship between this V. and tat-, q.v., is obscure; it can hardly be a der. f. since there is no trace of a Dev. Suff. -ı:-, so is presumably a Sec. f. For modern occurrences see tatXak. xi aş ağızda: tatı:dı: ronucida fa/m hada"l-ta"üm fl-fam aca taladdada bihi “the taste of the food vvas ascertained in the mouth, and it (the mouth) found it delightful” Kaş. 7/77 257 (tatrr, tatizma:k; prov): KB tatidi tiriglik "life was sweet! 5627. PUD tota:- Den. V. fr. tot, q.v.; 'to disparage” or the like. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. söğüp sarsıp totap uçuzlap ing, abusing, and disparaging (Hend.)' Suv. 136, 9-10; a.o. U 11 77, 17-18 (utrun-): Civ. TT VII əs, 5-6 (térge:s). tüte:- 'to emit smoke or steam'; survives in most NC, SC, NW languages, and SW 'Tkm.; the Osm. form tüt- scems to be a Sec. f. rather than the original form. See tütet-, tütek,. tütün. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. kaltı linxwa sayu tütün tüterçe ol erser “vhen every İotus (Chinese l.-w.) seems to be emitting smoke' PP 38, 5-7. Dis, DDC S tutçı: Sec tutşı:. Dis. V. DDDD tatıt- Caus. f. of tatı:- , sis. m.]l, Xak, xt tu:z aşığ tatıttı: “the salt brought out the flavour (atecada ta"m) of the food”, also used of anything that impresses on you (aşarra laka) the flavour of anything Kaş. 1I 299: xin(?) At. "asal tatrup ilkin tamak tatıtıp “first he makes you taste honey and gives a pleasant taste to your throat” 207: Xvvar. xiv tatut"to make (someone) taste (something cc.) Qutb 173. D tütet- Caus. f. of tüte:-; s.i.s.m.l. in NE, NC, NW, 'to make (something) smoke, to smoke out (an animal from a hole)'. Xak. xı o:t tütü:n tütetti: 'the fire smoked' (daxxana'l-duxán) Kaş. H 299 (tütetü:r, tütetme:k; both spelt /ütit-): Xwar. xir dü:te:t- “to smoke' ' Ali 25 (misdescribed as a Den. V.). Dis. DDG D ta:tığ (in Kaş. under the heading /477) Dev. N. fr. ta:t- (tat-) rather than tatı:-, 'taste, flavour', often with the implication of “a pleasant taste”, This is the only form of this word in the early period and it still survives as  . DDA tatu: in NE, NC, but fr. the medieval period a syn. word tat appeared, which survives in all other language groups. 'lhere is no good reason for supposing that it is a really old word. Uyğ. viui ff. Man.-A tatağ M İT 12, 17 (i) (1 ten): Bud. in Bud. terminology tatığ 'taste' is normally the fourth of the six senses, see TT VI 17410; U 111 37, 30-1 (1 açığ)— in Suv. r18, 7 tati must mean concretely 'tasty food”, (if any are suffering from hunger and thirst) adruk adruk tar tapsuk tatığlar üze todğurdaçı bolayın 'I will be the one who satisfies them with various wonderful (Hend.) tasty foods”—in Suv. 590, 23 ff. the seven ufus of the body are enumerated as “fesh, blood, tati, skin, bone, marrow, and oluk(?)'; this seems to be an error for tadu:: Civ. tatiBlar bütgüke tayağı tétir “it is called a support for the preparation of tasty foods! TT 7 191; o.o. do. 187, 199: Xak. xt ta:tığ, a/-ladda "a pleasant taste”, one says in a jingle ( f?'l-izditeáac) ta:tığ ta:lığ Kaş. 1 408; aş tatğı: tu:z yoğrı:n y€:me:s8 "one gives a flavour (fa'm) to food with salt, but one does not eat it as a (separate) dish” 277 31, 22: KB (when a man reaches the age of sixty) tatığ bardi andin 'the savour (of life) has gone' 367; tati erdi barça yigitlik işim *when I was young all my work was pleasant” 370; o.o. 375 (ÖÇ-), 689, 16087, 1891—3, 3586, etc., all with the connotation of a pleasant flavour: xin(?) Zt. (the wise man knows) bilig tatğın "the sweet taste of wisdom' 106; Tef. mizàác “the physical characteristics! (of a particular kind of water) tatığ 289: xiv Mwuh. al-datwq 'taste' da:t Mel. 34, 2-3; ta:t Rif. 119; al-ta'm dai 66, 3; ta:t 165: Çağ. xv ff. tat maza (flavour) tea ladda wa ta'm San. 152r. $: Xvvar, xiv tati "taste! Quib. 174: Kom. xiv. 'taste, savour” tatığ CC7, tatov CCG, Cr.: Kip. xii (after ta:tlu: 'sweet', opposite to 'bitter') a/-fa'm min. kull şay” ta:t Hou. 27, 10; 2.0. 40, 9: XIV tat al-haláwa 'sweetness' : ta:t al-ta'm İd. 64. D tıdiğ N.Ac. fr. ti:d-; 'hindrance, obstruction”, and the like. S.i.s.m.l. vv, similar phonetic changes. Uy£. viirff. Bud. (destroying and putting an end to) örtüğ tıdığlarığ “coverings and obstructions” U İT 33, 5: o.o. TT IV 6, 48 (boşğutçı), Suv. 73, 21 (adart-), U HI 18, 12; 28, 8: Civ. adın kişilerdin tıdığ bar “there is obstruction by others” TT 1 213-14: Xak. xi tidiğ a/-haşr mina”l-şay” wa'l-man' 'denial] -of access to something, prevention Kaş. I 373: KB (out of ten remarks) biri sözlegü ul tokuzı tıdığ, tıdığ söz tübl aşlı barça yıdığ “one is a foundation j.e. constructive) and nine are obstructive, the basis (Hend.) of obstructive remarks is completely disgusting' 999. D tutuğ Dev. N. fr. tut-; with a rather wide range of meanings. Apparently survives in NE Sor tuduğ 'pillage' R J/I 1495; Tuv. tuduğ “a building”, NC Kir. tutu: (1) “holding, grasping'; (2) 'the felt cover of a tent'; SW Osm. tutu (1) 'a stake' (at gambling); (2) “security” (for a debt). Cf. tutuk, See Doerfer  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 497 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. III 1449. Türkü vir ff. IrkB 29 (ur-): Yen. otuz eriğ baslayu: tutuğka: badı erinc Mal. 32, 12; the whole inscription is damaged and incoherent; this might mean “he bound (someone) at the head of thirty men as a hostage': Uyğ. vr ff. Bud. anın ne(?) tidiğ tutuğ(?) işinizler (sic) bar erser “thercfore whatever obstructions and restraints on(?) your work there may be” (get rid of them all) U HI 28, 7-8, a.o. USp. ros, 7-8 (ilig): Civ. yarım yastuk kümüşke tutuğ “security for half a yastuk in coin (i.e. not notes)” USp. 51, 3: Xak. xı tutuğ al-rahn “security, pledge': tutuğ al-ixd tala l-sa' fa mina! I-cinn "possession by an evil spirit'; one says anın tutuğı: ba:r "he is possessed by an evil spirit Kaş. I 373: a.0. HI 63 (yul-): KB ölügli kişi barca ödke tutuğ “all mortal men are hostages to time” 1211; tapuğka turur kut tutuğ *divine favour is a security for (good) service” 418o: xin(?) Tef. tutiB(?)/tutug “security, intermediary(?) 314-15: Xwar. xiv tutuğ “the cover of a tent'(?); (tutuğsuz 'without security”) Quib 188; tutuğ “security” Nac. 163, 7: Kip. xırı rahana tutu: koy- .... al-rahn tutu: Hou. 36, 19: xv rahin (tusnak Hap. leg.? and) tutu Tu. 17a. 4. F totok 1.-vv, fr. Chinese tu-tu (Giles 12,050 12,057; Pulleyblank, Middle Chinese tou tok) “military governor' (of a district or region). As pointed out in Doerfer II 874, where numerous occurrences of this word are collected, the correct transcription is totok and not tutuk, as it has usually been transcribed, but see tu:ğ. In Turkish it occurs both in the transcription of Chinese names and as a title given to 'Turks by the Chinese Emperor or, very prob. in some cases, assumed by Turks themselves. Türkü vrrı op totok "Wang Tu-tu' (a Chinese) IE xı, Türgeş xağan buyruku: Az Totoko:ğ "Az Totok, an officer of the Türgeş Xağan” 7 E 39; Koşo: Totok 7 N r, Bukağ Totok JI S ro: virt ff. Yen. (PU) Könç Toto:k Mal. 35, 2: Uy£. viri ff. tarxan kuncuy [gap] beg totok çiğşi a list of titles in a fragmentary text M III 41, 3-4 (iv): Bud. kebünzün cu totok begim(?) a? Chinese name U I/ zo, 2-3 (i); El ögesi Isig Edgü Totok . . . [sig Edgü Totok P.N.s Pfahl. ro, 15: O. Kir. ix ff. El "Toğan Totok Mal. r, 2; seven other similar names. D tutuk Pass. Dev. N./A, fr. tut-; s.i.s.m.l. with a wide range of meanings; 'overcast (sky); tongue-tied ; paralysed; closed (curtains)', etc. Cf. tutuğ. See Doerfer II 875. Xak. xi tutuk al-xaşs? wa'l-macbüb | ma'a(n) both '*gelding' and 'eunuch' Kaş. I 380 (these meanings do not seem to occur elsewhere): Çağ. xvff. tutuk metaph. 'a curtain or screen (barda tva há'it) which they put in front of a door' San. 169v. 13 (quotns.): Kip. xiv tutuk al-bagxána “vestibule” or the like /d. 37. D tutğu:ç N.I. fr. tut-; survives in SE Tar., Türki; NC Kir. tutkuc; NC Kzx.; NW Kk., Nog., etc. tutlas; SC Uzb. tutkic “a piece of felt for holding kettles, cooking-pots, etc.; a  DDG453 handle', and the like. Xak. xı tutğu:ç a/-sulfa mina'l-ta'àm Kaş. I 453 (al-sulfa normally means 'breakfast', but a/-saif means “a (leather) provision bag”, and that is prob. the meaning here). D tutğa:k Dev. N./A. connoting Habitual Action fr. tut-; survives at any rate in NC Kir. tutkak “a fit (of rage)! and SW tutak Osm. 'a handle, anything that holds or impedes' (Red.); 'Tkm. (of a dog) “that holds fast (to its prey). A cognate word s.i.s.m.l. in NC, SC, NW as tutka 'handle' and the like. 'This word had several meanings, some of which are obscure. Uyğ. vri ff. Bud. (as a result of birth, old age, and death come about) “and the appearance of depression, anxiety, pain, tutğak, embarrassment, bewilderment, and a great accumulation of pains comes about” U 77 rı, 6-7 (obviously an emotion of some kind, perhaps “a feeling of frustration"): Xak. xt tutğa:k “a mounted detachment (carida) that goes out at night to capture the enemy's patrols and reconnoitrers” Kaş. I 467: KB ölüm tutğakı ig tegürmis eliğ 'disease, the advance-guard of death, stretched out his hand (to him) 1067; ölüm tutğakı 1:352, 3580, 5976; (in the presence of the enemy a general adırğu üdürgü yezek tutğakı *must single out and choose advance-guards and reconnoitring patrols' 2342: xiv RƏ. (I am a son of the Prophet) bizde tutkak (sic) ^illati boima:s 'we do not suffer from seizures (Y R HI 1488: (iv. Muh.(?) qabdatu'l-sayf “the hilt of a sword' kiliç tutğa:sı: Rif. 173 (only): Kip. tutğa: qa'imu'l-sayf ditto İd. 64). PUD todğu:n Hap. leg.; spelt tadgu:n but no doubt l'ass. Dev. N./A. fr. to:d- in the sense of *full (of water). Xak. xi todğu:n “a river” (al-wádi) like the Euphrates and the like; used in place of ógüz for any constantly flowing river (coqdi cári) Kaş. 1 438. D tutğu:n Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. tut- ; 'prisoner, captured”. S.i.m.m.l.g. as tut&amp;un/tutkun, same meaning. Xak. xı tutğu:n al-axid tca'l-asir 'prisoner, captive” Kaş. I 438; o.o. spelt tutğun / r94, 11 (1d!l-); 205, 6; II 219, 7: KB yıl ay tutğunı boldum “1 have become the prisoner of years and months” 373: Çağ. xv ff. tutğun gəri/rör wa mahbüs ditto. San. 169v. ro (quotn.): Kom. xiv ditto tutğun/ tutkun CCI, CCG, Gr.: Kip. xn al-asir tutku:n (and tutsa:k) Hou. 32, 13: xiv tutkun a/-asir İd. 64: Osm. xıv-xvı dutBun ditto TTS II 330, 908; III 217; IV 252. Dis. V. DDGD 1 tatik- Intrans. Den. V. fr. 1 tat; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı türk tatıktı: “the Turk adopted Persian habits' (taxallaqa . . . bi-axlàqi'i-farisi) Kaş. II 116 (Aor. and Infin. after 2 tatik-): kiliç tatiksa: rs yuncrr er tatiksa: et tinct:r (mis-spelt tunci:r) “if a sword gets rusty, (its owner's) affairs deteriorate; if a man adopts Persian habits his flesh putreftes” (yatarazcteah) II 281. 11; Kip. xiv tatikti: “his speech and 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 498 
     
   
   
     454 language became like the language of a peasant” (al-fallah) İd. 62. D 2 tatik- Intrans. Den, V. fr. 2 tat; “to get rusty", Survives in NC Kzx. R İİİ goşş in other languages where such a Den. V. exists it is tatla- or the like. Xak. xı kilic tatikti: (later revocalized as tofukti:) “ust appeared ('alà'L-tab') on the svvord” Kaş. I] 116 (tatika:r, tatıkma:k, vocalized totuk-); a.o. 17 281, rı (1 tatik-). D tatğan- Refl. Den. V. fr. tatığ, survived until recently in SW Osm. tadan- (now obsolete. Xak. xı er aşığ tatğandı: taladdada' l-racul. bi'l-ta'àm toa tamattaqa "the man found the food delicious and smacked his lips' Kaş. II 241 (tatğanu:r, tatğanma:k). D todğur- (d-) Caus. f. of to:d- , “to satiate, satisfy. S.is.m.l. as toyur-/doyur-, cf. to:d-. Uyğ. vil ff. Suv. 118, 6-8 (tatif): Xak. xı ol meni: todğu:rdı: (sic, in error) aşba"ani "he satiated me” (todğurur, todğurma:k, prov.; verse); and one says ol meni: bu: ıştin todğurdi: “he svearied me (ama/lani) with this affair until I acquired a loathing (sa'ama) for it” Kaş. II 176; men anı: todurdum ajba'tuhu originally todğurdum Kaş. 1I 76 (todururmen, todurma:k); about a dozen o.o. of todğur- and one of todur-: KB yetürse içurse todursa karın “if he gives him food and drink and tills his stomach” 2560; a.0. 3766, 4769 (açım): xin(?) Tef. toyur- (and toydur-) ditto 306—7: xiv Mu. ajba'a (to:yğız- Mel. 41, 10) to:yğur- Rif. 130: Çağ. xv ff. toyğar-(-mayın, etc.) dovurVel. 225-6; toyğar- sir kardan ditto San. 187v. ig (quotns.): Xwar. xiv toyur- ditto — Qutb 182: (Kom. xiv. ditto toydir- CCG; Gr. 248 (quotns.)). D todğurt- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of todğur-, mentioned only in a para. on the formation of Caus. fs with -t- fr. V.s ending in -r-. Xak. xı men anı: todgurttum 'I gave orders that he should be satisfied! (bi-igba'ihi) Kaş. Il 256, 6. Tris. DDG D tatığlığ P.N./A. fr. tati; always specifically “having a pleasant taste'. S.i.m.m.l.g. but in the shorter form tatlığ/tatlı/tatlu: and the like, cf. tatığ. Türkü vii ff. Toy. 1I rr, 6—7 (1 2:8): Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-A (tatağlağ in M 1 27, 2 is an error for tapağlağ, see 1 a:tlığ), körtle (VU) tatağlağ nomt “his lovely, sweet doctrine! Man.-uig. Frag. 400 heading: Man. Wind. 250, 36 (ur-): Bud. tatığlığ soğançığ nom nomladı “he preached the sweet and excellent doctrine” PP 46, 4; tatağlağ (sic) aş içğü 'savoury food and drink, do. 71, 6; a.o. Suv. 647, 4 (aşat-): Civ. TT 1 118: Xak. xı tatığlığ ne:) "a delicious (laddid) thing”, originally ta:tığlığ Kaş. 1 495; the shorter form also occurs in verse quotns, tatlı:ğ aşı:ğ delicious food" I 45, zo, tatlığ öter sanduwa:c “the nightingale sings svveetiy” 7 $29, 7; //T DIS. V. DDĞ178, 16; (a bird's) tatlığ ünün 'sweet song” 1H 194, 15: xin(?) Tef. tatlığ/tatluğ/tatlu: 'sweet' (of fruit, water, words) 289: xiv Muh. al-huhwe | *sweet' (opposite to acr “bitter") da:tlığ, sü:cü: Mel. 54, 7; (sü:cü: Rif. 151); lahu fa'm 'tasty' (opposite to tn:tsız 'tasteless”) da:tluğ 66, 3; ta:tlığ 165: Çağ. xv ff. tatlığ zathı Vel. 167; tatlığ bd maza 'tasty, savoury'; abbreviated in Rümf to tatlu, which is also used for 'sweetmeat' San, 152r. 4: Xwar. xiv. tatlığ/tatlı 'sweet' Quib. 173; MN 163: Kom. xiv. 'sweet' tatlı CCI, CCG (common); Gr. 237 (quotns.); 'savoury' tatığlı CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiu al-hulw (opposite to 'bitter' act, etc.) ta:tlu: ya'ni gi? fam Hou. 27, 9: xiv. fatlu: al-/uite, also pronounced tatlu: /4. 62: xv al-má'ul-huhe. ta:tlı: şu: Kav. 58, t5; hulm tatlı Tuh. 13a. 12; in do. 32a. 1 tatlı is given as one of thirteen translations of /aban 'milk'. D tıdığlığ P.N./A. fr. tidiB; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vur ff. Civ. künikeki (sc, ?kündekl) ışın tıdığlığ “your day-to-day work is obstructed' TT I 161; a.o. (?misread) do, 185: Xak. xi tıdığlığ ne:np ol-say'u'l-mamnu'. "anPl-touşül tayhi “a thing access to which is obstructed" Kaş. I 496. D tutuğluğ P.N./A. fr. tutuğ: n.o.a.b.(?); SW Osm. tutukluk 'paralysis' is an A.N. fr. tutuk, Xak. xt tutuğluğ, ye:r al-macanna, that is “a place occupied by evil spirits who injure anyone that goes there” Kaş. 7 496. D tıdığsız P.N./A. fr. tıdiğ, “ünhindered, unimpeded'; pec. to Uvg.; particularly common in TT VI where tidiğsız bodisatv translates Sanskrit asanga bodhisattva, sec P- 56, note oro. Uy£. viri ff. Man. tidiğsiz burxan kutin bul(tupuz] “you have attained the divine favour of the unimpeded öurxan" (Mani) TT HI 107; tidiğsizin "without impediment” do. LX 23: Bud. (the demon Hidimba went to meet him) tıdığsız kópülin 'with an imperturbable mind” U 77 26, 16; tıdığsız bördi "he gave unstintingly' PP 8, 6; tidigsiz bodisatv 7T VIoio,etc.; TT VIII G.19; Suv. 186, 1. D tutuksuz Hap. leg.; Priv. N./A. fr. tutuk, apparently in the meaning of 'holding up”, a meaning not recorded elsewhere; a faulty spelling of tutuğ is not impossible. Uyğ. viitt ff. Bud, Sanskrit anádháraka 'unsupported' futuksu:z TT VIII A.. Tris. V. DDGD tutukla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. tutuk. Xak. xı ol oğlın tutukla:dı: “he castrated (xaşd) his son, or destined him (zasabahu) for castration” Kaş. 17] 337 (tutukla:r, tutukla: ma:k). D tatığlan- Refl. Den. V. fr. tati$; survives with the same meaning in SW Osm. as tatlan-, and in NW Kaz. as tatu:lan- “to become reconciled'; (tatu:laş- exists with the latter 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 499 
     
   
   
     TRIS. meaning i. NC Kir.) Xak. xi üzüm tatığlandi: 'the grapes became tasty and delicious' (dà ta"m wa ladda) Kaş, II 265 (tatığlanu:r, tatığlanma:k). D tutuklan- Hap. leg.; Reft. f. of tutukla:-. Xak. xı ura:ğut tutuklandı: "the woman procured a eunuch as chamberlain to walk in front of her” (háciba(s) yaqdamuha) Kaş, II 265 (tutuklanu:r, tutuklanma:k). : D todğurumsın- Hap. leg.; Refl. Simulative Den. V. fr. a N.S.A. fr. todğur-, mentioned only as an example in a grammatical section. Xak. xr ol anı: todğurumsındı: "he pretended to satisfy him" Kaf İl 263, 2. D todğurun- Hap. leg., Refl. f. of todğur-, mentioned only as a grammatical example. Xak. xt ol karın todğurundiu: “he pretended to fill his stomach, or devoted his whole attention to filling it” Kaş. Il 202, 4 D todğuruş- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of todgur- ; mentioned only as a gramimatical example. Xak. xı ol menip birle: karın todğuruşdı: *he: competed with me in filling the “ Kaş. İl zor, 24. D tatığsa:- Desid. Den. V. fr. tatif; pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı er tatığsa: di: 'the man longed for something svvcet” (al-halawa) Kag..111 333 d (tatığsa:r, tatığsa:ma:K), a.o. / 276, 26. D tatığsıra:- Hap. leg.; Priv. Den. V. fr. tatığ. Türkü vririt Man. bilge biligi tatığsırayur "he loses his taste for wisdom" M III 18, 12 (i). Dis. DDG D te:tik morphologically a Dev. N./A. fr: 2 tét-; semantically there is no obvious connection with that V., but a close connection with tö:til-, *quick-witted, intelligent" ; s.i.a.m.l.g., but some meanings in NC, NW are hard to connect with the original one. Uy. viu ff. Bud. (in a list of'good qualities) tetik odBurak 'quick-witted and wide awake" TT VI 279: Civ. TT VII 28, 53-4 (bilge:): Xak. xi oğlu: tetik a/-malad fatin "her intelligent son” Kaş. HİT 33, 27; n.m.e.: KB tetik is a stock laudatory Adj.; e.g. ajunda tetik er yedi bu cihün “in this world the quickwitted man, conquers the world' 279; 0.o, 297 (adut), : 475, 883, 1188; in 58 tedük, for which there is no obvious etymology or explanation, may be a distortion of this word to rhyme with bedük, akt erdi elgi yüreki tedük biliglig sakınuk kör ati bedük “his hand vvas generous, his heart intelligent(?), vvise, and thoughtful, he had a great reputation”: xı 5) At. (an occasional mistake comes) neçe tetik erdin 'from a man however dəyə he may be” 361: xiv Muh((?) al-dahi "sa ious” te:tik Rif. 151 (only): Çağ. xv ff. t tik “active, enterprising; capable .in business matters! Vel. 183 (quotns.); (teyik (sic) of a sick man *losing his.senses and talking wildly' do. 182 (quotn.)): tetik (spelt) same translation and quotn. as feyik above; also pronounced DDG tetik, ihe Rümi author ( Vel.) translated it “active, enterprising; capable', and Tali"-f Harawi (see Bad. şəb. 9) translated it “in good health” (salizh) as opposed to 'ill' (marid) and quoted this verse; they were mistaken San. 152r. 15; tetik similar translation (same verse as Vel. s,v. tetik) also pronounced tetik do. 19or. 7 (there is obviously considerable confusion here; Vel.'s first translation and T4li'-: Harawi's translation are substantially correct, San. was mistaken in accepting Vel.'s second translation based on a misunderstanding of the verse quoted): Kip. xiu al-4daki (opposite to *stupid' PU abru:) te:tik Hou. 26, 11: xiv tetik "the key (miftál) to something secret, which no one knows except its maker” /d. 37. ?Stedük See té:tik, F di:dek Hap. leg.; no doubt a l.-w., prob. Iranian, Xak. xi di:dek “the cover of the litter (kabisatu'l-za'ina) in which a bride hides from the neighbours on the day of her wedding' Kaş. 1 408. D 1 titiğ Hap. leg.; N.Ac. fr. 2 tits; “aching”. Xak. xı Kaş. 1 386 (2 tit-). 2 titig “mud”, both in its natural state and as a raw material for house-building. N.o.a.b., see balçık. Türkü viirff. teve: titl:ğke: tüşmí:S "a camel fell into mud” JrkB 46: Uy£. vru ff. Bud..(he drew mortals) sansarlığ kök titigdin "out of the grey mud of samsára' TT V 26, 85-8; titiğ yuğuru 'kneading mud' (to build a house) TT VI 82; a.o. Suv. 619, 15: Civ. emdi titiğ kılğu künlerni ayalim 'now let us prescribe the days appropriate for making (builders) mud' TT VII 38, ız, yerde sidip titigin alıp “urinate on the ground and take the mud so made” H 1 74; o.o. TT VIII 1.75 (catuk); H II 26, 110: Xak. xt titiğ al-/in “müd” Kaş. I 386; o.o. 1 150, 7 (ocaklik); 506, rz (küzeclik); 77/ 297, 22 (suvla:-). D tütek Dev. N. (Conc. N.) fr. tüte:-; etymologically "something which steams or smokes” , in practice “a spout” or more generally "a tube; a pipe as a musical instrument; waterpipe", and the like. Survives in NC Kur. tütük; Kzx. tütik: NW Kk. tüteftütik; Krim düdük, Nog. düdik; SW Az., Osm. düdük; Tkm. tüyduk, 1.- -w. in Russian as dudha. Xak. xı tütek “the spout' (sunbür) of a ewer and the like Kaş. 7 386: xiv Muh. al-sabába 'reed pipe, flute! dü:dük Mel. 63, 2 (only): Kip. xii a/-şababa dü:dük Hou. 24, 10; 41, 7: xiv düdük ditto İd. 48: xv daff "tambourine' (dümri) Tkm. düdük Tuh. 15b. 8: Osm. xv ff. SAĞIM 'reed pipe' TTS III 254. 455 Dis. V. DDG?E tütgür- See tutur-. Tris. DDG D titigçi: Hap. leg.; á N. Ag. fr. 2 titig; 'a man who makes mud walls. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. (in a list of workmen) titigçi Atsız Pfahl. 24, 29.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 500 
     
   
   
       456 TRIS. ?E tötökci: See tü:nek. I D tetiklik A.N. fr. téti., “intelligence, quick-wittedness'. Survives in SW Osm. Xak. xı KB tetiklik bile kıldı yalpuk isi "with intelligence a man does his work (properly) 2222; 0.0. 2188, 2224: xir(?) At. 55 (0:z-). Tris. V. DDGD tétiker- Hap. leg.; Intrans. Den. V. fr. tetik, properly “to be quick-witted, intelligent'.. Uy£. viri ff. Bud. (if a man's hair turns white while he is still voung; if he swents freely and is bad-tempered) artukrak yaruk yasuk tetikerser tülinde yana ot kórser "if he has a brilliant intellect(?) and constantly sees fire in his dreams” (you should know that that man has a bilious disposition) Suv. 594, 10-11. Dis. DDL PU?F todliç Hap. leg.; this word occurs in Xak. x1 KB 5377 together with 'swan, pelican(?), crane, and bustard' (toy) in a list of eight game-birds; the other three like this are Hap. leg. If pure Turkish, the word must be connected with either to:d 'bustard' or to:d-, but there does not seem to be any other occurrence of a suffix -İlç, and the ending -la:ç which occurs in other names of birds like sundila:c and karğıla:ç is prob. foreign, and all these words prob. l.-w.s. S tatlığ See tatığlığ. Dis. V. DDLD tatil- (?d- -d-) Pass. f. of tat-; survives in SW Tkm. da:dil-. Xak. xı a:ş tatıldı: "the food (etc.) was tasted' (diga) Kaş. II 120 (tatilu:r, tatilma:k). D té:til- morphologically Pass. f. of 2 té:tbut semantically connected not with that word but with té:tik, Pec. to Xak. Xak.xı oğla:n t€:tildi “the boy became intelligent' (fazi) Kaş. II 121 (te:tilü:r, te:tilme:k, in a Section headed fa'aldi, which implics a short vowel in the first syllable, everywhere vocalized teytil-); 2.0. İ 106, 8. D tidil- Pass. f. of tt:d- , 'to be obstructed” and the like. Survives in the same languages as U:d-, except NE, with the same phonetic changes, and some extensions of meaning. Uy£. vin ff. Bud. [gap] sarsığ sözlemekdin tıdrlzunlar “let them be prevented. from using . . . and rough language” U TT 24, 3; tıdılğalı unamadı “he refused to be held back” do. 49, 26; odğurak tidilmadin kelgey “he will assuredly come without being prevented by anything" TT X 72; a.o. U IV qo, 181: Civ. (the sun sank below the horizon) yarumakı tıdıldı “its light was cut off” TT 1 23; tidilip tutulup turmağaymen “İl will not be obstructed and held back and stand still USPp. 45, 12; (in a remedy for nose bleeding) tidilur “it is halted' H I 130; a.o. H II 14, 133: Xak, xi er tiştin tidildi: 'the man   DDG abandoned (fmtana"a) the enterprise; also used when he is prevented by someone else (mana'a ğayruhu), yata'addá wa là yata"adda “Active (i.e. Intrans.?) and Passive” Kaş. II 126 (tidilur, tidilma:k): KB 4428 (?; see tirel-): Çağ. xvff. tiyil- (spelt) mamnü" şudan "to be prevented” San. 203r. 20 (quotns.): Xvvar. xıv tiyil- "to be restrained, held back” Qutb 192: Kom. xiv “to cease, desist” tiyilCCI, Gr. D titil- (d-) Pass, f. of tit- , survives in most of the same languages with the same phonetic changes. Xak. xı et bışıp titildi: taharra'a'l-lalım bi'l-tabx "the meat was boiled to rags'; also used of clothing when it has become shabby and torn to rags (axlaqa rea tamazzaqa) Kaş. II 120 (titilu:r, titilma:k), D tutul- Pass. f. of tut-; noab. Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. USp. 4s, 12 (tidil-): Xak. xi keyik tutuldi: “the wild animal (etc.) was caught! (uxida) Kaş. II 120 (tutulu:r, tutulma:k): xın(?) Tef. tutul- (of a man) “to be caught' (by the legs 454); (of a road) “to be blocked' 315: Çağ. xv ff. tutul- girifta gudan “to be grasped, seized' Sar. 168v. 6 (quotn.): Xwar. xi: tutul- “to be held fast” “Ali 25: xm?) tutuldi 'battle was joined' Og. 160: xiv tutul- (of the moon, etc.) 'to be eclipsed” Qız? 188: Kip. xiv tutulmak al-xusif “an eclipse of the moon”: tutul- xasafa İd. 64; al-xusüf ditto Bul. 2, 15: XV xustüf tva'l-kusüf (“an eclipse of the sun”) tutulmak TuA. 14a. 2; tutul- is conjugated do. 48a. 8 ff.: Osm. xiv and xv dutul-, later tutul- occurs in s or 6 idiomatic meanings T'TS 7 235; 11 333, 909; II 691; IV 254. D ti:tlan- 'Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. tet, quoted only as a grammatical example. Xak. xı ta:ğ tr:tlandi: “the mountain was covered with larch-trees' (şanazıbar) Kaş. III 199, 5. D tidlin- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of tidil-. Xak. xt er rsstin tidlindi: “the man gave up (imtana'a) the enterprise" (etc.); also used when he has been reluctant to speak (fatoaqqafa fi halümihi) Kaş. I1 242 (tidlinu:r, tidlinma:k). Tris. V. DDLD tutuldur- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of tutul-. Uyğ. vin ff. Man. İgapllarığ tutulturtupuz “you have caused the . . . to be restrained! TT IIl 79. Dis. DDM F didim 'crown'; L-w. fr. Greek ötdönna, obtained through Sogdian öyöm. N.o.a.b. Türkü viii ff. Man. TT 11 8, 67 (ur-): Xak. xı didim (sic) "the crown (a/-ık/il) which a bride wears on her wedding night” Kaş. I. 397. D titim (d-) Hap. leg.?; N.S.A. fr. tit-, but judging by titimlig, q.v., already with front vowels. Xak. xr KB (a beg must. be stout-hearted and a good shot) yürek birle boldi yağıka titim “vith a stout heart he becomes destruction (or the like) to the enemy' 2043.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 501 
     
   
   
      DIS D tutum (tutom) N.S.A. fr. tut- ; lit. “a single ;: DDN act of grasping”, but normally used as a Conc.' N. meaning 'a handful', with other cognate meanings. In the medieval period became tutam, presumably because the original form. was tutom (cf. tutuş), and s.i.a.m.l.g. in this form. Osm. tutum 'sumach' is a Pe. 1.-w., not connected with this word. Uyf. vii ff. Civ. yéti tutum talkan 'seven handfuls of meal” TT VII 24, 9; 25, 9-10: Xak. xı KB (man is born to die) tutamça tiriglik tüker alkinur 'his handful of life comes to an end and perishes' 5265: Çağ. xv ff. tutum (r1) girift-i hür wa dtar-i hay, 'seizing a thing and traces of a thing; (2) £terşi wa hamüdat *pickles' (and in Pe. “sumach”) San. 169v. 17 (the first translation ís obscure; neither meaning scems to be noted elsewhere); her tutam tört €liğ "every tutam is two double handfuls' Babur (P. de C. 222): Kip. xiv tutam al-qabda “a handful" /d. 64: Bul. 9, 10. D tutma: Pass.(?) Dev. N. fr. tut-, Hap. leg. in this meaning, but a common N. Ac. in some modern languages. Xak. xı tutma: al-şandüq 'chest, coffer' Kaş. 7 431. D tutma:ç Dev. N. in -ma:ç (denoting kinds of food); some kind or kinds of farinaceous food, 'noodles, macaroni, vermicelli”, and the like; popular in the medieval period, but now obsolete; the latest trace is in SW Osm. tutmac “(for tutma as!)' “a dish of stewed mutton in gobbets with chick peas' Red. 1251. See Doerfer 11 876. Xak. xı tutma:ç “a food (ta"düm) well known to the Turks”, followed by a story about Dü'l-qarnayn, who is said to have provided this food when his troops said tutma: aç “do not keep us hungry” Kaş. 1 452; 0.0. HI 119 (çötb), 3 o.o. translated tutmác: Çağ. xv ff. tutmaç “a kind of food (aş) made by rolling out dough and shredding it” San. 169v. 12: Kip. xiv. futma:c (-c) 'handfuls (qabdat) of dough placed in meat soup'; its meaning is “held back for hunger' (al-mumsak li'l-cato'); tutma: “do not hold back”, ac *hungry'; the phrase (aí-cumía) is used as a name la. 64; (in a list of foodstuffs) a/-fufmüc qibcágiya "a Kip. word! Bul. 8, 12: Osm. xiv to xvii tutmaç “macaroni soup' in several texts 7 TS II 907; III 689; IV 766. Tris. DDM D titimlig (d-) P.N. fr. titim; pec. to KB; the context indicates some meaning like 'destructive, disruptive'. Xak. xı KB (an army commander in the face of the enemy must be as brave as a lion, with a wrist like a leopard's) topuz teg titimlig 'as destructive as a wild boar” (as strong as a wolf, etc.) 2311; 0.0. 2328 (tupul-), 5905. Dis. DDN ta:dun originally “a calf, one or two years old”. Survives only in NE Kaç., Koib. (R III 928); Khak. tazın “an ox, a gelded bull'. Xak. xı tadun a/-cada" müna"l-baqar "a two-year-old calf”, and the feminine is tişi: tadun Kaş. 7 2 0 —— 0. a 05. 9. 40 0:3.  457 400; ta:dun (?, -d-) al-tabi' mina'l-baqar 'aoneyear-old calf” 111 171. VU?D trdin n.o.a.b. For the description in Kaş. cf. türk, in a Section in Kaş. headed faà'il together with ta:dun and to:dun. İH the -dcould be taken as an error for -d- this might be an ABİ, of tt: with which there is some semantic connection. Uy£. vir ff. Bud. (if a man, because he does not understand this, takes entirely different views) azu ters tetrü (PU) tıdınça yaprluk nomlasar “or preaches errors at inappropriate timcs”(?) TT VI 195 (nne of several] v.l. of this para.; the translation is purely hypothetical, but it is hard to see any alternative): Xak. xı tı:dı:n (gic, but an error under fá'il) harf yunbi' 'ani'I|-wagt "a Particle connoting time”, hence one says bu: ti:din (sic) keldi: cd”a fi mütl hádàá'l-waqt “he came at about this time' Kaş. 111 171. to:dun (hitherto transcribed fudun, but the Chinese transcription indicates to:dun, cf. totok); a Türkü title of office. It occurs fairly frequently in Chinese records regarding the Türkü, where it is spelt ?'u ("un (Giles 12,100 12,232; Pulleyblank, Middle Chinese fou duən), see Chavannes, Documents sur les Tou-kiue (Turcs) occidentaux, St. Petersburg, 19oo, Index s.v. t'ou-t'ouen and toudoun. ln the list of "Turkish offices in the Chiu T'arg Shu, Chap. 194b. (Chavartes, p. 21) the £'u-t'un occupies the 7th place, coming after the Asieh-li-fa (élteber); when T”un Yavğu:, who was the Wcstern Türkü xağaz in the first quarter of the 7th century, conquered foreign countries he gave their rulers the title of élteber, but sent a to:dun to supervise them and collect the taxes (Chavanres, p. 24); the word appears in these records, as an element either first or second, in P.N.s, e.g. 7”ung todun and Todun Sad (Chavannes, Index). By x1 the office had obviously lost importance. N.o.a.b. in Turkish texts. See Doerfer MI 1194. Türkü vr: todun (VU) Yamtarığ it(t)um 'I sent the todun Yamtar” (telling him “attack the Karluk to the south”) 77 E 42; Kül Todun inisi: 'younger brother of Kül Todun” Ixe- Asxete a.1; b.1 (ETY II 121-2): vil ff. Urugu: Todu:n Cigsi: Miran A 2-3 (ETY II 64); Xak. xi todun 'the headman ('arif) of a village, and the man who allocates water for watering livestock! (mutvazzi'u'l-miyáh fi'l-şirb) Kaş. I 400; to:dun “the man who allocates water for watering livestock among villagers! 771 171. D tütün Dev. N. fr. tüte:-, 'smoke'. S.i.a.m.l.g., usually as tütün, but NW Kk., Nog. tütin; Kaz. töten. See Doerfer II 953. Uy£. vir ff. Man. tamğakında kara tütün taşıkar “black smoke comes out of her throat” M II 11, 20: Bud. tütsügnür tütüni “the smoke of incense” Sut. 424, 12; o.o. PP 38, 6 (tüte:-); TT V ız, 13o: Civ. tütün occurs frequently in lists of taxes mentioned in contracts, e.g. kalan kurut tütün kabın USp. 14, 12; 21, 12; a.o. do. 88, 44; its exact significance is obscure, perhaps a hut tax (see  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 502 
     
   
   
     458 Caferoğlu in TM IV, p. 42): Xak. xı tütün al-duxán 'smoke' Kaş. I 4oo (prov.); o.o., spelt tütü:n /7 72, 9; // 299, 8 (tütet-): KB kişiler evinde bu koprur tütün “this man raises smoke in people's houses” 341; yarukluki azrak üküşi tütün “he gives out very little light and a lot of smoke' 6127: xiv Mh. al-duxán tü:tü:n Mel. 68, 16; Rif. 169: Xwar. xiv tütün 'smoke' Qutb 191; Nahc. 439, 4-5: Kom. xiv ditto CCI; Gr,: Kip. xit af-duxán tütün Hon. qo, 8: xiv ditto 7d. 37; dütün a/-duxán already mentioned under t- but commoner (aktar) with d- do. 47; al-duxán tütün Bul. 4, 12: xv ditto Tuh. 15b. 8: Osm. xiv ff. dütün is the normal form until xvi but tütün is noted fr. xiv onwards; c.i.a.p. TTS I 706; II 350, 913; İİİ 230; IV 265. Dis. V. DDND tatin- (? d-d-) Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of tat-; quoted only to illustrate this meaning of the Refl. f. Xak. xı ol aş tatındı: “he pretended to taste (yadüg) the food without actually tasting it” Kaş. IJ 158, 17. D tétin- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of 2 tét-. Xak. xı ol anar tétindi: qaáwamahu wa'ctara'a 'alayhi “he opposed him and took a bold stand against him”, hence one says anın yü:zine: tötinü: baksa: bolma:s “a man cannot look at his face boldly (?; MS. /amxa(n) naşira(n) which might have this meaning; or, reading lamha(n) 'stealthily' because of his beauty Kaş. H 144 (tétinü:r, tetinme:k). , 1 D tidin- Refl. f. of ti:d-; "to restrain, or control, oneself? and the like. Survives in NE Tel/ tıyin- R ZIEL 1301. Türkü vir ff. Man. (if our praises and prayers have not reached God, but) ne yerde tıdıntı tutuntı erser “have been obstructed or detained somewhere' Chras. 217-18: Uyğ. vir ff. Man. titinu umatin TT III 111 (damaged; sic but ?belongs here): Chr. (then the Magi approached and entered) tıdınu 'keeping control of themselves" U 7 6, 11 (so read, quite clear in the MS., Müller, in error, titiri): Xak. xı er rstin tidindi: “the man gave up (imtana'a) the enterprise! Kaş. IH 144 (tidinu:r, tidinma:k). D titin- (d-) Hap. leg.?; Refl. f. of tit-. Türkü vr ff. toğan kuş tirpakt: sucu:lu:nmi:s yana: titt:nmi:s “the falcon's claws were skinned and torn' IrkB 44. D todun- (d-) Refl. f. of to:d- ; usually “to be satisfied, satiated'; survives in NC Kır., Kzx. toyun-. Xak. xr er todundti: “the man pretended to be satiated' (sa'bán); also used when he has been satiated (tagabba'a) Kaş. II 144 (todunu:r, todunma:k; mis-spelt todtn-). D tutun- Refl, f. of tut-; s.i.m.m.]. with a wide range of meanings. Türkü vir T 25 (ığaç): virt ff. Man. Chinas. 217-18 (tidim-): Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. U IV 8, 37 (siçğanakK): Civ. H 1 37 (şi): Xak. xi kin tutundi: "the sun was eclipsed” (Rusifat); and one says ay DIS. DDN tutundt: “the moon was eclipsed' (xusifa); and one says beg meni: oğul tutundu: "the beg adopted me (/abannáni) and took me as a son”, also in other contexts (wa gayruhu kadálika) ; and one says er keyik tutundı: “the man devoted himself to catching (istabadda . . . bi-axd) the antelope” ş also used of catching anything when one concentrates on it (/ufarada bihi), and one says o:t tutundi: “the fire caught hold' (ittagadat) (tutunu:r, tutunma:k; spclt tutan-, cf. tutum; verse) and one says ol avurta: tutundı: "he engaged (riftaxada) a wet-nurse'; and ol meni: ötügçi: tutundi: "he engaged me as an intercessor with the king" (Radálika'l-imagdar with the same Aor. and Infin.") Kaş. İT 143; çaksa: tutunu:r “if one strikes (a strike-a-light) the fire catches hold” II 23, 17: KB atiedgü bolsa tutunsa bodug “if a man's reputation becomes good and. retains its colour” 1957; (listen to) özin tutnur er "the man who controls himself! 4103; a.o. 1697 (adaş), 2276: xın(?) Zt. (if the fire of anger) yalinlansa tutnup “catches hold and flames up” 339; Tef. tutun- “to take (as one's own God, friend, ctc.)' 315. Tris. DDN D tutuncu: Hap. leg.; Dev. N./A. fr. tutun-. Xak. xr tutunçu: oğul “a boy whom a man has adopted” (fabarınd) Kaş. III 375. D todunçsuz Priv. N./A. fr. a Dev. N. fr. todun-; 'insatiable'. N.o.a.b. Türkü vrit ff. Man. Chuas. 252-3, ctc. (1 su:k): Bud. toduncsuz yaruk yula teg "like an insatiable burning lamp" TT V 6, 49; olo. Chuas. Berlin 27, 7-8 (amran-); Suv. 582, 4. D tatındı: Hap. leg.; Pass. Dev, N./A. fr. tatın-. Xak. xr tatındı: sü:t al-gubr (MS. al-'ubr, but this has no suitable meaning) mina'l-laban "the residue. of milk” Kaş, 7 449. D tıdındı: Hap. leg.; Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. tdin-.. Xak. xi tidindi: nein (misvocalized tadındı:) al-say'u' l-mumanna'!. 'somcthing inaccessible' Kaş. 7 449. D tütünsüz Priv. N./A. fr. tütün; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı o:t tütünsüz bolma:s “there is no fire without smoke' Kaş. 7 400, 19; I1I 16, 18; .n.m.e.: xi(?) Tef. tütünsüz ditto 319. Dis. DDR tatir perhaps survives in NC Kzx. tatir; this now means 'salt pan' (which should be tepiz) but may originally have meant, more generally, 'flat ground'. Cf. tatirlif. Xak. xı tatir ye:r al-qaráh mina'l-ard "a flat sown field! Kaş. I 361 (or "land free from salt"). titir 'female camel'; the difference in meaning, if any, between this word and inge:n is not apparent. N.o.a.b. Türkü virt ff. IrkB zo (buğra:): Xak. xi titir a/-náqa 'female camel' Kaş. I 361: KB (the grey cranes fly) tizilmiş titir teg “like camels tied in a line! 74; o.o.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 503 
     
   
   
      DIS. V..DDR206, 2312 (1 ö:ç), 5370: Kip. xin (al-naqa bnge:n); al-niyáqu'l-'arabiya “Arab female camels” titir Hou. 14, 13. D tetrü: presumably Ger. of *tétür-, Caus. f. of 2 tét- (cf. tetrül-), used as an Adv./Adj., with a rather wide range of meanings some of which can only be inferred. "The word is several times spelt quite clearly tertrü: and survives in SE Türki as tertür/tetür/te:tü: "inverted, inside out, the wrong way, wrong, topsy turvy” Jarring 304; “Var, te:tür ditto R Iİ 1093. İt is possible that this was the original pronunciation, but the vocalization in "Türkü and SE "Türki exclifdes the possibility of connecting this word with tart- and there is no other trace of *tert-. Türkü virt ff. (VU) tığr:ğ tertrü: (sic) kişe:mi:ş “(a man) hobbled the roan horse(?) crosswise' (it stands unable to move) /rRB 39: Man. (being deccived by those who say) tertrü (sic) yana igideyü 'wrongly and untruthfully' Chuas. 135: Uy£&amp;. vi ff. Man. tertrü (sic) saçlığ kurta m error for kurtğa) yek “an old female demon with dishevelled hair” M 77 11, 16; same phr. with tetrü and kurtğa do. 12, 1 (ii); körürler erti sizipe tétrü “they were looking askance at you” TT III 82: Bud. tetrü körmekliğ yarukin ıdtı “she sent the brightness of a sidelong glance” (at the king) U İl 23, 11712; o.o. of tétrü kör- in TT X — in the phr. tétrü uk- U IJ 7, 6 etc. and tetrü sakın- TT V zə, 14-21; U İl s, 4ff. the word has no pcejorative significance and seems to mean (to understand, or meditate) “deeply, thoroughly, through and through' — ters tetrü (sic) kórüm öritdimiz erser “if we have caused false (Ifend.) omens to arise' TT IV 8, 74; o.o. of ters tetrü TT VI 331; VII 40,37; VII O.zə: Civ. tetrü sakınç 77 I 110: Xak. xt tetrü: (sic) al-ma'küs 'inverted', of anything Kaş. I 420; (after tét-) and one says ol apa:r tétrü (sc) bakdı: ağıdaqa”l-nazar ilayhi "he stared fixedly at him” and one says of a handsome man (al-camil) apa:r tétrü: baksa: bolma:s 'a man cannot stare fixedly at him'; ta qad yakün bi-ma'ná nazari'l-gazr "and it (also) means "looking askance” ” /7 292: KB yarağlığ yarağsıznı tétrü körüp ; 'looking closely at his useful and useless qualities! 328; (if you love somcone his faults become virtues) kamuğ tétrüsi op 'everything crooked about him is straight" $36; o.o. (all pejorative) 1670, 1902, 1984, 5507: Kip. xiv détrü: baknazara hádda(n) "to look intently at (someone) ld. 48. PU tudrıç Hap. leg.; so spelt, but ?read -d-. Arğu: xı tudric ai-zibl “dung” Kaş. 1 453. ?E tutruğ Hap. leg.; n.m.e.; prob. an error for *tutzuf, see tutsuğ. Xak. xı iglig tutruğı: e:d bolur soaşiyafı”/-marid tahtin lahu fal hasan “a sick man's will is a good omen for him” Kaş. I 79, 13. D tutruk Hap. leg.; this is the reading in all three MSS. and can be explained as a Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. tutur-, lit. “one who is ordered 459 to hold', but it may be an error for buyruk which would suit the context; the verse occurs in a passage about the functions of begs. Xak. x1 KB bu él tutruki ham tübl bekliki 'the basic quality of this man who is put in charge of the realm is his firmness' 2132. PU?D tütrüm pec. to Uyğ. Bud. and found only in the Hend. tütrüm terír presumably *profound, deep”. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. tütrüm teri qualifying nom 'doctrine' TT V 22, 18; VI 283 (vl); Hüen-ts. 214; tütrüm terlg yörüğlüğ nom “a doctrine of which the interpretation is deep(?) and profound' Suv. 87, 20; 88, 16; 371, 3; tütrüm terip edgüsin 'his deep(?) and profound goodness' Hüen-ts. 1958. Dis. V. DDRD ta:tur- (?da:dur-) Caus. f. of tat-; 'to make or let (someone Dat.) taste (something Acc.) ; as such n.o.a.b., but s.i.s.m.]. astattur-/ tattir-; SW Tkm. da:dir-. Xak. x1 men anar aş taturdum “1 made him taste (adaqtuhu) the food” Kaş. II 73 (tatururmen, taturma:k); ol mapa: aş ta:turdi: “he made me taste the food” (etc.) 7I] 186 (ta:turur, ta:turma:k); o.o. 7 515, 22; İl 74, ir: xui(?) At. 'asal tatrup 'giving him honey to taste' : 207; n.0. 263; Tef. tatdir- ditto 289: Çağ. xv ff. tatur-(- mas) fatdur- Vel. 162 (quotn.); tatur- (spelt) gagamidan “to cause to taste' San. 1s2r. 3 (ditto): Kom. xiv ditto tatirCCG, Gr, 237 (quotn.): Kip. xii! dawwcaqa ta:ttur- (sic) Hou. 40, 9. D té:tür- (d-) Caus. f. of té:- ; survives with the same meaning in SW Az. dédirt- (sic); Osm. dedir-/dedirt-. Cf. 1 tét-. Xak. xi ol andağ té:türdi: kallafa hatta qila kada “he arranged for it to be said thus” Kaş. III 186 (té:türür, tö:türme:k): Xwar. xin(?) (there was a stretch of uncultivated steppe) muna Çürçet tetürürler (?d-d-) erdi "they had it called Çurçet” Oğ. 261. D tidtur- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of ti:d-; prob. here “to let oneself be obstructed'. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. TT VII 40, 19 (boBun-). : S todur- See todğur-. D tutur- Caus. f. of tut-; "to order to seize” etc. S.i.a.m.l.g., usually as tuttur-. Xak. xr ol apar it tuturdi: “he set (ağrd) the dog on him to seize him” (/i-ya'xudahu; this is irregular; grammatically it should mean 'he ordered him to seize the dog”), and one says (qad yuqdl) tutturdi: (this was no doubt the original text, it has been changed by a later hand to tütgürdi:) originally it contained three tá's, it tutturdi: with -tt- (mujaddada), and one of them was elided as an abbreviation (taxfifa(r)) Kaş. 11 73 (tutturur, tutturme:k; this spelling may be a deliberate correction by a later scribe, cf. tutug-; it is unlikely to be original); beg ofrrn: tutturdı: “the beg ordered the capture (bi-axd) of the thief, and he was captured! 77 174 (tutturur, tutturmm&amp;:k; spelt with two fá's, not a faşdid): xiv un... —.—:. 6. —— . — MN Jg MN 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 504 
     
   
   
      460 DIS. V. DDRMuh.(?) awsád “to bequeathe' tutu:r- Rif. 105 (this is the likeliest of several meanings of ateşd in this context and the likeliest transcription of the "Turkish word which is unvocalized, but it might be an error for tutu:z-, q.v.): Xwar. xiv tutur- “to order (someone Dat.) to accept (a command 4ec.)' Qutb 188: Kom. XIV “to order to hold' tutur- CCG; Gr. E tótür- in USp. Index is an error for tuytur-. titre:- (?d-) “to shiver, shake”. S.i.a.m.l g. usually as titre-/titire-; NW Kk., Nog. dirilde-; Kaz. derelde- may be a Sec. f.; in SW Az. dltre-/titre-; Osm. ditre-; 'l'km. titre-. Cf. bez-. Uyf. vii ff. Bud. U 1I 43, 30 (etc.) (bez-); do. 8, s: Civ. (the branches of the larch) mip tórlügin titreyür 'shiver a thousand ways! TT 7 164; ba:şı titre:r “his head shakes! VIII 1.4: (Xak.) xin(?) Tef. titre- "to shake, shiver” 303: xiv Muh. irta'ada “to tremble' titre:- Mel. 22, 5; Rif. 103; harraka "to move” (Trans.; ? read JAaraka) ditre- 4o, 19 (13o tepre-); Rbj. yer titredi 'the earth. shook! RII] 1391: Çağ. xvff. titre- (spelt) larzidan “to shiver, tremble' San. 189v. 12 (quotns.): Kom. xiv “to tremble, quake' titre- CCI, CCG; Gr. 246 (quotns.): Kip. xiv ditre- i?ta"ada İd. 48; xv ditto titreTuh. 6b. 3; ra'da 'shudder' titremek do. 17a. 4: zalzala “earthquake” ditto do. 17b. ro: Osm. xv ff. ditre- "to shiver, quake, tremble'; c.i.a.p. TT.S 2 213; İİİ zor, IV 232. D titret- (?d-) Caus. f. of titre:-; “to shake (something), to make (it) tremble', etc. S..s.m.l. Uyf. vin ff. Man. M I 18, 4 (ii) (butarla:-): Bud. TT X 450-1 (tepret-): (Xak.) xiv Muh.(?) a"rada gayrahu “to shake someone! titre:t- Rif. 103 (only): Çağ. xv ff. titret- Caus. f. larzánidan "to make (something) shiver, tremble'; also used as an Intrans. (Azim) for larzidan San. 189v. 27 (quotns.): Kip. xiv al-hummá'l-bárida "a cold fever, ague' ditretmek (spelt -mak in error) Bul. 9, 16. D tétrül- Pass. f. of *tétür-, see tétru:; 'to be turned round, reversed, perverted”, and the like. N.o.a.b., always with -e-. UYĞ. vir ff. Man. az biliğ éyin tetrülmekiğ “being perverted by lust! TT II 16, 25-6; o.o. do. 34-5, 46-7: Bud. f(teltrülmiş başlığ kıldaçı siz [xan] üskindekileriğ "you make those” who stand before the king confused(?)” Hüev-fs. 2065-6: Xak. xı yeözl tetrüldi: "the wind veered (ingalaba) from south to north or north to south'; and one says tetrüldl: ne:p 'the thing was reversed and inverted' (ingalaba . . . tea'n'akasa); and one says er kiliki: tetrüldl: *the man's conduct (etc.) deteriorated' (sd'a) Kaş. II 229 (tetrülü:r, tetrülme:k). D tatruş- (?da:druş-) Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of ta:tur-, Xak. xı ola:r bi:r ikindi:ke et tatrugdi: "(hey gave one another meat (etc.) to taste' (addqa) Kaş. II 217 (tatruşu:r, tatruşma:k).  D titreş- (? d-) Co-op. f. of titre:-; “to shiver, shake, etc., together'. Survives in SW Osm. ditres-. Xak. xi kişi: tumlığdın titresdi: 'the people (all) shivered (irta'ada) because of the cold'; also used of a thing when it shakes (fazalızaha) Kaş. 11 217 (titreşü:r, titreşme:k): xırı(?) Tef. titres- 303: Çağ. xv ff. titreş- ba-ham larzidan "to tremble togetber' San. 189v. 26: Xwar. xur titreşditto Alf 54: Osm. xiv ditreş- “to tremble (in ave) TTS IV 232. i Tris. DDR PU tatırğa: lHap. leg.; the word is slightly misplaced under -K- between tararku: and tavilku: and may be mis-spelt. Xak. xi tatırğa: a/-qadam walwa cild abyad madbüğ *white tanned skin” Kaş. I 489 (this seems to require some meaning like 'vellum' for al-qadam, but it is not in the dicts.). D tuturgu: Hap. leg.; Dev. N./A. fr. tutur-. Xak. xi tuturğu: ne: şay” haqqıhu yü'az fihi 'something to be recommended' Kaş. 7 489. PU?F tuturka:n 'rice'; spelt clcarly with -kin TT VIII and Ka;.; other Uyğ. spellings are ambiguous; later forms all have -$- ; unless it is a ].-w., which is quite possible for a commodity like rice, it is hardly likely to be a basic word, but there is no semantic connection with tutur-. An early (?xiv) L-w. in Mong. as tuturğan (see N. Poppe, Mongol'skit slovar' Mukaddimat al- Adab, Moscow-Leningrad, 1938, p. 356), but obsolete in "Turkish soon ' after that date. Uyğ. vırı ff. Bud. tuturkan Suvsuş “ricc wine' Hiüen-ts. 1941-2: Civ. tuturka:n TT VIII 1.13 (burçak), İlvi aşı tuturkan tetir "its (appropriate) food offering is said to be rice” VII 14, 28: Xak. xı (under -K-) tuturka:n a/-uruz "rice” Kaş. 1 521: xiv Muh. al-uruz tuturğa:n Mel, 78, r, Rif. 181: Çağ. xv ff. tuturğan/tuturğu (the latter an error, nün read as wáw) in Mong. (sic) “rice” (birinc), in Ar. uruz San. 169v. rz: Kom. xiv. 'rice' tuturğan CCI; Gr.: Kip. xui ak -urux tu:turfa:n. Hou. 9, 16: xiv tuturğan/ tuturğan al-ruzz Íd. 64; al-uruz tuturğan Bul. 6, 15: xv ditto Kav. 63, 13; Tuh. 5a. 1. D tatırlığ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. tatir. Xak. xı tatırlığ ye:r ard dàt cadad wa şalaba *smooth, hard ground” Kaş. 7 494. Dis. DDS D tutsık Dev. N./A. tr. tut-. N.oa.b. "Türkü vri (there has never been a better place than the Ötüken mountain forest) él tutsik yer Ötüken yış ermiş “the Ötüken mountain forest was the place which controls the realm! 7 S 4; ao. I S 10-11, I1 N 8 (ölsik). D(S) tutsuğ “a will, testament” prob. a Sec. f. of "tutzuğ Dev. N. fr. tutuz-, for which tutru£, q.v., is prob. a scribal error. N.o.a.b.; cf. xuma:ru:, and, for the form, 1 tütsüg. Xak, xı tutsuğ a/-roaşiya “a will, testament';   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 505 
     
   
   
     DIS one says men apar tutsuğ tutuzdum avwjaytuhu bi-maşiya “1 made a will in his favour” Kaş. I 462. D(S) 1 tütsüg 'incense' and the like; prob. a Sec. f. of *tützüg, Dev. N. fr. tütüz-; owing to the ambiguity of the Uyz. script this may in fact be the Uyg. form. Survives in SW Az. tütsü 'smoke'; Osm. tütsü 'fumigant, incense'; "Tkm. tüssü 'smoke'. UYĞ. vi ff. Man. Wind. 36-7 (ur-): Chr. arid tütsüg “pure incense M 11I 49, 12 (ii): Bud. küji tütsüğ 'incense sticks! U II 4o, 105-6; 47, 77; edgü yıdlığ yıparlığ tütsüg küyürüp “burning sweet-scented, fragrant incense' TT V 8, 72-9; 0.0. U H 61, 6; TT VII 40, 60; Suv. 129, 8; 424, 10-12 (tütün), USp. ror, 11; Iozb. zr: Xak. KB kayust: elig sundt tütsüg tutar 'some stretch out their hands, holding incense' 98: Çağ. xv ff. tütsi dud swa baxür "smoke, fragrant odour' San. 169v. 9: Xwar. xri dütsi “smoke” 'Ali 57: xiv tütsü ditto Qutb 191. ?E 2 tütsüg 'hostile'; 1 tütsüg, though it occurs in K B, is not listed in the present text of Kaş., and it scems likely that some word meaning 'incense', prob. al-baxür, followed tütsüğ in Kaş. 1 476 and was followed by some word meaning 'hostile'; as the next word is türpiğ, the second consonant might have been -t-, -Ç-, or -d-, but some word ending in -$ and cognate to tétrü:, tétrül-, possibly *tétrüg is the likeliest. Xak. xı (PU) tütsüg kişi: a/-muşahin “a hostile person” Kaş. I 476. Dis. V. DDSD tutsuk- Emphatic Pass. f. of tut-, “to be caught, seized”, etc. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vi fi. Bud. oğrı oğurlasar tutsuksar “if a thief steals and is caught” TT VI rro: Xak. xı er yağı:ka: tutsukdı: “the man was captured (uxida) by the enemy” Kaş. II 227 (tutsuka:r, tutsukma:k). Tris. DDS D *tütsüglüg P.N./A. fr. 1 tütsüğ , “containing incense'; n.o.a.b.; the omission of -6- is prob. inadvertent; 1oğ is a Chinese l.-w. Uyğ. vilt ff. Bud. (then the officiating priest must take black incense sticks (küji), recite the dhárani seven times, and) tütsülüg (sic) loda küyürmiş kergek 'burn them in the censer' TT V 12, 130 (and see note). D tütsüglük A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. 1 tütsüg; *censer'. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. éliginde tütsüglük tuta bu tütsügüg urup méni okizun Tet him take a censer in his hand, put this incense in it, and call on me' Suv. 129, 7-9. VUD tudasız Priv. N./A. fr. tuda:, q.v.; pec. to Uyğ. and used only in Hend. with adasız, q.v. Dis. DDS D ti:dig Hap. leg.; Dev. N. (connoting reciprocity) fr. tıd-. Xak. xı tı:dış al-mumána'a *mutual obstruction' Kaş. 7 407.  461 . DDŞ D tutuş/tütüş (?tutoş) Dev. N./A. (connoting reciprocity) fr. tut- ; with various meanings, usually 'quarrel' and the like. For the vocalization see tutuş- ; consistently spelt tütüş ; all modern forms have back vowels. Survives as tutaş meaning either “continuous, complete', or 'touching, adjacent in SE Türki, NC Kir,, Kzx., SC Uzb.; NW Kk., Nog. (tutas); Kumyk; SW Osm.; tuduş/tutuş ditto in NE Alt, Tel,, T'uv.; SW Tkm., and tudis “quarrel, fight” in NE Khak. Uy$f. vii ff. Bud. (he pacifies) alku kor ayığ tütüş keriş karışmakığ “all damaging, evil quarrels (Hend.) and disputes! U İT 58, 4-ş (i): Civ. tütüş kerişte tezgil “fiy from quarrels (Hend.) TT I 48, o.o. of tütüş keriş do. 177, 180; VII 28, s, (if a man misbehaves in what he does) tütüş bolur “a quarrel ensues” 77 7 195; o.o. do. 196; VII 33, 16; 36, $: Xak. xı (after tapis “mutual trust") (VU) tutuş aslab lafza(n) minhu, al-mu”dxada a stronger expression, 'clinging to one another” Kaş. I 367: KB (wine is an enemy) kılınçı (VU) tutuş boldi kilki urus “its actions are quarrelsome and its conduct pugnacious' 2098; o.o. 2651, 4247 (tepiz), 4586 (axsumla:-): Xwar. xiv tutuş rüza tutmağıl “do not fast continuously' Nahc. 260, 15; a.o. 416, 14. “D tü:deş N./A. of Assocn. lit. “having hair the same colour', but used more indefinitely. Pec. to Xak. Xak. xi any class (cins) of things which resemble (ywug5:h) one another is called tü:deş ne:r, derived fr. tü: “hair” (al-sa'7) ; one says of an animal bu: at ne: tü:lüğ 'what are the markings (siya) on this horse?”, and -deş harf muşdhaba ta müqdrana “a Particle connoting companionship and association! . . . tü:deg mugàrrnu'l-laywn wa'l-siya "of the same colour and markings” Kaş. 1 406—7; a.o. III 207 (tü:): KB adaşlı kadaşlı ikiğün tüdeş “frends and kinsmen are like one another” (English 'birds of a feather”) 3485: könli tüdeş “like minded” 5721. D tutşı: 'constantly, continuously” , Dev. Adj./ Adv. fr. tutug-. N.o.a.b.; common in Xak.; the original form *tutusi: (tutoşı:) does not occur, but the Sec. f. tuta:şı: occurs in Xak., often corrupted to tutçı: and even (metri gratia?) tugr, which is prob. the commonest form in KB. Uy£. vır ff. Man. tutçı üzüksüz 'continuously and uninterruptedly" TT III 26, ar: Xak. xı tutst: al-şay”ı”l-mugürinu'l-mucáwir 'something associated or adjacent'; one says anın yé:ri: menir yé:rke: tutşı: ol “his land is adjacent to (ie. continuous with) mine'; -S- and -€- are close to one another (tataqarabün) here and one (also) says tutçr:: tuta:şı: an alternative form (luğa fihi), one says men sana: tuta:şı: barı:rmen “1 am constantly (dàá'ibo(n)) going to you” Kaş. J 423; about a dozen o.o. of tutçi: often translated abada(n) 'everlastingly': KB the word meaning 'constantly, continuously' is common, the form depends on the position in the verse, tutaşı (c - —) 31 (ulam), 434, etc.; tutçi (— —) 41,878; tuçi (» —) 119, 126 (evren), 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 506 
     
   
   
       462 xı1(?) Tef. tutaşı 492, 909 (öğdil-), etc.: tutşı/tutşu ditto ditto 314: Xwar. xiv Qutb 188. Dis. V. DDŞD tidis- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of t:d-.. Xak. xr ola:r bi:r bi:riğ tidisdi: tamána'á fi say'i(n) *they obstructed one another over something' Kaş. 11 93 (tüdişu:r, tidigma:k). D titis- (d-) Co-op. f. of tit-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı ol mapa: yun titişdi: “he helped me to pluck (/T nafs) the wool by hand so that it might be spun' (yugzal); also used for competing and when two people tear (/azaqa) one another's clothes Kaş, 77 89 (titişu:r, titişma:k, altered from or to (?) -me:k): Xwar. xın (VU) didiş- (sic) "to tear one another, quarrel” “A/ 57. D tutuş-/tütüş- (?tutoş-) Recip./Co-op. f. of tut- ; on the variations in vocalization, which are not quite without parallel but have no obvious explanation, see Kag. and cf. tutus/ tütüs. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. a variety of meanings, in some languages as tutaş- (which points to an original form tutoş-) and in others as tutuş-, cf. tutus/tütüs. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. tütüşüp "lighting! (all kinds of incense sticks) U II 47, 77; iki €liğ tutusup (sic) 'clasping the two hands! TT V 26, 88; tütüşgeçi keriş£ecl bolur “they become quarrelsome (Hend.)' U III 81, r: Civ. tütügsgülük emgek bar “there is the pain of conflict(?) TT 7 72; edgü ögli tutuşdaçı (sic) “clinging to the welldisposed 71 17,23; süsgüni arkası tutuşur his back (Hend. ?) grips him painfully(?)' do. 25, a: Xak. xı ola:r ikki: tutuşdr:la:r “they seized (axada) one another”, also used of anything that sticks (/aşıqa) to something else (tutuşu:r, tutusma:k); and one says ol mapa: keyik (VU) tutuşdı: "he helped me to catch ('alà axd) the wild animal” (etc.); also for competing; and one says ola:r ikki: tütüşdi:le:r “those two quarrelled' (faşdcard) (tütüşü:r, tütüşme:k), the original form (a/-aşl) is the first Kaş. Zİ 88, tutuşkalı: (sic) yakıştı: "they drew near one another to seize (li-va'xud) one another” IJ 170, 19; tütüşmeğginçe: tüzülme:ş “vithout quarrelling (a/-taşücür) one cannot be reconciled' I7 71, 13 (in Kaş, at any rate the implication is that tütüs- means 'to quarrel' while tutusconveys all the other meanings): KB mana kelse (VU) tütşü “if he comes to quarrel with me” 815; kanı ol tütüşüğli dunyà üçün “vhere is the man who fought for the sake of this world?' (this world remains, but he died by violence) 6442: xiu(?) 7ef. tutaş(sic) (of a fire) “to catch light” 315: xiv talàxama “to cleave to one another” dutuş- Mel. 47, 7 and 15; tuta:ş- Rif. 133: Çağ. xv ff. tutus-/tutaflas- Recip. f. ham-digar-rà giriftan “və one another” San. 168v. 13 (quotns.); ” Ter-giriftan usually i in the mean*-e) or “to strike up” (a ^77 To quom: 4H 48: DIS.  DDS xiv. tutaş-/tutuş- ditto Quib. 187-8: Kip. xit ixtaşama "to quarrel' tütüş- (-gll) Hou. 37. 3: xrv ditto İd. 37: xv 'aliqa min qadhrl-zand “to catch fire from a strike-a-light” tutaş- Tuh. 26a. 8. Tris. DDS S tuta:şı: See tutşı:, D tütüşlüğ (?tütóglüg) P.N./A. fr. tütüş, 'quarrelsome, | mutually hostile'.— N.o.a.b. Uy£. vir ff, Bud. otli suvlt teg tütüglüg bolur 'they become mutually hostile, like fire and water' TT VI 64-5; VHI O.8 (spelt tótóglüg): Civ. sözlemiş savın tütüslüg "whatever you say meets with opposition" 77 I 38 (cf. yağı:lığ). Dis. DDY D tutyak Dev. N. in -yak fr. tut- ; this seems to be the only occurrence of this Suff. ; it might be an early example of the sound change -0- 5-a-, and thus a Sec. f. of -yuk which may originally have bcen -yok just as the Pass. Dev. N/A. Suffix -uk was originally -ok, for this same sound change see tutuş, tutuş-. Normally used to translate the Buddhist technical term uöddana 'grasping', Chinese cA'i (Giles 3,118), the fourth of the twelve links in the chain of Nidana. Pec. to Uyğ. Uyğ. vin ff. Man. ot teprinip tepri yérindeki tutyaklığ [long gap] “the Fire God's . . . in the country of the Gods” M 111 36, 9 (iii): Bud. tutyakta ötğürü kiline bolur “action (bhava) comes about precisely from grasping (ubüdünay U II 8, 22-3; 0.0. do. 6, 8 fT.; in do. 6, 9-10 mis-spelt (or mistranscribed ?) tutayak; in do. 11, 2-14 replaced by tutyaklanmak; ((bring all your wealth here quickly) tutyaksiz köpülin bus: bergülük “ to give it away in alms with. an ungrasping mind' U III 12, 12). Dis. DDZ VU?D titiz 'unpleasant' and the like; there is some semantic connection with 2 tét- and it should perhaps be spelt tétiz, and taken as a Dev. N./A. Survives in SW Osm. titiz 'peevish, captious, meticulous', and the like. Xak. xı titiz ne:p 'anything with a bitter (or pungent, "afiş) taste, like the taste of a myrobalan” (ihlilac) Kaş. 1 365: xiv Muh.(?) (after 'sweet, sour, bitter, salty”) kari “disagreeable, unpleasant” titi:z (MS. fiti:r) Rif. 165 (only). D "tutzuğ See tutsuğ, D *tützüg See tütsüg. Dis. V. DDZD tutuz- Caus. f. of tut-; “to entrust (something 4cc., to someone Dat.) and the like. N.o.a.b. Türkü vur [gap] tutuzti: eki:si:n özi: altuzdu: “he ordered to grasp . . . and himself had two of them taken” 7 E 38: Uyg. virt ff. Man. (you have shown the bridge of the true doctrine; you have taught the excellent  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 507 
     
   
   
      MON: DG doctrine in the mind) (small gap] 1duk anc«um;»anka tutuztupuz “you have entrusted ... to the divinely blessed community" TT III 57: Bud. sizipe tutuzurmen “1 entrust to you” (my beloved son) PP aş, 5; oo, do. 62, 8; U 11 34,9; IHI 27, 18, 83, o(urungak); Hüen-ts. 273, 1952: Civ. yapirtu tutuzup 'entrusting (property to them) afresh' U Sp. 88, 18-19: Xak. xı men apa:r sö:z tutuzdum 'I communicated (aw'aztu) a statement to him, or something which he ought to bear in mind" (rdi) Kaş. 11 86 (tutuzur, tutuzma:k); 3.0. 1 462, o(tutsuğ): KB bayatka tutuzdum muni 'I have entrusted him (my son) to God" 1483; 0.0. 1578, 3816, 38344 6184 — (after a speech) yana ok tutuzdi 'he then added' (another speech) 5o11. D tütüz- Caus. f. of tüte:-; “to fumigate”. Uyğ. viri ff. Civ..H I 22-3 (ara:): Xwar. xiv (he washed, his face) taki özine 'üd tütüzdi 'and fumigated himself with aloe vvood” .Nahc. 33, 1: Kip. xv baxxara "to fumigate' tütüz- (Tkm. buğlat-) Tui. 8r. ro. "Tris. DDZ VUD titizlik A.N. fr. titiz; survives in SW Osm. titizlik “peevishness, fastidiousness', etc. Xak. xir titizlik al-'afüsa 'bitterness, pungency', like the taste of myrobalan Kaş. I 506. Mon. DG 1 da:ğ/da:ğ Pec. to Kaş. whose etymology in this case may be correct. Arğu: xı da:ğ/da:ğ (sic) a Particle (Aarf) meaning /avsa "it is not”, one says ol andağ da:ğ ol 'it is not so”, and the Oğuz took it from them (the Arğu:) and changed their phr. da:ğ ol and said tegül meaning /aysd, because the Oğuz are neighbours of Arğu:, and in their phraseology mixed with them (fi alfüzihim muxdlata bihi) Kaş. 111 is3ş a.o. İ 393 (tegül). F 2 da:ğ “a livestock brand”), in spite of Kaş.”s remarks a l.-vv. fr. Pe. döğ, s.i.s.m.l. See tafla:-, tógü:n. Xak. xı da:ğ “the brand” (al-kayy) with which horses and other livestock are branded (yusam); this word comes from the Turks and it should not be said that it is a word of the Persians (a/-furs), because they have no livestock (darodbb) so as to have names for marks on them (li-simátihim asma"); I heard this word in the Moslem frontier posts (fi. tuğür”l-Islam) Kaş. HI 1553: xin(9) Tef. dağ “a mark” (put by God on a man's forehead) rr6. . . 1 ta:ğ (d-) “mountain”, C.i.a.p.a.1,, usually as tağ or taw; in NE Tuv., NW Krım, SW Az., Osm. dağ, Tkm. da:ğ. See Doerfer II 859. "Türkü viri (VU) Tönkeş tağda: “on the "Tönkeş mountain' 7J S 8; 1 E 12 (Én-) a.o.o.: viu ff. tağ üze: “on a mountain' /rRB 17; 2.0.0.: Uyğ. vir1 kömür tağda: “at the Coal Mountain” Su. N 8; a.o.o.: Vitr ff. Bud. tağ *mountain' is common; see also tağdın: Civ. ditto: Xak. xr ta:f a/-cabal 'mountain' Kaş. 463 III 153 (prov.) and nearly 7o o.o.: KB yazı tağ 'plains and mountains' zı, 69, 96, etc.: xıı1(?) Tef. ta:ğ/ta:ğ ditto 281: xiv Muğ. al-cabal da:k (sic) Mel. 24, 13; ta:ğ Rif. 178; quilatu'l-cabal 'the crest of a mountain' da:ğ ba:şı: Mel.; ta:ğ ba:şı: Rif. do.: Çağ. xv ff. tağ kuh 'mountain' (also 'tamarisk' a Pe. l.-w.) San. 157r. 16: Xwar. xin(?) tağ ditto is common in Oj.: xiv ditto Qutb 168: Kom. xiv 'mountain' tağ/tav CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xırı al-cabal ta: Hou. s, 17: xiv ditto /d. 64 (tağ), Bul. 3, 9: xv al-cabal ta:ğ, also called taw bi'l-wàw Kam. 58, 11; cabal tavv “also with -Z' Tuh. 11a. 9. S 2 ta:ğ See tak (Xak.). tak in the early period occurs only in association with mur (bup) 'sorrow, distress', but seems to mean something like “need”, N.o.a.b.; the tak which has various meanings in several modern languages cannot be satisfactorily connected with this word. See Doerfer 1I 860. Türkü viri ff. Man. Chiuas, zoo, 251 (bug): Uy£. viu ff. Bud. PP 26, r (buy): Xak. xı mun ta:ğ “visdom tooth” Kaş. 11] 359 (bun): KB 391 (bun): Xwar. xır fáqat1 tak “his "strength is exhausted' ' Alí 57 (perhaps belongs here); Osm. xv gerçi anip armağana taki yok “it is true that he has no need of gifts" TTS I 670. ti: the colour of a horse's coat; the Ar. words used to translate it are apparently imprecise, but the colour seems to' have been some kind of 'roan', dark or light. N.o.a.b. Türkü viit ff, tiğ at IrkB 50; a.o.? do. 39 (tétrü:); in Toyok 11 (ET Y II 58) tuğ ta:ş “a brown (?) stone” is associated with the moon (this document is based on a Sogdian document with Man. associations): Xak. xı tr:ğ at al-faras ğayna”l-aşqar wwa' l-kumayt “a horse with a coat between roan (bay, sorrel, or chestnut) and reddish brown (or dark bay)” Kaş. HI 127. 1 to:ğ “dust”, an early l-w. in Mong. as to'osun (the -sum a common Mong. Suff.; Haenisch 151); survives only(?) in SE Türki tof 'dirt which as the result of a dust storm gathers on the leaves of trees and bushes' Jarring 309. Cf. 1 to:z. Uyğ. xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. 'dust' toğ (VU) tömel Ltgeti 265: Xak. xı to:ğ “the dust (al-habà') which rises from horses! hooves” Kaş. III 127; a.o. //1 183, 1 (tuğ-): KB tuğa keldi tog “the dust rose” 5672; 0.0. 1773, 4893: Çağ. xv ff. toğ toz... ğuübör ma"nasına “dust” Vel. 213 (quotn.; only): Xwar. xiv yüzümdeki toğnı kiterdi “he . wiped away the dust on my face” Nahe. 153, 2. .?D 2 to:f the basic meaning seems to be something like 'obstructed; obstruction, barrier', and the like; if so perhaps a Dev. N./A. fr. to:-, and also perhaps the origin of a word meaning “barren” (of an animal, i.e. ? '*with an obstructed womb") which survives as NE Sag., Sor tof R III 1157; Koib., Sag. tuğ do. 1430; NC Kir, Ezx, tuz, Türkü viri (we marched for ten days) yantakt: toğ evirü: “skirting the HU 9! À— TX À— ga ———À————Ó o 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 508 
     
   
   
       464 spurs on the side (of the mountains)! T 26: Uyğ. viii (PU) Kutyar (?, -y- uncertain) tağ toğı:n (long gap] “the spurs of the Kutyar(?) mountain” Su. WW 3 (a possible reading): vii ff. Bud. anın ol ögüz suvınıp berü bu kólke kelgülük tof ağızın yémirip suvuğ ópi kemişmişlerin kördi “then he saw that they had breached the mouth of the embankment (by reason of which) the water of that river came in this direction to this lake and diverted the water elsewhere! Suv. 602, 8-11: Xak. xt to: sikru'l-má' "a dam in a stream'; one says suvka: to:ğ ur da" l'l-nàá' sihr “put a dam against the water'; to:ğ sidád kull şay) “a stopper, obstruction to anything'; hence one says tünlük to:ğı: sidádu' l-huteiwa 'something to block up a smoke-hole (or window)', etc. Kaş. HI i27: KB Xıtay arkışı kesse arkış toğt “if a ban on caravans cut off the China caravan' 4426. F tu:ğ “a royal emblem”, that is essentially some kind of drum or standard; in the early period it is not easy to decide which is meant. Acc. to Kaş, the standard was a silk flag (no doubt an idea derived fr. China), but the traditional "Turkish standard was a horse's tail or a bunch of horsehair. No doubt a 1.-w. fr. Chinese tw “banner, standard” (Giles 12,056; Pulleyblank, Middle Chinese dok) see Doerfer 11 969; the vowel in Chinese was originally -o- and became -u- at some date which is uncertain but presumably before the 'Turks borrowed the word, since there is no evidence of a pronunciation fo: in Turkish, on the other hand in the case of totok, which occurs in Tibetan as todog (see Doerfer 11 874), the borrowing prob. occurred before similar sound changes took place in this word. An early L-w. in Mong. as tuğ (Haenisch 153); s.i..m.l.g. as tuğ/tuvv (NW Kk.)/tu.. Uyğ. vi (I said “let us start a campaign tuğ taşıkar erikli: “ust as the standard was setting out” Şu, E 5: vir ff. (by the power of the divine Buddha to effect distinguished rebirths (see kelig) you attain) kentü özi tuğ belgü kılmiş nomluğ etózin belgürtme etózin “he Dharmakáya and Nirmánakáya, which make themselves their banner and distinguishing sign” Hüen-ts. 157; (hang this charm) tuğda alamda sünüde "on a banner, flag (Ar. "alamı), or lance! USSp. 104, 18; o.o. U II 38, 77 (1 u:Ç), 40, 107 (uçruğ), Hiüen-ts. 1909 (örü): Xak. xı tu:ğ "a drum or kettle-drum' (al-küs sea l-tabl) which is beaten in the presence of the king; hence one says xan tu: urdı: daraba'l-maliku'l-nawba "the king told his drummers to beat”, tu:&amp; a/-"alam “a flag, standard”: hence one says tokuz tu:ğluğ xa:n “a king or xan who has nine standards'; the number of nine standards is not exceeded (là yuzád); if there are more than nine provinces or titles of honour (?, a/-milaya wa'l-manzila) they choose nine by lot(yatafd”alün), these nine king's standards are made of brocade or orange silk (dibác at harir nürinci) as the lots determine (tafá'ala(n) bihi) Kaş. PI 127; 6.0. 7 rg4 (urul-); 195, 2: KB buht MON. DG kökredi urdı nawbat tuf yaşın yasnadi tarttı xakan tugi “the cloud thundered and the drummers beat the drums; the lightning flashed and the xakan unfurled his standard” 86; (he gave him the post of tvazir, a seal, a title) tuğı küvrügi "his standard(?) and drum' (and a suit of armour) 1036; a.0. 2553: XIV Muh. al-'alam tuk Mel. şı, 4 (Rif. 146 süngü:): Kom. xiv “flag” tow CCI; Gr. D 1 tok Pass. Dev. NA. fr. to:-; “full, satiated', and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. some extended meanings. “Türkü vr: (O "Türkü people) tok arkuk sen 'you are satiated and refractory! 7 S 8, II N 6 (? so read); bodun boğazı: tok erti: "the people's throats were satished' T 8: (Uyğ. virt fT. Civ. tok in USp. 3, 5 is an error for boğ): Xak. xı tok kişi: al-insánu'l-sa'bán "a man who is satiated” Kaş. 1 332; 1 358, 5 (tokaç), and 3 o.o.: KB ay könlüm tokı "O thou of whom my mind is full” Sor, o.o. 2721 (umdusuz), 4729, 5384: xiv Rbg. kóplüm tokı R III 1144; Muh. al-şa"bün to:ğ Mel. 54, 15; fo:k Rif. 152: Çağ, xv ff. tok 'satiated' (sir) opposite to “hungry” (gursna) San. 180v. 25: Kip, xii. al-şa"bün tok Hou. 26, 5; 29, 19: xv ditto İd. 65 (to:d-): xv ditto Tuh. zob, 8. VU 2 tok Hap. leg., but see 2 tokluk; cf. ta:z. Xak. xı tok er “a man who, like the Turks, has no hair on his head' (the implication is "close shaven' rather than 'naturally bald"); tok yılkı: “a hornless (al-acamm) animal, that is one that has no horns Kaş. 7 332. 3 tok in the Reduplication tok tok an onomatopocic, see tokt:la:- and tokr-. Xak. xı tok tok etti: “the solid (a/-musıa) thing made a noise (saw:wata) like one stone falling on another”, and one says er kissi: (sic) birle: tok tok boldt 'rough language was exchanged (:eaqa'ati'l-xugtina) between the man and woman' (or husband and wife?) Kaş, 7 332. Mon. V. DGtak- “to fix, or attach (something Acc., to something 2ar.) , the early occurrences confirm Kag.'s statement that in his period this Verb was Oğuz, but it s.i.a.m.l.g., and he does not so describe taktur- or takıl-. Uyğ. vni ff. Civ. kumbandı takzun TT VII 25, 19 (in a damaged passage; dubious, kumbhünda is a kind of demon): Oğuz xı er burunduk butlu:ka: takdı: “the man fastened the leading rein to the camel”s nose peg” : also used of any cord, when it is fastened to something Kaş, İT 16 (taka:r, takma:k): Çağ. xv ff. tak- bastan “to fasten' but only in certain special contexts (matvárid) such as "to put on' (ornaments), 'to fasten' (a cord or rope to something), 'to put on' (a bracelet or necklace), and the like Saz. rs7r. 25 (quotns.): Xwar. xit dak- (and dağ-) "to fasten' ' 4/i 13: Kom. xiv tak- CC7, Gr. 235 (1 a:t): Kip. xiv tak- 'al/aga “to suspend (something from something)" İd. 65. s  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 509 
     
   
   
      Ü EEEEEEE——n—Q uis — eid aS  MON. V. DG 465 VU tiğ- 'to blunt (soinething cc); so vocalized cverywhere, but the Pass. f. is everywhere vocalized tağıl- , in the phr. başı tığthe Verb seems to be used metaph. Pec. to Kaş. Xak. xi ok başakın ta:ş tidr: "the stone blunted (kallala) the point of the arrow', that is removed (ddhaba) its sharpness by striking it Kaş. II 14 (tığa:r, tığma:k), bulun bo:lup başı: tığdı: "becoming a prisoner he bovved his head” (ra”fa”a ra'sahu; lit. “he blunted his head”) / 307, 18: eren kó:rüp başı: tığdı: when he saw (my) men, he veiled his head and fled' (taqanna'a ra'sahu wa haraba) İT 83, 24; in III 230, 18 the correct reading seems to be udu: kama: töpün (unvocalized) tığdı: (first letter undotted and marked with fatha) "then he Jowered and blunted (the crown of) his head', but the translation, which is very loose, does not confirm this. tk- 'to thrust, squeeze, or cram (something Acc. into something Dat.). S.i.a.m.l.g. Uy£. viri ff. Man. (the demons drag the lost souls to hell and) töpüsin toptaru tikar “push them in head downwards' M II 13, 5; 2.0. M III 28, 4 (iii): Bud. tikmis erdi uluğ 6güzüg tetrü nomluf taluyka "he has thrust the great river into the sea of false doctrine' Hüen-ts. 1912-13: Civ. (if you crush garlic cloves and) iki kulakipa tolu tiksar "push : them into both his ears (until they are) full” H I1 176-7; alo. HI 16, 11: Xak. xi ol ka:bka: u:n tikdi: "he forced (şadda) the flour into the container” (al-zarf); also used for anything which is inserted into a container by force (udxila fi swi'à bi-şidda) or by kicking or squeezing it; hence “compressed grapes' (a/-"inábu'l-mutarákimu'l-habbat) are called tikma: üzüm Kaş. II 16 (no Aor. or Infin.): xiv Mu. al-şadd dokmak (error for dıkmak or dokimak?) Mel. 34, 16; ditto unvocalized Rif. 120: Çağ. xv fI. tik- araştan wa tabandan “to fill up, cram' San. 195r. 18 (quotns.): Kom. XIV “to stop up” tix- (or tixa-?) CCG; Gr.: Kip. xıl sadda (sic) "to stop up, dam” tikHou. 41, 2: xiv ditto (but tik-) /d. 65; Bul. 47r.: XV ditto Kav. 9, rə, haşd “to fill up, stuff' tik- do. 13, 17; haşa (SOK- and) tikTuh. 13b. ro, sadda tik- do. 24a. 4. toğ- (d-) n.o.a.b., the Caus. f. toğur- is equally rare, except in the Ger. toğuru:, q.v., which still survives; the general connotation seems to be 'to go straight for (something dcc.) disregarding such things as curves in the road. "Türkü vin (wading through the snow and) Kógmen yışığ toğa: yorip "marching straight on (or through?) the Kögmen mountain forest” 7 E 35, I1 E 27; (we marched) faltu:n yışığl toğa: “going straight through the Altai mountain forest” / E 36-7 (TI E 27 substitutes aga: 'crossing"). tuğ- (d-) “to be born”, with some extended and metaph. meanings. S.i.a.m.l.g. "The vovvel is -u- in TT VIII and all modern language groups except SW where the form in Az., Osm., Tkm. is doğ-. In the medieval period the Verb became “Trans. “to give birth to (a child)', etc. in some languages, and is now 'Trans. in NC Kzx.; SC Uzb., and some NW languages; in NC Kir. tu:- is both Trans. and Intrans.; in other languages the Caus. f. is used for Trans., doğur- in SW and tuğturor the like elsewhere. Türkü vrır fi. kün tuğdı: “the sun rose” JrkB 26; a.o. do. 52: Man. kentü tuğmış kılınmış “the spontaneously born and self-created (gods)' Chuas. I 14; (if we say that the sun and moon) erksizin tuğar batar “rise and set involuntarily" Chuas. 24: Yen. on ay €ltdi: ógim oğlan tuğdım “1 was born a boy carried (in her womb) by my mother for ten months” Mal. 29, 5; 0.0. do. 26, 2; 48, s: Uyğ. vini ff. Man. baxşılığ burxan tepri tuğtunuz "you have been born as a divine teaching Burxan” TT III 129-30; (under the influence of the Wind God all kinds of shrubs, trees, and plants) tuğar 'emerge (from the ground)' Wind. 8; 2.0. do. 11: Bud. Sanskrit medyajalajátam iva "as if born in dirty water' arığsızlığ su:vta: ünmişiğ teg a:zu tuğmışığ (sic) teg. TT VIII D.36; játijarám "being born and growing old” tuğma:k ka:rrma:k do. E.48; ne üçün karımak ölmek tuğar 'why do old age and death come about?” U II 5, 14; tuğa teglük “born blind' U TT 29, 14; 31, 41; U İİİ 77, zo, o.o. PP 5,1; U 124,6; U III 36, əz etc.: Civ. kün tuğa: (sic) "at sunrise TT VIII L.8; özümde tuğmış . . . oğlum “my own son” USb. şr, 2; in contracts tuğmışım “my descendants” is common do. r3, 12; 30, 17 etc.; a.o.o.: Xak. xr kü:n tuğdiı: "the sun rose” (tala"at), and one says oğul tugdi: “the child was born” (zoulidat) Kaş. Il 4 (tuğa:r, tuğma:k, prov.), to:ğ tu:ğdı: "the dust which was kicked rose” (sata'a) III 1:83 (tu:ğa:r, tu:ğma:k, verse; the -u:- is prob. an error, there is no other evidence for it and "Tkm. has doğ-), nearly 20 o.o. in both senses: KB tuğ- is common, e.g. tuğuğlı ölür “man is born and dies” 180; o.o. 99, 234, 1932, etc.: xn(?) KBVP tuğmiş elindin çıkıp 'leaving the country where he was born” 58: xın(?) At. Postscript tuba körmez erdi "he was born blind' 485; Tef. tuğ- “to be born; (of the sun) to rise; tuğa közsüz “born blind' 3o5: xiv Muh. tala'a duğ- Mel. zo, 3; Rif. 100; tuğ33, 8; 118; weulida düğ- 32, 5; tuğ- 116: Çağ. xvff. tuğ- (-ğan etc.) doğ-/toğ- Vel. 213 (quotns.); tuB- zà'idan "to be born”, metaph. tal" şudan “to rise” San. 178v. 14 (quotns.): Xwar. xır tuğ- “to be born; to rise” Afr 37, 45; tuğ- ditto Qutb 181 (tof-); MN 262, etc.: Kom. xiv toğ-/tov-/tuv- ditto CCI, CCG; Gr. 247 (quotns. and note): Kip. xit! (among the P.N.s) Ayduğdı/Ayduğmuş “the moon rose (bazaga), that is was born” (ttulida); Kündugdr/Kündugmius similar translation How. 29, 10-12: xiv düğ- fala"a, originally duw-; also tu$- 1d. 49; tuğ- tulida, hence Aytuğmış marlüd qamar, Künduğmiıs matolid şams, the meaning is both ser/ida and tala'a do. 64: xv fala"a tuğ- Kav. 58, 9; aşraqa "to rise and shine' duğ- Tuğ. 6a. 3; Künduğdı, Ayduğdı noted as P.N.s do. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 510 
     
   
   
     466 MON. V. DĞ 42b. 9: Osm. xiv ff. doğ- noted in various phr. TTS 1 214; İİ 202; IV 234. Dis. DGA tağı: n.o.a.b., in contexts suggesting that it is the female of the kula:n, q.v.; if so 'female of the wild ass, Equus hemtonus'.. ..-w. in Mong. as tahi "wild horse, wild ass” (Kot. 1650, Hahod 392). UyB. xiv Chin.-Uyg.. Dict. see kula:n. Xak. xi KB kulan ya tağı tut taki kók teke 'capture the male or female wild ass and the grey he-goat' 5375. ?D taki: (d-) prima facie Ger. of tak- used as an Adv., but there is this difficulty that there is no evidence that tak- was ever *dak- while the cvidence that this word originally had dis unusually strong. It is most often used in the early period as a Conjunction at the beginning of a sentence meaning “and, furthermore", or after one or two words meaning *also', but there are other usages which need a special study. S.i.a.m.l.g., sometimes as takı/tağı or dakı/dağı (in NC Kir.; NW Kk. both tağı and dağı occur), sometimes (NE Tuv.; SC Uzb.; NW Kaz.) in the extended form tağım, sometimes as an enclitic ta/te/ da/de. In SW Az., Osm. enclitic da/de is common; in Osm. two forms daxı “and, also” and daha “more” evolved; in Tkm. only dağı. Türkü vir ff. PrkB 3 (tü:); 33 (ur-): Uyğ. vini ff. Man.-A (at the beginning of a sentence) taki yeme “and again” M 7 7, r, 8, 4; (ditto) taki 'and' do. 8, 9 and 13 a.o.o.: Man. taki “and” TT III 92 a.0.0.: Chr. (at the beginning of a new para.) tak1 yeme 'and in addition' U 1 o, 9: Bud. takt and taki yeme at the beginning of a sentence are common, and taki 'also' after one or two words: Civ. ditto; üç yüz taki sekiz altmış “three hundred and fifty eight” TT VII 9, 12-13: Xak. xr taki a Particle (/iarf) meaning ayda(n) "too, also”, hence one says takı: yarma:k bé:r “give another (üxar) dirham'; and it also occurs meaning 71a'a *with' in Oğuz: hence one says ol taki: anda: “he too (avda(n)) is there with him” (ma"a(n)) Kaş. III 226; the Turks say taki meaning ayda(s) and the Oğuz dakı: II 195, 26; a.o.o.: K B takt "and, also” is common both by itself and in association with the enclitic -ma/-me; it occurs both at the beginning of a sentence, e.g. takı 'and' 874; taki ma 'and also' 122, and near it, e.g. adin ma taki bolsu rır: xin(?) Tef. taki "and, also' at or near the beginning of a sentence 282: xiv Muh. ğayr toa. ayda(n) "in addition to, also” taki: Mel. 16, 7; Rif. 93: Çağ. xv ff. dağı daxı, dağı bir biris: dax: Vel. 257; taki diyar “another” San. 157v. 22 (quotn.), daxı digar, also takı/dağı 223r. 22; dağı digar, also takı/daxı 224r. 4 (quotn.); a.o. 57r. I9 (adruk): Oğuz xı see Xak.: Xwar. xıı(?) taki (or dakı?) “and” is common in Oğ. both at the beginning of a sentence, 2, etc., and in such phr. as ya taki kalkan 'bow and shield' 97-8: xiv taki "and, also” Quib 171; tağı (once dağı) MN aş, etc.: Kom. xiv. dağı/tağı, dağın, -da/-de CCI, CCG; Gr.'71, 81. many quotns.): Kip. xır avda(n) is dağı:, and if you wish to say qdla ayda(n) you say dağı: ayıttı: . . . and for a"tıni ayda(n) bérgll dağı: or dağı: bérgil Hou. 56, 8: xiv taki bi-ma'nà ayda(n); and it has been explained (surijia; i.e. in the grammatical section, 150, 4 ff, q.v.); taki: áxar İd. 39: xv da:ğı: ayda(n) Kav. zo, 22; “Ramd annahu '"like(wise) (yene, gene) dağı, and they also mean ayda(n) Tuh. 31a. 8; a.o.o.: Osm. xiv ff. daxı (in xiv and xv also dağı/dakı) with six or seven shades of meaning; c.ka.p. TT'S I 171; H 250; III 162; IV 186 (there are no refces. to daha or -da/-de in TTS). VU 1 toga: 'illness'; n.o.a.b.. Not to be confused with tuğa:, Ger. of tuğ- (q.v.), which occurs in such phr. as tuğa: teğlük “born blind”. Uyğ. vni ff, Bud. iğ toga “ilİness” (Hend,) U 1 45, 9; HI 41, 4 (ii); Suv. 592, 9 etc. (cominop); a.o. PP 67, 3-4 (buşıcı:): Civ. ig toğa TT I ız: Xak. xı toga: al-ddà' wa tiglu'I-nafs "illness, dyspnoea (difficult breathing)”, hence one says i: toğa: same translation Kaş. III 224. S 2 toğa: See 2 toku:. VU 1 toku: (?toko:) n.o.a.b., always in association with türó:, q.v., in contexts which suggest some nieaning like 'traditional cercmonics". "The only possible survival seems to be SW xx Anat. toka SDD 1372, which is generally a survival of 2 toku: but in one district is syn. vv. dörü/dürü “vedding present”. Uyü. vir ff. Bud. (when a man dies, they choose an auspicious day and) uluğ tórü toku éterler 'perform a grent (funeral) ceremony' TT VI 231; o.o. of tórü toku do. 285 (a funeral), 334 (a feast), 344(a wedding): Xak. xı KB tórü ham toku öndi yincge tapuğ uluğ hacib etse açar yol kapuğ “f the Chancellor observes the traditional law, ceremonies, and customs and (performs) scrupulous service he opens (all ways and doors' 2490; tórü yok toku yok yeme kilk kilinç törüsüz tapuğçı yaramaz erinç 'a servant who does not observe the traditional laws and ceremonies and is undisciplined in his character and conduct is really useless! 3739: Çağ. xv ff. toka asbab-i tacammul $a atát— "formal clothing and cquipment'; takım is used in the same sense San, 181r. 23 (the translation looks like a mere guess; the illustrative quotn., taken fr. Bübur (Gibb Memorial facsimile 237v. s) töre wa toka bile elçilik kilurn: koygil seems to mean 'stop carrying out your.diplomatic functions in accordance with the traditional rules and ceremonies"). 2 toku: (?toko:) 'buckle' and the like; s.i.a.m.l.g. except NE (?) as toka/toga; l.-w. in Pe. and other languages, see Doerfer 11 910. Xak. xı toku: ibzimu'l-mintaqa “belt buckle" Kaş. 111 226: Çağ. xv ff. (after toka (1 toku:) : tokka “vith -kk-” (bà qaf mugaddad) 'a buckle with a tongue (/ia/qa-i zabünadàr) made of iron or bronze through which they pass swordI—À—— s À— Tr M] e MÀ? LESER EE EE LL... La  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 511 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. DGD- 467 belts or saddle girths' San. 181r. 25: Kom. xiv 'buckle; ring on a horse”s bit” toğa CC7; Gr.: Kap. xiv toğa: al-ibzim İd. 64: xv ditto Tuh. 4b. 6; razza 'staple, hinge' ditto do. 17a. 7. Dis. V. DGAtokt- (d-) lit. “to hit, knock (something)', hence “to beat (an enemy) , “to weave (a fabric)', presumably because the weft is beaten down from time to timc to consolidate it, and other metaph. and extended meanings. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE(?), usually with -u- or -a- as the second vowel and nearly always for "to weave'; SW Az. toxu-; Osm. doku-;ZTkm. doki-. Türkü vii (a Chinese army approached) tegip toki:dim 'I met and beat it” [7 S 8: 0.0. 1 N 6 (eBir-), II E 31: Uyğ. vii toki:dim '[ beat! (an enemy) Su. E 6, E8, S2, W 3: viii ff. Bud. kazğuk tokiyurmen 'I knock in a peg” U II 61, 18; (some of them tore their hair and) tokidilar “beat” (their breasts) U 111 15, 5 (i); iki kala tamırım tokip “my pulse beats twice' (but cannot beat a third time) dv. 37, 36; tam tokıyu “building a wal TT VI 82; o.o. PP 2, 4-5 (to weavz', bodut-); TT IV 10, 7 (bedük), ız, 43; U II 26, 14 (1 ok): Civ. (take the ashes and) kara ingek sütipe tokip içip “bsat them in the milk of a black cow and drink them” TT VII 26, 13-14; similar phr. do. 27, 12 and 16; H I1 45-6; o.o. TT VII 41, 23; VIII L14: Xak. xı ol kapuğ tokı:dı: "he knocked (gara'a) at the door'; and one says, in Oğuz, ol kulin toki:di: “he beat (daraba) his slave'; the Turks use a Hend. and say urdi: toki:di: for daraba; and one says temürçi: kilic toki:di: “the blacksmith forged (faba'a) a sword' (or knife, etc.) and one says er bö:z tokr:di: “the man vvove (nasaca) cotton cloth” (etc.), and one says anı: suv tokı:dı: “the water drowned him (ğarraqahu) and carried him away'; and one says erni: yö:l tokrdr asdba'l-racul sa'fa mina'l-cinn 'demoniacal possession struck the man” (see yél) Kaş. III 268 (tokrr, tokt:ma:k); o.o. I 12, 19 (daraba); 21, 17 (nasaca): KB yorip tin tokiğli Axir ölgüsi (a man) walks about and draws breath, but in the end he will die" 233: xın(?) Tef. toki- “to knock (at a door); to drive in (a peg); to beat; to erect (a gallows); to compose (a story)” 307: xiv Muğ. hüha "to weave' doku:- Mel. 25, 3 (Rif. 107 corrupt); nasaca ditto 31, 13 (only): Caf. xv ff. tokubaftan "to vveave” San. 18or. 3 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv ditto MN 82: Kom. xiv toğu"to weave; to devour' CCG; Gr.: Kip. xur naşaca doEr-, also daraba and 'agaba "to punish' Hou. 35, 19: Xiv toki- daraba darb taci" "to strike a painful blow'; also zasaca (and “a weaver' (al-hà' ik) is called tonduki:gi: (? ton dokı:çı:)) İd. 6s: xv nasaca tokuTuh. 36b. 13: Osm. xiv ff. doku- (less often toku-) “to strike; to drive in (a nail)”, c.i.a.p. TTS I 214; İİ 311; III 202; IV 235. Dis. DĞC D tokaç “a loaf or cake'; Kaş. may be right in linking this word with tok; if so, it is a Dim. f. Survives with the same meaning in SE Tar. toğaç R III 1160; "Türki tokac; SC Uzb. tükac. Osm. tokac 'a mallet, a bat (for beating washing)' seems to be the same word with the meaning changed owing to a supposed derivation fr. tokt:-. Xak. xr tokaç (qdf unvocalized, the damma in the printel text is an error) a/-qurş "a loaf or cake”, taken from the phrase tok er “a man vvho is satiated” (a/-şab"dn), because it satiates him (yuşbi"uhu) Kaş. I 358: Çağ. xv fT. tokaç “a piece of wood (cibi) which they put at the back of a door so that it cannot be opened', in Pe. rmatars; also “a mallet (tzgmàg, a "PÇurkish l.-w.) which is used to beat laundry when washing it' San. 18ov. 25. D tuğçı: N.Ag. fr. tu:ğ, “a standard-bearer'; the word occurs in Çağ. xv1 Abu'[-gàzi and is a l-w. in Pe., see Doerfer 11 973. Xak. xi KB (the Chief Gate-keeper should supervise the cup-bearers, bed-makers, and the cooks and also) tuğçıka 2557. PUF taxçek Hap. leg.; unvocalized, the second consonant is hö”, presumably an error for xd”, cf. taxtu:; obviously a l.-w. fr. an unidentifiable language; the -X- is not very likely to occur in a Chinese lw. Xak. xi taxçek darb min hariri”I-şin “a kind of Chinese silk” Kaş. I 476. Dis. DGD F taxtu: Hap. leg.; obviously a l.-w. fr. an unidentifiable language, cf. taxcek. Xak. xr taxtu: al-gazz qabla l-£azl “"ravv silk before it is spun' Kaş. I 416. D tağdın Den. Adj./Adv. fr. 1 ta:ğ, “on, or to, the north” (lit. the mountain"); pec. to Uyğ., where it is used instead of “Türkü yırdın, ” q.v. Uyğ. viui ff. Bud, TT VI 83-5; Suv. 466, 5-10 (öndün): Civ. TT I 6, etc. (öndün). Dis. V. DGDD tikit- Caus. f. of tik-; as such Hap. leg., but there is in SW Osm. tikat- Caus. f. of tika- a Sec. f. of tik-. Cf. tiktur-. Xak. xr ol apar aş tikittr: alqamahu. iyáhu'l-ta'àm bi-'unf “he ordered him to feed him forcibly'; originally used of anything wbich is inserted into a container with a violent kick (bi-rakl şadid) Kaş. II 308 (tikitu:r, tikitma:k). D tokit- (d-) Caus. f. of toki:-, with the same range of meanings. S.i.s.m.l., usually for "to have (something) woven'. Türkü vir taş tokitdim 'I had a (memorial) stone driven into (the ground)! 7 S ız, bepfü: taş tokitdim I S 12-13; 13 (the parallel passage in /7 N 14 is lost, Orkun's reconstruction tokt:drm is an error): Uyğ. viri Su. E 8 (çit): viri ff. Bud. uluğ küvrüg toktitip *ordering that the great drum should be beaten! PP sr, 8: Civ. TT VIII rı (begni:): Xak. xi ol anıp boynin tokittt: “he ordered that his neck should be struck' (adraba 'unuqahu) (tokitu:r, tokitma:k): and one says ol bö:z tokitti: “he had 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 512 
     
   
   
     468 cotton fabric woven' (ansaca); and one says ol kiliç tokitti: "he had a sword (or knife) forged” (arba"a) (tokitu:r, tokitma:k); and one says ol kapuğ tokitti: “he had the door knocked” (aqra"a) Kaş. II 308: Çağ. xvff. tokut- bafündan "to order to weave" San. 18or. 16. D taktur- Caus. f. of tak-, but unlike that word not described as Oğuz. S.is.m.]. Xak. xı et sı:şka: takturdi: “he strung (nazama; ? error for nazzama “he had . . . strung”) the meat on a spit” Kaş. /I 174 (takturur, takturma:k). D tiktur- Caus. f. of tik-; survives in NW Kaz. tiktir-, Cf, tikit-, Xak. xi çol) u:nu£ ka:bka: tıkturdi: “he urged the man to insert (5i-idxal) the flour into the container and force it in”, also used of other things Kaş. II 174 (tikturur, tikturma:k). D tuğtur- (d-) Caus. f. of tuğ-, q.v.; survives in SE, SC in the normal meaning “to give birth to' and in NC Kir. (where tu:- means both “to be born” and “to give birth to”) tu:dur- (1) “to give birth to” (lit. and metaph.), (z) “to deliver a woman (of a child). Xak. xı tepri: oğul tuğturdı: a:wlada'láhu'l-walad mina'l-mar'a “God caused the child to be born of the woman'; originally tufurturdr (si, but ?tugurtdr in the original text). This is in accordance with the rule, which is that if a verb is a Caus. f. without the attachment of -t- (//haqu”l-td”) then when a -t- is attached to it it makes it Causative in such a way that the Object (al-maf"ül) is operated upon by two Subjects (al -fà'ilàn), one of whom gives an order and the other performs an act; for example su:v içürdi: aşraba”l-mü” "he gave (someone) a drink of water', but if one says Su:v içtürdi: (sic, but ?igürtdi: in the original text) it means “he ordered someone else to give (someone) a drink of water'; again ol anı: boğdı: means "he strangled him”, but if one says bofturdi: it means “he ordered someone else to strangle him”, there is the same difference of meaning in Ar. between /aqafa and alqata and saqata and anqata, where the addition of a- makes the verb Causative with two Subjects (fa'ilán) operating on the Object Kaş. II 173 (tuğturur, tuğturma:k, MS. boéturur, boğturmazkş it is prob. that it was a copyist, and not the author, who made nonsense of this para. ; the translations of içür- and igtür- are identical in Kaj.; there is no other trace of içürt-, which is clearly the form required by the words idà ulhiqat bihi I-tà). Tris. V. DGDD tokitil- (d-) Pass. f. of tokit-; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. 1nga kalti ulug 1 iğaç küçlüğ katığ yélke tokitilip kamılmış teg "ust as a great bush or tree when it is struck by a strong and violent wind falls to the ground* Suv. 623, 13-14; azu ani tozi toprakı yel üze tokıtılıp teğser “or if the dust (Hend.) from it is driven by the wind and reaches them” U 7I 39, 89-90. DIS. V. DGDDis. DGG S takuk See takt:fu:. Dis, V. DĞĞD tağık- Intrans. Den. V. fr. 1 ta:ğ, “to go to the mountains'. N.o.a.b. Türkü vir 7 E 12 (6n-): Xak. xı eçkü: tağıktı: "the goat (etc.) became wild and took to the mountains' (ta'abbada . . . tva lahiqa bi"l-cabal) Kaş. II 117 (tağıka:r, tağıkma:k). Tris. DĞĞ takı:ğu: (etc.) "a domestic fowl'; a very old word both in its natural meaning and as one of the animals in the twelve-ycar cycle. An early l.-w. in Mong. as fakiya (Haenisch 144; Studies, p. 235). Cia p.a.l. in a bewildering variety of forms, which are set out very fully in Doerfer 11 861. Doerfer suggests that it is by origin a quasi-onomatopoeic, but it is more likely to be an old animal name ending in - ğu:, unless it is a l.-w. Uyğ. vin takiğu: yilka: “in the Fowl year” Su. N 10; W 4: viu ff. Man.-A takığu (distinguished as erkek and tişi) 'fowl' ('cock/hen) M I 36, s ff.: Bud, takığu iğidgüçi 'poultry keeper' TT IV 8, 55-6; a.o, Suv. 4, 12 (ördek): Civ. takığu as an animal of the cycle is common in T'T VII and VIT: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. domestic fowl" taka'u Ligeti 257; R İİİ 800: Xak. xi taka:ğu: (sic) a generic term for “cocks and domestic fovvl” (or 'hens', al-dik tea'l-dacác), they are differentiated by saying erkek taka:ğu: for “cock” and tişi: takn:ğu: for “hen” (prov.): taka:ğu: yılı: "the name of one of the twelve years in "lurkish' Kaş. 1 447: xiv Muh: al-dacác taku:k Mel. 73, 5; 81, 1 (in the cycle); da:ku:k Rif. 176; tağu:k 186: Çağ. xv ff. tağuk mur£ "a bird”, also tawu&amp;/tawuk, in Ar. dacáca San. ış?r. 23; takuk the same as taxuk muğ do. 157v. 21; tawug/tawuk murj-i xünagi *domestic fowl'; in Mong. (sic) tağuk/taxuk/taxakuy, in Ar. dacádca do. 165v. 22; (taxuk/taxakuy murd in Mong., in Ar. dacáca; also the name of one of the Turkish years do. rşəv. 3): Tkm. (sic) xt takuk a/-dacüc bi-luğat”1- Turkan Kaş. 11 286; o.o. (not so described) JJI 13 (yalığ), 114 (yalığlan-): Xwar. xiv tavuk 'fowl Qutb 174; takuk çakırmakına “before the cock crows' Nahc. 318, 7: Kom. xiv. 'fowl' tawuk CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xur al-dacác dağık (sc); Tkm. dakuk Hou. 10, 12: XIV takuk a/-dacdc ld. 65; Bul. 12, 7 (misvocalized tokuR): xv dacác tawuk Kav. 39, 4; 62, 12; Tuh. 15b. 7. D tokığu: Hap. leg.; Dev. N. (N.L) fr. tokt:-; "a drüm-stick”. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. (just as a sound is constantly produced from a drum by the combined action of wood, leather) tokifu “a drum-stick” (and the (human) hand) Suv. 375, 7. D takukluğ Hap. leg.?; P.N./A. fr. takuk (takı:ğu:). Ofguz xı takukluğ er “a man who owns poultry! (dacac) Kaş. I 497. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 513 
     
   
   
         m8: x£...8--. DIS. V. DĞL- : 469 PUD toğa:klık an A.N. (Conc. N.) pec. to Kaş. and mentioned twice with slightly different spellings. "Fhere is no trace of Ytoğa:k/toka:k “a strainer (of liquids)! or of any verb of which it might be a Dev. N.; the normal word for 'to strain” is Süz-, but süzğeç “a strainer” is not noted carlier than Çağ. Xak. xr toğa:klık “a piece of wood (xaşab) suitable for making a strainer' (a/-fidam) Kas. I 503; (in a note on the significance of the Suff. -lik/-lik) toka:klik yığa:ç similar translation 7 50s, TT. Dis. DGL P4 tığıl Sec cigil. VU?D tufil n.o.a.b., the context suggests 'shining', but there is no etymological basis for such a meaning; perhaps Dev. N./A. fr. tuğ-, lit. 'rising'. İt cannot be connected with tokuluğ as suggested in a note on the passage where the latter word is mistranslated. Uyğ. viti ff. Man. Tokharian /hási fukye 'shining to see” (like the crown of Brahma) kórgeli tugil TT IX 14; a.o. (Tokharian lost) do. 20. tokli: "a lamb a few months old”, older than a kozi: but younger than a ko:fi, the exact age varying in different languages. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SE, see S/icherbak 115 (where the word is incorrectly connected with tuğ-) and Doerfer II gög, which mentions its appearance as a l.-w. in other languages. Xak. xi tokli: a/-cada" mina'l-dàn “a lamb', that is one which has reached the age of six months Kaş. / 431; toklı: bóri: katı:lsu:n (sic, MS. apparently kaytılsu:n) fa-yamgi'l-dib ma'a'l-cada'a mina'l-dán (so rcad, MS. dib which is clearly an error due to the earlier occurrence of this word) “let the lamb and the wolf go together” (lit. “be intermingled”) 7 106, ro: xiv Muh. al-'anz li-sana "a one-year-old goat ( Rif. al-ğananı 'oneyear-old sheep) to:kli: in Turkistan, to:xhi: in 'our country' Mel. 8, 8; Rif. 8o; (under 'sheep!) al-hatwli “one-year-old” toğli: zo, 14; to:kli: 172: Kip. xii (al-xariif lamb! kozu:) al-xarüf ibn sana tokli: Hou. iş, 2: xiv. al-xarüfu'l-wasaft "a middle-sized lamb” tokli: (a small one" kozi:) Bul. 7, 13. DF tuğlığ P.N./A. fr. tu:ğ, "having . . . standard(s), etc. Survives in SW Osm. tuğlu. As Red. says that tu:ğ, at any rate in Osm., meant, inter alia, 'a badge worn on a helmet' it seems prob. that Mong. duğulğa (Ko. 18:0) “helmet” which occurs in some modern languages in place of yosu:k, q.v., is a l.-w. fr. this word with the usual metathesis and sound changes (cf. *fiudruB x nudurğa, köprüg - Ac”ürge, Studies, pp. 228, 238). Uyğ. vin üç tuğlığ türkü bodun “the "Pürkü people with three standards” Su. N 8; W 7: Xak. xı Kaş. III 127 (tu:ğ, similar phr.). D 1 tokluk AN. fr. 1 tok; “satiety”, etc. S.is.m.]l. Xnak. xi tokluk aij-giba' 'satiety' Kaş. I 469: KB ajun tokluki “the satiety of this world' (is really hunger) 5317: xin(?) At. (be satisfied with enough to wear and) karin toklukin "a full stomach' 186: Çağ, xv ff. tokluk sir? 'satiety', and metaph. arzáni wa ruxş toa twufür-i ni mat 'cheapness, plenty, and abundance of good things” Sam. i8ir. 4 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv tokluk 'satiety' Qutb 182: Kom. xiv 'superfluity' tokluk CCG; Gr. VUD 2 tokluk Hap. leg.; A.N. fr. 2 tok. Xak. xı tokluk a/-camam, that is, "of a man's head being hairless, or of an animal being without horns' Kaş. I 469. Dis. V. DGL?E tağıl- See tifil-. D takil- Pass. f. of tak-; s.i.s.m.l. w. some phonetic changes, e.g. tağıl-. Cf. tev-. Xak. xı et sı:şka: (?sic and altered later to st:5ka:) takıldı: "the meat was strung (nuzima) on the spit' (etc.) Kaş. II 129 (takilur, takilma:k): xır (?) Tef. taki- “to be unrolled' (?; dubious) 283; Çağ. xvı ff. takıl- basta sudan “to be fastened” Sam. 157v. 15: Xwar. xiv laskarim takilmasun 'may my army not be hampered” (?) Qutb 171 (very obscure). VUD tiğil- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of (VU) tığ-, q.v., but everywhere vocalized tagil-. Xak. xt ok başakı: taşka: tegip tığıldı: (?s:c) “the point of the arrow (/idda naşl), when it hit a stone, vvas blunted and broken” (£a//a wa'nkasara), also used of anything pointed vvhen it is blunted by hitting something hard or a rock Kaş. II 129 (tiğılur, tığılma:k, ?sic). D tikil- Pass. f. of tik- , s.i.s.m.]l. vv, some phonetic changes, e.g. tigil-. Xak. xı kendükke: u:n tikildr “the flour was poured into the large storage jar under pressure' (subba . . . bi-şidda wa dağt), and one says evke: kişi: tıkıldı: "the people crowded (zdahama) into the house” , also used of anything that crowds together until its space is restricted (£adiq mahdnahu) Kaş. II 129 (tikilurr, tikilma:k): Çağ. xvff. tkil-/ tikilig- bà cami'at a izdihàm ba-cá'i tapidan "to crowd together in one place” Sar. 195v. 2. D tokil- (d-) Pass. f. of toki:- ; siis. m.]. Xak. xı er tokıldı: “the man was beaten' (duriba); and one says bó:z tokildi: 'the cotton fabric (etc.) was woven' (riisica); and one says kiliç tokıldı: “the sword (or knife) was forged' (tubi"a), the phr. er tokildi: is Oğuz Kaş. I1 129 (tokilur, tokilma:k; sic, the other occurrences are vocalized tokul-): Çağ, xv ff. tokul- bafta şudan “to be woven' San. 18or. 16: Oğuz xı see Xak.: Xwar. xiv tokul- “to be woven' Qutb 182. DF tağla:- (d-) Den. V. fr. 2 da:ğ, “to brand (an animal). S.is.m.L, usually as dağla-. Xak. xı ol atın tağla:dı: “the man branded (coasama) his horse” , also used of other animals, not originally a "Purkish word (/uğa ğayr asliya) Kaş. IH 294 (tağla:r, tağla:ma:k).  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 514 
     
   
   
     470 D toğla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. 2 to:ğ. Xak. xı ol ya:rig toğla:dı: sadda'[-batq “he blocked the breach” (in a river bank or the like) Kaş. III 294 (toğla:r, toğla:ma:k). DF tağlat- (d-) Hap. leg.?; Caus. f. of tafla:-. Xak. xı ol atın tağlattı: “(he man had his horse marked with a branding iron" (atwsama . . . bi'l-kayy); the Persians (al-furs) took this word from the Turks, so that they say dág for al-wasm, just as they took from the Turks the word for 'castle' (a/-qa/"a) and say diz; in Turkish it is tl:z yözr "a high place” Kaş. H 344 (tağlatu:r, tağlatma:k, both statements are, of course, false). Tris. DĞL VUD toğalığ Hap. leg. (?); P.N./A. fr. 1oğa:, Uyğ. viri ff. Chr. (blind, dumb, lame, crippled, mad) igli&amp; toğalığ 'ill' (Hend.) M İİİ 49, 475. VUD tokuluğ P.N./A. fr. 1 toku:; pec. to Uyğ. Bud. Uyğ. vin ff, Bud. (that king) yarlıkançuçı kópülüg tórülüg tokuluğ erip 'having a merciful heart and being faithful to the traditional law and ceremonies! U III 39. 24-5; similar phr. do. 8o, 25; körkle kóvsek rokılığ (sc) inimiz “my lovely, gentle younger brother, faithful to the traditional ceremonies (?)' Suv. 619, 22; a.o. USp. 43, 10. Tris. V. DGLD toki:la:- elongated Den. V. (cf. çatı:la:-) fr. 3 tok; survives in NE Alt., Tel. tokildaR. HT 1149; NC Kir, Kzx, tokulda-; the vocalization in the MS. is chaotic, a kasra below the 6” and what looks like a fatha turned into a damına above it, but -0- is certainlv correct. Xak. xı toki:la:dı: ne: “the solid (a/-musmat) object made a noise (gawata) because it fell on something hard”, for example a cross beam falling on a column (al-'árida 'alá' l-sáriya) and the like Kaş. 11] 326 (tokr:fa:r, tokila:ma:k). D toku:la:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. 2 toku:. Xak. xı er kadış toku:la:dı: "the man fastened a buckle (rakkaba . . . halqa) on the strap” Kaş. HI 325 (toku:la:r, toku:la:ma:k). Dis. DĞM D tuğum (d-) N.S./A. fr. tuğ-, “birth”. S.i.s.m.l.; not to be confused with tukum 'seed' in NC. Kir, Kzx., etc, which is a l.-w. fr. Pe. tuxm, same meaning. UyÉ. vii ff. Man. tuğum ajun “rebirth” (Turco-Sogdian Hend.) TT III 26, 79; tórt tubum “the four (kinds of) rebirth' do. 38; LX 49; yek tuğum 'rebirth as a demon! LX 61: Bud. Sanskrit şatibhava "birth and existence' tubum a:jun TT VIII A.47, 0.0. do. 4.48; E.48; U II8, 18; emğekliğ tuğumlarığ “unpleasant rebirths” U H 33, 6, a.o.o.: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. R I 1658 (2 uruğ): O. Kir. ix ff. eki: él()ig tuğum (so read?) yaşda: "in my forty-second year” Mal. 49, 3. DIS.:V. DĞLD tokum (d-) N.S./A. fr. tokir-; s.i.a.m.l.g. except SW as tokum or the like 'a numdah, under-saddle felt'; a (fairly recent?) 1.-vv, in this sense in Mong. as tokom. Xak.xitokum al-cazür "an animal for slaughter'; this is generally used of a horse for slaughter Kaş, 7 396; o.o. 7 472, 26 etc. (2 yüz-): Çağ. xv ff. tokum “a pack-saddle which they put on an animal's back”, also "a horse blanket (cull-i asb) San. 181r. 23; a.0. 347v. 14 (yona:k). D tikma: Tlap. leg.?; Pass. Dev, N./A. fr. tik- ; “compressed”, Xak. xi Keş. 17 16 (tk-). Tris. DGM D tokrmak (d-) Dev. N. (N.I) fr. toki:-, *club, mallet', and the like; the second vowel was elided in the medieval period and the word, sometimes vv. further phonetic changes, s j.a.m.l.g. and has become a l.-w. in Pe. and other languages, see Doerfer ll 877. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud, U IV 8, 39-40 (batrak): Xak. xrtokizmak mübzaru (mis-spelt mi'zaru) l-gagşür "a fuller's] mallet" Kaş, 1I 177: xiv (under agricultural implements) a/-midagqa "a mallet tokmak Mel. 6o, 2; Rif. 159; (under fuller's implements) hüdin (sic) "a mallet' tokmak ör, 2; 159: Çağ. xvff. tokmak “the well-known implement (dlat) used to drive in tent pegs” (also the name of a Turkish tribe) San. 187r. 7 (quotns.); Xwar. xiv tokmak 'mallet' Qutb 182: Kom. ditto CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiv tokma: (sic, ?error) al-irzabba toa'l-mihadda "iron bar; pickaxe'; Arabicized as a/-duqmaq İd. 65: xv dabbüs “club” (inter alia) dokmak Tu. 15b. 3-6: Osm. xviii tokmak .. . and, in Rümi, mugta-i hallác "a cotton-dresser's implement? San. 181r. 7. Dis. DGN tağun N.o.a.b.; 'flattery'?. Perhaps the origin of SW xx Anat. dagna- 'to despise, put to shame', etc. Cf. tauncr, tağunla:-. Uy£f. vii f£. Bud, TT. IV, 18, note A72, 8 (azğançu:). zm toğan (d-) 'falcon' of some kind. Survives onlv(?) in SW Osm. where doğan is a generic term for 'falcon! and, acc. to. Red., specifically "a lanner, Falco lanarius” , it forms part of the names of seven or cight other related birds. It is often used as a P.N. Cf. 1 cavlt: etc. Sce Doerfer 111 1351. 'Türkiüi vir ff. ürüp esri: toğan "a white dappled falcon” /rRB 4; 0.0. do. 43, 44 (titin-), 64 (buymul): O. Kir. ix ff. Külüğ Toğan P.N. Mal. 44, 7: Xak, xi KB 2458 (ünlüg): Çağ. xvif. toğan “a kind of bird of prey used in hunting' (catcárih-i şikari) also called ótelgü San. 179v. 2 (the latter a l.-w. fr. Mong. itelgii '"lanner falcon”): toğan same translation, but itelgü; and metaph. sucá' xagm-afgan "intrepid, overthrowing enemies'; also a P.N. do, zörr. 29: Kip. xui (under birds) al-cárih minha muftlaga(n) bird of prey” in general toğa:n Hou. 9, 19; ditto asa P.N. do. 29, 5: xiv toğan al-bàzt *falcon' İd. 64; ca fan (sic) a/-bazi, also called toğan do. 43; al-bázi çoğan (sic) and (PU)  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 515 
     
   
   
       DIS.: soğanğuş (unvocalized) . . . a/-hida”a "a kite' de:lü: toğa:n Bul. 11, 9-10: xv bdz foğan Tuh. 7b. 2; zağ 'crow, rook” ditto do. 18a. 4 (çoğan is a possible, but improbable, Sec. f. of toğan there; may be some —— vvith Mong. çağan white"). tağna: Hap. leg.; perhaps a l.-w.; 1 yava:, q.v., seems to be some kind of fungus or truffle, a/-mahrüt, lit. 'cultivated', is an elusive word but Steingass's Persian (sic) Dict. translates it "root of benzoin', and that may be the meaning here.: Xak. xr a kind of a/-mahrüt is called tagna: yava:, it is (a substance which is) cut up and mixed (yumygac ma'qur) with sour milk and used to colour ( f? sibag) futmaç (q.v.) Kaş. I 434. Dis. V. DGND tikin-. Refl. f. of tik-;s.i.s.m.]l. Xak. xi er yu:) tağa:rka: tıkındi: “the: man. applied himself (tazwalla) to putting wool in a sack by pushing and kicking it'; and one says (er) as tıkindi: ağala”l-racül bi-'unf 'the man stuffed himself with food'; a man uses this expression only when he is angry with him (ğadiba 'alayhi) Kaş. II 147 (tikinu:r, tikinma:k). D tokin- (d-) Refl. f. of tokr-; s.i.m.m.l.g., usually. “to collide with' but also in various idiomatic meanings. Uyf. vir ff. Bud. (then the elephant ; . .) keyikçi er közine tokindi *caught sight of the hunter' U III 58, 8-9: Xak. xi er ta:mka: tokındı: “the man collided with (şadama) the wall' ; and, in Oğuz one says er tokındı: “the man was beaten” (duriba); and one says kilig tokindi: “the sword was forged'; and one says tokum tokindi: “he slaughtered a beast for himself” Kaş. 17 147 (tokinu:r, tokinma:k; in some places spelt tokun-); a.o. III iz, 26 (yoduğ): KB” (he sobbed and) urundi tokundi "beat his breast (Hend.) 6292: “(of a coin) to be struck; to encounter! 307: Çağ. xv ff. tokun-/tokuş- of two things, “to collide (ha-ham xtcurdan) violently or run into one another” (rnesödamat kardan) San. 8or. 19 (quotns.): Oğuz xı see Xak.: Xwar. xut dokun- “to touch, come in contact with' “Ali 56: Tkm. xiv İd. 67 (tuüa:ğ): Kip. xiv ngába'l-garad "to hit the target' dokun- Bul. 25v.: xv inşadama wa'ndaraba wa'ndaqqa “to collide, to be hit, to be knocked' tokun- Tu). 6a. 2, a.o.o.: Osm. xiv fT, dökün-, occasionally dokan- 'to strike', etc. in one or two texts TTS H 311; HI 202; IV 234. Tris. DGN D tağunçı: Hap. leg.?; N.Ag. fr. tağun. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. (then the king Ajàátaéatru took a flower) tafuncisipa sunup TT X 458; the context suggests that the meaning is 'and handed it to his confidant (the Brahmin Ratikara). Tris. V. DGND tagunla:- Hap. leg.?; Den. V. fr. Taun: "to deceive by flattery 70). Uy£. vii ff. Bud. TT IV 8, 72 (az&amp;angu:la:-). xur(?) Tef. tokın-/tokun- . DĞR 471 uw Dis. DGR : : tağa:r “a large container', usually but not necessarily “a sack'; perhaps a l.-w.; s.i.s.m.l., and a l.-w. in Pe. and several other languages, discussed at great length in Doerfer İl 9os. Xak. x1 taga:r 'a sack (al-garára) for containing wheat and other things” Kaş. 7 411; 1 244 (artil-), and three o.o., same translation: (xır (?) Tef. tağara "an earthenware dish” 28r: xiv. Muh. al-cirab 'a leather bag” tağarçuk Mel. 69, 7; Rif. 170): Çağ. xv ff. tağar (1) “a clay jar (tagt- i gülin) or large bowl (qadah) (quotn.); (2) “a fixed measure or quantity' (Pe. quotn., V”aşşdf), (3) 'soldiers' rations' (ğa//a) (ditto); (4) 'a kind of long narrow sack' (guwaàl) San. 157r. 19. takır an onomatopoeic; survives in SW Osm. Xak. xi at ada:kı: takır takır etti: “the horse”s hooves clattered' (şazvroata), one also says tiğir tiğir etti: vvith the same meaning Kaş. I 361. D tuğar Aor. of tuğ- used as a N.; 'sunrise, east'. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı tuğardın cadan kopti “Scorpio rose from the east” 4889; o.o. 63 (6pdün), 6219: xırı(?) Tef. kün tuğar “the cast” 305: Xwar. xiv tuğar 'east' 181. S toğru: Sce toğuru:. D tığra:k N./A.S. fr. tığra:-, “firm, tough', and the like. N.o.a.b. Uy£. viii ff. Bud. (on her beautiful bosom) katığ tigrak bürtgeli yumşak iki emiğleri “her two breasts, firm (Hend.) but soft to touch' TT X 445: Civ. ked tığrak “very tough' TT VII 17, 8 (damaged): Xak. xi tığra:k er “a tough (ca/d) man” Kaş. I1 468 (verse); a.o. 11 212 (tığraş-): xiv Muh. al-cald (opposite to *weak' küçsüz) tığra:ğ Mel. 54, 1; tiára:k Rif. 150: Kip. xit al-mutafanninu'L- nabih “versatile and sagacious” tığra:k Hou. 25, 7: xiv tiğrak al-safir “cunning, deccitful' Id. 64. VU?D toğra:ğ prima facie a Dev. N. fr. toğra:-, but with no obvious semantic connection; spelt toğza:ğ in the MS. but this must be an error since the Refl. Den. V.s of this word, q.v., and tuğra:ğ are dealt with together in one para, Pec. to Kaş. Xak. xi toğra:ğ "any horse which a king gives his troops on the day of the start of an expedition (al-rikáb) or a battle and takes back from them. when they return" Kaş. ] 462; keldi: berü: toğrağı: atand bariduhu "his mounted messenger came to us" III 65, 13 (misvocalized tigragi:; the word is not very apt and was perhaps used merely for the sake of the rhyme). tuğra:ğ “a royal sign manual”, survives only (9) in SW Osm. as tugra. Sce Doerfer III 1344. Oğuz xi tuğra:ğ tübi'u'l-malik. ta tazoqi tii "the seal and signature of a king” in Oğuz, the Turks do not know the word and I do not know its origin (aslahu) Kaş. I 462: xıv Muh. al-taseqi" tu:ğra: (and other words) are pronounced with a vigorously articulated Zayn in "Turkistan, and with a soğro in our country Mel. 6, ız, Rif. 77; a.0. 51, 2; 146.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 516 
     
   
   
      472 DIS. ?D tofrak 'poplar'; survives only(?) in SE Türki Shaw, BS, Jarring, the last specifying *balsam poplar, Populus balsamifera', but the refce. to “nuts" in /rkB is puzzling; al-hamad is not traceable in the dicts. and may be corrupt. Türkü viri ff. (of a falcon) yağaklı:ğ toğra:k üze: tüşü:pen 'settling on a £oğra:R full of nuts! IrkB 64: Xak. xi toğrak a/-ğarab (MS. al-garb) "a poplar', tea. huwa, şacavu l-hamad. Kaş. I. 468. D toğrıl a bird of prey, exact identity unknown, describe by Aag. as larger than a sıpkur, q.v.; it is best known as a P.N. and has not survived as a Common Noun; prob. Dev. N. fr. toBra:- with. which there is a clear semantic connection. See Doerfer III 1445. Uyğ. viuit ff. Bud. Alp Toğrul Tégin Pfahi. 23, 13: Civ. Tofril occurs several times and "Toğrul once as an element in P.N.s in USp. and Studies, p. 98: Xak. xi tofril “a bird of prev (cárih min siba"Pl-tayr), it kills a thousand ducks and eats one of them; men are called Toğrıl after it Kaş. 7 482; a.o. IJI 381 (supkur):(Gancak xı (VU) togril (completely unvocalized) “a length of gut stuffed with meat and fruit (possibly the same word) Kaş. I 482): xiv Muh.(?) (among birds) rat" mina'l-eatcürih "a kind of bird of prey' toğrıl (ra' unvocalized) Rif. 175 (only: Çağ. xvff. toğrul (spelt) “the name of a hunting bird" (paranda-i şikari), also the name of a wellknown Salcuk padrga^t whose father was Alp Arslan San. 261 v. 5; (zağanus in Rmi, same translation, also called togrul do. 228r. 22; Red. translates zağanus “the hunting owl, Bubo maximus! trained like a falcon): Kip. xiv. toğrul "the well-known bird”, when it is sent after cranes it goes on attacking and killing one after another until it reaches the end of them; then it cats only the first one that it has killed 1d. 64. Dis. V. DGRD toğur- (d-) Inchoative(?) f. of toğ-, as such n.o.a.b., but the Ger, toğuru: is common and the Pass, f. toğrıl- is used to translate istaqüma “to be upright, straight, straightforward' in Tit. şa, 9 and survives as doğrulin SW Osm. See also toğruş-. Uyğ- vrır ff. Bud. (may 1 reach the jewelled island after surmounting huge difficult snowdrifts and) keçinçsiz terip taluy ógüz suvin toBurup “traversing the waters of deep oceans hard to cross” TT VI, p. 62, footnote l. 2: Xak. xı ol mana: tofurdr “he came precipitately (mutağaşmra(n)) to me, leaving the road” ş also used of anyone who has a slapdash attitude (muta'assif) towards something Kaş. I] 8o (toğurur, toğurma:k, the vocalization is imperfect and shovvs signs of an attempt to make the word togru-). D tuğur- (d-) Caus. f. of tuğ- , 'to give birth to (a child Acc.) Survives, as doğur-,onlyin NW Krım R III 1706; SW Az., Osm., Tkm. In other modern languages either tuğ- or tuğtur- is used in this sense. Uyğ. vıu eki:  DGR yaprka: kün tuğuru: süpüsdim “1 started the battle at sunrise on the second day of the month” Su. E 1; a.o. do. S «s: vin ff. Man. tuğurtunuz “you have caused them to be born" TT 771 6o: Bud. USf. 102a. 4-5 (alpirkan-): Civ. (if a woman wcars this amulet) uçüz tuğurur “she gives birth without difficulty” TT VII 27,13;0.0.do. 15 (arkuru:); H I118:xi Xak. ura:ğut oğul tuğurdiı: "the woman gave birth (rcaladat) to a son”, also used metaph. ('ala'l-isti'ára) of animals giving birth Kaş. 17 8o (tuBurur, tuğurma:k, prov., containing tuğ-): KB (V was in the dark of night and) tugurdi künüm “it made my sun rise' 383; (a feast to celebrate) tuğursa oğul "the birth of a son” 4575: xiu(?) Tef. tugur- “to give birth” 306: xiv Mihi. (under woman) allati zvaladat duğurmiş Mel. 53, 4 (only): Çağ. xv ff. tuğur- Caus. f.; zöydnidan "to give birth” San. 179r. 9 (quotns.): Kom. xiv. ditto. tuvur-/tu(w)ur-/toBbur- CCG; Gr. 247 (quotns.): Kip. xin sealada. mina'l-wiláda tuğur- Hou. 43, 15: xiv talada duğur- Hul. 88v: xv ditto tuwur-; Tkm. tuğur- Tu. 38b. 6. tığra:- “to be tough, sturdy'; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı er tığra:dı: "the man was tough, sturdy" (caluda) Kaş. III 277; (oğra:r, tığra:ma:k, and see tavra:-): xiv Muh.(?) tacallada tığra:- (unvocalized) Rif. ro6 (only). toğrn:- (d- -) “to cut, or split into slices or small pieces”, s.i.a.m.l.g. "with some phonetic variations; except in some NC and NW languages which have tuvra-/tu:ra-, consistently spelt with -0-; SW Az, Osm., Tkm. doğra-. Uyğ. vii ff. Civ. H 7 76 (uvşa:k): Xak. xi «ol» et toğra:dı: “he sliced (xardala) the meat for tutmiac or something else” Kaş. HII 277 (toğra: Tr, toğra: ma:k), the word, translated qata"a “to cut”, occurs frequently in the list of conjugational forms i in 711 au ff.: Çağ. xv ff. tofra- (spelt) riza kardan 'to break in pieces' San. 179r. 13 (quotns.): Kip. xiv toğraqaffa"a “to cut in pieces” /d. 64. D tığrat- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of tığra:-, Xak. xı oğlin rsgka: tiğrattı: “he toughened (şaddada) his son and made him forceful (calad) in all negotiations and business transactions” Kaş. II 330 (tiBratu:r, tığratma:k), a.o. JI 330 (tigret-). D toğrat- (d-) Caus. f. of toğra:- ; s.i.m.m.l.g. Xak. xı ol apar et toğrattı: "he ordered him to cut the mcat in slices” (bi-qaf' . . . müxardala) ; used only of foodstuffs (al-şav" Pl-mafüm) Kaş. 11 330 (toğratu:r, toğratma:k): Çağ. xv ff. toğrat- Caus. f.; riza Rundnidan 'to order to break in pieces' San. 179r. 27. D toğral- (d-) Pass. f. of tofra:-; s.i.m.m.l.g. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. [gap] toğrulup (sic) yidip sasıp 'broken in pieces and stinking (Hend.)” U III 25, 6: Xak. xi et toğraldı: “the meat was cut in slices” (qufi'a müxardala(n)) (toğralu:r, toBralma:k); and one says ton ki:rdin toğraldı:" the garment was     
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 517 
     
   
   
      DIS. DGS tattered (tafazzara) because of dirt”, also used when cracks (a/-şaqdq) appear in a foot or a fabric (fi'l-rícl tca'l-mansitc) for any reason Kaş. Iİ 230 (toğralu:r, toğralma:k): Çağ. xv fT. toğral- riza şudan "to be broken in pieces” Sar. 179r. 29 (quotns.). D tofran- (d-) Refl. f. of toğra:-. Xak. xı ol ö:zipe: et toğrandı: “he pretended to cut (annahu yuqatti") meat (etc.) in pieces for himself” Kaş. 17 240 (toğranu:r, toğranma:k): Kip. xv taqafta"a “to be cut in pieces” towran- ; 'Tkm. toğran- Tw. 10b. s. D tığraş- Hap. leg.?; Co-of. f. of tığra:-. Xak. xı oğlan tığraşdı: "the boy was thoroughly tough and sturdy" , taken from their word tigra:k for al-calad Kaş. 1l 212 (no Aor. or Infin.). D toğraş- (d-) Co-op. f. of toğra-, the second sentence is separated fr. the first by tığraş- and toğruş-. Xak. xı ol mapa: et toğraşdı: “he helped me to cut the meat in slices! (toğraşu:r, toğraşma:k) . . . and one says to:n ki:rdin toğraşdı: 'parts of the garment werc tattered (tafazzara) because of dirt'; also used of anything when cuts and cracks appear in it Kaş. II 211-12 (toğraşu:r, toğraşma:k). D toğruş (d-) Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of toğur-. Xak. xı ol menin bile: yo:lka: toğruşdı: “he competed with me in travelling (f?'l-sayr) and cutting (gat') a path precipitately (mutagagmira(n)) to the objective" Kaş. II 212 (no Aor. or Infin., sec toğraş-). Tris. DGR D toğuru: (d-) Ger. of toğur- used as an Adv. and N./A., originally (physically) 'straight', hence metaph. "straight, honest, upright, true”. Soon contracted to tofru:; s.ia.m.l.g. in a variety of forms, e.g. NE toğra: SE toğra/ toğrı, NC tura; NW Kk. tuwri; Nog. tuwra; SW Az., Osm., Tkm. doğrı/doğru, A 1.-vv, in Pe. and other languages, see Doerfer II 971. Uyğ. vitr ff. Civ. toğuru (or toğru) tumlitu satdım “1 have sold outright and irrevocably” is a common stock phr. in contracts in USp. r3, 14; 56, 6 etc.; a.o. do. 32, 19 (PU töleç): Xak. xi toğru: "the tang (al-silan), that is the tail (danab) of a sword, knife, or dagger which is stuck into the handle! Kaş. I 420: xi(?) Tef. (they went) anar tofru 'straight to him” 3oş: xiv Muğ. sádaqa "to tell the truth” doğru: ayt- Mel. 25, 15 (Rif. 111 corrupt); a/-fiqa 'trustworthy, honest" doğru: s2, 1 (147 ba:yık), al-muqawwam 'straight' doğra: 56, 5 (154 kóni:): Çağ. xv ff. toğrı (1) röst “true”, opposite to durüg 'lie'; (2) barábar tea muhàádaà 'equal, level, facing” Sar. 179v. 6 (quotn.): Xwar. xır doğrı 'exactly opposite” (?) “AH 55: xiv toğrı/toğru “straight, honestly! Qurö 181: Kom. xiv “straight” toğru CCI; tuvra CCG (arkuru:); Gr.: Kip. xir al-mustaqim 'straight (opposite to eğri: “crooked”) toğru: How. 28, 6:.xiv fofru: a/-muqateteam. tea'[-südiq  473 'straight, true”, one says tofru: sözlcr 'true statements! /4. 64: xv qgatám “uprightness, truth' fo(w)ra; Tkm. togri Tuh. 29b. 7; 73b. 13; mustagim ditto do. 34b. ro (OD in margin in second hand). ?F tokurka: Hap. leg.; "a spout'; un"Turkish in form and prob. a l.-w.; not to be connected with Mong. tofurka 'the felt fabric of a tent” (Kom. 1815) which is listed as Çağ. in San. 179v. 13. Xak. xi tokurka: a[-sunbür fil-dinán toa'[-matáhir "the spout of a wine jar or jug'; also the name of a place in the summer station (a/-muştaf) of Kaşğar Kaş. 1 489. Tris. V. DĞRD tığraklan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. tığra:k. Xak. xı er tığraklandı: “the man demonstrated his own toughness” (azhara . . . mün nafsihi calada) Kaş. II 274 (tuğraklanu:r, tığraklanma:k, verse). VUD toğrağlan- Hap. leg.; Refi. Den. V. fr. toğra:ğ. Xak. xı oğla:n toğrağlandı: “the boy had a £oğra:ğ), that is a horse which the king gives his troops when he goes out with his retinue (yatora'l-mazwkib), and which is returned to him when they dismount Kaş. 77 272 (toğrağlanu:r, toğrağlanma:k). D tuğrağlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. tufra:É; mentioned only in a note after toğrağlan-. Oğuz xı “it is also used in Oğuz of a document when it is signed' (a/-hitab idá wiiqqi a). Dis. DGS E tağsu/tağsut See takşut. VU?D tuğsa:k Hap. leg. See tu:1l, Xak. xı tuğsa:k al-armala "a widow'; usually used in the Hend. (muzdawica(n) tu: tuğsa:k Kaş. I 468. D tufsik Dev. N. fr. tuğ- ; used only in the phr. kü:n tufsik 'sunrise, east'. N.o.a.b.; cf. batsik, tuğar. Türkü vir ilğerü: kün tuğsık(k)a: 'eastwards towards the sunrise" I S 2 (II N 2 but tuğsıkr:pa:), ópre kün tuğsıkda: “in the east where the sun rises” 7 E 4, II E s: Uyğ. ix ilğerü: kün tuğsu:k [(k)a: ] 1H 5 7 (ETY II 38), kün tufásuk(k)a: batsik(k)a: uci 4: vir ff Man.-A kün tuğsukdunkı yel “the east vind” M III 9, 1 Gi): Xak. xı “the east' (a/-şarq) is called kü:n tuğsı/uğ (sie, both kasra and damma marked) Kaş. I 463: xin(?) Tef. kün tuğsukı “the east' 306. C tokso:n (d-) crasis of tokkuz o:n, which phr. was used down to Uyg. inclusive; 'ninety'. S.i.a.m.l.g. usually as toksan, SW Az. doxsan; Osm. doksan; Tkm. toksan (although “nine” dokkiz). An important word as giving an incontrovertible example of modern -a- representing earlier -0-. Xak. xı tokso:n the numeral 'ninety', originally tokuz o:n that is "nine times ten” and then  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 518 
     
   
   
     474 combined (cu'ilatà wáhid) Kaş. I 437: xii(?) Tef. toksan: xiv Muh. tisüna dokuza:n Mel. 81, iş, toksa:n Rif. 187: Kip. xii tirina toksan Hou. 22, 7: xıv tokşan ditto İd. 65; toksan Bul. 12, 14: xv tokşa:n Kas. 4, 21; a.o.0., Tuh. 6ob. 10. Dis. DĞŞ D tokis (d-) Dev. N. connoting reciprocity fr. tokt-. S.ism.; SW Osm. dokus. Xak. xi tokiş (vocalized fokuş) al-harb *battle" Kaş. 7 367 (verse tokiş (sic) al-haycö” *battle'); o.o. 7 ız, 17 (urus); 77 83, 23; Ill 172, 12 (2 ule): KB 2366 (ö:glen-): xui?) Tef. tokuş “quarrcl, fight” 307: XIV Muh.(?) al-magaff "battle array' Rif. 146 (only): Cag. xv ff. tokus (1) mükü-yi çülaha “a weaver's shuttle'; (2) “a violent collision between two things” San. 181r. 22: Xvvar, xit (2) Oğ. 266 (uruş): xiv tokuş "battle” Qutb 182; Nahc. 12, 13-15. D takşut Dev. N. fr. *takig- ; "verse, poem, Hüen-ts. 1832. Dis. V. DĞŞD tikis- Co-op. f. of tik-. Survives in SW Osm. “to crowd together (Trans. and Intrans.)'. Xak. xı kişi: evde: tıkiştı: "the people crowded together (izdahama) and filled the house" Kaş. II 104 (tikisu:r, tikisma:X). D tokig- (d-) Recip. f. of tokt-; s.i.s.mil., usually meaning 'to collide' and the like. Xak. xt beğle:r tokişti: “the begs (etc.) fought one another” (hdraba) Kaş. II 103 (tokişu:r, tokisma:k; verse); four o.o. translated háraba] taháraba, sometimes vocalized tokuş-: xim (?) Tef. tokış-/tokuş- “to quarrel, fight” 3o7: Çağ. xv ff. San. r8or. 19 (tokin-): Kip. xv tasádama “to collide' tokunus-, with note in margin “also without -nu-' Tu. rob. r: Osm. xiv ff. dokuş- (occasionally tokuş-) *to fight; to collide with; c.i.a.p. T TS I 693; II 897; II 682; IV 755. . : D taksur- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of *takisRecip. f. of tak-, "to compose (verses). Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. U III 75, 11 (ii) (bitit-). Dis. DGY : tağa:y (d-) 'maternal uncle (unlike 1 eçi: without reference to the question whether he is older or younger than the mother). S.i.a.m.l.g. usually as tayı, in NW Kk.; SW Az. Osm., Tkm. dayı. See kükü:y and Doerfer III ri76. Uy&amp;. vi ff. Bud. ulatı ka kadaş yeğen tağay (so read) “all the family and kinsmen, nephews, and maternal uncles” DIS. DGS Pfahl. 24, 26; yegen tağay U III 35, 17; tağay Topa Sapun 'uncle ' Toga Sanun” U II 8o, 67: Civ. tağayım in a list of various kinds of relatives concerned in a contract USp. 114, 9; tiş, 14: Xak. xi tağa:y al-xál 'maternal uncle! Kaş. III 238: xiv Müh. ditto Mel. 49, 6; Rif. 144: Çağ. xvff. tağay/ tağayı birádar-i mádar *mother's brother', in Ar. xül San. 261r. 16; Kom. xiv. maternal uncle tağay CCI; Gr.: Kip. xim al-xal ta:y also called (t:ğa: (so spelt, perhaps a müddle of tağın:y) a dialect form (/ufa); al-xála ta:y eje: (sic) Hou. 31, 20: xiv fay al-xal İd. 67: al-xál ta:y, al-xala (ana: kiz karinda:ş and) tağza: Bul, 9, 3. Dis. DĞZ tokku:z (d-) "nine”, There is no doubt that this word and some other numerals originally had a medial double consonant, see Clauson, "The Turkish Numerals', RAS, 1959, p. 20, and this double consonant would not have been written in the Runic or Uy. scripts. İt survives at any rate in SC Uzb. tükkiz; SW Az. doğğuz and Cuv. tixxör, as well as təxör Ash. xv 7, ır. The initial d- survives in SW Az., Osm., Tkm. A l.-vv. in Pe. and other languages, see Doerfer II 976. Türkü virt tokurz 7. N 6, g: vii ff. toku:z IrkB ss, 60: Yen. tokuz Mal. 30, 2; 32, 10: Uyğ. vir tokuz Su. E a: vini ff. Bud., Civ. tokuz is fairly common: O. Kir. ix ff. tokuz Mal. 23, 1; $1, 2; toku:z do. 45, 2: Xak. xr toku:z Kaş. 1 437 (toksom), III 127, 14; n.m.e.: xim(?) Tef. tokuz 309: xiv Muh. tisa dokuz Mel, 8:1, 8; toku:z Rif. 186: Çağ. xv ff tokuz 'adad-i nuh, in Ar. tis'a San. 181r. 9; in do. 20v. 15 mentioned as one of the numerals spelt alternatively. 5a-taşdid or ba-taxfif, i.e. as tokkuz or tokuz: Kom. xiv toğuz CCG, Gr.: Kap. xur tisa tokuz IJou. 22, 7: XIV ditto. /4. 65; tokkuz (si) Bul. iz, 12: XV tokuz Kav. 5, 1 4.o.o., takuz (sic, in error) Tuh. 6ob. 8. Tris. DGZ PU(D) tağuzmak Han. leg.; a dubious word, the last syllable is unvocalized but otherwise certain, the -z- might be an error for -r- vvith a cazm over it, but there is no obvious etymology. Xak. xr tağuzmak er al-raculu”l-buhturu” l-qaşir “a short stout man", also spelt with -k- and used of other than men Kaş. I 564. D tokuzung (d-) Ordinal f. of tokku:z; *ninth?. S.i.a.m.l.g., but everywhere with final -i-u, cf. üçünç. Türkü vir töküzünç IN E; vin fi. Man. ditto Chas. 191: Uy£. vini ff. Bud. ditto PfaHl. 6, 2: Civ. ditto several times in TT VII and USp.: (Xak.) xui(?) Tef. tokusunç 309 (under tokuz). D tokuza:r (d-) Distributive f. of tokku:z, *nine each”. Survives in SW Osm. dokuzar, but rare or unknown elsewhere. Uyğ. vii ff. Civ. tokuza:r ta:şığ (nine stones each” TT VHI L7. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 519 
     
   
   
      ——-—-—————————,—m    MON. DG 0475 Mon. DG te:g (d-) Postposn. "like'; together with üçün, üze: and birle: one of the 'four old postposns.” discussed in K. Grenbech, Der türhische Sprachbau, Copenhagen, 1936, p. 35. When attached to the oblique stem of ol it soon became fused with it as antağ, q.v.; later it became similarly fused with the oblique stem of 1 but. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SW where it is replaced by other words like Osm. gibi (kib), the vowel varies between -e- and -a-, and the final betwcen -$ and -y, but the initial is consistently d- everywhere. Türkü vit tepri: teg 'god-like' 7 S 1, I N 1, a.0.0.: Uyğ. viu ff. Man. bulit teg “like a cloud” M İl 11, iş, a.o.o.: Bud. moncuk teg 'like a (pearl) necklace! PP 6, 8; many o.o.: Civ: munt teg kılsar “if he acts like this” H 7 154; a.o.o.: Xak. xı te:ğ Jarf tagbih "Particle of comparison'; hence one says ol andağ te:ğ “he is like that” Xaş, I1] 155; o.o., spelt teg I 353 (Sürk); 354, 18; 490 (cekürge:); 497 (karakst:z): KB tolun teg yüzin “his face like a full moon” 48: xın(?) Zt. bilig teg Hike wisdom' 100; a.o0.0.: xiv Muh. Adverbs of comparison. The commonest is teg, and some of “our Turks” change the t- to d- when it is (attached) at the end of a word; e.g. 'his tongue is like a sword' dili: kt:li:c deg; “this is as sweet as honey! bu da:tlu: dur ba:l deg Mel. 18, 4; ti:li: ..... teg; sü:cüg teg Rif. 96: Çağ. xvíf. the word is mentioned several times in San. as an adüt-i taşbih “Adv. of comparison'; the forms quoted are dég :r7r. 24 (quotns.); 226v. 3 (quotns.); t66 ro8r. 15: Xwar. xit(?) teg (or deg?) is common in O£., c.g. adakı ud adakı teg “his legs were like an ox's legs! rz: xiv teğ “like” Quib 176; teğ MN 5, etc.; Nahc. 263, 15; 387, 15: Kom. XIV "like! dek/dey CCG; Gr. 82 (quotn.): Kip. xiv def mit/ “like” fd. 49. tek Preliminary note. There tas certaimly a tword tek meaning 'only', vohich is not mentioned in this meaning by Kaş., it seems likely, however, that his translation "for no particular purpose! is a misunderstanding of it. There was also certainly a tword tek meaning 'silent(ly) tohich is generally used to qualify tur-, and must be carefully distinguished fr. tik which is similarly used. There is a modern word in NC Kzx. teğ/tek 'family, origin', tehich. Radloff, certainly in error, read in some early texts; in Türkü VI! ff. Yen. Mal. 28, r the correct reading is prob. teğme: 'all'; in Xak. XI KB the readings are all due to scribal errors in the Vienna MS., in 344 akran teki for evren basi; in 950 tegin for tepin and in 1630 teginde for beginde. A word tek “under” first mentioned in Cağ. XV ff. San. 157v. 24 and surviving in several modern languages looks like a corruption of Ar. taht, sohich is the word used to translate it in San. 1 tek “only”, survives with some extended meanings, 'alone, solitary, odd (not even)' in ERR. E NC Kzx., several NW languages and SW Az., Osm., Tkm. Uy£. viit ff. Bud. bir tek .,. tek bir ódun 'only once . . . on one single occasion” Kan. go-1; tégin alkunı taplamadı tek taluy ógüzke kirmişiğ tapladı “the prince did not approve any (of these proposals), and only approved of going to sea' PP ış, 2-3; a.o. Hüen-ts. 253 (seç-): Xək. xı tek halima wa ma"nahu bi-là qaşd "a word meaning (the phr.) without any particular purpose'; hence one says tek keldim “1 have come vvithout any particular purpose”: Kaş. I 334 (i.e. "the only thing I have done is to come”): KB tili kópll bir tek “unequivocal and single-minded” 53 (sie, not feg as in Arat's text): xin(?) At, eri bardı kaldı kuruğ tek yeri “the man has gone (i.e. died), only his empty place has remained' 202; 0.0. 304, 434: Çağ. xv ff. tek fard wa tanhd “alone, solitary” San. 157v. 24; ték ditto roSr. 17 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv tök "only, one only” Qutb 177; MN 9s: Kip. xv fard tek/ték Tu. 27b. 9; 62a. 10-11; b. 4. 2 tek 'silent, silently' ; normally used to qualif: a verb, generally tur-. Survives in suc phr. in NC Kir.; SC Uzb.; NW Kk., Nog.; SW Osm. Cf. sük, (Xak.) xin(?) Tef. tek 'silently'; tek tur- “to be silent! 295-6: xiv Muh sakata “to be silent” deg dur- Mel. 27,5; tek tur- Rif. 110: Çağ. xv ff. tek “silent” (sühit ca xteàmitg) San. 198r. 16; ték tur- “to stand silent' 197r. 21 (quotns.)); dék ditto 226v. 5: Oğuz xı and one says tek tur uskut in Oğuz Kaş. I 334: Xwar. xiv tek/ték turditto Nahe. 309, 9; 418, r: Kom. xiv “to be silent” tek tur- CCI; Gr.: Kip. xit sakata mina'l-suküt wa'l-gamt tök tur- also tök yü:ri:Hou. 38, 1: xiv. tek oltur- sakata ay qa'ada sdkita(n) (to sit silent) İd. 39; sakata tek tur- Bul. 48r-v.: xv şah 'hush! tektur, or more emphatically tep tektur Kat. 52, r, uskut tek tur (also epsem) do. 75, 13; sakata tek tur- Tul. 20a. 5; 59b. 12. ?F tik (d-) 'straight; vertical, upright; hence (of a cliff) “precipitous” and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE?; in SW Az., Osm., Tkm.. dik, almost the only word in Kaş. which preserves the original d-. A 1.-vv, in Pe., Doerfer lI 1005. As he points. out, practically syn. vv. Chinese chih ( Giles, 1,846, Pulleyblank, Middle Chinese djak), and prob. a l-w. fr. it. Its relationship to Mong. çike (Kot. 2175) is obscure, on balance it is perhaps more likely to be a l.-w. fr. "Turkish than direct fr. Chinese, although the unvoiced initial and the fact that the Mong. word has Sec. meanings peculiar to Chinese point rather in the other direction. Xak. x1 'when a thing is vertical! (idá'ntagaba'l-say' qáà'imo(n)) one says dik turdi: Kaş. I 334: (xii(?). Tef. the phr. spelt ti:k turbut transcribed /ek tur- in 295-6 seems to belong here): xiv Muh.(?) al-'agaba “cliff, acclivity' ti:k Rif. 177 (only): Çağ. xv ff. tik (*with -i-, not -é-") 'straight' (rást) opposed to *crooked, bent' San. 198r. zo (quotn.): Kom. xiv. “a column! tik ağaç CCI; Gr.: Kip. xv Tuh. 362. 8 (0rü:). à  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 520 
     
   
   
     476 MON. DG PU 1 tüg (? d-) Particle meaning 'several, many' placed before high numbers; perhaps best explained as an alliterative jingle before tümen subsequently used also before min, but this does not explain the d- in Kaş. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viii ff. Man. tük (sic) tümen tinlhiglari$ kutğartınız “you have saved many myriads of mortals! TT III 67: Bud. tüğ tümen kişiler Suv. 587, r: Xak. xi düğ min mà bavna' I-ulüf 'several thousand'; one says düg miy yarma:k 'several thousand dirhams” Kaş. I 334: KB tusulmaz sana etse tüğ mip tulum “even if one prepares several thousand weapons, they are no use against you' (O death!) 1537. S 2 tüğ Sec tü:. PU dük Hap. leg.; onomatopoeic. Xak. xt dük urdi: “he struck him gently (daraba . . . darbh xafif) with his fis Kaş. 1 334. Mon. V. DGteğ- (d-) properly “to reach (a place Dat.) but with various extended meanings from an carlv date, including 'to attack (someone), to touch (something), to concern (someone), to be worth (i.e. to reach a price of, so much)”. S.ia.m.l.g., in NC, NW generally tly-; in NW Krim; SW Az., Osm. deg-; Tkm. dég-. Türkü vı teg- occurs over şo times meaning either (r) “to attack” e.g. Kül Tégin yadağın oflayu: teğdi: “Kul Tégin attacked on foot gasping' 7 E 32, or (2) “to reach” e.g. (I campaigned in the Shantung plain and) talu:yka: kiçiğ teğmedim “only just failed to reach the sea” İ S 3; similar phr. / S 3, II N 3: vin ff. üze: tepri:ke: teği:r "it reaches the sky above” İrRB 20; o.o. do. sg (yidit-); Toyok 24-5 (1 u:ç): Man. (if our prayers and praises) teprike teğmedi erser Chuas. 216-17; o.o. do. zoo (bu:g); M I 7, ro (tos): Yen. yağlı:ka:) tegmis "when he attacked the enemy” Mal. 26, 8; a.o. 28, 8: Uyğ. tix (my fame and reputation) teğdi: “reached” (the sunrise and sunset) uc: s: vin ff. Man. tulumluğ (?so read, MS. tonumluğ with tail of -1- omitted) teğir “the armed man attacks' M IH rı, iz: Bud. teğ- “to rcach, attain” is common, e.g. ertiniliğ otruğka teğdiler "they reached the island of jewels' PP 33, 7-8: Civ. ditto e.g. edgüke teğir "he attains goodness? TT VEHI 28, 47; (let my wife, after I am dead) erke beğke teğmedin “not marry again” (but keep my house and look after my son Altmiş Kaya. If my sons Kosanş and Esen Kaya say) ógey anamız bizke tegir alırbiz "our step-mother belongs to us, we will take her” USp. 78, s-o (text revised by Arat); a.o. do. 116, 17 (ağır): Xak. xi ol evke: tegdi: “he reached (balafa) the house” (etc.) Kaş, 11 19 (tegi:r, teBme:k; prov., verse, aza:k); I 48 (1 ok) and about zo o.o.: KB ajun éncke teğdi: “the world has attained peace' 103; (a wise, understanding man) tilekke tegir *achieves his desires! 155-9; (one is the Secretary, the other the Minister) bu iki kişike söz acmak tegir “it is the duty of these two people to express their vicws' 2679; 0.0. 263, 713, etc.: xın(?) At bu kün tegsü méndin durud 'let my praise reach (the Prophet) today' 29; 2.0.0.; T'ef. teğ- “to reach', etc. 292: XIV Muh. agába "to attain! deg- Mel. 22, 14 (Rif. 103 degür-); toaşala “to reach' teg- 32, 3 (misvocalized tüke-); 116 (-&amp;- marked); 132: Çağ. xv ff. tég- (so spelt) (r) "to hit” (xwwrdan) of one thing like an arrow, stone or blow hitting another; (2) “to reach' (rasidan), (a) “to be worth! (arzidan) San. rgsv. 7 (quotns.): Xvvar, xin tég- “to rcach" "A// 38; dég- “to be worth, to cost' do. 57: xni(?) teğ- “to reach' Og. 310: xiv ditto Qutb 177; MN 9i: Kom. xiv teg-/tey- "to rcach, touch” CCJ, CCG; “to be worth' CC7, Gr. 238 (quotns.): Kip. xiv. deá- tvaşala İd. ag, Bul. 88r.: xv massa “to touch” tey- Kav. ro, 1; sába “to hit (a target, etc.) (urus- and) téy- Tuh. 22b. 13: Osm. xiv değ- “to reach', etc.; c.i.a.p. T TS 1 187; İİ 268-9; İTİ 174; İV 198. tik- (d-) basically “to insert (something Acc., in something else Dat.)' with a wide range of specialized meanings, e.g. “to erect (a memorial stone), to plant. (a plant)', (in both cases lit. “to insert” (in the ground)); “to sew' (insert a needle), etc. Although in some mcanings there is a connotation of inserting vertically, it is prob. that the phonetic identity with tik 18 fortuitous, esp. if that is a l.-w., unless this is also one, which is improbable. S.i.a.m.l.g.; see östik-. Türkü vir balbal tikmiş “they erected memorial stones” (to my father the xagan) I E 16; o.0. 1 E 25; I1 S 9, rı: vin ff. Yen. Mal. 28, 4 etc. (bepğüs): Uyğ. vir ff. Man. TT III 46-7 (biliglig): Bud. (listen) tike kulğakın "with pricked cars” TT X 3o; TM IV 254, 93; (accept the flowers and) başıyda tikgil 'stick them in (the hair of) your head' TT X 488; o.o. TT V, p. 16 (çıça:muk), Hien-ts. 1909 (rü:): Civ. kim kayu kişi sögüt tikser “if anyone plants a tree" T T VII 28, 42: Xak. xı er tom tikdi: (sic) “the man sewed' (xafa) the garment'; and one says atı: yıla:n tikti: (sic) “the snake bit (/asa"at) the horse” (etc.); also used of a scorpion (stinging); and one says er yığa:ç tikdi: “the man planted (ğarasa) a tree” , also used of anything that one sets up vertically (nagabahu gàá'ima(r)) Kaş. 1I zo (tike:r, tikme:k); o.o. 7 195, 2; 401, 3 (tiken); //T 25 (ylgi:); 229 (ditto); 367, 11: K B (he sat down quietly and) közin yerke tlkti 'fastened his eyes on the ground” 769, 956: xın(?) Tef. tik“to stick' (a staff in the ground) 301; “to insert" (something in a leak) 304 (tik-?): xiv Rig. çadır tikip 'pitching a tent” R III 1346; Muh. xöta tik- Mel. zs, 11; Rif. 108; al-xayáfa ti:kmek 34, 13; tikmek 119; a/-ğars tikmek 1:20 (only): Çağ. xv ff. tik- (with -i- not -é-") (r) düxtan “to sew'; (2) metaph. naşb kardan “to erect (3) “to plant (gars kardan) a tree' Sar. 195v. $ (quotns.): Xwar. xiv tik- 'to pitch (a tent); to fix (one's eyes on something)! Quib 178: Kom. xiv 'to sew together, to plant' tik- CC7; Gr.: Kip. xii ğarasa min garsil-gacar tike koy- Hon. 36, 7;    
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 521 
     
   
   
     DIS. DGE xádfa mina'l-xayá[a UK- do. 39, 20: xiv tiklagqama 'to feed' (as a bird feeds its young) wa xája İd. ag, diK- ğarasa wa xdfa tea nagaba do. 49; xayyata wa laqqama tik- Bul. 43r.; lasa'a tik- do. 79v.: xv tik- xayyata wa ğarasa Kav. 9, 7; 2.0. do. 75, 10; laqqama tik- Tu. 32a. 6; (naşaba”l-cüm "to set out the drinking cups' kur- do. 36b. 13; a later (?SW) scribe misunderstanding this connected a/-cám with lacama “to sew' and added dikti): Osm. xiv ff, dik-, dike, etc. in several meanings, fairly common T'T'S I 204-5; I1 296; İTİ 193; İV 222. VU tö:ğ- (d-) “to pound, crush, grind'; as the vowel is long, -ó:- rather than -ü:- is prob., and this vowel survives in SW Az. döy-, Osm. döğ- (usually pronounced dóv-); Tkm. dóv-, but the word also survives as NC Kzx. tüy- ; SC Uzb. tuy-; NW Kk., Kumyk, Nog. tüy-, so the point is not clear; similar doubts arise regarding VU tógl:, q.v. It is possible that a sound change occurred at a fairly early period. Xak. xı er tu:z tó:gdi: "the man crushed (daqqa) the salt” (etc.) Kaş. /II 184 (tó:ge:r, tó:gme:k): X war. xiv töğ- (of hail) “to beat down' (flowers); “to forge' (iron) Quzb 183 (tóg-[tók-): Kip. xır daqqa (VU) dügHou. 40, 4: Xiv tüw- daqqa İd. 37: xv daraba "to beat” (inter alia) tüy- Tuh. 23b. 11 (in margin in second hand, 'also tüg-/düg-"). tüg- (d-) “to tie (a knot), to knot (a string)', and the like, hence metaph. "to knit (the brows in anger, etc.)'. S.i.a.m.l.g. with some phonetic changes in -£-; in SW Az. düy- ; Osm. düg-/ düy-; Tkm. düv-. Türkü vriff. tığ at kudrukin tügü:p 'knot the bay horse's tail” IrkB so: Uy£. vut ff. Bud. U 77 so, 3 (iii) (alınlığ): Xak. xı er tügü:n tügdi: “the man knotted the knot' (etc.) ('agada . . . al-'ugda) Kaş. II 20 (tüğe:r, tügme:k; prov.): o.o. I 472, 10; II 243, 9, (same translation): KB kalrk kaşı tügdi “the atmosphere knitted its brows' (and poured out tears, i.e. rain) 80; 0.0. 191, 770 (açıt-), 1586 (iriglen-), 1673 (çırğuy), etc.: Çağ. xv ff. tüg- (specifically so spelt) grrit zadan “to knot' San. 181r. 26 (quotns.): Kom. xiv tü-/tüv- "to knot' CCG; i 252 (mis-spelt tu-): Kıp. xiv düg- 'agada . 49. tök- (d-) "to pour out (a liquid cc.) hence more generally 'to spray out, scatter'. S.i.a.m.lg.; in NW Krim, SW Osm., Tkm. (but not Az. ?) dök-. Türkü vrıı the word has been read in T sz where the stone is very much weathered between (À) and (B); (neither sleeping at night, nor sitting down by day) krzil (A) kanim tókti: kara: terim yügürü işiğ (B) kü:çüğ börtim ök 'I gave my services (to the xa£an) with my red blood streaming and my black sweat flovving” , tökti: with -t- following -K- cannot be right, tökülü: would suit the sense best and be parallel to yügürü:, but cannot be read with confidence; [gap] tókdi: 7x. 17 (no translation possible); the word may also occur in İx. 4 alpı: erdemi: anta: tökdi: “he poured out 2477 his bravery and manly qualities there', the tis not clear, but the rest is, and kükdi: which has been read here is not attested elsewhere; in both /x. passages tilkedt: is the likelier reading: viit ff. Man. töktümüz saçtımız erser “if we have poured out o: scattered” (the light of the five gods) Chuas. 239: Uyğ. viri ff. Civ. (if a man has a worm in his tooth he should hold wine vinegar in his mouth and) birğerü (so read?) tókgü 'spit it out together (with the worm)' H I 70-1: Xak. xi oğla:n su:v tökdi: "the boy poured out (aráqa) vvater” Kaş. İT 19 (prov.; no Aor. or Infin.): KB sözün barı tök “pour out all that you have to say” 195; tökme kan “do not shed blood” 1395: xiv. Rbğ. kan tökmek R IJI :242; Muh. baddada “to scatter” dö:k- Mel. 23, 15; tökRif. 105; sakaba'l-má' “to pour out water Su:ni: dö:k- 27, 7; tök- i10; sakbu'l-mà' dókmek 34, 14; tókmek 120: Çağ. xv ff. tök- rixtan “to pour out”, used as both Trans. and Intrans. San, 181r. 16: Xwar. xiv tök“to pour (water); to shed (blood)! Qurb 183: Kom. xiv ditto CCG; Gr.: Kip. xii sakaba tök- Hou. 34, 6, baddada tök- do. 38, ış, şabba min şabbi"l-mö” "to pour out” tök- do. 41, 10: XIV tök- baddada İd. 39; dök- baddada wa şabba do. 49; baddada tök- Bul. 3sr.: xv ditto Tu, 8a. 12; şabba wa baddada tökdo. 22b. 9; hatta ("to pour out”) wa baddada tök- do. 31a. 13. Dis. DGE teke: “he goat'; the difference of meaning, if any, between this word and erkeg is obscure. S.i.a.m.l.g., see Shcherbak, 112, 118; a ].-w. in Pe. and other languages, see Doerfer 1I 917. Uyğ. viri ff, Civ. (two ewes, two she-goats) bir teke “one he-goat” USp. 36, 3: Xak. xi teke: fahlu'l-zibà' “the male mountain goat', out of whose horns bows are made: teke: ai-tays 'he-goat'; hence a man with a scanty beard (ai-kawsac) is called teke: saka:l because his beard is like a goat's Kaş. 1II 228: xiv. Muh. al-tays teke: Mel. 70, 16; Rif. 172: Çağ. xvff. tekke (so spelt) buz-i nar “a he-goat', in Ar. cady and tays San. 158r. 6 (quotn.; also the name of a 'l'ürkmen tribe): Kip. xii al-tays teke: Hou. 15, 8: xiv ditto İd. 39; deke: al-tays, also pronounced teke: do. 49; al-tays teke: Bul. 7, 13: xv ditto Tuh. Sb. 135. D tegi: (d-) Ger. fr. teg- used as a Postposn. after Nouns in the Dat. meaning “up to, as far as” (a place), and “until” (a time). Like some other words, e.g. akru:, ÖDİ: it acquired a final -n in the medieval period for no obvious reason (Brockelmann's suggestion in para. 141 (i) that this form is a Participle is not plausible) and s.i.s.m.l., usually in this form e.g. SW Osm. degin/deyin/deg. Türkü vırır tegi: is fairly common, e.g. Santu:p yazı:ka: tegi: süledim 'I campaigned as far as the Shantung plain” 7 S 3; a0. 1 S 6, II N 4 (uğuş) (the word has been erroneously read in İN 5 where the right reading is sü[p]ügi: sındı: “his lance was broken', not sü: ftlegi:  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 522 
     
   
   
     478 sinde:): vın ff. (a big house was burnt down) katı:pa: tegi: kalmaduk “right down to the foundation nothing remained” IrRB g, o.o. do. 9, 16: Man. uluğka kicigke tegi “rom great to small' Chuas. 86-7; bastan (sic) adak(k)a tei “from head to foot' M I s, 13; amtıka tegl “until nov” TT II 8, 40: Uyğ. viii Selepe:ke: tegi: “up: to the Selenga river” Su. E 4: viri ff. Man. amtika tegl TT TH 65: Chr. kök kalikka tegl “up to the sky” U 1 8, 13-14: Bud. (a man must make efforts) Sanskrit fdvat "to such an extent' ança:(ğ)ka teği, vávat “as” ne:çe:ke: tegl (will ensure that he profits) TT VIII E.44; amtika tegi TT X 5; bu künki künke tegi “until today” do. 97-8; a.o.o.: Civ. yeti künke tegi “or seven days” TT VII 26, 4: o.o. do. VIII L.15, etc., mip yıl tümen künke tegi 'for.a thousand years and ten thousand days" is a stock phr. for describing an irrevocable sale in USp. 15, 16, etc.: Xak. xı (küni:) küni:nip küline: tegü: (sic, ?error for tegi: yağı: translated “a co-wife is an enemy until her ashes are scattered in the eyes of her co-wife' Kaş. III 237, 10; n.m.e. (in 7 349, rr kirk yılka: teği:n ba:y çığa:y tüzlinür “at the end of forty years rich and poor vvill be equal” (i.e. both dead) the t€gi:n was inserted in the margin by a later hand, and is not in an xt form): KB ediz “arşta altın taröka tegi “from the high vault of heaven (l.-w.) down to the earth (1.-vv.)” 24; bu ödke tegi “until now* 1259, 3744; tuğardın batarka teği “from east to west' 4714: xIII(?) Tef. tegi/teğin "up to; until” 292-3: xiv Rbğ. émdike tegl a.o.o. Brochelmann, para. 141 (1): Çağ. xv ff, dégin “up to, until” (2/2 tva hattá) used to indicate a terminal point (intiha”) San. 226v. 15 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv tegl “until” MN 436; Nahc. 233, 13-715; tegin MN qo. E teki the existence of a word of this form (in the Index tégi) meaning “family” in Uyğ. vitr ff. Civ. is suggested in USp. with a refce. to Radloff's similar suggestion regarding tek (see Preliminary note thereon), but it is clear that this is an error arising fr. misunderstood uses of the Den. Suff. -teki, e.g. (if l die before paying the debt) Nomkulintptekiler bile kóni bérsünler 'let the Nomkulis also honestly repay it” U Sp. t, 8; cf. (if I die before paying the debt), inim kasuk evtekiler bile kóni bérsünler “let my younger brother (PU) Kasuk together with those in his house honestly repay it” do. 7, 7-8; the latter is a revised text, Radloff in U.Sp. read Kusuknın tekiler and there is no doubt that the -nın- in ı, 8 is also an error for ev, and that a similar error occurred in other parallel passages in Up. 8, ro, 34, etc. PU tigi: “a sound". Kag.'s etymology, though no doubt false, suggests that the second consonant was -£-, the first vowel might be -é-. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viii ff, Bud. Suv. 166, 6 (coga:): Civ. yağız yerde tig] ündi: "a sound rose from the brown earth” TT 7 go, süzük suv tiğisi "the sound of clear water' do. 135: Xak. xt tiği: “a sound” (derc?) heard. at night; the DIS. DGE 'Turks believe. that. the. spirits of the dead assemble once a year at night and go to the places (a/-amşür) where their bodies were when they were alive, and visit their relations (ahaliha), and that anyone who hears that sound at night dies. This is widely known (maghir) among the 'l'urks. "Vhe word is spelt with a Rasra on the tö”, but in my view it would be more correct (actcad) with a fatha (bi'l-naşb), because when a woman, who has been given in marriage, visits her family one says 'tegdi: keldi: "she has come visiting" (zàá'irata(n)) Kaş. III 230. D tikü: (dikgö:) Xaş”s suggestion that this is a contracted Dev, N. in -ğü: fr. tik- is prob. correct, cf. tikim. S.i.s.m.l. and a L-w. in Pe. and other languages usually as tike/tikke (rare) sec. Doerfer 11 918. Xak. xi one says bi:r tikü: et "a piece (or slice, falda) of meat'; originally it had a double -kk- then it was shortened and (one k) absorbed in the other (wuffifa wa ulhiqa li-axawátihi) Kaş, III 229: Çağ. xv ff. tikke “a piece' P. de C. 263: kak göşttun bir iki tike aldım “1 took one or two pieces of dried meat' (quotn. Bábur) do. 406 (s.v. kak): Kip. xv /uqma 'morsel, mouthful” tik (later vocalized tiki, ?read tike, and (VU) sukum) Tuh. 31b. 8 tüge: (?d-) 'a (half-grown) calf'; survives in SW Az. düge/düye; Osm. düve; Tkm. tüve usually for “heifer”, Shcherbak, p. 101; acc. to Sami 871 (s.v. dana) a düye is a female, and a tosun a male, calf bigger than a buza:ğu: or dana; Kag.'stranslation is cryptic, but unless tigi: has fallen out before the second tüğe: it may mean that this word already meant “a female half-grown calf'. Xak. xı tüğe: “a calf” (svaladu'l-baqara) when it has reached the second year; and the female (al-untá) is called tüge: Kaj. 77] 229: Kip. xin al-cüriya 'slave girl” (Kirna:k, also called kara:va:ş, kara:ba:ş and) tu:ğe: Hou. 32, 17 (prob. the same word used metaph.). VUD tógl:(d-) Dev. N. fr. (VU) tó:g-, q.v.; *crushed or cleaned cereil'; the first vowel is given as -Ö- in TT VIII in a text in which the spelling is erratic, but all modern forms have ü or the equivalent see Doerfer 11 979 where its forms as a İ.-vv. in Pe. and other languages, are shown. S.i.s.m.]l. in NW and SW fairly consistently with d- even in languages in which this initial is rare. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. töğömin . . . tógOde:n (spelt tóho) TT VIII K.3 (sıka:-), do. VII 14, 8 (üyür), do. 17, etc. (konak): Civ. (VU) tügi 'husked millet” (?) is mentioned twice in a list of deliveries of foodstufis, etc. USp. gi, $ and 24: xiv Chin.—Uyğ. Dict. mi “hulled rice' (Giles 7,802) tügi Lageti p. 270; R IH 1539: Oğuz xı (VU) tüğl: “millet seeds (lubbu'l-duxn) after the husks have been removed” Kaş. 111 229: Kom. XIV 'crushed millet, millet flour' tüvvi/ftü CC7, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv (under zd" folloved by tedte) tüwgü: (?tü:gü:) al-dura, 'maize', also called ü:gre /d. 4o (glossed al-duxnu'l-maggür *husked millet! in one MS.).  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 523 
     
   
   
      TRIS. PU tükü: lap. leg.; onomatopoeic. Xak. xr one says, in calling a puppy (a/-carts) tol: tükü: Kaş. I1I 229. Dis. V. DGEtüke:- "to come to-an end, finish”, and the like. Survives in SE Tar., Türki tüge- [tügü-; SC Uzb. tuga-. Türkü vir ff. (a hymn) tükedi: "is finished” Toy. 1v. 4 (ETY II 177); a.o. İrhB 3 (tü:): Uyğ. vir [long gap] barça: tükep teze: (long gap] “all goming to the end (of their strength) ran away" Su. S a: vr ff, kirü tükeser “if they have finally entered' TT V zə, 35; tuyğuluk bilgülük yol tolmig tükemiş üçün "because the way which they must perceive and know is fulfilled and completed' do. 24, 79; (Sanskrit lost) tüke:miş do. VIII A.11; (I could not prevent him) erkim tükemedi “my authority was insufficient PP 27, 4; (loading the ship) tükegüçe “until (its capacity) was exhausted' do. 34; 3: Civ. tükedi altı otuz (sakis] “number 26 is ended' TT VII zı, $, a.o.o., tüke- “to come to an end” occurs several times in the calendar text TT VIII L.: Xak. xı rg tüke:di: “the task has been completed (fama) and nothing has remained'; and one says bu: aş kamuğka: tüke:di: "the food went 'round (eva yala . . . eva balağa) to everyone"; this is one of the words with two contrary meanings (mina'l-addad) Kaş. III 270 (no Aor. or Infin.; the two contrary meanings are “to come to an end” and “to go round completely without being exhausted”): K.B rr4, etc. (alkin-), 976, . "1047, io50, etc.: xıı(?) At. tükedi sözi “his speech has come to an end” 486, Tef. tükeditto 316: xiv Muh. faná "to come to an end” tü:ke- Mel. 3o, 3 (tüken- Rif. 113). ' *- pis. DGC D tiküç Hap. leg.; crasis of *tikgüg N.I. fr. tik-. Xak. xı tiküç a/-minsağa “a pastry-cook's implement for ornamenting bread and cakes' “Kaş. I 358. Dis. DGD D(F) tégit Plur. in -t of tégi:n, q.v.; the only other word which forms a similar Plur. is tarxan and there is no doubt that both these titles were borrowed fr. some earlier language (see tarxan), and that the Plur. Suff. -t is foreign also. There is, however, no reasonable doubt that its resemblance to the Mong. Plur. Suff. -d is purely fortuitous. The other supposed Plurs. in -t listed in v. G. ATG para. 65 are not Plurs.; sü:t (sü:d) is a basic word, takşut a Dev. N. in -ut and the other words Dev. N.'s in -ğut. Uyğ. vui ff. Man. (in a list of dignitaries) tarxan tégitler élci bilgeler M I 31, ş (ii): Bud. (in a list) tégitler buyruklar U 71/ 42, 24; o.o. Suv. 608, ro, 620, 9: Civ. (in a list of persons, etc., to whom fines are to be paid) oğlan tegitlerke USp. 78, 12; 2.0. IIS, 16-17: Xak. xi tégit Plur. of tégl:n it was originally a word for “slave” (al-'abd) then it was turned (suyyira) into a title (lagab) of the sons of xágàáns (al-xdqdniya), it is an irregular ("a/4 ğayrı”l-qiydş) Plur.; one says DGD , 479 öğe: tégit that is 'senior commoners (al-kibár »una'l-suwaqa) and junior princes'; the two words are used together (muzdatwica(n)); the origin of the name öğe: was in the time of Dü'l-qarnayn, when there was a conflict between his troops and the troops of the Turks before they made peace Kaş. 7 555. — Dis. V. DGD- : D tüket- (tüke:t-) Caus. f. of tüke:-; “to bring to an end, complete', and The like. S.i.a.m.l.g.; see tüketi:, Uyğ. vir ff.” Bud. tüket- seems to be used only as an Aux. V. denoting completed action, e.g. kilu tüketmiş ayığ kılınçlarım “the sins which I have committed” Suv. 139, 3-16; 140, 7; idi tüketmiş “he has sent" Hüen-ts. 75; munda tegü tüketip "having arrived here” do. 96-7; a.o. do. 2071-2: Xak. xı ol işin tüketti: “he has finished ( farağa) his task” Kag. 11 309 (tüke:tü:r (sic) tüketme:k): KB kimig yaşı altmış tüketse sakış 'whoever reaches the age of sixty” 367; a.o. 1051: xin(?) At. tüketür 'umurni bu yazım küzüm “this summer and autumn complete my life” 472: Tef. ditto 317: Çağ. xvff. tüket- zamám hkardan “to 'complete' San. 182r. 13 (quotns.) Xwar. xiv tüket- “tö finish” (e.g. a speech) Qur 189; “oz: Kip. xv if you wish to say “finish the work on which you are engaged' or “eat up the food which is in front of you' you say tüket Kav. 77, 2; tüket- is also entered in the margin of Tuh. 6a. GG spain “ama 'a "to kill” (kir- in text). 'D tiktür- (d-) Caus. of tik- , s.i.s.m.l. with a more restricted range of meanings than tik-. Xak. xı ol to:n tiktürdi: “he ordered the sewing (xzyádta) of the garment, and it was sewn' Kag.. 1] 174 (tiktürür, tiktürme:k): (uv Muh.(?) sahana wa qarra “to dwell or settle in” diktür- Rif. 110; this should prob. be read dik tur-) Çağ. xv ff. tiktür- (spelt) Caus. f.; “to order to sew' (düzàánidan) and "to order to erect' (5a-naşb farmidan) San. 197r. 18: Xwar. xin(?) kirk kulac iğaçnı tiktürdi 'he had a pole forty fathoms high erected" “Oğ. 364: xiv tiktür- ' to have (a tent) pitched” Qutb 179. D töktür- (d-) Caus. f. of tök-, s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı ol su:v töktürdi: "he ordered the pouring out (sabb) of the water' (etc.) Kaş. II 174 (töktürür, töktürme:k): Çağ. xv ff. 'tüktür- Caus. f; "to order.to pour out” (rizánidan) San. 182r. ız. Tris. DGD i D tüketi: Ger. of tüket- used as an Adv., “completely” and the like. Sutvives in some NE languages as tügede R III 1638. Türkü vit I.S 1, I1 N x (ésid-): vii ff. Man. tepri ayğın tüketi ışlayur biz “ve carry out God's commands completely! TT II 6, 5; o.o. do. 8, 55; Chuas. 212 (edfüti:), 257, 285: Bud. alku tüketi bérip 'giving everything completely” PP 28, 3; o.o. U II 21, 19-20, etc. (tüzü:): O. Kir. ix ff. Mal. 11, 3(?) (yılkış), 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 524 
     
   
   
     480 DIS Dis. DGG D tikig Dev. N. fr. tik- ; meaning obscure, but clearly some kind of discomfort, 'itching' or 'pricking'? N.o.a.b., but cf. tikiglig. Uyg. viri ff. Bud. (then the Buddha washed the sick monk; and with the touch of the hair on his soft arm) etózindeki alğrığl? tikigi sönüp "the pain(?) and itching in his body died down (and his illness disappeared) U 7/77 38, 35. PUD tügek (d-) Dev. N. fr. tüg-. Survives in SW Osm, dügek/düvek “a trailing plant". Xak. xr tüğek al-f/aris that is "a wooden ring at the end of a cord with which loads are fastened' Kaş. II 287. D tügük (d-) Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. tüg-; lit. 'knotted'. Pec. to KB? Xak. xi KB bu kaşım tügüki 'this knitting of my brows' 816; sakınçın tüfük 'frowning in deep thought" 1563; tüğük yüz açığ söz “a frowning face and bitter words' 2577. — D tökük (d-) Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. tók-; lit. *poured out”, Survives in SW Rep. "Turkish dökük (and dökük saçık) (of hair, etc.) *hanging loosely over the shoulders'. Uyğ. vitt ff. Bud. aç yeklerke icgeklerke saçığ tókük 'scattered offerings and libations to the hungry demons (Hend.)! TT VI 265-6: Civ. saçığ tökük TT VII əş, 7. Tris. DGG D tikiglig (d-) P.N./A. fr. tikig; survives in SW Osm. dikili 'stitched, sewn'. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. Suv. 585, 13-15 (ağrığlığ): Xak. xr tikiğliğ to: "a sewn (muxayyat) garment Kaş. 1 509. D töküklüğ (d-) P.N./A. fr. tökük, lit. *poured (into a container)'. Xak. xı töküklüğ tarığ "wheat (etc.) which is stored” (magiin) Kaş. I 509. Dis. DGL (7C) tegül (d-) “is not”. The word seems to have been specifically Western, rather than Oğuz in the narrow sense. Kaş.”s etymology looks like a folk one but may be correct, and is supported by the NW Kk., Nog. form tuvil. Also survives in NW Kaz. tügel; Kumyk tüğül, SW Az. deyil, Osm. degil/deyil; Tkm. del. Oğuz xı tegül laysa kadülika “is not so” originally taken from the Arğu: phr. da:&amp; ol with d- changed to t-, -ğ- to -8-, and the two alifs elided Kaş. 1 393; IJI 153 (1 da:&amp;) and four o.o. in Oğuz phr.: xin(?) Tef. degül ditto 117; tegül 294: xiv Muh. if you (wish to) say “it was not” (md kàána) you say yo:k erdi: or deyü:l erdi: meaning mà küna or laysa hüna Mel. ış, 17; Rif. 99: Çağ. xv ff. tügül degü/ Vel. 217 (quotns. fr. Lutfi): Xwar. xii değil ' 4/i 27: xiv degül MN 353: Kom. xiv dewül .CCG; Gr. 83 (quotns.): Kip. xiv degül /aysa İd. ag: xv laysa both degül and tügül; the first is better known (aşhar) and most commonly used Kav. 28, 3: (in a grammatical Section) and the negative is tüyül, you say alası tüyül men 'I will not . DGG take": the "km. say alacak and the negative is degül T7uh. 478. 9; a.0.0.: Osm. xiv ff. c.i.a.p.; until carly xvi spelt degül T'T'S I 188; II 27031; HI 175-6; İV 199: xvii degül (spelt) nist "is not” (quotn. Haydar Telbe), this word is not used in Çağ., but is used by the "Turks of İrin and Rüm San. 224r. 17. D tüke:l Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. tüke:-: “complete, entire', and the Jike. Survives in SC Uzb. tugal. Türkü vırı ff. (three years later they met again) kop esen tüke:l “all safe and sound” /İrAB 15; o.o. (tükel) do. 27, 42: Uyğ. vun ff. Man.-A tükel erdemlig 'completely virtuous” M I ız, 18: Bud. tüke:l bilge: “the all-wise' (Buddha) TT VIII H.s, 6; U II 79, 54; IH 34, 2; 35, 24; esen tükel PP əə, 6; 24, 3 etc.; on ayağ kilinc tükel kildimiz erser “if we have committed all the ten evil deeds” TT IV 8, 75; 8.0. do. VIII B.10 (bişrunul-): Civ. (the three signs of thirst) tüke:l közönür “all appear” TT VII Iş, such phr. as tükel aldım “1 have received in full), and tükel bérdim “1 have paid in full are common in USp.: Xak. xı tüke:l a/-tamám 'completion' ; and one calls “a complete thing" (al-say'u'l-támm) tüke:l; hence one says tüke:l alğıl 'reccive in full” (támma(n)) Kaş. 1 412; 6 o.o. (tükel/tüke:l/tü:ke:1) usually meaning 'completely': KB tükel kil tilek 'fulfil his every wish' 116; (if wisdom is combined with understanding) bolur er tükel *a man becomes complete' 225; tükel bolsa . . ay 'when the moon becomes full” 733; 2.0.0.: Xil(?) At. havvadürlikimni tükel bilsü “may he fully know my love for him” 8o; 2.0. 199 (eğsü:-): Tef. tükel ditto 316: (Çağ. xv ff. tükel tafahhus wa cust-ci 'investigation, diligent search' San. 183r. 6; obviously based on a misunderstanding of some kind, cf. Osm.): Xwar. xii] tükel “all, complete(ly)' “A/ 52: xıv ditto Qutb 189: Kom. 'complete, completion' tükel/tügel CCG; Gr. 259 (quotn.): Kip. xiv. dükel a/-cami" “all” İd. ag: Osm. xiv ff. düğeli “all, the whole'; very common till about xvii. 7TS. 7 238; 11 335; İİİ 220 (occasionally tükeli; the only word der. fr. tüke:- in which d- is at all common): xvttt tüğeli (spelt) in Rrini, cami" wa cumla; also spelt with d- San. 183r. 7; same entry reversed do. 225t. 23. D teğlük (d-) contracted Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. tegil-, q.v.; "blind”, N.o.a.b.; modern languages use for “blind” either the Pe. l.-w. hür (in Turkish kór) or Mong. sokor or a periphrasis. Türkü viri ff. IrkB 24 (emig): Uyğ. viti ff. Man.-A (they curse one another saying) teglük teg “(you are) like a blind man” M I 9, 15: Man. kózsüz teglük 'blind (Hend.)” M 118, 6 (0; a.o. TT İH 89: Chr. teglük M III aş, 3: Bud. tuğa teglük “born blind" U II əş, 14, etc. (tuğ-): Civ. teglük bolur TT VII 33, 11: Xak. xı teglük a/-darir *blind'; hence one says teğlük közlüğ “a blind man” Kaş. 7 477 (misvocalized tüglük): Kom. xiv. 'blind' tówluk CCI; Gr.: Kip. xın al-a'má "blind” (kózsi:z; and one says)  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 525 
     
   
   
       i 'TRIS. tewlük ou. 26, 8: xiv (under tà' with làm) tü:lük a/-a"mü İd. 4; (?misunderstanding of tewlük or tówlük ?). Dis. V. DGLD tegil- (d-) Pass. f. of teg-; properly “to be reached”, but nearly always “to be blinded" (i.e. reached by some sharp object). N.o.a.b. Uy£. viir ff. Man.-A özüt axro:jankaru ağmak tegilmek 'the ascent of souls to the calendar and their absorption in it(?)' M III iz, 13 (i): Man. tegilmis kózler [gap] 'blinded eyes” TT III 71: Bud. (the merchant in the dark fell over a tree and) söğüt butikipa kózi teğip bir közi teğildi "his eye ran into the branch of the tree and one eye was blinded” TT III, p. 28, note 71, 3-4: Xak. xı anın kó:zi: teğildi: "his eye was blinded” (a'twarrat) Kaş. II 130 (tegilür, tegilme:k): xır(?) At. tegillmez muradka akı er teğer “the generous man attains unattainable wishes" 234: Tef. teğil- “to be attained (?)' 293; “to be blinded” 301 (mistranscribed £727/-). D tikil- (d-) Pass. f. of tik-; s.i.m.m.l.g. with the same rather wide range of meanings; in SW Az., Osm,, 'Tkm. dikil-. Xak. xı yığa:ç tikildi: “the tree was planted' (furísat); also used when something is set up vertically (intaşaba qà'ima(n) Kaş. II 130 (tikllür, tikilme:k). D tügül- Pass, f. of tüğ-, “to be knotted, tied'. S.is.m.]l. Xak. xı tügü:n tügüldi: in'agada'l-'ugda “the string got into a knot'; also used when someone has knotted it (Çaqadahd ğayruhu, i.e. “to be knotted'); both Intrans. and Pass. (tügülür, tügülme:k); and one says ag boğazda: tügüldi: “(the man) choked (£ussa) over the food, and it got caught (in'agada) in his throat" Kaş. II 130 (tügülür, tügülme:k repeated): KB tügüldi yüzün *your face (ie. brow) was knitted' 795; tüğülmiş tügün 58:7: Çağ. xv ff. tügül(vvith -&amp;-') girih şudan “to be knotted' Sarr. 18rv. 28 (quotns.). D tökül- (d-) Pass. f. of tök-, "to be poured out” and the like”, S.i.a.m.l.g.; SW Osm., "km. dökül-. Türkü vir T sz (?; see tök-): virt ff. Man. irir kan tökülür “the foul blood pours out” M 7 6, 4-5: a.o. do. 5, 11 (teşil-): Uyğ. viu ff. Bud, U 7 26, 15-16 (üstürti:); USp. 106, 46 (ığla:-), Suv. 566, 3 (ös-): Civ. (if one breaks a vessel) içindeki tatığ tókulgüke [gap] '(it makes] the delicacies in it spill" TT I 199: Xak. xi su:v tóküldi: 'the water was poured out' (uriga); also used of anything composed of individual units (fczd”) which pour out and scatter (tanhál wa tangabb) for example wheat or flour when it is scattered over something; this verb is both Intrans. and Pass. Kaş. II 130 (tökülür, tökülme:k): xim?) At. tilindin töküldi telim er kanı “many men's blood has been shed by the tongue' 142; Tef. tökül- “to be shed, scattered" 309: Caf. xvíff. tökül- rixta şudan "to be poured out” San. 181v. 27 (quotn.): Xwar. R 8641125 RITU ———TU————————— NP  481 b6L xim tó:kü:l-/dókü:l- "to come to an end” * Ali 48 (these look like errors for tükel-, but in view of the spelling must be old ones): xiv tökül- “to be poured, shed' Qutb 184: Kom. xiv “to be poured out” tógül- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv tabaddada 'to be scattered" tókel- (sie, ? in error) Bul. 4or. D tiklin- (d-) Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of tikil-. Xak. xr yığa:ç tiklindi: intaşaba”l-xaşab “the piece of timber (etc.) vvas placed vertically” Kaş. II 244 (tiklinü:r, iiklinme:k). D tüglün- (d-) Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of tügül-. Xak. xı su:v boğazda: tüglündi: “the water got caught (n"aqada) in the throat, and the man choked (şariqa) over it”, and one says yip tüğlündi: “the cord (etc.) got into a knot (in'agada) Kaş. II 244 (tüglünü:r, tüglünme:k). D tóklün- (d-) Refl. f. of tókül-; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Civ. tóklün- “to be poured out” H II 6, 9: Xak. x1 su:v tóklündi: 'the water was poured out” (/rrşaöba wa sukiba) Kaş. 11 244 (tóklünü:r, tóklünme:k). D tegler- unusual Caus. f. in -er- (-ür- might be expected) of tegll-. N.o.a.b. Üyğ. vii ff. Man.-A (they threw stones at Zruşç Burxan. "The stones came back at them and) başlarin [? sıdı közlerin) teglerti '(broke] their heads and blinded [their] eyes” Manm.-uig. Frag. 400, 11-12: Bud. amtı mun: iki köz teglerip sançayın 'now I will pierce both his eyes and blind him' PP 57, 5-6; a.o. 58, 5-6. D tikliş- (d-) Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of tikil-. Xak. xı yığa:ç tiklişdi: “the piece of timber (etc.) was placed vertically (imtasaba) Kaş. 1I 207 (tikligü:r, tikligme:k). D tüglüs- (d-) Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of tügül-. Xak. xi yipla:r tüglüşdi: “the cords (all) got into a knot' (/n'aqada) Kaş. II 207 (tüglüşü:r, tüglügme:k). D töklüş- (d-) Co-op. f. of tókül-. Survives in SE Tar. tökülüş- R III 1243. Xak. xt töklüşdi: ne:p insabbati'l-agyyá wa tasáyalat *the things were (all) poured out and allowed to flow' Kaş. II 207 (töklüşü:r, töklüşme:k, the second vovvel looks more like -e-). Tris. DGL PUD tigiliğ P.N./A. fr. tigi:; 'noisy, resounding. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vı ff, Bud. tigilig yapkuluğ .. .ünin with a resounding echoing voice" TT X 191-2; same phr. do. 318; Suv. 346, 21. D tükellig P.N./A. fr. tükel; “perfect”. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff Man.-A barça edgü kilincka tükelliğ bolalim “may we become perfect in all good deeds! M I 29, 30-1: Bud. bilge biligke tükellig 'perfect in wisdom" U IV 1o, 77-8; kértgüng üze tükellig “perfect in faith' USp. 59, 6: 0.0. TT VI 352; VIII D.37, etc.: Civ. alku ediremke (for  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 526 
     
   
   
     482 erdemke) tükelliğ “perfect in all virtucs" TT VII ıy, 21. VU tügültü:n Hap. leg.; various attempts have been made to find an etymology and meaning for this word, but it scems likelier that it is merely a geog. name. Türkü vri IS6,H N s (çoğay). Tris. V. DGLPUD tigl:le:- Den. V. fr. tigi:; n.o.a.b. Uyf. vin ff. Civ. yel üze yel tigilep 'wind upon wind blew howling' TT I 15-16: Xak. xı tigi:le:di: ne:p "the thing buzzed and rüstled' (dawteá wa haffa) Kaş. III 5 (tigi:le:r, tiği:le:me:k). D tikü:le:- Hap. leg.; Den, V. fr. tikü:, Xak. xı ol mana: et tikü:le:di: “he offered me (náwalani) a piece (lt«qma) of meat' (etc.); and one says ol begke: ne: tikü:le:di: “he bribed (raşü) the beg with something'; taken from the first (meaning) Kaş.. 1I] 326 (tlkü:le:r, tikü:le:me:k). PUD tigileş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of tigi:le:-. Uy£. vin ff. Civ. TT I 74 (çaşut). Dis. DGM D teğim (d-) N.S.A. fr. teg-; “entitlement, what is due”, or the like. N.o.a.b., but see tegimlig. Uyğ. vii ff. Civ. (in a short note instructing one person to give another) alti otuzka tegim kezik aşka bir kap born: “one skin of wine for rations due up to the 26th" (of the current month) U. Sp. 75, 2-3; (I have received ten sifizrs in coin) onunc ay. on yapika teğimçe bérürmen “1 will repay it duly on the roth of the 10th mon do. 113, 4-5. D tikim (d-) N.S.A. fr. tik-; survives in SW Osm. dikim ' an act of sowing or planting”. Xak. xı “a piece of stuffed meat. ball” (al-bidda mina'l-zumáward) is called. bi:r. tikim türme:k Kaş. J 396. D teğme: (d-) Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. teg-; "every, any”, and the like; the semantic connec-. tion with teg- is obscure. Survives with the same meaning in SW Osm. degme/deyme. Not to be confused with té&amp;me: Participle in - ğme: fr. té:- used in such phr. as sidi teğme işiğ küdügüg 'undertakings called siddhi' U I 34. 17. Xak. xr teme: a word (Aalima) meaning every (Rull ahad) Kaş. I 433 (prov.); and 9 o.o.: KB kişike kerek teğme yerde bilis ca man needs acquaintances in every country” 497; teğme künde “every day” 967: xın(?) KBPP teğme biri "every onc of them” 18; Tef. teğme ditto 293: xiv Röğ. teğme yörde R III 1040: Xwar. xit té&amp;rne ditto "Ali sə, xtv ditto Qurb 177) tegme MN 250; Nahc. 250, ro: Kom. xiv “every” teğme CCT; Gr.: Kip. xiv teyme ull İd. 41; (Tkm.) küll degme: (and har) Bul. 16, 1; değme: kull, one says degme: kişi: “everybody”, and. in Kip. teyme kişi:: Teyme meaning Aul] and TRIS.  bGL this değme: occur in the same way that kull occurs in Ar., the following word being annexed to it (yudàf flayhá); also (the phr.) teyme bir anca: meaning 'some', with opposition. (xi/áf) between the annexer and the annexed in this language; blr means 'one' and anca: "like ic "Hoe but the whole phrase means “some” fd. 49 (obscure, but this seems to be the meaning): xv ku/lanığ "every time, whenever! teyme:, for example "every time (Rullamü, teyme:) that you write a page, I will give you a dirham' ; and teyme: is used for kull connoting repetition (al-takrár); one says “Tİ will give you a diram every month” (teyme: ayda:) Kav. zı, 21; kull teyme (?sic, MS. time, Ykm. har) Tuh: 31a. 10 (in margin in SVV(?) hand degme): Osm. xiv ff. değme *every'; c.i.a.p. TT.S 1 186; II 267; III 174; IV 198. D tikme: (d-) Pass. Des. NJA. fr. tik-; 'sewn', etc, Survives in SW Osm. as dikme 'sewn'; a L-w. in Pe., see Doerfer 1l 914. Xak. xı tikme: ne:p 'something. sewn' (nuxayyat) Kaş. I1 433: Kom. xiv tlkme 'sewn together! CCT; “a post, pilla! CCG; Gr, D tügme: (d-) Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. tüğ-, properly “knotted”, the ordinary meaning "button" prob. originally referred to a cord knotted and re-knotted at the end to form a button of a type stili common in China, S.is.m.l. meaning “button”, in SW Az. düyme, Osm. dügme/ düyme, 'Tkm. dügme/düvme. See : Doerfer III 1187. Xak. x1 tüğme: “a button” (zirr) on a shirt; also the buttons of tunics and cloaks Kaş. I 433: xiv Muh. al-zirr tü:ğme: (-8marked) Mel. 67, 1; Rif. 166; (under, 'buildings' ; al-taléla “ala taláta axşöb (Rif. xagabát) *a ruined building standing on three timbers' (i.e. with the fourth gone?) (VU) tügme: 76, 13; 180; perhaps to be transcribed töğme: and derived fr. tü:g-): Çağ. xv ff. tügme (spelt) “silk buttons” (dánahá-yt förişim) which they sew on gnrments instead of tapes " .”. derived fr. tüğ- “to knot' Sarr. 1837. 12 (quotn.): Kom. xiv “vvily, intriguing" tökme (?sic; if so a different word, but hard to connect semantically with. tük- -) CCI; Gr.; "button” tüwme dritto: Kip. xit al-zirr tügme:, which also mieans al-raculu'l-'ayvár "an intriguer' Hou. 1:6, 3? al-'ayyüár (PU) tügme: do. 25, 8: xiv (under tà" followed by mim) tü:me: (?read tüwme:) a/-zirr İd. 40; (Tkm.) düğme: al-zirr; (PU) dügme: al-katiru'l-hila "very vvily” dol 49:^xv al-zirr. tüyme; Tkm. dügme Tu. 18a. $078 0603 ” Tris. DGM D tepimlig P.N./A.. fr. tegim, *worthy, deserving', and the like; usually preceded by Noun in Dat. or Verb in Ger. in -ğalı/- geli: "worthy “of, or to be”, N.o.a.b, UyB. viri ff. Man. tekimligce (sic) islerig igletipiz “you. have done your work worthily' TT 7/7 72; "Tokharian (a jewel) *worthy to be worn on. the crown of the head” tóz töpüte tutkali tekim-' lig (sic) do. LX. 16; a.o. do. 26: Bud. aya&amp;Ka.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 527 
     
   
   
         teg&amp;lmlig “vorthy of respect', a very common: stock epithet of gods, Buddhas and holy men U I 28, 12; II 32, 64; 77, 18; T'T IV 10, 29; VIII A.29; X 83, 108, etc.; [gap] kórgeli teğimliğ bolt "has become worthy to see (or be seen by?) U III 17, 13; a.o. U IV 46, 57-8 (ata:-): Civ, ayağka tegimlig “vener-. able', perhaps here a Noun 'monk' follows P.N.s in USp. 15, 8; 61, 4; 84, 3; 88, 6: Xak. xı KB silig bolsa kutka teğimliğ bolur “if he becomes pure, he deserves the favour of heaven' 2446. D tegimsiz Priv. N./A. fr. teğim, 'unworthy (of)'. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vırı ff. Chr. biz tapinguka tegimsiz ermiş biz "vee were unworthy of respect” U I 9, 1: Bud. U IV 46, 64-5. (ata:-): Xak. xı KB tegimsiz tapuğ birle törke tegir "an unworthy man by rendering service attains a place of honour' 614; teglmsiz kişi 2516, 4074. Tris. V. DGMD tügmelen- (d-) Refl. Den. V. fr. tügte:;' “to: button”. "The basic form tüğmele- is noted in Kip. and survives with the same. meaning in SW Az. düymele-; Osm. düg-. mele-/düymele- and with a slightly different" meaning in Tkm. düvmele-, with this Refl.' f. as the Pass. Xak. xı er tügmelendi: “the man fastened the buttons (şadda . . . azrár) of his shirt Kaş, III 202 (tüğmelenü:r, tüğmelenme:k). i ; Dis. DGN (F) tégin (or ? tégi:n) a very old title, like tarxan, q.v., inherited fr. some earlier non-. "Turkish language, as shown by the fact that it had the non- Turkish Pl. f. tégit, q.v. In the Türkü period it meant 'prince' in the limited . specific sense of 'a son, or grandson, of a ruling xagan'; after that period it was used in a much less restricted sense as a title of; honour of diminishing importance, but did: not survive the Mongolian invasion. Its history : is discussed at great length in Doerfer 11 922 (which contains some errors) and more briefly: in Bosworth and Clauson, 'al-X wárazmi on the Peoples of Central Asia”, RAS, 1965, p. 7. İt is noteworthy that both Kaş. and Sar. give wholly erroneous &amp;ccounts of its origin, ” "Türkü vırı the prince commemorated in İ was; Kül Tegin, younger son of Elteriş Xağan , both 7 and İT were drafted by Yolluğ Tegin,” the atı: ('grandson or nephevr”) of Bilge: Xağan (see 7 S 13; SW; II SW) who was: himself a tégin (see 7 E 17, 71 E 14) when his” uncle succeeded his father as xafan; four: tégins attended the funeral of Küli Cor Ix.: 24: Uyğ. viii Ozmiş Tegin xan bolmig: “Ozmiş Tegin became xan” Su. N 9 (N.B. the: last Türkü xağan): viu ff. Man. M İİİ 14, 3 (iii) (1614-): Bud. the two royal princes in PP” were called Edgü ögli tégin and Ayığ ógli* tégin; Teyriken Kutluğ Bars Tégin P.N.” (prob. not a royal prince) TT IV, p. 2o, note” B69, 3: O. Kir. ix ff. er atınü Yaruk Tegin' DIS. DGN    483 “my adult name was Yaruk Tegin" Mal. rş, i (not a royal prince): Xak. xı tégkn in its original meaning (fi aşlı"l-luğa) “a slave' (al-'abd); hence one says kümüş tegi:n "a slave of faultless colouring like silver', alp tegi:n "a robust (calad) slave' and kutluğ tégi:n "a blessed (mubdrah) slave'. "Then this noun was made an exclusive appellation (sima mahda) for the sons of the Xaqans and is combined with the names of birds of prey, e.g. Çağrı: tegi:n, that is “a prince (tégi:n) with the strength of a falcon' (al-bázi); küç tegi:n “strong prince. This name was transferred from slaves (al-masváli) to the sons of Afrásiyab because they respected their fathers and whenever :hey addressed or wrote to thení they” said or wrote “your slave has done so-and-so” depreciating themselves and exalting their fathers. After that they were known specially by this name; but the word remained as the name of a slave when it was combined with something which as clearly distinguished from them (ie. princely names) Kaş. I 413; o.o. I 355 (tégit); 357 (begec); III 368 (topà:): (KB kayus1 tégin beg, 4068, is an erroneous conjecture by rat; the MSS. indicate rather kayusı kül erkin): xiv Mub. (?) (in a list of titles) zin abnàá'i'l-umará “an amir's son” tegi:n (mis-spelt öegi:n) Rif. 145 (only): Çağ. xv ff. tegin in the (Pe.?) Oğuz Nama in introducing the account of Buğra Xan it is said that he had three sons named El Tegin, Kuzi Tégin, and Sübük Tegin;' and the meaning of tegin in the language of the Turks is 'good-looking' (mika gürat) San, 158r. 9: Kip. xut (in the list of names of slaves) aydegi:n amir qamar 'ruler of the moon”, tva huma luğa Hou. 29, 18. : S tegip See teyin. D tiken (d-) crasis of *tikge:n Dev. N./A. fr. tik-, 'thorn'. S.i.a.m.l.g.; in SW Osm. diken, but Az. Tkm. tiken; see Doerfer 1l 915. A Dim. f. tikenek, is first noted in Kip. xii and also s.i.s.m.l. with the same or a slightly different meaning. Uyğ. vim ff. Bud. (there is an iron tree a mile high) alti yégirmi erpek uzuni temirlig tikenleri ol 'it has iron thorns sixteen fingers (i.e. inches) long” TM IV 253, 65-6: Civ. H 11 6, s: Xak. xı tiken “a thorn' (al-sa:wk), it is so pronounced only as an abbreviation (a/-xü7a): by rule (al-qivás) it should be pronounced tikken with -kk-; this noun is derived from tikdi: ğaraza ar” cazzaza aw naxasa “to prick or pierce” something; the (first) -k- is basic, and the second is added to make it an Adj. (sifa) (other examples of the same construction follow, tevdi: tevğe:n, çömdi: — çömğe:n, Sikti: — sikke:n) Kaş: 7 4oo, III 44 (yan-” dak) and 4 o.o. all spelt tike:n: KB tiken ol ukuşluğka dunyü tolu “o a man of understanding this vvörld is full of thorns' 6383, a.o. 3846 (çikne:-): xın(?) Tef. tiken. "thorn” 3or: 4t. 376 (edle:-): Çağ. xvff.: tiken xár 'thorn', in Ar. gat&amp;k San. 198r. 23 (qusth.): Xwar. xiv ditto MN 7, etc.; (tiken-. siz *thornless! Qutb 178): Kom. xiv 'thorri     
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 528 
     
   
   
     484 tigenek CCG, Gr.: Kip. xii al-şarok tike:nek, Tkm. tike:n How. 9, r: xiv tikenek al-şaroh İd. 39; (Tkm.) diken ditto 49: xv al-jatek tikenek (mis-spelt feRenek) Kav. 59, 9; şatok tikenek Tu. 21a. 3 (also without the final -ek' in the margin). VUD tógü:n (?dógO:n) “a brand”, presumably Dev. N. fr. tó:&amp;- although the semantic connection is obscure. Survives only (?) in SW Osm. dógün 'tattoo mark' Red. 926 (only ?). See 2 da:ğ, töğne:-, tógünlig. Xak. xı tógü:n a/-wasm toa'l-kayy "a mark (of ownership), brand” Kaş. I 414; xiu(?) Tef. tógün 'brand' 318 (tükün): Çağ. xv ff. tógen (sic, “vith -8-”) dağ “brand” Vel. 216 (quotn.); ditto San. 183r. 7 (quotn.). D tüğün (d-) Dev. N. fr. tüg-; “a knot'. S.i.a.m.l.g. w. some phonetic changes; in SW Az. düyün; Osm. dügün/düyün ('marriage, or circumcision, feast', see Kip. below; “knot” is dügüm/düyüm); Tkm. dügin/düvün. See Doerfer 11 978. Üyğ. viuit ff. Bud. amranmaklığ bağ tüğünin 'with the bonds (Hend.) of love” U III 835, 1: Xak. xı tügün ai-'ugda "a knot' Kaş. 1 400; III 270 (bekü:-), and about 30 o.o., all except one spelt tüğü:n: KB yazıldı tügün “the knot was untied' 150; 0.0. (mainly with yaz- or yazil-) 172, 283 (berk) 1:084, 1856, 4029, etc.: Çağ. xv ff. tügün ('with -ğ-”) gírih 'knot' Vel. 216; tügün (spelt) girih wa 'ugda San. 183r. 11 (quotn.), düğün (1) girih; (2) sür wa 'arüsi “a wedding feast! do. 225r. 26: Xwar. xiv tügün 'a knot' Qutb 189: Kip. xiv dügün al-uqda; (after düğ-) hence cam'ul-'urs "a wedding party” is called düğün, that is in"aqada”l-cami" "there was a contract of marriage'; hence Sancar dügünindeyidük "ve were at Sancar”s wedding! İd. 49: xv “a knot ('ugda) in a cord or the like (bavv and) tüyün Tuh. 258. 3. PU tekne: “a trough'; perhaps an early 1.-vv. Survives in (SE “Türki teple/tepne?); NC Kzx. tegene; SC Uzb. tegana; SW Az., Osm. tekne, Xak. xi tekne: a/-nagir "a trough” Kaş. 1 434: xiv Müh.(?) al-taşt “basin” (PU) tekne: (unvocalized) Rif. 170 (only: Kom. xiv “basin, water trough' te&amp;ene CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiv tekene: (sic) al-nagir İd. 39: xv dasqári (sic, corrupt Pe.) "basin” tekene Tu. 15b. 8: Osm. xvii tekne: (spelt) in Rmi, “a large round vessel carved out of wood in which they wash things and knead dough'; and metaph. “a small round boat used to cross a piece of water! San. 158r. 5. D teginç Dev. N. fr. teğin-, etymologically this should mean 'reaching, attainment', but the meaning in Uy£. is obscure, and in Tef. the word is syn. w. tegi: and looks like an abbreviation of the Equative form in -çe of tegin (tegi:). Cf. teğinçsiz. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. Sanskrit ksanasamripátam "whose meeting lasts (only) a moment” teginçnin yığılma:kın TT VIII D.16: (Xak.) xiu(?) Tef. bis. DGN eğnidin eline teginç "from his shoulder to his hand” (is seventy cubits) 293. Dis. V. DGND tegin- (d-) Refl. f. of teğ- , with a curiously wide range of meanings; (1) (occasionally) 'to reach, attain (something Dat.)' very occasionally without an Indirect Obj.; (2) teginmek was the word chosen to translate the Buddhist technical term vedanmd 'sensation, perception (of external objects); (3) most commonly it is used as a self-depreciatory Aux. V. following a Ger. in -u:/-ü: "to venture (to do something)' in direct antithesis to the Honorific Aux. V. yarlıka:- “to deign (to do something)”. Survives in NE Koib., Sag. teğin- (of a sword or lance) “to penetrate" R III 1034. Uyğ. vui ff. Man. okiyu tegindim “1 have ventured to recite” M I 29, ış, ötünü tekinürmen (sic) “I venture to ask” TT IX s4; olo, do. 5, 44; TT III 175: Chr. bitiyü teginelim Zaxarıya dindarnip ölüm teginmisi “ve shall venture to recite how the high priest Zacharias met his death' U I 9, 9-11: Bud. (may we be saved from this sinful body and) kurtulmak yolka teginelim 'attain the way of salvation” PP sz, 1-2; anın bizip yertinçü közetçi tép atımız teginür “this is how we have come by our title of "world guardians" ” (Sanskrit lokapála) Suv. 401, 9-10: teğinmek translating vedaná TT V 24, 66 ff. (alın-), U II 6, 14ft.; yağışlığ tapığımıznı teğinip 'noticing our service of sacrifice! Suv. 29, 8-9 (possibly an error for tegürüp “offering”): a.o.(?) U III 4, 1 (ii) (damaged; sinir), taplayu tegindim “I have ventured to be satisfied' (to keep your commandments) U III 36, 2; and many o.o.: Civ. USp. 15, 17 (elig): Cigll xi when a king or amir in Çigil is notified of the arrival of someone one says to him ol tegindi: that is “he has arrived' (/iadara) meaning “he is glad to have arrived” (taballaga br'l-wugil); similarly when he has gone one says to him tegindi:; the Oğuz dislike (fubgid) this word Kaş. II 143 (teginü:r, teğinme:k, presumably the Oğuz disliked the self-depreciatory connotation): Kap. xır tamaşşala "to reach” degin- Hou. 39, 3 desinD tüken- Refl. f. of tüke:-; 'to come to an end, be exhausted', and the like. Prob. only fortuitously first noted in xi1(?). Survives in NC Kir. tügön-, SW Osm., "Fkm. tüken-. (Xak.) xııı(?) Tef. tavarsızka bilgi tükenmez tavar “to the poor man his knowledge is inexhaustable wealth' 127; Tef. tüken- (of food) “to be exhausted' 316 (tiigen-): xiv Muh. Janá tü:ke:n- Rif. 113 (Mel. tü:ke-, q.v.): Çağ. xv ff. tüken- tamám şudan "to come to an end” San. r82v. 2 (quotns.): Xwar. xiu düken- ditto 'A/i 56; xiv tüken- ditto Quib 189; MN 439: Kom. xiv ditto tügen- CCG; Gr. 259 (quotns.): Kip. xiv tüken- farağa "to come to an end, be idle' /d. 39: (Tkm.) düken- ditto do. 49; farafa tüken- Bul. 69v.: xv ditto Kav. 9, 22; 77, 2; Tuh. 28b. r, tamma "to come to an end” tüken- do. ga, s, naqida  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 529 
     
   
   
       DIS. V. DGR (to -be broken, abraded') tea faraja ditto 37b. 1. D tüğün- (d-) Refl. f. of tüg-; n.o.a.b.? Xak. xr ol tügü:n tügündl: 'he concentrated on tying a knot' (bi-'agdi'L-'ugda); also used for pretending to tic Kaş. II 143 (tügünü:r, tügünme:k). D tókün- (d-) Rcfl. f. of tók-. Survives in SW Osm., "Tkm. dókün- “to pour (e.g. water) over oneself”. Uyğ. vı fi, Civ. tümen sav töküni séni de (sic, ?for sende) bolt: *innumerable words came pouring out in your favour(?) TT I 126-7. VUD töğne:- (d-) Den. V. fr. töğü:n, “to brand, cauterize'. Perhaps survives in SW 'Tkm. dóvne-, but with quite different meanings. Uyğ. vun ff. Civ. TT VII 21 is a text regarding the effects of bleeding, cauterizing and making incisions on various days of the month; töğneser “if one cauterizes (the patient)' 2, 14 (see also 2 ba:ş, kana:-): Xak. xı ol ba:şın tógne:di: kamod qarhatahu bi'l-nár "he cauterized his wound' Kag. III şor (töğne:r, tógne:me:k): xiv Muh.(?) dawwaga (hybrid Pe.-Ar. word fr. dağ) "to brand" tó:gne:- Rif. 109 (only). Tris. DGN D teginçsiz Priv. N./A. fr. teğinç, 'inaccessible" or the like. Uyğ. virff. Bud. (if ] have committed grievous sins) tamu pret yılkı ajuninda asurilar yerinde ulatı sekiz tórlüg teğinçsiz orunlarka éltdeci “vhich carrv me to the eight kinds of inaccessible( ?) places, rebirth in hell, or as a harmful ghost (Sanskrit l.-w.) or animal or in the country of the demons” Sus. 138, 8-10; a.0.0. D tikenek Sec tiken. D tügü:nük (d-) 'the smoke hole in the top of a tent”, apparently Dim. f. of tügün, Syn. vv, tünlük, q.v.; both words seem to survive, but oniy NE Alt., Leb., Tel. tü:nük, NC Kzx. tünük R //1 1553 seem to go back.to this word. Türkü vii ff. (in a para, relating to various parts of a tent) tügü:nüki: ne: teg *what is its smoke-hole like?” IrkB 18: Kip. xiv düğnük (so vocalized) qubbatu'l-xargàh “the dome of a tent” fd. 49. VUD tógünlüg Hap. leg.; this word is more likely to be a P.N./À. fr. tógü:n than one fr. tügün which would be hard to translate in this context. Türkü vırı (I sent out distant patrols; I erected the watch-tower at Arkuy(?); I reported the approach of the enemy; I persuaded my xağan to take the field; by the favour of heaven, among this Türkü people I did not allow enemy in armour to gallop about) töğünliğ atığ yügürtmedim “1 did not let the branded horses run wild' T 54. Dis. DGR D tegi:r (d-) Aor. of teg- used as a Dev. N.; in Uyğ. “share” i.e. that which comes to some485 one; later “value, price”. Survives in SW Osm. deger “value, price”, and the like. Uyğ. vtt ff. Civ. USp. 55, 26 (ana:): Xak. xı Kaş. 1I 82 (bokur-); n.m.e.: Kip. xiv al-qiyma "price" degir (mistranscribed diger) Bul. 6, 2. tigir Hap. leg. but see tiğre:- ; onomatopoeic for a clattering noise. Xak. xı Kaş. / 361 (takir). D teğre: (d-) Dev. N.(?) fr. *tegir-; used both as an Adv. (and Postposn.) meaning '(all) around' and the like, and as a N. meaning *surroundings'. Survives in both meanings in SC Uzb. teğra. See tegrek. Türkü vin T 8 (uguk): vii ff: Man. (the sun and moon gods) teğre (so 1.ad) toli teğzinür 'revolve round and round” Chuas. 10-11: Uyğ. vin [long gap] teğresi: eli: "his surroundings(?) and his realm” Su. N 2: vir ff. Bud. (all the people in the town came together and) tegre toli tururlar erdiler “vere standing round him" PP 71, 4; tepri Burxan tegresinde [gap] yügürür [erdi?] 'he ran round and round the holy Buddha” TT X 349-50; o.o. do. 337(?); TM IV 252, 35: Civ. etózüp tegre ada bar *there is danger round about your body' TT I 60; (if a man) etözün tegre körser 'consults an oracle about your body” do. 219; in TT VH əş, 6 ff. the same phr. is spelt teBere körser: Xak. xı teğre: Aawlu'-say' ta hitáruhu 'the surroundings or rim of something”, one says kuduğ tegresi: (sic) "the rim of a well (etc.) Kaş. 7 421; 1 310 (ava:la:-); six o.o. as Adv. or Postposn.: xin(?) Tef. değre “the fence' (round a garden) 117; teğre 'surroundings, around” 294: Çağ. xv ff. töğre (with -&amp;-' dà'ira ve afráf 'surroundings, around” Vel. 19: (quotns.); San. 198r. 25 (quotns., but dawra ?in error): Xwar. xu teğre “the rim” (of a well) “Ali 48: xiv tégre “around” Quitb 177-8; bu madina tegresinde “round this city” Nahc. 27, 17: Kom. xiv “surroundings” teyre CCT, Gr. D teğrek (d-) Dim.(?) f. of teğre: and syn. vv. it. S.i.s.m.l. with some phonetic changes, e.g. NE Alt, Tel. teğerek R 777 1031; NC Kir. teğerek, Kzx. tógerek/tóperek; NW Nog. tógerek. See tegrikle:-. Xak. xı teğrek "the rim (Ritar) of anything'; hence one says kuduğ teğreki: “the rim of a well' Kaş. I477: Kip. xv halqa “ring, circle” tegrek Tuh. 13a. 3: (mudasınvar “circular” tógerik 34b. 10). Dis. V. DGR *tegir- (d-) See teğre:, tegirme:, etc. D tegür- (d-) Caus. f. of teğ- , lit. "to cause to reach”, but usually “to deliver or convey (something cc.) to (someone Dat.)'. Survives in SE Türki teğür- Shaw 86, SW Tkm. degir-, but in most other languages the Caus. f., not always with the same meaning, usually assumes other forms, eg. SE Türki tégdür-/tégüzjarring 305; SC Uzb. tegiz-; SW Osm. degdir-. Türkü viu (I mobilized an army and) şantun yazika: taluy ógü:zke: tegü:rtim 'took them to the plain of Shantung 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 530 
     
   
   
     486 and the sca' T 18-19; 0.0. do. 26, 47: vi ff. óglpe: kapi:pa: teğü:rmi:ş “it brought him to his father and mother" IrkB 35: Uy. vini ff. Man.-A yaruk tepri yéripe tegürdecl 'conveving them to the country of the god of light” M 1 26, 17-18: Chr. ked kópül tegürüp *concentrating your minds' U I 6, r: Bud. yapalar beğine kın kızğut teğüreyin *[ will inflict tortures (llend.) on the lord of the elephants! U [II 20, r (ii); taluy öğüzke kıdığına tegürdi “he conveyed him to the sea shore” PP 52, 4-5; o.o. U II 15, 8-13; TT V, p. 16, note As4, 6 (alin), etc.: Civ. H I 178 (salkim): Xak. xi ol mapa: begdin sö:z teğürdi: “he brought me (ballagani) a message from the beg! (or someone else) Kaş. II 84 (tegürür, teğürme:k), and several o.o.: KB teğürgil “convey” (my greetings to all his four Companions) 31; kilicka tegürgil sen ötrü elig “then put your hand to your sword' 222; 0.0. 61, 78r, 1781, 4462 (te:r), 5864 (yoga:&amp;eu): xu(?) KBVP bu xaşş höcib atın teğürmiş muna “he bestowed on him this title of Privy Counsellor” 62: xın(?) At. 331 (1 emgek); Tef. tegür-/ teğdür- “to bring, bestow' 292-4 (tegrü- is a crasis of teğürü u-): xiv Rb. teğür- “to bestow' R. HI 1038 (quotn.): 47uh.(?) aşdba "to attain' degür- Rif. 103 (Mel. 22, 14 deg-)) awsala "to bring. deliver! teğür- 132 (only): Çağ. xv ff. tegür- (spelt) Caus. £., rasdnidan "to convey, deliver! Sar. 197r. ro (quotns.): Xwar. xır teğür- “to stretch out (the hand) “Ali 48: xiv teğür-/tegür- “to offer, present" Qutb 174-7; MN 130, etc. “to bring” Nahc. 81, 2: Kom. xiv “to deliver, grant', etc. teyir- CCG; Gr. 239 (quotns.): Osm. xiv ff. degür- (rarely degir-) "to convey, deliver", etc.; common till xv, sporadic till xvii TTS I 185; 11 267, HI 173; IV 197. D tiğre:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. tigir; see tiğret-. Xak. xr at ada:kı: tigre:di: "the horse's hooves clattered” (dazofya), and one says oğlan tiğre:di: "the boy toddled” (tada"da"a, not fara"ra"a as in printed text) Kaş. III 280 (tigre:r, tiğre:me:k). D tegürt- (d-) Caus. f. of tegür-; n.o.a.b.; the word in San. 4v. 16-17 which might be read tégürt- is in fact yétkürt-. UyB. vrır ff. Bud. (if you would let me have a list of the scriptures that you want) tegürtü ótünelim “ve shall venture to have them sent to you” Hüen-ts. 185o-1; Civ. neğü yeme ış küç teğürtmeğü üze “vithout being required to perform any services” USp. 88, 8-9. " D tiğret- Caus. f. of tigre:-; n.o.a.b. The "Türkü spelling proves the -&amp;-. Türkü vir ff. (knot the bay horse's tail and) tiğret “make it break vind” J[rkB şo: Xak. xı ol atin tlgretti: *he made his horse break wind on the move' ('ala'l-hafif fi'l-cary); and one says ol ogulni: tiğretti:, alternative form of tığrattı: (/uda fi'l-ayn) Kaş. II 330 (tigretü:r, tigretme:k; if Kaş. is right this would mean "he made the boy tough', but it seems likelier that it meant “he made the boy toddle"). DIS. V. DGR D tigres- lap. leg.; Co-op. f. of tipre:-. Xak. xi atla:r ada:kı: tiğreşdi: "the horses' hooves clattered (together); and one says oğla:n tiğreşdi: "the boys toddled (together) (tada'da'at, not tara'ra'at as in printed text) Kaş. II 209 (tiğreşü:r, tiğreşme:k). "Tris. DGR PUD tigirtsiz Lap. leg.?; this and the following word seem to be mis-spelt and both present morphological difficulties; they are, perhaps, Priv. N./A.s fr. Dev. N.s fr. tigre:and tepre:- respectively, but even so are hard to interpret. Uyğ. viui ff. Bud, incip tigirtsiz (?tiğretsiz) tepirtsiz (?tepretsiz) alku tigl çoğı 1rak ópt üdrülmis 'thus all sounds (Hend.) (even) those which are not noisy and stirring(?) are distant and far removed” Stt. 166, 5-7. D tegreki: (d-) N./A.S. fr. tegre:; “in the neighbourhood of' and the like. Pec. to Uyg. Uyğ. vit ff. Bud. ol tegreki yer orun “places (Hend.) in that vicinity! USp. 103, 22; o.o. U II əə, 2 (tapığçı:), do. 25, 21-2; TT X şı-z (bodun). D tegirme:/teğirmi: (d-) “round, circular'; Dev. N./A.s in -me: and -mi: fr. *tegir-. "The spelling with -mi: is pec. to Uyğ. and seems to be sufficiently common to exclude the possibility of mistranscription, it survives in SW Az. deyirmi, Osm. değirmi, but there does not seem to be any other trace of such a suffix. Uy£. viri ff. Bud. (a golden drum) kün tepri tilğeni teg tegirmi "round like the disk of the sun” Suo, 92, 18; a.o. do. 490, 21: Civ. (if a mouse) teğirmi ısırsar *bites a round hole' (in a garment) TT VII 36, 3; a.o. do. I 57-8 (esrük): Xak. xı tegirme: ne: 'anything circular! (mudatowar) like a loaf, mill-stone, or coin! Kaş. I 490: Oğuz xı the Oğuz when they wish to stress the circular character of something say tes tegirme: Kaş. 7 328: Kom. xiv "circular! teğirme CCT, Gr.: Kip. xiv. teyirme: yüzli: “round-faced” İd. 41; xv Tuh. 34b. ro (see te&amp;rek;in marginin SW(?) hand) değirmi. VUD tegirmek (d-) Hap. ley; if correctly spelt Dev. N. fr. *tegir-, but the semantic connection is tenuous and a Den. V. fr. tegürmeaning “a conveyance” is possible. Xak. xı teğirmek a/-hawdac "a camel İitter”, the Oğuz call.it üğürmek Kaş. I so6. D tegirme:n (d-) Dev. N. fr. *tegir-; "a rotary mill” for grinding corn. S.i.a.m.l.g., in some much abbreviated e.g. NE te:rmen/ te:rben: Tub. de:rbe, NW Kumyk tirmen; Nog. termen; with initial d- in NW Kk. digirman; SW Az. deyirman, Osm., Tkm. degirmen. Uyğ. vur ff. Bud. (in a list of household equipment; kitchen, guests' quarters, large and small doors, well, fireplace) sokğu tegirmen “a mortar, a (hand) mill” TT VI 86 (two separate objects, not a Hend. as in the translation): Xak. xı tegirme:n is a generic term for “a mill” (a/-öhün) Kaş. IIT 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 531 
     
   
   
         DIS.. V. DGŞ- ; 487 266 (tlge:-); n.m.e.t (xiv "Mu. -al-rahütet 'mille' değirmençi: Mel. 57, o, tegirmemçi: Rif. 155): Çağ. xv ff. tégirmen dsiya “mill” San. 198v. 2 (quotn.): Xwar. Xiv tegirmen/tégirmen “mil” Qutb 174—7: Kom. xıv “mill” teğirmen CCI, Gr. 238 (quotn.): Kip. xni al-táhün teyirmen Hou. 6, 9: xiv ditto İd. qı: xv fühün teyirmen, Tkm. degirmen Tuh. 23b. 12. Tris. V. DGRVUD tegrikle:- so transcribed, but apparently a Den. V. fr. tegrek; there may, however, have been a Dev, N. *tefrik fr. *tegir-; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff, Bud. süsin teğresinde teğriklep 'assembling his army around him” TT X 337; İgapl keyiklerin teğriklep k€sari arslan turmış tef e the lion Kesarin Founding up the deer of .. U IV 18,215. -D tegirmile:- (d-) Den. v. fr. tegirmi:, péc.. to Uyğ. but the der. f.s degirmilet-, değirmilen- survive in SW Osm. Uyğ. vt ff. Bud. (the demons) teğirmileyü avlap 'cerowding round him” U IV 8, zo (I 41, 4); 18, 192; 20, 232; 36, 89-90; etözünüz yarukı teğirmileyü yaruttı ondin sınar yer suviğ “the light of your bödy illuminated the country all round in all ten directions' So. 348, 7-8; Civ. tegirmileyüki yağın telim bolti “the enemies surrounding you have become numerous! TT 1 58. : Dis. DGS D tügsi:n Dev. N. ultimately der. fr. tüg- ; there is no other known occurrence of a Suff.: -Ssin; the word may be a Dev. N. fr. the Simulative f. *tügsi:-. İn its second meaning it may be the same'word used metaph., but is more likely to bea Chinese l.-w. or an old title like tégi:n inherited fr. some earlier language. N.o.a.b., but see Doerfer II 912; his conjecture that the word also occurs in KB 4066 (possibly spurious) is improbable. Xak. xr tüğsi:n "a kind of knot" (mina' F"uqad) tied with four 'components (ad/A', lit. 'ribs") (verse): tügsi:n 'the title of a commoner (miüna”l-süqa) who is in the third rank (a/-daraca) below the king” Kaş. I 436. "Tris. DGS : 2 PUD tigisiz Priv. N./A. fr. tigi:; 'noiseless, silent. Pec. to Uyğ. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud, U Ill 10, 13 (çoğısız): Sus, 484, 17-18 (amub.. . Dis. DGS P “ə D tegiş (d-) Dev. N. (connoting reciprocity) fr. teğ- ; s.i.a.m.l.g. w. some phonetic changes, sometimes ” contracted to ti:s: SW Osm. degis; usually; means “exchange”. Xak. "xr teğiş “exchange” (a/-ıurdzcala) in the sense that'a morsel (Iugma) is give to you and that you give one in exchange: teğiş ai-gdya wa'l-madá fi hull şay” "the objective or goal' of anything Kaş. 1 368: Çağ. xv ff. tegiş (spelt) Aer me E (1) “meeting one another”, (2) 'erícounter, collision, hostilities' (quotn.); (3) ' price, value! (arzış) San, 198v. 3: Xvvar. xiv teğiş "a meeting” Qutb 177. D tegsüt (d-) Hap. leg.; abbreviated Dev, N. fr. tegig-. Xak. xı teğşüt “an exchange (bad!) of something by way of exchange” (a/-"mad), as for example base coin (ai-zuyüf) is given and göod received Kaş. T 451. Dis. V. DGSD tegis- (d-) Recip. f. of teg- ; s.i.a.m.l.g. vv. some phonetic changes and a rather wide range of meanings, “to mcet one another, to exchange”, and the like; in SW Az. deyiş-, Osm., "km. degis-; see Doerfer I] 921. Xak, xı ola:r ikki: beğke: tegişdi: “they two summoned one another (zakdkamaü) to appear before the beg'; and one says menin eliğim taruska: tegişdi: “my hand reached (tcaşala) the ceiling' Kaş. 77 roş (tegisü:r, tegisme:k; prov.; see tikiş-): KB teğişğü “one must attack” 2375-6; açığ olarka tegiş “present gifts to them” (foreign ambassadors) 2495: Çağ. xv ff. teğiş- (spelt) tabdil wa mu'áteada kardan "to exchange” , (2) “to meet or encounter one another", and metaph. “to fight”, this is the word which the "Türkmen of Iraq incorrectly pronounce döğüş- Sar. 196v. 3 (the 'Tkm. word is actually dó:güg-, q.v.): Xwar. xiv tegis-/téBis- "to meet, come into contact with (someone)! Qutb 174-8: Kom. xiv teyiş- “to present (a gift) to a superior' CCG; Gr. 239 (quotns.): Kıp. xv gáyada “to barter” deyiş-, Tkm. degis- Tu. 30a. 13. D tikis- (d-) Co-op. f. of tik-; s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı ol mapa: to:n tikişdi: “he helped me to sew (fi xiyáta) the garment'; and one says ol mapa: türme:k türme:k (sic) (PU) tikişdi: náwalani'l-zwmáward “he exchanged meat balls with me” Kaş. II 106 (tikişü:r, tikişme:k). Çağ. xv ff. tikiş- Co-op. f.; "to sew (xiydti hardan) together” San. 196v. 2. VUD tó:güs- (d-) Recip. f. of tó:&amp;-, q.v. regarding the first vowel. Survives, usually meaning “to fight one another” in NC tüyisSW Az. döyüş-, Osm. dögüş-(/dövüş-), "Tkm. dóvüg-. Xak. xı ol menin birle: tu:z tö:ğüşdi: "he competed with me in crushing (fi daqq) salt” (etc.), also used för helping Kaş. 77 106 (tö:ğüşür, tö:ğüşre:k): Tkm. xvii dögüş- Sar. 196v. 3 (tegiş-). D tügüs- (d-) Recip. f. of tüg-; s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı ol menip birle: tügü:n tügüsdi: *he competed with me in tying knots' (f£ 'agdi'l-ugda); also used for helping Kaş. II 106 (tügüsü:r, tüğüşme:k): Çağ. xvff. tüğüş- (with -&amp;-") girih zadan “to knot' San. 182r. 9 (quotn.). D töküş- (d-) Co-op. f. of tök-, Msn: Xak. xı ol mana: tarığ töküşdi: “he helped me to pour out (fr sabb) the stored grain'; also for pouring out water in a spray (rágsga() lahu), and for competing Kag. JI yo6 (töküşü:ry  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 532 
     
   
   
     488 töküşme:k): Çağ. xvíf. töküş- “to pour (rixtan) on one another" San. 182r. 9. D tegsil- (d-) Pass. f. of teğiş- , usually “to be changed”, Survives in SW Osm. degisil(Red. onlv?). Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A (just as a lamb or a calf) etózi tegsilip 'when its body is changed” (becomes a lion or wolf cub) M I 8, s, adın özke tegsilmeki “their being changed into another living being” (on reincarnation) M 711 ız, 14 (i): Bud. teğşilmedin artamadin 'without being changed or deteriorating" U 1/1 23, 3 (iii); 0.0. Sut. 71, 20-1 (uvsat-); sos, 13; TT V 5, 21 and 42; VI 206: Civ. TT I 117 (eski:), 118 (bokdam), 192 (bis1£). D tegsür- (d-) Caus. f. of tegis- , "to change, alter (something ec.). N.o.a.b.; in some languages replaced by some form of teğiştür-. Uy£. viti ff. Man.-A körk mepiz teğşürmek 'changing one's appearance' M I 25, 29-30; a.o. do. 19, 13: Man. körğ tekşürüp (sic) TT HI 124: Bud. TT V 10, riş (baya:kt:); USb. 104, 4-ş: (Xak.) xin(?) Tef. teğşür"change, give in exchange” 294, 296 (tehgür-): xiv. Muh. baddala “to exchange” degsür- Mel. 23, 16; teğşü:r- RİZ. 105 (but Zayyara “to change, alter” degistür- 29, rr; rr3): Kip. xın Zayyara degsür-; hence a/-dagşüri (1.-w.; *horse-dealer') because he changes the kinds (sifat) of horses when he sells them Hou. 42, 16: xiv ğayyara değşür- Bul. 66r.: xv badala “to change! (in margin in SW(?) hand degsür-) Tuh. 8b. s: Osm. xiv ff. değşür- “to change, exchange” fairly. common down to xvi T TS I 187; 11 269; İİİ 174; IV 199; this word as well as devşür-, occasionally occurs as a corruption of derşür- (Caus. f. of teriş-) "to assemble, collect, recruit". Tris. V. DGSE teksirtür- See tegzindür-. D tegsürül- (d-) Pass. f. of teğşür- ; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı KB (see, too, my character) bir yanın özüm teğsürülmez yarukta ópin 'unlike the light [ myself am not changed in any way' 835; tadu tegsürüldi 'his constitution altered! (and he became ill) ro54; ajun teğşürüldi "the world has changed” 6487. D teğşürüş- (d-) Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of tegsür-. Uyğ. vir ff, Civ. (one party to a contract having given (bérip) a property which is described, and received (alip) another property) teğşürüştlimiz) “ve have exchanged them” US). 3o, 8. Dis. DGZ PU tüğüz "having a white blaze on the forehead”. The first vowel is uncertain; in I 365 the £d” is unvocalized, in 7 367, 24 it has a clear damma; in the A.N., q.v., it twice has a fafha. Not connected with Çağ. xv ff. tüküz 'complete, perfect” Vel. 217 (quotn.); San. 183r. 10 noted in SW Osm. as tügüz/ dügüz Sami 632, which is a Dev. N./A. fr. DIS. V. DGŞtüke:-. Xak. xı tüğüz at a/-farasu'l-agrah “a horse with a white blaze on the forehead" Kaş. I 365; a.o. I 367, 24. D teğzinç Dev. N. fr. teğzin- , with various related meanings. For the metathesized form see teğzin-. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (the Sütra named so-and-so) bir teğzinç “one scroll TT IV 14, 68; USp. 106, 85; üçünç teğzinç 'third scroll' (i.c. Chapter of a Sritra) USp. 102, 2; uluğ teğzinçler tegzinür "great eddies (or whirlpools) swirl' (in the river of ashes in hell) TM 7V 253, 54; similar phr. PP aş, 8; eşiçteki teğgzinçler "the eddies in a cooling pot” U /// 44, 3 (i); (drawing him out of the bottomless) tuğmak ölmekliğ sansarlığ tegzinctin “vhirlpool of the cycle (Sanskrit samsára) of birth and death” Sun, 430, 8-9: Xak. xi tezginç (sic) ma'afifu'l-cabál 'the folds of a mountain range! and the like; and one also says tezğinç yo:l “a winding (al-multavi) road” Kaş. III 387; a.o. do. (yörğenç): KB 126 (tegzin-). Dis. V. DGZD tefiz- See tegzin-. D tegzin- Reft. f. of tegiz-; “to revolve, rotate, travel about', and the like. The etymologv of this word is obscure; tegiz- is the current Caus. f. of teg- in SC Uzb., but this word scems riüther to be related to *tegirand its der. f.s. Except in SW Osm. it became metathesized to tezğin- at an early date, and is now obsolete everywhere. Türkü vrır ff. Man. Chnuas. 10-11 (teğre:): Yen. elimde: tórt teğzindim '[ made four circular tours (?) in my realm' Mal. 29, 6; üç kata tegzinti: do. ar, 4; tokuz tezgi:nip (sic) do. 32, 11: Uyf. viri ff. Man-À mar amu mojak bahk[?m]da tegzindi busi koldi "Mar Amu Majak wandered round in his(?) town and begged for alms” M 7 32, 11-12: Man. (living beings) teksinürler (sic) 'revolve' (in the cycle of rebirths) TT H 17, 79: Bud. uzun sansar içinde tegzinip 'rcvolving in the long cycle of rebirths” (Sanskrit samsára) U II] 76, 15-16; (the sun) teğzinü yorir *revolves (round the earth)” ITüen-ts. 186; o.o. do. 93-4 (kez-); U 11 4, 10 ff. (aÉtar-); do. 41, 17 (oparu:); TT VI 19s v.l. (bat-); TM İV asa, s4 (tegzinç): Civ. TT VII 18 (udikla:-): Xak. xi çığrı: tezgindi: (sic) “the pulley rotated (dárat); and one says ol yérrig tezğİndi: “he walked about (7áfa) the country” also used of anyone who walks about a place Kaş. İl 241 (tezğinü:r, tezğinme:k), korkup başı: tezginür “they are dizzy with fear H 312, 6; a.o. II 303, 9 (ud-): KB alun tezğinür “the world revolves' 114; (God created the heavens; they constantly revolve) anip birle tezğinç yeme tezğinür "and therewith they rotate'(?) 126; (merchants) ajun tezginürler “travel all over the world" 4420; 0.0. 344, 669, etc.: xırı(?) Tef. tezgin*to rotate; (of water) to swirl; to travel about' 295: xiv Rbj. tézgünürde "when walking about” R 7I 1104: Çağ. xv ff. tézgin- (spelt) 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 533 
     
   
   
       I——— áÁ—Ín—À"—9 MÀ e| Sa  MON. DL 489 dater zadan "to revolve', also called cézgin- ; they also say töskin- San. 194r. 1; téskinthe same as tézgin- do. r94r. 26: Xvvar, xiv tezğin- “to revolve” Quth 175; “to walk about Nahc. zo, 9; 106, 14; 116, 6: Kom. xiv başım tezgindi "1 was dizzy” CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv tezğin- (vocalized tezgen-) döra İd. 38: xv düxa "to be giddy' tezgln- Tu. 16a. 4; dára (ayla-; in margin in SW hand) also degzin-, çevrün- do. rab. 13: Osm. xiv ff. degzin- "to revolve, walk about, be dizzy'; fairly common until xvi 7 TS 7 188; 1I 272; i11 176; IV zoo. Tris. DGZ PUD tügüzlük Hap. leg.; A.N. fr. tügüz; in both cases the 16” carries a fatha. Xak. xı tügüzlük Raronu'l-farasi'l-adarr “the condition of a horse with a white blaze on its forehead" Kaş. I so? (prov.). Tris. V. DGZD tegzindür- (d-) Caus. f. of tegzin-; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. USp. 102b. 22 (ötlüm): Civ. tıyuktakı taş köprüğ öndün sıparkı teğzindürü (mistranscribed rehşirtürü) tamlığ kavlalıkımnı “my vegetable garden with an encircling wall to the east of the stone bridge at "Tiyuk” USp. 15, 2-3: (Xak.) xin(?) Tef. tezğindür- “to make (something) revolve to pass round” (e.g. wine cups) 295: Çağ. xvff. tezğindür- Caus. f., danır dádan wa dá'ir süxtan "to cause to revolve” San. 194r. 15 (quotn.), téskindürsame as tézgindür- 194r. 26. Mon. DL ta:1 (?d-) the earliest meaning seems to be 'branch, twig'; this meaning survives in SW Osm. dal, everywhere else the word has meant, from a fairly early period *willow tree”, which in Osm. is söğüt and in Tkm. both ta:l and sóvüt. Sec talu:, Uyğ. xiv Chin.— Uyg. Dict. liu *willow tree, Salix spp.' (Giles 7,251) tal Ligeti 258; R III 875: Xak. xi ta:l al-qadibu'l-rajb "a green branch'; hence a slim, supple man is called ta:l bo:dluğ as a metaphor for his suppleness; the term is chiefly used of tall slim girls Kaş. I7] 156; (of a girl) bo:dr: anim ta:l 7 412, 21; a.0. II 105 (büküş-): KB könl tal bod1 “his figure is like a straight branch' 1102; a.o. in r495A a spurious(?) verse in the Vienna MS. only: Çağ. xv ff. tal dal budak ma'násina "a branch' (quotns.); also sógrit ağaçı 'willow tree' (quotns.) Vel. 171: tal the name of “the willow tree' (diraxt-i bid), in Ar. xılaf San. 160r. 23 (quotns.): dal ((1) 'shoulder or back', ie. Mong. dalu)); (2) 'tree' in general and 'willow tree' in particular; and in this context they call cheap red cloth (/andra) which they cut out and sew in an intricate branching fashion (ba-tarh-i müuştacar) dalbar (ie. dal with Pe. Suff. -bar “bearing”) do. 224v. 4: Xwar. xırı(?) (he tied the stag to the tree) talnuy çıbıkı birle *with a willow shoot! Oğ. 29-30, köp telim tallar köp telim ığaçlar “very many willows and other trees” do. 209: xiv tal *willow' Quitb 168; MN 243: Kip. xii al-şafşaf “xillovv tree' ta:1, Tkm. sögüt Hou. 8, 6: xv şafşaf tal ağaç Tuh. 22b. 2: Osm. xvi fal “branch” in one text TTS IV 731: xvin tal... in Rümi şaxca-ı diraxt “a small branch of a tree” ar. 158r. 25. til (d-) lit. "the tongue'; hence metaph. *an informer, information, particularly secret information, language", etc, S.i.a.m.l.g., in SW Az., Osm., Tkm. dil; as the vowel is short in 'Tkm. it was prob. always short; it was -1- in Türkü and Kaş., apparently both -1- and -i- in K B and -1- in Uyg. and all later languages except NE Tuv. dil Türkü viri (if the enemy do not come) tili savığ ali: olur “stay there collecting informers and reports! T 32; tılığ kelü:rti: 'they brought an informer! T 36; a.o. 1 N 11 (sığıt): vin ff. Man. (seeing with the eves, hearing with the ears) tılın sózlep 'speaking with the tongue' Chuas. 313: Uyğ. vir (my men attacked his skirmishers and) til tutmiş 'captured an informer” Su. E 12: vini ff. Man.-À öz tilin teğşürüp 'changing (i.e. disguising?) his own speech' M T ro, ız: Man. éssiz 1duk tilipiz iüze 'with your incomparable sacred tongue! T'T III 108: Bud. enetkek tilindin tavğaç tilince evirmiş 'translated from the language of India into the language of China' U İ ıq, 2; etözdeki kópüldeki tildekl (sic) kilinclar factions by the body, the mind, and the tongue' 77 7, 9-10; (may the king) tilke (sic) kirmezün “not become subject to criticism" PP 12, 2; 0.0. do. 11, 2 (erinç), 65, 7; U HI 33, 22; Hüen-ts. 2151, etc.: Civ. bórinipn söpükin tilin kuritip "drying the bones and tongue of a wolf! H 1 79; ündedeci til ağız tapğay “the vociferous tongue and mouth will serve(?Y TT T ro8; a.o. do. 74 (çaşut), til tar tegmezün “may criticism not come to restrict us(? TT VII 27, 3; a.o0. do. 36, ro: Xak. x1 til al-kalám 'speech'; one says ol anar til tegürdi: “he injured him (ddàhu) with his tongue and his speech': til al-lisün "the tongue” (prov.): tl a/-luğa “a language”, one says oğuz tib: Hağatıci-ğuzziya 'the Oğuz language”, and Yaba:ku: tili:, this word corresponds to Ar. in meaning, because al-/isiin means 'speech' and “language” (as well as 'tongue'; Arabic quotn.); and "a prisoner' (al-axid) taken from the enemy is called til, hence one says til tuttim “Iİ captured a man from the enemy to question him about the situation! Kaş. 7 336: tt:l (sic, ?error, see above) al-lisán (same prov.): tl al-lu£a; hence one says Uyğur tili: “the Uyğur language” and xita:y filu (sic) “the language of China (al-şin)”: ti:l al-kalám; hence one says ol begke: tr:l teğürdi: asába'l-amir bi-kalam fihi sabb “he used abusive language to the beg": titl al-cásiis "a spy'; hence one says yağıcdın tib tutti: “he captured a spy (a/-"ayıı) from the enemy” III 133; several o.o. in both spellings: KB 162ff. (Chap. VII) describes the merits and defects of til “the tongue'; the Dat. in 168 is tilka but the cc. in 312 (ülgüle:-), 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 534 
     
   
   
     490 623, 774 (tepret-) is tiliğ, rhyming with bilig; (a general must first) til alğu “get hold of an informer” 2351: xin(?) At, til (Dat. tilke 148) is very common; T»f. til tongue, language' 301: xiv Muh. al-lisin di:l in “our country", til in "Turkistan Mel. 7, 16; Rif. 79; o.o. dil (and scveral phr.) 47, 3; tizl (ditto) 140: Çağ, xv ff. til dil Vel. 193; til (with -1-”) zabán 'tongue, language”, etc. Sam. zoor. 19 (quotn.): Xwar. xim til “tongue” ' Ali 14; dil do. 21; siznin dilçe “in your language” do. zz: xr(?) (of an infant) tili kele başladı “he began to speak” Oğ. 11: xiv til 'tongue', etc. Qutb 179; MN 35, etc.: Kom. xiv 'tongue, language” tll CC], CCG; Gr. 244 (quotns.): Kip. xiv. til al-lisán İd. 39: dil al-lisán, also called til do. 49: xv al-lisán til Kav. 60, 14; Tuh. 31b. 5. tu:l (d-) “vidov” , and perhaps also *widower' with a word attached to indicate the sex. S.i.a.m.l.g.; in SW Az., Osm. dul, Tkm. du:l. Türkü vir ff, terkin tul tonta tasıkıp tezdi "he immediately stripped off his mourning garments and ran away' M 1 7, ro-ır: "Talas xatun: tuli: kalmı:s “his wife remained a widow' has been read in Ta. I z, IV s, and tuli: in IJI 4, but very dubiously ETY II 133 ff: Uyğ, vin ff. Civ. [gap; if a man has a mole somewhere] tul kisi (so read) alğuçı bolur "he will marry a widow* TT VII 37, 2; Xak. x1 tul ura:ğut a/-armala "widow! Kaş. Hİ 1:33 (prov.); a.o. I 468 (tuğsa:k): KB tul erdim . . . bu tul ton: suçlup “1 was a widow . . . stripping off these mourning garments! 84; (benevolent to) çığay tul yatimke “to the poor widows and orphans (L-w.) 2473; 8.0. 5302: xıu(2) Tef. tul xatun “vidov” sır: xiv Müh.(?) al-armala tuzl Rif. 149 (only): Çağ. xv ff. tul dul 'avrat . . . ki eri olmaya “a widow who has no husband” Vel. 220 (quotn.): tul (^with -u-”) zan-i bi-şavchar wa bima '"widow', in Ar. armala San. 184r. 29 (quotn.; adding “also a horse in mourning (fa'ziya) trappings”: Kom. xiv tul xatun “vidov” CCG; Gr.: Kip. xim al-armala tul epçi: Hou. 25, 1: xiv. tul. al-mar'atu l-ayyim. widow! İd. 66: xv armala tul Tuh. 15b. 12. tö:l (d-) basically 'progeny, descendants'; s.i.a.m.l.g. with this meaning but in some languages also with extended ones, for example SW Osm. döl 'foetus, unborn child”, 'Tkm. dö:l 'semen; (a fruit) crop; lambing”. Uyğ. virt ff. Civ. éldin xandin töli yok “the realm and the xam have no progeny' TT I 202-3: Oğuz xı tó:l (b'l-imála *with a front vowel") rvaqtu'l-nitüc "the season. when animals give birth to their young”, and al-nitác “the new born young” are called tó:l Kaş. III 133: (xiv Muh. dü”l-nasl “having progeny' tó:llüg Mel. 49, 3; Rif. 143): Çağ. xv ff. töl "the progeny (nitác) of ewes or cows' San. 184v. 2: Xwar. xit(?) Og. 64-5, etc. (boğuz): Osm. xiv ff. döl *progeny, descendants; young (of animals)” and in phr.; fairly common 7TS 7 221; II 319; İTİ 207; IV 240. As MON. DL tül 'dream'; syn. vv, 2 tü:s (d-); an unusual example of a //r form in Uyğ. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vini ff. Chr. (then an angel appeared) Yawsipnip tülinde “in a dream to Joseph' U I ro, 5: Bud. bu muntağ tül tügeyük men 'I have dreamed a dream like this” U II 24, 27 (and III 54, 15); alku bulğanmış yavız tüllerig "all confused bad dreams' do. 58, r (ii); o.o. TT VII ao, 38; USp. 104, 5; Sut. 475, 10-1 (amirtBur-); 593, 23; 594, 5: 620, 17; U 1H s8, 2 (iti) (yokadtur-). Mon. V. DLtal- (d-) 'to lose strength; to lose consciousness, to faint'. S.i.a.m.l.g. with these meanings; SW Osm. dal- also means “to be sunk in (thought, sleep, etc.)', and hence "to dive (into water). Uyğ. vrir ff. Bud. öğsüz bolup talıp 'becoming insensible and fainting' U IV 4o, 171; olo, PP 61, 6 (ógsire:-); Sim. 620, 10: Xak. xı talğa:n ig al-şar" 'epilepsy' (lit. “a disease involving frequent fainting”) Kaş. I 438; n.m.e.: (xın(?) Tef. zamana talmış belğürtmiş “an appointed time”, hard to connect with this verb 283): Çağ. xv ff. talvorul- 'to be exhausted” Vel. 173 (quotn.): tal- (r) xasta şudan “to be infirm, ill”, syn. vv. ar-, har-, talik-, tavşal- (the second is a corruption of 1 a:r-; the third and fourth are not early words); (2) fir? raftan “to plunge, be plunged”, esp. into water (5a-d5) or in thought (ba-fihr) San. 158r. ro (quotns.): Xwar. xtv tal- “to become exhausted' Qutb 169: Kip. xiv. tal- ta'iba “to be or become exhausted' ; but in Tkm. it is used for Zafasa 'to dive, plunge! İd. 65: xv ta'iba tal- Kav. 74, t1; (ar and) fal- Tu, gb, 6: Osm. xvii dalin Rümi the same as tal- in the meaning 'to plunge into water, to dive' San. 224v. 3. tel- (d-) “to pierce' and the like; survives only ót-, teş- (note the -1-/-S- correspondence, cf. tül/2 tü:ş), and occasionally 0:y- in this sense. Uyf. vini ff, Bud [gap] telip kuna kesip kapığ açıp “breaking through (walls?), robbing and cutting off, breaking open doors' U H 76, 1: Xak. xı er ta:m teldi: “the man broke through (taqaba) the wall' (ctc.); and one says ol oğla:kığ sağlıkka: teldi: "he put the kid to the milch-ewe (a/-na"ca labün) tö suck”, that is when the she-goat's (al-ma'zà) milk is insufficient, ot it has died, and the kid or lamb has been left uncared for Kaş. II 22 (teli:r, telme:k): xır(?) Tef. tel- “to pierce” 296: xiv Muh. taqaba del- Mel. 24, 13; Rif. 106: Çağ. xv fi. tél- süráx hardan “to make a hole (in something), derived from (sic) télük Sar. 198v. 9 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv tél"to pierce' Qutb 177-9: Kip. xi taqaba tél(sic?) Hou. 37, 16: xiv del- ditto İd. so: xv baxaşa "to bore” tel-/teş- Tu, 8b. 5; taqaba ditto do. 11a. 6. til- (d-) “to cut into slices'. S.i.a.m.lg.; in SW Osm., Tkm. dil-. Cf. toğra:-. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (the Brahman) tildi “sliced” (the king's flesh) U IJI 3o, 7: Xak. xt er yarin/ (?) in SW Az., Osm. del-, other languages use ^ 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 535 
     
   
   
     PCIE m mE ted UL E DIS. da:k tildi: qadda'l-raculu'l-qidd ' mina'l-cild “the man sliced off a strap from the hide'; also used of anything when one splits it lengthways (şaqqahu tüla(n)) Kaş. II 23 (tile:r, tilme:k): Çağ. xv fF. til- ç?z?-rd xatt xatt wa şarha şarha burdan “to cut something into strips or slices'; derived (sic) fr. tilim "slice! San. 198v. 9 (quotns.): Kip. xır qadda “to slice', in the sense of slicing a melon, etc. with a knife dil- (misvocalized) Hou. 42, 6: xiv dil- şaqqa daliha”l-maşqüq İd. şo: xv (şaqqa wa) qadda til- (in margin del-, sic) Tu. 21b. 1 (under $-), qadda til- do. 30a. s. D to:I- (d-) Pass. f. of to:-; “to be filled, or full”. S.i.a.m.l.g. with these and some extended meanings like 'to be fulfilled'; in SW Az., Osm. dol-, Tkm. do:l-, the last proving the long vowel. Uyğ. vil ff. Bud, agilikim tsapim tolzun “may my store-house and trcasury (Chinese l.-w.) be full” U I 29, 2-3; cambudvip yér suv tolu uluğ yél “a great wind filling the universe TT V 8, 81-2; tuyğuluk bilgülük yol tolmış tükemiş üçün “because the way which they must perceive and know is fulfilled and completed" do. 24, 79: Civ. in an astronomical text the Chinese term aran “to be full” (Giles 7,622) is” translated tolmak TT VII 11, 3: Xak. xı Kaş. I 430 (toplu:), n.m.e.: KB yağız yer yıpar toldi “the brown earth is full of fragrance! 64; (the moon) yaşık birle utru bakışsa tolir *when it and the sun look squarely at one another is full” 137; 0.0. 70, 536, 732, 759 (ne:n), 975, 1052, 5731 (asığlığ), $913 (çıkış): xın(?) At. anın wuddi birle kópüller tolup anın yadı birle ajun tolsu tép 'saying ““may (all) minds be full of love for him and the (whole) world full of memory of him"' 73-4; 199 (i:r11-), a.0.0.; Tf. tol- (and tola- ?) “to be full” 308: xiv Mu. imtala'a 'to be full' do:l- Mel. 25, 7; to:lRif. 104; al-imtilà' to:lmak 35, 14; 121: Çağ. xv ff. tol- (-ğum, etc.) tol- Vel. 218; tol- pur şudan “to be full' Sar, 183r. 15 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv tol- ditto MN 253, etc.: Kom. xiv ditto CCG; Gr. 248 (quotns.): Kip. xiv tol- imtala'a İd. 65. VU tul- the Xak. verb seems to be Hap. leg. but see tuldur-; except for the Ulyğ. phr. below, which it is hard to connect semantically, there does not seem to be any other trace of a 'Trans. verb. tol- or tul-. Uy£f. vini fT. Bud, tüzü yügün tulmis [gap] transJates the Chinese phr. ping p'ei “gathering together the reins' (Giles 9,282 8,837) Hiüen-ts. 162: Xak. xı er tobikni: ağrı: bile: tuldi: “the man struck the ball with a forked stick" ('alà şu"batayn), this is a kind of Turkish game, and is played as follows. When one of the players wishes the game to start and strikes in this way, the (right to) start the game is given to the man who is most capable (aqdar) at it; and for 'playing tipcat” (garbı”/-qal wva'l-qula) one says tuldi: (vocalized taldr:) Kaş. Iİ 22 (tula:r (sic), tulma:k unvocalized): (K.B tulmadim in ı?r is an error for bulmadim 'I have not found”). DLA .— 491 Dis. DLA talu: 'choice, select, chosen'. N.o.a.b. This word has no connection with dalu (sometimes dali/dal) 'shoulderblade, shoulder' in some modern languages, which is a Mong. l.-w. Xak. xi talu: ne:n al-;ay'u'l-muxtár 'something chosen, choice! Kaş. III 232: KB talu is common, e.g. (the Prophet) bodunda talus: kiglde kedi 'choicest of the people, the best of men' 34; (my moon was full, but now it has waned) talu erdi kilkim barir bu talu “my character was excellent, but this excellence is going” 1071; o.o. 57, riz, 688 (yavız), 825, 2349, 4491, etc.: xrr(?) At, ol ol halq talusı “he (the Prophet) was the choicest of men” 23; a.0.0.: XIV Muh.(?) al-muxtàr talu: Rif. 190 (only). S telü: See télve:. PU?D tili: Hap. leg.; presumably Dev. N. fr. til- in the sense of a narrow strip of hide or the like. Xak. xı tili: raşdfatı”l-sahm "the thong which ties the head to an arrov” Kaş. III 233. 1 toli: (d-) 'hail'. Survives in NE Küer. toli R HI 1195; Tuv. dolu, Khak. tor dol (top “frozen hard"): NC Kir. dobul/do:l; SC Uzb. dül; SW Az., Osm. dolu, "Tkm. doli, with a remarkable prevalence of initial d-. 'Hail' in other languages is burcak (metaph.) or the Mong. 1.-vv. móldür. Uy£. vir ff. Bud. iğlemekliğ tolı yağmur 'hai! and rain of illnesses! (pour down on you) U III 14, 4s: Xak. xı toli: “the hail (al-barad) which descends from the sky” Kaş. III 233; o.o. I 139, 19; 354, 24: KB 6013 (1 buzz): Çağ, xv ff. tolu tagarg 'hail' ; in Pe. yala, in Ar. hàlub (sic) and barad San. 184v. ış: Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 182: (Kom. xiv in CCI "hail” is translated burçak in Kom. and toolu in Pe.): Kip. xır a/-barad burgak; Tkm. tolu: Hou. 5, 8: xiv toli: al-barad İd. 66. VU 2 toli used only in the phr. tegre toli "all around'; not connected etymologically with either 1 tol: or tolu: Türkü vii ff. Man. Chuas. 10, 11 (teğre:): Uyf. vit ff Bud. PP 71, 4 (teğre:). D tolu: (do:lo:) Dev. N./A. fr. to:l-; 'full'. S..m.m.l.g.; in SW Az., Osm. dolu, Tkm. do:li. Cf. tolun. Uyğ. viii ff. Man.-A M T 25, ıı (erüş): Bud. tolo TT VIII B.g-1o (bisrunul-); maytrı sakınçın tolu “full of Maitreya-like thoughts” TT X 185: (at the end of a colophon; this book) tolu tükel boldi “has been completed” Sut. 199, 20; yarımlı tolulı nomlarığ “the half and whole doctrines! Hien-ts. 1923: Civ. (if one cuts up a garlic bulb and) iki kulakipa tolu tiksar *stuffs his ears full of it” H 7 176-7: Xak. xt tolu: idis “a full (a/-maT”dn) vessel'; also used for anything full to overflowing (tdfit) Kaş. III 232; olo. I oo, 7; İTİ 357 (2 çı): KB mepesi tolu “vith a full brain” 57; seviticin tolu “full of love” 117; o.o. 825, etc. (i:ril-), 1351: xir(?) Tef. toliftolu (and toluğ) “full” 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 536 
     
   
   
     492 DI1S 308: xiv. Mu. al-maPdn dolu: Mel. 54, 9; do:lu: Rif. 151: Çağ. xv ff. tola (sic) tolu pur ma'násina "fulP Vel. 218 (quotn.); tola pur tea mamli” San. 184v. 4 (quotn.; this form with -0: » -A survives in SW Uzb. tüla): (Xwar. xiv toluji$ “full” Qurb 182): Kom. xiv “full” tolu CCI, CCG; Gr. 249 (quotns.): Kip. xi al-mal'àn tolu: Hou. 27, 16: xiv tolu ay 'the full (mutalà'nüra (n)) moon” İd. 65; imtala'a "to be full” tolu: ol- Bul. 8ov.: xv mal'án toli Tuh. asa. 13: Osm. xiv ff. dolu “full” (cup, moon, etc); c.ia.p. TTS I 216; II 313; III 203; IV 235. Dis. V. DLAtala:- 'to damage, pillage” an early l.-w. in Mong. tala- (HTaeniseh 144); s.i.a.m.l.g. with some extended meanings. Cf. talaş-. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. nomi törüsi talağuluk ermez bolğuluk "his doctrine and rules must not be violated, they must be (observed) Hiüen-ts. 118-19: Xak. xı KB (the Taciks call him Afrasiyab) bu Afrasiyab tuttr eller talap “this Afrasiyüb seized and pillaged (many) realms" 28o: Çağ. xvff. tala- (-y, etc.) yağmd eyle-İtarac eyle- “to pillage” Vel. 172 (quotns.), tala- gárat kardan “to pillage' San. 158v. 12 (quotns.): Ktp. xiv tala- xarbaga'l-kalb "of a dog, to bite, tear' İZ. 65: xv nahaba “to plunder” tala-. Twh. 37b. s: Osm. xiv ff. fala-/dala- 'to pillage; of a dog, to bite'; c.i.a.p.; in TTS instances with the first meaning are indexed under tala- and those with the second under dala- but the difference is not rcal TTS T 173, 670; HI 253, 872; III 165; IV 731; xvi tala- ..... and, in Rüni, gazidan-i sag "of a dog, to bite! San. 158v. 12. tile:- (d-) originally “to seek (for something Ace”: hence "to desire (something .dec.); to ask (someone 45/.) for (something Acec.). S.a.m.l.g.. usually in. all meanings; in SW Az. Osm., Tkm. dile-. Türkü viri yérel tiledim 'I sought for a guide' T 23: vin ff. IrkB 24 (emig): Man. M III 22, 3-5 (ii) (étiglig): Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-A barça kişiler inca tileyürler 'all men seek for (or desire?) this” M 7 23, 30-1: Man. kutrul[f$u yol yınakllarığ tileyü “seeking for the way (Hend.) of salvation" T'T III 6o: Chr. U 7 6, 1 (iste:-): Bud. [gap] sözöğg téler (sic) “he seeks for a... word TT VIII A.25; burxan kutin tileyü 'seeking for (or desiring) the blessed state of being a Buddha' (for all mankind) PP 47, 7 ff.; bir kupkaw tilep 'asking for a guitar (Chinese l.-w.)' do. 69, 7; 70, 3; (if a woman) urt oğul tileser “vishes to have a son” U II rs, 3; tileyürmen küseyürmen “T desire (Hend.) U III 8, 18; a.o.0.: Civ. ed tavar tileser (co-ordinate with küseser) 'if vou desire wealth! TT 7 ro, o.o. do. 183, 184, 192: Xak. xı ol anı: tile:di: talabahu wa tafaqqadahu "he sought and searched for him”, and one says tepri: andağ tlle:di: “God so wished' (ardda) Kaş. III 271: (tlle:r, tile:me:k); about a dozen o.o., usually translated falaba: KB tile- is very common, e.g. (God) tiledi *wished' (and created the universe) 4; . DLA yalavaç şevinçi tiledi “he desired (or sought for?) the Prophet's love” sz, bayat bérdi barça tilemis tilek “God granted his every wish' go: xıq(?) KBVP hila bu düşman cerigin sığuka tile 'seek for a device to break this enemy's ranks! 4s: xtrii(?) KBPP (God) neni kim tiledi erse kildi “did whatever he wished' 3-4; Az. (take food and clothing from the things of this world) artuk tileme “do not seek for (or desire?) more" 190; a.0.0,; Te/, tile- (and? tila-) “to desire; ask for” 301—4: xiv. Muh. arada tiile:- Mel, 17, 19: Rif. 94 (and 103 margin); ibfağd “to wish, request! tile:- roz (only); faíaba tva arada dile:- 24, ir, ti:le:- ::2; al[falab dilemek 36, rr; ti:lemek 122: Çağ. xv ff. tile- (-p, etc) dile- Vel. 193-4; tile-/tilesxwástan wa talab kardan 'to wish, request”, etc. San. 199r. 5 (quotns.): Xwar. xii dile- “to ask for (pardon, etc.); to wish' "A/Z 26, 56: xn1(?) tile- "to ask for, to wish' Og. rr, 25, etc.: Xiv ditto Quib 179; MN 36, etc.: Kom. xiv ditto CCI, CCG; Gr. 244 (quotns.): Kip. xut zalaba tile:- Hou. 34, 12; 38, 8: xiv tile- falaba, also pronounced dile- İd. 40; dile- arada zun sa'ala ("to ask for”), one says ne dilersen “vhat arc you asking for, or do you want?' do. şo, falaba dile- Bul. syr.: xv talaba (izde-, and also) tile- Kav. 74, 19; Tuh. 24a. 2; sa'ala tile- Kav. 76, 6: Osm. xiv-xv dile- “to beg (for alms, etc.); to intercede for” T'T'S 7 206; IV 224. S tola- See tolğa:-. D 1 tóle:- (d-) Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. tö: Oğuz xi ko:y töle:di: unticati'l-£anam. “the ewe lambed' Kaş. III 271 (töle:r, töle:me:k), ?F 2 tóle:- “to pay (a debt), repay (a loan); almost certainly a Mong. L.-w. fr. tóló- (Kor. 1922, Haltod 435); the only carly occurrences are in late Uyğ. texts containing other l.-w.s. S.i.a.m.l.g.; in SW only ''km. See Doerfer II 98o, and tólec. Uyğ. xiu(?) Civ. bu men Tasik yanip kelip Turtka tólep bérsermen “f I, Tasik, return and repay (the debt) to Turi' U.Sp. 32, 15; a.o. do. 98, 27-8 (boyin) Kom. xiv “to pay; to remit (sins) tóle- CCT, CCG, Gr. 250 (quotn.): Kip. xv ğarima “to pay (a debt)' töl- (sic?) Tuh. 27a. 12. D tüle:- (tü:le:-) 'tó moult, shed feathers or hair”, Den. V. fr. tü, S.i.3.m.l.g. Xak. xr at tüle:di: "the horse (etc.) moulted” (a'aqqa), that is the winter coat fell out and the young hair ('agigatuhu) grew' (tüle:r, tüle:me:k) originally tü:le:di: but the -ü:- was shortened Kaş. III 270: Çağ. xv ff. tüle- "icad hardan “to exchange, change”, and in particular, of birds of prey “exchange their feathers' (i.e. “moult)), the Dev. N. is tülek San. 183v. 7. Mon. DLB D tolp (d-) crasis of tolup Ger. of to:1-, and perhaps merely a shortened scription for that word which does occur occasionally in the same sense; “all, whole, completely'. Since tolu is sometimes used in much the same  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 537 
     
   
   
     DIS.  sense, some of the occurrences below may be misreadings of that word, but tolp is written quite clearly in Manichaean script. "There seems to be a further abbreviation to top in one passage below, and there are traces of such a meaning for top in some modern languages; otherwise n.o.a.b. Cf. barça:, Uyğ. vırı ff. Man.-A (your human bodies) tolup (sic) barça teven . . . etmiş yaratmış ol "have been entirely made and created by deceit” (trickery and the like) M 7/7 9, 11-13: Man. bu tolp sansar içindeki tınlığlarığ “mortals involved in this whole cycle of rebirths' (Sanskrit samsára) TT 11 16, 39-40; tolp sansarığ do. III 78; top (sic) yokadturur “he completely destroys' do. II 17, 70-1: Bud. tolp etózin “his whole body” TT X $47; tolp nom ukuşindakı tinliğlar "all mortals who have understanding of the (true) doctrine! Suv. 137, 19; 0.0. U HI is, 9; 83, 7-8 (uruncak); TM IV 252, zı, 253, 63 (osul-); Suv. 188, 11; 646, 4: Xak. x1 KB neçe min tirig öldi tolup batar 'however many living beings have died, they all sink out of sight! 4835. Dis. DLB D tolup See tolp. télve: (d-) 'lunatic, mad”. The evidence seems to point to -é- rather than -e- as the original first vowel. Survives in SE Türki telbe (Jarring 302); SC Uzb. telba; SW Az., Osm., "Ykm. deli, 1.-w. in Pe. and other languages, see Doerfer 11 1008. Uy£f. viii ff. Man. kal télve (-/-) teg ertiler “they vvere like lunatics (Hend.)” TT III 115: Bud. ógsüz kal telve U Ill 76, 13-14: Xak. xi telve: al-macnün "lunatic' Kaş, I 426: KD télve (sic), often in Hend. with munduz, is common 295, 473, 741, 963, 2099, 2655, 6394: xi(?) Tef. delü “mad” 117; telve ditto 296: xıv Rbg. telbe “mad” R III 1090; Muh. al-macnün (opposite to 'sane' ukuşluğ) delü: Mel. 5s, 7; télbe Rif. 152; cunna “to be mad” (mun-, likewise) delü: o:1- ro7 (only): Çağ. xv ff. télbe deli Vel. 195; telbe (spelt) diwüna “mad” San. 200r. 23 (quotn.): Oğuz xı telü: al-ahmaq "an idiot” Kaş. IJI 232; a.o. III 156, 13: Xwar. xiv delü *mad' Quib 47; telbe do. 174: Kom. xiv 'fool' teli CCT, Gr.: Kip. xri al-macriün te:li: Hou. 25, 21; 33, 6: xiv delü al-macnün . . . also telü:, tell: jd. 50; al-hida'a “the kite” (bird) de:lü: toğan Bul. II, IO: XV macnün tell Tuh. 33b. 4. VU tolvir the Ar, words used to translate this are ambiguous, meaning both “a veil' covering a woman's head and body, and “a canopy, screen”, and the like; as such n.o.a.b.; in the three occurrences the £6” carries danıma twice and fatha once, the vd” kasra twice and nothing once. Perhaps survives as talvar in SW Osm., see below, and as talvar/talfarf talpar “a garden hut or shelter, animal shelter, and the like SDD 1307. Xak. xı tolvir al-sitr, that is al-ficál which is stretched (yumadd) over women, and is made of brocade and silk DLC 493 Kaş. I 457; olo. II 173 (talpir-); III 100 (yélvir-): Osm. xvi talvar 'a shelter for garden-watchers built in the branches of a tree” in three Ar.- Turkish dicts. T'T.S IJ 872; IV 732. Dis. V. DLBtalpr:- 'to flutter, palpitate, pulsate', and the like; not noted before the medieval period but see the der. f.s below. Survives only(?) in NE "Tel, talbi-; SW Osm. talabi-. Xwar. xiv talbi- “to struggle, flutter' Quib 169: Kip. xiv talabi- farga' a 'L- tá'ir canáhahu “of a bird, to flutter its wings' /d. 66: Osm. xiv ff. talabi-, occasionally spelt talbı- and in xvi dalabi“to flutter” , (of the heart) “to beat fast” in several texts. T T.S 7 173; II 252; 1II 164; İV 187: xvın talabi- (spelt) in Rmi, fabidan "to palpitate, flutter” Sax. 160r. 22; a.o. 159r. 28 (talpin-). D talpın- Refl. f. of talpı:- and syn. vv. it, with some extended meanings like 'to struggle'. S.i.m.m.l.g., but not NE or SW, as talpinand the like. Xak. xı kuş talpındı: "the bird struggled (idtaraba) and fluttered (xafaqa) its wings', also used of anything that struggles Kag. II 239 (talpinu:r, talpinma:k): Çağ. xv ff. talpin-(-mak) dürüş- ve çalış- “to struggle, strive” Vel. 174 (quotn.); talpın- (so spelt) ;apidan “to palpitate, flutter', in Rümi talabi- San. rs9r. 27 (quotns.): Kip. xv rafrafa "to flutter” talpin- (in margin in second hand talabın-) TuA. 17a. 10: Osm. xiv to xvi talbin-, occasionally dalbın-, “to flutter, palpitate' in several texts 77 I 174; III 164; IV 732. D talpir- Hap. leg.; Inchoative f. of talpı:-, syn. w. yélvir-, Xak. xi kuş talpırdı: “the bird fluttered (xafaqa) its vvings” , (VU) talvir (sic) talpırdı: xafaqatı”l-hacala "the canopy(?) fluttered” : also used of anything which struggles "(idtaraba) Kaş. II 173 (talpıra:r, talpırma:k). D talpış- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of talpı:-. Xak. xı kuşla:r kamuğ talpışdı: “the birds all fluttered (xafaqat) together'; also one says batrak (sic, later altered to bayrak?) kamuğ talpışdı: “the flags fluttered, and the silk pennons of the points of lances and the like were agitated” (tdfarabat) Kaş. II 204 (talpışur, talpışma:k). Dis. DLC PU ?F töleç n.o.a.b.; in Uyğ. spelt fölç, morphologically inexplicable, since although there is some semantic connection with F 2 tóle:-, -€ is not a possible suffix either in Turkish or Mong. Both Uyg. occurrences are in very late documents relating to the same man, (PU) "Turi, which contain several l.-w.s. "The meaning seems to be 'free, gratis, without payment'. Uyğ. xır(?) Civ. töleç kuruğ kalmayin “let me not remain unpaid and without the land” (?) US. 24, 10(thisseems to bethe meaning, but the whole document is very obscure); M ——— M 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 538 
     
   
   
     DİS 494 (if I do not return within three years and give these things to "l'ur) borluk 'Turtka toğru tólec bolsun “let the vineyard go to "Vuri outright and free of charge' do. 32, 19-20: Kom. xiv tólec bergil “give it free, gratis' CCG; Gr. Dis. DLD D tölet n.o.a.b., the context suggests the meaning 'cushion' or the like; apparently a Dev. N.; there is obviously no semantic connection with 1 or 2 tóle:-, and the word seems rather to 2 derived fr. *tóle:- as an //r form of töşe:-, cf. tül/tüs Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (food to eat, clothes to wear) olurğuluk orunin töletin töşekin “a seat, cushions, and mattress to sit on” Suv. 513, r3:a.0. 77 VIII D.12 (orun). D tılda:ğ/tılta:ğ (d-) Dev. N. fr. tilda:-; prob. with -1t- in Uyg. and -ld- later; the meaning is very elusive; in some Uyğ. passages "cause, reason' suits the context best, in others perhaps 'pretext', which is nearer the etymological meaning of tilda:-. N.o.a.b., but NE Tob. tildak 'eloquent', R 771 1333, seems to be a parallel Dev. N./A in -K. Became an early 1-vv, in Mong. as şi/rağişilta”a (€ "çıltağ) 'reason, cause' (Haenisch 140); this word was then reborrowed in this form but with meanings more akin to those in Xak., in Çağ, (San. 260v. 3), Kom. (sıltov CCG; Gr. 238) and various modern languages, as well as in Pe. and other foreign languages, see Doerfer I 236. Uyğ. viri ff, Man. in. T T IX 'Tokharian fu sa “thercupon, therefore' is variously translated anın, anı üze and (l. 32) ol tilta&amp; üze: Chr. ol uğurka bükün (sic) künke tegi moğoçlar o:tka tapınmak tıltağı bu erür 'therefore this is the reason for which the Magi worship fire down to the present day” U 7 9, 3-5: Bud, tıltağ 'causc, reason” is common, e.g. Sanskrit süktaheto "because of the good preaching' edgü (etkü) nom tılta:ğında: TT VHI D.5; 0.0. do, E.3, 4 etc.; yavlak és tus tiltaBinda *because of (or under the influence of) evil companions (Hend.) TT IV 6, zr, o.o. UT 24, 2 (anvant), TT V 22, 27; 24, 71-2 (adruk); U II 8, 26 etc.: Civ. USp. rir, 3-4 (alış): Xak. xı tilda:ğ a/-tacanni 'alá'i-insàn “a false accusation against a man'; hence one says ol apar tılda:ğ kilu:r “he makes a false accusation against him”, in Pe. it is bahdna Kaş. I 462; munda: ağın tılda:ğ (the jdm was later(?) altered to kaf) ok ta ğayr hàdà mina'l-asbábi' l-muhlika “illa “and in addition to this there is a reason among its (time's) destructive causes! 7 160, 4: KB (1f God asks "why did vou behave like this?”) negü tildağım bar “vhat excuse have I got?” 6544: xiv Muh.(?) (VU) al-'ard (?read al-'urda “purpose, intention") tı:lda:ğ Rif. 190 (only): Xwar. xiv tiltaf 'motive, cause' Qutb 192: Kip. xii (ihtacca mina'l-ihtícác “to offer an excuse” dilda:fla:-); a/-hucca 'excuse, pretext, argument” dılda:ğ Hou. 37, 12: XIV diltak a/-Inicca, more commonly pronounced with t- /d. so. . DLC  Dis. V. DLDD tilet- (d-) Caus. f. of tile:-ç sism.l. Uyğ. viii f£. Bud. bizin kut tiletü yarlikap 'deigning to order that the favour of heaven should be sought for us” USp. 88, 13: Xak. xi ol anı: tiletti: “he ordered someone to scek him” (yaflubahu), so he searched. for him (fa'ftagadahu) Kaş. H 31:0 (tiletü:r, tiletme:k): Çağ. xv ff. tilet- Caus. f.; talabünidan “to order to scek or summon (someone)' St. 199v. 8 (quotn.). D tólet- (d-) Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of 1 tóle:-; Kag.'s explanation of the origin of the word would be applicable to a Caus. f. of tüle:-, either he confused the two words or some words have fallen out. Oğuz xı ol ko:y tóletti: natacati'l-fanam (error for nataca) “he helped the ewe to lamb'; agluAu tsqati l-'agiqa mina”l-şa"r "its origin is making the hair fail out” Kaş. JI 310 (töletü:r, tóletme:k). D tilda:-/tilta:- (d-) Den. V. fr. til; regarding the phonetics see tilda:&amp;; etymologically this should mean “to use the tongue', but in practice it seems usually to mean “to make excuses, to seek pretexts', and the like. Survives only (?) in NC Kir. tilde- “to abuse”. Uyğ. vr ff. Civ. (in a pledge by executors of an estate; “if anyone presents these documents to us) neğüke tıltamayın bütürüp bérgeybiz “ve will pay in full, without seeking any pretexts” USp. 12, 9-10; a.0. do. 14-15 (Çamsız): Xak. xı KB (if you are now willing to learn) tilin tildama emdi kesgil sözün “do not make any excuses and stop talking at once' 4030: Xwar. xiv tilta- “to incite, induce (someone cc., to do something Dat.)' Qutb 192: Kom. xiv tiltağan söz “a false statement" CCG; Gr. VU?D tólte:- Tap. leg.; perhaps Den. V. fr. tólet which could mean 'to provide with cushions", UyÉ. viri ff. Man. Wind. 34-5 (ét-). D tiltan- (d-) Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of tilta:-; perhaps "to make (something Dat.) an excuse'. "Türkü vırı ff. Man. Chuas. 267 (1 1:8). D taltur- (d-) Caus, f. of tal-; sisml, usually as taldur- “to tire out, exhaust', but SW Osm. daldir- means 'to plunge (something Ace.) into vvater”. Xak. xı ol anı: urup talturdi: “he beat him until he almost fainted” (kada an yuğşa 'alayhi) Kaş. II 174 (talturur, talturma:k). D teltür- (d-) Caus. f. of tel-; survives in SW Osm. deldir-. Xak. xı ol ta:m teltürdl: "he ordered the piercing (bi-tagb) of the wall' (etc.); the second fd” is changed from dö/ (MS. lam), as they say in Ar. qatara and gadara with the same meaning (quotns.); a döl may be changed from £a,, and a fa” (MS. bö”) from dàl (quotns.) Kaş. TT 174 (teltürür, teltürme:k). D tiltür- (d-) Caus. f. of til-; s.i.s.m.l.g., usually as tildir-. Tildür- in Kaş. follows tuldur- so presumably belongs here, although I—— anuununusnunuuxnununununxməsrcqss————xxvx—————————2222XQ0X0 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 539 
     
   
   
     DIS. semantically it is nearer teltür-, but the text is . in some disorder and it is follovved by biltür-, tamtur-, etc., the scribe was obviously confused between -t- and -d-, but biltür- is misplaced in any event. Xak. xı er yarinda:k tiltürdi: 'the man ordered that a strap (lit. strip) should be cut” (27-qaddı”l-qidda), also used of anything when it has been cut in strips (qudda), e.g. leather, and the like Kaş. TT 175 (tilturür, tiltürme:k): (ol) anı: biçe:k bile: tildürdı: "he stabbed him (twaca'ahu; ?read arıca”ahu "had him stabbed”) with a knife! II 176 (tildürü:r, tildürme:k). D toltur- (d-) Caus. of f. to:l-; 'to fill'. S.i.m.m.l.g., in SW Az., Osm. doldur- ; ''km. do:ldur-. Xak. xi ol ayak tolturdi: “he filled (amla'a) the cup” (etc.) Kaş. II 175 (tolturur, tolturma:k): xııı(?) Tef. toldur"to fill' 308: xiv Müh.(?) amla'a tozldur- Rif. 104 (only): Çağ. xv ff. toldur- Caus. f.; pur hardan “to fil” San. 183v. 4 (quotn.): Kom. xiv ditto toltur- CCG; Gr. 249 (quotn.): Kip. xiv. toltur- mala'a İd. 65; mala'a doldur(once toldur-) Bul. 8ov.: xv mala'a toltur*with two ts; some people pronounce it with two ds Kav. 74, 1; mala'a toldur- Tuh. 35b. 8. VUD tuldur- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of tul-. Xak. xi atlığ anı: tuldurdi: “the horseman (etc.) collided with him” (sadamahu) Kaş. II 175 (no Aor. or Infin.). PUD tültür- Hap. leg.; the passage occurs in a list of the unpleasant results of sin; the spelling is quite clear in the MS.; v. 1. C. suggests that it means 'to make (someone) dream', connecting it with tül, this is possible only by assuming a homophonous V, and N. of this form, but there is no other trace of VU *tülor this verb, and no convincing sense is given by assuming that either this word or tufduris mis-spelt. Uy. vrrff. Man. tüş üze olurup (so read) tültürür (the demons) “sit on your chest and ?” M II 1r, 12-13. VUD toldra:- Hap. leg.; this verb is listed in.a Chapter devoted to disyllables, in a small section containing three other verbs all of which are onomatopoeics; the vocalization is chaotic; in the case of this verb the 1 and d carry cazms in the Perf. but are unmarked in the other tenses; in the case of the other verbs the third consonant usually carries a kasra, but this seems to be an error. Prima facie a Den. V. fr. *toldir, possibly onomatopoeic 'to clatter away' or the like. Oğuz xı bo:y (misspelt fo:y) toldra:dı: tafarraqa”l-nüs min Rull cünib "the people scattered in every direction" Kaş, III 447 (toldra:r, toldra:ma:k). Tris. DLD D tıltağlığ P.N./A. fr. tıltağ , “having . . . as a cause'. N.o.a.b. More or less syn. vv. tözlüg. Uyğ. viui ff. Bud. yél tiltağlığ ig toa "an illness (Hend.) caused by wind' (?sic here, not “an evil spirit") Suv. 592, 9 (cf. 591, rz yel tözlüğ ig). .. DLĞ 495 Mon. V. DLĞtalk- the basic meaning of this verb, which is pec. to Kaş. but without a main entry is obscure. İt survives as talkı- “to work (leather) while tanning it; to scutch (hemp)” in NE Alt., Sor, Tel. (Tuv. dalğı-), and NW Kaz. R III 89o. Cf. talku:, talğuç, talkit-, talkil-. Xak. xı talka:r yadurr "injures, harms” Kay. 1 506 (tepizlik); ódleg karıtmışka: boduğ talkma:s 'hair-dye does not shame (/à ya'ib) a man whom time has made whitehaired' 77 304, 23; n.m.e. Dis. DLG tala:k (d-) 'the spleen'. Survives in NC Kzx.; SC; NW as talak or the like and SW Az., Osm. dalak; "Tkm. da:lak. Xak. xı tala:k al-tihàl “the spleen' Kaş. 7 411: Çağ. xv ff. talağ/talak supurz 'spleen', in Ar. tihál San. 16ov. 6; dalak same translation do. 224v. 8 (prob. Rumi, though not so described): Kip. xni al-fihál tala:k Hou. 21, 17: xiv. talak ditto İd. 66: xv ditto tala:k (vocalized fola:k) Kav, 61, 10; talak Tuh. zab. 4. ta:lığ Hap. leg.; obviously a mere jingle Xak. xı Kaş. 1 408 (ta:tığ). D tila:k (d-) Dim. f. of til, “the: clitoris". Survives in SW Osm. dilak and prob. all rnodern language groups, but the kind of word often omitted fr. dicts.; l-w. in Pe., see Doerfer 11 925. Çiğll xı tila:k matàá'u'l-mar'a “clitoris” Kaş. 1 411; (Xak.?) tıla:k farcu'l-mar'a ditto 1 335, 3: Kip. xrir a/-bazr ditto tila:k Zu. 21, $: xiv filak al-zunbüru'lladi fi'l-farc ditto İd. 66: xv başr (misspelt badr) tilak TuAh. 7a. s: Osm. xvi ff. dilak/tilak (also dilcik) “clitoris” in several Ar. and Pe. dicts. T TS II 292, 893; IV 217. D tıllığ P.N./A. fr. til; "having a tongue'. S.i.m.m.l.g. usually w. a preceding qualifying Adj., 'having a. . . tongue”, but tilliğ in some NE languages means “eloquent” and SW Az., Osm., 'Tkm. dilli “glib, voluble'. Xak. xı yavla:k tı:llığ bé:g “a foul-mouthed husband" Kaş. İİİ 133, 15; n.m.e.: xiv Muh. al-faşih 'eloquent' (opposite to 'stammering' ti:İsi:z) dillü: Mel. sş, ır, ti:lliğ Rif. 153; a.o. do. 150 (6:810ğ): Xvvar. xiv tillig/tilli “having a , . . tongue! Qutb 179. VUD tuluk Hap. leg.; the meaning can only be conjectured; the editors suggest a connection with modern words of similar form meaning 'wine-skin' and the like, no doubt der. fr. to:1-, but this is not very plausible; the meaning seems rather 'barrier', or the like, which is a possible meaning for a Pass. Dev. N./A fr. tul-. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. (when a murderer is reborn in hell, the lords of hell lay him face downwards on a surface of red-hot iron) üzesinde yalınlayu turur yoğun tuluklar teğresinde tokip anınp içinde batururlar “they fasten thick barriers(?) constantly flaming on the top round him and lower him within them' 7M IV 252, 34 ff. :  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 540 
     
   
   
     496 F talka: See tarka:. D talku: prob. a crasis of *talk&amp;u: Dev. N. fr. talk- ; survives in NE Tel. talku:; NC Kir. ditto; Kzx. talki; NW Kaz., Nog. ditto 'an instrument for working leather while it is being tanned”, İt is difficult to see the semantic connection of the Xak. word with this, but it is connected with the meanings of other der. f.s. Xak. xi anything 'spun or twisted' (maftil mudaictcar) is called talku:; hence a 'twisted cord” is called talku: yışığ. Xaş. / 427. D talğu:ç Hap. leg.; abbreviation of *talkBu: N.I. fr. talk-; "a toggle” and the like. Xak. xr talğu:ç “the name of the piece of wood (al-xagaba) which is inserted between a package (al-“idl) and the cord (round it)”, the cord is twisted several times(vuftal . . . fatalat), until the cord is stretched ( yumadd) and the load secured (yuşfadd), so that the package cannot shift (là yu'atewwac) Kaş. I 453. ?E talğa:ğ See tolğa:ğ. D talkığ Dev. N. fr. talk-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xr talkığ mustadimu'l-hibál (so read, MS. cibàl) "tension(?) of cords'; talkig ta'wiqu'l-umtüir "a business complication! Kay. I 463. D talgu:k abbreviation of "talkğu:k N.I. fr. talk-; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. terkin bég yüz talğuklarığ anutğıl 'quickly prepare the şoo iron nails' U //I 47, 9: Xak. xı talğu:k “the peg (or tang, al-tvatid) which is inserted in the handle (maqbad) of a spade or axe, so that the (spade or) axe-head can be secured (yaştadd) to it” Kaş. I 469. D tolğa:ğ (d-) Dev. N. fr. tolğa:- lit. 'twisting, something twisted', and the like; Kag. give three meanings; in the third "snovv-storm” it is vocalized zalğa:ğ , this meaning is not found elsewhere, but there is no reasonable doubt that it is the same word in the sense of 'something switling'. İt is possible that the Uyğ. word was a parallel Dev. N. in -k, tolğa:k, which would have the same meaning, and most modern forms seem to go back to this word rather than tolğa :ğ, they include NE Sor tolğak, Khak, tolğax, 'Tuv. dolğak 'twisted, intertwined,' and the like; SE Türki tolğak "birth pangs'; NC Kir. tolğo:/tolğok ditto, and 'the act of twisting; pressing, urgent Kzx. tolğak ditto; SC Uzb. tülğok “birth pangs'; NW Kh., Nog. tolğak ditto; SW Az. dolağ, Osm., ''km. dolak “puttees". Uyğ. vii] ff. Bud. tolğağ (or tolğak?) “pain, distress”, occurs both by itself, e.g. ayığ adalığ tolğağ “evil, dangerous pain” USSp. 99 II b. ro, and in lists of near synonyms, e.g. i kem sıkığ tanığ ada tuda tolğağlarında “in diseases (Hend.), constrictions (Hend.), dangers (Hend.), and pains! U 11 73, 2 (iii) ff.; and in Priv. N./A. form e.g. emğeksiz tolğağsız 'without pain” TT VI 280: Civ. tolğağ bolup sönmeser “if a man has colic (?) and it is not relieved' H 7 44: Xak. xi tolğa:ğ sanafu'i-mar'a "a woman's earting'; DIS. DLĞ hence one says yinçü: tolğa:ğ "a pearl carring”: tolğa:ğ al-miliia "pain , hence one says emğek tolğa:ğ originally al-zahir twa'l-quielinc 'dvsentery, colic'; hence one says anın karnı: tolğa:r “he has an attack of dysentery and diarrhoaea” (a/-hayda): tolğa:ğ (apparently :alfa:p corrected to £olğo:ğ) "a snowstorm (a/-damaq) which takes a man by surprise (yuğşa”l-insan) so that it nearly kills him; hence one says ta:ğ üze: tolğa:ğ (spelt talğa:ğ) boldı: “a snowstorm arose (qama) on the mountain” Kaş. 77 288: Xvvar. xiv tolğağ zahmatı is used both for “birth pangs” and the “sufferings" endured by a pilgrim Nahc. 287, 2-3: Kip. xiii (in a list of clothing, between "boot” and 'slipper) a/-lafaq”if 'puttees, or leggings! to:la:k (9s:c, MS. torla:k) Hou. ış, 5: XIV tolak al-;ay'u']-malfüf "something wrapped up or round” İd. 65; in do. 45 against çolmak al-lifáfa one MS. adds, “also called dolak'. D tolku:k (d-) 'an inflated skin container, or bladder', and more generally “a skin container” , morphologically a Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. toluk-, Emphatic Pass. f. of to:l-, which is traceable as doluk- in SW Osm. fr. xvi onwards (T T.S I 216; İV 236), and still survives in xx Anat. SDD 456. 'The latest trace of this word is in SW Osm. Red. 1261; it is now obsolete everywhere. Uyğ. virt ff. Man. Wizd. 22-4 (1 ür-): Xak. xı tolku:k al-zigqu'l-manfüx fihi "an inflated skin” Kaş. 11 289: xiv Muh.(?) (under *wine-merchants! equipment") al-ziqq to:lku:k Rif. 162 (only): Ktp. xiv dolkuk a/-27gg, also pronounced with t- /4. so, tolkuk al-z:qq do. 66: xv zarf cild "a skin container” tolkuk Tuh. 24a. 12: Osm. xvi tolkuk (spelt with tö”) occurs in three dicts. translating Pe. words for "skin container TTS HI 686, IV 560 (Red. spells with fà' 'pronounced d-"). D talka:n 'crushed parched grain' and the like; prob. abbreviation of *talk$a:n Dev. N. fr. talk-. S.ia.m.l.g.; in SW only Tkm. talxan, a L-w. in Pe. and other foreign languages see Doerfer 11 928 (his proposed etymology is false), Uyğ. vur ff. Civ. yeti tutum talkan 'seven handfuls of parched grain" TT VII 24,9; 25, 10; a.o. H IJ 12, 91 (arpa:): Xak. xı talka:n al-sawiq 'crushed parched grain' Kaş. / 440 (verse); o.o. 11 89, 24 (katig-); 154, 16(1 katin-); 189, 28 (kattur-); 190, 5 (1 kartur-): xiv MuA.(?) al-satiq ta:lka:n (mis-spelt with qaf for fa”) Rif. 165 (only): Çağ. xv ff. talkan “a food made of crushed parched wheat! Vel. 173; talğan/ talkan "wheat parched, crushed, and made into food' in particular, and 'anything softened by crushing' in general (quotn., prov.); it is pointed out that the translation of talğan/ talkan as 'pillage' in Vel. 172 in the same verse is an error San, 160v. 14: Dis. V. DLGD tilik- (d-) Hap. leg.; Intrans. Den. V. fr. til. Xak./Oğuz xı kişi: menin birle: tılrkdi: "the man conversed (takallama) with  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 541 
     
   
   
       TRIS. V. DLĞme and tried to obtain (istacarra) information from me", and one says ol er issiz trlikti: “that man became a target for gossip (ğarad li'l-alsun). being criticized and abused for discreditable conduct'; the first is an Oğuz phrase and the "Furks do not know it Kaş, 77 116 (tilika:r, tilikma:k). ?D tolj$a:- (d-) basically 'to twist, wrap round”, and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g., usually as tolğa-, but NE Tuv. dolğa-, SW Az., Osm., 'Tkm. dola-, with a wide range of meanings in some languages. See tolğar-. Xak. xı kiz yinçü tolğa:dı: "the girl put on earrings (garratat İi-nafsihü şanaf) of pearls” (etc.); and one says Ol yu:p tolğa:dı: "he wrapped together hanks ('ammata 'amita) of raw wool' (i.e. for spinning); and one says anın karni: tolğa:dı: “his stomach writhed (lated) with diarrhoea and the like” Kaş. 7/1 289 (tolğa:r, tolğa:ma:k, in three places the nuqfas of the td" are missing, and in the first phrase it has fatha instead of damma): xiv Muh.(?) "amala mixadda “to make a pillow, or bolster to:la:- Rif. 113 (only; the t- requires back vowels, which excludes a connection with tólet; the implication may be “to wrap up material to make a pillow"): Çağ. xv ff. tolğa(-di, -p) foldur- (sic? error for tola:- or döndür-) ve bür-; dóndür- “to twist; to turn (away) Vel. 219 (quotns.); tolğa- a Trans. vetb (maşdar-i muta'addi) pbiçidan “to twist, turn”, tolğandur- is used in the same sense San. 184r. 8: Kip. xiv. tola- /affa “to wrap (round)” /d. 65: xv zalaqat “to be in the throes of child-birth” tolğa- wh. 24a. 6; lawàá (kayril-/mayril-; in margin in second band) tola- do. 32a. 12. 1 D talkıt- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of talk-; this must be the correct form, it is the vocalization of the Aor., elsewhere the vowel signs are absent or wrong. Xak. ol anın r:şın talkitt: "he urged someone to obstruct ('atwaqa) his business”: and one says ol yükni: talkıttı: “he urged someone to push the load into position” (yugdimu'l-haml); also used when one orders someone to secure it (bi-işlahihi) with a rod (mirba'a) which is inserted between the cord and the load and twisted (yuftal) until the load is straight (yastaqim) Kaş. 1I 339 (talkrtu:r, talkitma:k). D tolğat- (d-) Caus. f. of tolğa:- , "to cause pain or suffering. S.is.m.l. with extended meanings. Türkü vir // N ı3 (emğet-): Uyğ. vii ff. Man. TT II 16, 41-4 (emğet-). D talkil- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of talk-. Xak. xı talkıldı: ne:) inşadama"l-şay” wa'ndafa'a “the thing was pushed back into position”, and one says rg talkıldı: “the business was pushed back' (?postponed, indafa'a); and one says yük talkıldı: indafa'a'l-haml fi'l-. habl. 'the load was pushed back under the cord (holding it in position)” Kaş. II 230 (talktrlu:r, talkı1ma:k). D tolğan- (d-) Refl. f. of tolğa:- , s.i.m.m.l.g. with extended meanings; in SW Az., Osm.,   497 'Tkm. dolan- 'to rotate, revolve; to circulate, saunter about”, and the like. Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A kim etöz üçün emğenser tolğansar “vhoever undergoes pain and suffering for the sake of his body" M VI ır, 11-12 (ii): Bud. U 71 24, 1 (ulin-): Xak. xi er ulindi: tolğandı: "the man writhed (/tatcd) with pain and tossed (faqallaba) from one side to the other”, and one says er ó:zl: tolğandı: “the man was seized with diarrhoea and dysentery”, and one says er ó:zipe: yu: tolğandı: “the man vvrapped together hanks of ravv vvool for himself” Kaş. 11 241 (tolBanu:r, tolğanma:k): Çağ. xv ff. tolğan- (-ıp) fo/lan- Vel. 219; tolğan-/tolğaş- piçida şudan "to be twisted' San. 184r. 23 (quotns,): Kip. xv 'akira (of water) "to be turbid' (bulan- and) tolan-, Tkm. (bulğan- and) tolğan- Tuh. 26a. 3 (these descriptions should be reversed ?). VUD tolğar- Pec. to Kaş., the vocalization and etymology of this verb are most obscure, of the six occurrences the first syllable is vocalized tal- six times vvith the alternative (two vowel signs) tol- once, nevertheless considering the meanings tol- is almost certainly right; the second syllable is -ğur- four times and -ğır- twice. The word can hardly be a Caus. f. since it is Intrans., and the likeliest explanation is that tolğa:- is a Trans. Den. V. and this verb an Intrans. Den. V. from *tolig in which case the correct form of this verb should be tolfar-. Xak. xr könlüm tolğardı: “my constitution (nafsi) was almost thoroughly upset (read tatamawswac for tatahatwwac in MS.) when it was revolted (/aqisat) by eating putrid food” (tolğarur, tolğarma:k): art başı: tolğardı: “a snowstorm rose (gámati'l-damag) over the head of the pass” (etc.) Kaş. II 178 (tolğara:r, tolğarma:k). D talkış- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of talk-. Xak. xı ol mapa: uyma: talkışdı: “he helped me to twist (fi layy) the felt out of which boots are made”? also used of anything that is twisted (yulwá wa yuftal) Kaş. II 207 (talkişu:r, talkışma:k). D tolğaş- Co-op. f. of tolğa:-: s.i.s.m.l. with various extended meanings; in SW Az., Osm., "Tkm. dolaş-. Xak. xı ol menin birle: yup tolğaşdı: "he competed with me in wrapping together( fi ta'mit) hanks of wool'; also used of twisting (/? layy) anything, and also of colic (al-luti) when it attacks the stomach Kaş. II 220 (tolğaşu:r, tolğaşma:k), Çağ. xv ff. San. 184r. 23 (tolğan-). Tris. DLG D tala:ğu: Hap. leg.; Dev. N. fr. tala:- Xak. xı tala:ğu: "a quick-acting (a/-mucahhaz?) poison” and 'dysentery' (a/-zahir) is also called tala:ğu: Kaş. 1 447. Tris. V. DLĞD tolkuklan- (d-) Hap. leg.: Refl. Den. V. fr. tolkuk. Xak. xr tolkuklandı: ne: “the thing was inflated (intafaxa) like a skin con 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 542 
     
   
   
     498 tainer' Kaş, 77 351 (tolkuklanu:r, tolkuklanma:k). DF talkalan- Tlap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. talka: (tarka:); inadequately vocalized but certainly of this form. Xak. xi üzüm talkalandı: "the grapes were sour' (tahagrama) Kaş. HT 201 (talkalanu:r, talkalanma:k). Dis. DLG D telük (d-) Pass. Dev. N. fr. tel-; “a hole'. Survives in SW Az., Osm. delik. Cf. tesük. Xak. xı telük (?sic, MS. telik) al-taqb “a hole" Kaş. 1 388: xıu(?) Tef. telük/telik “a hole (in a ship); the aperture (of a cow's udder)' 296: xiv. Rbg. teşük telük koymadı “he left no hole” R III 1085: Çağ. xv ff. télük delik Vel. 194 (quotn.); télük (spelt) sirax 'hole' San. 200r. 26 (same quotn.): Kip. xiv telük (?; lüm unvocalized) al-buxs “hole” 7d. 39; (Tkm.) delük a/-taqb do. şo, al-buxş (t-) delik (sic) Bul. 3, 16: xv bux; telik Tul. ya. 12: Osm. xiv delük; xvi delik T73S IV 202. D tile:k (d-) Dev. N. fr. tile:- ; "request, wish'. S.i.a.m.l.g.; in NE Tuv. dilek; SW Az., Osm. dilek; Tkm. dileg. Uyf. vin ff. Civ. ótüg (so read) tilek bulğulukı sarp “it is difficult to achieve one's desires (Hend.)' TT I 221-2: Xak. xi tile:k al-murád “vish” Kaş. I 412; 0.0. II 148, 7 (tl:le:k); III go, 3 (tilekniş): KB bayat bérdi barça tilemiş tilek “God granted him all his vvishes” 9o; many o.o. 37, 116, 125, 136, etc.: xı1(?) At. tilekçe tiril "İive as you vvish” 415; Tef. tilek 'wish' 302: xiv Muh. al-murad ti:le:k Mel. 84, 10; Rif. 190: Çağ. xv ff. tilek dilek Vel. 193; tilek (spelt) talab sta mas'ala “request” San. 200r. zo (quotn.): Xwar. xir dilek '*wish, request” "Ali 56: xiv. tilek ditto Qutb 179: Kom. xiv *wish' tilek CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv ((Tkm.) dilek al-murád İd. so: xv tilek Dev. N. of tileTuh. 84a. 2. : VU?F dölük Hap. leg.; the /ám is unvocalized ; it is possible that the damrta is misplaced and that this should be read as delük (telük) but initial d- is so rare in Kaş, that it may well be a foreign l.-w. Xak. xı dölük al-hazafu'l-a'á (sic in MS., ? read a'tà or ata) ta huma nahvou I-carratu' l-maksuratu' l-ra's; (al-aşa “nightblind' is an obvious error; a/-ağta means *rubbish'; though grammatically dubious, the phr. hazafı"l-ağtü, gives the best sense) “a rubbish pot', for example a jar with a broken neck Kaş, 7 389. VUD tólek (d-) 'tranquil, sedate, quiet', and the like. Survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. dólek, same meaning (and others) SDD 464; there are also in this language several related verbs dölet-, dólen-, dölendir-, döleş-. For Osm. Red. 927 (only) lists dölük in this sense and dólün- 'to become quiet'; these are prob. misvocalized. İt seems clear that tölek 18.8 Dev, N. fr. *tóle:- (d-) a different word from 1, 2 töle:- above. Oğuz xı tólek al-mutma'in sua”l-sühin "quiet, sedate'; aç érvek tok tölek “the hungry man hurries to TRIS. V. DLGthe food, the satisfied man is sedatc and does not care if the mcal is late' Kaş. 7 387: xii(?) Tef. tülek (mcaning obscure, but a/-sahina *tranquillity' translated tóleklik) 318 (tülek): xiv Rbğ. ay yawas tölek "oh gentle and tranquil man” R 7/7 1568; Mul. al-hudna “quiet” tóle:&amp; (-8 marked) Mel. şı, 2 (corrupt); Rif. 146: Çağ. xv ff. (after tülek) it (here tólek) also occurs with the meaning yaraş “quiet, gentle! Vel. 220: Xwar, xiv tólek “mild, kindly" Quib 189 (tüleh). D tüle:k Dev, N./A. fr. tüle:-, 'moulting; the moulting season'. Survives in SW Osm. tülek, same meaning (and others); l.-w. in Pe., sce Doerfer I] 982. Xa8k. xı tülek treaqt isgüti'l-dawabb "aqayiqihi “the season when animals shed their winter coats'; one says ko:y tüle:kinde: (sic) keldi: 'the sheep has reached the moulting season Kaş. I 387; tüle:k yılkı: ol-mu'iqq.- mina'l-hayaswán, 'animals whose winter coat has fallen out and whose summer coat is growing' I 412: Çağ. xv ff. tülek ('with -K") “the time when birds change their feathers! Vel. 220 (quotn.); tülek (spelt) "of animals and birds, shedding their coats or feathers and growing new ones' San. 184v. 15 (same quotn.). PU(D) tölük pec. to UyB.; some meaning like “vigour” or “vtolence” seems to be indicated; etymology obscure, Uyf. vil ff. Bud. bar küçin üntürüp tölükin sekriyü barıp summoning all his strength and going with vigorous leaps' U IV ro, 46—7 (I 43, 10-11); ópkesi tólükinde 'in the violence of his rage" U 11 25, 25; tölükin urup 'violently striking" do. zy, 24; belinldek) tölükin “vith terrifying violence” TT X 354-5; o.o. Suv. 102, 4 (kivirğak), 615, 6 (kinig). D tü:lüp P.N./A. fr. tü:, 'hairy, feathered”, S.i.a.m.l.g. but in such forms as SE Türki tüklük; SW Osm., Tkm. tüylü with inserted consonant. Uyğ. vrríT. Bud. etöz tülüg e:rür "the body is hairy TT VIII G.63: Civ. do. P.24; İH 1 37-8 (erük): xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. “peach” tülüg (erük? Ligeti 271: Xak. xı one says of a horse bu at ne: tü:lüf ma şiya "what is the colour of this horse's coat?" Kaş. I 406, 24; 1 69 (erük); III 19 (yadım), III 207 (tü:); n.m.e.: xiv Muh. dü şa"r *hairy" tü:glü:&amp; Mel. io, ro (Rif. 83 sa:çlüğ sic): (Xwar. xın(?) tük tülüklüg 'hairy' Og. 15; kök tülüklüğ 'grey-haired' do. 140, etc.): Kom. xiv "hairy! tüklü CCT, Gr. D tilge: (d-) Hap. leg.; Dev. N. (Conc. N.) fr. til-. Xak. xr one says bk:r tilge: et "a slice (filda) of meat'; also used of anything cut lengthways (quti'a. [ila(n)); hence one calls “a strip (safba) of land” bi:r tilge: y€:r Kaş. 1 429. tilkü: “fox”, s.i.a.m.lg., usually with two rounded vowels, tülkü and thc like; SW Az: tülkü, but Osm., “Tkm. tilki, sce Shtcherbak, p. 135. "Pürkü viri ff. özi:n tilkü: yemliş “a fox eat him” İrRB 46: Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. tilkü (in lists of evil carnivorous animals) U 77 31,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 543 
     
   
   
         DIS. DLM . 499 83: Suv. $99, 16; 610, 15: Xak. xt tilkü: al-ta'lab “fox”, also a nickname for a girl baby, for reasons explained at some length Kaş. 7 429; I1] 244 (ékki:le:-) and s o.o., once (17 343, 18) tilki:: KB 2312 (alçı): xin(?). Tef. tilkü “fox” soz: xiv Muh. al-ta"lab tilkü: Mel. 72, 8, Rif. 174: Çağ. xv ff. tülkü rübüh 'fox' San. 184v. 15: Xwar. xiv tilkü Qutb 179: Kom. xiv “fox (skin) tülkü CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiii al-ta"lab tilkü (? unvocalized) Hou. ır, 4; xiv. tülkü: al-fa'labu'l- Burtasi 1d. 39 (from Burtas on the middle Volga); (Tkm.) dilkü: a/-ta'lab; also pronounced with t- do. so; al-ta"lab tilkü: Bul. 16, 7: xv fa"lab tülki Tuh. 11a. 2: Osm. xiv to xvi, once in xvii, dilkü in several texts 7TS I 206; II 299; III 195; IV 224. D telge:k Dev. N. fr. telge:- ; n.o.a.b. in the Hend. bulğa:k telge:k. Uyğ. viri ff. Man.A (it is like the great ocean) kim bulğak t(elgek] üküş ol *where there are many disturbances' M İTİ 9, 17 (ii); o.o. do. 9, 2 (ii); ro, 15 (i): Bud. bu bulğak telgekke (mistranscribed /ilgegke) katıltım . . . erser “if I have been involved in these disturbances' U 77 87, s3 (in the parallel texts U İT 78, 35; TT IV 10, 17 the phr. used is él bulğakka “civil disturbances"). PU(D) tilge:n “vrheel, disc'; pec. to Uy£.; unlikely to be a basic word but with no obvious etymology. Uyğ. viti ff. Bud. Sanskrit cakra *wheel' tilge:n TT VIII 4.34; yüz tilke:nin (sic) *with a hundred wheels' do. G.69; kün tepri tilgeni teg "like the sun disc” TT V 6, 21: Suv. 92, 18 etc.; kaplı tilgeni tef "like a cart wheel' Suv. 133, 20; 0.0. TT V 6, 43-45 (1 otluB); VI 455 (tevir-); VII 41, 24; U İTİ 17, 9. Dis. V. DLGtelğe:- Hap. leg.; but see telğe:k, telgen-. Xak. xı ol ata:sın bulğa:dı: ctelge:di:» atuqa"a abühu fi harad wa dacar “he infuriated and enraged his father” , telğe:di: is used only in Hend. (muzdawica(n)) and not by itself Kaş. III 291 (telge:r, telğe:me:k). D telgen- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of telge:-. Xak. xı ol anar bulğandı: telgendi: “he was infuriated and enraged by him” (ğadiba . . . wa harida), telgendi: is not used by itself, but always follows bulğandı: Kaş. II 242 (telğenü:r, telğenme:k). Tris. DLG D tileklig (d-) P.N./A. fr. tile:k; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. viu ff. Bud. (I came here) nomluğ nom tilekliğ küsüş üze 'with a desire to search for scripture books” IHHüen-ts. 203-4. Tris. V. DLGD tilkü:len- Refl, Den. V. fr. tilkü:; lit. “to behave like a fox”, N.o.a.b., but SW Osm. tilklleg- has much the same meaning. Xak. xı er tilkü:lendi: “the man was slyly flattering' (tamallaqa . . . fi varcağdn) as if he was a fox Kaş. I1İ 202 (tilkü:lenü:r, tilkü:lenme:k): Osm. xvi-xvirr. dilkülen- “to fawn, flatter obsequiously' in several texts, mainly dicts. TTS 1207; 11 299; 111 195; IV 255. Tris. DLL D tolılığ (d-) P.N./A. fr. toli:; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. Man. tolilig bulit teg “like a cloud full of hail' M II ir, 16. D toluluk (d-) A.N. fr. tolu:; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı KB atım erdi Aytoldı kılkım tolu irildi toluluk “my name was Aytoldi ("the moon has become full”), my character was full (like the moon); the fullness has waned' 1351. Tris. V. DLLD talu:la:- Den. V. fr: talu:; 'to choose'. N.o.a.b. Türkü vir ff. talu:la:pan 'choosing' IrkB 19 (this para. is unintelligible, and possibly corrupt): Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. (human beings) tuğdukta kün talulamaz “do not choose the day of their birth” . . . öldükte yeme kün talulamaz “and do not choose the day of their death” TT VI 227 ff.: Xak. xı ol talu:la:dı: ne:mni: “he chose (fxfara) the thing" Kaş. III 326 (talu:la:r, talu:la:ma:k): KB (if this favour of heaven comes, a man”s days (read küni) are favoured) tümen arzü birle talulap yer aş “he chooses and enjoys food and countless (other) desires” 68z, o.o. 686, 899, etc.: xiri(?) At. (this is a wise book) bir sözüğ talulap ketürdim 'I have chosen one (wise) word and brought it (to you)” 477 (sözüğ seems a better reading than süzük). D tolu:la:- Hap. leg.?; Den. V. fr. tolu:; “to fil”. Xak. xu(?) KBVP 51 (akat-). Dis. DLM talım an Adj. used to qualify words for animals, prob. 'predatory', or the like. N.o.a.b. "Türkü viri ff. talım kara: kuş “a predatory (9) eagle! IrkB 3, 43, 51; talım uri: in do. 40 makes no sense and is prob. an error for telim uri: “many ravines”: Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. talim kara kuş in Kuan. 142 (U Hİ 20, 23) corresponds to Sanskrit garuda "a mythical bird, king of the birds and enemy of serpents' ; talım balık PP ız, 1 represents Sanskrit mahara “a mythical but dangerous sea monster'. telim (?d-) "many", one of the commonest words with this meaning down to xt, but now obsolete everywhere. Uyğ. viir ff. Man. TT III 21, 145 (üküş): Bud. telim is common, both by itself, e.g. nom bitiglerin telim yığyuk men “1 have collected many scriptures! Hüen-ts. 58-9, and in the phr. üküş telim Suv. 140, 22 etc. and telim üküs U III 40, 28 etc.: Civ. (if an eye) üküş telim yaş aksar 'waters profusely” H 7 65: Xak. xi telim aí-katir “many”, one says telim yarma:k “many dirhams” Kaş. I 397; nearly 40 o.o.: KB méni emgetür til idi ök telim “my tongue very often injures me” 166,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 544 
     
   
   
      500 DIS. DLM kişide kişi adrukı bar telim “there are many differences between one man and another” 201; 0.0. 272, 404, 761, etc.; telimrek 2148: xiu (?) At. telim er kanı “many men's blood" 142; 3 0.0.; Tef. telim “many, much” 297: Xwar. xin ditto “Ali 52: xin(?) köp telim “very many” Og. 119, 120, etc.: xiv telim/télim “many” Qutb 174-6; MN 366; Nahc. 336, 7: Tkm. xii al-katir (Kip. köp/üküş) te:lim Hou. 25, 13: xiv delim a/-kafir, and one says bu delim dur 'this is too much', on finding something excessive ("ind istihtari”l-şay”) İd. şo: Osm. xiv ff. delim “many, much”, very common in XIV and xv, once in xvt TTS /rgr, 11 275; 111377: IV 201: xvitt telim, in Rümi, faráwáün wa bisyür “much, many” San. 160v. 25. D tilim (d-) N.S.A. fr. til-; 'a (single) slice' and the like. S.i.a.nı.l.g.ş in SW Az., Osm., "Fkm. dilim, a 1.-w. in Pe., see Doerfer 11932: cf. tilğe:. Xak. xı bi:r tilim et “a slice (filda) of meat'; also used of anything cut or split lengthways Kaş. 7 397: Çağ. xv ff. tilim qág burida "cut in slices” San. 200r. 29 (quotns.); 2.0. do, 198v. 9 (til-) Kom. xiv “a slice of bread' tilim CCG; Gr. VU(?D) 1 tulum the only meaning in Xak. is 'weapons, military equipment; fr. the medieval period onwards the only meaning, except when it is a Sec. f. of tulup, is “a skin container, inflated skin used as a float', etc. It is, of course, poss. but not very likely that these are two different words, In both cases the word might semantically be regarded as a N.S.A. fr. tol-, but it is consistently pronounced tulum in all the modern languages in which it survives and is a l.-w. in this form and the second meaning in Mong. (Kow. 1855, Haltod 431). 'The evidence against any conr.ction with tol- seems to be overwhelming, but there is no semantic connection vv. tul-. A L-w. in Pe. and other foreign languages, see Doerfer I1 931. Xak. xi tulum al-siláh ism càmi* "a generic term for weapons (or military equipment)! Kaş. 1 397; J 215 (anut-), IJ 3o (1 ba:n-) and 2 o.o.: K B (do not forget death) apar yok tulum “there are no weapons against i! 1381; ok ya tulum 'bow and arrows and military equipment' 3623; er at sü tulum "men and horses, an army, and vveapons” 5485; o.o. 1381 (2 at), 1537 (1 tüg), 2339, 2355: Çağ. xv ff. tulum xik “a skin container', in Ar. ziqq San. 184v. 18, a.o. 92v. 23 (uyma:). S 2 tulum See tulup. ?D tilmagc (d-) 'interpreter'; prima facie der. fr. til, but morphologically obscure since -maç is otherwise a Dev. Suff. forming names of foodstuffs; the possibility that it is a l.-w. cannot therefore be excluded, particularly since in a slightly different form it exists in Old Church Slavonic, while in Turkish it is not traceable earlier than KB; the reading timo in U II 19, 9 (Kuan. 127) is a misreading of nomçi, S.ia.mlg.; the forms which it takes in Turkish and various foreign languages are discussed at length in Daerfer IT 1010. Xak. xi K Bukuska biligke bu tılmaçı til “the interpreter of this to understanding and knowledge is the tongue! 162: xiv Muh. (2) tarcumün "interpreter! ttlma:e Fef. rss (only): Çağ. xv ff. tilmac (spelt) "an interpreter' (tfarcumán) who is an intermediary between two people and translates their words from one language to another, also pronounced dilmac San. 200r. 25: Kom. 'interpreter' telmaç (sic, in the Pe. column falamaçi) CCI; tolmaç CCG; Gr, (the latter a Slavonic form): Kip. xiv al-tarcumán talma:e | (sic) Hul. 6, 11: xv ditto tilmage (in margin, 'with t- and d-”) Tuh. ga. 3. Dis. V. DLMD telmir- (?d-) perhaps Intrans. Den. V. fr. telim, but, if so, it should mean “to do something many times'; in practice it means 'to look (at Someone) tenderly, or expectantly'.. Survives in SE "Türki telmür- ; NC Kır., Kzx. telmir- ; SW "Tkm. delmir-, same meaning. Uy£. vini ff. Bud. telmire kózin teri xatunlarına körürler “they look tenderly (or expectantly ?) at their divine consorts” 77 7, p. 19, note 46,2 (fr. Maitrisimit): Xak. xı er telim telmirdi: “the man glanced (talaffata) to the right and left as if he was looking for something or saw a man or the like” Kaş. // 179 (telmire:r, telmirme:k): KB ölüm tutti bardı kózi telmire “death took (the lords of this world) and they went off glancing about them' 6634: Çağ. xv ff. télmür- (-di, -üp) (VU) çahr-, bah- "to look expectantly'(?) Vel. 195 (quotn.; the first. verb is unvocalized and cannot be identified); tölmür- (spelt) büz màndan-i (asm. dar intizür swa atdfa-i nazar kardan 'to look long and expectantly' Sam. zoor, 1 (quotns): Xwar. xiv telmür- “to look tenderiy” Qut) 174. Tris. DLM VUD tulumluğ P.N./A. fr. tulum; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vur ff. Man. M İT ir, 12 (teğ-): Xak. xı tulumluğ er a/-mudaccac “an armed man” Kaş. I 498 (verse): KB (a famous warrior) er üdrüm kerek sü tulumluğ témis “said “your men must be picked and your army well armed” ” 2337. Tris. V. DLMVUD tulumlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. tulum. Xak. xı er tulumlandı: /abisa'[-racul atezára'l-harb. sca'l-siláh “the man wore military equipment and arms! Kaş, 1I 266 (tulumlanu:r, tulumlanma:k). D tilemsin- (d-) Refl. Simulative Den. V. *tilem, N.S.A. fr. tile:-; mentioned only to illustrate this verbal form. Xak. xr ol andın ne:p tilemsindi: "he pretended to ask (yaz/ubu) him for the thing” Kaş. /7 259, 29. D tilimsin- (d-) Refl. Simulative Den. V. fr. tilim; mentioned in the same way as tilemsin- Xak. xı «ol» yarinda:k tilimsindi: “he pretended to cut a strap! (vagiddu'[-qidd) Kaş. 4I 262, 8. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 545 
     
   
   
       DIS. DLS sor Dis. DLN D to:lun (d-) Intrans. Dev. N./A. fr. to:l-; used only in the phr. tolun (a:y) 'the full moon”, a:y somcetimes omitted; s.i.s.m.l., in SW Osm. dolun, Xak. x1 tolun ay a/-badr "the full moon” Kaş. I 402; 7 82 (to:lun a:y); 7 288, 5 (tolu:n); /// 33, 14 (to:lun): KB qiyamatta körgit tolun teg yüzi 'show his face like a full moon on the day of resurrection' 48; tolun bolsa tolsa “vhen (the moon) becomes full and is full” 732: xin(?) Tef. tolun ay 3og: Çağ. xv ff. tolun pur wa mamlü” "full, filled'; tolun ay badr-: kamil "the full moon” San. 184v. 22 (quotn): Xwar. xiv tolun ay Qutb 182; MN s, etc.: Kip. xii al-badr ay tolun that is qamar mal'àn Hou. $, 4: xiv (tol“to be full”, hence) tolun ay/tolu ay “the moon filled with light" /d. 66. tulup “the temples! (anatomical); hence “the hair on the temples', and later more generally “a lock of hair”. Survives meaning “a lock of hair”, sometimes specifically over the temples, in NE, most dialects, tulup; NC Kır., Kzx. tulum SC Uzb. tolim/tulim; NW Kaz. tolim; Kk, Nog. tulim; SW xx Anat. dulum/dulun/tulun/tulup SDD 472, 1396. Uy£. vir ff, Civ. tulu:yr sançar “he has a splitting headache! TT VIII L4: Xak. xi tulun a/-şudğ “the temples': tulun “a small component (2arra) in a horse's bridle, its position is below the horse's ear, and the temple and head straps are passed through it; hence one says yügün tulunpi: tayi”atı”l-licám 'bridle fittings! Kaş. III 371; tulun “the temples! in one of the two dialects (lufatayn); and the small component of a bridle which is on the temples to the right and left is called tulun 7 4or: Xwar. xiv tulup "hair on the forehead! Qutb 185: Kom. xiv “a lock of hair” tulum CCG; Gr.: Kip. xitt al-dafira "a lock of hair” tulum ou. 19, zo, (VU) al-fard xa huwa'l-sudg tulun (sic?, vocalized tafın) do. 22, r: xiv tulup (with -9") al-şudğ İd. 66: xv şudğ (taplay Mong. l.-w.; in margin) tulun Twh. 22a. 3: Osm. xiv ff. dulup, less often tulup, 'temples' in several texts TT'S 1227; II 323; II 211; IV 244. E tilpeg See telge:k. Dis. V. DLND telin- (d-) Refl. f. of tel-; survives in SW Osm. delin- *to be perforated, worn through'. Türkü vir üze: tepri: basmasar asra: yer telinmeser “if the sky does not press down from above, or the earth be pierced beneath" (who can harm the Türkü people?) 7 E 22, IT E 18: Uyf. viii ff. Bud. U III 357, 3 (oyul-): Civ. sü silleser yér telinür “if he goes on an expedition the earth is pierced' (i.e. collapses before or beneath him) T'T 7 32; (a remedy) telinmez kartka “for an ulcer that does not discharge! H I 42 (tenilip in do. 43 is an error for telinip): Xak, xı ta:m telindi: "the wall was pierced' (ifaqaba) Kaş. II 147 (telinü:r, telinme:k): xiu?) Tef. telin- "to be perforated, pierced' (of a ship, and pearls) 297:  Çağ. xv ff. télin- sürüx şudan "to be perforated' San. 199r. 4. D tilen- (d-) Refl. f. of tile:-; s.i.s.m.l., in SW Az., Osm., Tkm. dilen-, usually meaning 'to ask for (something) for oneself, to beg'. Uyğ. viii ff, Civ. men Künbermiş Sapunda tilengü ol “he must ask me, Künbermiş S. (for the payment)! USp. 35, 4: Xak. xı em sem anar tilenip 'I sought for (falabtu) a remedy (Hend.) for it” Kaş. 1 407, 28; tilengil 'seek' III 43, zo, n. m.e.: KB iki ajun tilen “seek for both worlds for yourself! 443: Ktp. xiii hadda mina'l-kudya “to beg” tile:n- Hou. 43, 10: Xiv şahada ditto dilen- Bul. sov.: xv şahata ditto (kovala-/kov-/)tilen- Tuh. 21b. 9. D tilin- (d-) Refl. f. of til-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı teri: tilindi: “the hide split lengthways (fnşaqqa £üla(n)) like straps' (al-qidd) Kaş. II 149 (tilinü:r, tilinme:k): Çağ. xv ff. tilinşarha şarha burida şudan "to be cut in slices" San. 199r. 4. Tris. V. DLND tulunla:- Den. V. fr. tulug; properly “to strike on the temples. Xak. xi ol kulin tulunla:dı: soakasahu "ala lahyahi wea taht üdüihi "he struck (his slave) on the chin and below the ear' Kaş. I11 409 (tulupla:r, tulunla: ma:k). D tilapur- pec. to Üyğ, and noted only in the Infin. which seems to mean “eloquence”, morphologically obscure, but ultimately der. f. til. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. tila:purma:k TT VIII G.11; U 117,9; Hüen-ts. 1986; USp. 59, 18; Sun. 506, 13. Dis. DLR VU?D tiler Hap. leg.; the name of some kind of insect; Müller suggests 'the praying mantis', no doubt regarding it as the Aor. of tile:- used asa Noun. Uyğ. vırı ff. Bud. ("dogs, tortoises, snakes, violent evil animals vvith fangs and talons, birds, flies) tiler, (ants, beetles, etc.”) U II 35, 20-24. Tris. DLR VU(D) tolursuk the second vowel bas been read as a fatlıa but looks more like a damma, survives in NC Kir. tolarsak R 1/7 1193, in "ud. tolorsuk “a small bone which links the knuckle bone to the shinbone in the leg of a quadruped'; there is a related Kzx. word tilersek translated 'shin bone” in R 7JII 1383 and “Achilles” tendon” in MM 361. Morphologically obscure, but hardly a basic word. Xak. xı tolursuk “the heel” (al-'agib), usually used for the heel of a quadruped ('agibu'l-dabba) Kaş. I soz. Dis. DLS VU?F talas n.o.a.b.; ?a 1.-vv.ş Kay. also mentions the word as a place-name. Xak. xı talas (làm unvocalized) ai-maqbad (error for al-miqbas) that is “the cord which is stretched at the winning post (a/-ğdya) for horse races and  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 546 
     
   
   
     $502 DIS (competitions at) striking with a polo-stick' Kaş. 1 366; tasal 'the boundary (al-madá tea l-hadd) which is set up for (competitions in) striking with a polo-stick'; it is a metathesis (qalb) of tala:s (sic) (a similar metathesis in Ar. is quoted) 7 392. VU tulas n.o.a.b. Xak. xi al-wachu'l-sáhim "a pale (or emaciated) face” is called tulas yü:z Kaş. 1 366: KB tümen yılda berü tul erdim tulas 'for countless years [ have been a pale widow' 84: Kip. xır a/-haqir 'humble, despised' (opposite to cali! illustrious") tula:z Hou. 26, 17. Dis. V. DLSD talaş- (?d-) Recip. f. of tala:- , s.i.a.m.l.g., in SW Az., Osm., Tkm. dalas-, with the same shades of meaning as tala:-. See Doerfer 1l 923-4. Uyğ. viti ff. Civ. (in a contract for the cession of land; my elder and younger brothers, children and relatives whoever they may be) talaşmazunlar “are not to dispute (this cession)! USp. 15, 11-12; beş yek talaşur “five demons fight one another” T'T' I 29; a.o. do. 74 (çaşut): Çağ. xv ff. talaş- Aris kardan “to make war, quarrel” Sax, 159r. 2 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv talaş- “to dispute, object, quarrel" Qutb 169: Kom. xiv “to quarrel” talaşCCG; Gr.: Kip. xi adşama “to quarrel' talaş- (Imperat. in error -gil) Hor. qo, 1: Xv (whoever speaks) anın bile talaşkaymen adárib ma'ahu “1 shall come to blows with him” Kav. 27, t0; xágama (Savaş- and) talas Tu. 158. 3: Osm. xv-xvi dalas- (once talaş-) “to quarrel'; in two or three texts T TS I 173; II 254; IV 731. D teliş- (d-) Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of tel-. Xak. xı ola:r ikki: ta:m telişdi: "they two competed in breaking throuah ( f? tag) a wall" (etc.); also used for helping Kaş, 77 ro8 (telişü:r, telişme:k). D tileş- (d-) Co-op. f. of tile:- ; survives in SE Türki tileş- (Share only); "TTkm. dileş- "to ask of one another”, Xak. x1 ol menin birle: ne:r tileşdi: “he competed with me in searching for the thing'( ft iftigádr l-gay' wa nugdánihi) Kaş. II 108 (tile:şü:r (sic), tileşme:k): Çağ. xv ff. San. 199r. 5 (tile:-). D tiliş- (d-) Hap. leg. ?; Co-op.f. of til-. Xak. xı ol mapa: yarında:k tilişdı: “he helped me to cut a strap'( f? qaddrl-qidd), also used for competing Kaş. IJ 108 (tilisü:r, tilişme:k). Dis. DLY F talu:y (?d-) originally specifically “the sca', later used for any large body of water. A Chinese l.-w. In 'Nachworte zur Inschrift von Tonjukuk' (in Radloff, Dre alttürkischen Inschriften von. Mongolei, zweite Folge, StPétersbourg, 1899) p. 18, Hirth made the plausible suggestion that it represented the Chinese phr. £a “great” (Giles 10,470) and lei (Giles 6,843 vv. the ^vater radical attached). "This /ei (Middle Chinese İytez i.e. ?/ui) was a . DLS medieval name of the Sang-kan River in Chih-li (NE China) down which the "Türkü advanced in their raids towards the sea in late vir, As they had never before approached the sca they may well have thought that it was the Great Lui River. An early l.-w. in Mong. as dalay (Haenisch 31) perhaps borrowed direct fr. Chinese. "The word in Og. below and NE, most dialects, talay R 777 878 and 'l'uv. dalay are re-borrowings fr. Mong. Türkü vitt (I campaigned up to the Shantung plain and) talu:yka: kiçiğ teğmedim 'just failed to reach the sea” / S 3; a.o. T 18: viri ff. (I am a golden eagle . . .) talu:yda: yatipan 'lying by the sea” IrkB 3: Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A. ol taluy “that sea” (or lake?) M III ro, 14 (i): Man. emgeklig taluydin keçürtüpüz 'vou have brought us across a sea of suffering! TT II] 51; taluy ógüzdeki balıklar “the fishes in the sea” do. 90; a.0. do. 163: Bud. uluğ taluy ógüz él(T)igi (the Bodhisattva) “great ruler of the sea" U 7 18, 1; 0.0. Sut. 354, 7 (étigsiz); Kuan. 177 (andik-); U IH ss, 3 (i); in. PP taluy and taluy ógüz, both meaning 'sea', are common: (Xwar. xi(?) munda itil müren degen bir dalay bar érdi “here there was a large body of water called "the river (Mong. l.-w.) Volga"' Og. rs7; daki daluy (sic?) dakı müren “lakes and rivers! do. 101). Mon. DM 1 ta:m (?d-) originally “a wall' (by implication built of mud or mud bricks); s.i.a.m.l.g. w. a wide range of extended meanings including 'a building with earth walls; a brick-built structure; a grave mound'; SW Az., Osm. dam “roof”, Tkm. ta:m “a brick-built structure”. Türkü viti (I have written this inscription) bu: taşka: bu: ta:mka: (sic) "on this stone and these walls! 7 SE: Uyg. vin ff. Chr. U I 3, 1617; (bégük): Bud. tam tokiyu *pounding into shape the (earth) walls! (in building a housc) TT V7 82: Civ. (if a man falls from his horse or is flogged or) tamdin tüsüp 'falls off a wall' 7 7 181; tegirmi tam icinte esrük boltip "you have become drunk within a walled enclosure! 7'7 7 57: Xak. xi ta:m a/-cidar wal Kaş, İİ 157; I] 153 (ükeklig), 307 (ükekle:-), and nearly 40 0.0. translated al-cidár, al-hö”it 'wall' or. al-süir *town wall': xin(?) Tef. dam "wall, building” 116; tam ditto 283: xiv Muh. al-höit ta:m Rif. 179 (Mel. 75, 13 t1wa:r); al-sath "a roof? da:m 76, 6; ta:m r79: Çağ. xv ff. tam fam . sagf ma'násina “roof” Vel. 175 (quotn.); tam diteár-i saray "palace wall' San. 161 v. 4: Xwar. xırı(?) bu üynin da”amı “the wall of this house” Og. 249 (Mongoloid spelling representing a long vowcl): xiv tam “vali” Qutb 169: Kom. xiv 'roof' tam CCI; Gr.: Kip. xii al-sath ta:m üsti: Hou. 6, 4: xiv tam (t-) sic ditto. Id. 66; ditto azm Bul. 16, 10: XV s/füh (also al-qá'ir ?meaning, perhaps error for a/-qa"ida 'foundation) tam Tuh. 19b. ir: Osm. xiv ff. dam (and? tam) “building, cowshed, prison', and the like in several texts Z"TS I1 174; II 254; III 165; IV 188. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 547 
     
   
   
      EU MEE EE IRIS STCEDI I REEE  DIS. V. DMC- 503 VU 2 tam Hap. leg.; there is no widely current Turkish word for “bolt, door-bar'. Xak. xı tam /izázu'l-báb "the bolt or bar of a door'; hence one says kapuğ tamlattı: “he fastened (şadda) the door with a bar” Kaş. 1 337. VU?F ti:m IIap. leg.; there is perhaps some misapprehension here; the word is prob. a 1.-vv. from Chinese tren “shop, inn” (Giles 11,173; Pulleyblank, Middle Chinese tem) which would explain why it was used for 'wine merchant('s shop)”. Xak. xı ti:m afl-zigqu'l-mamli” xamr “a skin filled with wine' ; ti:zmel: al-xammár "a wine merchant'; some people call “a wine merchant! (fáciru'l-xamr) tim, but the former is more correct, because -Çİ: is the suffix for persons carrying on professions (al-muhtarifin) Kaş. 1II 136. 1 tum (?d-) Hap. leg. Xak. xi tum al-bard fi agli l-luga “cold” as the basic word; but they use tumliğ for “cold” and “a cold (a/-börid) thing” Kaş. 1 338. VU 2 tum pec. to Xak. Xak. xi tum “uniform' (al-bahim) of a colour when speaking of horse's coats ( f? szyáti'l-xavl); hence one says tum kara: at 'a uniformly black horse', and tum torığ at “a uniformly dark bay (Rumayt) horse” Kaş. 1 338: KB (do not look for a big army) er üdrüm tile ham tulum tum bile “look for picked men with standard equipment' 2339. Mon. V. DMtam- (d-) “to drip'; s.i.m.m.l., in SW Az, Osm., Tkm. dam- ; in some modern languages the der. f. tamçıla- is used as well as, or instead of, tam-. Xak. xı su:v tamdı: "the water (etc.) dripped (qatara) Kaş. 1I 26 (tama:r, tamma:k); five o.o.:: KB sözi yumşak erdi tili tüz tamar “his specch was gentle, and his tongue dripped equably” 464; qalamda kara tamsa altun kelir “if black (ink) drips from the pen, gold comes' 2715: xıı1(?) Tef. tam- “to drip” 283:xıv Mu. qatara dam- Mel. 3o, 7; tam- Rif. t14 (adding a naqata “to drip): Çağ. xv ff. tam- “to drip” (çakidan), in Rümi tamla- San. 161r. 11 (quotns.): Xwar. xur tam- (of blood, etc.) “to drip” "47 35, 48: xiv ditto MN 72, ctc.: Kom. xiv ditto CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv tam- qafara İd. 66: xv darafa (sic, ?read darina “to be dirty") tea naqata tam- Tuh. 16a. 6: Osm. xiv ff. dam- (sometimes spelt tam-) “to drip”, c.i.a.p. TTS I 174; I1 254; III 165; IV 187. Dis. DMA F 1 tamu: 'hell'; l.-w. fr. Sogdian trm; in the medieval period the form tamuğ, possibly borrowed fr. some other lranian language, appeared. One of the few pagan religious terms which was taken over by Islam. S.i.s.m.l. in both forms; see Doerfer II 936. "Türkü vırı ff. (the road which leads) tamu kapğına “to the door of hell” Chuas. 126; tamu yérin 'the country of hell' do. 161: Uyğ. vurff. Man.-A M I 13, 15 (1a:$-): Man. T'T III 14 (to:-): Bud. tamu is fairly common, e.g. tamuli yılkılı '(rebirth in) hell or as an animal” U 1/ 33, 7; (you have suffered grievous pains) tamudakı teg “like those in hell” U 7/7 46, 18 etc.: Xak. xı tamu: a name for “hell (cahannum) Kaş. 111 234: KB tamudin yirar 'it is far from hell' 292; solupdin tamu ornı uştmax on ol “hell is on your left and paradise on the right” 917; iki ev yarattı bu xalqka kamuğ biri atı uçmak birinin tamuğ (sic) “he created two dwelling places for all these people, the name of one is paradise and of the other hell” 3654: xi(?) Tef. tamuğ 'hell' 284: xiv Muh.(?) cahannum tamuğ Rif. 138 (only): Çağ. xv ff. tamug/ tamuk £amu cahannum ma'nàsima Vel. 175; tamuğ/tamuk düzax “hell” Sar. 161v. 19 (quotn.): Xwar. xır tamuğ “A/ s2: xiv ditto Qutb. 169: Kom. xiv. “hell” tamu/ tamuk/tamux CCI, CCG; Gr.: (Kap.) xri cahanunum "km. ta:mu: “Hou. 8, zr: xiv tamu: ditto /d. 66: xv ditto Tuh. 11a. 8: Osm. xiv ff. ditto; c.i.a.p. TTS 1671; 11873; III 663; IV 733. ?E 2 tamu: at the end of a verse in Kaş, I 420, 5 is prob. a scribal error for Şamu:. ?D toma: Hap. leg.; morphologicallv Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. to:-, but with no very clear semantic connection. Xak. x1 toma: buxsun “that which rises to the top (ma yataşü"ud 'alá'l-ra's) of a iar of millet beer” Kaş. HI 234. Dis. V. DMA- P time:- n.o.a.b.; noted only in the Hend. éttime:-, which seems to mean “to prepare". See timeğ, timen-. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. [gap] etdi timedi “he prepared' (acc. to the Chinese text his “books and pictures” (for the homeward journey)) Hüen-ts. 84; odğurak étingey timeğeymen “1 shall make thorough preparations” (and collect an enormous army with elephants) do. 318-19. Dis. DMB PUF tembin/tenpin a liquid measure for wine, pec. to Uyğ. Civ. and clearly a Chinese ].-w.; it must have been a fairly small quantity since in USp. 4, 1-2 otuz tembin bir kab bor “a skin of wine containing şo tembins' and in Malov DUD 1, 6 otuz tembin bir kab süçüğ, same meaning, are mentioned. The word is discussed at length, in Japanese, by N. Yamada in Memoirs of the Faculty of Letters, Osaka University, XI, March 1965, pp. 92-3. Dis. DMC VUDF ti:mçi: N.Ag. fr. tizm; “vine merchant'; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı Kaş. III 136 (ti:m): KB yağı ol bu bor timçi “the wine merchant is an enemy (of mankind)' 2098. -Dis. V. DMCD tamçur- (?tamçır-) der. f. of tamn.o.a.b., the Suff. -çur-/çür-, etc. is extremely rare; in tapçur- and kikçür- it is a  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 548 
     
   
   
      504 Sec. f. of -sur-/-sür-, which is prima facie a Caus. f. of -ş-, but there is no parallel -sform of this verb and the question whether there is one of külçir- is an open one. This may, of course, be fortuitous, Kag.'s statement that it formed Inchoative Verbs is prima facie convincing, whatever its origin. morphologically, Xak. xi yağmur tamçurdi: faraşşaşa (MS. in error farşasa) "İ-matar aca cá'a'l-tall 'the rain drizzled and there was a slight shower! (and the like) Kaş. 77 175 (tamçura:r (MS. famçrrar:r), tamçurma:k), (in a note on the four kinds of verbs containing four consonants) the third kind consists of Intrans. Verbs meaning 'almost to do something, and genuinely intend to do it but to approach the action gradually and by degrees', for example su:v tamçurdi: (MS. tam(irdi) "the water drizzled (taraggaga) from the clouds and oozed out (sari5a) a little” /J 200, 26 fT. (and sce taşğur-): (Çağ. xv ff. tamsi- “to drink wine slowly from the glass, not hurrying but enjoying the flavour' l'el. 175 (quotn.); tamşı- (spelt) same translation San. 161r. 19 (quotn.); no doubt a survival of this Verb). Dis. DMD D tamdu:/tamdvk ]Hap. leg., but sce tamduksuz; presumably Dev. N.s fr. tamıd-. Xak. xi tamdu: a/-daram "a fierce fire, blaze'; also called tamduk Kaş. 7 418. Dis. V. DMDPU?DF tamid- “to blaze up”. Survives as tamiz-, same mcaning, in NE Koib., Sag.: NC Kır., Kzx.; NW Kaz., Kk., Nog. Prob. a Den. V. fr. the Chinese word yen 'flame, blaze”, etc. (Giles 13,069 or 13,151-2 which were diam in Karlgren' s Archaic (but not Ancient) Chinese) i in which case the borrowing must go back to a very early. period; cf. biti:-, Uyğ. virr ff. Bud. kalti kurug otun tiltafinda ot tamidur édiz küyer örtecnür 'just as fire, bv reason of (the presence of) dry kindling flames and. burns high and blazes' U 11 $, 26 ff. D tamıt- (d-) one of several Caus. f. of tam- ; survives in SE Türki, Shaw 65, Jarring 293. Cf. 2 tamtur-, tamız-. Xak. xi ol su:vni: tamıttı: gatfara'l-má' “he dropped the water (etc.) in small drops! Kag. /1 311 (tamitu:r, tamıtma:k). PUD tamdul- Ilap. leg.; morphologically Pass. f. of tamıd-, which is irregular as that is an Intrans. V. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. kalti başda tamdulmis tonda tutunmiş küyer otuğ öçürğeli tavranurça “ust as (people) caught in garments which are on fire from head (to foot) hurry to put out the burning fire” Suc. 141, 8-10. D tamdur- Caus. f. of tamid-; the position of the word in Kag. n that the third consonant was -d- (? for -d-) in Xak. N.o.a.b Uyğ. vrir ff. Bud. tamdurdum men kamafda yég nomluğ yulağ ' have kindled DIS. V. DMCihe torch of the supremely good doctrine" U 7 22, 3-4; 0.0. [HI 32, 19 ff. (Süksük) and 23; TT VH 40, 98, and 112; JHiüen-ts. 1908-9 (için), USp. roza, 35 (yula:): Xak. xi ol o:t tamdurdı: (MS. in error famturdi) "he kindled (areqada) the fire", also used for "to light (a lamp, asraca) Kaş. 11 176 (tamdurur, tamdurma:k): K/j fasid tamdurur ol udinmis otuğ 'wickedness makes that dying fire blaze up” 4412. 5 amur: (d-) Caus. f. of tam-; survives in "Türki tamdur-; SW Tkm. damdır-. Ak x1 ol anip ağzına: su:v tamturdt: "he ordered that water should be dripped (bitaqattur) into his mouth! Kaş. // 175 (tamturur, tamturma:k, “this is a wcak (da"ifa) word"). , 'Tris. DMD PU?F tama:ta: Hap. leg.; the first letter is undotted hut must be either b- or t-, prob. the latter since b- before -m- is very unusual in Xak.; Brockelmann's and Atalay's suggestion of y- is excluded by its position in Kag.; a very unusual form, prob. a l-w. Xak. xt tamn:ta: “a piece of thin dough ('acin) of the kind used for pastry wrapped round a fat fowl, or a piece of meat so that its juices (teadakuliá) are not spilt when it is cooked” Keş, 1 445. D tamduksuz Hap. leg.; Priv. N./A. fr. tamduk; -t- in these texts often represents -d-. Uy. vin ff, Bud. Sanskrit. nirubdddana va $ikhi "like a fire without kindling” tazmtuksu:z (sic) od ya:lı:nı te:g TT VIII A.29. Dis. DMĞ SF tamuğ See tamu:, S tamak Scc tamğa:k. | tamğa: an old word ending in -ğa:, not semantically connected. with 2 tamğa:, originally a “brand” or mark of ownership placed on horses, cattle, and other livestock; it became at a very early date something like a European coat of arms or crest, and as such appears at the head of several "Türkü and many O. Kir. funerary monuments, scc L. P. Kyzlasov, "Novaya datirovka yeniseiskoi pis/mennosti' (Sovetskaya arkheologiya, 1960, 11) and “o datirovke pamyatnikov yeniseiskoi pis'mennosti' (do. 1965, 111). It was the word used for a Chinese 'scal' and passed into Mong. in this meaning as famafa (Kere, 1643). S.rLa.m.].g. vv. some phonetic variations; in SW Az., Osm. damğa, Tkm. tağma, a ].-w. in Pe. and other foreign languages, sce Doerfer II 933, where the word is discussed at great length. Türkü vrnr ff. Man. tamğa is used for the mystical 'seals' of the Manichaeans Chuas. 177 (see note thereon), 181, etc.: Uyğ. vir ff. Man. üç tamkalarığ (sic) bütürdi “they carricd out the (obligations created by the) three. seals! TT. II 144: Bud. in Buddhist terminology Sanskrit »udrád “a mystical gesture or pose' translated in Chinese by a word 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 549 
     
   
   
      'TRIS. which normally means “seal” is translated tamğa, e.g. etóz közedğü tamğa tutmış kerğek "one must assume the posc (mudrá) for protecting the body” TT V 8, ş3: a.o.o.in TT V: Civ. TT I 129 (3 aD; in USp. tamğa is very common for "the personal seal” impressed on commercial documents: Xak. x1 tamğa: "the seal” (tábi') of a king or other individual Kaş. 1 424: KB kedin boldi tamğa kamuğ savçıka 'thereafter he (Muhammad) became the seal (Ar. technical term a/-xdtim) of all the prophets' 45; (the king) vvazirlik anar bérdi tamğa ayağ 'gave him the post of Vizier, a seal and a title” 1036: xiv Mu. al-'aldma "a mark” tamğa: Mel. şı, 2; Rif. 146; al-xatm ('scal") wa'l-hadára . . . “seal and (?meaning' ; Rif. dağ "brand”) tamğa: 85, r, 119: Çağ. xvff. tamğa “a sign or mark” ('aláma zoa nişdn) ; and the implement with which they seal or mark (muhr twa nigán kunand) something, or brand (dağ numdyand) livestock; and a grant (fattah) of tithes or government taxes'; and also a seal or sign on the decrees of ""Vurkish rulers, those written in liquid gold being called altun tamğa, those in red ink al tamğa and those in black ink kara tamğa San. 161 v. 13 (this refers primarily to the chancery practices of the Mongol rulers of Persia): Xwar. xır(?) (I have become your xagan . . .) tamğa bizke bolzun buyan 'let virtue be our distinguishing mark" Oğ. 98-9: Kom. xiv “seal” tamxa CCG, Gr.: Kip. xv xatm tamğa Tuh. 14b. 8, kayy "brand” tamğa do. 31a. r. D 2 tamğa: Hap. leg.; Dev. N. fr. tam-. Xak. xı tamğa: “any affluent (s4"/4) of seas, pools, rivers, and the like” ş and “a narrow arm of the sea” ( ferdatıcl-bahr) is called tamğa: Kaş. I 424 (verse). D tamğa:k (d-) Dev. N. (connotirig habitual action) fr. tam- ; lit. “constantly dripping”, but in practice "the throat', or perhaps more precisely “the soft palate'. Practically syn. vv. boğuz, S.i.m.m.l.g. sometimes with extended meanings like “the mouth of a river” (cf. 2 tamğa:) and “food”, in SW Az. (meaning *palate'"), Osm., Tkm. damak. Uy£. vii ff. Man. TT II 16, 16 (opra:-); M 1I 11, 20 (tütün): Bud. tim tamğakım . . . kuriyu “my tongue and throat being dry' U III 37, 29-30; (placing the ring finger in turn) almka tamğakka yürekke “on the forehead, the throat, and the hcart” Müller, Zauberritual (SPAW, 1928), zz, 5: Civ. til tüpi boğzı Ööpke:si ta:mğa:kı “the root of the tongue, the throat, lungs, and throat (or palate?) TT VIIT I.1 (the difference of meaning between it and boğuz here is obscure); boğuz tamak (sic) H I 12 (ağrı:-): Xak. xı tamğa:k a/-halq sca' l-hancara "throat (or palate) and throat (or gullet! Kaş. I 469; (if a man talks too much) tamğak kata:r "his jaw (al-hanak) stiffens through dryness of the mouth' 7 467, 9; the Turks call al-hulqiim "the throat or gullet' tamğak and the Oğuz etc. tamak 7 33, 17: xın(?) At, 'asal tatrup ilkin tamak (stc) tatitip “first he gives you honey to taste, and. makes a pleasant taste in your throat' 207; DMÖĞ : $05 Tef. tamağım *my throat! 283: xiv Muh.(?) al-lahát "the uvula' ta:ma:k (mis-spelt ya:ma:k; and al-halq boğaz) Rif. 140 (only): Xwar. xiv tamak *throat' Qutb 169: Kom. xiv ditto CCI, CCG, Gr.: Kip. xir saqfu'l-halq "the roof of the throat" tama:k (and al-hulqim boğa:z) Hou. zo, s: xiv tamak ditto 7d. 66: xv zardama 'throat' tamaw; Tkm. tamağ Tuh. 17b. ro, Dis. V. DMGD tamğır- (d-) Hap. leg.; Inchoative f. of tam-; cf. tamcur-, Xak. xı su:v tamBirdi: “the water was on the point of dripping (Rada . . . an yaqtur) from the ice” Kaş. İl 179 (tamğira:r, tamğırma:k). Tris. DMĞ D tuma:ğu: (?d-) Dev. N. fr. *tuma:- Den. V. fr. 1 tum; “a cold in the head”, S.i.a.m.l.g.; the first vowel is consistently -u- or an equivalent; in SW Az. tumov; Tkm. dümev; in Osm. Sami gro spells it tomağı but says that it was obsolete, Red. has the same spelling, the xx Anat. forms are duma, dumağ, dumağa, dumağı SDD 473-4 (all very common) and domağa, domağı do. 456 (both Hap. leg.). Uyğ. vrit ff. Civ. tumağu bolup ketmeser “if a man has a cold which will not go away' H I 144; alo. H II 35, 27: Xak. xi tuma:ğu: al-zukàm "a cold in the head” Kaş. 1 447: xiv Muh. zukám du:ma:ğu: Mel. 65, 1; tu:ma:fu: Rif. 164: Kip. xv axşam “having a cold in the head” tumaw (in margin in SW(?) hand tumağ) Tuh. 4a. 7; zuküám tumaw (MS. in error famam), ditto tumağ do. 18a. r: Osm. xiv-xviri dümağu/ tumağu, occasionally dumagi/tumafii; common down to xviri, esp. in dicts., T T.S II 324; İH 212; IV 245. D tamğa:çı: N.Ag. fr. 1 tamğa: the official title of an officer whose duties related to the tamğa:, as the meaning of the latter term varied it is impossible to translate the word with confidence in most contexts. A L-w. in Pe. and Mong. see Doerfer 11 934. Türkü viri the two representatives of “my son the 'Türgeg Xağan of the On Ok (Western Türkü)” at Küf Tégin's funeral were Maxaraç (Sanskrit Mahárájà) tamğaçı: and Oğuz bilge: tamğaçı: 7 N r3: Uy£. vin ff. Civ. a tamÉact is mentioned in USp. 64, 2 an obscure late document relating to tamğa kümüş “money due for taxes' (not, as Radloff supposed, “minted money”), and seems to mean some kind of “tax collector': Xak. xı KB kóni erse kılkı bolur tamğaçı “if his character is upright he becomes a £amğaçı” 4046: Caf. xv ff. tamğaçı 'amil wa mübaşir-i fi l-i tamğa “an official, the supervisor of the business of the farığa” (which seems fr. the quotn. to be taxation) Sart, 161 v. 15. D tamğa:lığ P.N./A. fr. 1 tam£a:; s..s.m.l. Türkü vinrífíf tanuklu:ğ sav tamğa:lığ biti:g eşi:dmi:şte: körü: körml:ş yég “a statement before vvitnesses, a sealed document, seeing is better than hearing” Tun. IlIa. 2-4 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 550 
     
   
   
     $06 TRIS . DMG  (ETY II 94): Yen. tamkalt (sic) yilkt: bupsrz ertt "his branded livestock were unlimited! Ma(. 26, 6: Xak. xi tamğa:lığ Kaş. 1 527 (tamğa:lık): xın(?) Tef. tamğalığ '*sealed' (book) 2835. D tamğa:lık A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. 1 tamja:; pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı tamğalık “a small ewer' (al-ibriq): tamğalık "a small table (a/-mdyida) which a man keeps for his own use” (yaxuss bilia); its origin is tamğa:lığ “marked with a scal” (al-tábi'), because a king seals (yaxtim) his ewer and his private table; they contain (and carry) sufficient drink and food for a man. Hence every such ewer and table are called tamğalık because they are destined to have a seal (xdfim) put on them, so that no one except the king can get hold of them, and if it was said that the qaf took the place of the fay” (MS. in error qàf) because their points of articulation (maxrac) are close together, it would be correct (cd”iz) Kaş. I 527. Tris. V. DMGD tamğakla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. tamğa:k. Xak. xr ol anı: tamğakla:dı: “he struck him on the throat” ("a/4 ha/qihi) Kaş. İT 351 (tamğakla:r, tamğakla:ma:k). D tamğa:la:- Den. V. fr. 1 tamga:; s.i.s.m.l. usually for “to brand, to seal, to stamp', and the like. Türkü vit ff. Toy. IVr. 3-5 (aya:-); Man. tört yaruk tamğa köpülümüzde tamğaladımız “ve have sealed our minds with the four seals of light" Chuas. 177-8: UyÉ. vin ff. Bud. köğüz üze tamÉalap 'making the müdri over the breast TT V 8, şə: Xak. xr ol bitig tamga:la:di: “he put the Sultan's seal (tàbi') on the letter” Kaş. HI 3s3 (tamğala:r (sic), tamğa:la:ma:k): xiv Muh. xatama "to seal' tamğa:1a:- Mel. 25, 13; Rif. 108; 'allama (Rif. adds 'aláma) “to mark” ditto 29, 5; 113. Dis. DMG D timeg lap. leg. ; transcribed timek, but the association with étig makes it certain that this must be a Dev. N. fr. time:- the spelling of which is certain. Uyf. vur ff. Bud... . ulati étig timeğler üze “vith such preparations (or arrangements) as . . .' U İT 40, 108. VU(?D) tümge: 'single-minded, foolish'; n.o.a.b. Uyf. virrff. Man, adın tümke köpüller "other simple minds” TT III 164: Bud. tümğe erdim erser “although I-was foolish” Hüen-ts. 1947; a.o. Suv. 384, 21. Dis. DML D tamlığ (d-) P.N./A. fr. ta:m; “having a wall; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vri ff. Civ. USp. 15, 2-3 (tegzindür-): (Xak. xin(?) Tef. tamlığ suv translating ruffa “a drop of semen' isa parallel P.N./A. fr. tam 'a drop' a homophonous N. associated with tam- which is not noted before the medieval period). "t D tumlığ (?d-) P.N./A. fr. 1 tum (?, see tumli:-); n.o.a.b. Uy£. viri ff. Man. tumliğ suv “cold water' in antithesis to isiğ suv "hot water! H”Td, 4r, 48; a.o. do. 39 (ergür-): Bud. tumluğ yüzlüğ “cold faced' (i.e. hostile, unsympathetic) U ZI 17, iy, 86, 3; TM IV 252, 18; C T X 354 (with an unacceptable suggested etvmology); a.o. Hüen-ts. 106-7 (Ö:d): Xak. xi tumlığ al-bard wa I-bárid “cold" (N. and Adj.); (verse); the origin of tumluğ (sic) is tum: and one says ölüğ yüzi: tumluğ “the dead man's face is cold”, that is his relatives shun him after his death Kaş. I 463; I 338 (1 tum); 77 217 (titreş-), /77 439 (bu:d-) and a dozen o.o. of tumlığ or tumluğ: KB (God created) isiğ tumlığığ “heat and cold” 3726: xın(?) Tef. tumlu/tumlug “cold” (Adj.) 311: xiv. Muh.(?) al-börid (opposite to “hot” isi) tumluğ Rif. 150 (only, sa:wu:k in margin): Kip. xiv dumlu: ai-bard İd. so, tumlu: al-bárid do. 66. Dis. V. DMLD tumli:- (?d-) Den. V. fr. 1 tum with the unusual, Suff. -1:- instead of -la:-; “to be cold", n.o.a.b. It is possible that tumlığ the use of which both as N. and as Adj. is remarked on by Kaş. is a Dev. N./A. fr. this V. and nota P.N./A. fr. 1 tum. Uyğ. vri ff. Bud. ölüp bütün etózi tumiltp (xc) “he died and his whole body became cold” Sr. 4, zo: Xak. xr su:v tumlİrdi: "the water was cold” (barada) Kaş. III 294 (tumlr:r, tumlt:ma:k; verse): KBbumuncaisinmek azu tumlimak 'to be so hot or cold” 4701; iriğ sözke tumlir kişi kópli terk "a man's heart is quickly chilled by harsh words' 5221. VUD tamlat- Hap. leg.; Caus. Den. V. fr. 2 tam; “to bar (a door). Xak. xı Kaş. 1 337 (2 tam). D tumlit- (?d-) Caus. f. of tn mbhi:-; “to chill; n.o.a.b. Xak. xr ol su:v tumlittt: “he chilled (barrada) the water! (milk, etc.) (tumhtu:r, tumlitma:k); and one says ol anın kópnülin tumlitti: “he angered him (ağdabahn) and chilled his heart so that he came to dislike hiny Kaş, 7I 344 (tumhtu:r, tumlitma:k): KB (pride is unprofitable and) köpül tumlitur 2120; (a frowning face and bitter words) kişiğ tumlitur 2577; a.0. 4706: XIV Mh. dabbara "to exert oneself" (this makes no sense, ?metathesis of barrada) tumlut- Mel. 26, 1; Rif. 108. Tris. DML PU?D tumlitu: this word occurs in Uyğ. viti ff. Civ. in eight documents in USp. (13, 4; $6, 6 etc.) in the phr. toBuru tumilitu satdım which clearly means 'I have sold outright and irrevocably'. It is difficult semantically to regard it as a Ger. in -u: of tumht-; cf. tólec. à DF tamu:luğ P.N./A. fr. tamu:; “hellish”, n.o.a.b. Uy£. virt ff. Bud. (if someone breaks his father's and mother's heart) ol tinliğ tamuluğ bolur “that individual becomes destined for hell” (and is not reckoncd as a son or daughter) PP ir, 6: (Xak. xi KB the wise man's saying has come to me us follóws  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 551 
     
   
   
        DIS: DMN 57 tamudin yırar tep tamuluk özi "the man whose spirit is hellishness is far from hell” 292; this makes little sense in the context and may be corrupt). Tris. V. DMLD tamu:la:- Hap. leg.; clearly der. fr. 1 ta:m, but miorphelasiedlt. inexplicable. Xak. xi ol su:vuğ tamu:la:di: şadda sihr b"l-ma" "he dammed up the water! Kaş. 7/1 327 (tamu:la:r, tamu:la:ma:k). VUD tümi:le:- Hap. leg.: Den. V. fr. *tüml: Xak. xı eşye:k tümi:le:di: rataka'l-himár wahwa idü 'adà 'adw bi-qafazün "the donkey advanced in short jumps'; the form more commonly used is tümi:lendi: Kaş. IJI 326 (tümi:le:r, tümi:le:me:k). D tumluğlan- Refl. Den. V. fr. tumluğ (tumlığ), n.o.a.b. Xak. xı ol bu: ufurni: tumluğlandı: “he reckoned that this period (al-wwagqt) was cold” (bárid) and gave up his plan (irtada'a 'ani'l-'azm); and one says ol apar tumluğlandı: "he showed him boorishness and hostile looks” (cafá' tea kuliha'l-tvach) Kaş. II 273 (tumluğlanu:r, tumluğlanma:k). VUD tüml:len:- See tümi:le:-. Dis. DMN temen “a large needle, packing needle”, Survives in NC Kzx. teben and perhaps one or two other languages. Uyf. vin fE Civ. temen “a large needle' is tentatively read in Fam. Arch. 2, 48, so: Xak. xı temen yigue: al-ibratu'l-kabira "a large needle! Kaş. I 402; III 35 (igne:); (Atalay erroneously altered tümen, q.v., to temen in /1/ 367, ro): xiv Mudh. al-misalla "a large packing needle' temen Mel. 69, 3; Rif. 170: Kom. xiv 'needle' temen CCG, Gr.: Kap. xv (PU) böbtüza (unidentifiable, ?corrupt) temen Tuh. 7b. 13. t€:min (d-) 'immediately', originally apparently in the sensc of the immediate future, but more often, from an carly date, “in the immediate past, just now'. Survives in SW Osm. as demin (with the accent on the first syllable) in the latter sense. "The discussions of this word in PP, p. 254, note 3 and TT I, p. 21, note 86, written before the publication of Kag. "are not well founded. Uyf. vii ff. Man.-A M I 14, 10-11 (1:): Bud. antada basa temin 'immediately after that” U 7 33, 12; (if a man has faith) ol kişi temin çın kişi tetir “that man is immediately called a loyal man” TT V 26, 113; témin ók 'immediately' do. 24, 53; 26, 116; X 274; U III 5, 12; o.o. PP 62, 1 (öğlen-), Suv. 619, 18-19 (ançada:): Civ. TT I 86 (ancada:): Xak. xi tö:min an Adv. (harf) meaning qabl hadihi"l-sd"a "before this moment”, one says t6:mİn keldim “1 have just artived' Kaş. I 409. tuma:n (d-) "mist, fog. S.i.a.m.l.g.; in NW Kk.; SW Az. Osm. duman; 'Tkm. duma:n; a l.-w. in Pe., Russian and other foreign languages, see Doerfer I1 935. Cf. bu:s, Türkü vir ff, üze: tuman turdi: asra: toz turdi:  "the fog was stationary above and the dust below' IrkB iş: Uy£&amp;. vin ff. Bud. Hüen-ts. frag. (satğa:-): Xak. xi tuma:n al-dabab “mist, fog” Kaş, I 414; and 3 o.o.: KB ə8ş (alunçı:): Çağ. xv ff. tuman. . (2) 'a thick mist” (buxár-i ğaliz) which rises from the ground and covers the face of the sky; also called duman Sar. 182r. 16; duman “the mist which rises from the ground'; but the steam (also buxár) which rises from soup, food, and the like is called bug do. 225v. 20; a.o. do. 136r. 23 (2 bu:): Xwar. xiv tuman 'fog' Qutb 18s: Kom. xiv “fog” tuman CC/, “gloomy faced” tuman betli CCG; Gr.: Kip. xır a/-dabüb tuma:n: xiv tuman ditto İd. 66; Bul. 2, 16: xv ditto Tuh. 23r. 6; al-jaym İfog” tuma: n Kar. 58, 4. F tümen properly “ten thousand”, but often used for “an indefinitely large number", immediately borrowed from 'l'okharian, where the forms are A tmàán; B tmane, tumane, but Prof. Pulleyblank has told me orally that he thinks this word may have been borrowed in its turn fr. a Proto-Chinese form *tman, or the like, of «can "ten thousand' (Giles 12,486). Tt became an early l-w. in Mong. as füme(n) (Hacnisch 154) and in Pe. as tiimán and other foreign languages, see Doerfer 11 983, where the word is discussed at great length. S.i.s.m.l., but in some, perhaps a reborrowing fr. Pe. or Mong. Türkü vırı bir tümen artukr: yet: bip “r7,ooo” II S r, a.o.o, for '10,000'; bir tümen ağı: 'innumerable precious things” I N 12: viri ff. (one spiraea became a hundred, a hundred a thousand) min tavilku: tümen bolti: “a thousand spiraeas became ten thousand” IrkB 32: Man. yüz artukı kirk tümen yek '1,400,000 demons' Chuas. I 12: Uy£. vu [ü]c tümen 136,000" Şu, W 7, in bin yunt tümen Kofi “a thousand horses and ten thousand shecp” do W 9(?) and side (ETY I 182) the word is not intended to be precise: vrir ff. Man.-A sansaz tümen yıl bolt “it has been countless myriads of vears' (since we departed from you) M I ro, 4-5: Bud. PP 1,5 (özlüğ) a.o.o., nearlv always for “an indefinitely large number”: Civ. the irrevocable sale of a property is often described as min yıl tümen künke teg] “for a thousand years and ten thousand days” USp. 13, 10 etc. (the phr., which also occurs in vin Su. E 9, is prob. taken from Chinese): Xak. xr tümen al-katir “much, many” of anything; one says tümen törlüğ sö:zle:di: "he talked volubly on every kind of subject': tümen min alf alf fil-adad “a million”, one says tümen mip yarma:k 'a million dirhams' (sic) Kag. I 402; tüme:n (sic) çeçek “all kinds (anzá'):of flowers' 7 233, 26; (scorpions, flies, and snakes) dük mig kayu tümenler “in innumerable quantities! 7I] 367, ro: KB tümen “an indefinitely large number! is common, e.g. tümen min törüttün bu sansiz tirig “Thou hast created these innumerable living beings' 21; 0.0. 2, 22, 84, 159, 172, etc.: xrn(?) At, (this world looks nice from the outside, but within it are) tümen ná-xwusi “innumerable  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 552 
     
   
   
      508 DIS. DMN unpleasantnesses' 218: Çağ. xv ff. tümen an expression for “a large number” (gokluk); also on biy migdári "Ufman ahçası "a sum of ten thousand Osmanlı small silver. coins! Vel. 220 (quotn.; tümen “ıo,ooo”, and the Mongols call an dərir with an army of 10,000 mir-i tümen, and the people of Persia call *1o,000. dinörs” yah fümüán San. i8sr. 14: Xwar. xiv tümen in both senses Qutb 190: Kom. xiv '10,000' tümen CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv. tümen a/-badra "a sum of 10,000 dirhanıs” İd. 40; dümen '10,000'; also called tümen do. $o: Osm. xiv-xvi tümen in both senses, fairly common 778 7 705; 77 911; HI 692. Dis. V. DMND tamin- (d-) Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of tam-; irregular since tam- is Intrans. Xak. xı ol ö:zine: ya:ğ tamındı: "he set himself to drip (5i-taqtir) the oil for himself! Kaş. Il 149 (taminixr, tamınma:k). D timen- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of time:-; 'to prepare oneself. Uyf. vii ff. Bud. tinin timenir 'prepare yourselves (Herid.)' Hiien-ts. 230. Tris. DMN D tamındı: (d-) Hap. leg.; Dev. N./A. fr. tamin-, Xak.xr tamındı: su:v qatáratu'l-mà? 'dripping water' Kaş. I 450. D tuma:nlığ (d-) P. N./A. fr. tuma:n; 'foggy, misty”. S.i.m.m.İ.g.ş in NW Kk.; SW Az, Tkm. dumanlı. Uy£. vin ff. Man. tumanlığ yekler “the demons of fog” M II 11, ro: (Xak.) xiv Muh.(?) yam mugima foggy day” tuzma:nlu:b (mis-spelt £u:ma:glu;j) kü:n Rif. 185 (only). DF tümenlig P.N./A. fr. tümen, 'numbercd in tens of thousands'; n.o.a.b. Türkü vir ff. Man. miplig tümenliğ kuvrağ “a congregation of thousands and tens of thousands" TT H 8, sz: Uy&amp;. vii ff. Man. tümenlig yekler M İT 11, ro. Dis. DMR ?D tamar/tamır (d-) "vein, artery” (the two are not distinguished in the texts quoted below). The original form seems to have been tamir with tamar as the Oğuz form, and this makes it improb., although still poss., that it is the Aor. of tam- used as a N., since that should have been tamar everywhere. Tamur was in any event a Sec. f. due to labial attraction. S.i.a.m.l.g. w. some extended meanings; in SW Az. Osm. Tkm. damar, elsewhere tamır, or occasionally tamur. Uyğ. vir ff. Man.-A (the arrow) öz tamarına (?, MS. tmriga) tegdi “reached his own vein” Man.uig. Frag. 401, 8: Bud. sipiri tamırı “his muscles and veins! U III 35, 20; TM IV 254, ror İki kata tamirim tokip "my pulse beats twice' (but cannot beat a third time and comes to rest) U III 37, 35-6: Civ. suv tamırı Xurisar “if the veins of water dry up” he vegetation dries up) TT 7 55—kimnip nar) yoğun bolsar kanağı yenil “if a man's arteries thicken it is easy to bleed him" do, VII 42, 3; Su:v özl ó:tüs(?) a:ita:ci ta:marla:rı "the internal vessels which receive the passage of water and moisture! do, VIHI L1: Xak. xi tamur (ric) "a vein (al-'irrq) in the body; the Oğuz say tamar with -a- because they always seck lightness (a/-xiffa) and -a- is the lightest of the vowels, so they have recourse to it Kag. 7 362; III 201 (berge:len-): KH otaçı térildi tamur kördiler "the physicians assembled and felt his pulse” 1:057; tamurin teser “he pierces his vein” (and sucks his blood) 4099: xit (?) Tef. tamar 'vein' 283: xiv Muh. al-'irg tamar Mel. 45, 14; Rif. 139: Çağ. xv ff. tamur ramar . . . rag ma nàástna “vein” Vel. 174 (quotn.); tamur (spelt) rag wa rişa-i diraxt "vein, the roots of a tree! San. 161 v. 17 (quotn.): Oğuz xı tamar sce Xak.: Xwar. xın tamır 'vcin! Ali 35: xiv tamar Qutb 169: Kom. xiv. 'vein! tamar CCI, CCG, Gr.: Kip. xiu al-'irg tama:r Hou. 21, 18: xiv tamar al[-'irq tea'l-cins mugtarak both “vein” and “race, kind” İd. 66; al-'irg tamar Bul. 3, 13; al-cins (Kök and) tamar do. s, 6: xv al-"irq tamar Kar. ör, 9; Tuh. zab. 8; cadr (for cadr) "root, origin” tamur (in margin famar) do. r1 b. rr. temir (d-) “iron". S.i.a.m.l.g., usually as temir, in NE "Tuv., SW Az, Osm., "km. demir, a ].-w. in Mong., Pe., and other foreign languages see Doerfer I1. 1012, III. 1190-1. Türkü vri temir kapığ “the Iron Gate”, a pass on the road between Samarkand and Balkh mentioned several times in /, I1, T., Ix.: Uyg. vir ff Man.-A M I 8, 11-12 (ol): Bud. temir talğuk “an iron nail” U 7I] 47, 9; o.o. PP 31,5;33, 2 (1 ac-); TT IV 12, 42; V 16, 93: Civ. in the calendar text TT VII 17, 17 temir is used to translate (Chinese) “metal” in the list of the five elements; Temür is a common clement in P.N.s in USp.: Xak. xt temür a/-/radid 'iron' Kaş. I 361 (prov.); o.o. I 42 (1 ark); 187 (éges-); 519 (tupul-); JI 21 (çök-): /7T qo (yultuz): xin(?) Tef. temür “ron? won fctters' 297: xiv. Mui. al-hadid demür Ael. ır, 2; 61, 8; 75, 8; temür Rif. 84, 160, 178; alo, 79, 8; 183 (kazğu:k), Rbg. témür 'iron (nail R 1I 1135: Caf. xv ff. témür demür . . . dhan ma'nàásina “ron” Vel. 196; temür (spelt) d7ar, also a P.N. San. 200v. ro (followed by several phr.): Xwar. xiri(?) temür (? demür) cıda “an iron lance' (Mong. l.-w.) Og. 99;a.0.0.: xiv temür/temür Qutb 175-6; Nahc. 11, 7: Kom. xiv. 'iron' temir: CCI, CCG; Gr. 240 (quotn.): Kip. xır al-hadid temür Hou. 23, 19; both temür and demür appear as a component in P.N.s listed in do. 29; al-[tadid temir (sic) also called demür do. 31, 13: xiv ternir a/-hadid also pronounced with d- İd, 4o (and 3 phr.); demür a/-hadid, also pronounced with tdo. so; al-hadid temür Bul. 4, 12; a.o. in phr. 2, 12: XV al-hadid temir Kan. ss, 3; 58, 7; Tuh. i2b. iz (and in several pr.): Osm. xıv ff. demir (but in xiv-xvi normally demür) 'iron'; c.i.a.p. 773 7 191; I7 276-7; IH 178; IV 203. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 553 
     
   
   
     Auli c e e E iE. TENERE D RS "ENT Yen TUE DIS. DM$ $09 tümrüg (d-) “tambourinc” or the like; n.o.a.b.; cf. küvrüg. Oğuz xı tümrüğg a/-daff 'tambourine” Kaş. I 478: xiv Muh. (among the royal instruments) ai-tfabl 'drum' dü:mrüg Mel. $1, 4; tü:mrü:g (mis-spelt) Rif. 146; a/-daff dümri: 63, 2; tümri: r61: Kip. xır (in a list of craftsmen and the like and their instruments) ai-mudiff 'tambourine player” (tümrü:ci; ai-daff» tümrü: Hou. 24, ro (this must have been the original text): xiv dümrü: al-daff İd. so: Osm. xıv-xvııı dümrü (?sic, dumru in text) “tambourine" in three xiv and one or two later texts TTS I 228; II 325; IV 246. VUD tomrum Hap. leg., N.S.A. fr. 2 tomur-. Xak. xı tomrum yığa:ç xaşab maqtü" ha-"alatı”l-askaf "a shaped piece of wood like a shoe-maker”s İast” (and the like) Kaş. I 485. Dis. V. DMRVU?D 1 tomur- (of the nose, etc.) “to bleed'; n.o.a.b. 'lThis meaning would be very appropriate for a Caus. f. of tam-, and it is tempting to regard this as a Sec. f. of *tamur-, particularly since the word is occasionally so vocalized in Kaş., but there is no doubt that the first vowel was rounded, and a sound change -a- -0- is unlikely at this period even before -m-. Uyğ. vr ff. Civ. kan tomurmakka em “a remedy for nose bleeding' H I 126, 129 (specifically the nose, in both cases the remedy is inserted in it); a.o. do. 181 (bertin-): Xak. xı er burni: tomurdi: “the man's nose bled' (ra'afa) Kaş. II 85 (spelt tamurd:, followed by 2 tomur-), bu: oğul ol burni: tomurğa:n (spelt tamur£a:n) “this boy's nose is constantly bleeding! 7 518; same phr., but spelt yomur£a:r, similar translation J 524, 16. VU?D 2 tomur- prima facie Caus. f. of VU *tom-; “to cut in a rounded shape'. Hap. leg. (but see tomrum, tomruş-) unless it survives in NE Tel, tomir- “to cut through (a log)" R III 1238. The first vowel is uncertain; SW Osm. tomruk “a bud, a boulder; a lump of wood' seems to be a Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. it, and this, taken with the Tel. V. would point to -0-, but in Osm. 'the rounded beak (of a bird)” is pronounced tomşuk, whereas in all other languages, including Tkm., it is pronounced tumşuk, and this looks like a parallel Dev. N. fr. *tumig-, Recip. f. of *tum-. Xak. xı (following 1 tomur-) and one says er yığa:ç tomurdi: (kasra as well as damma on mim) 'the man cut a piece of wood in a rounded shape (gata'a . . . mudawwswara(z)) like the base of a column' Kaş. II 85 (tomurur (tà' unvocalized), tomurma:k). VUD tomruş- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of 2 tomur-. Xak. xı ol menin birle: yığa:ç tomruşdı: “he competed with me in cutting a piece of vvood in a rounded shape hke a tray with a foot-stand” (K'al-xiwàn) Kaş. II 213 (tomruşu:r, tomruşma:k). n. "Tris. DMR D temirci: (d-) N.Ag. fr. temir , “blacksmith". S.i.m.m.l.; in SW Az., Tkm. demirci; Osm. demirci. Uy$f. viri ff. Civ. (my slave named [gap] temirçi “a blacksmith” USp. 73, 2: Xak. xi Kaş. IJI 268 (tokr-): KB (in a list of craftsmen) temürçi 4458: xiv Mu. al-haddad “blacksmith” demürçi Mel. 11, ız, 57, 5; Rif. 85; temürçi (unvocalized) 155: Kom. xiv “blacksmith” temirçi CC?, Gr.: Kip. xır al-haddád temirçi: Hou. 23, 19; so, 18. D temregü (d-) Dev. N. fr. *temre:- Den. V, fr. temir, “a skin disease in which the skin is covered with dry scabs'; herpes, tetter, and the like; presumably so called because the skin looks like rusty iron. Survives either directly or in cognate forms in NE Khak. temire: NC Kır., Kzx. temiretki; SC Uzb. temiratki, NW Kaz. timreü; Kk. temiretki/temirevv, Kumyk, Nog. temirev; SW Az. demrov, Osm. temregi; 'Tkm. demrev. Xak. xı temregi: a/-quwabá' 'tetter' Kaş. f 491: Kip. xiv demregü: a/-qurcabd” İd. 50: xv ditto temrew (in margin in second hand temregi) Tuh. 28b. 13. D temürge:n (d-) Den. N. fr. temir; recorded by Red. only in SW Osm. as temren which is not a genuine Osm. form. See 1 başak, Oğuz xi temürge:n raglu'l-sahrn “arrovv-head” Kaş. I 522: (xiv Muh.(?) al-nugüli “a maker of arrovv-heads” demrençi Rif. 157 only): Kip. xui al-sinán 'spear-head" temre:n Hou. 13, r: xiv Tkm. demren a/-naşl, (Kip. başak) /d. şo: Osm. xvi demren Vel. 128 (1 başak). D tamırlığ (d-) Hap. leg.(?); P.N./A. fr. tamır. Xak. xi tamırlığ et *meat which is full of veins and sinews' ("urüq wa a"şab) Kag. I 495. D temirlig (d-) P.N./A. fr. temir, “made of iron” and the like. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. U II 25, 26 (ört), TM IV 253, 65-6 (tiken): Xak. xı (after temürlük) and with -g şühibuhu, i.e. temürlüg 'owning iron' Kaş. İ 506. D temürlük (d-) Hap. leg.?; A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. temir. Xak. xi temürlük 'a place at which iron-stone is melted and iron is refined from it” Kaş. 1 506. Dis. DMS VUF tumsa: Hap. leg., a 1.-vv, presumably Iranian. Arğu: xı tumsa: a/-minbar "a pulpit'; ğayr aşliya “not originaly Turkish” Kaş. I 423. Dis. DMS?D tumşuk “a bird's beak', perhaps with the implication of its being a curved beak; if so perhaps a Pass. Dev. N. fr. *tumis-, see 2 tomur-. S.i.a.m.l.g.ş, a Ll-w. in Pe, see Doerfer Yl 984. Üyğ. vin ff. Bud. (vacir tumşukluğ “vith a vajra for a nose' U II, 60 2 (i); (birds seize their entrails, lungs, and 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 554 
     
   
   
     S816 livers) tumsiklarinda “in their beaks" U //7 79, 4: Xak. xı tumşuk al-minqàr li'l-[ayr "a bírd's beak' Kaş. 7 469: KB 77 (çomğukK): xiv Muh. al-mingàr tumsik Mel. 73, 8 (misvocalized tamgik); Rif, 176: Çağ. xvff. tumşuğ/tumşuk (1) rmingár-i fuyür; (2) metaph. 'a nose'; (3) metaph. 'the spur of a mountain' San. i18sr. 23 (quotns): Xwar. xiv tumguk “a bird's beak” Nalic. 43, 1; 338, 13: Kip. xin al-minqür dumsak (sic?) Hou. 10, 15: XV münqür (burun, in margin in SW (?) hand) tumşuk Tu. 33b. 8 Dis. V. DMŞD tamış- (d-) Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of tam-. Xak. xı su:v tamışdı: “the water. dripped' (tagátarat) from the ice, etc. Kaş. İİ ııo (tamişu:r, tamışma:k). Dis. V. DMZD tamız- (d-, tamuz-) Caus. f. of tam-, cf. 2 tamtur-, 1 tamıt-. Survives in one or two NE and NW languages. Not to be confused vv. the tamiz- which is the modern f. of tamıd-, q.v. Uyğ. vin fi, Civ. karağu sıçğannınp ótin tamizsar “if one drips the gall of a black mouse into it” H 1 56-7; üç kata burunka tamızğu ol "one iust drop it three times into the nose” do. 127; a.o. H II 12, 86: Xak. xı ol su:v tamuzdı: "he dripped (gaffara) the water (etc.) Kaş. II 86 (tamuzur, tamuzma:k); a.o. II 164, zo: K B kiliç kan tamuzsa “if the sword drips blood” 2715: (Kip. xv in a list of “very unusual” Caus. f.s, the Caus. f. of naqafa “to drip” is given as tamzır- Kan. 69, 15; cf. emüz-). Tris. DMZ D tamızım (d-) N.S.A. fr. tamız- “a single drop” (of water, etc.). N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. (it is possible to count) bir bir tamızım sanın “the number of individual drops' (in a, great ocean) USSp. 89, rz: Kip. xiv tamzum, (sic) al-qatra "a drop” İd. 66. Mon.DN 1 ta:n “a cool breeze”, Survives in NE Kaç., Koib., Sag. R 711 822, and Khak. Xak. xrta:n "a cold wind' (al-riliu'l-bárid) which blows at dawn and sunset Kaş, IJ] 157: KB (your mouth is like a cave) sözün çıksa andın sahar tani teg “if words proceed out of it (they are as cool) as a dawn wind' 2684. F 2 tan “body”, An Iranian l.-w., cf. Persian tan, which was borrowed at an unusually early date, S.is.m.]. Türkü vin ff. IrkB. 3 (tü:): Xak. xı Kaş. II 307 (kaşıt-): xiu(?) At, kamuğ tanda tan turup "every morning the body stands up” (bovvs to the tongue and does worship) 147-8; Tef. tan “body, individual, self” 297 (ten): xiv Muh. al-cutta “body” ian Mel. as, 12; Rif. 138: Xwar. xiv ten/tén “body” Qutb 175-7: Kom. xiv. “body, flesh? 4as opposed to 'spirit') tan; common CCG;. Gr. 249 &amp;otns.): Kip, xiv tan af-cism "body” 11. 40. s DİS. DM$ dap Hap. leg. ?; onomatopoeic. Xak. xı dap doy etti: ne:p ahassa'l-sav' "the thing made a low sound”, like the phr. tap tory etti: gatetvata “it made a noise! Kaş. İİİ 357. 1 tap (d-) 'dawn'; si.a.m.l.g.; in NE Tuv.; SW Az. dap, Osm. dag/tap. 'l'km. dag. Cf. érte:, Türkü vir T 3s (üntür-): vin ff. tan taplardı: (?error for, or misreading of, tanla:dı:) "the dawn broke! 7rRB 26: Man. kaltı yeme ta[g attı) "and as dawn [broke]' TT II 8, 61: Uyğ. viui ff. Man. the text in M Il 9 isahymn to the (Sogdian Manichaean) god Vam 'dawn', translated tar tepri: Bud. tap taplayur erken PP şı, 7; tapda sayu “every morning” USp. 6o Ta. 15 (erte:), 104, 2; o.o, Hüen-ts. 1966 (aBtur-): Civ. tapda sayu H 183, 163; aç karında topuz ötl uc tap birle içser “f he drinks pig's gall on an empty stomach on three (consecutive) mornings' (stc ?, an unusual idiom) do. 175; o.o. TT VII 1,2431 (érte:); 35, 8 etc.: Xak. xı tay ai-sub/t “the dawn' (verse); one says tap attı: fa/a'a'l-facr 'dawn broke' Kaş. I1] 355: KB tat) 'dawn' is common 2536, 3612, 3954, etc.: xi(?) Zt. 147 (2 tan); Tef. ditto 284: xiv Muh. al-subh ta:pla Mel. 8o, r, tam Rif. 184: Caf. xv ff. tan sabáh Vel. 178 (quotn.); tapla erte do.; tap sub San. 164r. 22 (quotn.): Kip. xui(?) Oğ. 31-2 (érte:) a.o.o.: xiv tap 'dawn' Quib 170; MN qo, etc.: Kom. xiv “morning” tap erte; tomorrow' tapda CCI, CCG; Gr. 234: Kip. xri waqtu'l-sahar tayn (sic) Hou. 28, 13, (among the P.N.s) Tankus (vocalized Tonhuş) "the bird of dawn' do. 3o, 6: xiv fap (with. -n) al-subh; tapla: wagtu'l-subh; you say tapla: keldim 'I came at dawn', and 'I shall come at dawn' tapla: kelgemen İ4. 65; Şadü 'tomorrow' tanda: Bul. 13, 6; al-subh (d) tan (sic) do. 13, 14: xv ditto tan Kav. 36, 13; Tuh. 21b. 13; £adá tanda do. 36, 10; tan 26b. 7; tan şağalı do. 72b. ro, a.o.o.: Osm. xiv ff. tap 'dawn'; c.i.a.p. TTS 1672; 11 874; III 664; IV 733. 2 tan (?ta:p) wonder, surprise', and the like; s.L.a.m.lg. except NE, esp. in the phr. tap kalmak "to be astonished'; in SW only ''km. ta:p. Uyğ. vin ff. Man. ne tap savlar “vhat extraordinary statements' M I 35, 10; 36, 13 (a damaged text, the word is clear enough, but in 36, 13 at the end of a line and possibly only an extended scription of ne teg 'what kind of?”): Bud. körkle tay arığ kızlar “beautiful, wonderful, pure maidens' PP 42, 8, tap. körtle seviglig közin “her wonderful, beautiful, lovely eye” TT X 550; 0.0.; Hiüen-ts. 1895 (tavra:k), Suv. 118, 6—7 (tat14): Xak. xt tan ne:p al-savu'l-'acib "somethinir wonderful, marvellous'; hence one says ta, kördüm "I saw something wonderful! Kaş. III 355; 2.0. 162,6; K R tapım bu menin ':'is is what surpri:es me” 786; bu tan tapsuk işler 'thesc wonderfu! marveilous deeds! 794: xini(?) Tef. tap "acib 284: Çağ. xvf. tap ay ta'accub mua nósna 'sarprise' Vel. 177 € qüotn.), tay. ta"arcub San. Y64r. 24 (quoti): Y var. xiv tan *wonder, wonderful* Qura 179. Kom. xiv 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 555 
     
   
   
     — “.—5 a ——-— — ———————”.— — M M — MÀ —— —— e MON. DN $tt 'wonder, miracle! tap. CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv 7 tap ("with -9") a/-"acab “vonder” İd. 65: Osm. xiv ff. tap (in xv occasionally dan) “vvonder, wonderful; common till xvi, sporadic till xviii. TTS I 175; I1 256; III 166; İV 188. VU 3 tar onomatopoeic in the phr. tap top; pec. to Kaş.? "The vowel in the main entry is damma, but see dap. Xak. xı tap (or tog?) top etti 'the heavy. thing made a noise (tagawwata) when it fell on a solid object" Kaş. III 356; a.o. 111 357 (day). VU 4 tan (?tép) Hap. leg.; the vowel is fatha, but this word comes after 1 and 2 top where damma or kasra might be expected; perhaps a l.-w. Xak. xi tay “any building (binà") which once existed, of which the superstructure (MS. 'amátuhu, ? read 'imáratuhu) has disappeared and the foundations (asluhu) remain as a high mound (tall)'; it is the foundations of any ancient town (MS. qahandar, read quhandiz) and the like Kaş. I1] 356. ?F 5 tap Hap. leg.; almost certainly a l.-w.; “sieve” is normally élgek, Arğu: xı tap b”/-işba" *with a back vowel', al-munxul “a sieve' Kaş. III 355. 7 VU ?F 6 tap occurs several times in commercial documents in Uyğ. viit ff. Civ. as a measure of capacity for seed cotton; it must have been a fairly large measure since in U.Sp: 2 the rent of a piece of ground for growing cotton was “ten tan kebez', and US. 7o, 6 (bütgür-) relates to a transaction involving borrowing four tar kebez in the spring and returning seven in the autumn. Perhaps to be connected with Pe. tang “a donkey load', but this word also means “half a load”, and in this sense looks like a l.-w. fr. 1 ter, q.v. It is; however, unlikely that 1 ter should be read in these Uy£. passages. 1 tep (d-) basically “equal” (to something else), hence 'equivalent' (to something else) and, of the two pans on a pair of scales “level” (equal to one another). S.i.a.m.l.g.; in NE Tuv.; SW Osm.,. Tkm. dep. A l.-w. in various foreign languages including Pe. (see Doerfer II 941) where in the forms tanğ/danğ it acquired the special meaning of 'half a load' on an animal's back (i.e. one equal to the other half), hence more generally 'a load, or package'. With these forms and meanings these Pe. words were reborrowed by some modern Turkish languages, e.g. Rep, Turkish denk, While there is no reasonable doubt that the Chinese word téng was a l.-w. in some early languages, see 2.tey, the theory that it was also the origin of. this word (see Doerfer, loc. cit.) is untenable since the: meanings are quite different. Türkü vrr fT.: Yen. yağlıka:) teğmi:ş sü tepi: yeti: bin oğlan erti: "the (size: of the) army which attacked the enemy was equal to seven thousand young men' Mal. 26, 8.; bodun tépin bifi:r erti "he knew the value (9) of the people” do. 22, 3 (both readings very dubious):. Uy. vrir fí., Man.-A (the fourth thought is unceasing warfare. with the passions. İf you ask why?) nizvanilarap etözke ten ten tatağ tatağ üçün inca küclüg bolurlar “your passions become so strong because taste is equivalent to the body (?) M II 12, 17 (ii) (in Buddhists terminology 'taste' is the fourth of the six vígayas, the point seems to be that it is as strong as the body and so may overpower it): Bud. bodisatvlarnip kópüli birle ter kópülüg bulmakı erür “it is acquiring a mind equal to the minds of the Bodhisattvas” U 77 48, 12-13; (if when engaged in trading I have cheated) tepin tarazukin 'with a pair of scales' (measures of length and. volume and so on) U I1 77, 25; 86, 42; TT IV 10, 4; Suv. 135, 8; (for a ruler) süli aşlı kértgüncli ücegü tep kerğek “the army, the food supply. and faith (or confidence?) are all three equally necessary! TT V 26, 105-6; (all people in the world) bir ikintike tuşın tepin körüp “seeing that they are equal (Hend.) to one another” VI 307-8: Civ. tep ülüşlüğ “in equal shares” US. 11, 5; 29, 9; bu borluk tepince iki borluk 'two vineyards each equal to this vineyard! do. 13, 14; o.o. do. 28, 6 (üleş-), 98, 17 (ülüş), etc.: Xak. xı ten al-'id! twa'l-qirn 'equal, equivalent'; hence one says tep tus aj-'ad! wal-qarin "an equal, com. panion”: tep rmkánu'l-say' wa mawdi'uhu wa fursatuhu “the: possibility, proper place, and proper turn of something! (prov., “if you erect a mill” tepsizde: fi Zayr matodi'ihi toa imkünihi “in an unsuitable place and conditions”) Kaş: III 355; kügl: teni: tokıştı: hàraba qadr táqatihi “he fought as hard as he could” I1 103, 26: KB ter is common, e.g. (if I bequeath gold and silver to you do not take them to be) bu sözke ten-e “as valuable as this advice' 188; yıparlı biligli teni bir yanı 'perfume and knowledge are equally valuable and of the same kind” 311; (there is no one who is) sapa tuş ten-e “Thine equal (Hend.) 7, ten tuş 4181; o.o. 186 (altın), zr5, 413, 569, etc.: xrir (?) At. törütmişte yok bil apa tuş tep-e "He has no equal in all creation! 24; a.o. 98 (tepe:-); Tef. tep tuş 298: xiv Muh.(?) gadru'l-qàma “the size of a man's stature' ter) Rif. 190 (only): Çağ. xv ff. ten beraber 'equal, level', etc. Vel. rg? (quotns.); tép barábar wa musáti 'equal' San. 202r. 23 (quotns.); a.o. 285v. 21 (2 kur): Xwar. xii tön “like, equal "Ali 48: xiv. tep/ten ditto Qutb 175-7; MN 6, etc.; a.o. Qutb 187 (1 tu:g): Kom. xiv 'equal" ten CCG; Gr.:: Kip. xv şinf wa'l-nazir wa'l-mitl “sort, equal, likeness” ten Tuh. 22a. 13; mütl tep 35a. 11; 'alámatu'l-tagbih “an indicator of comparison' (inter alia) tep 89a. 12: Osm. xıvff. den (and once xiv ten tus) “equal” and the like; fairly common; mis2” denk TTS I 193; İl 279; III 179; 206. F 2 tep a word which seems to mean “kind, Sort' occurs in several early texts. It is plausibly suggested in T7 VI, p. 90, s.v. te, that : in these passages it is a l.-w. fr. the synony-. mous Chinese.word féng (Giles 10,877). The 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 556 
     
   
   
     tii following passages seem the clearest cases of this word, but there are prob. others where it has been mistaken for 2 tar and thus transcribed. Türkü viri ff. Man. TT 11 8, 58 (oyun): Uyğ. vı ff. Bud. ter adınçığ erteni yinçü "various kinds of jewels and pearls" PP 34, 172; 0.0. of ten adınçığ do. 71, 5; Kuan. 149. E 3 ten a word so transcribed and translated "marsh(?)' (Brockelmann), “lake” (Atalay) has been read in a verse in Kaş. J 528, 9-10; it is not vocalized; it is very unlikely that a word with this meaning should be a Hap. leg. Kag.'s translation of the verse is "it describes wild fowling and says "when the goose (should be “duck”) saw me in that pool (a/-ğudar) with a blunt arrow, this bird (the kaşğalak) dived into the water" ”. It will be noticed that the last word of the first line (ata:r in the MS.) is not translated. "The likeliest explanation is that al-Zudar is a scribal error for al-£adá and that the verse read tapda: bile: kórse: meni: ördek öte:r kalva: körüp kaşğalakı suvka: bata:r “the duck seeing me at dawn quacks; the Raşğalak seeing (my) blunt arrow dives into the water'. tin (d-) Kaş. has two main entries tin “breath” and trn 'rest', but it is unlikely that the distinction in length is semantically valid since elsewhere 'breath' is consistently spelt tt:n (note also that there are two main entries for *bridle', tin and ti:n). Indeed, it is likely that the same word was used for 'breath' and 'rest' (i.e. stopping to take breath). It is significant that this is one of the rare cases of a homophonous N. and V. and that the V. is translated both “to breathe' and “to rest”. The two words have therefore been treated as identical. "Tin *breath', sometimes by extension 'spirit, life', survives in all NE languages; NC Kir. (also dim); NW Kaz,, Kk. NE Tel. (R IIIJ 1342), Khak. also have a word tim 'silent' which seems to be a Sec. f. Türkü vur ff. Man. tin tura teprl “the God of the Zephyr'(?) Chuas. 34, etc. (see 1 tura:): Uyğ. vin ff. Man. tin tura tepri M 7 zı, r: Bud. PP 38, 4 (1 ağu), U JI] 43, 31 (buz-): Civ. tin alu umasar “if he cannot draw breath! H 7 141; 8.0. do. 60, etc. (buzğak), tını uzun “his life is long” TT VII 29, 17: Xak, xt tin. al-rüh wwa'l-nafas *breath, soul(?); hence one says anıp tini: (sic) kesildi: *the man's breath was cut off' Kaş. 1 339; tun kişi: “a man who has retired (al-mucimm) and does not engage in work'; also used of any animal when it rests for some days and is released from work (idd istardha ayy" “sea acamma) Kaş. İİİ 138; o.o, I m” 176 (öçür-), roz (öçük-), 248 nd three o.o., all 'breath' and n: KB tn tokiğli 'drawing esgil axir tinim “cut off my CU 394; 8.0. 773: Xwar. xiv 192: Kom. xiv "spirit, soul” mon); “a fallow field” tin " tfm (sie) bol- CCG; "ap. xiv. tin. al-rüh İd. MON. DN 40: din a/-nafas, one says dinin alhigti: “he breathed' (tanaffasa) that is alıştı: "he received, or took', fr. aldr, with -ış- for reciprocity (al-mugáraka), his breath do. şo: xv nafas tin. Tuh. 36a. 8. VU tin Hap. leg.; meaning doubtful. It has been suggested that this is the basis of tipla:but this is very dubious. Uyğ. vii ff. Civ. (the clatter of the ten-fold keş (?'jade") game is heard . . .ş if you break off( ?) the game, your property has gone as garlic goes) kaş tipt teg edgün basdı (?read bezdi) “your good things have been shaken(?) like the sound(?) of the kaş TT I 97-8. ti:n the exact meaning is doubtful; the likeliest is “halter”, or "leading-rein', but 'bridle' and "rein” cannot be excluded. Survives in NE several dialects (R 77J 1360), Khak., and Tuv. (din). Uyğ. viu ff. Bud. (then the prince) atin tinin tartap (sic) 'reining in his horse' USp. 97, 3; 2.0. do. zo (ke:rü): Xak. xr tin al-miqtvad 'halter'; hence one says tin tizgin migiwad swa “inan "halter and rein” Kaş. 1 339; ti:n a/-"indn III 138. VU tip Hap. leg.; exactly synonymous with tik, Xak. xı one says er tip turdi: rntagaba'l-racul gá'fma(n) “the man stood upright! Kaş, III 356. to:n (d-) 'garment, clothing”. S.i.a.m.l.g., in most modern languages for 'outer garment, overcoat”, in SW Az., Osm. don; Tkm. do:n. It has been usual for some years to describe this as a 1.-vv, fr. Saka fauna 'clothing', but it is unlikely that the Turks would have had no native word for 'clothing', and there are difficulties about the initial sound; the resemblance is therefore prob. due to coincidence. "Türkü vırr (tonsız, q.v.): vin ff. Man. ton “clothing” (i.e. everything that a man is wearing) M I $, 13; 7, 11-14: Uyğ. vir ff. tonnun biti “a body louse' (lit. clothing louse) M 18, 14: Bud. ton 'clothing' common U 77 18, 13; JI 38, iy, PP 56, 1; Sanskrit vastrá 'clothing' ton TT VIII D.11; bard ditto ton kedim (Akhetim) do. 38: Civ. ton “clothing” common TT I 149; VII 26, ro, 38, ro(biç-), etc.; VIII 1.20; USp. passim: Xak. xı to:n al- tareb “clothing" Kaş. IJI 137; over 100 0.0.: KB 84 (tul); 474 (2 at): xın(?) At. kónilik tonın ked . . . kedim ton talusı kónilik toni "put on the clothing of uprightness . . . the clothing of uprightness is the choicest of (all) clothing (Hend.) 167-8; Tef. kedim ton 309: xiv Muh. al-tatob to:n/to:n Mel. ro, 10-11; Rif. 83: Caf. xv ff. ton giyeceh . . . qaftün ma"nasına "wearing apparel, outer robe' Vel. 224 (quotn.); ton gabá 'garment' San. 186v. 26 (quotn.): Xwar. xii ton bağı “belt” "Ali zr: xiv ton 'clothing' Quib. 182. MN 62, etc.: Kom. xiv 'garment! ton CCI; Gr.: Kip. xi a/-/artva “a fur garment! (kürk, also called) fo:n, which is a generic term for *clothing' (al-malbzs) Hou. 19, 12: xiv fon al-tarb İd. 67: xwv al-malüfa *cloak'(?) ton Kav. 63, 17; Tuh. 34a. 13; fateb ton do. 10b.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 557 
     
   
   
      l^ E NT  -5-— —— 5 ————— — 00 “uv — — o” — — — —v “ MON. V. DN13: Osm. xiv fi, dön (common in xiv, sporadic later)/fon 'clothing'; c.ia.p. 778 7 217; HI 314; III 204; IV 236. 1 tuin. first born”, Survives only(?) in NE Alt, "Vel, tun R. 1I 1439; Khak. tun; Tuv. dun. Xak. xı tun oğul bikru'l-mar'a ca woman's first born”, that is the first child that a woman bears whether it is male or female; a female is (also) called tu:n Kr:z that is “the first daughter'; and a woman's first husband is called tu:n beg Kaş. II] 137: xiv Muh.(?) al-waladu' l-awwal tu:n Rif. 144 (Mel. i:le:rü:). VU 2 tu:n Hap. leg.; comes between to:n and 1 tu:n in Kaş. so cannot be a scribal error for tin. although syn. vv, it. Xak. xr tun al-tum'anina “tranquillity”, hence one says könül tu:n boldi: “his mind was at rest” (ftma"anna) Kaş. III 137. 1 ton (d-) properly “frozen hard”, but sometimes, more indefinitely for “very cold” and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g., in NE "Tuv; SW Tkm., dop; Az., Osm. don. Homophonous vv. topXak. xı 'anything frozen hard” (cámid) is called top; hence “frozen mcat" is called ton et; also anything else Kaş. III 356: (xi?) Tef. kiş tonluğda (sic) "in the winter cold” 309): Xwar. xi1(?) (there is a high mountain here and on the top of it there is) ton (or ?don) takı (or ?dakı) muz “solid ice” (Hend.) Oğ. 230: Kip. xiv ton ("vvith -9') a/-calid "solid ice” İd. 65; a.o. do. (topuz). VU 2 top “solid” (not hollow); pec. to Xak. and prob. merely 1 ton used metaph. ; a/-hal/a normally means “alfalfa” or “esparto grass', but also, acc. to Steingass 'bull-rush', which is prob. the meaning here. Xak. xr 'anything which has no internal hollow' (cazıf) is called top; hence a/-halfd” is called tor kamış that is "solid (muşmat) reed” Kaş. I1] 3560: KB a man of exceptional strength of character is called (a powerful archer, resistant, hard and) top yürek 'stout-hearted' 1949, 2271. 3 ton See 3 tan. tün (d-) “night”, in some modern languages additionally or alternatively “yesterday”. Tün ortu:81: properly means 'midnight', and is often so used, but in the earliest period was also used as a cardinal point “north”, S.i.a.m.l. ; in NE Tuv. dün “night” dü:n (?crasis of dünen) “yesterday”, in SW Az. dünen, Osm. dün, Tkm. düyn all meaning “yesterday”. 'Tünle: “at night”, which is more likely to be an abbreviated Ger, of *tünle:- than a crasis of tün birle, occurs from an early period. Cf. 3 kéce: Türkü vri yırğaru: tün ortu:si:paru: “to the north' 7 S 2, I7 N 2; o.o. J E 27, II E 22 (udu-), etc.; vii ff. (at midday he was astray) tün ortu: kanta: negü:de: bolğay 'where and how will he be at midnight?' IrkB 24: Man. ilki kün) tün "for two days and nights" 77 IJ 6, 27-8; a.o. M IH 19, 9 (i) (1 öçeş-): UyB. vri kün [gap] miş tün terilmiş by day they [scattered ?, and] at night they came together" Sw. E :: 8641125 S  513 viit fT. Bud. tün sayu “every night" TT V ro, 109; bir kün bir tün “one day and one night” Suv. 140, 22; a.0.0.—Sanskrit divd ca rütrau ca “by day and night" tünle yeme: kündüz yeme: TT VIII E.38; o.o. do. 32; U I1 28, $, II 25, 18; kap kara tünle “on a very dark night” TT III, p. 28, note 71, 3: Civ. tünle: ...tünnüp künnüp TT VIII I.14: Xak. xı tün a/-layla “night”, hence one says tü:nle: keldim “1 came at night” Kaş. 7 339; nearly 20 0.0., occasionally spelt tü:n: KB (God created) kün ay birle tün “the sun and moon and night” 3; tün kün “by night and day” 39; tünün ham künün 78, tünle sayu “every night” 2314; 0.0. 952, etc.: xii(?) Ar. (God created) tünüp kündüzün “your night and day” 13; 0.0. 15, 16; Tef. dün 119; tün “night, dark” 318: xiv. Rbg. tün uykusin 'sleep at night” R HI rs48; Muh. al (ayl düm Mel. So, 3; tün Rif. 184; amis “yesterday” dü:n do. do., followed by several phr. containing dü:n/tü:n and dü:nle;/tü:nle:: Çağ. xv ff. tün (with -ü-, not -u-”) gece “night” Vel. 224; tün (1) tarik «ca muzlim “dark” (quotn.); (2) metaph. şab “night” (quotn.) San. 186v. 23: Xwar. xir dünin günin "Al 22: xır(?) tün (or? dün) yap&amp;akka 'towards the north” Og. 320; tün (?dün) sarika, opposite to tap (?dap) sarıka do. 336-8 seems rather to mean 'towards the west'; xiv tün, tünle Qutb 190; tün “night, yesterday” MN 3, etc.: Kom. xiv “night” tün, “yesterday” tüne kün CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kap. xi amis tün kün Hou. 28, rı, nisfu'l-layl 'midnight' tün bucki (sic?) do. 17; al-layl tün do. 18; albüriha “yesterday” (or "last night'?) tün ké:ce: do. 19: xiv tünle: a/-layl, tün amis İd. 4o; dün al-layl also pronounced tün, also used for naháru'l-amis; tün kün tün keçe: al-laylatı?l-böriha do. so, amis tün Bul. ı3, 7: XV amis tün kün Kav. 36, 10; al-layl tün/ tünle: do. :3; amis tüne Tuh. sa. 5; layl (keçe and) tün do. 32a. 3: Osm. xiv ff. dün 'night', dünle “at night” and dün in various phr. is very common till xvi and occurs sporadically in this sense later, düne ğün “yesterday” in xvi TTS I 239; II 337, /11 222; IV 257. P*tÓp See tópdi:, etc. Mon. V. DNta:n- (?d-) “to deny; to disclaim (an obligation); to go back on one's word'; used both with an object in Ace. or Abl. and without. S.i.a.m.l.g.; in SW Az. dan-; tan- in Ar. and Armenian script is described as Osm. in R III 822 but does not appear in any other Osm. authority and may be NW, e.g. Armeno-Kip. Uy. vui ff. Man. M İİ ri, 15, etc. (özüt): Bud. Suv. 134, 11-12 etc. (ayığla:-), esrük kişi ted tana muna yorıyurlar “they wander about like drunken men denying (their faith) and raving' TT VI 215: Xak. xr ol alımnı ta:ndı: cahada”l-dayn “he denied (disclaimed) the debt' (etc.); also used for any one who denies something Kaş. 11] 184 (ta:nar, ta:nma:k): xni(?) Tef. dan- “to abjure (one's  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 558 
     
   
   
     su MON. V. DNfaith. .45/); to deny (something Dat.)' 117; tan- ditto 284; tenmeklik (sic) 'infidelity' (a/-kufr) 298: Çağ. xv ff. tan- inhár hardan "to deny! San. 161v. zr (quotns.; pointing out that tan- “to know' in Vel. 178-9 is an error for tanr-): Xwar. xiv tan- “to break with (someone Ak)”, to put an end to (a friendship)” Qutb 170; 01 tandi "he denied' (saying “1 did not kill my uncle") Vahe. 339, 17; a.o. do. 273. 9: Kom. xiv “to disclaim (a debt) tan- CCI; Gr. tap- (?d-) “to wrap up, tie up tightly! (with a cord, bandage, etc). S.i.a.m.l.g.; in SW only(7) Tkm. dap-. Xak. xı ol anın başın tapdı: şadda ra”sahu bi-işüba “he tied up his head in a turban'; also used of anything which you tie up tightly (şaddadta . . . şadd qavi) with a cord and the like Kaş. Zİ 390 (tapa:r, tapma:k): Çağ. xv fI. tan (-1p, etc.) sar- ve bağla- "to wrap, tie up” Vel. 176-7 (quotns.); tap- pipidun tea bastan ditto. San. 162v. 5 (quotns.): Kom. xiv “to tie up” tap- CCG; Gr. VU tep- this V. and its Caus. £s tepit-, teptür-, tepür- are all Hap. lcg. and have inconsistent, or no, vowel points and dots, but -e- is the likeliest vowel, See also tepiz-. Xak. xı kuş tepdi: “the bird soared” (ha//aqa), similarly when an arrow is shot high towards the sky and disappears in the air one says ok tepdi: kallaqa”l-nabl Kaş. 111 390 (tene:r, tepme:k; the first letter is everywhere undotted and unvocalized, but the entry comes between the heading T- and tap-). 1: tin- (?d-) the basic meaning seems to be “to breathe', thence “to breathe quietly' and so 'to be tranquil or at ease, to come to rest', thence (e.g. of rain) “to cease'.. S.i.a.m.l.g. with meanings of this kind, but in some languages rare or non-existent and replaced by der. f.s; in SW only Osm. din-/dip- (sic), in "Tkm. drn-, Cf. tim. Uyğ. viii ff. Man. tınğuluk orunta “in a place of rest” TT III] 110; Uunmatin "without resting! do. LX 75: Bud. turkaru tinmaksiz bodisatv 'the completely unresting Bodhisattva” U 7 17, 4-5; (my pulse beats twice, and being unable to beat a third time) tinu turur 'comes to rest” U IJI 37, 37; yéti kün anta tintilar 'they rested there for seven days” PP 33, 8ff.: Xak. xı yağmur tindi: "the rain ceased” (aqla"a), and one says er uluğ tindi: tanaffasa'l-raculu'l-gu'dà “the man breathed a deep sigh'; and one says aruk tindi: “the tired man rested' (rstaráha) Kaş. II 28 (tina:r, tinma:k; and see 2 tin-); JI 316, ro (arukluk) and 5 o.o.: KB ugugb yoriglt tınığlı neçe "all creatures whether they fly, walk, or are at rest” 23; (when the xükdn mounted the thronc) ajun tindi “the world was at rest” 93; qalam ma tinar "his pen, too, Comes to rest” 294; tilim tinma “my tongue, do not be silent" 381; o.o. in similar meanings. 669, 1499, 3835, 4419, 4782, 5728, etc.: xii (?) T'ef. tin- "to rest, be at rest” 304: Çağ. xv ff. tin-(-ay, etc.) digle- ve sühin ol- “to rest, be quiet" Vel. 197-8 (quotns.); tindsdyfg wa drüm giüriftan “to rest, take a rest” San. 200v. 20 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv tin-/tip'to rest” Qutb 193; tip- (of tears) 'to cease to flow' Nac. 369, 14: Kom, xiv “to rest” tn- CCG, Gr.:: Kip. xir. al-rüha “rest, case” (opposite to “exhaustion" nrmak) tnmak //on. 27, 14; istardho tin- do. 34, 12; sahana müna”l-suhün dadda "l-haraka “to be at rest”, opposite to “in motion' fin(also a/-ráha) do. 37, 18: xiv tlg- (with -p-") istarüha İd. 65; tin- ditto; in Tkm. dinlendo. 66: xv tanaffasa tin-. Tuh. gü, to), ta“atotcaqa “to loiter' tin- do. 10a. 1; sakata "to be silent' (nter alia) tin- do. 20a. 5; sob. 12: Osm. xiv in a verse dinmek (?dipmek) is in antithesis to dınmnk “to speak” and clearly means “to be silent” TTS / 201; xvii diy(sic) in Rümi, sühit şudan San. 226v. 29. 2 tin- (d-) “to speak”, specifically Oğuz, and perhaps merely an idiomatic use of 1 tin- in the sense of “to breathe a word'. Survives in SW Az. din- “to speak, say” and Osm. tingenerally used in the Neg. f. tınma- “to pay no attention, pretend not to see or hear'. Oğuz xı (after 1 tin-) and the Oğuz when they tell a man to stop talking (sahat . . . 'ani'I-takallum) say tinma:; this is the opposite (magliib) and really means /á taskut “do not be silent; the "Purks say tin meaning ushkut “be silent', and if they say tinma: they mean “do not be silent; the Oğuz are mistaken (axta'at) in this Kaş. I7 28: xin(?) Tef. tin- “to speak, reply' 304: Kip. (or Tkm.?) xv nataqa “to speak” fin- Tth. 37b. 4; wa natcqa is added in the margin beside tazaffasa tın- do. ga. ro: Osm. xiv ff. din-/dinma-, fr. xv onwards usually spelt tın-/tınma- “to speak; to keep silence'; common fr. xiv to xvi TT'S 7 zor, II 293; III 191; IV 218: (xvi in the entries of 1 tin- in Vel. 197-8 sóyle- "to speak” is consistently given as the first translation before diple-; this is nn error, the word was not Çağ. in this sense); xvii tin- ., . and, in Rümi, suxn guftan soa. harf xadan “to speak, talk” San. 200v. 20. VUD ton- 'to be closed, fastened', and the like; prima facie Refl, f£. of to:-, but survives in most NE dialects as tun- R 7/7 1439 in this sense. (NC Kir, Kzx. tun- (of liquids) “to settle, become clarified' can hardly be the same word.) See tonçuk-: Uy$f. viri ff. Bud. ol kapığ tonar (v.l. tonur) “that door is closed' TT VI 234: Civ. ton- “to be closed' H IJ 18, 6o: Xak. xi kö:k tondi: “the sky was overcast” (gàmat); and one says kapuğ tondi: “the door was fastened” (insadda); also if a mountain pass is blocked (insaddat) with snow one says art tondt: Kaş. 71 27 (tonu:r, also in the Aor. tona:r, tonma:k, in Oğuz, Kip. it is customary for the Aor. to have -ar/-er in verbs like this): xin(?) Tef. mepizin tondı “your face has become sad” 311 (ftun-), 318 (fün-): Çağ. xv ff. ton(-dı/-er) when someone looks closely at something bright and shining or the sun, one says köz tondi ("his eyes were blinded') Fel 222 (quotn.; ton- tira sa  NK NN RE 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 559 
     
   
   
     DIS tádrih şudan "to become dark” San. 185r. 29 (same quotn.; the lit. meaning was perhaps (of the eyes) “to be shut). top- (d-) “to be frozen hard", S.i.a.m.l.g.; dop- in NE 'Tuv.; SW Az., Osm., Tkm. Cf. 1 top. Türkü viri ff. kópe:kl: topmkg “his pail was frozen” IrkB $7: Xak. xı su:v topdi: *the water (etc.) was frozen hard' (camada); and one says er topdi: hurà'[-racul mina'l-bard idü máta "the man was frozen to death” Kaş. III ago (topa:r, topma:k): xiv Muh.(?) camada to:- Hif. 107 (only): Çağ. xv ff. ton- (-, -up, -ar) afsurda olub dog-, sovukdan toy- "to be frozen” Vel. 223 (quotn.); top-/ topul- (both spelt) (r) yax bastan "to be frozen”, (2) metaph. sard tva dil-sard şudan “to be cold, cold-hearted' San. 185v. 21 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv t0p- “to be frozen” Qutb 186 (tup-): Kom. xiv (of a person) “to be freezing! ton- CCG; Gr.: Kap. xiv fop- (with -9-) camada İd. 65: xv ditto Tu). 12a. 9. tó:n- (d-) originally "to turn back, return”, thence 'to turn round (and round), to turn into (something)', and the like. Specifically Oguz, survives as dön- in NW Kk.; SW Az., Osm., dö:n- in Tkm. Oğuz xı ol evine: tó:ndi: “he returned (raca'a) to his house” Kaş. III 184 (tó:ne:r, tó:nme:k): xiv Muh. raca'a dónMel. 15, 12; 26, 9; tön- Rif. 93 (yan- 109); tagallaba 'to turn over, change' dón- 24, 9; 106: Kom. xiv 'to be turned into (something) tön- CCG; Gr. 251 (quotn.): Kip. xir düra min Vtd”l-qafa "to turn, in the sense of turning the back on” dön- Hou. 40, 6: xiv dön- raca'a İd. so: xv raca'a (kayıt- and) tön- Tuh. 17a. 10; 67b. 6: Osm. xiv ff. dön- “to turn into (something)' in several texts 77S 7 224; II 321; III 209; xvii dón- in Rümi, bargaştan "to turn, return”, kópül dön- tahawowu' şudan “to vomit” San. 225v. 22 (quotn.). ?*tüp- See tópdi:, etc. *tüp- See tüpül-, tüpüş-. Dis. DNA F tana 'coriander seed', etc.; no doubt, as Kaş. says, an Iranian l.-w. and prob. specifically fr. the Pe. form dána; interesting as showing that foreign initial d- was devoiced in the languages listed below. Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. (a remedy for nose-bleeding) yas tananı Sokup 'crush fresh coriander seed' H 7 126: Uç/Arğu: xi tana: al-culculán | 'coriander seed” Kaş. HI 236; (under yumğa:k) hence in Uç al-kuzbara 'coriander seed' is called yumğa:k tana:; 1 think that tana: is the Pe. word dána for “a seed' (al-habb); the "Turks turned it into Turkish (tarrakathu) as tana: III 44: Kap. xui a/-lı”lu” 'peari' (yinçü: and) tana:; its origin is the Pe. word döza for al-habba Hou. 31, 15: xv habba tana Tuh. 12b. r1. D tanu:- Hap. leg.; Imperat. of tanu:; the phr. quoted seems to mean “see if 1 don't', see yamu:, Kag.'s explanation suggests that he did not understand the grammar of the phr.; . DNA  515 there are several corruptions in the MS. Xak. xi tanu: yamu: (both unvocalized, t- for xin the second. word) 'two particles! (harfán) meaning kartd tebsir (NIS. yasir); hence one says men barğa:ymen ctanu:» yamu: *[ shall go hatta tubşir, see (if I don't)! Kaş. İTI 236. VU tona: with back vowels but whether -0or -u- in the first syllable is uncertain. Kaş.”s statement that the word originally meant 'tiger' is not confirmed by any other authority (the evidence in the case of U I 39, 15/IV 8, Iş is not conclusive) and is improbable. If it did, it is odd that the Indian word for 'tigress' was translated tişi bars (a Ll.-w.) in U III 63, 4-5; Suv. 609, 17. When not used as a component in P.N.s it seems to mean, rather vaguely, “hero, outstanding warrior, or the like. N.o.a.b. Cf. tonalığ, topala:-. Uyğ. viii ff. Man. (there were innumerable individuals) éligler xanlar topalar xfaltfun)Har klunçüylar 'kings, xans, great warriors, highly placed ladies and consorts' M III 41, 5—7 (ii): Bud. Arcunı tona “the hero Arjuna' U II 24, 6; (seeing this, King Castana summoned up his courage and plunged fearlessly into the midst of the demons) topalar begi teg kşatrık begler mepiz menzep (?sic for merlep) “like the lord of the... and resembling the lord of the warriors (Sanskrit kgatriya) U I 39, i5ff/IV 8, 15-17 (in 7 Müller translated 'elephants(?)', in İV v. G 'heroes (— tigers) , “heroes” seems to be correct); Isi Edgü Totok Er Topa P.N. Pfahl. 11, 15: Civ. (PU) Yazır Topa P.N. of a witness USp. 108, 22; Oğul Topa ditto 110, 17: Xak. xı tona: “the tiger” (al-babr) that is (the animal) which kills elephants; this was the original meaning (a/-aşl), the word remained among the Turks but its meaning became unknown (read dalla for salla in MS.), and it is frequently used as a title (yulaqqab bihi), one says tona xa:n, topa: teği:n, and the like; Afrasiyab the great king of the "Turks was given the title Topa: Alp Er that is “the heroic man as strong as a tiger” Kaş. III 368; 3.0.0. as a title: KB topa “hero” and the like is common, particularly as a Vocative at the end of a line, e.g. tapuğka köründür ay ersiğ tona “make him see his duty, oh brave hero” 573; Topa Alp Er is mentioned as one of the famous Turkish begs 277: xıı(?) At, "Ali törtilençi ol ersiğ tona *''Ali the brave hero was the fourth (of the Prophet's companions) 34: xiv Muh.(?) tona: (with vir written as yd” in the MSS.) translates al-qatwi “strong, hard” (as opposed to “veak” kü:çsüz) Rif. 152 (only; in margin, küçlüğ in text), and ditto (as opposed to “soft” yumşak) 153 (only). ı VUD tonu: crasis of *tongu: Dev. N./A. fr. ton-, lit. "stopped up” and the like, actually *deaf'. N.o.a.b., but NE. Khak. tunux “deaf” is a parallel Pass. Dev. N./A. Other modern languages use a wide range of words, mainly Pe. l.-w.s, for 'deaf'. Xak. xr tonu: al-ufrii “deaf” Kaş. III 368: KB (if a man is dumb he 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 560 
     
   
   
     516 DIS can still attain. wisdom) topu bolsa teğmez biligke eliğ "if he becomes deaf, he does not (i.e. cannot) stretch out his hand to knowledge" 1016. Dis. V. DNAtanu:- this V. presents some difficulties, since it is hard to reconcile its various meanings; there may in. fact have been two. almost homophonous V.s, tanu:- (d-) “to suggest, recommend, discuss', and the like, and tanı:(t-) 'to be acquainted with (someone)', the latter not noted before xv. 'This is supported by the fact that there are in SW Az., Osm,, 'Tkm. tani- 'to be acquainted with', and tanış- "to be acquainted with one another” and in Az., Osm. (but not 'T'km.?) danış- "to consult one another, discuss'. The latter is pec. to SW, the former s.i.a.m.l.g. See tanuk "witness, Xak. xi ol mapa: so:z tanu:di: aw'aza ilayya kalüm 'he made a suggestion to me”, also used for areşa "to recommend, command' Kaş. III 273 (tanu:r, tanu:ma:k): Çağ. xv ff. tanı- sináxtan “to recognize, be acquainted with (someone)” Sam. 162r. ro (quotns.; in 161 v. 23 it is pointed out that Vel”s translations of tan- (-di, etc.) by bil- "to know' are an error, but some genuine forms of tani- bil- are listed in Vel. 178-9): Xwar. xiv tani- “to know, come to know (someone)” Qutb 170: Kom. xiv “to know, recognize (someone)' tanı- CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xii şüara “to consult' ta:n- (sic) Hou. 41, 7: XIV tan- (sic) ista dana “to ask for permission' (in one MS. glossed şözcara) İd. 66: xv "alima wa 'arafa “to know' (inter alia) tanı- Tult. 25b. 10. D tepe:- (d-) Den. V. fr. 1 ten, “to value (something /cc., at something JDat.)'. Pec. to Zt.; cf. teple:-. Xak. xııı(?) Zt. biligliğ birini biliğsiz minin tepegli tepedi bilignip tepin 'he estimated the value of knowledge by valuing a thousand ignorant people at (the value of) one wise man” 97-8; a.o. 498. D tona:- See tonat-, etc. D tüne:- (d-) Den. V. fr. tün, s.i.s.m.l. in all groups, usually for “to spend the night”. Xak. xı ol mende: tüne:di: “he spent the night (bata . . . lavla(n)) with me" Kaş, İİİ 273 (tüne:r, tüne:me:k): KB keçe yattı anda tünedi serip "he lay down in the late evening and spent the night there enduring (discomfort)” 489, (everything that descends rises, that rises descends) yaruğlı tüner “that brightens gets darker' (that moves comes to rest) 1049 (so read for tunar in text): xiv Rbg. tüneyür 'it becomes dark” R /TI 1549: Xwar. xiv tüne- (of a mirror) “to tarnish' MN 252; “to spend the night” Na/ic. 71, 7; 300, 8: Kap. xiv tüne- bata İd. qo. Dis. DNB F tenbin See tembin. Mon. DNC D tinc (d-) Dev. N./A. fr. tin- , “rest, repose; at rest, resting'. Survives in SE "Türki tinc . DNA (arring), tinic (BS); NC Kir. tine; Kzx. tnis; SC. Uzb. tine NW Kaz. tiniç, Krim tinc. R III 1316 ff; Kk, Kumyk, Nog. tinis; SW Az, Osm. dinc, Tkm. ding. Uyğ. vini ff. Bud. USp. oo, 4 (€nç): Çağ. xv ff. tine dine... diylenmig ma'násina 'resting, at rest” Fel. 197 (quotn.); tinc (spelt) ásrda ta ürámida 'at rest” San. 202r. 21 (quotn.): (Xwar. xiv tinclik “quiet, peace! Qutb 193): Kom. xiv “rest, resting! tinc CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv. tin (^with -c") müstarih "at rest! fd. 66: Osm. xiv dinç (A.N. dinçlİk) “at rest” in two texts. T'T.S II 301-2. Dis. DNC E tepüc See tepgüc. VU?D tancu: “a gobbet or lump', of mcat, earth, and the like. N.o.a.b, See yertinçü. 'l'he evidence points strongly towards -a- in the first syllable, but the main entry in Kaş. has -0- and the word perhaps occurs once in this form in Uy£. Civ. "The suggestion in TT ///, p. 26, footnote s, that this is a Dev. N. in -u: may well be right although the suggested etymology of tançğala-, q.v., is prob. an error, but there is no other trace of *tanc-. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. U HI 37, 26 (a lump of earth”, ülüş), TM IV 253, 63 (of flesh, osul-): Civ. yeti tançu “seven lumps” (of raw and cooked meat) TT VII 24, 9; 25, 10; (a sound rose from the brown earth) tonçudakı (sic) , . . kutrulti 'the , . . in the clods(?) were liberated” TT 7 9gr-2: Xak. xi tançu: (vocalized tonpu:) al-luqma “a göbbet” I 417; tançu: al-/uqma 1H 16 (kev-), 711 392 (sipür-): xiv Muh.(?) luqma tangu: Rif. 165 (only; MS. tanhum). VUD?F tinci: See sa:vçı: (Uyğ.). F tipgan L-w. fr. Chinese £öng chan "lamp bowl' (Giles 10,864 300). N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vil ff. Civ. (in a list of articles issued to various individuals) bir tinçan yağ onc lamp bowl(ful) of oil” (Sb, gi, 11 and 26. Dis. V. DNCVU tinçi:- "to be, or become, putrid; to smell foul'. "There is some doubt about the first vowel; in the main entry, it is shown twice as -1- and once unmarked; in /7 281, ız it is -0-[-u- but perhaps only because the word rhymes with yungi-; in /]] 303, 11 it is -1-, but a philological note is added in which it is given as -a-, and in the Co-op. f. it is three times given as -a-. N.o.a.b. Xak. xi et tınçıudı: "the meat. putrefied, smelt bad” (aşalla) Kaş. 11 276 (tingrr, tinçiema:k), 11 28: (1 tatik-); (in a verse) erdem eti: fincidi : “the flesh of good breeding and virtue putrefied' (asalla) . . . tançadı:, its origin was tançğa:dı: but the -i$- was omitted owing to the exigencies of the metre; this is in the Oğuz and Kip. languages permissible (cda”iz) because they elide medial -ğ- in nouns and verbs alike 777 303, 11 ff. (this seems to he 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 561 
     
   
   
      DIS. V. corrupt, there is no other trace of final -a:in this Verb). VUD tonçuk- (d-) Intrans. Den. V. fr. *tonc Dev. N. fr. ton-, cf. tinc; regarding the first vowcl sce ton-. Survives in NE Har, tunzuk-; Sor tunçuk- £ IJ] 1442; Tuv. dumeuk-/dunguk-; NC Kzx. tunsuk- R III 1442; tungi$- MM 371 “to be suffocated'. Xak. xı er tonçukto: gunma'l-racul hattàá lam yaqdir an tanaffasa the man was covered up so that he could not brcathe”, and one says suğur tonçukti: “the marmot entered his burrow for the winter and will not emerge until the spring”, also used of any animal with a similar habit Kaş. /7 227 (tonçuka:r, tonçukma:k): X war. xiv tonçuk- “to faint, lose consciousness! Qrutb 186: Osm. xiv-xvt duncuk- (rarely tuncuk-) “to be suffocated'; fairly common T'TS II 325; 11] ziz, IV 246. ?E tançğa:- See tingr-. VUD tınçış- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of timct:-, q.v.; spelt farıçış- in the MS. Xak. xı etle:r kamuğ tınçışdı: “the pieces of meat all putrefied” (aşa//at) Kaş. II 217 (tingisu:r, tınçışma:k). Tris. V. DNC ?E tançğala-/tançkıla- this V. has been read in the two passages below, and it was suggested in 77 ///, p. 26, footnote 5, that it is a Freq. f. in -ğala- of *tanc-. Such Freq. f.s do exist in some modern languages, but seem to be unknown in Uyğ. There can be little doubt that this is merely tangu:la:- mistranscribed. Uyğ. viu ff. Bud. sansiz üküs tinliglari$ azığları üze tançğalayu (read tançulayu) ölürüp “killing innumerable people and tearing them to pieces vvith their fangs” U I 45, 17-18/IV. 1o, 71-2; (the dying man loses consciousness) öz erinin tançkıTayur (read tançulayur) 'tears his own lips to pieces” TT //T, p. 26, note $, l. rə. D tancu:la:- Den. V. fr. tançu: “to tcar to pieces, masticate', etc. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vii ft. Bud. (the woman . . .) yaşuru ağzınta tançulap 'secretly masticating (various drugs?) in her mouth! U 711 85, 18 (and see tançğala-): Xak. xı er etme:k tançu:la:dı: "the man chewed (madağa) bread” (etc.) Kaş. III 352 (tançu:la:r, tançu:la:ma:k): KB 46or (uvşa:k). Dis. DND D tópdi: pec. to Kaş., morphology obscure, as in the case of Ópdi:; comparison with tópre: suggests that it is a Den. N.; tópit- is at first sight a Caus. f. of *tóp-, but its Caus. f. tópder- suggests that it was originally *topidand also a Den. formation; on the other hand tópüs- is clearly the Co-op. f. of *tóp-. Neither *tóp nor *tóp- have survived, and it is possible that originally both existed in parallel cf. tin/tin-, top/top-. "The basic meaning in any cvent is 'opposite, upside down'; and the like, Xak. xı KB (that is the DND- (517 way this old world sworks, that is its traditional custom) kerek öndi tutğıl kerek tópdisi “cither accept its traditional custom or take the opposite' 1547, 4720. Dis. V. DNDD tanut- Caus. f. of tanu:-, q.v.; with various meanings. S.i.m.m.l.g. as tanit-, properly “to make (someone) acquainted with (someone elsc),! but also “to make (something) known'. Xak. xı ol mana: sö:z tanuttt: amarani bi-isa'r'[-kalüm li-ğayri “he ordered me to convey the command (or recommendation) to someone else” Kaş. IJ 312 (tanutu:r, tanutma:k): Çağ. xvff. tanıt- Caus. f. gimasándan "to make acquainted” Sar. 162v. 2 (quotns.). VUD tepit- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of tep-, q.v.; in the MS. the first vowel is -e- everywhere. Xak. xı er okın tepitti: “the man launched (a"la) his arrow upwards in the direction of the sky” Kaş. III 396 (tegitü:r, tepitme:k, corrected fr. -ma:k). D tonat- (d-) Caus. f. of tona:- Den. V. fr. to:n. Tona:-, which is not noted in Turkish before xv, Çağ. San. 18sv. 7, but was old enough to become a xim l-w. in Mong. as tono- (Haenisch 151), could etymologically have two opposite meanings 'to put clothes on (oneself or someone else)” and “to strip clothes off (ditto)'. "The two early occurrences are both in the latter sense, and the V. survives for “to rob” as tona- in NE Khak., NC Kzx. and tono- in Kir., and as tonna- (? for tonla-) in Tuv., but NE Sor tona- means 'to dress oneself'. Most of these words have a Caus. f. Xak. xı ol meni: tonattı: “he dressed me in a garment (albasani'l-tawb) as a gift from himself” Kaş. İl 312 (tonatu:r, tonatma:k; its origin is to:n ıdtı: “he sent him a garment): Osm. xıv ff. donat- (occasionally tonat-) (1) “to dress, fit out (someone)'; (2) “to cover with abuse”, (3) “to equip' (e.g. a ship); fairly common 775 I 218; III 205; IV 237. D tünet- (d-) Caus. f. of tüne:-; 'to put (someone) up for the night". S.i.s.m.l. in this mcaning. Xak. xı ol konukuğ evde: tünetti: "he put up (abáta) the guest in the house for the night" Kaş. /1 312 (tünetü:r, tünetme:k): xın(?) At. tünetür tününni künün keterip “he makes your night dark, taking away your sun (or day?)” rs: Tef. Makkanı tünetti “he spent the night in Mecca' 318. D tópit- (tópid-) n.o.a.b. but see topta- , for the etymology see töndi:, as the Caus. f. tópder- means 'to invert' and the like this V. is presumably Intrans. meaning 'to bow down, bend down, move downwards', and the like, başın in the quotns. below being in the Instr. and not the Acc. with Poss. Suff. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. PP 19, 4 (1 bas): Xak. xı er başın tönitti: “the man lowered (ta'ta'a) his head” (etc) Kay. III 396 (tópitü:r, tópitme:k; spelt tógüt- everywhere); KB yétigen kötürdi yana baş örü tönitti yana yıldrik adğır naru “the Great Bear raised its 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 562 
     
   
   
       DIS. V. 518 head upwards again; Procyon(?) and Sirius(?) moved downwards again' 6220. E topta- has been read in the passage below but certainly mistranslated. 'l'he letters to and tmş are quite clear, the slim letter between them is not. İt cannot bc a front -s-/-şas Radlotf originally suggested, both because it would be out of place here and because there is no known V. tosat-/tosat-. Malov's 1059 reading ftokta- is impossible both because there is no room for -k- and because tokta- is a Mong. l-w. which did not occur in Turkish before xi at carliest. "The obvious course is to rcad it as topit- and take it as an alternative form with back vowels of tópit- parallel to the Uyg. form with back vowels of tógder-. Türkü vii (when I ascended the throne the Türkü people, who were expecting to die soon) öğirip sevinip topitmig kózi: yügerü: kórtl: 'rejoicing and being glad raised their downcast eyes and looked up” 77 E 2. D tantur- Caus. f. of ta:n- ; survives in some of the same languages. Xak. xi ol mapa: alımın tanturdi: achadan?l-dayn “he made (or allowed) me to disclaim his debt' Kaş. JI 176 (tanturur, tanturma:k). VUD teptür- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of tep-, q.v.; the /4” is vocalized with damna in the Perf. and fatha elsewhere. Xak. xı ol kuş tentürdi: azcala bi'l-tayr wa bi'l-nabl “he set the bird, or the arrow, in motion' Kaş. III 397 (teptürür, teptürme:k; cf. the translation of tepür-). D tindur- (d-) Caus. f. of 1 tin-; survives in some of the same languages, usually meaning 'to cause. to rest”, Uyğ. vir ff, Bud. (the prince led thc old guide to an island) ötrü tınturğalı sakinti “and then thought that he would let him rest' PP 36, 8; bir ódün sónmez tınturmaz emğetirler (the pains of hell) 'torture him without abating or letting him rest for a moment" TT VI 446-7; a.o. TT X 9s (damaged): Xak. xı ol meni: tindurdi: areqa"ani fi'l-rálta aca acammani "he allowed me to rest and released me from work'; its origin is the word trndtr fanmaffasa “he breathed' Keş, 77 176 (no Aor. or Infin.): Xwar. xiv (VU) tindur- “to pacify, allow to rest" Qutb 193; tindür(-gil) "to bring (a boat) to rest” Nac. 378, 14. S toptar- See tópder-. VUD tondur- Caus. f. of ton-, q.v. regarding the first vowel. Survives as tundur- in several NE languages and NC Kir., Kzx. but the semantic connection with the latter is dubious. In Kaş. the word is listed among V.s with -das the penultimate letter, but spelt in the MS. with -t-. Xak. xı ot anın kó:zin tondurdi: (tonturdi:) the drug made his eye shut! (Zarfà "aynahu)ş also used of anything which covers (or conceals, safara) something Kaş, II 176 (tondurur, tondurma:k; -r-, -1-): xiv Muh.   DND(?) radda al-büb "to shut a door' kapi (VU) tondur- Rif. 109 (only ; tà' unvocalized). D tópder- Caus. f. of tópit-; “to turn (something) over, to invert', and the like. In Uyg. the word is consistently spelt toptar- (or topdar-) although tópit- had front vowels in that language and this V. has front. vowcls everywhere else, Survives with the same meanings in NC Kir. tönkör-, Kzx. tópker-; SC Uzb. tünkar-: NW Kaz. tünter-; Kk. tàpker-; Nog. töpter-, SW "Vkm. dünder-. Uyğ. viu ff. Man. M 11 13, 5 (tik-): Bud. U Il 4, 10 (ağtar-), TT VIII A.s (uğuş): Xak. xı ol aya:k tönderdi: "he inverted (qalaba) the bovvl” (ctc.) Kaş.l 7/1 397 (tönderür, tönderme:k): xiv Muh.(?) aqlaba"l-tamb "to turn a garment inside out” tóndür- (sic) Rif. 104. (only): Çağ. xv ff. tópter- (spelt) wedjgün hardan “to invert" San. 186r. zr (quotns.). Tris. V. DNDD tindurul- Tap. leg.?; Pass. f. of tindur- ; “to be allowed (or ordered) to rest”, Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. (by the powerful influence of this dhárami . . .) alku anculayu kelmişler üze tindurulmaki bolur “bcing allowed to rest by all the Tathagatas comes into existence' U II 46, 63-5 (Müller points out that the translation is inexact, the Chinese original has 'the abstruse meaning (of the doctrine) will be constantly and exhaustively explained to them"). D tönderil- Pass. f. of tönder-, q.v. for the Uv&amp;. spelling. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. noted only in the phr. ağtarılu topdarilu Suv. 133, 21 ctc. (ağtarıl-): (Xak.) xii ff. Tef. tópderil-/tópteril- "to be overturned' 309. Dis. DNG D tapığ Dev. N. fr. tap-; “constriction”. See tapis. Uyğ. virr ff. Bud. sikiğ tanığ 'pressure and constriction” are mentioned in U /7 11, 7, together with gricf, anxiety, pain”, ctc. as among the inevitable consequences of being born; tórt tuğumluğ kısağ tanağda (sic) "in the imprisonment and constrictiori of the four kinds of rebirth' TT IV, p. rs, footnote, İ. 5. D tanuk 'a witness' (to a statement, document; etc.); survives as tanik in this sense in NW Kaz.; SW Osm. and meaning “mark, sign” in NE Khak.; SC Uzb. As the initial is consistently t- in Osm. the connection seems to be with tanu:- q.v., in the sense of 'to be acquainted with', and it is therefore a Dev. N. in -k (Active) not -uk (Passive). Türkü vir ff. Man. igid kişi tanuki boltumuz erser 'if we have become witnesses for a liar" Chuas. 101-2: Uyğ. viri ff. Civ. all contracts in U.Sp. and elsewhere end with the signatures of one or both parties and some *witnesses' described as tanuk: Xak. xi tanuk a/-gáhid "witness! Kaş, 7 380; a.0.0.:: KB törütğen  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 563 
     
   
   
      DIS. DNG $19 baripa törümiş tanuk “the created are witnesses to the existence of the creator 15; 0.0. 20, 153, 711, 2216, etc.: xır(?) Tef. tanuk 'witness' 284: xiv Muh. al-saháda 'evidence” tanu:k Mel. 84, 4; Rif. 190: Çağ. xv ff. tanuk (anük Vel. 179; tanuğ/tanuk şühid toa gumüh 'witness' San. 164v. 10 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv tanuk 'witness' Qutb 170: Kom. xiv 'witness! tanuk CCTI; tanik CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv tanuk al-şdahid İd. 66; şahada da:nuk ol- Bul. sor.: xv gdhid tanik Tuh. 21a. ro: Osm. xiv. ff. tanuk the commoner form till xvi, rare thereafter; fanik occurring fr. xiv onwards, *witness; evidence, proof'; c.i.a.p. 77S 7 672; I1 874; HI 665; IV 735. D tapuk Pass. Conc. N. fr. tap-; 'parcel, bundle”, and the like. Survives in this sense in NC Kir. tanık, Xak. xı tapuk the word for “a gift (hadiya) which is brought out to kings (when they are) on a journey and the like'; it contains food and brocades (dibábic): tanuk the word for “any piece of brocade which is given to a man who strikes the ball through the goal at polo”: tapuk “the pieces of silk” (a/-harira) which are fastened to the heads of lances and standards in war time Kaş. HII 365: KB (the world is at rest now that this monarch has mounted the throne) anın ıdtı dunyá tapuklar tüze 'therefore the world has sét in order and sent gifts” 93;, 0.0. 99; 5951 (acil-). E : D tınığ N.Ac. fr. 1 tin-; “brcathing, breath”, N.o.a.b. Xak. xı sökel tinir artak b”sa tanaffusu'l-marid “the sick man had difficulty in breathing”, from the phr. er uluğ tındı: “the man breathed a deep sigh” Kaş. JI 40, 13; n.m.e.: Xwar. xiv tınığ "breath” Quib 193. Ytuha:ğ "hoof”, medieval and modern forms prove that the centre consonant was -fi although even in "Türkü (see tuya:ğlığ) it had already become -y-, the "Türkü and Tuv. forms suggest that the second vowel was originally -0-. Survives only(?) in NE Kaç., Koib., Lcb., Sag. tuyğak, Tuv. duyuğ, SE "Pürki, NC Kir., Kzx. tuyak; SC Uzb. tuyok; NW tuyak; SW Tkm. toynak. See Doerfer II 99r. Xak. xı tuya:ğ al-háfir 'hoof'; one says at tuyağı: (sic) “a horse”s hoof” Kaş. 7IT 165: xiv Muh.(?) hafirha "(a horsc”s) hoof” tuyna:k (unvocalized) Rif. 170 (Mel. 69, 14 tırna:k): Çağ. xv ff. tuwaj$ firnaf 'hoof' Vel. 224 (quotn.); tuynak bu daxi ternak 225 (quotn.); tuvvağ “a quadruped's hoof' (sum), also called tuynağ Sar. 187r. 19 (quotns.); tuynağ/tuynak “a quadruped's hoof, or nail (náxun); also called tuwag do. 188r. zo (quotn.): Xwar. xiv tuynak 'hoof' Qutb 185; Nahc. zoo, 4; tunyak do. ss, 3: Kip. xiu háfiru'l-faras wa ğayrihi tuyna:k Hou. 12, 17: xiv Kip. tuyak; Tkm. ftuyna:k al-háfir; used today in the prayer afin fuyna:kina: ta:ş tokunmasun “may a stone not injure your horse's foot' 7d. 67: xv hafir tunyak (sic, in margin in second hand tuynak) Tiu. 13a. 4: .Osm. xıv-xvı (only) duynak also spelt tuynak, diynak, fiynak; fairly common TTS I 235; H 333; İH 680; IV 219. Dis. V. DNGD tinik- See E binik-. Tris. DNG D tona:ğu: Hap. leg.; Conc. N. fr. tona:-, there is in this passage a v.l. tonanğu, q.v., and this may be an error for that word. Uyğ. vil ff, Bud. (weaving gives people useful things) kedgü tonağu ulatı 'wearing apparel, clothing, etc.” TT VI 392. D tanukluğ Hap. leg.?; P.N./A. fr. tanuk. Türkü vur ff. tanuklu:ğ sav "a statement in front of witnesses! Tun. IIIa. 2 (ETY II 94). D tanukluk A.N. fr. tanuk; “a statement by a witness, evidence”, etc. Survives in SW Osm. taniklik. Xak. xi tanukluk a/-sahada 'evidence, testimony! Kaj. 1 503: KB tilimni bezedi tanukluk bile '(God) adorned my tongue with the power to bear witness (to Him)” 386; tanukluk bérür rozr: xır(?) At. senip barlıkınka tanukluk berür 'bears witness to 'Thine existence' 5; Tef. tanukluk 284: Çağ. xv ff. tanuğluğ/tanukluk şahdda wa guütühi (Hend.) San. 164v. 14 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv tanukluk (usually with bér-) Qutb 170; Nahc. 272, 14: Ktp. xiv. şahada da:nukluk ver- Bul. soa: Osm. xivff. tanukluk/taniklik usually with vér-; c.i.a.p. TTS I 674; 11 875; III 665; IV 735. D tanığma: Hap. leg.; Ger. of ta:n- used asa N. Üyğ.vrı ff. Man. tört élig teprilerde tanığmalar “denials of (the existence of) the four divine kings” M II 11, 5-6. Tris. V. DNGD tanığla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. tanığ, “to feel constricted” or the like. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. the Chinese phr., speaking of a gift which is offered, “do not blame it, or find it strange, because it is small” is translated az tép tanığlayu yarlıkamazun Hüen-ts. 1846. D tanukla:- Den. V. fr. tanuk, n.o.a.b.? Uyğ. vir ff. Man.-A tanuklayu sav bérdi “he gave oral evidence” M 7 rg, 14: Bud. kertğünçlüğ köpülüğ tanuklayur 'produces evidence that he has a believing mind” TT V 22, 35-6; o.o. do. 22, 31; Suv. 137, 11 etc. Dis. DNG PUD tepig Hap. leg.; unvocalized and the first letter undotted, but the first word in a section which also contains sepek, etc. and so no doubt Dev. N. fr. tep-, q.v. Xak. xı tepig a/-hatıd "the atmosphere! Kaş. 171 366. D tü:nek (d-) Dev. N. (Conc. N.) fr. tüne:-; *prison', lit. "a dark (place). N.o.a.b. (Uyğ. vr ff. Bud. Sanskrit adhikaramika “official, jailer' tönökçi (possible alternative reading tötökçi) TT VIII C.4 may be the N.Ag. of this word): Barsgan xi tü:nek a/-sicn 'prison' 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 564 
     
   
   
      520 Kaş. I1 408: Xak. xi KB bu dunya tünek ol "this world is a prison! $423: xiv Mu. (in the list of buildings) al-Aabs 'prison' tü:ne:k Mel. 76, 1; Rif. 179. PUD tepgüc lIap. leg.; the first entry in a list of words containing four consonants of which the second is -p- but spelt in error tengüpc; N.L fr. tep-, meaning lit. 'something which rises in the air". Xak. xı tepgüg ull gay! murtafi" qadr nisf dirá! naliw afafi'l-qidr tea ğayrihi 'anything which stands to the height of half a cubit like a tripod for a cooking pot, etc.” Kaş. IH 381. PUF depge:l Hap. leg.; 447 unvocalized, in the same list of words containing four consonants of which the second is -D- as tepgec under the heading -L, but like it w. only one kaf. "The d- indicates a l.-w., prob. Iranian. Xak. xı denğe:l al-ku'bura "a knuckle; a knot in a (corn) stalk' Kaş. HI 384. Dis. V. DNGD tepger- Hap. leg.: "Trans. Den. V. fr. 1 ten, in a list of V. vv. four consonants, the second -p-, written termger- but vv. traces of a tagdid over the -g-. Cf. teple:-, Xak. xı bi:r ne:p bi:rke: tepğerdi: 'adala bayna'l-say'ayn “he equated (or balanced) the two things” Kaş. III 398 (tepğerü:r, tenğerme:k). Dis. DNL ] D tanıl Hap. leg.; Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. tap-; lit. “corded” or the like. Xak. xr tapil keyik al-zabvu'ladi fi yadayhi xutüt, "a gazelle with striped legs'; also used of other (striped) things Kaş. 171 366. D tapla: Sec 1 tap. D tünle: See tün. D tınlığ P.N./A. fr. tin; "a living crcature', human or animal, as opposed to an inanimate object; a standard Bud. technical term, but not a Moslem one. N.o.a.b. Türkü vir ff. Man. beş tórlüg tınlığ 'five kinds of living creatures! C/tias. 58-9; do. 86, etc. (turalığ) a.o.0. Uyf. vin ff. Man. amari tinliğlar “some living creatures! 77 711 92; a.o.o.: Bud. tinli$ is very common; often used correctly for "living creature', but in many passages w. the more restricted meaning “human being: (Xak.) xr(?) KBVP açın kodmaz hargiz kamuğ tınliğığ “he never leaves any living creature hungry” s: xın(?) KBPP kamuğ tinliğlarka rüzi bérgen 'giving their daily food to all living creatures! 3: xiv Muh. al-haytán "living creature' (opposite to 'inanimate” ó:le:t) tınliığ Mel. 45, 6; Rif. 158. D tonlığ (d-) P.N./A. fr. to:n; 'clothed; having . . . clothes”, Survives in some NE languages w. phonetic changes, Türkü vii yalıp boduniığ tonliğ kiltim “1 clothed the naked” 7 E 29, II E 23; vun ff. uzu:n tonlu:6 *wearing long clothes”, i.e. 'woman' (the original theory that this meant “monk” has DIS. DNG long since been disproved) JrkB 47: Man. uzun tonluğ Chuas. 1:17: Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A erli uzun tonluğlı “a man and a woman' M 1 16, 15-16; yürün tonluğ 'wearing white clothes! M III 3o, 10-11: Bud. uzun tonluğ USp. 104, 8-9: Civ. ditto TT VH 26, 1; 37, s: (Xak.?) xiv Muh. (in the grammatical section) dii fazob 'clothed" to:nlijs/ tonlik Me/, ro, 9; to:nlu: do. ro, 11; to:nlug Rif. 83. D to:nluk (d-) A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. ton, 'something connected with clothing', normally “an allowance for the purchase of clothing". Survives in SW Osm. donluk; Tkm. do: nluk; a l.-w. in Pc.,, see Doerfer 11: 990. Xak. xt Kaş. H 11 (kis-), n.m.e.: Kip. xiv cömakiya "wages! (lit. 'clothing allawance') (t) donluk (sic) Bul. 6, 13. : D teplig P.N./A. fr. 1 tep; 'equal to; equable', and the like. Survives in SW Osm. denlü/ denpli. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. (if a man knows) bir padakça teplig nom “as much (Buddhist) doctrine as a single verse' (Sanskrit 1.-w.) U ITI 29, 16; neçe tepli&amp; “hovv great” (is the strength in the Buddhas' bodies?) do. 73, 2; a.o, TT X 345; mapa teplig kisig "a woman like me” TT X 499; Sanskrit sopehgant 'equipped with tranquillity'(?) birle: te:pligleir TT VIII A.21; übehşd 'tranquillity' teplig (? for teplik) do. 34: (Xak.) xın(?) "Vef. ança teplig "as much as that”, munca teplig “as much as this” 299. (D) tüplük 'the smoke-hole of a tent', hence, by extension, *window' and the like; syn. vv. tüğü:nük, q.v. which is older; morphologically obscure, an. A.N. (Conc. N) fr. *tüp which may ultimately be connected ctymologically with. tügü:nük, Survives in such NE forms as tündük/tünnük; SE Tar. tüpnik; "Türki tünlük: NC Kir. tündük; Kzx. tündik; ].-w. in Pe. and other foreign languages, see Doerfer II 988. Uyğ. xiv Clhin.-Uyg. Dict. *window' tünlük Ligeti 271; R III 1545: Xak. xi tünlük a/-huteta. "a dormer window' Kag. 111 383; o.o. I1 18, 1; III 120, 23 (1 6:1), HII 127 (2 to:ğ): xiv Muh.(?) rawzana 'dormer window tü:plü:k Rif. 179 (only): Çağ. xv ff. tünlük “a window (ratezana) in the top of a nomads' tent which they close in cold and rain and open to let out the smoke when they light a fire” Vel. 223 (quotns.); tünlük (spelt) razezaza-i xára San. 187r. r&amp; (quotns.)): Xwar. xin(?) (the walls of the house were gold) tunlukları (sic) dakı kümüşdün “and its windows of silver” Os. 249: xiv tünlük/tünlük 'smoke hole, dormer window! Qutb 190; tünlük Nac. 19, 12; 43, 6: Kip. xiv tünlük datru'l-gà'a "an upper storey of a house” İd. 40: xv rawgan 'dormer window' (baca; in margin in second hand) tünlük TA. 17a. 2; şabbüh "lattice window" tüplük Tuh. 21a. 12. Dis. V. DNL D tapıl- Pass. f. of tap-; “to be bound, constricted”, and ehe like. S.i,s.m.]. Uyğ. vin ff. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 565 
     
   
   
     P242)  LL DIS. V. DNL | $21 Bud. kisilur tapilur erserler 'so long as they are. imprisoned and constricted' (in the imprisonment and constrictions of the four kinds of rebirth) TT IV, p. 15, footnote, l. 5 (sce tanığ), Suv. 586, 14 (Sikil-)—this word has been read feş//- and translated “to descend' in a phr. transcribed ilkisiz sansarda berü beş ajun içinde ağa tepile 77 IV 4, ro ff. owing to a supposed antithesis to ağ- “to rise'; the phr. obviously means “being . . . constricted within the five forms of existence since (the beginning of) the immemorially old chain of rebirths (Sanskrit samısdra) ; ağa, too, seems to be a mistranscription either for aka 'flowing' (see ak-, the word has a technical Buddhist meaning) or perhaps ağ(ı)r 'grievously' : Xak. xı tapıldı: ba:ş translated 'agaba'l-racul ra' sahu 'the man wrapped his head' (in a turban, etc.); also used of anything that is tied fast with a cord (şudda bi-xayt) Kaş. I1I 395 (tapilu:r, tapilma:k). D tanul- Pass. f. of tanu:-, q.v., in this sense Hap. leg. but tanıl- “to be known', etc. s..m.m.l. Xak. xi apa:r só:z tanuldi: i'iza (MS. in error aw'aza) ilayhi'l-kalám “the statement was suggested to him” Kaş. 11 130 (tanulu:r, tanulma:k). D tinil- (d-) Hap. leg.; Pass. f. (used only Impersonally) fr. 1 tn-.. Xak. xi emgektin tinildi: usturiha mina'l-mihna wa'l-'anà' “there was a respite from pain (Hend.)'. This Verb is Impersonal (má lam yusamm fà iluhu mina'l-fi'li'l-lázim); there are many similar ones in this language; no Impersonal V. can be derived from an Intrans. V. in Ar., but there are many in Turkish, for example evke: barıldı: there was a mövement into the house” and ta:ğdın énildi: “there was a descent from the mountain! Kaş. 1] 130 (tinilur, tinilma:k). D tüpül- Pass. f. of *tür- ; "to be disappointed, dissillusioned , to despair, give up hope (of something /2/.)”. Survives as tünil-/tüpül-, same mcanings, in NC Kir., Kzx.; NW Kk., Nog. Xak. xı er rıştın tüpüldi: “the man despaired (ayrsa) of the affair” Kaş. I7I 395 (no Aor. or Infin.); attin emdi: sen tü:pü:l (sic) 'now give up (any hope of getting) the horse” 7 74, ro: KB bu istin tüpül “give up this affair' 1195; 0.0., same meaning, 1220, 2011, 2121, 3793, 4612, 4792: Kip. xv ya”ısa mina l-ya's "to despair of” tüpül- Tuh. 39a. 11 (in margin in second hand tügül-). D 1 tapla:- (d-) Den. V. fr. 1 tap; prob. only in the phr. tar) tapla:- “to dawn; (of dawn) to break”, N.o.a.b.?; the usual phr. is tap at-. Türkü vri ff. IrkB 26 (1 tap): Uyğ. vri ff. Bud. tap taplayur erken PP 31, 7. D 2 tapla:- Den. V. fr. 2 tap; originally Intrans. “to wonder, be surprised'; thence 'Trans. 'to find (something) wonderful, to admire (it)' ; and thence “to admire (something) more than (other things), to choosc (it). Sur. vives for “to be surprised” in NE tapda-/ tapna-; SW Osm. tapla-, and for "to pick out, choose', with some extended meanings in NC Kzx. tapda-; NW Kk., Kumyk, Nog. tapla- ; in thesc latter languages and NC Kir. “to be surprised' is tanlan-/tandan-. Uyğ. virt ff. Man.-A [gap] taplayurmen '] am surprised' M I 37, 23; taplap do. 21 title: Man. 'lokharian àktike 'wonderful' taplaguluk TT IX 38: Bud. mupadip taplap "being disturbed and astonished” U 111 72, 22; TT X 21; Suv. 604, r, körklerin taplap “admiring (or being surprised by) their beauty” PP 43, 3; a.0. do. 71, 3 (1 rr): Xak. xı er rSgiB tapla:dı: fa'accaba'l-racul müna”l-amr "the man was surprised by the affair' Kaş. 111 403 (tapla:r, tapla:ma:k): KB (when you closed your eyes) özüm tapladim “1 was surprised' 648: xırı(?) Tef. ditto 285: xiv Rb. ol nürni taplap hayrön kaldi “he was astonished by that light” R HI 811; Muh.(?) ta"accaba ta:pla:- Rif. 106 (only): Çağ. xv ff. tanla- (- p, -mis; sic) temyiz et- farq ma'nàsina; ayla- bil-; ixtiyar et- “to distinguish; to understand, know; to choose' Vel, 179 (quotn.; the second meaning due to confusion with tanu:-); tapla- sarzaniş kardan wa ta'n wa tatcbix “to blame, reproach', Tali'-i Harazi's translation biçidan corrected San. 162v. 27 (the correction is just, the word was mistaken for tap-, but San.'s own translation is false and apparently a mere guess; quotns.), tanla(spelt) bar-guzidan sa intixab hardan “to choose, select” do. 163r. 16 (quotns.): Xwar. xir danla-/tanla- “to be surprised, to wonder' "Ali 29, sı: xiv tapla- ditto Qutb 170: Kom. XIV "to be surprised, to wonder' tapla-; “to choose” tapla- CCI, CCG; Gr. 234 (quotn.): Kip. xii ta"accaba tanla- Hou. 38, 19: XIV tapla- (“vith -n-”) ditto /d. 65: xv 'aciba "to vvonder” tapla- Tul. 26a. 13: Osm. xiv ff. tapla- (occasionally danla-) “to be surprised, to wonder'; c.i.a.p. TT.S 1 178; 11 259; III 168; IV 190. D teple:- (d-) Den. V. fr. 1 tep; “to equate, weigh, comparc', and the like. S.i.m.m.l.gr.; in SW 'l'km. deple- ; Osm. denkle- is distorted by a supposed connection with Pe. dang which is a l.-w. fr. 1 ten. Cf. tenğer-. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. kamağ suturlarığ teplemek atlığ ülgü “the criterion called "“veighing all the sütres”” Iüen-ts. 1833: Xak. x1 bi:r ne:p bi:rke: teple:di: 'adala bayra'l-say'ayn "he balanced the two things” Kaş. III 403 (teple:r, teple:me:k); (the Chinese emperor has a great deal of silk brocade, but) teple:medip bıçma:s “does not cut it without measuring it first” (///4 mugaddira(n)) I 427, 6: KB sınamış yağıçı kişi teplemis on iki mir er sü üküş sü temiş “an experienced general assessed (the value of) his troops and said “an army of 12,000 men is too big an army” ” 2334; (a general must first get an informer and find out from him about the enemy's morale and) apar tenlese 'assess it by that (information) 2352; (he heard your words and) üküş tenledi *weighed them carefully” 4979: Çağ. xvff. tépel- (apparently 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 566 
     
   
   
     522 deliberately so spelt, 'to be conjugated in the same wav (as tépeg-), but with -1-”, but Co-op. f. téples- follows immediately) musázer şudan "to be equal' Sar. 202r. 6: Xwar. xiv kara kirpikipe nàwak tenelmes “an arrow is not equal to your black eyelashes (in straightness)” MN 276 (perhaps metri gratia, teplemes would not scan). ?FD tipla:- (d-) Den. V. fr. Stinm), it has been suggested that this is the tir) listed above, it is perhaps more likely that it is Chinese t”ing "to hear, listen' (Giles 11,299; Pulleyblank, Middle Chinese f'eng), but the d- and back vowels make this difficult; properly 'to listen to (something Zcce.)', but often used for “to hear” (properly €şid-). S.i.a.m.l.g., in NE Tuv. dipna-; SW Az., Osm., Tkm. diple-. Türkü vi (begs and people) bu savimin edgü:ti: esid katığdı: tipla: "hear my words well and listen to them carefully! 7 S. 2 (spelt with front t- and back -1-): virt ff. Irk B 58 (2 6t): Uyğ. vii ff. Bud, éliglerin kavsurup tipJazunlar “let them fold their hands and listen' U 1 22, ız ff.; edğü nom tıplağalı bolğay erki men 11 shall no doubt listen to the good doctrine" U III 29, 4-5; a.0.0.: Xak. xı er sö:z tipla:di: "the man listened (aşğa) to the statement! Kaş. 11] 403 (tipla:r, tipla:ma:k) a.o. J gö, 11: KB sözüm tipladi 559; o.o. 648, 4979, 5433 (tapirka:-): xıır(?) Tef. ditto 304: Çağ. xvíf. tipla- (spelt) gamidan wa fater-i suxun kardan "to hear; to ponder deeply on a statement” San. zorr. 22; dinla- (spelt) same meaning as tipla- do. 226v. 28: Xvvar. xn; diple- “to listen" “AF 26, sr: xiv (VU) tipla- ditto Qutb 193: Osm. xv and xvi dip (/dipif/dipü) diple- 'to cavesdrop'; in several texts. T'T.S I1 209; II 302; III 196; IV 226. VUD topla- n.o.a.b. in a Maitrisimit fragment; Den. V. fr. *top which might be an onomatopoeic like 3 top (3 tap) but is perhaps more likely to be a Chinese l.-w.; the meaning must be “to flog! or the like. Uy. viti ff. Bud. berpen kağalın tokir toplayur erdimiz ...temirlig$ bergen ... toplayur[Jar] “ve " have beaten and flogged(?) with whips and willow rods, . . . they flog(?) with an iron whip' TT IV, p. 18, note Bz, 2-3. D taplat- Hap. leg.?; Caus. f. of 2 tapla:-. Xak. xı ol meni: taplatti: arcqa"ani fi'l-'acab tea a"cabani dálika "he astonished me and made me wonder at that” Kaş. II 358 (taplatu:r, taplatma:k): (Çağ. xv ff. taplat- maf'un süxtan "to cause to be rebuked' Sar. 163r. 15; sce 2 tapla:-). D tiplat- (d-) Caus. f. of tipla:-; s.i.a.m.].g. Xak. xr ol mana: sözz tıplattı: asma'ani'l-kalüm voa astaşğüni ilayhi "he made me hear the statement and listen to it” Kaş. II 359 (tiplatu:r, tiplatma:k). D teplen- (d-) Refl. f. of teple:-; n.o.a.b. Uyg. vir ff. Bud. iğligleriğ emlep óyedtürgell uğulukın teplenip 'estimating his DIS. V. DNL own ability to treat and cure the sick' Suv. 597. 3-4: Xak. xı er ı:şın teplendi: dabbara'l-racul fi amriht "the man put his affairs in order” (or took stock of his affairs?) Kaş, III 4oo (teplenü:r, teplenme:k). D taplas- Co-op. f. of 2 tapl&amp;:-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı kişi:ler bu: rgi$ tanlaşdı: “the people were (all) astonished (za"accaba) at this affair' Kaş. 11] 398 (taplaşu:r, taplaşma:k, verse): Xwar. xiv taplag- "to be astonished (collectively) Quib 170: (Kom. xiv “to examine, investigate tanlaş- CC7, Gr. seems to be a mis-spelling of teples-). D teples- (d-) Recip. f. of tenle:- ; s.i.s.m.l.; NE Tuv. depnes-; SW Osm. denkles-; "km. deples-. Cf. teneş-, Xak. xı bl:r ne: bi:rke: tepleşdi: "onc thing balanced (ta'ádala) the other" Kaş. III 398 (teplesü:r, tepleşme:k): Çağ. xvíF. tenpleş- (spelt) müsdtedt cüstan sva büham musdwi şudan "to reach equality, to be equal to one another" San. 202r. 6: (Kom. sec tanlaş-). D tıplaş- (d-) Recip. f. of t15Ja:-; s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı ol menig birle: sö:z tıplaşdı: "he competed vvith me in listening to a statement” Kaş. III 398 (tiyplasu:r, tiplagma:k): Xevar. xiv (VU) tmlaş- “to listen to one another" Qutb 193. Tris. DNL VUD tona:lığ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. topa:. Uyğ. vur ff. Bud. (his life becomes long; he is free from disease) mepilig topalığ bolur “he becomes happy and capable of heroic deeds' U II 45, 56 ff. D teplegüç/tepleğü:n (d-) “the kite (a bird); imperfectly vocalized but best so transcribed and regarded as Dev. N.s fr. teple:- in the sense of '(a bird) which hovers or balances itself (in the air)", Survives in NE Sag., Sor teglegen, tegligen; Leb. teliğen, Khak. tegilgen; 'l'uv. de:digen; NW Kumyk tülüpen SW Osm. dülengec. Xak. xı tep1egü:n a/-hidáà'a “the kite', a (kind of) bird Kaş. III 388: Oğuz xr teplegüg “the kite" Kaş. III 388. D tanlançığ Dev. N./A. fr. taplan- (sce 2 tapla:-); “vonderful, marvellous”, N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. Chr. U I 8, 14-15 (belgü:): Bud. taplangi$ munadınçığ edgülüg savJar *wonderful, marvellous, excellent words' U IV 28, 31-2; ança yeme müunadınçığ ftaplalrıçığ ermez mü “and is not this ” wonderful and marvellous?” U III 39, 6-7; taplançığ yürür tışları “her wonderful white teeth' U IV 3o, 51-2; 2.0. Stt. 348, 3 (koduru:): Kom. xiv *wonderful' taplancix CCG; Gr. D teplencsiz Priv. N./A. fr. *teplenc Dev. N. fr. teplen- ; “imm-asurable, incomparable”. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. Suv. 151, $-7 etc. (ülgülencsiz). 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 567 
     
   
   
      MM ÀÓ  |  DIS. DNR 523 'Tris. V. DNLD tipi:la:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. “tipi: an onomatopocic, prob. tin elongated to avoid confusion with tipla:-; the Infin., originally -me:k was corrected to -ima:k and at the same timc a minute f4” was written over each fd”. Xak. xı ne:p tıpi:la:dı: "a heavy object like a mortar (al-minhàáz) made a noise (şazcmata) when it fell to the ground” Xaş. JJ] 404 (tipi:la:r, tipica: mak). VUD topa:la:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. toga:. Xak. xi er tona:la:dı: “the man performed the feats of warriors and strong men” (a/-abşal roa"l-aquiya”) Kaş. 1II 40s (toga:ar (sic), topa:la:ma:k). D tüpüldür- Caus. f. of tüpül-; survives in NC Kir, tüpüldür- (also tüpült-; zx. tüpilt-) and NW Kk. Xak. xı KP tüpüldürdi aydı yana kelme tép “he discouraged him and said “do not come again”” 5865. Dis. DNN PU tapa:n the first letter is undotted and unvocalized in the main entry, which immediately follows the heading -N in a list of words containing three consonants of which the second is - p- and the first anything except y-; as for practical purposes b- nevcr precedes -p- in Xak., the word can hardly be anything except tapa:n. In the second occurrence the first letter is y- but this is certainly an error. The translation suggests that it was “a hooded crow, Corvus cornix', or "a jackdaw, Corvus monedela'. In modern languages these birds are called ala (alaca, etc.) karğa. Xak. xı tapa:n a/-aşqa" müna”l-ğirbün "a / whiteheaded crow', that is one of which only the head is white' Kaş. IJI 376; kuzğun tapa:n (MS. yanam) al-gudáf | wa'l-gurábu'l-a'sam "the raven and the white-footed (sic) crow' /İT 240, 26. Dis. V. DNND tapın- Refl. f. of tap-; s.i.s.m.l, with the same meaning. Xak. xı er başın tanındı: “(he man wrapped (fa"aşşaba) his head (in a turban, etc.) doing it by himself” (infarada bi-fi'lihi) Kaş. H1 395 (tapinu:r, tapınma:k). D tenan- (d-) Refl. f. of tona:-; “to dress oneself”. S.i.s.m.l. with the same meaning; SW donan- means rather 'to ornament or deck oneself', and, of e.g. a ship 'to be fitted out, equipped, decked with flags'. Xak. xi KB kurimig yığaçlar tonandı yaşıl “the dry trees have decked themselves in green” 67: Kıp./Tkm. xv tazazıtcaqa "to be adorned' (Kip. bezen- and) Tkm. tonan- Tu. 10a. 6: Osm. xiv ff. donan- (? and tonan-) 'to adorn oneself'; in several texts 77S 7 218; I1 316; III 205. Tris. DNN D tonanğu: (d-) Conc. N. fr. tonan-, n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vur ff. Bud. (if he provides him with food and drink) tonin tonanğusin “his clothes and clothing! Kuan. 86 (also U II 15, 13); a.o. TT VI 392 (tona:ğu:). Dis. DNR tüpür (d-) the antonym of böşük, q.v., originally probably “a tribe (or member of a tribe) to which daughters could be given in marriage', but in the actual texts 'a person who actually is, or properly could be, a relation by marriage'. Survives in this, and some extended, meanings in SW Osm. dünür and Yakut tüpür (Pek. 2899). UyB. vır ff. Bud. PP 64, 6 etc. (böşük): O. Kir. ix ff. (in a long list of 'partings") tünürime: adrildim “1 have been parted from my relations by marriage" Mal. 11, 7: Xak. x1 tüpür almá'u'l-mar'a “a woman's relations bv marriage', that is brothers, father, and mother (-in-law) Kaş. III 362; tüpür kadın boluşti: 'aqada ma'i "aqda” l-muşdhara “he became my relation by marriage” 7I 110, 3, tüpür a/-şihr 'brother-inlav” 111 372,6: Osm. xiv düpür 'brother-inlaw! in two texts 77TS I 241; III 225. tepri: a very old word, prob. pre-Turkish, which can be traced back to the language of the Hsiung-nu, 111 B.C., if not earlier. It seems originally to have meant 'the physical sky', but very early acquired religious overtones and came to mean 'Heaven' as a kind of impersonal deity, the commoner meaning in the earlier texts. İt was the normal word for “God” in Man. and Bud. texts and was retained in this sense in the Moslem period, although it is rare in KB, where the normal word for 'God' is bayat, and was later largely displaced by 1.-w.s like Alláh and xudáy. An early l.-w. in Mong. as feygeri (Haenisch 148, Kor, 1697; but often spelt £5ri, as in "Turkish, in religious texts and always dégri in the hP'ags-pa texts). S.i.a.m.l.g., in NE often in the Mong. spelling, in SW Az., Osm., 'Tkm. tanrı:, this is prob. an old Oğuz pronunciation, but it is impossible to discover when the change occurred; a l.-w. in Pe. see Doerfer 11 944, where it is discussed at great length. Türkü vii teprl: is common; in üze: kök tepri: asra: yağız yer kilindukda: "when the blue sky above and the brown earth below were created” 7 E r, /7 E z it clearly has a physical sense, but this is rare, it is more often used in a religious sense, e.g. tepri: yarlhkadukrn üçü:n “because Heaven so commanded” 7 S 9, II N 7, and even as a sort of tribal deity in üze: Türkü tepri:si: “the Heaven of the Türkü on high” / E ır, /7 E ro: vl ff. tepri: is fairly common in /İrRB, both in a physical sense, e.g. (a hawk) tepri:din (sic) kodi: . . . kapmi:ş 'swooped down from the sky” 44; and in a religious sense, e.g. ala: atlı:ğ yol (or yul) tenri: men “lam the god of the road (or the spring) riding on a dappled horse” 2: Man. tepri (consistently spelt for? in all scripts) is very common; in yer teprí yok erken ópre '*when earth and heaven did not yet exist! C/vas. 162-3 it has a physical sense, but ncarly always means “God” or 'divine': Yen. üze: tenri: yarlıkadı: Mal,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 568 
     
   
   
      524 32, $: a.o.(7) do. 36, 2: Uyğ. vit (f. Man.-A tepri (in all Uyğ. texts consistently spelt £grt) is common; (they first created) on kat kök teprig “the blue heavens in ten layers” M I 14, 6-?—tegri Mani burxan tepri yérigerü bardukınta “since the divine Prophet Mani went to the heavenly country” do. 12, 13-14; and many 0.0. meaning 'God, divine': Man. tepri “God, divine' is common: Bud. ditto but yer tenri törümişte when carth and heaven were crcated” PP s, 8; alo, do. 18, 2 (tüpir-): Civ. tepri is more often used in a phvsical sensc, e.g. tenri kapığı açıltı "hcaven”s gate has been opened! TT I1 144: O. Kir. ix ff. kök tepri:de: kün ay 'the sun and moon in the blue sky” Mal. ro, 3; 45, $ and tépri: elim 'my divine. realm" do. 3, 2; 14, 3 etc. are included in the list of "partings” in funerary inscriptions: Xak. xr tepri: A/lah "azca ta calla “God, to Him belongs glory and power" (prov. see tapugsa:k; verse). 'T'he unbelievers (al-kafara) call the sky (a/-sama”) tepri:, and also anything which is great in their eyes, like a big mountain or big trees, and for this reason they worship such things Kaş. 777 376; many 0.o. translated “God”: K.B the standard words for “God” are bayat and uğan but tepri occurs in 44, 92, 6176 (erki:): xin(?) At. teri is not used in the text but occurs in glosses on idim and uğan, T»f. tanri(-ğa) “God” 285, 289 (tenri): xiv Muh. Allahu'l-qa:ci 'almighty God” tepri: Mel. ız, 15; u:ğa:n tepri: Rif. 87; Allah ta"ala tegri: 44, 8; 137: Çağ. xv ff. tépri (spelt) candb-ı bari ta"ala “the Creator” San. 202r. 26 (quotn.): Xwar. xin(?) kök (VU) tepri “blue sky” Og. 60, etc.; teprini calbarğuda "while praying to God" do. şo: xiv tapri(-ka)/tepri(-ke) Qutb 170; (VU) MN r: Kom. xiv “God” tepri common CCI, CCG; Gr. 241 (quotns.): Kip. xur Allah subhánuhu tea ta"ala tenri: (and in a dialect which only a few people know uga:n) ou. 3. 12: xIv. tepri: (^with -p-") Allah İd. ao, Allah calla dikruhu tenri: Bul. 2, 9: xv li-acali Hüh "for God's sake! teğri: üşün (sic with -ğ- for -p-) Kav. 43, 8; Allah tepri Tuh. 3b. 10; 41b. 6: Osm. xiv ff. the pronunciation was prob. ahvays tanrı, the A.N. taprilik is noted in xv 77S III 667. VU topra: Hap. leg. Xak. xı togra: wasaxu'l-badan 'dirt on the body” Kaş. III 378. D tópre: Adv. fr. “tön, see tópdi:; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı (after topra:) one says er ÖDre: (sic) yattı: istalqd'l-racul "ala qafahu "the man lay on his back” (i.e. face upwards); and one says er tönre: tüsti: akabba"l-racul "al wachthi “the man fell on his face” (i.e. face downwards) Kaş. III 378. S tınrak See tırnpak. D teprim “my God” occurs in Uyğ. as a form of address not only to God but also to superiors; it then became in Uy£. Bud. an element in the P.N.s of princesses; in Pfahl. 8, 12 the list of names at the end of the document is headed by 1:5 names of princesses, each ending in  DIS. DNR teprim, followcd by the names of various men, the first an él ógesi. Cf. terim. Dis. V. DNRE teper- Scc tepger-. VUD tepür- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of tep-, q.v.; cf. tepit-/teptür-. Xak. xı er ok tenpürdi: “the man shot his arrow. upwards. towards the skv so that it disappeared from view in the atmosphere'; also used when he launches a (hunting) bird (azcala' l-fà'ir) from his hand to make it soar Kaş. 111 392 (tepürür, tegürme:k; completely unvocalized; first letter undotted everywhere, but must be t-). D tüner- (d-) Intrans. Den, V. fr. tün, "to be, or become, dark'. S.is.m.l. Uyfs. viri fT. Bud. yörüğde tünermişlerke yaruk yaşuk okitu yarlıkar erti "he deigned to communicate light (1Tend.) to those who were in the dark about the interpretation (of thc scriptures)' IHiien-ts. 1931-2: Xak. xi tünerdi: ye:r “the place was dark” (az/ana); also used of time (a/-samdün) Kaş. II 86 (tünerür, tünerme:k): KB tünerdi yarumaz kórügli karak “my seeing eyes have become dark and no longer shinc” 374; tünermeğey erdi yarumış kün-e “the bright day would never become dark” 696; 0.0. 1520, 5018. ?E tenri:- Hap. leg.; this V. occurs in a í Chapter in which the order of words should be determined by (1) the last consonant; (2) the second consonant (3) the first consonant; following savra:-, sekri:-, semri:-, sanrı:-, and preceding kevre:-, kökre:-, külre-, there are in any event errors in the arrangement and from time to time after (1) the order seems to be determined more by (3) than by (2); in any event tenri:- could not properly follow sanrı:- or precede kevre:-, "The second consonant is fairly clearly -n- in the facsimile, but in a word which was almost certainly unknown to the scribe this might well be a miscopving of -f-, for -v-; tevri:- would in fact suit thc meaning well, if taken as cognate to tevür- although the morphological connection is obscure. Xak. xı anın başı: tenri:di: axada ra'sahu ka'l-dutwár 'something like dizziness attacked his head”, that is when sleep overcame him and he resisted it and there resulted a feeling of ants crawling in his head for lack of sleep Kaş. III 282 (tenri:r, tenri:me:k). Tris. DNR D teprici: N.Ag. fr. tepri:; “a preacher of God”, N.o.a.b. Türkü vii ff. Man. (if we have sinned against the gods of light, the purc doctrine and) tenriçi nomçı arığ dintarlarka “the pure Elect vvho are preachers of God and of the doctrine! Chuas. 324-5; a.0. do. 135-6 (artiz-). D tepridem Den. N./A. connoting resemblance fr. tenpr1: 'god-like; divine, holy. Pec. to Uy£., but there fairly common. Uy£. virt ff. Man.-A tepridem [gap] M I 25,9(ii):   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 569 
     
   
   
       DIS Man. TT III 170 (üstel-): Bud. tenridem suv 'holy water' U 777 38, 28; tepridem xwa çeçek “holy flowers (Hend.) TT V ro, 104; X 154; tepridem kız azu tepri oğlanı 'a divine maiden or son of God' TT V 12, 127; 0.0. U II 28, 1-2; TT X 494 (uğuşluğ) etc.: Civ. TT I 1 (ornan-). S tıpraklığ See tirpaklif. D tüneriğ (d-) N./A.S. fr. tüner-; "dark, darkness'. Survives in NE "Tel, Türkü viri ff. Man. yaruk yiltizin . . . tünerig yiltizin “the root of light . . . the root of darkness' Chuas. 161-2; tüneriğ sürün “drive away the darkness" M IIIJ s, 4; alo. do. 19, 9 (1) (1 öçeş-): Man.-A kararığ tüneriğ “black and dark” M III 9, 1: Man. tüneriğ yeklerke tapunuğmalar "those who worship the demons of darkness! M 7H ır, 7: Xak. xi tüne:rlg yé:r “any dark (muzlim) place”, and *the grave' (al-qabr) is called tüne:rig; one says er tüne:riğke kirdi: "the man has entered the grave” Kaş. 1 488: KB (1 was in darkness (karapku), He made my night bright.) tüneriğde erdim 'I was in the dark of night', (He made my sun rise) 383. D tönörğe: “a tree trunk'; prob. an old word ending in -£e:; there is no convincing etymology for it, but Zay. in his note on Bul. may be right in seeing NE Bar. tonok “tree-stump” as a cognate word. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. Sanskrit citüyüm "on the funeral pyre' tópórge: ükünde: (spelt tóyórke ügiüinde:, lit. "a heap of tree-trunks") TT VIII D.29: Kip. xiv. al-quria 'trce trunk' tönertğe: (!à' unvocalized) Bul. 3, 13. D tenri:ke:n Den. N./A. fr. tepri:; 'devout, pious'. This is clearly the right meaning, not 'sacred, divine' as originally suggested; normally applied to rulers. Türkü vil tepri:ken is the term used in Ongin 5, 6, 8 for the ruler to whom the person commemorated in this inscription was subject: virt ff. Man. Tepriken TT II 6, 29 is a short title for Böğü Xan "Tenriken do. ro, 8o: Uyğ. virirff. Man. burxan teprikenimiz bóg[ü ?kut]tpa perhaps a royal title M 7/7 36, 1 (i) (M İ şı, 1 (1); tepriken kuncuy *devout consort' do. 4 (ii) (4 (i)): Bud. the title of the ruler mentioned in the dating formula of the first '"Pfahl.' is Kün ay tepri teg küsenclg körtle yaruk tepri böğü teprikenimiz Pfahl. 6, 2-3 and the nun who was joint dedicator was tepriken tégin siliğ terken kuncuy teprim do. 4: Civ. USp. 4o and 41 are addressed to Idukkut tenrikenimiz: Xak. xı teprike:n “a pious sage' (al-'alimwl-nösih) in the language of the infidels Kaş. III 389; (at the end of the entry on tepri:) hence they (the infidels) call a/-'alim tepriken HI 377. 4 : D teprilig P.N./A. fr. tepri:, n.o.a.b. (Teprili in the phr. teprili yerli “heaven and earth” with the Postposn. -li must not be confused with this word.) Türkü vir ff. tepri:. DNS 525 H:ğ kurtğa: “a devout old woman' IrkB 13: Xak. xi KB kanı kalmadı bir kişi teprilig *why is there not one devout man left?' 6475; tepriliğ iş 'God's work' 6479: Kom. xiv “divine understanding! teprilik us CCG; Gr. D teprilik A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. tepri:; originally “temple”, later 'divinity'. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viii ff. Man.-A [tep]rilikIperü [bar]d: “he went to its (the town's) temple' M 7 33, 15; ol teprilikteki kam 'the (?Buddhist) priest in that temple” do. 17; o.o. do. 34, 8-16; Man.-uig. Frag. 401, 3 (étil-): Bud. TT IV 6, 46 (é:t-): Xak. xi KB (there are two kinds of enemies) biri teprilik ol “one is the pagan temple' (infidels are always hostile) 4225: xil (2) Tef. tanrılık “divinity” 285: Çağ. xv ff. teprilik xudd'i wa ülühiyüt: 'divinity, godhead”, also haqqdniyat sea lillahivat(?) 'piety, love of God' Sam, 202r. 27: Xwar. xiv taprilik 'divinity' Qutb 171. Tris. V. DNRD tapirka:- Den. V. fr. 2 tap; “to be astonished'. Survives as tapirka- in NE Alt., Tel. R HI 806; NC Kir,, Kzx.; NW Kk. Xak. x1 KB negüni tapirkadi emdi ózür “vhat are you now surprised at?” 785; (the value of speech does not lie in speaking much) ya sözni tapirkap üküş tınlasa “or listening in admiration to long speeches” 5433; a.o. 6487: Çağ. xvff. tanırğa- (spelt) ta'accub kardan "to be surprised” San. 163v. 8 (quotns., pointing out that tanızğa-, translated fapíain Vel. 177 is a mis-spelling): Xwar. xiv tapirka- “to be astonished' Qutb 171. D tüpürle:- (d-) Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. tüpür. Xak. xı ol meni: tüpürle:di: "he reckoned me to be his relation by marriage (min aşharihi) and claimed me (nasabani) as such” Kaş, I1] 408 (tüpürle:r, tünürle:me:k). D tüpürlen- (d-) Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of tüpürle:-. Xak. xı ol mapa: tüpürlendi: "adda nafsahu li sihra(r) "he reckoned himself as my relation. by marriage! Kaş. HI 407 (tüpürlenü:r, tüpürlenme:k). Dis. DNS D tapsuk Den. N./A. fr. 2 tap, “vonderful, marvellous, precious, rare'; usually applied to concrete objects. S.i.s.m.l.ş a l.-w. in Mong., Pe. and other languages, see Doerfer 11 939. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. Suc. 118, 6-7 (tatiğ): Xak. xı “anything which is marvellous and found to be novel' ("acib wa mustatrif minhu) is called tapsuk ne:n, and a kind of food which a man finds “outstanding in exquisiteness' (ahydra”l-nifása) is called tansuk aş Kaş. 111 382: KB (you have shown me) bu tap tapsuk isler “these marvellous things” 794; (merchants own) tümen tü ağılar ajun tapsukı 'countless treasures, the rarities of the world' 4424: xıır(?) At. anın dikri tapsuk ediz bolsu tép “may his memory be wonderful and lofty' 76; o.o., qualifying *words' 475, 483; Tef. tapsuk 'marvellous, wonderful; a recompense I-—————sssáÁ—,gÀ i X )—td—— EE ER 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 570 
     
   
   
     526 DIS (good or bad)” 285: xiv Rbg. kamuf tapsuklari "all marvelous things", tapsuk Adam "wonderful Adam” £ 7/7 813: Çağ. xv ff. tagsug/tapsuk faylamalu "marvellous” Vel. 177 (quotn.); tapsuğ/taysuk the same as tansuğ/k Sar. 164v. 4; tansuğ/tansuk (spelt) 'something scarce, wonderful, and rare” (Ramyab tva garib sca nadir) (quotn.); the word is "Turkish, and not as the Hurhán-i Qatı" says a corruption of Persian fansux, but vice versa do. 164r. 14: Kom. xiv "vonderful, rare' tapsık CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv. fapsik (“vith -p-") al-"acab İd. 65: xv turfa 'something new and curious! tansık 7u. 23b. 13: Osm. xivxvii tapsuk (twice dapsuk) *wonderful, rare; a rarity'; common till xvi TTS I 179; II 260; III 667; IV 738. D tepsiz (d-) Priv. N./A. fr. 1 tep; usually in an abstract sense 'inequitable, excessive' (pejorative) or “unequalled” (laudatory). Survives in SW Tkm. degsiz and Osm. (distorted) denksiz. Xak. x1 K B (the fortunate man must avoid) kamuğ tensiz iştin “all excesses' 726; (oh wicked death!) ne tepsiz ölüm sen “vhat an inequitable death you are” 1537; (modesty prevents) kamuğ tensizligiğ “all excesses” (but shamclessness is) idi tensiz İğ “a quite unparalleled disease! 1662; atı tepsiz 'with an unequalled reputation' 4069; o.o. 986, 2039, 2102, 4478. D tinsiz (d-) Priv. N./A. fr. tin; 'inanimate'. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vr ff. Bud. (when earth and heaven, and male and female combine together two kinds of products result) tinliğ and tinsiz, “the five states of existence” are called tınlığ and *bushes, trees, and vegetation” are called tinsiz TT VI 321-3. D tonsiz (d-) Hap. leg.?; Priv. N./A. fr. to:n, 'unclothed'. Türkü vi: 7 E 26; 7I F 21 (aşsız). Dis. V. DNSD *tapsa:- See yansa:-. Tris. V. DNSD tinsira:- (d-) Priv. Den. V. fr. ttn; “to stop breathing, become inanimate', and the like. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vri ff. Dud. Suv. 619, 18 etc, (kamıl-). Dis. DNS ?E tanış if authentic Dev. N. fr. tap-; a phr. transcribed sıkış taniş has been read in U I7 73, 2 (ii) but it is almost certainly a misreading of sıkığ tanığ, if correctly read it would have the same meaning as that phr.; see tapığ. D tepes (d-) Dev. N./A. fr. *tege:- Den. V. fr. 1 ten, survives in NE Tel. tepeş “of the same age, contemporary'. Xak. xi KB kücipe tepesi yüdürgll yükin 'assume their burdens to the extent of your strength” 4528. VUF tupsu: Hap. leg.; no doubt a Chinese ].-w.; the first syllable is ön "lamp! (Giles . DNS 10,864), the second not vet identified. Cf. tınçan. Xak. xr tunşu: nmanidratu'l-sirác 'a lantern) Kaş, 11H 378. Dis. V. DNSD tanış- (?d-) Recip. f. of ta:n-; s.i.s.m.l. ?, but homophonous with modern forms of tanuş- and not ensy to identify. Xak. xr ola: İkki: (MS. in error meni:) tanışdı: "they repudiated their debts (cahada . . . dayn) to one another” Kaş. 11 112 (tanisu:r, tanışma:k). D tanuş- Recip. f. of tanu:-, q.v. regarding tanış- “to be acquainted with one another”, which s.i.a.m.l.g. and danış- "to consult one another, discuss' which survives only in SW Az., Osm. Xak. xı ola:r ikki: sö:z tanuştı: “they made suggestions (ateza'a . . . kalam) to one another”, its origin is tanu:dı: Kaş. II 112 (tanuşu:r, tanuşma:k): Çağ. xv ff. tanışbilig- “to know one another” Vel. 178; tanisRecip. f. hamdigar-rd şindğxtan "to know one another” San. 162r. 26 (quotns.): ''km. xiv tanışmak a/-maytoara. 'consultation'; tanıştagüwara "to consult one another” /4. 66-7: (Kip.?) xv sáwara tanış- Tuh. zın. 13: Osm. XIV to xvi danis- (occasionally tanış-) “to consult one another”, in several texts TTS I 178; 11 259; III 168; IV 190. D tepes- (d-) Refl. f. of *tepe:- Den. V. fr. 1 ten; "to be, or become, equal to one another”, and the like. Survives in NE Şor, "Vel, R III 1044; cf. tepleg-. Xak. xı tepesdi: ne:n ta'adala'l-gay' bi'l-gay' "one thing was equal to the other”, in a verse bilgi: mapa: tepesdi: “his knowledge was equal to mine” Kaş. III 393 (tepe:sü:r (sic), teneşme:k): KB (if a letter arrives in. good handwriting, the recipient is delighted) balağat bile xatt tepesse kalı “if the contents (lit. 'eloquence") are as good as the handwriting! 2695; (whatever you plan to undertake, first seek advice) tilemiş tilekke képesin teneş "and weight the advice you receive against the end you seek” 5560: Çağ. xv fT. tépes- (spelt) Recip. f.; bà yak-digar sancidan wa mütoasana hardan 'to weigh and balance with one another” San. 202r. 3 (quotn.): (Xwar. xiv teneştür- “to compare' Qutb 175). D tópüs- Hap. leg.; presumably Recip. f. of *tóp-; syn. vv, tóplt-; see töpdi:, Xak. xr er töpüşdi: “the man lowered (fa'ta'a) his head with dovvncast eyes” (mufriqa(u)) Kaş. II 393 (töpüşü:r, töpüşme:k). D tüpüş- Hap. leg.; presumably Recip. f. of *tüp- and cognate to tüpül-, but the semantic connection is not obvious. Xak. xr topuz tünüşdi: "the boar glared (ahdaqa) and intended (hamma) to attack the man”, likewise one says of a man idà fta'abbá gabüla'l-amr vea .tfaraddada fi dálika wea. ahdaqa'l-nazar ila amrihi (sic.? read dmirihi) káriha(n) l'l-amr er tüpüsdi: (amr has a wide range of meanings in Kaş. including “thing, affair, business”, the amendment above seenis necessary to fit the grammar, in which case it has the basic mean  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 571 
     
   
   
     TRIS. DNZ 527 ing 'command, order”) “vhen he refuses to accept an order and rejects it and glares at the man who gives it in disgust at the order' Kaş. III 394 (tüpüşü:r, tünüşme:k, corrected from -mah:). Tris. V. DNŞ D teneşçi N.Ag. fr. tepeş, n.o.a.b., and perhaps invented as a jingle with képegci. Xak. xı KB (the vizer is always the beg”s adviser) képesci kişiler tepeşçi bolur 'advisers are people who weigh up situations(?)' 2255. PUF düpüsge: Hap. leg., and presumably, like other Gancak words, a l-w., prob. Iranian, some kind of plant; translations of al-qunábari vary; Brockelmann gives 'Draba, a kind of mustard', Azalay sülüklü pancar which Red. translates 'water milfoil, Myrizophyllum verticillatum', and Red. (in Osm.) “the good King Henry goose-foot, Chenopodium Bonus Henricus. Gancak xi dünüsge: a/-qunábari Kaş. I 490. Dis. DNZ tepiz (d-) first actually noted in x1 when it replaced talu:y, q.v., which disappeared at that date, but so old that it existed in the L/R language from which Hungarian tenger 'sea, ocean' was borrowed; originally prob. any "large body of water', whether static, like a lake, or moving, like a large river; later specifically, and finally exclusively, “the sea”. As al-bahr, the Ar. word habitually used to translate it, is equally ambiguous it is impossible to trace the exact evolution of meaning and difficult to determine the precise difference between tepiz and kó:l, q.v., except that the latter seems to have had a narrower meaning. S.i.a.m.l.g. only for “the sea”, except in some NE languages which use talay, reborrowed fr. Mong., in this sense; in SW Az. deniz; Osm., "Tkm. deniz. See Doerfer III 1192. Xak. xi tepiz a/-bahr Kaş. III 363; o.o. I 100, 18 (bóg-); akar közüm os tepiz (translated) “the water of the sea (a/-bahr) flows from my eyes”, he only compares it to the vvater of the sca (al-bahr) because there is salt in tears // 45, 27; HI 136 (köl, 370 (terip): KB (man's mind is like) tübsüz teniz “a bottomless lake (or sea?)' 211; bilgi teniz “vhose wisdom is (like) a lake” (or sea?, in breadth or depth?) 48o, 2185; olo, r164: xi(?) KBVP biligdin tepiz o: xııı(?) Af. tepiz occurs three times in metaphors for breadth or depth; Tef. depiz “sea” 117; tepiz ditto 298: xiv Muğ. al-bahr tepgiz Mel. 4, 17-19; 77, r: Rif. 74, 180: Çağ. xv ff. tépiz (spelt) daryd “a large body of water, river or sea' Sam. 202v. 3 (quotn.): Xwar. xırı(?) the three sons of Oğuz Xan were called Kök, Tağ(?Dağ), 'Tepiz (?Depiz) “Sky, Mountain, Sea(?)” Og. 86-8: xiv teniz “sea” Quib 175: Kom. xiv “sea” tepiz CCI, CCG, Gr.: Kap. xui al-bahr teniz Hou. 6, r8: xiv teniz ditto İd. 40; ditto deniz (-n-) (sic) Bul. 4, ız: xv al-bahr teniz al-bahrı”l-malih "the salt sea” a:cı: tepiz; al-bahru”l-huhuu "a fresh-water lake” tatlı: tepiz Kav. 58, 15-16; balır tepiz wa "uman tepiz Tuh. 7a. 12-13 (the latter glossed al-bahru”l-a" zam “the great sea”): Osm. xiv ff. deniz “sea” in various phr. 7738 I 192; 11 279; III 180; İV 205. topuz (d-) 'pig', a generic term for the wild and domesticated pig of both sexes; replaced lagzin, q.v., in xt as one of the animals in the 12-year cycle. Survives with initial t- in SE "Türki, SC Uzb. and with initial d- in NC Kır., Kzx., NW Kaz, Kk., Kumyk, Nogay, and SW Az., Osm. (domuz), Tkm., see Sheherbah, p. 124; a l-w. in Pe. (only in the r2-year cycle?) and other foreign languages, see Doerfer II 985. Türkü vir ff. adığlı: topuzlr: a:rt üze: sokuşml:ş erml:ş “a boar and a bear met on a mountain pass” IrkB 6: Uyğ. vui ff. Bud. (if I have slaughtered sheep, fowls or) topuz 'swine' U /1 84, 9; (rebirth as) topuznup U İl 31, 52; a.o. Suv. 4, 12: Civ. topuz 6ti 'pig's gall' E 7 24; a.0.0.; toOpuz as a member of the t2-year cycle is common in calendar texts in 7”T VII and occurs in dating formulae in USp.: Xak. xı topuz al-xinzir “pig”: topuz “one of the twelve years” Kaş. 211 363; o.o. meaning prima facie 'wild boar” I 304 (az1&amp;1a:-); II 343, 18; 111 394 (tüpüg-) and in 7 346, 13 (the rz-year cycle): xııı(?) Tef. topuz “pig” 309: xiv Muh. al-xinzir topuz Mel, 72, 7; to:guz Rif. 174; (in the 12-year cycle) dopuz yı:lı: 8r, r, to:puz yızlı: 186: Çağ. xv ff. tonuz (with -p-") xz 'pig'; also the name of one of the Turkish years Sar. 185r. 13 (VU dopuz “a person with an empty brain and his head in the clouds' 226r. 1 may be the same word used metaph.): Xwar. xiv topuz éti 'pig's flesh” Nahc. 364, 14: Kom. xiv “pig” topuz CCI, CCG; Gr. 249 (quotn.): Kap. xit al-xinzir tonğu:z Hou. 11, 13: XIV tonuz (^with -p-") al-xinzir (also “frozen fat” top üz) İz. 65; al-xinzir tonğuz Bul. to, 13: xv al-xinzir donf$uz Kav. öz, 8; danpğuz (sic) Tuh. 14b. 2: Osm. xiv ff. dopguz (sometimes tonuz) is common till xvi and occasionally occurs later instead of domuz TTS 7 219; II 316; İT 205; IV 237. Dis. V. DNZVUD tepiz- the Infin. in the MS. is -ma:k and the Kip. f, too, has back vowels, but semantically this could be a Caus. f. of tepin the sense of “to send up in the air”. Xak. xı er ópke:sinde: tepizdi: işma"adda”l-racul wahwa an yantafix gadaba(n) “the man was puffed out with anger'; and one says Öpke: tepizdi: intafaxati'l-ri'a “the lung was distended', that is vinegar and mustard are poured into it preparatory to cooking it, and it is filled and distended Kaş. 717 392 (tepizür, tepizme:k, MS. -ma:k): Kıp. xiv tanaz- (sic, with -D-) ahmarra'l-waram gea"ştadda "the swelling was inflamed and hard” /d. 65. Tris. DNZ D topuzct: N.Ag. fr. topuz, n.o.a.b.; prob. *pig keeper', but "hunter of wild boars” is a 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 572 
     
   
   
     528 possible: alternative. Uyğ. vir ff... Bud, (if ] have killed sheep or kept poultry or been) topuzei (fisherman, hunter of wild game, wildfowler and so on ) TT IV 8, 56. Mon. DR 1 ta:r (d-) 'narrow, constricted, confined'. S.i.a.m.l.g.: in SW Az, Osm. dar; Tkm. da:r. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. tar yolka kirmişke sanur "they are reckoned as having entered a narrow road' TT VI 275 (as opposed to a broad (kér alkığ) one); kópülleri tar 'their minds are narrow' Hiien-ts. 103: Civ. bu yek ickekke tar kolğu (? read kılğu) vu ol “this is an amulet which constricts the demons (Hend.) TT VII 27, 5; a.o. do. 3 (t1); Xak. xı ta:r al-dayyiq narrow, straitened” of anything; one says ta:r ev "a cramped dwelling' and the like Kaş. 117 148; 0.0. 111 97 (yigtür-); II 259, 19; this word, and not ter, should also prob. be read in: and one says er tar boldi: (tar unvocalized; MS. vo/di:) "the man was ashamed” (/iacala) this is in place of the phr. er (rra?) bold: 7 322 ('constricted' seems a likelier metaphor for shame than “svveat”): KB kópül kilma tar "do not be distressed” 6183: xııı(?) At. 315 (bitil-); lef. tar 'narrow, cramped” 287: xiv Muh. dayyaqa "to constrict” da:r et- Mel. 28, 3; Rif. 111; al-dayyiq (opposite to 'broad' kesp) ta:r ss, 3; 152; dayyiqu'l-cablia (opposite to 'with a smooth brow' yası: alı:nlığ) ta:r alı:nlığ 46, ır, 140: Çağ. xv ff. tar far ... tay ma'násina 'narrow' Vel. 163 (quotns.); tar fang wa dayyiq San. 154v. 18 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv kilma köpül tar Qutb 171; tar ağız “a small mouth” MN 136, etc.: Kom, xiv “narrov” tar CCG, Gr.: Kip. xin al-dayyiq (opposite to "broad” ké:p) ta:r Hou. 27, 15: xiv tar ditto 7d. 62: xv "this is narrower than that” bu andan ta:r dir Kas, 24, 11; dayyiq tar Tuh. 23a. 8. 2 ta:r "a rafr made of inflated skins fastened together', almost synonymous with 1 saz:l, which seems, however, to mean “a raft made of timber”, al-'imd is not a common Ar, word, but would etymologically mean "a support”. N.o.a.b. Tata:r, Yaba:kı: xi tar. al-ramat tcahica'l-'imd “a raft! ; that is skins are inflated and their necks tied, then they are fastened together and made like a platform (a/-sath) on the top of the water, and people sit on them and cross (rivers); thev are also made of reeds and branches Kaş. JI] 148; a.o. III 157 (1 sa:D: Kip. xiv. ta:r al-kalak "a raft of skins” 1d. 62. 3 ta:r a kind of milk product; survives only(?) in Yakut tar 'a kind of yogurt prepared in the summer and kept to eat in the winter' Pek. 2564; there may however be traces of this word in Mong. farağ "coagulated sour mülk” (Haenisch 145) and Pe. farxtedna "a preparation made of dried curds'. Xak. xr ta:r tufálatiel-samn, tva dálika idü uxidatri'l-samn. ba'da'l-idábati'l-xulása wa. baqiva' l-labanu'l-xàtir. fi asfalihi *milk residue, that is the clotted milk TRIS. DNZ which remains at the bottom when the pure butter has been melted and drawn ofl' Kaş. III 148: (Kip. xiv. al-hişk 'groats mixed. with sour milk and dried in the sun” tarxana: Ju. 8, 2: xv ditto Tul. 31a. 7). te:r (?d-) 'sweat'; also fr. an early period *wages', presumably a metaph. for “that which is earned by sweating'. S.i.a.m.Lg., including SW Az., Osm. as ter; only NE Tuv., SW "Fkim, have der; the short vowel in ""km, casts some doubt on the Xak. spelling. Türkü vri T sz (tök-): (Uyğ. vırı ff. Civ. terke aldım has been read in USp. 3, 5; terike bérdim in 30, r3 and terike aldim in 70, 3; in 70, 3 which has been re-edited by Ikeda it is an error for tüşke aldım (see 1 tüş) and it is likely that the other readings are similar errors): Xak. xı te:r ucratiu'l-acir “the wages of a day labourer'; hence a day labourer (read al-acir for al-asir "prisoner” in the MS.) is called terçi:: te:r (so read for ferçi: in MS.) al-'araq 'sweat' Kaş, İH 148 o.o, of ter (sic) "svveat” I 181 (içiş-), 7 466, etc. (burçaklan-), 77 96 (soruş-), 303 (terit-); 336 (tüvset-); ol terke: kirdi: daxala'l-ucra “he entered paid employment! //T 212, 23: KB işin kılsalar terk terin teğrü ber “if they work for you, pay their wages promptly! 4462: xiv Mu. al-'arag de:r Mel. 45, 17; ter Rif. 139; al-ucra ter 147 (only): Çağ. xv ff. ter ter . . . "araq ma'násma Vel. 184 (quotns.); ter "araq San. 193r. 9 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv tör 'sweat!' Qutb 178; ol "AbdulHahnı terke tuttilar “they hired. that "Abdullah" Nahc. 23, 12; a.o. 292, 13: Kom. xiv 'sweat' ter CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. a/-"araq ter Hou. zr, 20: xiv ditto hi. 38: xv ditto Kav. 61, 13; Tuh. 25a. 6: Osm. xiv to xvii der 'sweat! in a few texts 7 7 I 195; II 284; IV 211. to:r “a net for catching birds or fish” ; s.i.a.m.l.g. except NE; in 5W Az., Osm., 'l'km. tor (sic); L-w. in Pe. and other languages, see Doerfer II 954. Cf. 2 a:&amp;. Uy. vii ff. Bud, Sanskrit jálinvasya “his net-melon' (sic?) tori erür monur TT VIII G.59: Xak. xi to:r (br'i-işba" '"with back vovvel) "a trap or net (a/-faxx sca l-gabahka) for catching birds or fish” Kaş. İTİ 121; 0.0. İİİ 39, 13 (l &amp;:k); s? (yap-): KD 4262 (osandur-): Çağ. xv ff. tor "a (hair-) net made of silk, or a fish-net” (balik ağı) Vel. 205; tor 'anything netted (miugabbak bafta) like a hunting-net (dáni)or a woman's hair-net” San. 172r. 8 (quotn): X war. xiv tor “net” Qutb 182: Osm. xv ff. ditto, in several texts T TS II 900; IV 756. tó:r "the place of honour” in a tent or room, or at a banquet, etc. s.i.a.m.l.g., but in SW only iü Tkm. tó:r, "The Sec. f. tóre: mentioned bv Kaş. is not noted elsewhere in this sense; it may be the same word as that meaning 'prince, nobleman', and the like, which is first noted in Cai. and s.i.s.m.l, but see törü:, Türkü vir 77 N. o (al-, it is possible but improb. that the word here is tórü:): Xak. xi tó:r (bi'l-igmaám. "with a front. vowel) müqaddamu'l-bavt. “the: place of honour in a house", 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 573 
     
   
   
      MON. V. DR one says tö:rke: keç "pass to the place of honour' Kaş. İİİ 121; tóre: (with front vowels) 'the place of honour in a house, and the seat of honour” (şadruhu), hence one says töre: yokla:dı: "he took the scat of honour in the house” (tagaddara fi'l-bayt); also called tö:r /İI 221: KB 262 (1 €), $77, 614, 902, 1661, etc.; (help Moslems in distress) bayat bérge ucmak kör ornur tór-e “God will give you paradise and your place (will be) the seat of honour' 3503 (the -e here is the usual verse filler which is very common in KB, this is unlikely to be töre:): Çağ. xv ff. tör xüna şadrı ve ev buçaği “the seat of honour in a house; a recess in a house (so used)' Vel. 204 (quotn.); tör . . . sadr-i xàna (quotns.) San. 172r. 9 (the next meaning 'opposite, facing! can hardly belong here); tóre nasab rea nàd-i büdişühan “the family and lineage of rulers! (quotn.); sahzadagán swa awlàád-i büdişühan 'princes and sons of rulers' r73r. ız (quotn.): Xwar. xırı tör “the seat of honour? "Ali 48: xiv ditto Qutb 184: Kip. xiv(?) tó:wür (sic, under !4'-sww) gadru'l-maclis ld. 40: Xv sadru'l-mahán tör Tuh. 22a. 2. Mon. V. DRta:r- "to disperse, or divide up (something)', and the like. N.o.a.b. "The supposed Sec. f. tara:- is rather dubious, and may be based on nothing more than the fact that tara:-, q.v., has a vaguely cognate meaning. It is unlikely that there is any real etymological connection between this word and Mong. tarka- “to Scatter, disperse' (Intrans.; Haenisch 145) which became a L-w. in Xwar. xiv tarğa-, Qutb 171, and survives as tara- in several modern NE, NC, and NW languages, R III 837, etc. Xak. xi beg siksin ta:rdı: “the beg dispersed (farraqa) his army'; also used of anyone who disperses anything Kaş. IJI 18o (ta:ra:r, ta:rma:k); a.o. 7/7 260 (tara:-); (if I wanted to, I used to go after him) tutar erdim süsin ta:rtp 'and catch him and disperse his army” 7 399, 23: K.B (he breaks up the enemy's ranks and) yağısın tarar “scatter his enemy" 2268: xin(?) Tef. tar- "to separate, cause dissension between (?, people) 287: Xwar. xiv kadğu tar- “to put an end to distress” Qutb 171. té:r- (d-) “to bring together, collect, assemble'; practically syn. w. y1&amp;-, but there seem to be minor differences in shades of meaning in some modern languages, e.g. in SE Türki “to gather in (the harvest)' is yığ-, but “to gather (berries) is ter-. S.i.a.m.l.g.; in SW Az., Osm. der(lacking in Tkm.) Türkü vit (he campaigned to the east and west and) térmis kuvratmış “collected and assembled (the peoples)' 7 E rz, II E 11: Uyğ. virt tokuz oğuz bodunimin térü: kuvratı: altım “1 collected and assembled my people the 'Tokuz Oğuz and took (control of) them” Su. N 5: vri ff. Bud. olarnı barça bir yerde yığınlar téripler 'collect (Hend.) them all in one place" U 777 28, 5-6; n.o. do. 73, 24-5 (kavir-); térmek translates a Chinese calendar sign meaning lit.   529 “to collect" TT VI 259: Civ. xan yasak térürmen “I am collecting the Xan's taxes (Mong. L-w.) USp. 69, 2-3: Xak. xı ol tava:r t6:rdi: "he collected (cama'a) property, etc. Xaş. II] 181 (te:re:r, te:rdi:), ol yarma:k térdi: “he collected money" /T 39 (térer, terme:k, in a grammatical excursus, not a main entry); 8 o.o. translated cama'a, mostly spelt té:r-: KB nece terse dunya *however much the world collects' (it comes to an end) 114; terer sen yomitsa saçarsen kamuğ “you collect (things) and when they come together you scatter them all” 719; o.o. 1119, 1674 (co-ordinated with yığ-), 6079: xin(?) At. baxil terdi zar sim “the miser has accumulated gold and silver” 241; a.o.o.; Tef. ter- “to assemble (people)' 299: xiv Muğ. cama'a déxr- Mel. 25, 1; Rif. 107; laqata “o gather, pick (fruit, etc.) d6:r- 31, 2; 115; al-cam' dé:rmek (spelt -mak) 36, 3 (only): Çağ. xv ff. tér- (-ip, etc.) dér-, devgür- “to collect Vel. 184-6 (quotns.); tér- (r) pidan in all the meanings which it has in Pe. 'to gather (fruit); to pick (one's language), to spread (a carpet; to pick (flowers or vegetables)'; (2) bar gidan za cam" hardan “to collect, accumulate” San. 190r. 9 (quotns.): Xwar. xir dér-/dé:r- “to collect! ' Ai 30; ter- “to pick (fruit, flowers) Qutb 178; tér- ditto 179: Kip. xil cama'a dér- Hou. 33, zo: xiv İd. 32 (basak): xv cama'a (y1y-; in margin yığ- and) der- Tuh. 128. 5; damma “to collect' ter- 23b. 2; lagata a cama'a wa qaşşaşa (to pick up weeds) (şöple- and) ter- (in margin der-) 32a. 8: Osm. xiv ff. properly dér-, but sporadicelly der- “to collect'; c.i.a.p. TS 7 197; 11 286; 1H 187; IV 213. *tir- (d-) the basis of tirig, tirgür-, tiril-; its exact nature is obscure; as it had a Pass. f. it was presumably Trans. and meant something like 'to bring to life, revive', but in that case the status of the Caus. f. tirğür- with precisely that meaning is obscure. 'The Kip. word below looks more like a back-formation fr. tirig than a survival of the original verb. Kip. xiv. tiri- (sic) hayiya 'to live, be alive'; also pronounced with d- İ4. 38. 1 tur- (? d-) “to stand”, both in the sense of “to stand upright' and “to stand still” with various extended meanings. From an early date it was also used as an Aux. V. following a Gerund in -u:f-ü, -p or -ğalı:/- geli: with different shades of meaning, but usually “to continue to (do something)'. From a date as early at least as Uyğ. Chr. the Aor. turur, later abbreviated to tur/dur, etc., but no other part of the V. was used as a copula meaning “is” and so replacing erür. C.i.a.p.a.].; in 5SW Az., Osm. dur- in Tkm. both tur- and dur-, as the vowel is short in Tkm., Kaj.'s alternative form tu:r- is prob. an error or dialect form. Most Turkish grammars and some dicts. discuss the various idiomatic uses of this V. at great length. Türkü vrir anta: kalmışı: yer sayu: kop turu: ölü: yoriyu:r ertiğ “those of you who remained there all went to all sorts of countries and stayed or died (there)' 7 S o,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 574 
     
   
   
      530 II N 5; the only other occurence is [gap] turu: [gap] Ix. 21: vin ff. tur- "to stand still, remain”, and the like occurs ro times in JrkB e.g. üze: tuman turdt: asra: toz turdt: “the mist was stationary (or rose?) above and the dust below' 15; kamşayu: uma:tı:n turu:r 'stands still unable to move” 16, 25, 37, 39: a.o. 28 (1 €:1): Man. üze ou kat kök asra seğiz (sc) kat yer beş tenri üçün turur “above the heavens in ten layers and beneath the carths in eight layers remain stationary for the sake of the five gods' C/mas. 42-4: Uyğ. viri [gap] turup Su. S. 6 perhaps the end of a longer word: viri ff. Man.-A turmis kergek erür 'they must remain' M / 24, 3; (may our bodies) bütünin katağın tursun 'remain whole and strong' do. 28, 26: Man. yalinlayu turur tamutin oztilar “they have escaped from the continuously flaming hell” TT 7/7 135; tekip (for tegip) turur 'continues to reach'(?) do. LX 59: Chr. (the star) suk turdi 'stood still" U 7 6, 9; kótürü umatın turur 'stands still unable to carry it” do. 8, 6-7, (the flame rose and) kök kahkka tegi turur erdi 'stood erect right up to the firmament' do. 8, 14—bu taş ertipü ağır turur “this stone is extremely heavy” do. 8, 4-5: Bud. yokaru turğalı "to stand up” PP 19, 5; yeti kün turup “halting for seven days” de. 31, 4; ığlamap turun “stop weeping and stand up” do. 60, 1; 1nga tursun 'thus may they remain' TT IV 12, 42: korayu tursun 'may they continuously diminish' do. 12, 45; a.o.o.: Civ. (the birds) ucu umatin turdi 'stood still unable to fiy” T7 724; busuş kadğu belgüsi epire turur “manifestations of grief and distress continuously surround you' do. 79; evde tursar “if one stays at home” VII 28, 33-44; a.0.0.—in the late texts in USp. there are several occurrences of -p turur e.g. bolup turur “there is”, erk tutup turur “are taking control” 21, 7-8: Xak. xı er yoka:ru: turdi: "the man (etc.) stood up" (qama), and one says tuma:n turdti: “the fog rose” (idca) (turur, turma:k), turur this Aor. (gàbir) verb is used without Perf. or Infin. and means huma üs”, e.g. one says Ol ta:ş turur “that is a stone” and ol kuş turur “that is a bird”, this is a copula in the sentence (şi/a f?'l-kalàm), comparable to Ar. yanbagi which has neither Perf. nor Infin. Kag. I 6: (in the section for Mon. V. with long vowels) er yoka:ru: tu:rdi: (same translation) (tu:rur, tu:rma:k); tu:rur a Future (mustaqbal) verb without Perf. or Infin., like Ar. yada" and yadar, it indicates the stability (? or truth? garàár) of something, or its existence or position at the time of speaking (fi hölat”l-dikr iyyahu); hence one says ol evde: turu:r (sic) “he is (hàádir) in the house', not meaning that he is standing up (al-qiyám), and er sökel turu:r “the man is ill, not standing up /TT 18o; tur- is very common and turur fairly common as both are used in grammatical sections, in phr. like şük tur uskut "be silent', 7 335, 15, it means “to stand still” not “to stand up”: KB (they were his advisers) birle turup 'staying with him” 49; (good fortune) kapuğda turur 'stands at the   MON. V. DRdoor" 100; evindin turup çıktı "he stood up and left his house” 486; 0.0. with the same range of meanings are common, 538, 541, 1296 (tur-a), etc.: xu(?) KBVP (every country has given this book a different name) ol elnip bógüsi hakimi turup 'the sages and wise men of the country stood up' (and gave it a name looking to the local custom) 27: xıı(?) KBPP turur “is” (which seems not to occur in K B) is common both as a copula, e.g. (God who) turur 'is' (the Almighty King) 2, and after Participles in -mis/-mis, c.g. árüsta kilinmis turur “it has been adorned' ro, At. tur- “to stand up”, turur 'is', several occurrences; 7ef. tur- “to stand up, stand still; -p tur- 'to do something continuously' -u:/-ü: tur- ditto; turur “is, exists” 311: XIV Muh. qama dur- Mel. 3o, 4: tur- Hif. 114; toaqafa “to stand still dur- 32, 5; tur- 116; al-qiyüm turmak 35, 6; 120; a.o.o.—for “is” Mel. has dur in tr, 12; 16, t and tur in 11, 13; turur in r8, 2; Rif. has dürür in 93, elsewhere tur/turur: Çağ. xv ff. tur- (-mayın, etc.) dur-, sühin ol- “to be stationary” Vel. 204-7 (quotns.): tur- ('with -u-") (1) isfadan “to stand up”, (2) mandan sta mahat hardan “to remain, stay, halt! San. ror. T3 (quotns., in both authorities the Aor. is turar); tur one of the copulas (razoğb/f) meaning ast “is”, e.g. kétip tur, kélip tur 'he has gone, he has come'; in this sense also dur do. 172r. 15; dur and durur (but not tur) are mentioned among the razábif in 16r. 22: Xwar. xiu dur- “to remain' "AZ 26: xın(?) tur- (1) “to stand”, (2) as an Aux. V. and turur “is” are common in Oz.: xiv tur- “to stand” Qur? 186; MN 9s, etc.: Kom. xiv tur- 'to stand, stand up, remain', and as an Aux. V. and turur)tur/ dur/dir/dir as a copula are very common CCI, CCG, Gr. 254-8 (numerous quotns.): Kap. xim qàma mina'l-wuqnf toa'l-labt. wwa'l-qiyüm 'to halt; to stay, remain; to stand up" tur- Hou. 43, 4; huwa dur $56, 15: xiv. türqüma İd. 62; tur “is” do. 23 (anuk); dur a word (/afza) which accompanies a statement to emphasize it; in certain contexts the d- is changed (zabaddala) to 1-, also durur/turur do. 48; qáma wa teaqafa dur- Bul. 71r.: xv qüma (ur- Kav. 11, 5; Tuh. 29b. 11; maqafa tur- TuÀ. 38b. 6; dır/dur is used for emphasis Kav. 35, 14-15; tur/dur “is” Tw. szb. 7; 2.0.0. Osm. xiv ff. dur- (occasionally in the early period tur-) in the meanings given above; c.i.a.p. TTS I 230; 11 327; III 214; IV 248. 2 tu:r- “to be, or become, weak or emaciated'. An early l.-w. with the same meaning in Mong. tura-[turu- (Haenisch 155); survives in NE Kaç. Koib., Sag. tura kal-/tura par-; Khak. tura par- “to be exhausted” R /71 1446; Bas. 240. Xak. xı at tu:rdı: “the horse (etc.) was weak or emaciated” (kazala) Kaş. Ill ı8ı (tu:ra:r, tu:rma:k). tür- (d-) “to roll up (a scroll, one's sleeves, etc.)”. S.i.a.m.l.g.; in NE 'Tuv. and SW Osm. dür-. Cf. bür-, Uyğ. virrff. Bud. Suv. 137, 4 (bóg-): Xak. x: ol bitig türdu: fazod”/-kitab  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 575 
     
   
   
      DIS 'he rolled up the scroll (etc,)” Kaş, II 7 (türe:r, türme:k); a.o. /7 39, 2-5: Osm. xv and xvi dür- “to roll up” in several texts 77S 1241; IV 260. Dis. DRA teri: (d-) “the skin, hide” (of a human being or animal). S.i.a.m.l.g.; in SW Az., Osm., Tkm, deri, Türkü vırı ff. IrkB 44 (üpüş-): Uyğ. vir ff. Man.-A (the louse) kim kişinep terisinte ünüp 'which emerges from a man's skin' M 1 8, 14-15: Bud. (some people kill animals and) terisin soyar (so read) 'strip off their skins' PP 5, 3; terisin soyup U III 52, 9: Civ. yılan terisin “a snake's skin" HZ I 114; a.o. do. 129 (kirpi:): Xak. xı teri: al-cild 'skin' Kaş. 111 221; İİİ 244 (*ékki:le:-) a.o.o.: XiIi(?) Tef. teri “skin” 300: xiv Mu. al-cild (human skin) deri: Mel. 45, 14; té:ri: Rif. 139; al-furzwa "a fur coat' deri: to:n 65, 7 (Rif. 166 1:çmek): Çağ. xv ff. teri deri büst ma"ndsına “skin” Vel. 186 (quotn.); teri büst, usually of the hides (cild) of animals or the peel (gigr) of fruits and plants San. 193r. 27 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv teri ditto Qutb 175: Kom. xiv “skin, hide, leather” teri CC], CCG; Gr. 242 (quotn.): Kip. xiv teri: al-eild bi'l-suf "a skin with wool on it” İd. 38: xv al-cild teri: Kav. 61, 9; cild (inter alia) ter (sie, with a note in the margin saying that it means a skin with wool on it); Tub. 11a. 12 zat" “a large piece of tanned hide” teri do. 36b. s. S tiri See tirig. VU 1 tura n.o.a.b. only in Hend, vv. trn, with which it must be more or less syn. Cf. turalığ. Türkü vir ff. Man. in the list of the five Manichaean gods, the sons of Xormuzda, tin tura tepri "the god of the zephyr(?) (the wind god, the light god, the water god, and the fire god) Chuas. 34 fI: Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A the same list in M I zı, ı (i) ff. 2 tura: basically “something to shelter behind”, used both for permanent fortifications, and for portable 'breastworks' which could be moved about and fixed temporarily to the ground. A l.-w. in the first meaning in Mong. (Kot, 1879, Haltod 432) and Pe. and other languages, see Doerfer 11 958; it survives in most NE languages R III 1446, and Khak. where the meaning has attenuated, through 'stockade, fortified village" to “tovvn” and even "house". Xak. xi tura: kalkan a[/-turs tca'l-daraqa wa hull mü tasattara bihi'l-racul mina'l-aduwtw 'breastwork, shield, and anything that a man shelters behind from the enemy” Kaş. 11I 221; o.o. II 356, 19 (kalkan tura: daragatuhu wa tursuhu); III 106, 14 (?, text perhaps corrupt): KB kara baylikin kildi özke tura “he made the wealth of the common people a protection for himself' 256; (some men expose themselves to swords and battle axes in battle) kayusı turada yulugda karir 'some grow old behind breastworks in security (?, or as hostages)” 1736; o.o. 5263 (ordu:), 6434: xır(?) Tef. bustannun turası . DRA |^ 531 “a garden wall' 312: xiv Mu. al-qal'a 'fortress' tu:ra: Mel. 75, 15; Rif. 179: Çağ. xv ff. tura (with -u') "a shield (kalkan) the height of a man which soldiers hold in front of them in battle and fight behind' Vel. 203 (quotns.); tura 'iron rods and plates of iron which they fasten together with chains and hooks on the day of battle and make into a line of defence Ünisar-i lagkar) behind which they stand to fight” San. 173r. 16 (quotns.). VU turr: "bitter, acrid'; pec. to Xak. Xak. xi turi: ne:p 'anything with a bitter, acrid taste' (ta'm 'afis) like the taste of an oak-gall (al-'afs) ; hence a man when he is disagreeable (gakisu'l-xuluq) is called turi: kişi: Kaş. İİII 220; ölüm o:tin icü:rdüm icti: bolup yü:zi: turi: 'I made him drink the potion of death and he drank it making a wry face” (káliha(n) tvachahu) 1 47, 16: K B (oh death!) isiz edgü nepke sen ók sen turi 'you are (equally) disagreeable to bad and good things” 1538; a.o. 1334 v.l. in Vienna MS., possibly authentic; 1706; 4553. S tóre: See tö:r and törü:. tórü: (tóró:) 'traditional, customary, unwritten law'; one of the basic political terms of the Turkish pagan period. It was closely associated with 1 €:1 and xağan in the sense that it could not exist without a “realm” as its sphere and a 'ruler' to administer it. It was adopted as a religious term both by Buddhist and Manichaean missionaries in the sense of “a rule' subordinate to the prescriptions of the true doctrine or religious law, no:m, q.v. In Xak., where it was still common, it meant “custom, customary law', as opposed to the religious law of Islam (al-gari'a) and prob. also to the arbitrary decrees of rulers. It became an early ].-w. in Mong. as döre/töre. It is not clear whether the form tóre current fr. the medieval period onwards, and still surviving in some NW languages including Kar. T., R 7/I 1250, and SW Osm. is a direct survival of the old word or a reborrowing fr. Mong. and some confusion arises from the fact that it is homophonous with the word for 'prince' and the like in these and other languages, see tó:r. Certainly in Osm. its true origin was so far forgotten that in Sami 449 it is spelt tura and described as a l.-w. fr. Hebrew torah. See 1 toku: Türkü vr tórü: occurs about a dozen times, usually in association vv. 1 özl, e.g. (my ancestors the xagans took hold of the realm and) éli&amp; tutup tórü:$ etmiş “having taken control of the realm organized the (system of) traditional laws! I E 3, I1 E 4; elin tórü:sin tuta: bérmig éti: bermiş I E 1, İl E 3, etc.; o.o. by itself, (people who had abandoned their realm and xağan, become slaves and) türkü tórü:sü:n ıçğınmış “given up the Türkü traditional laws! I E 13; écü:m apa:m törüsi:mçe: (according to the traditional laws of my ancestors (Hend.)” 7 E 13, II E ız: viii ff. Man. nom törüğ yadturmatin tidtimiz erser “if we have created obstacles by not preaching the doctrine and 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 576 
     
   
   
     532 rules” Chuas. 74-5; iğid nomuğ tórüg “false doctrine and rules” 128; (then the king) ınça [ok?] nom törü urt1 'prescribed the doctrine and rules as follows! TT II ro, 9o-1—tÓrü bar erti 'there was a rule' (prescribing that) Chuas. 210 (alkan-), 223 (é:t-), etc.: Uyğ. vurff. Man. kértü törülerte katığlanu 'striving in accordance with the true rules' TT I 136: Bud. Sanskrit »mandanavidhau "in accordance with the rule for decorating" éténmek yaratınmaklığ tórósinde TT VIII D.8; tórósi bolsa:r (p-) “if there is a rule for it” do. C.9; (if a man believes) ters tetrü töröke “in false (Hend.) rules” do. O.2 (TT VI 56-7); élig tórüg ağı barım tutar 'it is the treasury that maintains the realm and traditional laws! PP 9, 1-2; bu yertinçü törüsi antağ ol "it is the natural law of this world' (that lovers are separated) do. 78, 3-4; élig tórüg bulğadımız erser “if we have disturbed the realm and its laws' TT IV ro, 17; in TT VI and elsewhere tórü often represents Sanskrit dharma which basically means aw, rule' but has much wider connotations in Buddhist terminology ; o.o. U 7I ro, 19-20; TT V 10, 114; Suv. 133, 15; 136, 18; TT X 500, etc. ; törü toku TT VI 231, etc. (1 toku:): Civ. (joy and pleasure come to you) tórülüg törü İtegdi?) 'equitable laws come to you” (?) TT I 89; (in an adoption contract) él tórüsi birle “in accordance with the law (or customs?) of the country” USp. 98, 3: Xak. xı törü: al-rasm "customs”, hence the proverb él kalir tórü: kalma:ss “a realm is abandoned, given up ( vutrak), but customs are not” Kaş, III 221 (prov. repeated /7 25, 8); törü: al-rasm ya'nt'l-ingáf (customs, that is equity' IJI 120, 23 (1 él; also IJ 18, 1): KB tórü is very common, usually for 'civil law', sometimes more vaguely "law and order', e.g. (the world has achieved peace) tüzüldi tórü 'the civil law has been put in order”, törü birle “by his laws' (he has raised his fame on high) 103; (men of understanding have come to lay down) edgü törü “good laws' 219; 0.0. 252, 8oo, etc.; tórü toku 2490, etc. (1 toku:); öndi törü zrır, etc. (öpdi): xın(?) Tef. tóre “custom” 310: Çağ. xv ff. töre "adat ve qünün "custom, lav” Vel. 203 (quotn.), töre . . . (3) rası ta qünün (one "Purkish, one Pe. quotn.); (4) metaph., "the: code of law (sgari'at) which Çingiz Xan promulgated' San. 173r. 14: Xwar. xiv tóre “custom, customary law' Qutb 184; (pay us annual tribute, be submissive, put enmity out of your hearts) öz tórepiz tutun “keep your own customary laws! Nahc. 111, 17; a.0. 139, : Kom. xiv “custom? (Christian) law' töre CCI, CCG, Gr. 251 (quotns.): Kip. xiv dóre: al-gari'a tva'l-uslib "a code of law and conduct İd. 48: xv "ada tóre Tuh. 25a. r, 36a. 7 (tör), 90a. 4: Osm. xv to xvil töre (mis-spelt tire) “custom, lav”, etc.; common T7'S 1 705; II 911; 711 692; IV 769. Dis. V. DRAtara:- (?d-) “to comb (the hair, etc.)'. S.i.a.m.l.g., with some phonetic changes in DIS. DRA NE; NE Tuv. dira-; SW Az, “kecir, darabut Osm. tara-. Xak. xi ki:z saçın tara:dı: “the girl combed (fərzaşafat) her hair'; and one says (ol) anıp sü:sin tara:dı: “he dispersed (Çarraqa) his army”, its origin is tardi: for dispersing something. Do you not sce that the two (verbs) come together (tactami'àn) in the Aor.? One says tardı: farraqa, tara:r and tara:dr, also tara:r. "This law is not applicable to all verbs but (some) bilitteral and trilitteral verbs have the same Aor, (examples are given aşa:r fr. ag- and aşn:-, and kana:r fr. kan- and kana:-) Kaş. 711 260 (this is all very confused, but it suggests that the author meant to put an Aor. and not a Perf. in the second quotn.; it should not be taken to mean that tara:- ever meant farraqa); a.o. 1 14, 9: KB üküş ternekiğ kör taradı ölüm “death has combed out many gatherings' 4829: xiti(?) Tef. tara- “to comb' 287: Çağ. xv ff. taratara- Vel. 167 (quotn.); tara- sana kardan “o comb! San. 152v. 4 (quotns.): Xwar. xiu tara- "to comb” "Ah 29; dara- ditto 39: xtv tara- ditto Quib 171; Nahc. ir, 8: Kip. xii maşata "to comb' tara:- Hon. 37, 4; sarraha bi'l-magt ditto 41, 2: xiv fara- majata, and in the Krtáb Beylih tarakla- İd. 62: xv sarraha tara- Tuh. 20a. 3; 83b. ır. tart- properly 'to cultivate (ground), as opposed to ek- “to sow' and tik- “to plant. Survives only(?) in NE Alt., "Tel. R 177 846, Khak., and 'Tuv., where it now has all three meanings. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (one can make good profits) tarığ tarimakta edgü yup kentir bir tarisar mir tümen bolur "by cultivating the ground, if one plants one of good cotton(?) or hemp it becomes a thousand or ten thousand” PP 13, 3-4 (see yun which properly means *wool'); a.o. do. r, 4 (özl): Civ. kebez tarığu yér “land for cultivating cotton" US. 2, 2-3; tarif tarığu yér "land for cultivation' do. ır, 2; 28, 2; bor tarığlı “a wine grower" do. 53 (4) 4; a.o. do. 28, 6 (2 uruğ): Xak. xt ol tarığ tarrdr “he cultivated a. plot of ground' (harata'l-hart; etc.) Kaş. III 262 (tarı:r, tarrma:k): KB (this world is a tarığlağ 'plot for cultivation") tarısa orar er terilğü oti “if a man cultivates it, he reaps the crop when it is ready to be gathered' 1393: xın(?) 4t. 1:92 (edgülük): Tef. tar-(sıc, ? error)/tarı- “to cultivate” 287-8: Çağ. xv ff. tari- (-p) ek- ehin eh- “to sov” Vel, 166 (quotns.); tarı- fuxm afşündan 'to scatter seed, sow' San. 152v. 22 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv ditto Quib 172. D taru:- (da:ru:-) Den. V. fr. 1 ta:r, “to be narrow, cramped, confined'. N.o.a.b., but der. f.s which are not ancient words like NC Kir., Kzx. taril-; SW Az., Osm. daral- s.i.s.m.l. Cf. tarık-. Xak. xı ev taru:di: “the house (seat of honour (al-sadr), etc.) was narrow, cramped' (dàga); and one says er buşdi: taru:dı: “the man was annoyed and uncomfortable” (dacara . . . wa tadayyaqa) Kaş. III 261 (taru:, taru:ma:k): KB bu elgim tarusa 'if my hand is narrow' (i.e. if my means are restricted) 477; (he entered the town, but 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 577 
     
   
   
         ' RIS. DRB 533 could not find lodgings) tarudi ajun “the world was narrow' (i.e. he felt uncomfortable) 488: xin(?) At. (it is God who gives you pain and another man riches) caza" kılma yü ranc idisi tarup 'oh you who suffer pain do not be impatient in your discomfort' 464. tire:- (d-) "to prop up, support”, s.i.a.m.].g. with some extensions of meaning; in SW Az., Osm., dire-; Tkm. di:re-. Xak. xı ol kapuğ tire:di: “he propped up ('ammada for MS. 'amadda) the door'; also used for propping up (MS. 'ammada) anything! Kaş. III 262 (tire:r, tire:me:k): Çağ. xvff. tire- nasb hardan 'to put up, erect), and rast kardan "to straighten' the opposite of xam hardan "to make crooked' San. Torr. 28 (quotns.): Kip. xiv sec törü:-. S tiri- Sec Ytir-. tórü:- (tóró:-, ?d-) 'to come into existence, to be created”, An early l.-w. in Mong. as tóre-/dóre- (Haenisch 37, 152); survives in most NE languages as törö-/töre- R III 1251-3; Khak. tóre-/tóri-; Tuv. tórü-; SW 'Tkm. dóre-, xx Anat. tóre-/türe- SDD 1393, 1408; the Osm. form is given as türe- in Sami 449, Red. 608. Türkü vim kişi: oğlı: kop ólgeli: tórü:mis 'the children of men all came into existence to die' / N ro: Uy£. vin ff. Man. (all the things which cause mankind to suffer) tórüyür belgürer 'come into existence and appear' (as a consequence of anger) TT II 16, 48; kas icinte tórümis (human beings) “vho came into existence within the ?' TT III 115: Bud. 1 iğaçda törümiş tüş yemişler 'fruits (Hend.) that grow on bushes and trees" U 7 27, 3; karımak ólmek tórüyür 'old age and death come about” 7 s, rış, yer tenri törümişte 'ever since earth and heaven came into existence” PP s, 8, o.o. TT X soo, etc.: Civ. [gap] tórügey “vvill come into existence' TT 7 108: Xak. xı yalpuk törü:di: “man came into existence” (inxalaqa); this is Intrans. (lázim) and means xuliqa "vvas created” Kaş. III 262 (törü:r, törü:me:k): KB törümiş ney erse yokalğu turur “if a thing comes into existence it is destined to perish” 692; o.o. ış (tanuk), 882, 883, etc.: Çağ. xv ff. tóre-(-di)/tórü(-di) yoh iken nesne dörü- ya'ni haşil ol-, icád ma"ndsına “of something which did not exist to come into existence in the sense of being crcated' Vel. 207 (quotn.); tóre- (spelt) tawlid yáftan ata ba-ham rasidan "to be born, to come into existence' San. 171r. ro (quotn.): Kom. XIV “to be born” tóre- CCG; Gr. 251 (quotns.): (Kıp. xiv tö:re- ğarasa “to plant, set up” İd. 38 looks like an error for tire:-, unless gurisa “to be planted” is read, but this would not give a very convincing meaning): Osm. xiv to xvi dórü- (T TS dürü-) "to come into existence, be born”: in several texts 7 TS 7 242; 71 342; III 226; IV 260. Dis. DRB PU torpiı: Hap. leg.; al-tabi' normally means, quite generally, “a follower', but also, specifically, 'a calf which still follows its mother', because it is too young to leave her. İt is likely that this is the mcaning intended here, since a Dim. f. seems to survive in NE Alt. torbok; Khak. torbax; SE Türki torpak/topak; NC Kir. torpok; Kzx. torpak “a calf in its second year”, sec Shcherbahk, p. 102. Xak. xı torpt: al-tabi' Kaş. 1 415. VUD törpiğ Dev. N. fr. törpi:-, “a rasp, a large file”, "This is thc only word in the group which is not Hap. leg.: it survives only in SW Osm. türpl; "km. törpi, as between the two pronunciations the Tkm. is likely to be the original onc; the sound change 6 ü is common in Osm. cf. tórü:-. A ].-w. in Russtan terpug. Xak. xı tórpig al-safan “a rasp', also called tórpigü: Xaş. 7 476: xiv Muh. al-midbar (sic., ?metathesis of mibrad “file, rasp') tö:rpi: (-b-) Mel. 84, 1; Rif. 190 (mis-spelt tö:rf:): Kip. xiv törpi: (-5-) al-mibradu'l-kabir “a large rasp' İd. 38: Osm. xvii dürpi (spelt) in Rümi, “a kind of file, or rasp' (sihàn) called in Ar. safan San. 225r. 6. PU torpun Hap. leg. Cf. torpla:-. Xak. xi torpun a/-taharri wa'[-qiyàs 'seeking, measuring(?); one says anın evin torpinla: (sic) “find out (&amp;aharr) where his house is” Kaş. 1 435. Dis. V. DRBVU törpi:- Hap. leg., see tórpig. The modern syn. V.s are SW Osm. türpile- ; "Tkm. törpüle-. Xak. xı er yığa:ç törpi:di: “the man smoothed (safana) the piece of wood' (etc.) Kaş. III 275 (törpi:r, törpi:me:k). VUD törpit- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of törpi:-. Xak. xı ol müpüz törpitti: “he had the horn (etc.) smoothed” (asfana) Kaş. II 327 (törpitü:r, törpitme:k). VUD törpil- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of törpi:-. Xak. xı yığa:ç törpildi: (MS. törpüldi:) “the piece of wood was smoothed with a rasp' (sufina . . . bi'l-safan) Kaş. II 229 (tórpilü:r (MS. piil- ) törpilme:k (bà' unvocalized)). PU(D) torpla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. *torp, which must be cognate to torpun. Xak. xi er torpla:dı: ne:mni: “the man tried to find out about (MS. taltaddà, clearly an error for taharra) the thing" Kaş. III 443 (torpla:r, torpla:ma:k). VUD tórpis- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of tórpi:-. Xak. xı ol menig birle: yığa:ç tórpisdi: (translated) “he helped me to smooth (fi saf”) the piece of wood'; also used for competing Kaş. II 204 (törpişü:r, torpişme:k, the translation is erroneous, it means "he competed with me in smoothing . . ."). Tris. DRB VUD törpigü: N.I. fr. tórpi:-; pec. to Xak. Xak. xı törpigü: a/-safanu'lladi yusfan bihvl-xaşab "a rasp for smoothing vvood” Kaş. 7 491) a.o, İ 476 (tórpig).  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 578 
     
   
   
       534 "ris. V. DRBPUD torpinla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. torpun. Xak. xi Kaş. 7 435 (torpun); n.m.e. PUD torpunlan- Hap. lcg.; Refl. f. of torpınla:-. Xak. xı er torpunlandı: “the man tried to find out (faharra) about the thing” Kaş. II 278 (torpunlanu:r, torpunlanma:k). Dis. DRC D terçi: N.Ag. fr. te:r; “a hired labourer, one who works for wages'. N.o.a.b. (Uyğ. vri ff. Civ. tórt terçi “four labourers' is a misreading of tórt tap 'four measures' (of cotton seed)): Xak. xı terci: a/-acir "a hired labourer' Kaş. 1 417; alo, HT 148 (ter): xiv Muh.(?) al-acir terçi: Rif. 147 (only). D torçı: N.Ag. fr. to:r; “a netter (of birds or fish)”. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. (in a list of disreputable professions) keyikçi apct tuzakçı . . . torçr çıvğaçı *wild game hunters (Hend.), trappers, netters, bird snarers(?)” TT IV 8, 56-7; (in a similar list) balıkçı avçı torgt (transcribed foz(/, in error?) tuzakçı "fishermen, wild game hunters, netters, trappers” PP 1, 8. Dis. V. DRCVU törçi:- "to begin, start” (Trans. and Intrans.). N.o.a.b.; cf. 1 basla:-. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. (feverish diseases) alku tutdaçı uğuşlarindin törçimiş 'which begin from all the clans of gripping (demons)! U H 68, 4 (i); sarığ tózlüg ig ağırığ kayu ödte törçiyür "in. which. season do illnesses (Hend.) arising from bile begin?” Suv. 588, 19-20; 0.0. 592, 45; 593, 2 etc.: Xak. xı er :s tórci:di: "the man began (bada'a) thc task' Kaş. III 275 (törçi:r, törçi:me:k): KB éligke kirü ham çıka törçidi “he began to come into the king's presence and go out again” 733. VUD törçit- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of törçi:-. Xak. xı ol apar rs törçitti: “he told him to begin (abda'ahu) the task' Kaş. II 329 (törçitü:r, törçitme:k). Tris. DRC D törüçi N.Ag. fr. tórü:; "one who prescribes rules". Pec. to Lily, Bud, UyÉ. vi ff, Bud. körümçi ulatı ters tetrü törüçi "people who prescribe false (Hend.) rules, soothsayers, and the like” TT VI 331; o.o. Kuan. 127-8 (égil). Mon. DRD VU tirt Hap. leg. ; onomatopoeic for a tearing sound. Xak. xı one says anın to:nin tirt tirt yirtti: "he tore his garment with this sound owing to carelessness" Kaş. 7 341. tört (? dó:rd) 'four'; c.i.a.p.a.l.; in NE Tuv. dört, SW Az. dörd, Osm. dört, Tkm. dó:rt. A long vowel before a final consonantal cluster is very unusual, but may exist in this word in view of the "Tkm. form. Türkü vir; vir ff. (including Man.) tört is common: Uy&amp;. viri ff.   TRIS. V. DRBMan.-A, Man.; Bud.; Civ. tört is common: Xak. xı tört yarma:k 'four dirhans'; also “four” of anything else ş also (pronounced) tó:rt, the form with -6:- is better (a/-acıcad) Kaş. 1341;2.0.0.: KB tört is common: xin(?) Ar. tört 41; Tef. tört 310: xiv Müuh. 'four' dö:rd Mel. 81, 6; tö:rt Rif. 186; dawátu'l-arba'a *quadruped' dó:rt aya:kll: 138 (only; MS. ya:kn): Çağ. xvff. tórt/tórter 'four' Sas. 172r. 21 (followed by several phrs.): Xwar. xın(?) tört (or dörd?) Og. 103-7: xiv tört Quib 184; MN 439; Nahe. 2, 11, etc.: Kom. xiv 'four? tórt/dórt (sc, d- very rarc in Kom.) CCG; Gr.: Kip. xin 'four' dó:rt Hon. 22, 4: xiv dörd /d. 22 (s.v. altağu:): tört do. 38; Bul. 12, ro: xv dört Kav. 6s, 6; Tuh. 6ob. 7 a.0.0.: Osm. xiv ff, dört in various phr. and der. f.'s TTS I 225; II 321; IV 243. Mon. V. DRDtart- (?d-) basically "to pull, or drag (somcthing .dcc.), but with many extended meanings of which "to weigh' is the oldest. In R III it occupies three columns, 857-60. S.i.a.m.l.g.; in SW Az., Tkm., and old Osm. dart-, in later Osm. and Rep. 'T. tart-. Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-A Man.-uig. Frag. 400, 6 (soydur-): Man. Wind. 3 (sorğu:): Bud. korkinçlardın tartdaçı "who draws (mankind) away from the fears (of the three evil ways)' U II 59, 1 (i); ışığağ tartğaymen “1 will pull the cord' PP 8o, 4; (the hair on your head is arranged in plaits) birin tartmış teg “as if they had been pulled up one by one” TT X 436; o.o. do. 443; TT V 26, 85; Hücn-ts. 2119-21 (Suğun), U IV qo, 48 (I 43, 13); Suv. 430, 7 fl. etc.: Civ. kiçiğ oğlan yél tartsar 'if demoniacal possession (or the wind?) pulls a small boy” TTVII 27,8; yéltarup H Li24;in TT VIII L.25 ff. tart- seems to mean “to subtract'; a.o. TT I şı: Xak. xı ol yarma:k tarttr: “he weighed (ttazana) the silver coin (etc.) , and one says 0l ytp tartti: “he stretched (madda) the cord” (etc.); and one says ol tartin tartti: imtára müna”l-mira "he drew (i.c. procured) provisions'; also used when one drags (cadaba) anything'; one also says 0l etü:kin tartti: “he pulled off (maza'a) his boots! Kaş. III 426 (tarta:r, tartma:k; prov.): KB elig tartti aştın “he drew his hand back from the food” 5442; n.o, 86 (tn:f): xm(?) Tef. tart- “to pull, drag; to draw (a sword, a bow); to weigh' 288: xiv Muh. madda da:rt- Mel. 31, 3; tartRif. 115; matala "to stretch! daert- 31, 7 (115 yo:ba:-); wazana da:rt- 32, 3; dart- 116; al-cadab ta:rtmak 37, ir, 1:23; al-wazn da:rtmak 39, 3 (126 ülgü:le-); rstagá'l-má' "to draw water! Su: tart- ro3 (only): Çağ. xv ff. tart (-ar, etc.) çeR- “to pull.draw', e.g. a sword, a bow, and other things; fç- “to drink" in the sense of £aındim çeh- "to drain (a goblet)', and other idiomatic meanings of çeh- Vel, 163-5; tart- (spelt) kagidan “to pull, draw' in all the meanings of the Pe. V., e.g. 'to drain (a cup), to take (revenge), to suffer (grief or pain), to weigh, to draw (a picture), to withdraw, to draw (breath)! and so on; in "Turkish  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 579 
     
   
   
         DIS. DRD 535 it also means (of the eye) 'to throb'; two of Vel.'s translations are not quite accurate San. 153v. 2 (quotns.): Xwar. xırı fart- "to weigh' "Ali sz: xii(?) tart- (? or dart-) “to draw to oneself (as a friend)' Og. r10; “to draw (money from the treasury)' do. 119: xiv tart- 'to drag; to draw back; to suffer (pain)', etc. (as in San. equivalent to Pe. kaşıdan) Qutb 172; MN 232, etc.: Kom. xiv tart- 'to pull, draw', and in idioms 'to grind (corn), tighten (a belt), suffer (pain) CCI, CCG; Gr. 236 (quotns.): Kip. xiv cadaba tart- Hou. 35, 4; carra 'to pull” tart- do. 39, 9; wazana mina'l-wazn tart- (furt-) do. 40, 15; madda of stretching a cord and the like tart- (furut-) do. 43, 22, 3.0. do. 34, 1 (Ógit-): xiv tart- both cadaba and twazana İd. 62; wazanua dart- (with fwritten over the d-) Bul. 87v.: xv nataga "to pull out, extract' tart-/tarta- Tuh. 37a. 13 (cadaba and carra are translated by çek-): Osm. xiv ff. dart-(the older form)/tart- “to pull; to weigh; to suffer; to draw together (wealth)', etc.; c.i.a.p. TS I 681; I1 882; III 672; IV 191. türt- (d-) originally 'to rub, anoint (with ointment), and the like; this meaning survived in Osm. till xvır but seems now to have disappeared everywhere, other words like Sürt- and 1 yak- being used instead; it now means 'to prod, push up (a tent pole), nudge, jog (someone's elbow or memory), incite'. S.i.a.m.l.g.; in Az., Osm., Tkm. dürt-. (Türkü vin fT. türtmig in IrkD ss is prob. a mistranscription of törütmiş, q.v.): Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. (putting on clean new clothes and) etózige edgü yid yıpar türtüp “rubbing sweet perfumes (Hend.) on his body' Suv. 519, 14-15 (U I 29, 12-13): Civ. (if you burn a dog's tooth and) negüke türtser tü ünmez bolur "rub it on any place, hair does not grow there” 77 VII 23, 3: (crush castereum in water and) türtsün “rub tt on” H I 125; a.o. do. 174: Xak. xı kó:;nke: ya:ğ türtti: “he rubbed (lataxa) oil into the leather” , also used for any kind of rubbing Kaş. III 425 (türte:r, türtme:k): KB ajun türtti yüzke kómür teg boduğ “the world rubbed a charcoal-like colour on its face” 3837: xiv Mult. (?) dalaha wa tald *to rub (with the hand), to anoint' dürt- Rif. 109 (only); fala dürt- 112: Çağ. xv ff. türt(spelt; *with -ü-") firü burdan “to bring down, lay low'; (this meaning scems to have been wrongly inferred fr. a verse which, contrary to the usual practice in Sam. is translated word for word, partly here and partly under germe:-; it relates to an elephant and says yétip türtğeç sadra-ásá manár translated 'reaching and bringing down the pillar-like lotus tree'; the true meaning seems to be 'reaching and rubbing against . . .") Sar. 171r. 26: Kip. xır (after arba'a dó:rt) soa huwa (i.e. dü:rt) is an Imperative addressed to someone whom you wish an yadkur gayrahu bi-itrafi'l-aşdbi" "to remind someone by prodding him with a finger' /fou. 22, 4: xiv dürtdi: (sic) nağaza 'to tickle, tease'; dürtti: (sic) dalana *to.anoint (with oil)” 7d. 48: Osm. xiv to xvil  dürt- 'to wipe, anoint, rub (something) on'; fairly common T'TS 7 242; II 341; İİİ 225; IV 261. Dis. DRD PU(D) tardıç Hap. leg. and of unknown meaning; perhaps a Den. N. in -dıç, but see savdıç. Uyf. vir ff. Man. (the demons) tardig teg etózin kodur "lay down his body like a ?” M I 11, 14-15. D tartığ (?d-) Dev. N. fr. tart- ; s.i.s.m.l. as tarti/tartu/tartik with such meanings as “a weight (for a weighing machine); cramp; stammering; evasive; oblique'. Uyf. vin ff. Bud. U II 4o, 107 (uçruğ): Xak. xı tartığ dafru'l- (MS. in error safru'l-) racul wa hizamuhu “a man's plait of hair and ribbons for it: tartığ du'a'uwl-malik. haşiyatahu li-amr bada'a lahu "a summons from the king to his retainers for some work which he has initiated' Kaş. I 462 (and see tartığçı:): Çağ. xv ff. tartığ piskag “a gift' Vel. 167; ditto Sar. 154v. 25 (quotn.: Ktp. xiv tartu: a/-mizdn “a weighing machine' İd. 62: xv tagdima "a gift tartik Tu. 8b. 3: Osm. xiv to xvi tartuk “a gift'; in several texts T T.S 7 684; II 883; III 672 (this looks like a parallel Pass. Dev. N. in -uk). D tórtgil (d-) Den. N./A. fr. tórt; 'quadrangular, quadrangle'. Not listed in R. but appears in several modern dicts, perhaps revivals rather than survivals, NE Khak. tórtkil; NC Kir. törtkül, Kzx. tórtkil; NW Kk. tórtkül; Kumyk dörtgül, Nog. dórtkil. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. törtğil mandal “a quadrangular mandala” (Sanskrit; “magical drawing”) U TI 47, 74; Suv. 544, 8: Xak. xı törtgil (the kaf carries both kasra and damma) ev “a quadrangular (murabba') house", and anything else quadrangular Kaş. I1] 417: Kom. xiv 'quadrangular!' tórkül (sic, ?in error) CCI; Gr.: Ktp. xv murabba' (çümeli, q.v.; in margin in second hand) dórdül, also called dórtgül Tuh. 33a. 8; (in a list of words with this Suff.) murabba' dórtgül do. 62a. 4. D tartı:n (? d-) Intrans. Dev. N. fr. tart-; survives only(?) in SW Osm. tartın “a continuous roll or swagger in vvalking” Red. 1220 (only). Listed in a chapter containing words with four consonants, the last -n, indexed under the penultimate letter and immediately ” following 'T'; in its first occurrence the tö” is not dotted; the -5- in the printed edition is an error. Xak. xr tartı:n “a group of tribesmen (camá'a mina'l-qavwm), who are the retinue of their chief (raht li-kabir minhum) and under his orders”: tartı:n a/-mira “provisions” Kaş. I 435; a.o. İİİ 426 (tart-). : D törtünç (?dö:rdünç) Ordinal f. of tört, “fourth”. This shorter form n.o.a.b., the longer form in -ünçü, etc. first appeared in the medieval period and is novv universal, in NVV Kumyk dörtünçü, Nog. dörtinşi, SVV Az., Osm. dördünçü, Tkm. do:rdinci. Türkü viri ff. Man. törtünç Chuas. 64: Uyğ. viri ff.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 580 
     
   
   
       536 DIS. DRD Man.; Bud.: Civ. törtünç is common: Xak. xı al-rabi" "fourth! tö:rtünç Kaş. 1 132, 5; HI 449, 4; n m.e.: KB törtinç (sic in Vienna MS.) 134: xiv. Muh. al-rabi" dó:rtinc Mel. 82, 9; tö:rtinç Rif. 187: Çağ. xv ff. törtünç dördüncü Vel. 206; törtünç (spelt) cahàrunm San. 172r. 29 (quotn.); tórtünci çahdrumin do. 172v. 2 (quotn.; the two Pe. words are syn.): Kom. xiv törtünçi CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xv dörtünçi Tw. 61b. 2. tartar an onomatopoeic for the name of a bird; cf. Latin turtur 'turtle dove'. Survives in NE Khak. ta:rrt; NC. Kir; NW Kaz, tartar all meaning “Tİand-rail: corncrake', but carlier apparently used also for other birds. Xak. xı tartar “a bird likc the turtle dove" (al-qumri) Kag. I 48s: Kip. xiv şu: tartarı: dikw' l-mà' "a water fowl İd, $6; al-salwá *quail tardar (t) (sic); diku'l-mà' su: tartarı: Bul. 12, $: XV sahvá tartar (mis-spelt fartaz) Tuh. 1924. 13. S tertrü Sce tétrü:. Dis. V. DRDD tarıt- Caus. f. of tari; “to order to cultivate”, Survives only(?) in NE Khak., Tuv. Xak. xı n.m.e., but tarit- occurs several times in the grammatical section Kaş. // 319 ff. e.g. ol tarığ tarıtğa:n ol “he is constantly ordering cultivation (al-hart) ; bu er ol telim tarif tarıtğa:n “this man is constantly ordering tilling (or seeding, a/-zirá'a)! 1 514: Çağ. xv tf. tarit-. Caus. f.; afsánándan “to order to scatter (seed)' San. 151r. 8. D tarut- (d-) Caus. f. of taru:-; “to constrict narrow (something) and the like. Survives only (9) in NE Alt, Sor, Tel. tarit-, other languages use such forms as tarilt-; SW "Tkm. da:ralt-. Xak. xı ol evin tarutti: dayyaqa 'alavhi baytahu "he made his dwelling narrow, cramped'; also used of anyone who makes something narrow Kaş. I] 302 (tarutu:r, tarutma:k). D terit- “to sweat'; Den. V. fr. te:r; no doubt originally terid-. Survives only(?) in NE Tuv. derit-, other modern languages use terle:-. "Türkü «vin ff. IrkB so (ógürgü:: Uyğ. vun ff. Bud. üküş teritip övkeçi erser “if a man sweats a great deal and is bad-tempered” Suv. sos, 9: Xak. xt er teritti: “the man (etc.) sweated' ('ariga); taken from their word teri: "the skin” and the meaning is teri: ötti: that is "the sweat exuded from the skin” with elision of the ö- so that it became a single Verb; or else taken from their word ter 'sweat' and the mcaning is ter attı: “the body threw out (rama) sweat', and the a/if was dropped so that the two were made into a single verb Kaş. İT 303 (terite:r, teritme:k). D törüt- (? dórót-) Caus. f. of törü:-, “to bring into existence, to create”, usually with “God” as the Subject. The phonetic evolution and subsequent history of the word is much the same as that of törü:-, Cf. yarat-. Türkü vitt ff. (a tough son. of man. went off to the army; in the fighting area) erkli:ğ savct: törütmi:ş (so read instead of türtmi:ş which is meaningless here) possibly “he got himself made an independent envoy' IrkB. sş (not wholly satisfactory, but short of a scribal error it is hard to find an alternative explanation): Uy. vir ff. Man. in. TT 7/1 73 (sce umug) tórüt(t)üpüz “you created! should perhaps be rcad for törütüpüz "you came into existence': Bud. (mortals with erroneous beliefs say) tenrili yerli törütmiş törü ol “that is a rule laid down by heaven and carth' T'T VI 270; a.0. do. 330: Xak. xi tepri: yalpuk tórütti: “Göd created. (xalaqa) Adam and the rest of mankind' (a/-xalq) Kaş. TI 303 (tórütü:r, törütme:k, followed by Oğuz meaning, and a Xak. versc): KB törüt- “to create" is very common, c.g. (God) tórütti 'created' (the brown earth, the blue sky, etc.) 3: xı(?) KBVP (God) yaratğan tórütgen “the Creator (Hend.) 2 (in xin(?) KBPP only yaratğan): xin(?) At. the word, fairly common, is consistently spelt töret-, e.g. ayA til tóret madh “Oh tongue, make praise! 41; tóretgen idi “Lord Creator” 121; Tef. törüt“to create” (but “Creator” is spelt tóredeci/ törüdeçi/törüteçi) 310: xiv Mwh. (al-xdliq yara:tğa:n . . .) aí-micid tó:retge:n (unvocalized) Mel. 44, 10; Rif. 137 (the two Ar. words are practically syn.): Çağ. xv ff. töretCaus. f£; mutawallad süxtan “to bring into existence! San. 171r. 25: Oğuz xı (after Xak.) törütti: f? lugatiI-Guzziya idü qaddara'l-say* sea aslahahu "to fit a thing, or put it right” Kaş. II 303 (cf. Oğuz meaning of yarat-): Xwar. xiv töret- “to create" Qufb 184; MN 7: Kom. xiv. “Creator” töretteçi CCG; Gr. (but “to create! is yarat-): Kip. xv xa/laqa (yarat- , in margin in second (?SVV) hand) dórüt- Tw. 14b. 9 (there is a parallel marginal note against xöliq in 14a. 2): Osm. xiv to xvi dörüt- (in xvi ?döret-) “to create”, etc., somctimes of God, but more often not; fairly common TTS I 244; İT aas, III 228; IV 263 (consistently spelt diriit-). D tartil- (d-) Pass. f. of tart- , s.im.m.l. with a wide range of meanings. Uyğ. viti ff. Bud. teğinmekdin tartıldaçı “being drawn out by perception TT V 24, 66-7z: Xak. xı yarma:k tartildu “the dirham (etc,) was weighed' (zorzira), also used when a cord, etc. is stretched. (mudda) Kaş. II 229 (tartilu:r, tartilma:k): xin(?) Tef. tartil- (of shadows at dusk) 'to be elongated' 289: Osm. xiv to xvi dartil- “to be pulled, drawn'; in several texts 7 TS 7 680; II 882. D türtül- (d-) Pass. f. of türt-; s.i.s.m.l., but not with this meaning (see türt-). Xak. xı teri:ke: ya:ğ türtüldi: "oil was rubbed (Tutixa) into the hide” (ctc) Kaş. 7I 229 (türtülü:r, türtülme:k); (his face becomes yellow as if) kürküm apar türtülü:r 'saffron was rubbed on it' 7 486, 17. D tartin- (d-) Refl. f. of tart- ; s.i.s.m.l. with a wide range of meanings. Uyf. vri ff. Civ. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 581 
     
   
   
     D1S. DRĞ : 537 (if a man has a mole on his thumb) ka kadaşka tartınğuçiı bolur “he becomes closely attached to his family and relations” 77 VII 37, 13-14: Xak. xı er oğlıpa: tartındı: “the man loved his son tenderly' (agfaqa 'alà waladihi) and wished that all kinds of good things (xayr) or food should be presented to him; and one says ol evke: tarığ tartındı: “he pretended to convey (yanqul) wheat into his house” (MS. in error “out of his house; also used when nomads (a/u'l-wabar) obtain provisions (imtüra) from the sedentary population (ahlu'l-madar) Kaş. II 24o (tartinu:r, tartinma:k): Kom. xiv “to imagine (something) tartinCCI; Gr.: Osm. xiv to xvi dartin- (occasionally fartin-) “to shun, guard against, withold', etc.; common T'T'S I 68o, II 383; III 672; IV 743. D türtün- (d-) Refl. f. of türt-; "to rub onto oneself', N.o.a.b. in this meaning. Uy£. viii ff. Bud. kanlığ türtünğü üze turkaru etózin türtünür erdi 'he used constantly to rub his body with ointment made of blood' U IV 34, 52-3; 8.0. TT X 294: Civ. türtüngüle:r türtünüp TT VIII Lay: Xak. xı ol ó:zi:pe: ya:ğ türtündi: “he busied himself with oiling (bi-iddihán) himself' ; also used for pretending to oil Kaş. TI 240 (türtünü:r, türtünme:k). D terter- Hap. leg., Caus. f. of terit-, perhaps to be rcad terder- (cf. tönder-), -:- in TT VIII sometimes represents -d-. Uyğ. vin ff. Civ. iglig (spelt zk/zg) kişike: uza:tı terte:rmiş kerğe:k (spelt kerkek) "you must make the sick man sweat for a long time” TT VIII M.35. D tartis- (d-) Recip. f. of tart-; s.i.m.m.l. with a wide range of meanings of which the commonest is 'to struggle, quarrel (with one another)”. Uyf. ix //7 C.9 (kunus-): Xak. xı ol maya: uruk tartisdi: “he helped me to stretch (fi madd) the cord'; and one says tartışdı: ne: facddabat aczá'wl-jay' 'the parts of the thing were pulled apart'; and one says ol menir birle: ya: tartışdı: “he competed with me in stringing( f? £azotir) a bow and drawing it” (cagbihf), and one says ol maya: altu:n tartışdı: “he helped me to weigh (fi toazn) the gold”, or to weigh anything else Kaş. II 205 (tartisu:r, tartigma:k); sakal tutup tartisur translated “the warriors pull (ta"a//aqat) one another's beards in the stress of the heat of battle' 7 230, 5; (if the wolf howls in the steppe) evde: ıt bağrı: tartışu:r “in the house the dog's liver aches (yafarcacca") in sympathy! JI] 255, 24: Çağ. xv ff. tartışCo-op. f; bà-ham kaşidan “to pull (etc.) together', and kaşd-Raş hardan “to contend, fight with one another” Sar. rs4r. 4: Osm. xiv dartış-/tartış- “to argue, quarrel', in one or two texts 7 TS 7 681. D türtüş- (d-) Recip. f. of türt-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı ol menin birle: koğuşka: ya:ğ türtüşdi: “he competed with me in rubbing Cfi latx) oil into the hide” , also for rubbing anything else Kaş. I7 205 (türtüşü:r, türtüşme:k): KJ óger atın ündep ünin türtüşüp “they call out and praise his name, anointing it with their voices' 95. Tris. DRD D tartığçı: (d-) Hap. leg.; N.Ag. fr. tartığ. Xak. xt (after tartığ) hence one says begdin tartığçı: keldi: “a messenger bearing a summons (al-dà'i) arrived from the king or the beg” Kaş. I 462. D törteğü: (d-) Collective f. of tört, “all four, four together”, S.i.a.m.].g. except SW, usually with the -£- elided, and sometimes in the 'Turco-Mong. f. with -lef-len appended (cf. ücegü:) Uyğ. virr ff. Bud. Tig. 26b. s etc. (uruput): Civ. (human bile, pig's bile, goat's bile, hare's bile) bu tórtegüde kayusı bolsar "whichever of these four is available" H 1 25: Çağ. xv ff. törte/törtele/törtevvle dörd? bile 'four of them together! Vel. 206; tórtew çahür tà 'four together” (quotn.); törtevvle (spelt) ditto Sar. 172r. 27: Xwar. xiv tórtegü Qutb 184: Kip. xiv dórdewü al-arba'atu'l-muctama'a İd. 22 (under altağu:): xv (in the list of Collectives) dórtew Tu. 61b. ro. D türtüngü: Dev. N. (Conc. N.) fr. türtün-, “ointment”. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. Sanskrit nulepana “ointment” türtüngü (spelt türtümkü) TT VIII D.12; 0.0. U II 40, 106-7 (sil-); IV 34, 52-3 (türtün-): Civ. TT VIII 1.17 (türtün-). D tartışlığ (d-) Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. *tartis Dev. N. fr. tart-; (passions) 'which drag (a many. Uyğ. vin ff. Man. TT III 42 (iliglig). Tris. V. DRDD tórütül- (?d-) Hap. leg.?; Pass. f. of tórüt-. Xak. xı KB kamuğ barca munluğ tórütülmisi 'all things created by Him suffer pain' 5. Mon. DRĞ ?D turk (d-) 'the length' (of something). Survives in NC Kir., Kzx. turk; Tkm. durk; NE Tuv. durt is exactly synonymous. This suggests that the two words are Dev. N.s in -k and -t respectively fr. tur-. In other languages uzun or a der. f. of it is used in this sense. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (at the bottom of the river there are iron spikes) altırar yeğirmi erpek (so read) turk1 “each sixteen fingers (i.e. inches) long” TM IV 253, so-1 (the phr. is repeated in do. 65-6 with uzuni for turk1): Civ. turuk uzun isig “a prolonged fever' H 7 2 seems to contain the same word: Xak. x1 one says for the length (a/-t7?) of any solid object (cirm) turk, hence one says bi:r süpü: turki; “about the length (qadr fri) of a lance” and yé:r eni: turku: “the breadth and length of a piece of land' Kag. I 349. Dis. DRG S tarak Sec tarğak. D tari Dev. N. (Conc. N.) fr. tart:-; has 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 582 
     
   
   
     538 DIS two basic meanings (1) 'cultivated land', which is somewhat attenuated in the phr. tarif tarı:-, almost syn. vv, tart-; (2) "the produce of cultivated land', usually some kind of grain. Survives in NE Khak. tarif 'sowing', as in spring sowing, sowing arca; Tuv. tara: 'crop, grain crop, cereals, millet”, Elsewhere tarı in most languages; NC Kir. taru:, SW Az., Osm., Tkm. darı means “millet”. In modern times confused with Pe. dárü “medicine, drug”, which has come to mean 'gunpowder' and is a l-w. in the last sense in several languages, usually as tari. "This confusion may have produced the d- in the SW languages since tarığla:ğ has become tarla not daría in those languages. Türkü vırı ff. (the black cloud rose and rained on cverything) tarif bişdi: “the crops ripened' JrkB $3: UyE. viri ff. Man.-A 1 tarag “bushes and cultivated ground' M JI iş, 6 (ii): Bud. tarığ tarryu PP 1,6; ış, 3: bağ borluk 1 tarif tarimak uğrunda “in the course of cultivating gardens, vineyards, bushes, and cultivated land” U I1 77, 27; TT IV 10, 6; (vegetables, fruit, melons) böş türlüğ 1 ta:rığ “the five kinds of bushes and cultivated land” (or “bush and field crops' ?) TT VIII K.4; o.o. U 1 27, s, TT VI 105 and 454 (uruğ): Hiien-ts. 291-2 (ufus), etc.: Civ. [151] tarığı yaviz bolur “his bushes and cultivated land turn out badly! TT VII ız, 8-9; (as I need) tarığ tarığu yer “some land for cultivation' USp. 11, 3; 28, 2 etc.; yarım şık tarıiğ "land seeded with half a sAi/t (of grain)" do. 66, 5; n.o. do. 121, 3; üç kürl tarif 'three pecks of grain' do. 69, 2-5: Xak. xi tarif al-zar' 'grain', a generic term; among the "Turks generally a/-/rinta. *wheat', among the Oğuz specifically al-duxn “millet”, this is a mistake (xatd), they call “vheat” ashk Kaş. 7 373; over 60 0.0. translated "wheat'; 'grain' (al-zar', al-badr, habbu'l-zar') or 'cultivated land” (al-hart); KB tarığçı tarığka irig bolsuni “let the cultivator work hard at cultivating (the land)” 5590; a.o. 4476 (uruğ): xii(?) Tef. darığ/tarığ/taru(?) 'crop; cultivated land” 1:16, 288-9: xiv Muh. al-duxn da:ru:; al-cáwars “vild millet” Kizil. da:ru: Mel. yy, 13; ditto but tarığ . . . tarığ Rif. 181: Çağ. xv ff. tarik mazra'a "a cultivated field”, tarif /aru ya'ni arxan “millet” Vel. 166-7 (quotn.); tarif arzan San. 155r. 12: Oğuz xı see Xak.: Xwar. xiv tarı “a grain (of corn)' Qutb 172; (O Prophet, in our country they make something) tarığdın "out of millet (?)' (and drink it) Na/ic. 362, 17: Kom. xiv “millet” tarı CCI; Gr.; Kip. xi: al-duxn ta:rı: Hou. 9, 16: xiv tari: ditto İd, 62; ditto ta:ru: Bul. 7, 1: xv ditto tarı Tuh. 15a. 13. toruğ (d-) (of a horse) “bay”. S.i.a.m.l.g.; NE ' Tuv. doru$; SW Osm. doru; Tkm. do:r; a l.-w. in Pe. and other languages, see Doerfer II 881. Türkü vırı toruğ at “a bay horse 1 E 33: Uyğ. ix marima: yüzer toru:$ bertim *[ gave my teachers a hundred bay horses each” Suci 7 (this is the likeliest translation, others are possible): Xak. xı toruğ a word applied (yuntaliş) to horses; one says bu: oğlamığ . DRG bi:r toruğka: aldım “I bought this slave for one horse' (bi-faras); also used of camels and cattle metaphorically: toruğ (the rd” seems to carry a Rasra and perhaps also a damma) at al-farasu'l-kumayt “a bay horse! Kaş. I 373 (it is not at all certain that the first word belongs here, if it does it is used metaph.; it might be a second meaning of turuğ which precedes it, but there is no obvious semantic connection with I tur-; the Türkü word above is likely to be the same); a.o. 7 338 (2 tum): Kip. xin al-humayt to:ru: Hou. 13, 4: xiv. toru: al-humayt İd. 62: xv humayt toru, Tkm. toğru Tuh. 30b. ro (the 'Tkm. spelling may be an attempt to represent the -0:- of modern "'km.). D turuğ (d-) Dev. N. fr. 1 tur- ; lit. 'standing'; 'a place to stand or stay”, "There is obvious room for confusion between this word, which only occurs certainly as below, and 1 turuk, q.v. Uyğ. vit ff. Civ. USp. 36 is a brief report that some sheep and goats had died turuğınta "in their shelter'(?): Xak. xi turuğ al-wazar zöahıva”l-marqil fi'l-cibál “a place of refuge, that is a shelter in the mountains! Kaş. 1 373; turif (sc) art tl:z "the name of a summer station of Kaşgar” 1 373; a.o. III 123 (ti:z) may contain this word; a.o. /7 152 (sigin-): KB kapuğda éte bérse oldruğ turuğ (the gate-keeper) 'must arrange places to sit and stand at the gate”, D 1 turuk (d-). Intrans. Dev. N./A. fr. 1 tur-. Morphologically this word, and not turuğ, q.v., must be the earlier form of a word meaning 'place of residence, stopping place', NC Kir, Kzx.; NW Kk. Nogay turak; SW Osm. durak (Az. Dim. f. duracağ) and SC Uzb. turok "a foot' (in the metrical sense). In the early period it means 'having stood still for some time”, hence (of water) "pure, clear, free from sediment! and, more generally, “pure”. In some languages it also meant (milk) which has stood for some time, hence “curds”, Cf. turuldur-. Türkü vırı ff. azu: turu:k suv erser opa:yrn “or if it is clear water, I will swallow it” Toyok İllr. 1-3 (ETY 1H 178): Uyğ. vurífl. Man.-A arığ turuk süzük manıstanlar içinde “in clcan, pure (Hend.) Mnznichaean monasteries” M 7 27, 35-6; a.o. do. 24, 2 (baçasız): Man. arığ turuğ (sic) TT IX 88: Bud. turuk süzük "pure" (Bodhisattva) TT VI 361; arığ turuk arhant dindarlar "pure (Hend.) arhats and devotees” Suv. 134, 14: (Xak.) xiv Muh. al-mahalla 'stopping place” tu:ra:$ Mel, 75, 15; Rif. 179: Çağ, xv ff. turak “a kind of dried milk (mast) which they put in a leather bag to store it': turak oti “a kind of wild vegetable like an artichoke (hangar) which they mix with turak', in Rümi gibitt "dill, Anethum graveolens San. 172r. 19: Xvvar. xiv turuf (sic) “clcar” (spring of water) Quib 186: Tkm. xii al-cácig 'salad of chopped cucumber and curds' tura:k (unvocalized) Hou. 16, 18: Kip. xiv turak al-magám *residence'; turakın (MS. turakni:) kanı: "where is your residence?”, tura:k (VU) a/-qanbar?s "curds” (Caferoğlu) İd. 62:  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 583 
     
   
   
        DIS: DRG : 539 Osm. xiv. ff. durak/turak 'stopping place, residence! c.i.a.p., durak/turak oti “dill” in several xvi ff. dicts. T'T.S 7 229; JI 325; III 212; IV 246. "D 2 turuk Intraris. N./A.S. fr. 2 tu:r-; 'lean, emaciated'. N.o.a.b. Türkü vii bizin sü atı: turuk “our army horses were emaciated' 7 E 39; a.o. T $-6 (ira:k): Uyğ. vrir ff. Man. kücsüz turuk kişiler *wcak ernaciated people” TT HI 87: Bud. ertipü turuk bolup "having become very thin' U 1/1 35, 21; a.o. do. 37, 2-3 (oyul-): Xak. xi turuk a/-mahzül 'emaciated' of anything Kaş. 7 380 (the following entry aruk turuk 'the name of a pass between Kaşğar and Fergana' is no doubt compounded of aruk 'exhausted' and this word). F tarka:(/talka:) "bitter, sour', and the like, lit. and metaph. No doubt a l.-w. fr. some Indo-European language and cognate to the syn. Pe. word falx. In TT İTİ, p. 27, note 39 it is pointed out that in two unpublished Uyğ. Man. fragments the phr. açığ tarka emgek and açığ terke emgek alternate, which could hardly happen if this were not a 1.-vv, Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. adruk adruk açığ tarka emgek emgendeciler 'suffering all kinds of bitter (Hend.) pains! TT VII 40, 25-6; a.o. Suv. 514, ış: Xak, xi tarka: al-higrim 'unripe fruit” an alternative form (/uga) of talka: Kaş. 1 427; talka: 'unripe fruit', the -1- is changed fr. -r- do. 427; a.o. I 179 (alar-). : ?F torku: (?torko:) “silk fabric” , one of many words with this general meaning, perhaps a l.-w. An early l.-w. in Mong. as tor£a(n) (or torka(n); Haenisch 152), also in Te, and other foreign languages, sce Doerfer 1] 884. S.i.s.m.l. vv. phonetic changes (-k-/-ğ- : -a/-1/-o[-u). Cf. barçın. Uyğ. viu ff. Bud. TT VI 390-1 (ésgü:ti:): Civ. yarım terini yarım torkuni “half a hide and half a (length of) silk fabric' USp. 5, 2; bir uluğ torku “a large (piece of) silk fabric! do. 127, 3: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. lun 'silk thread' (Giles 7,472) (?) torku Ligeti 267: Xak. xi torku: al-harir “silk” Kaş. 1 427 (prov); 3 o.o.:: KB yağız yer yaşıl torku yüzke badı “the brown earth has bound green silk over its face” 68; (a beg, if you praise him) yumşar bolur torku tef 'softens and becomes like silk” 4098; a.o. 3846 (çikne:-): xiv Muh., al-dibác “silk brocade' torxa: Mel. 67, 12; ditto ba:rçın a/-qazz “silk” torku: Rif. 167 (Rif. perhaps has the better text): Caf. xv ff. torBu 'coloured silk fabric (kumàág) which they fasten over rescripts and decrees to preserve the paper' Vel. 207 (quotn.); torğu (spelt) Jtarir-i nafis wa büfta-i tbrişami 'fine silk and woven silk fabric' (quotn.), and metaph. the silk fabric which they fasten over decrees and documents (quotn.) ; mistranslated “a letter bearing a seal” by 7a/r"-i Harawi, and mistranscribed targu and described as Pe. in the Burhan-i Qatif San. 172v. 15: Kip. xin woven fabric” (al-nasic) and the like torğa: Hou. 19, 17. D?F tarxat See tarxa:n,  D tarğa:k (?d-) sbbreviated Conc. N. (N.L) fr. tara:- lit. 'constantly combing', in practice 'a comb'. S.ia.m.lg. w. some phonetic changes; NE Tuv. dırğak, SW Az., Tkm. darak, Osm. tarak. Xak. xı tarğa:k a/-muşf “comb” Kaş. 7 467: xiv Muh. al-muşt tara:k Mel. 64, 12; Rif. 169: Çağ. xv ff. tarağ farak Vel. 167; tarağ/tarak şöna "comb”, tn Ar. mus$t San. 154v. 20 (quotn): Xwar. xiv tarğak 'comb' Quib 172; Nahc. 11, 7: Kip. xiv farak a/-muşt İd. 62. D turğa:k (d-) Conc. N. fr. 1 tur-; lit. 'constantlv standing', in practice “vatchman, sentry'. An early l-w. in Mong. as turğağ (Haenisch 155), specifically “the day watch' (the “night watch' being kebte'üil a Mong. word); also in Pe., Doerfer II 882. Survived until xvit (.A4bi7]-Cászi), but no longer in use. Xak. xı KB künün turdı turğak tünün yatğakın “he stood sentry by day and at night on the night watch' 608; (the gate-keeper must get up early and take charge of the gate) k€çe tapda turğaknı tepretmese "he must not remove(?) the sentries at dusk and dawn' 2536. D turkuğ Hap. leg., but cf. turkuğlan-, turkin-; presumably abbreviated Dev. N./A. fr. turuk- in the sense of 'being unable to move for shyness'. Xak. xı turkuğ a/-hayd” fi'Ll-amr 'shyness, or diffidence, about something", one says ol mendin turkuğ çboldi:3 şüra minni hayiy li-fi'l badü minhu "he was shy of me because of what he had done” Kaş. I 462. D tarğıl of cattle or other animals, “striped” , ?Den. N./A. fr. 1 ta:r in the sense of "with narrow (stripes)'. S.i.m.m.l.g. Xak. xı tarğıl yılkı: "any animal with black and white stripes (xutüt) like freckles (al-namig) on its back” is (called) tarğıl, this Adi. (a/-şifa) applies to all animals except horses Kaş. 7 482; (under “the Suff. -1') 'anything black and white or speckled” (al-abraqu'l-a'ram) is called tarğıl, derived fr. the V. tarıldı: “the thing was separated' (tafarraqa), as if black and white were mixed (imtazaca), and then one was separated from the other 7 15, 7: Osm. xiv, xvi targil 'spots, spotty, dappled'; in two texts TTS I 679; IV 742. F tarxa:n (?darxa:n) a title of great antiquity, prob. pre-Turkish discussed at great length (141 pages) in Doerfer 1I 879. In spite of his scepticism, Prof. Pulleyblank's theorv in "The Consonantal System of Old Chinese', Asia Major, N.s. IX, 1962, p. 91, that it represents the Hsiung-nu title of their supreme ruler, shan-yii (in Old Chinese *dán-ytcay for darxan) seems the best explanation yet of its origin. Like tégin it forms its Plur. in -t, tarxat, for *tarxa(n)t. It is likely that in this word the Runic and Uvg. k represented x,cf. the form in Kaş. In Turkish it had ceased to be the supreme title and was not even, like tégin and sad, peculiar to the royal family, but it was still a high title, and prob. carried administrative  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 584 
     
   
   
        540 DIS responsibilities, In this sense it cannot be traced in "Turkish after xt. [t became an early l.-w. in Mong. as darxan (Haenisch 32, Kore, 1676) where it meant not much more than "a person exempt from ordinary taxation”, and later merely 'artisan, craftsman'. The occurrence in Çağ. is no doubt a reborrowing fr. Mong. Türkü viri (in the list of persons to whom the inscription is addressed; my younger brothers, sons, united clan, people, in the east the şadabıt begs) yırya: tarxat buyruk begler “in the west the farxans, officials, and 5egs I S 1; otherwise only a component in P.N.s Inançu: Apa: Yarğan Tarxan / W 2; Apa: Tarxan // S 13; (gap] Taman Tarxan "Tonukuk Boyla: Bağa: Tarxan (described as buyruk “officials”) 77 S 14; the last also in T 6, Işvara: Tamğan Tarxan Ongin 4: vini ff. Man. [gap] Tarxan TT /1 6, 22: Yen. Çavuş Tun Tarxan AMaí. 3o, 3, Tarxan Sapun do. 32, 7: Uyğ. vir (1 gave the Cik people a fotok (military governor) and) işvaras tarxat anta: ançu: lad(um] "presented igtaras and tarxams to them there” Su. S 2: ix Kütluğ Bağa: Tarxan Suci 4: vini ff. Bud. (in the list of dignitaries in the first P/aak after one saytın and before three more) Kenç Turmiış Tarxan, It Tarxan, . . . Sarığ Baş Tarxan Pfahl. ro, 15-16; (in a similar list in the third Pfahl.,, after "our son, our younger brother, oursons-in-lavv”) tarxanimiz "emir Tirek Tégin, El Asmış Tégin do. 23, 14; Tarxan occurs as an element in other P.N.s in do. 23, 17-24: Xak. xı tarxa:n “a pagan word' (ism cáhili) meaning “chief” (al-amir, Kag.'s usual translation of beg) Kaş. I 436: Çağ. xv ff. tarxan (r) “a person who is exempt from all government taxes; any loot which comes into his possession in military operations is allotted to him; he can attend thc royal court without special permission; and he can commit up to nine offences without being called to account'; (2) 'the name of a tribe (or class?) of notables (uam-i tayifa az a"azim) of the ulus of Çağatay” (followed by a history of their origin) San. 155r. r. D turku:n (d-) abbreviated Intrans. Dev. NA. fr. turuk-; 'stationary; (of water) stagnant', and the like. S.i.s.m.l. with the same meaning; in SW Az., Osm., Tkm. durğun Xak. xı turku:n su:v al-má'u'l-dá'im 'permanent (i.e. stagnant) water' Kaş. 7 440. D tarkıinç (d-) Dev. N./A, fr. tarkin-; 'uneasy, unscttled, difficult, and the like. N.o.a.b.; the Uyg. quotn. comes from a very unsatisfactory fragment, see Malov's observations on it, and the word may have been misread; Radiloff read /arik(:)uc. "Türkü viu [?Türkü yeme:] bulğfak oll [temis] Oğuzu: yeme: tarkınç ol temis “he said “İthe "Türkü? are in a state of disorder and their Oğuz are unsettled” ” T 22: Uyğ. vir ff. Civ, tarkınç(?) künte "on a difficult day” Up. 46, 5. S torğay Sce torı:ğa:,  . DRĞ Dis. V. DRĞD tarik- (d-) Intrans. Den, V. fr. 1 ta:r; “to be constricted! and. the like. Survives in NC Kir, Kzx. tariki-; SW '"l'km. da:rik-; cf. tarğar-. Uyğ. viri ff. Man. [gap] terkin tarikur erti “they were quickly constricted' TT III 94: Bud. Sanskrit vyapaiti ca "and disappears! ta:rik[a:xr yeme)? 7T VHI F.s; adası tuğası kétzün tarikzun “may their dangers (Flend.) disappear and be suppressed TT X 233-4;:2.0. do. 248; (that boy's illnesses) kétip tarıkıp USp. 102b. 25; olo. U III 40, 2 (ii), Suv. 255, 3-9; 516, 22 (U I 26, 8); 597, ış ctc.: Xak. xi yér tarikti: “the place (etc.) was cramped' (gadayyaqa) Kag. 1H 115 (tarika:r, tarıkma:k): Çağ. xv fI. tarik- (-mağan, ctc.) taral- “to become narrow, shrink, etc. Vel. 166 (quotn.); tarrk- (spelt) dil-tang şudan “to be gloomy, displeased', etc. ; in Rim? daril- San. 153r. 11 (quotns.); a.o. 223v. 20: Xwar. xiv tarik- (usually of the heart) “to be constricted, grieved' Quib 172: Osm. xiv to xvr darik- (occasionally tarik-) “to be distresscd'; in several texts. 773 7 180; II 261; IV 742. D turuk- (d-) Emphatic f. of 1 tur-; “to stand still; come to a complete stop”. N.o.a.b., the supposed Çağ, V. turuk- "to abandon one's former home in panic”, R Tİ 1453, is not confirmed by any other authority. Xak. x1 ka:n turukti: aqrana” İ-dam “a vein swelled because it was blocked' (lit. 'the blood swelled") also used when pus and matter collect (ictama'a) in a wound Xaş. H 115 (turuka:r, turukma:k): a.o. 7 192, 4: Xwar. xiv turuk- “to stand, stand still” Quib 186 (common). D turkla:- (d-) lH lap. leg.; Den. V. fr. turk, Xak. xi ol yér turkla:dr 'he measured (masalia) the. piece. of land. lengthwise and breadthwise'; also used when one estimates the height (qaddara hayhal) of a horse Kaş. III 445 (turkla:r, turkla:ma:k). D tarkin- (d-) Refl. f. of tarrk-, the best evidence for the existence of this V. is the Dev. N. tarkınç: the only other cvidence is its possible occurrence in Uyğ. virt ff. Bud, U Sp. 23; this is a brief fragment of which no continuous translation is possible; some words are certainly mistranscribed; tarkanip is read in 1. 1; this might be a misreading of tarkınıp or as Malov suggests in a note, tarğarıp. D turkin- (d-) abbreviated Refl. f. of turuk- ; “to: be diffident, shy” in the sense of “to be unable to move for shyness'. Pec. to Xak.; cf. turkuğ. Xak. xı ol mendin turkındı: “he was shy (?sfalıyd) with me about something he wanted, and was inhibited (im'/ana'a) from embarking on it by shyness” (hayd”"an) Kaş. TT 241 (turkinu:r, turkinma:k); er türkündi: (sic) "the man was diffident (hayiya) about embarking on something! /7 255, 17. D tarğar- (d-) “to restrain, control, restrict", and the like; Trans. Den. V. fr. 1 ta:r. Traditionally the word is spelt tarkar- but it was in  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 585 
     
   
   
        "TRIS. fact tarğar-. N.o.a.b.; cf. tarik-. Türkü vri ff. Man. birök kentü özüpüzni (? so read) tarğarsar “if you restrain yourself” TT II 6, zo: Uy£. vin fF. Man, ((Tokharian) "you are the destroyer' (of lust and the other passions) siz tarkardaci TT 1X 24; (one of the virtues of the Wind God is that it) isigeg ergürer tarğarur “it melts and restrains the heat' Wind. 47; a.o. TT III 130 (s€:zig): Bud. Sanskrit máramjaho 'who holds off (the demon) Mara” şımnu:ğ ta:rğa:rmış TT VIII A.48, jagatparivarjaniya who must shun the (every-day) world' yérténcóke tarkarkuluk (the Suft. should be -ğuluk) do. D.28; (like a gold- or silver-smith) haradhvam malam dtmana 'remove the impurities from yourself" tarkarıplar nızvanılığ kirig öz kópólópózle:rtin do. F.47; a.o. do. H.6 (sé:zig); nızvanılarığ tarğaru umatın "because he cannot control the passions" U III 36, 6, yüz tórlüg adalarığ keterdeçi tarğardaçı erür siz “it is you who remove and suppress a hundred kinds of dangers! TT VII 40, 93; 0.0. USp. 102a. 34 (emgeklig); Hiüen-ts. 185 (karanğu:), TT X 198: Civ. (at sunset) tu:rma:kağ yastı: ta:rka:rmig ke:re:k 'you must lie down and limitstanding up” TT VIIII.22:tetrü sakınç tarğarğıl 'restrain perverse thoughts! TT 1 110; 8.0. do. 96. D 1 turğur- (d-) Caus. f. of 1 tur-, “to raise, lift, rouse', and the like. N.o.a.b.; replaced in the medieval period by turğuz- which s.i.a.m.l.g. with some phonetic changes; SW Az. durğuz-, Tkm. duruz-/turuz- (but Osm. durdur-). Türkü vr ff. (waking those who were asleep) yatığlı:ğ turğuru: “rousing those who were lying down' İrRB zo: Uyğ. vi Su. E 2 (ko:d-): viii ff. Man. ozkalı (sic) köpül turkurtt (sic) “he roused their thoughts to escape' TT III 126; a.o. do. 1X 82 (bakafiak): Bud. (Chinese) 'I have put an end to all sorrow kamağ kadğu nızvanığ uzatı yüğerü turğurup U / zo, 14-15; turğurup *raising him, trying to make him stand up” PP zo, 45,66,2; turğurdu “he kept(the boat) stationary' do. 31, 6; étdimiz turğurdımız erser “if we have organized and erected' (slaughter-houses and butchers' shops) TT IV 6, 46; küsüşüğ umunçuğ turğurur üçün “because they arouse wishes and hopes” do. V 24, 68-9; o.o. do. VIII A.26; U III 83, 19 etc.: Xak. xr ol meni: orundin (MS. orundun) turBurdi: “he made me rise (aqdmani) from my place", and one says er ta:m turgurdtr: “the man erected (banda) a wall', also a house or anything else that he sets up (rraşaba) Kaş. I1 177 (turBurur, turğurma:K), o.o. /I 198, 23 (agama); III 355, 11 (baná): (xiv Muh. aqáma durğuz- Mel. 41, II-15; tu:rBuz- Rif. 131; turdur- do. 132: Çağ. xvff. turğuz-(-mayın) ftrğurVel. 207; turğuz- Caus. f. (r) barxizándan "to raise, erect'; (2) wà düştan "to stop, restrain” San. 170v. 23 (quotn.)): Xwar. xii turgur"to detain' “AZ 24: Kip. xiv (turğuz- aqáma ” İd. 62); aqdma mina”l-qiyüm turğur-/durğurBul. 23v.: (xv the Caus. f. of qama is turğuzKav. 69, 14; aqdma turğuz- Bul. ssa. 11):   DRĞ : 541 Osm. xiv fT. durgur- (the earliest form, later usually turğur-) (1) "to stop, bring to a halt'; (2) 'to raise, rouse'; (3) 'to set up, bring into existence” ; common to xvi, sporadic later T T.S I 229; II 326; III 213; IV 247. D 2 turğur- Caus. f. of 2 tu:r-; pec. to Kaş.? Xak. xı ol atığ turğurdı: “he made the horse emaciated' (hazala'l-faras) Kaş. II 177 (turÉurur, turğurma:k), kadfu: ant: turgurup "gricf made them emaciated' 7 486, 15; kadğu: meni: turğuru:r 'grief makes me pine" (yudnini) HII 295, 8; a.0.0. Tris. DRG tori:$a: 'sky-lark'; an old animal name ending in -Éa: As such Hap. leg., but s.i.a.m.l.gr. usually as torğay, SW Az. torigay; Osm. turğay (sic); '"l'km. torğay. A L-w. in Pe., Mong. and other languages, not always for 'sky-lark'. Doerfer 11 887 may be right in suggesting that torğay, the Mong. form, is a re-borrowing fr. Pe. Xak. xı toria: al-qunbara mina'l-tayr "a sky-lark' Kaş. ITİ 174: Çağ. xv ff. torğay the bird called foyğar "sky-lark” Vel. 207 (quotn.); torğay (spelt) “a bird rather larger than a sparrow' called in Pe. gàna-sar 'hoopoe', and in Ar. hudhud ditto (quotns.); also spelt with t- ; also a P.N.; sometimes spelt torağay Sar. 172v. ır, torğay same translation do. 261r. 26 (Pe. quotn.; mistranslated; 'hoopoe' is üpgük, q.v.): Kip. xiv kızılça: torğay al-mutatwwaq mina'l-tayr 'ringdove' İd. 71; Bul. 12, 5; al-qunbara 'sky-lark' dorğay Bul ız, 8: xv qunbara torğay is entered in the margin of Tuh. 29a. 8: Osm. Xiv to xvi torğay 'sky-lark'; in several texts TTS I yor, JI 906; apart fr. Vel. the earliest note of toyğar is in xvii 7V 758. D tarığçı: N.Ag. fr. tarığ, 'cultivator, farmer”. N.o.a.b.; an early 1.-vv. in Mong. as tariyaci (Haenisch 146), also in Pe., Doerfer II 886. Uyğ. virff. Man. (Tokharian) 'farmer' tarığçı TT LX 39: Bud. (outside the city he saw) tarığçılarağ (sic) “the cultivators' (watering and cultivating the land) PP ır, 2: Xak. xı tarığçı: a/-fallah "peasant” Kaş, III 242; (in grammatical sections) tarığ al-hart, hence tarığçı: al-hürit “cultivator” 17 49, 4; the Oğuz for al-falláh say tarı:daçı: and the other Turks tarığçı: İ7 51, 22: xiv Muh. al-akkár “cultivator” ta:riBer: Mel. 56, 14; Rif. 154: Xwar. xiv tarığçı “farmer” Quib 172. D tarığla:ğ Dev. N. (Conc. N.) fr. *tarifla:Den. V. fr. tarif; “a cultivated field”, Abbreviated in the medieval period; survives in NE Sag. tarlağ R 711 856, Khak. ditto; NC Kzx. (R 111 856 only), Tob. tarlaw; NW Kaz. ditto; SW Az., Ösm. tarla, Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. buyanlığ tarığlağ (metaph.) “a field of virtue” FZüen-ts. Briefe, p. 3o, note 1870, l. 20: Xak. xı tarığla:ğ a/-mazra"a “a cultivated field” Kaş. I 496; a.o. I soo, 19: KB tarığlağ erür dunyà 'the world is a field' 1393; 9.0. 4733, 5248: Xwar. xiv tarlağ “a field' Qutb 172: Kom. xiv ditto tarlov CCI, CCG; Gr.:  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 586 
     
   
   
      542 TRIS. DRĞ Kip. xir "land ploughed (al-ardu'l-mahriba) in preparation for sowing' tarla: ou. 9, 10. D tarığlığ P.N./A. fr. tarığ, n.o.a.b, Xak. xı tarığlığ y€:r ard düt zar" “land which has been seeded'; also a/-huri "a granary' (i.e. a place for grain) Kaş. 1 496; tarığlığ ev bayt dü hinta 'a building for holding wheat'; tarığlığ (?yér omitted) al-huri I sor, 3: KB uruğluğ tarığlığ bedükler 'notables of good family on both sides' 4496 (cf. 4476). D tarığlık A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. tarif; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı tarığlık a/-/uri “a granary” Kaş. I 503: xın(?) Zt. tarığlık tep aymış ajunni rasül, tarığlıkta katlan tarı edgüluk “he Prophet said "this world is a field"; labour in the field and cultivate goodness' 191-2. D turuğla:ğ (d-) Dev. N./A. fr. *turujfla:-, Den. V. fr. turu£; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı turuğla:ğ (y&amp;r is inserted above the line and is prob. not part of the original text) rmatodi'u'l-iqàma "a stopping place, place of residence” Kaş. 7 496, turuğla:ğ same translation I şoo, 20: xın(?) At. turuğlağ “place of residence” 310. D turukluk A.N, fr. turuk, n.o.a.b, Xak. xı turukluk a/-huzál 'emaciation! Kaş. I 503; 505, 26. D turkaru: (d-) 'continuously, uninterruptedly'; v. G. is prob. right in suggesting in TT VIII, p. 22, note A33 that this is a crasis of *turkgaru:, turk with the Directive Suff. lit. lengthwise'. N.o.a.b., but a ].-w. in Mong. as forkaru (sic; Kot. 1890, Haltod 427). Türkü viii ff. Man. (the king) turkaru 'continuously' (inspires the people to do good deeds) TT II 10, 89: Uy, viri ff. Man.-A (may our hearts and minds be) turkaru 'continuously' (free from care) M I 29, 29: Man. TT III 27 (mupgul): Bud. evirdeçi turkaru nom tllgenin 'continuously turning the wheel of the lav” U 7 17, 1-2; kayu kişi uzun turkaru ölütçi bolur “vhoever is a longstanding and habitual murderer' 171 4, 10-11; 8.0. do. 54, 12; turka:ru: TT VIII A.33, O.6-8(TT VI 6z-s): o.o. TT VI 74 (örlet-), U IV 34, 52-3 (türtün-): Civ. turkaru TT I 152. E turkuru occurs several times in Uyg. vırı ff. Bud. in Hend. vv. arkuru, q.v. As arkuru means 'crosswise', this is no doubt merely a mis-spelling or mistranscription of turkaru "lengthwise'. : Tris. V. DRGD turkuglan- (d-) Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. turku£g. Xak. xı ol méndin (sic?) turkuğlandi: (MS. -4:g-) "he was inhibited (imtara'a) from embarking on some action, and was shy and blushing (rhtarama sea” htaşama) because of me” Kaş. II 272 (turkuğlanu:r, turkuğlanma:k; MS. in both places tar-). D turukla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. 2 turuk. Cf. 2 turğur-. Xak, kı ol atığ turukla:dı: istahzala”l-faras “hc considered that the horse (ctc.) was lean' Keg. 7/7 337; (turukla:r, turukla:ma:k). D tarığlan- Hap. leg.; Refl, Den. V. fr. tarif; in a grammatical section; n.m.e. Xak. xı er tarığlandı: “the man owned cultivable land” (Zar?) Kaş. Iİ 269, 7. D turuklan- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of turukla:-, Xak. xı ol bu: atığ turuklandt: “he reckoned (adda) that this horse was emaciated” (mahzül), also used of other things than horses Kaş. II 265 (turuklanu:r, turuklanma:k). D turuğsa:- (d-) Desid. Den. V. fr. turuğ, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı ol munda: turuğsa:dı: “he wished to stay (tamanná'l-igáma) here” Kaş. HI 333 (turuğsa:r, turuğsa:ma:k), tirig erse: turuğsa:dı: "he wished to remain alive' (an yakun hayya(n)) do. 333, 9. Mon. DRG terk an Adv., 'quickly, very soon”, and the like. Survives only(?) in NE Kar. L. R III 1068 and T. (Kow. 263); SW 'Tkm. Cf. terkin. Uyğ. viui ff. Man. ayı(?) terkie (for Dim. f. *terkkifie) tuyunup 'very(?) quickly acquiring insight! TT III 120: Bud. terk bütürgeyler "they will very soon achieve” Suv. 448, 1; 0.0. TT VIII D.1 (tavra:-); U IH 22, 1 (iti) etc. (tavrak): Civ. (one must) terkkie *quickly' (embrace the well disposed and) terk 'quickly' (get rid of the bad-tempered) TT VII 17, 22-3: Xak. xı one says terk kel isri" fi'l-hudür "come quickly'; also used of anything about which one orders rapid action (al-isra"), one says terk kil “be quick” Kaş. 7 350: K B (if one does not treat his disease) kişi terk ölür “a man quickly dies” 157; özün terk keçer “you soon pass away' (from this dreamlike world) 231; 0.0, 361, 745, 2511, 3533, €tc.: xi(?) At. (this world) terk kaçar 'swiftly disappears” 222: Xwar. xiv terk 'quickly' Qutb 175; Nahc. 32, 5; 153, 1; 299, 11; Kom. xiv, 'quickly, immediately" terk CCI; Gr. (tek tek 'frequently' do. might be the same word): Kip. (xui Hou. 42, 12; see terkle:-): xiv terk al-'acala 'speed, hurry! İd. 38; ditto derk Bul. 6, 2. türk originally a N. meaning 'the culminating point of maturity" (of a fruit, human being, etc.), but more often used as an Adj. meaning (of a fruit) “ust fully ripe'; (of a human being) “in the prime of life, young, and vigorous'. It has been suggested that this word is identical with the ethnonym Türk and really means “strong” in a general sense. The latest exposition of this theory is in Doerfer II 888, an article of over rr pages giving a history of the ethnonym and unfortunately containing several errors, ""he case against the theory, which is based on the facts that the original form of the ethnonym was "Türkü and that türk is never used in the generalized sense of “strong”, is in Studies, pp. 84 fl; see also Clauson, “The concept of "strength" in “Turkish”, Nemeth Armağam, pp. 93 ff., Ankara, 1962. Survives 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 587 
     
   
   
      T REM EUCH so E ER CR DIS. DRG 643 only(?)) n NC Kir. türk “(of a sheep) fat, in prime condition', Yud. 783. Uyğ. vin ff. (Man. TT III 65-6 has been restored to read türk burxanlarta ken éntipiz "you have descended (to earth) after the strong Prophets', but the only certain letter in türk is the ü, and the reading is very improbable; some other word like tört 'four' is likelier): Bud. (that man Sena's wife, named Rágagáyini) türk ylğit erdi "vvas a young woman in the prime of life" U III Si, 3; (she said to her brotherin-law) sen yeme türk yigit sen “you too are in the prime of life” do. 82, 15; o.o. of türk yigit applied to young women U IV 48, 89, TT X 475—erk türk “independence and the prime of life' is one of the good things of life associated with other good things like ağı: barım “treasures and property', and ed tavar “movables and livestock' in several passages U II yo, 15; TT IV 4, 4 (damaged) and esp. Tis. 19a. 4; 20a. 5; 21a. 1 etc.: Xak. xı türk a Particle (/tarf) relating to time (a/-rcaqf), it is the culminating point of maturity of any sort of fruit (toasf idrüh hull şay” mina'l-timàr); hence one says türk üzüm ö:di: “the time when grapes become fully ripe' (zcaqt. tawassut'l-'inàb. fi yan'ihi); and one says türk kuya:ş ó:di: wagt tawassut “the time (when the sun is) at the zenith'; and one says türk yiğit şabb tawassata şabübahu "a young man in the prime of his youth' Kaş. I 353 (this para. folows a long para. on Türk as an ethnonym; there is no cross-reference between the two): xı(?) Tef. (Warika said) türk bolsam erdüm senin birle Sázilik kil$am erdi 'if I] was in the prime of life, I would have gone with you to fight for Islam” 319. Dis. DRG tére:k (?d-) 'poplar'. S.i.a.m.l.g, with this meaning, with -é- in those languages which distinguish between € and e; in SW Tkm. derek (Az. and Osm. use kavak, which is not an old word, in this sense); in NW Kumyk, Nog. only(?) it means “tree” in general, as in Kip. Xak. xı tére:k al-hawr müna”l-şacar "the poplar-tree'! Kaş. 1 412; a.o. I 387 (tizig): Çağ. xv ff. terek (with -k”) havak agat Vel. 168 (quotn.); térek diraxt-i sapidár “the white poplar' Sar. 193r. 11 (quotns. and corrections of previous authors): X war. xiv terek 'tree' Qutb 175: Kom. xiv ditto CCI; Gr. 242 (quotns.): Kip. xiv terek a/-şacara 'tree' İd. 38; ditto dérek Bul. 3, 11: xv muflag al-şacar *trees in general” terekle:r, “one tree' terek Kas, 58, 16; şacara terek Tuh. 21a. 5; naxla “palm tree' terek do. 36b. 4 (this change of meaning may have been due to a supposed connection vv. Pe. drraxt 'tree"). D té:rig (d-) Dev. N. (Conc. N.) fr. t6:r-, n.o.a.b. Cf. térin, térne:k, Xak. xı alp çeriğde: bilge: té:rigde: translated “the (martial qualities of a) warrior (are tested) in battle; the (intellectual capacity of a) counsellor in the popular assembly! (al-mahfil) Kaş. 1 388, 17; anıp yarma:k té:rigi: kó:r "look at his accumulation of dirhams' (cam"ahu li-dirham) II 41, 12; n.m.e.: xiv Afuh.(?) al-xarác "head tax” te:riğ Rif. 146 (only). D tire:k (d-) Dev. N. (Conc. N.) fr. tire:-; 'support, prop, column', and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g.; in SW Az., Osm. direk, Tkm. di:reg. A L-w. in Pe. and other languages, see Doerfer 11 997. UyB. viii ff. Man. in an early ix Middle Persian Manichaean text published in F. W. K. Müller, Ein. Doppelblatt aus einem manichdischen Hymnenbuch (Mahrnámag), A.K.P.A.W., t9r3, tirek appears in a list of official titles, fairly high after totok, çık(?) totok, çiğşi but before él öğesi and sapun öğe 9, 28; it means presumably 'support (of the realm)', cf. the syn. Moslem title 'imádu'l-datla: Bud. in a similar list in the first Pfahl 12, 19-20 three persons described as tirek occur in a more modest position among junior functionaries: (Xak.) xırı(?) Tef. tirek '(tent-)pole; pillar (of a house)” 299 (mis-spelt térek): xiv Muh. (among nautical terms) a/-murdi “a boat-pole, punt-pole' ti:re:k Mel. 62, 12; Rif. 161; (among architectural terms) atátu'l-bayt "house furnishings' (sic?) ew tireki: 176 (only): Çağ. xv ff. (tirek; after térek) (2) and metaph. sutün-i xána “the pillars of a house” San. 193r. 17: Xwar. xır direk 'pillar' "AZ 55: Kom. xiv “column” tirek CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv. tirek al-'imád “tent-pole, pillar, prop', etc. /[d. 38, direk al-'amüd ditto; already mentioned under tdo. 48. D tirig (d-) Dev. N./A. fr. *tir-; 'living, alive; life". S.i.a.m.lg. w. minor phonetic variations; NE 'Tuv. diriğ, SW Az., Osm. diri; Tkm. di:ri:. Türkü viri bunça: yeme: tiriği: küp boltaçı: erti: “and as many of them as survived vvould have become female slaves” 7 N 9: vitr ff. Man, tirig özüğ aş içkü Çomission in MS.5 çby taking?» living creatures for food and drink' Chuas. 55-6: Uyğ. vini [? Kar]luk tiriği: barıp (? so read) Türgeşke: k[irti:?] “those of the Karluk who survived went and joined(?) the Türgeş Su. W 1: vii ff. Bud. tiriğ bolmak “to stay alive” (in antithesis to ölmek “to die”) TT V 26, 110; mapa yeme tirig öz negülük ol *what use is life to me?” U III 41, 4 (i); bu yértincüde tirig esen erür siz 'you will be alive and well in this world' TT X 47-8; a.o. do. 504: O. Kar. ix. ff. Köni: Tirig P.N.(?) Mal. 6, 1: Xak. xı tirig al-hayy mina'l-hayawán kullihà “life of any living creature” Kaş. I 386; (another sutfix is - $ (al-káfu'l-rakika) as in the word for) al-hayy tirig derived fr. the word tiri:ldi: hayyà “to live” 7 14, 21; tl:ri:g (sic) esen bolsa: “if a man is alive and in good health” 7 öz, 5; o.o. III 257, 19; 333 (turuğSa:-): K B (You created all things; they perish but) sen ök sen tiriğ "You live' 14; (You created countless) tirig "living beings” zr, 0.0. 237, 378, 5633: xın(?) At. (God brings) blügdin üriğ ham tirigdin ölüğ "the living from the dead, and the dead from the living” 17; 0.0. 94, 96; Tef. tirig/tirüg “living” 3oz: xiv. Rbg. (Eve said) tiriğdin yaratildim “I was created out of a living creature” R 7/7 1368: 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 588 
     
   
   
      544 DIS. DRG Muh. al-hayy tiri (in Türkistan) Mel, 7, 17; 45, 45 54, 5; Rif. 77, 79, 131, sr, diri: ("in our country”) 7, 16; 79: Çağ. xv tf. tirl diri zinda ma'nádsta. "living! Vel. 185; tirik (^with -K') do. 186 (quotn.); tirig zinda San. 193v. 1 (quotns.): Xwar. xın(?) tirig (?dirig) barğu “live booty” (as opposed to ölüğ barğu 'lifeless booty") Oğ. 171, 278: xiv. tirig/tiri "living" Qut 180; MN 286; Nahc. 438, 9: Kom. xiv "living, alive tiri CCI, CCG; Gr. 245 (quotns): Kip. xui al-hayy (opposite to “dead” ölüt) tiri: (misspelt teri:) Hou. 26, 4: xiv tiri: al-hayy; also pronounced with d- /d. 38: xv “from” tiri tirilTuh. 84a. s: Osm. xiv ff. diri noted in various phr. TTS 7 211; İİ 304; İl 198; IV 228. D 1 terke: Dat. of te:r, q.v., 'for wages' occurs in several phr.; in Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. TT VII D.33-4 after Sanskrit bArtá "hired for wages' terke: a:lilmig comes the phr. bhrtakádd iva “as if from a hired labourer' terke:tin teg, which suggests that it could also be used as a Common N. SF 2 terke: See tarka:. PU tergi: “a table”, more particularly “a portable table on which food is carried in”. N.o.a.b.; as -ğiİ: and -ki: are not Dev. Suff.s in Xak., and as there is no real semantic connection this can hardly be der. fr. té:r-, and its etymology and pronunciation remain obscure. Xak. xı térgi: al-má' ida "a (portable) table” Kaş. 7 429 (prov.); o.o. I 194 (urul-); H sa, 2: KB (the Chamberlain) liv ag térgi kirse kórü 1dsa kóz 'when the table of food (Hend.) is brought in he must examıne it closely! 2549; begi térgisi “his master's table” 2861: xiv. Rbğ. terği (unvocalized) "a portable table” R III 1069 (quotns.); Muh.(?) al-má'ida te:rği: tabak Rif. 170 (only): Kom. xiv “an offering" tirki CCG; Gr. (qó:b): Kip. xiv al-cafna “a large dish or tray' dérgi: Jd. 48: Osm. xv dergi “table” TTS I 210: III 197. D tergü: (d-) Dev. N. (Conc. N.) fr. tér- ; 'saddle straps' and more specifically 'straps with which packages, dead game, etc. can be fastened to the saddle'. Survives in this and some extended meanings in NE Sag. teriğ R HI 1066, Koib. te:rge 1070, Tel, tergi 1071, Khak. térgi, Tuv. dergi; SW Osm. terki, xx Anat. dergi "a rake' SDD 420; terki “the hind quarters of a horse' (sic?) 1345; a l.-w. in Pe. and other languages, see Doerfer 1I 893. Xak. xı tergü: a/-sınıdt 'saddle-straps' Kaş. I 428: xiv. Muh. al-fitrák ditto tergü: Mel. 71, 12; derği: Rif. 175: Kip. xiu al-fitráq (sic) terğü: Hou. 14, 3: XIV derğü: al-tasámit İP l-sarc 'straps on a saddie” İd. 48: Osm. xvi Pe. màáx(i "pack-horse” terki ati TTS IV 750; xvin terki (spelt) in Rimi, taht-i zin "the underpart of a saddle'; terki bağı fitrak San. 155r. 10. D tiréük (d-) abbreviated Conc. N. fr. tire:- ; “pillar, support”, syn. vv, tirek. Survives only (2) in SC Uzb. tirgak; Ll-w. in Pe., Doerfer I1 998. Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A él tirgük 'support of the realm'; part of a P.N. 41 7 27, 8: Bud. çın kértü nomluğ kapığnın limi tirğüki erti "he was the beam (Chinese l.-w.) and pillar of the gate of true (Hend.) doctrine" Hüen-ts. 1920-1: Civ. (the water supervisors shall not enter his vineyard and or) asğu üzüm ışığ tirğük yeme almazun “take the cords or poles on which the vines hang' USp. 88, 46-7; in the Sino-Uy£. list of lunar mansions, Z'T' VII, p. sz, l. s, tirgek (sic) yultuz corresponds to the 22nd mansion, 8 stars in Gemini, see Clauson, “Early "Turkish Astronomical Terms”, U 47, vol. 35, 1963, p. 354; this text was prob. transcribed fr. an original in Arabic script, and tirğük may have been intended: Xak. xı K.B bular ol haqiqat bu din tirgüki 'thesc (the Moslem divines) are truly the support of our faith” 4345. D türğe:k (d-) Conc. N. fr. tür-, lit. “constantly rolling up', in practice 'a package, parcel'. Survives with the same meaning in several NE languages as türgek/türgók R 7/77 1572; Tuv. dürgek. Xak. xı türgek al-rizma “a package” Kaş, İl 289; o.o. İT 14 (çığ-): 21 (ci&amp;- ; mis-spelt tergek). ?F terken a royal title slightly inferior to xafan, often but not always applied to females, and in that case more or less equivalent to *queen', discussed at length in Doerfer II 889. If he is right in saying that it existed in Kitah, it is possible, but still improbable, that it is a representation alternative to tarxa:n of the earlier word which lies behind that title, N.o.a.b.; note that it has no connection with terğen in AMalov, 'Uigurskie rukopisnye dokumenty ckspeditsii. S. F. Oldenburga' (Zapiski Instituta vostokovedeniya SSSR, 1), Leningrad, 1932, document s, 3 terğen ud *wagon ox', which is Mong. fergen “vagon”, Uyğ. viri ff, Bud. (the lay sister) Tepriken tégin siliğ terken kunçuy teprim ('pious prince, pure queen, consort princess") PfaAl. 6, 4: O. Kir. ix ff. Urunu: Külüg Tok Bógü: Terkepe: (Dat.) P.N. Mal. 1o, 6: Xak. xt terken :xijábu'l-xàgániya "the royal mode of address to someone who is king of a province' (malik "ala uslaya), it is not addressed except to one who is on the throne as xdqdn or king (Çala sadri'I-xàágániya wa'l-malik); its meaning is "O thou who art obeyed” (yd muta") Ka. 1441; kelse: aban terkenim “if my xágán comes' 7 442, 5; H 209, 20 (translated “ifthe king (a/-ma/ik) helps us by coming"); terken katun ku:tt:pa: teğür mendin koşuğ "present a poem from me to Her Majesty the Queen” (al-xátimi'L-malika) I 376, 11: KB (in the panegyric of the patron) ay terken kuti “Your Mafesty” 109, 115, 121: XIV. Mul. (al-malik. xa:ka:n); al-maliha "the queen' terke:mn Mel. so, 4; terge:n Rif. 145 (so spelt). D térgin (d-) Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. tér-; “gathered together, a concentration', and the like. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vi ff. Bud. (then those sons and daughters of the virtuous will have 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 589 
     
   
   
         DIS. V. DRG- ) 545 completed and acquired an enormous) buyanlığ yükmekig (so read) buyanlığ tér£inig 'heap and concentration of merit” Suv. 155, t 1-12: Xak. xi terğin su:v al-má'u'l-mustanqa' * water collected (in a tank)”, tergin sü: a/-cundu"l-muctama" "an army which has been brought together, concentrated'; and anything “brought together' is called tergin Kaş. 1 443; yadılmağay terginim “my concentration will not be scattered' 7 442, 7; II 209, 22 (mis-spelt türgünüm , and with tarılmağay, one or other of these must be a scribal error; neither translation literal). D terkin Instr. f. of terk, and syn. w. it; *quickly, very soon', and the like. N.o.a.b. Türkü vri ff. Man. M I 6, ro (tu:); 7, 15 (butarla:-): Uyğ. vii ff. Man. TT III 94 (tarik-): Bud. terkin tavrak 'hurriedly' U 7 31, 3; terkin 'quickly' U II zz, 21; İTİ 12, 14; TT X 423, 511: Xak. xi one says terkin kel asr" fi'l-hudür “come quickly'; its origin is terk a/-sur"a 'speed, rapidity' Kaş. 1 441: KB terkin 'quickly, very soon' is common 1127, 1331, 1580, 2398, etc.: xil(?) 4t. (contact with the wicked) seni terkin isiz kılığlığ ktlur 'quickly makes you an evil-doer' 380; Tef. terkin 'quickly' 300: Xwar. xtit ditto “Ali zz: xıv ditto Qutb 175: Kip. xiii Hou. 42, 12 (terkle:-). D türgün (d-) Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. tür-; lit. *rolled up together', but with extended meanings. Survives in NE Bar. türgün 'time' (as in üç türgün “three times” R /II 1563; and for.“a wife's parents and kindred, her parental home” in NC Tara türgün do.; Kir. törkün, Kzx. tórkin; NW Kk., Nog. ditto. Uyğ. viii ff. Man.-A (first they created the ten-fold heavens) bir türgün 'as a single coherent whole' M I 14, 7: Xak. xi türgün macma"ır?l-'agira wa baytu'l-umm twa'l-àb “a tribal community ; the house of one's parents'; one says kız türgünke: (or ?türgünipe:, spelt türgünike: in MS.) keldi: 'the girl came to her parents! house”, (in a verse) étilgemet türgünim şa/uha can"f “my community will be put in order” Kaş. 1 441; same verse /T 209 zı (but é:tilgemet yasluhu). : D terğe:ş (d-) Dev. N. fr. *térge:- Den. V. fr. térig; the basic meaning must be something like *crowding together'. "The Uyğ. word seems to belong here; it is difficult to see what else it could be. N.o.a.b.; cf. térges-. Uyğ. viii ff. Civ. (in a list of misfortunes overtaking the impious) kişini totağan tergis bolur "he disparages other people and becomes obstructive(? TT VII 25, 5-6; a.o.? do. 17, 6-7 (conjecture; éltig-): Xak. xı terğe:ş a/-tamánu' fi"l-sayr mina'l-zahima 'delay on a journey caused by crowds'; su:v térge:gl: mustanga'w'l-má' "an excess accumulation of water in a river (coming) from its tributaries' (al-a"dad) Kaş. I 460. VU tirkiş N.o.a.b. in the phr. arkış tirkis, prob. only a jingle with arkis, for which there B641125  is a good etymology. Türkü vir 7 S 8, I1 N 6: Uyğ. viii ff. Bud, U III 29, 2-3 etc. (arkig). Dis. V. DRGD terkle:- Den. V. fr. terk, “to hurry' (Trans. and Intrans.), and the like. N.o.a.b. "Türkü vrirff. er terkleyü: keli:ir “a man comes hurriedly' JrkB 7: Man. terkleyü keltiler M 7 ış, 17: Xak. xı ol ı:şığ terkle:di: “he hurried (accala) the affair' Kaş. III 445 (terkle:r, terkle:me:k): xiv Muh. asra'a “to hasten' (Trans. and Intrans. derkleMel. 22, 9; terkle- Rif. 103; al-musta'cil *urgency, urgent' terklemek 1:53 (terklig 56, 1): Xwar. xim terkleyü “in haste' “47 48: Kom. xiv 'quickly, immediately! terklep CCI; Gr.: (Kip. xit 'accala terkle:t- (sic), also called é:w-, terce: (for *terkce:), terkin Hou. 42, 12; the V. in Hou. is in the Imperat. which explains why Adv.s are included in the translation). D tirgür- (d-) Caus. f. of *tir-; 'to revive, bring to live”, N.o.a.b.; in the medieval period displaced by tirğüz- which s.is.m.l. in NE with some phonetic changes; Tuv. dirgiz-; NC Kir. tirgiz- (and tirilt-); other languages use tirilt-; SW Az., Osm. dirilt-; Tkm. di:relt-. Türkü vir ölteçi: bodunığ tirgürü: iğit(t)im 'I revived and fed the dying people” 7 E 29, II E 23: viii ff. Man. (if we have said) tirğürser tepr[i tirgürür] ölürser tepri ólürür 'if someone brings to life it is God who brings to life, and if someone kills it is God who kills" Chuas. I 26 (mistranscribed tirgüdser):; Uyğ. vii ff. Man.-A (and all the magicians together) nen tirğürmneğey 'will on no account bring to life” (or be able to give a son or daughter) M 7 rs, 9-10: Bud. Suv. 610, 18 (alapad-): Xak. xr tepri: ölüğ tirgürdi: “God raised the dead man to life” (ağyd”/-mayyit) Kaş. II 179 (tirğürür, tirğürme:k), o.o. in grammatical examples // 200, 17; 324, 21; İİİ 424, 16: xii?) Ar. ölüğlerni tirğüzmek (sic) asün apar “it is easy (Pe, l.-w.) for him to raise the dead” zo (one MS. only tirgümek); Tef. tirğüz- ditto 302: Çağ. xvíff. tirküz(-£üci; “vith -K- and -&amp;-") dirildeci (sic) Vel. 186; tirğüz- (spelt) sinda hardan "to make alive” San. 191r. 10 (quotns.); (tirilt- Caus. f. of tiril-, sında kardan, also called tirgüzdo. 9): Xwar. xiv tirgür- ditto Qutö 179: Kom. xiv “to raise the dead” tirgiz- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv. tirğür- (-$- unvocalized; one MS. tirgiz-) a"aşa "to bring to life”, also spelt with d- 7d. 38: xv muhiy tirgizgen Tuh. 32b. 1; fstahyd tirğiz- do. 55a. s: Osm. xiv to xvi (only) dirgür- (occasionally dirgir-) 'to bring alive'; common 77TS I 210; II 393; III 197; IV 228. D terğeş- (d-) Recip. f. of *térge:-, see törğe:ş: n.o.a.b. Xak. xi tevey térgesdi: tagattarati'l-ibil “the camels (etc.) walked in a line", also used of anything when they stand (qdma) one behind the other in a line (mutaqattira(n)) Kaş. II 206 (törgeşü:r,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 590 
     
   
   
     546 terğeşine:k), kalin eren térgesü:r (unvocalized) translated "he has now mustered (abba) a large army and advanced against me with it” I149,4; Basmil Çumul térgesü:r “the Basmil and Qumul tribes have assembled (ictama'at) to attack us” /459,9; alpla:r kamug tergeşü:r “the warriors are drawn up in line(yugtaff) for battle' 171 65, 15: Çağ. xv ff. terkeş- (so spelt) radif-i yak digar şudan tva qatar az "aqab ham-raftan “to follow one another, to walk in a line, one behind the other” San. 192r. 13. Tris. DRG D tire:ğü: (d-) Conc. N. fr. tire:- ; “column, support', and the like. Survives in NE Bar. tirew R III 1365; NC Kir, tirö, Kzx. tirew. Cf. tirek, tir&amp;ük. Xak. xı tire:$ü: 'anything on which something rests (ya "famid 'alayhi) and which supports (ya'mid) something', for example “a pillar' (a/-sariya) and the like Kaş. İ 447. D terekliğ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. térek. Xak. xı (after téreklik) tca şalbuhu "and the owner of (a poplar plantation)” with -8, i.e. téreklig Kaş. I 509. D téreklik Hap. leg.?; A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. térek, Xak. xı téreklik manbitu'l-hawr "a plantation of poplars” Kaş. 7 509. . D tiriğlik (d-) A.N. fr. tirig; “life, existence', and the like. S.i.m.m.l., usually abbreviated to tirilik or tirlik; SW Az. dirilik; Osm. dirlik; Tkm. di:rilik, Xak. xı KB tiriglik tilese if a man wishes for life” (ie. for his reputation to outlive him) 183; yiğitlik kaçar ol tiriğlik uçar 'youth passes and life flies away! 231; o.o. 60, 232, 364, 949, etc.: xın(?) Tef. tiriğlik “life” 302: xIV Rbg. tiriğlikim “my life" R III 1369: Muh. al-hayawa (sic) “life” di:riglik Mel. 45, 6; ti:ri:glik Rif. 138: Çağ. xv tf. tiriğlik zindagi "life" San. 193v. 6: Xwar. xiv tiriglik/tirHk “life” Qutb 180; tiriglik Nahc. 289, 7: Kom. xıv “life” tirilik CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv tirlik al-hayát; also spelt with d- İd, 38; ditto dirlik Bul. 5, ır: Osm. xiv ff. dirlik “life”, c..8.p. TTS I 211; Il 305; İİİ 199; IV 230; xiv dirilik 7 210. D *terkkifia: See terk. D térigse:k Hap. leg.; Desid. Den. N./A. fr. t6:riğ. Xak. xı (in a list of Desid. Den. N.s) and one says fi']-kalimati'l-mumála, “in a word containing é(?)' ol tava:r térigse:k ol "he is fond of accumulating (cam') property! Kaş. Il 55, 21. (Tris. V. DRGD tirigle:- (d-) Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. tirig, syn. vv. tirgür-. The word is quite clear in the facsimile, but the spelling is so odd that a miswriting of tirgürgeli must be suspected. Uyğ. vii ff. Man.-A (like the lord Moon God) ölüğüğ tiriglü:gli *who brings the dead to life” M I 24, 27-8. : DIS.V. DRGD türgeklen- liap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. türge:k. Xak. xi to:n türğeklendi: "thc garment was wrapped up in a package' (şadda ... fi l-ruzma ; sic in MS., ?read şudda . . . fi'l-rizma) Kaş. II 551 (türgeklenü:r, türgeklenme:k). D türgünlen- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. türgün. Xak. xi ol bu: evni: türgünlendi: *he reckoned this house to be one of the houses of his people and stopped at it' (min cumla bayt ahlihi fa-nazala bihi) Kaş. II 278 (türğünlenü:r, türğünlenme:k). Dis. DRL D tarla:/tarla:ğ See tarığla:ğ. D turla:k “emaciated” and the like. Semantically connected w. 2 tu:r- but not immediately der. fr. it. N.o.a.b. Xak. x1 turla:k *emaciated' (a/-nahif) of any animal; and if a man grows up a weakling (şubba”l-insün bi'l-du'f) he is called turla:k Kaş. 7 467: Kip. xiv turlak a/-mustahqarı”l-ğarib mina”l-insün “a contemptable destitute man” İ4. 62: Osm. xvi turlak (spelt) in Rmi, camdn amrad nazo-xwasta "a young and beardless youth'; also used for a young and beardless dervish (abdal qalandar) San. 172v. 28 (the latter meaning seems to lie behind Sami turlak “young, undisciplined (man); unbroken (horse)'; Red. torlak ditto). D terlik (?d-) A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. te:r; 'something which absorbs sweat', with various specific applications. S.i.m.m.1. usually as terlik, but NE Tuv. derlik; NC Kir. terdik; SW 'Tkm. derlik; normally 'saddle-felt'; the (fairly recent) Osm. meaning 'slipper' evolved from “a light inner shoe worn under heavy boots to absorb thesweat'; 1.-vv, in Pe. and other languages, Doerfer 11 894. Xak. xı terlik "the felt (al-mirgaha) which is put under the saddlecloth (a/-realya) Kaş. 1 476: Çağ. xv ff. térlik San. 57r. 27 (edrim): Osm. xiv to xv1 derlik, mainly noted in Pe. dicts., "a thin transparent garment' (usually feminine) T'TS II 286; III 187; IV 213. S tirlik See tiriglik. VU(?D) tórlüg (tórlóg; ?d-) “sort, kind'. Survives in SW Osm. türlü (earlier dürlü), 'Tkm. dürli; the consistent spellings with -Öin TT VIII, however, suggest that this was the original vowel; the sound change ö — ü is common in SW. Etymology obscure; unlikely to be a P.N./A. in -lüğ, there is no semantic connection with tö:r. It has no connection with the modern word tür, 'shape, form, exterior, appearance, pattern, type”, which occurs in several languages in all groups except SW, and seems to be a corruption of the syn. Mong. word düri (Kot. 1935, Haltod 482). Türkü vı ff. 5 törlüğ monçukun (sic) "of the five kinds of jewels' Toy. 2 (ETY II 57): Man. tört yeğirmi törlüğ baş “the fourteen kinds of wounds' Chuas, 52; 8.0.0.; bu muntağ tórlüg “all these kinds! (of  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 591 
     
   
   
        DIS. V. DRLD téril- (d-) Pass. f. of t€:r-, dangers) T'T 11 6, 22: Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-A böş tórlügin belgülüg bolur “they become visible in five kinds' M I 24, 8-9: Bud. Sanskrit dötfrayena “by two supports' 2 tórlóg ta:ya:ğ üze: TT VIII A.4; dafavidhena "by ten sorts' on tórlóg üze: (ise:) D.31; törlüğ do. F.10; O.3-5; tórlük do. K.4, 9; and many o.: Civ. tórlüg do. L.49; (the larch tree's branches quiver) min tórlügin “in a thousand ways! TT I 165; tokuz tórlüg ésiklernip “of the nine kinds of thresholds! VII ız, 4; and many o.o.: Xak. xi törlüğ 'ibüra "an anwá' "an expression for the kinds of a thing'; hence one says kaç törlüğ ne:p aşndf mina'l-şay” “several kinds of things”, and kaç tórlüg sö:z aydım quitu anwá' mina”l-kalam “1 said several things” Kaş. I 476; I 296 (1glel-); 402 (tümen), tórlüg çeçek anwá'u-zahr “all kinds of flovvers” I 119, 4; 11 122, 22: KB bu törlüğ cécek “these kinds of flowers' 96; o.o. 238, 497, 969, etc.: xı((?) KBVP ne tórlug 31; bu tórlüg ss: xın(?) At. ne törlüğ arığsız "whatever kind of impurity! i11; kamuğ tórlüg işte “in all kinds of work' rış, Tef. dórliftórlüg/tórlü ditto r19, 319: Çağ. xv ff. törlük ('with -k”) bir dürlü ve bir nası" Vel. 207; törlük naw' wa qism “sort, kind” San. 173r. 1 (quotn.): Xwar. xiu tórlüg/ törlü ditto ' Ali 12: xiv ditto Qutb 190; MN 262: Kip. xiv törlü: nam" wa darb min şay) "the kind, or sort, of a thing”, one says törlü: yemiş ketürdi "he brought various kinds (mutanatwwi'a) of fruit İd. 38. Dis. V. DRLtaral-/tarıl Preliminary Note. Kaş. lists Pass. f.s of ta:r-, tara:-, and tari:- mhich are easily distinguished, although the first and the third are homobhonous, So far as modern languages are concerned there are two complicating factors; first some NE, NC, and NW languages have a Sec. f., tara- of ta:r- so that in some of them taral- 1: the Pass. f. of tar:- and tara:-, and some languages have a Den. V. fr. 1 ta:r in al-/-il instead of tarik-. NC Kir., Kzx. taril-; SW Osm. daral-; Tkm. da:ral-. There is little, if any, evidence of the survival of 2 taril-. D taral- (?d-) Pass. f. of tara:-; “to be combed'. Xak. xı sac taraldı: “the hair was combed” (muşifa) Kaş. II 126 (taralur, taralma:k): Çağ. xv ff. taral- şüna zə “to be combed” San. 152v. 22. D 1 taril- ; Pass. f. of ta:r- , “to be dispeisedi. etc. Xak. xı tarıldı: ne: “the thing was dispersed' (tafarraqa) Kaş, II 126 (followed by 2 taril-); (animals in the spring) ógür ahp tarıldı: “form separate (mutafarriga) herds” HT 6, 3: 0.0. I 15, g (tarğıl), TT 209, 22(?; térgin): Xwar. xiv taril- “to be dispersed" Qutb 172. D 2 taril- Pass. f. of tarı:- ; “to be cultivated”, etc. Xak. xı tarığ tarıldı: “the seed (etc.) was sown' (zuri'a) Kaş. II 126 (tarıilur, tarilma:k): Çağ. xv ff. tarıl- afsánda sudan tuxm  — 647 “tö be collected; assembled'. S.i.a.m.l.g.; in SW Az, Osm. deril-, lacking in ''km. Türkü vitri (those who were in the town went to the mountains and those in the mountains came down and) térilip yetmiş er bolmış when they assembled they became seventy' 7 E rz, II E 11; xanı: süsi: terilmiş “their xan and army assembled' T 28; $ o.o.: virt ff. IrkB 28 (uyur): Man. térilti 'assembled' TT 27 8, 58: Uyğ. vin [Ta]yBan kólte: tériltim 'I concentrated (my troops) at Lake (Talyğan” Su. S 3; terilip do. S ız: vini ff. Man.-A (all the magicians) térilip M I ış, 9; térilü kuvranu keltiler "they assembled (Hend.) and came” do. 35, 19: Man. tüzün bilge kişiler terilelim *let us good wise men assemble' M TT ro, 2 (ii): Bud. (soo merchants) terilti PP 23, r, terilürler TT VI 334: Civ. sa:rığ terilür “the bile accumulates” TT VIII 1.23: Xak. xı bodu:n térildi: “the people assembled” (ictama'a) ; and one says yarma:k térildi: "the dirhams (etc.) were amassed' (ictama'at) Kaş. II 127 (terilür, térilme:k; follows tiril-, but feril-); bu:la:r (sic) bo:dun ol tütçi: terilğe:n “these people are constantly assembling about something; also used of anything which is in the habit of coming together and assembling (al-imziwá* va'lictimá') I 521; erkek tişi: t€:rildi: (sic) “the males and females have come together' (ictama'a) III 6, 2: KB (if one scatters the enemy) yana térlümez 'he cannot reassemble' 2396; (merchants) ajun tegzinürler terilgü tilep "travel the world seeking an accumulation (of wealth)' 4420; 0.0. 1057 (ota:çı:), 1393 (2 ot): xnl (?) Tef. teril- “to assemble” 3oo: Çağ. xv ff. térll- (spelt) (ida sudan wa bar-(ida şudan "to be gathered, collected, assembled” San. 190v. 14 (quotns.): X war. xir déril- "to assemble' 'A/; 36: Osm. xiv ft. deril- “to assemble'; c.i.a.p. T TS I 196; II 284; III 185; IV 211. D tirel- (d-) Pass. f. of tire:- , “to be propped up, supported', etc. S.i.m.m.l.g. (Xak. xı KB (if one reckons up all these numerous benefits) uzun bolğa söz tép ti:re:ldi (Fergana MS.; tirildi Cairo; tidildi Vienna) tilim “my tongue vvould be silenced, 1 “it vvould be too long a story”” 4428, the Vienna MS. seems to have the best text): Çağ. xv ff. tirelnaşb şudan wa tir şudan wa rüst şudan “to be erected, propped up, straightened' San. 191 v. 14 (quotns.). D tiril- (d-) Pass. f. of *tir-; properly “to be resuscitated, brought to life', but sometimes more vaguely 'to be alive, live'; cf. yaga:-. S.i.a.m.l.g.; NE Tuv. diril-; SW Az., Osm. diril-; 'l'km. di:rel-. Türkü vim üküş ölteci: anta tirilti: “many dying men tvere resuscitated there” 77 E 31: virt ff. (an old woman left behind in a deserted camp found a greasy spoon and by licking it) tiri:Imi:s ölümde: ozmkg 'was resuscitated and escaped death" JrkB 13: (UyĞ. there is no clear occurrence; the words transcribed £fr//all seem to be téril- -): Xak. xı ólüg tirildi: toa badr (of seed) to be sown' Sar. 153r. 8. hayiya'l-mayyit "the dead man came to life"  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 592 
     
   
   
     548 Kaş. II 127 (tirilür, tirilme:k); tirig ai-havy is derived fr. tirlildi: (sic) haytya İ 14, 21; bu: er ol edéü: sa:vin tirilğe:n “this man constantly lives (ya'75) with a good reputation' l1 523; 524, 10; (in the spring) kuş kurt kamuğ tirildi: "all the birds and insects (?, al-wahs) come to life again” 771 6, 3: yalguk mepgü: tirilme:s “man does not live (ya'ij) for ever' III 65, 1; a.o.o. in grammatical sections: KI tirilsüni terken kutr mir kutun *may Your Majesty live to enjoy a thousand favours of heaven” 121; ógi kópli tirlür “their thoughts and minds are brought to life” 603; (if water quenches fire) yana tirlümez “it cannot be revived' 2396: xır(?) At. tiril "live" (virtuously) 365, 415; o.o. 239 (ulam), 364; Tef. dirii-[tiril- "to come to life; to live” 118, 302: XIv Muh. "aşa diril- Mel. 28, 13: di:rilRif. 112: Çağ. xv ff. tiril- (with -1-") zinda şudan sea. zindagi kardan “to live, come alive' San. 190v. 18 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv tiril- “to live' Qutb 180; MN 70, etc.: Kom. xiv 'to be brought to life, be alive' tiril- CCI, CCG; Gr. 245 (quotns.): Kip. xti "Aşa tiril- Hou. az, 8: xiv tiril- "Aşa, strictly speaking (haq/qatuhu) "to be brought to life” (uğyiya), the -1being a Pass. Suff.; also pronounced with dld. 38: xv hayát (yagamak and) tirilmek (in margin in second hand dirilmek) Tu. 12b. 7; 'ája tiril- do. 25b. 6; from tiri tiril- do. 84a. 5: Osm. xiv ff. diril- 'to live, spend one's life'; c.i.a.p. TT I 210; I1 304; III 198; IV 228. D turul- (d-) Pass. f. of 1 tur-; as 1 tur- is Intrans., this should properly be used only Impersonally as SW Osm. durul- is; but in the passages below it seems to mean lit. 'to be brought to a stop”, see turuldur-. Uyğ. viti ff. Bud. Suc. 290, 16 (amril-): Xak. xi er rgtin turuldx: 'the man was tired of (or disgusted by; sa'ima) the task'; also used when a man is revolted by food Kaş. I7 126 (turulur, turulma:k). D türül- (d-) Pass. f. of tür-; 'to be rolled up, wrapped up”, and the like. S.i.m.m.l.g.; NE Tuv. dürül-; SW Osm. dürül-; Tkm. dörül-. Xak. xı bitig türüldi: “the scroll (etc.) was rolled up” (tuteiya) Kaş. 11.127 (türülür, türülme:k): xırı(?) Tef. türül- “to be wrapped up, covered up” 319: Xwar. xiv türül- (of a scroll) “to be rolled up” Qutb 186. D terle:- (?d-) Den. V. fr. te:r, “to sweat. S.i.a.m.l.g.; SW 'Tkm. derle-, but Az., Osm. terle-. Cf. terit-. Xak. xı at terle:di: “the horse sweated' (ragaka . . . “ariq), and one says ol atın terle:di: farcana farasahu wa naqgá atara”l"araq wa'l-rawt “anhu “he currycombed his horse and vviped off the traces of sweat and dung' Kaş. III 293 (terle:r, terle:me:k): xın(?) Tef. terle- “to sweat' 300: Çağ. xv ff. terle- "araq kardan ditto San. 192r. 14 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv térle- ditto Quib 178: Kom. ditto terle- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv terle'ariqa İd. 38; ditto derle- Bul. 64r.: xv ditto terle- Tul. 25b. 7; fr. ter terle- do. 84a. $: Osm. xiv to xvi derle- ditto; common T TS II 286; IV 213. DİS. V. DRLD tirilt- See tirgür-. D terlet- (?d-) Caus. f. of terle:- , s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı ol atın terletti: "he made his horse Sweat'; and one says 0l ntığ terletti: (misvocalized zürletti:) ahassa farasahu xa amara bi-farcánihi "he ordered that his horse should be curry-combed' (Hend.) Kaş. /T 342 (terletü:r, terletme:k): Çağ. xv if. térletCaus. f.; ba-"araq áwurdan “to put into a sweat San. 192r. 28. D terlen- (?d-) Hap. leg.?; Refl. f. of terle:-. Xak, xi at terlendi: "the horse (etc.) sweated' ('ariga) Kaş. Il 242 (terlenü:r, terlenme:k). D türlün- (d-) Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of türül-. Xak. xı türlündi: ne:p “the thing was rolled up or wrapped up” (rnfawà tva'nzared) Kaş. II 243 (türlünu:r, türlünme:k; verse). ' Tris. DRL VUD turalığ P.N./A. fr. 1 tura:; n.o.a.b. in the Hend. tinli$ turalığ. Türkü vii ff. Man. böş tórlüg tınlığığ turalığığ “the five kinds of living creatures' (lit. “those which have breath (Hend.)' ?) C/tuas. 86; 0.0. 91, 110, 146. D törülüğ P.N./A. fr. törü, n.o.a.b. Uyf. vini ff. Man.-A M 1 26, 14-15 (aplağ): Bud. Vayşalı atlığ nomluğ törülüğ balikda 'in the city called Vai$ali, where the (true) doctrine and rules are followed' TT VI o7: Civ. (joy and happiness have come to you) sana törülüğ törü tlegdi?) “correct rules (of life?) have reached you” 77 7 89: Xak. xi KB (listen to the words of) törülüğ kisi, tórülüg kişi boldı él tör başı “the man who (administers) the traditional laws; he is the head of the scat of honour in the realm' 2196: Kip. xv onurattib. "organizer” (glossed in a second hand şafıbıl-"ada “master of customary (law)') tóreli Tu. 33a. 2. ı "ris. V. DRLD turuldur- (d-) Caus. f. of turul-; “to bring to a hált' and the like. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vit ff. Bud. (the eighth aspect of faith is that it is called) kópüllüg suvuğ turulturdaçı süzdeci ertini “the jewel which halts and filters the streams of thought' TT V 26, 97; alku alp turuldurğuluk turuldurdaçı uluğ: Vacırapanı xanları “the great Vairapini" kings who put a stop to all difficulties which ought to be put a stop to” USp. 59, 20-1; (PU) tosınlarığ turuldurup 'bringing to a halt unruly men' (?; assuming a Sec. f. of tosun) Suv. 73, 1-2; (PU) tosin erenlerig turuldur-. daçı tepriler “the gods who bring to a halt unruly men' do. 187, 7-8. Dis. DRM D tarım N.S.A, fr. ta:r- , lit. “a single act of dispersing'; Hap. leg. as a common 'N. but familiar as the name of a river. (VU) Usmi: is perhaps the pre-'l'urkish name for it. Xak. xı tarım “branches (a'dád) of a river which:  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 593 
     
   
   
     ode aa  DIS flows into swamps and quicksands'; Tarım the name of a place on the frontier of Uyğur near Kuga: called Tarim (síc); a river flows through it, the river is called by the same name Kaş. 1 396: (VU) Usmı: Tarım the name of a large river which flows from the Moslem country to Uygur and there sinks into the sand 7 130. : S (D) terim a royal title or form of address, a [.-w. in Pe., see Doerfer II 1000. In spite of his scepticism, Pelliot's suggestion that this is a crasis of teprim, q.v., is the most plausible explanation of this word. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. terim component in a feminine P.N. Suv. 137, 18 (azğa:n): Civ. kiz kelürgüçi iki terim 'the two ladies who brought the bride” Fam. Arch. 154-5: Xak. xı terim a form of address (xifáb) to princes (al-tahàkin) and anyone who is a descendant (min awlàd) of Afrasiyab, royal ladies (a/-xazoğtin) and othe:s, great and small; this word is not applied to anyone except the children of Xaküni kings; if they are grown up (Aaburiz) altun terim is used in the title of royal ladies (fi laqabi'l-nisa'i'l-xawáatin) Kaş. 1 396: Caf. (?) xv ff. térem (so spelt) a name for great ladies (xzedtün-i buzurg); (Pe. quotn.); the author of the Farhang-i Cihdngiri included this word in his dict. with a quotn. Sar. 192r. 24. torum 'a camel colt', the next age-group beyond a botu:, q.v.; the agc indicated varies in different languages. Survives in NE Tuv. dorum 'a one-year old'; SW Osm. torun (sic) "a two-ear old”, Tkm. to:rum “betvvcen six months and a year", See Shcherbak, p. 106. Xak. xı torum (b”/-işöd, “vith back vowels) ibn maxád 'a camel colt', Feminine tisi: torum Xaş. I 396: xiv Mu. al-faşil "a camel colt just weaned' to:rum/(o:rum Mel, 7, 15; Rif. 79; al-hiqq properly "a three-year old”, but the only word for 'colt' under 'camels' to:ru:m 7o, 9; 172: Çağ. xvíff. torum “a two-year old camel colt'; a one-year old is called köşek and köşeleK and a three-year taylak; and it (? taylak) is also a stallion (asb-i nar) which they allow to run with the mares and breed from San. 173r. 9; ao. 306v. 18 (kógek): (Kip. xiv (a camel) alladi lahu sanatdün 'two years old” torumçax Bul. 7,5) D turum (d-) N.S.A. fr. 1 tur-; lit. “a single act of standing'. S.i.s.m.l. with various extended meanings, e.g. SW Osm., Tkm. durum “position, attitude'. Uyğ. virt ff. Man. turum Ara seems to mean “completely, or “immediately'; (anger) turum ara (destroys fully matured doctrine and humble thoughts) TT JI iy, 70: Bud. (let the king offer incense . . .) ol tütsügnür tütüni turum ara kök kalık içinde yadılıp “the smoke of that incense will immediately pervade the atmosphere and” Suv. 424, 12-14; 2.0. 425, 21: Xak. xı turum qadr qàmati'l-racul "the height of a man standing upright'; hence one says bi:r er turum: Su:v “vater (etc.) the depth of the height of a man” Kaş. I 396: (xiv Muh. (under 'weavers' . DRM 549 implements) si/silatu'l-fazl "the length(?) of thread” (PU) tu:ru:m Mel. 6o, 7; Rif. 159 may belong here). turma: Preliminary note. This zcord occurs in Üyğ. in contexts which suggest that it means "an offering', prob. of food. İn this sense it seems to be an İntrans. Dev. N. fr. 1 tur- in the sense of something thich is set before a god, Elsewhere it means 'radish' both in Turkish and Pe. and other languages, see Doerfer 11 807. It survives in one or two NW languages, elsezchere it has been displaced by Pe. turp. Doerfer is prob. right in suggesting. that, in viet of the resemblance between the two svords and the impossibility of finding a Turkish etymology for the word in this sense, it is a İ.-ıc. : D 1 turma: Dev. N. fr. 1 tur-, lit. 'standing'; “an offering”. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. TT VII 16 is a fragment of a text prescribing the offerings to be made to various divine personages. Ll. 7-16 listing the offerings to be made to the planets is headed aşları erser “as for their foods'; these offerings are vegetables and dairy products. Ll. 17ff. listing similar offerings to be made to the yağşas is headed yakşalarnın turmaları erser; (and after preaching this szira) yavğan turma [gap] egsügsiz(?) yétgürgeli 'offering plain offerings without stint(?)” (to the four divine mahdrdfds—i.e. the yakşas) Suv. 26, 19-20; tórt maharac tenrilerke turma ótüneyin “1 will offer offerings to the four divine mahürdfdr do. 27, 12-13. ?F 2 turma: “radish". Xak. xr turma: a/-fucl (MS. ficl) 'radish'; hence al-cazar “carrot” is called sarığ turma: that is 'yellow radish', and the people of Arğu: call it &amp;é:zri: taken fr. the Pe. word for 'carrot', gazar, substituting front vowels (rakkakühu); the Oğuz call it (VU) gesür, also taken from the Persians; when they mingled with the Persians they forgot some of their language and used Persian instead (various examples follow) Kaş. 1 431; a.o. 1 366 (küvi)): Kip. xii a/-fucl (açı: (PU) erene:: also called) turmia: Hou.8, 13: (xiv turp ("with -p”) al-fucl İd. 38). D tarmut Hap. leg. but see tarmutlığ, tarmutlan-, Active Dev. N. fr. tarma:with -a:- elided; lit. 'something which branches out”. Xak. xr tarmut ficácu'l-cabal wa tala"uhu 'ravines and stream-beds in the mountains'; hence one says ta:ğ tarmut keçtim “1 crossed ravines and stream-beds in the mountains” Kaş. 7 451. D tarma:k Conc. N. fr. tarma:- , as that V. is a Den. V. fr. tarım the basic meaning must be 'something which branches out in several directions', but, perhaps because of its resemblance to tirpak, it sometimes means “clavv”, instead of “a set of claws, a talon” which would etymologically be more correct. Survives in NE Sor tarbak *leather glove'; Tel, tarmak 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 594 
     
   
   
      550 DIS. 'rake'; Khak. tarbax 'forked, branching'; 'Tuv. dirbak “nail, claw'; SE "Türki tarmak "branch, offshot; harrow, grapnel”, NC Kir., Kzx. tarmak 'branch'; tırmak 'claw'; SC Uzb. tarmok 'branch, handle; net”, NW Kk., Knz., Nog. tarmak 'branch (of a river, railway line, etc.); section (of industry); SW Az. dirmif; Osm. tirmik; 'Tkm. dirmik 'rake'. Xak. xı tarmak: a/-mixlab "a talon”, and a kind of plant (a/-nabt) is called karğa: tarma:kı: ( ?x/c, 'crow's foot', MS. karga:k) Kaş. I 467: Kom. xiv “(finger) nail” tırmak CCI; Gr. D türme:k (d-) Conc. N. fr. tür-; 'a stuffed meat ball”, lit. something wrapped up”. Pec. to Xak. Xak. xi türme:k al-zumaward "a stuffed meat ball” Kaş. I 477; o.o. I 396 (tikim); 27 ro6 (tikiş-): KB "kişi utruki türmek alma tégü (at meals) "do not reach out and take a meat ball in front of someone elsc' 4598. VU?D tarmaz “a gherkin”, in / 343 spelt turmuz. Unless this is a l.-w. cognate to 2 turma: it is prob. the Neg. Aor. Participle of ta:r-, lit. “not branching', i.c. compact, as a gherkin is. Xak. xt tarmaz a/-qafad 'gherkin' Kaş. 1 457; a.o. 1 343 (karç). Dis. V. DRMD tarma:- Den. V. fr. tarim; lit. 'to branch out in various directions, take the shape of a talon', and the like, in practice 'to scratch' (i.e. “to use a talon”) and in some modern languages “to rake up”, S.i.s.m.L. vv, the same phonetic changes as tarma:k, q.v.; the SW sound change -a- 2 -1-, prob. under the influence of tirpak, is reflected in the vocalization of some of the der. f.s in the MS. of Kaş. Xak. xı ol anın yü:zin tarmn:dı: xadaşahu “he scratched his face” Kaş. 11 364, r (in a grammatical section); n.m.e.: Çağ. xv ff. tırma(-p, etc.) sar- eta mulhkam eyle- “to wrap up, make fast”, and panca urub tirmala- "to claw' Vel. 187 (quotns.), tirma- (spelt) çang wa nüxun zadan "to scrath with the nails or claws', in Rümi tirmala-; and, metaph., xaragidan “to scratch, lacerate” San. 192r. 28 (quotns.): Kip. xv xarbaşa “to scratch' tirna- (sic) and tirma- added above in the samir 2) hand Tuh. 15a. 1. D tarmat- Hap. leg.?; Caus. f. of tarma:-. Xak. xı ol anıp yü:zin tarmattı: axdaşa teachahu "he had his face scratched! Kaş. II 349 (tarmatu:r, tarmatma:k); a.o. 364, 8. D tarmal- Hap. leg.?; Pass. f. of tarma:-. Xak. xi anın ylü:zi: tarmaldı: "his face was scratched' (xudişa) Kaş. 11 230 (tarmalu:r, tarmalma:k; twice vocalized tirmal-). D tarmaş- Recip. f. of tarma:-; s.i.s.m.l. vv. some phonetic changes. Xak. xi ola:r ikki: tarmaşdı: “they scratched. one another” (faxddaşa) Kaş. II 207 (tarmaşu:r, tarmaşma:k, the 14” everywhere carries both fatha and kasra): Çağ. xv ff. (tırman- (-di) DRM tırmaş- Vel. 187); tirman-/tirmaş- öd gang tea nöxürt çasbidan tva ba-bdld raftan "to climb up holding on by the claws or nails” Sar. 192v. 17 (quotns.) Tris. DRM D tarmutluğ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. tarmut. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. kök kizil yürüp yalinlar tarmutluğ saçılu ünerler “blue, red, and white flames spring up and scatter and branch out in every direction! TM IV 253, 38. turumta:y oddly shaped; perhaps a l-w.; a kind of small hawk, perhaps 'the merlin (Falco aescalon)' but prob. also used for other similar birds. S.i.s.m.l. in SE, NC, SC, NW; an early ].-w. in Mong. turimtay (Haenisch is), and Pe., see Doerfer II 896 where its exact identity is discussed at length. Cf. çavlı:, etc. Xak. xi turumta:y ism fd"ir min sibá'i'l-fayr şayüd "the name of a predatory bird used for hawking'; and a man is given the name or title (yusammà . . . wa yulaqqab) turumta:y Kaş. HI 243; altı: Türümta:yımnı: "he took (my slave named) T"urumta:y from me” II 110, 6: Kip. xiv. al-bawetaga. tva'l-lu'lu'a turuntay (sic), Bul. 11, 15: xv calamá ditto Tuh. 11b. 3 (it does not scem possible to find a precise meaning for the three Ar. words; all three are used in İd. 86 to translate keygenek which is not an early word). D torumluğ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. torum. Xak. xi torumluğ er "a man who owns a camel colt' (ibn maxdd) Kaş. I 498. Tris. V. DRMD tarmutlan- İlap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. tarmut; cf. tarmaklan-. Xak. xi su:v tarmutlandı: gára'I-mà' dü a"dad wa xulc "the water. formed. (separate) branches and channels! Keş. I] 270 (tarmutlanu:r, tarmutlanma:k; these two misvocalized tur . . .). D tarmaklan- Ilap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. tarma:k; cf. tarmutlan- Xak. x: bo:y tarmaklandı: nazala"l-hilal toa! l-gabáyil ka'l-maxdlib fi'l-mafáza min kull cánib "the clans (Hend.) settled in the desert (fanning out) like claws in every direction'; and one says bala: tarmaklandı: "the nestling grew claws' (maxálrb) ; and 8u:v tarmaklandı: “the water formed channels' (xulc) nh II 274 (tarmaklanu:r, tarmaklanma:k). D türmeklen- (d-) Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. türmek. Xak. xı ötmek türmeklendi: uttuxida mina'l-xubzi'l-xumáward “meat balls were made out of the bread' Kaş. İT 276 (türmeklenü:r, türmeklenme:k). D tarımla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. tarım. Xak. xı ol ógüzni: tarımla:dı: "he crossed the river island by island ('abara . . . cazirata(n) fa-cazirata(n) from one channel (xalic) to another), that is he avoided its quicksand (teyhürahu) Kaş. HI 341 (tarimla:r, tarimla:ma:k). 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 595 
     
   
   
       DIS. DRN 551 D turumla:- (d-) Den. V. fr. turum; survives with the same meaning in NE Şor turumna-; Tel. turumda- R //7/ 1456. Xak. xı ol su:vuğ turumla:dı: qaddara 'umqa'I-màá' bi-qömatihi “he measured the depth of the water by his own height” Kaş. LI 341 (turumla:r, turumla:ma:k). D tarımsın- Tap. leg.; Refl. Simulative Den. V. fr. a N.S.A. fr. tarı:-. Xak. xr ol tarığ tarımsındı: “he pretended to sow the seed (yazra'u'l-zar'), but did not actually sow it” Kaş. II 259 (tarimsinu:r, tarımsınma:k). D terimsin- (d-) Hap. leg.; Refl. Simulative Den. V. fr. térim N.S.A. fr. téir-, not noted in the early period but fairly common in SW Osm. until recently as derim see TTS 7 196, etc. Xak. xi ol yarma:k terimsindi: "he pretended to accumulate (yacma") dirhams” Kaş. II 261, 1 (in a grammatical section); n.m.e. D turumsın- (d-) Hap. leg.; Refl. Simulative Den. V. fr. turum. Xak. xi ol yoka:ru: turumsındı: "he pretended to stand ” up (vagin), but did not actually do so” Kaş: 17 260, ro (in a grammatical section), n.m.e. : Dis. DRN D terin (d-) Intrans. Dev. N. fr. té:r-; "an assembly, gathering'. N.o.a.b. in the Hend. térin kuvra:ğ “a (religious) community”. Cf. térig, térne:k. Türkü virrff. Man. üküş tér(in] kuvrağ “many communities! M III zı, 13: Uy£. viri ff. Man. t[ér]inlfer]i kuvrağHarlı TT LX 97: Bud. bu yerdeki tórt törlüğ térin kuvrağı birle 'together with their four kinds of community on this earth" TT VI o9; o.o. USp. 103, zo, Hüen-ts. 20802083; Suv. 2, 13. teri (d-) 'deep'; s.ia.m.lg. except SE, usually with -e- in the second syllable; SW Az., Osm. derin, Tkm. deri:n, Uyğ. vı ff. Bud. (the Bodhisattva named) Sumér terinp “as deep as Mount Sumeru (is high) TT VI 360; (all the) teripde terim “very profound' (interpretations of the doctrine) Suv. 202, 21-2; nızvanılığ kirleri terip üçün “because the stains caused by their passions are deep” Hüen-ts. 104; o.o. Kuan. 177 (andik-); TT V 22, 18 etc. (tütrüm): Civ. terip küduğ “a deep well' TT S I102; er kuti (read quvvvvatı) belin suv kuti (read quvvvvatı) terin “the strength of a man lies in (his povver to cause) terror; the strength of water lies in its depth” VII 42, 4; 8.0. do. 30, 11 (éltlg-): Xak. xt terinp tepiz al-bahru'l-afyahu'l-'amig “the wide, deep sea" Kaş. III 370 (and see Oğuz): xır1(?) Tef. terip “deep” 300: xiv Muh.(?) al-'amiq derip (unvocalized) Rif. 153 (only): Çağ. xv ff. térip 'amiq San. 193v. 11 (quotns.): Oğuz xı (after Xak.) and the Oğuz (call) anything 'copious and deep” (ğazir 'amiq) terip; one says terip u:ri: “a deep ravine” and terip bilge: "a/ım hakim £gaziru'l-'ilm toa'l-hühma "a profound scholar, a very wise man” Kaş. III 370: Xwar. xur deren/de:re:n “deep” ' Ali 57: xın(?) terip (? d-) müren 'a deep river' (Mong. l.-w.) Og. 175: Kom. xıv 'deep' terep (sic) CCG; Gr.: Kip. xmi al-'amig (opposite to “the opposite of deer şa, Tkm. sik) terin /Ton. 7, r: (xiv under 'dwith -d-'; dü:den a/-"amiq İd. 48 looks like an error for derü:n): xv 'amiq (PU yaran, S1pil; in margin) terin Tuh. 25a. rr, teren (sic) 'amig do. 74a. 1. VU tirin Hap. leg.?; onomatopoeic. Xak. xi one says kula:kım tirin etti: “my ear buzzed' (tannat); it is an onomatopoeic (ğıRdya) for any similar sound; hence one says yassın tirin ettürdi: “he twanged (arbada) his bow'; it is an onomatopoeic for the noise made by the string Kaş. İİİ 370. tura: (?d-) 'crane' (bird) — S.i.a.m.l.g., usually turna, “occasionally tirna/torna, NE Tuv. durya:, SW Az, Tkm. durna, Osm. turna, See Doerfer III 1181. Türkü vir ff. turfiya: (sic) küş “a crane' (settled on its nest) JrkB 61: Xak. xı turna: al-kurki 'crane' Kaş. III 239: KB 74 (kökiş), 5377: xiv. Muh. al-kurki turna: Mel. 73, 1; tu:rna: Rif. 175: Çağ. xv ff. turna “a bird of blue colour which has a long neck and puts its tail feathers over its head', in Pe. Rulang 'crane' San. 173r. 5 (quotn.): Kom. xiv 'crane' turna CCI, Gr.: Kip. xi al-kurki turna: Hou. 10, $: XIV ditto Id. 63; Bul. 11, 9: xv ditto Kas. 62, 13; Tuh. 31a. r: Osm. xvi ff. turna “crane”, common T'TS IV 762. tirpak (7d-) “a (human or animal) nail, or claw'. Survives in NE several languages tırğak: Tuv. dırğak, SE Türki tirnak; SC Uzb. tirnok, NW most languages tirnak; SW Az., Tkm. dirnak; Osm. tirnak, The word was confused with tarma:k and some modern words listed there may belong here. See Doerfer 111 1182. Türkü vri ff. IrkB 44 (trtin-): Uyğ. viirff. Man.-A M I 17, zo (1 u:ç): Bud. kalti tirpak üzeki toprak teg “like earth under the nails” TT VI 336-9: Civ. tiprak (si) biçğu kün “days for cutting the nails! TT VII 32, 1; a.o.o.: Xak. xı tirpak al-zufr "nail, claw! Kaş. III 382; o.o. I 134 (ürün), 177 (adır-): KB 2377 (iliş-): xın(?) Tef. tirnak (sic) 'nail' 303: xiv Muh. al-zufr dirna:k Mel. 47, 9; Rif. 141; (under 'horses") hàfirhá "their hooves” tırna:k 69, 14; ditto (MS. tina:k) 171: Çağ. xv ff. tırnağ/tırnak nüxun 'claw' San. 193r. 25: Xwar. xiv tirnak *finger-nail' Qutb 193: Kip. xir (under “birds”) a/-mixlab 'claw' dirğa:k (sic, ? representing dirpa:k) Hou. yo, 15; al-zufr tirnak do. 20, 15: xiv tirnak al-zufr İd. 62: xv ditto Kav. ör, s, Tuh. 24a. 13; maxdlib tirnak do. 33b. 9: Osm. xiv to xvi dirnak (once xiv tırnak) “nail, claw'; in several texts TT S I 202; IJ 894; III 191; IV 218. D térne:k (d-) abbreviated Dev. N. fr. térin-; “an assembly or gathering'. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. dernek. Cf. térig, térin. Xak. xı térne:k mahfalu'l-qatom 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 596 
     
   
   
     DIS 552 . DRN  Yctama"ü"l-tadbir “a gathering of R tribe (when) they mect for discussions! Kaş. I 477: KB 4829 (tara:-): Osm. xiv ff. dernek/dérnek 'assembly, gathering'; c.i.a.p. T TS I 197; II 287, H1 187; IV 214. D ternek (d-) pec. to Kag.; apparently the right spelling in spite of its unusual position in the book (see çönek), if so, abbreviated Dev. N. (connoting habitual action) fr. térin-, originally *téringek, The main entry is unvocalized, the others fully vocalized; the spelling terpü:k is no doubt due to the supposed connection with farmüg. Xak, xı terpek al-nazz mina'[-má' *water oozing from the ground', in Ar. farrteq (MS. tarnquq, properly tarnüq "river slime”), the qàf was changed to kàáf, wa hadihi muwáfiqa “this is a concurrent meaning” Kaş. /7 291; terpü:k (sic) suvı: içelim “let us drink water oozing from the ground' (má'a'l-nazz) 11 6, 2; ünmiş uluğ terpek üze: köp kaşakı: translated (freely) amurr fi acimmá' ta halfö” hatira nabata 'alà mà istancala minc”l-ard "1 shall go into the luxuriant vegetation and bulrushes which grow in abundance on the swampy ground' 77 328, 17. Dis. V. DRND taran- ( ?d-) Refl. f. of tara:- ;'to comb one's own (hair)! and the like. S.i.m.m.]l. Xak. xi ol saçın tarandı: “he combed his. own (tmtagata) hair without help from anyone else” Kaş. II 145 (tara:nur (sic), taranma:k). D tarin- Refl. f. of tarı:-, n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vit ff. Civ. bodun tarinip yer “the land which the people cultivate for themselves' USp. 77, 6: Xak. xı er tarığ tarındı: "the man pretended to cultivate the land'(yahrutu'l-hart); also used when he cultivates it by himself Kaş, Il 145 (tarinu:r, tatinma:k); a.o. İT 159, 4. D tarun- (d-) Refl. f. of taru:- ; usually "to feel oneself restricted; to be annoyed', and the like, Survives only(?) in NE most dialects tarın- R III] 848. Uyf. vii ff. Civ. ig ağriğta yek icgek tarınsar “if one feels restricted by(?) demons (Hend.) in an illness” TT I 207-8: Xak. xı er ışta: buşti: tarundı: (MS. tarındt:) the man was annoyed (dacira) about this affair and felt restricted” (tadayyaqa) Kaş. II 145 (tarumur (si), tarunma:k). : D terin- (d-) Refl. f. of tér-. Survives only (2) in NE Tel. R 7/7 1066; Khak. (Türkü vut ff. Man. yaruknupy tözi yıltızı térnegüli tepri yériperü barsar “vhen the origin and root of the light (of the country of all the Prophets) assembles and goes to the country of the gods! Chuas. 5-7; terneğüli is the reading of two MSS. and seems to be the Ger. of térne:- a Den. V. fr. terin): Xak. xı «ob ó:ipe: yemiş terindi: "he gathered fruit (etc.) by himself (imfarada bi-cam") and for himself” Kaş. II 146 (térinü;r, térinme:k). D tiren- (d-) Rcfl. f. of tire:-; lit. "to support oneself (on something)', with extended meanings like 'to brace oneself against (something); to resist”. S.i.s.m.l.; SW Az., Osm, diren-, 'lTkm. di:ren-. Xak. xı er rstin. tirendi: (MS. rerindi:) "the man. refrained from (imtana'a ..... min; taking) the action'; also for refraining from anything; and one says er ta:mka: tirendi: 'the man İcant (ittaka'a) against the wall' (etc.) Kaş. I 145 (tire:mnür (sic), tirenme:k); (if misfortune comes . . .) anca: apar tirengil 'and so brace yourself against it 777 233, 16: KB tiren arka berme "brace yourself and do not turn your back” (on . the enemy) 2378; (whatever 1 took firm hold of) 01 anra tirendi élettl tatığ "he equally supported himself on and deprived of attraction” 3885; (the body is a dangerous enemy) tilekince 1dma katığlan tiren "do not give in to its desires, be firm and brace yourself” 3638: (xiv Muh.(?) a/-ra"da ti:re:nmek (MS. -mak) Rif. 125 (only); a/-ra"da "to thunder, threaten! must be an error, perhaps for al-rikza "to be firm, resolute”): Kom. xiv “to be erected' tiren- CCG; Gr. D 1 turun- (d-) Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of 1 tur-, the. two entries, both self-contained, arc separated from one another by four others but seem to represent the same V. Xak. xı ol mapa: turundı: qáwamani “he faced me”, also used qd qöma bi-muqdbilatihi wa 'áradahu for "to confront, oppose' Kaş. I[ 145 (turunu:r, turunma:k): er ışta: turundi: “the man hesitated about (or delayed; Zatoaqqafa) the work' 77 146 (turunu:r, turunma:k). D 2 turun- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of 2 tu:r-. Xak. xı at turundi: "the horse (etc) was emaciated” (huz/la) Kaş. II 146 (turunu:r, tucunma:k). D türün- (d-) Rcfl. f. of tür- , survives as “to roll up' (Intrans.) only(?) in NC Kir., Kzx. Xak. xi er ö:z bitigin türündi: 'the man rolled up (fateá) his own scroll, and did it by himself' (infarada bihi) Kaş. II vaş (türünü:r, türünme:k): xır(?) Tef. türün- “to roll up” (the heavens like a scroll) 319. D terne:-(?) See terin-. Tris. DRN D terinçek “cloak, wrapper', or the like, prob. Dev, N. fr. térin- in sense of something that one gathers round oneself. Oğuz xı terinçek al-rayta "a thin linen garment! Kaş, I so: xiv Muli.(?) (under *women's garments?) a/-milhafa 'cloak, wrapper' tere:ncek (sic) Rif. 149 (only): Xwar. xiv men taki terincekimni yüzümke örttüm “and I covered my face with my cloak” Nar. 415, 1 (said hy a woman). D tırpaklığ (?d-) D.N./A. fr. tırpak, "having nails, or claws'. S.i.s.m.l. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. U II as, 22 (azığlığ). D térinsiz Hap. leg.?; Priv. N./A. fr. terin. Uy£. vir ff. Bud. (if they are reborn in the mum———————————sá—egs—s—Y—s]9—QÀ— lO EHE RERO RISILIII..,. OQ....—— ııı 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 597 
     
   
   
      ''RIS. V. DRS- 553 world of the gods, they become) çoğsız yalınsız térinsiz kuvrağsız 'without glory or radiance and without (religious) communities” Suv. 299, 10-1. Tris. V. DRNVUD tergeklen- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. terpek, q.v.; spelt fergük/en-/teriyühlen- in the MS. prob. for the reasons stated under terpek, Xak. xı su:v tergeklendi: /stascala'l-mà' wa' ntahara “the water oozed from the ground and flowed incessantly” Kaş. /T 411 (terpeklenü:r, terpeklenme:k). Dis. DRR D turur See 1 tur-. Tris. DRR VU tararku: |lap. leg.; completely unvocalized; morphologically obscure, perhaps a L-w. Xak. xı tararku: yé:r ard nabtuha ğayr multaff 'ground with sparse vegetation' Kaş. I 489. Mon. DRS ?F ters Adj./Adv. with a rather wide range of pejorative meanings; originally prob. “false”, also 'hostile, adverse, awkward, uncomfortable', and the like; more or less syn. vv. tetrü with which it is often in Hend. in Uyğ. S.i.a.m.l.g., usually as ters, occasionally teris. Doerfer”s theory in 11 880 that it is taken fr. Pe. tarsd “Christian” (lit. (God) fearing”) is plausible; final -rS is very unusual in Turkish. L.-w. in Mong., Pe., and other languages, see Doerfer, loc. cit. Uyğ. vu ff. Bud. ters kórüm öritdim erser 'if I have caused false omens to arise” U JI 76, 8-9; same phr. but ters tetrü 77 IV 8, 75; ters nomluğ “false teacher TT VIII O.3 (TT VI 57 ters tetrü nomluğ), o.o. /Tücn-ts. 1911—12 (çal-) and of ters tetrü TT VJ 56—7 (törü:), 331 (törüçl:), VII 40, 37, and sec tétrü:: Xak. xı ters 'anything difficult (or awkward, $a'5)'; hence one says ters r$ "an awkward affair' Kaş. I 348; (after cars) similarly one says (VU) ters ters (unvocalized) urdı: “he hit him from every direction! (min kull cünib) do.: KD idi ters bolur kör bilişmez kişi “a man without acquaintances is in a very awkward position” 491; neçe ters tüğün erse 'however complicated a knot is” (he unties it) 1856; (it is easy to ask questions) tersi cavvab “vhat is difficult is answering them” 1907; (food and drink) idi ters bolur 'are a very awkward matter' (if you distrust the cook) 2826; o.o. 1908, 2146, 4017: (xın(?) Tef. "usr 'difficulty, awkwardness! terslik 3oo): Çağ. xv ff. ters (1) ma'küs "inverted”, (2) sargin “dung” San. rssr. 8 (the second meaning, which also occurs in Osm. is presumably metaph.): Kom. xiv 'irascible, unfriendly ters CCG; Gr.: Fap. xiv ters al-maglüb “inverted” ; one says tonun ters keydi: “he wore his clothes inside out” İd. 38: xv ma"küs ters Tuh. 34b. 7; Osm. xiv, xv ters izine dön- “to retrace one's steps'; in two texts T TS 1I 679. Dis. DRS tarus “the roof of a house'; pec. to Xak.; perhaps a l.-w.; Dis.s with final -S are very rare in Turkish. Xak. xi tarus sagfu'l-hayt “the roof of a house” Kaş, 1 366; a.o. İT 105, zo (tegiş-). (D) tirsge:k (?d-) no obvious etymology, although it looks like a Dev. N.; 'elbow, a stye (in the eye)”. S.i.s.m.l. in all language groups, usually for “elbovv” but in some NE, NC languages 'knee joint" and in some for 'stye'; in NE Tuv. diskek; SW Az., Osm. dirsek but "km. tirsek, Xak. xı tirsge:k batra taxrac bi-aşfar”l-ayn "a swelling which emerges on the eyelids': tirsğe:k zandu'l-yad “elbov” Kaş. III 424: Çağ. xv ff. tirsek (spelt) band toa mafşil-i said "the elbow joint'; in Ar. mürfaq, in Pe. dranc San. 193r. 18 (quotn.): Kıp./Tkm. xır a/-mirfaq (Kip. çı:kana:k) Tkm. tirsek Hou. zo, 11: xv al-mirfaq (Kip. şağanak Kav. 61, r, çağanak Tuh. 32b. 6) Tkm. tirsek do. Dis. V. DRSD tersin- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of *ters-, a V. homophonous with ters. Xak. xı beg anar tersindi: 'the beg was angry with him' (gadiba 'alayhi); and one says ba:ş tersindi: “his wound, or ulcer, broke out again (sukisa) after it had healed' (imdimal) Kaş. II 240 (tersinü:r, tersinme:k). : Tris. DRS D törüsüz (tóró:süz) Priv. N./A. fr. törü:, n.o.a.b. Türkü vir ff. Man. (if you offend) tórüsüzün 'contrary to the rules” TT II 6, 8: yü. vir ff. Bud. bu iki yégirmi tórlüg törüsüz ujaklar bitigler “these twelve kinds of irregular (or unlawful) letters and writings' TT VI 261; a.o. do. 332. Tris. V. DRSPUD tarisla:- Hap. leg.; there is no doubt that Kaş. meant to spell this word with -S-, it immediately follows the cross-heading -S- and precedes tarusla:-, but it is obviously der. ultimately fr. ta:r-, and it is likely that the -Sis an error by Kaş. himself for -Ş-, since there is no known Dev. Suff. -s and the word is easily der. fr. a Dev. N. in -ış fr. ta:r-; the second vowel is uncertain, fatha once on the Perf., unmarked elsewhere, but -1- is likeliest. Xak. xı alp çeriğ tarısla:dı: (MS. tarasla:dı:) farraqa”l- batal cam'a'l-harb “the warrior broke up the (enemy's) ranks'; and one says cağrı: ka:zığ tarısla:dı: “the falcon broke up the flock of geese” (Kaş, 'ducks'); also used of anyone who breaks up something by force (bi-quwswatihi) Kaş. III 332 (tar1sla:r, tarisla:ma:k). D tarusla:- llap. leg.; Den. V. fr. tarus. Xak. xı ol evin tarusla:dı: ittaxada li'l-bayt saqf "he roofed his house” Kaş. III 332 (tarusla:r, tarusla:ma:k). : 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 598 
     
   
   
     «giu goa uns ?»g (596“11: sapi) uns əsəulqo aj “al 1 qəur (osourq)) s, uns) 4 1 '1iz1 cds [de3] exüesy Gnunóueu] [de3] ^41) :(ğıpues) 1* '9g II f) (ües) re 1£—2 "öz / () nj 9q Aieue13 puz Kinsear Aur Áeui, unz[o3 uites) uu “yr (oseo12u:r spoo3 o[qzaour pue Áj1adoud papue| Aui Áeur) -png "Hula "gÁA( "esi YO Buuaef '$g PHALL 1987 AI CH GEL 48 ul ,2snoqo1ie^ juauiulaAOZ, (us se SƏATAHDG "(109*11 do 16811 s2]i£)) Hülübəui oues 'Zup,5] əsəulu?) "ay "əx, *,Ainseo4) “Aaeusiğ, (es) 4 NSG “"uoy ((Şniğnioq) yysz g x 1x *xex :(ontp) f£.'0£ TA .LL ƏD :(Buüise) ir "EP COS 'png "His cHÁQ “Şniğnsnə gə qo .Jeogousq, t:nsn) “iy "V/'N'd nimnsn) q “SG 'SH.L "Qe 've1 xeuip:nsn) 51 'g£ (25) yeuuesm, fpu-jp : (91 -Suse 1r 'z£ ]oj) 911 fi] -pnsm p, Dfou ufnpy MIX (rers) gf£$S 'Qo c) 1z15 "(zs -aığeq) *LSz (8m p) ££$1 *9$g “göl "oo 1498 ,APoqAzsəAə sjgauaq ueur snonjiA ?, Jo 9H -uiapJo 19x anınsm) exgnurex ə *uouiulo2 sı -Jnsn) gX :Grvurnsn) “aninsn) Azı II $vy (müb) v,vfou) un pəygəuəq əurərpəui sig, (71p]p522 "G]A) “ipinsn3 x:e(ig 30 :nq ix *4eX :9-501 7 LL |etoyauaq aq 30u j[r "003 *sBun| 3üərəuc yo qSuəns oq Avegvwwnsn) əurəA j5nx udw[uex pos CAD :(:eSuv) zoz "op "oz 198z TA .L.L ,u9^eaQ jo 1noagj əq) Suuq lu pue [ergeueq Afəurənxə eq ə 3, £Aegpenx Aeğinsm | nüpdə (səuri) UəAƏS pəşiəəl Si m4pup əv) jn) "png "HA ŞAR CqeoN “əx ən pue “qerogəuəq 'snooSejueApe oq o), :Zurueaur 'sseq o[qnidao -1ad ou unu 3nq -sn) jo j 'sseqd -insn) (T . '-pn$93 998 -risə) S | "UISG "A 'SIG 'se[e) 998 Jese3 S "sq "sıq (quo) zoı nj (pexieur $-) gns:nj ,]|ous 3e2As, pqié&amp;vj-],niijpa-]o. (q yn] AX 262g SİƏDİS 192*^s o[qeieumuur pue uado sioMopg uou, $Şısm n) ueunj epue anızeA x2595 (queo Ses NSG"* HX x MÜX Quşusuş 56 Snsm. 3j "V/'N'd *UB9[ DSsd'sH -$vgdsej 'r:n$egsej) occ əuo pedde[s Aəuş, puvjpjt aceyo IX “yeX “SİN əş U 1-:ğsu Jo j diy i39 *u:n3egsv3) g££ zz Soy (ou 2Av[s sıq peq 2q, :D3e2su) "-egse) Jo 7 neo, Tə) "(p:ewuregse; "pl uum] poddy[s əq, nou 1o IX *qyeX '-exses se "A 3nq * ol "deH unoj sin u *aexnsn)) 911 77 "$vyr (up əurərpəui si, :xnsn) :eü '-snj jo j oneqdurq 134: T-DSQ'A" 'g S. [ ,Ki3unq uooq Suret jou op no pojenes 21e no/ uəəq (1849) Suravu 4əquu Aığunu 91€ no2 jt, uəszət iq ueszaulo iso) JE "pəpə -p- qi -6:03 "iy" 3j sdeuiod “V/”N “Aəqi "də 9sq "si usd “sı əəs (£ rix "A5AX) :061 7/7 p pfupu-)p "ynyy AX :£e1 (q) p,pfpu) jour pəsəuəq ət :nsn) sür 30 70 SÁES c *jgouoq, pfif-],Da ppfuniu“rk qoöyy (usur uaAes pəfib Á[ou Aui 0j ən/pA Áui, uu:n "gi xI ary O (dise) £11 039 $ “iz qd 00 14-97 'o1 poo3 3eu^, Aegqoq nsn ə 9^ 19)je 3usdai 9A jl) "pn III.L.L “UEYN BA ŞAR əu3 sexy qəra “(bzgi '&amp; Suiueeuir oues *psn; se "Suc "puəH ur pesn Á[[gensn sr sıq 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 599 
     
   
   
     *-sn) ujoN Ca9d "deyi gnjgnsn) (T L "(qeu II vM a9ujoue j up$egse) :ppit 1 -$DĞSDA 3|ods-siu | “deyq -Suğsu) (I "(:euegdsv) ipjjo) pəddeis (212) uin» yo IX ^xex "deyl -3egse3 (CI | *a:efisv3) 482-711 DİD) :1p:edsu) nus AL AN UT səAlAsns | 1 defs o), -:egsv) "Opeuuynsn3 ,Dfou) şəvi peyyouoaq eui 30 :nq IX *3uX | “deri -ynsm) (I sid "NII u (1949) 1oquiouio1 | 92uo pue :pojernes oum jou op no luo xis5:&amp; 188603 s5:&amp; HA nyunL qoid əsoul 3nq -:03 [deg] (-p)xrrso) 4 q $o) əəs eqsn 4 q (5m T q :8 '*8 72A :nsmn) TT ome iycz [I] o» Hörpəul 380, “1pUx uo əəvəq 1 ,Apəulər |» :nsnj IX "yex :£ [ ] 381) ,SBAL ui[eor $n) :əyuuiə :11093 ILL ^X) (ğısu) ATLI d9P 311148 u (ifəq o3 əuoğ əasu 8 “(ğrsu) "əsə “Sor 'q'eoN "19A0A 3813 ON “951 qösəpH) IN ür ^A-'[ A[189 uy 3 qon qur grise "bzi JI[ ,souio[? sıq uo (;jA[pajeador əri) Á[pide3 ung onus əq, spin ssn) s:nj su: (40) :6zt 7 oy ,punos siu3 tprA j!q 3U, :rp4n sn sn) sÁes əuo 22uau f3əy 10 səuşofə (s,auoouros) Suns əqdurexə doy *3jos Zurgjiug Suryins (jo punos 21) soy (v&amp;nq1]) ərəodoşrunouo ue sn) snş IX "4ex .0120dojeuouo i3o[ dep] s:nj/sny (1A "ge£ [Sox («o[[oy so[duiexo) zna() ur ur- pue soZená -ue[ usppi, 19uj0 ie ur d- Qi pourquioo pus uəyüş si po 2t) JO 42419[ 3s1tj əqş sduluş Jo (pfi$-juy) suondiiosop oui Juiziseqdura. ut pue sino[oo jo əssə əuq) ur jeu) si əni əu) əsneəəq '1e[nHolrr st sıq) ::9urIpdo) soj AES (Apmöappnu) puno4 3uigi&amp;ue yo (/$oo 1f j02v|pq) S2115119]2v18Q2 213 əzispüdülə Aəq) uaua zn3() əv) IX zngQ 'sioip ur pajjruio u33jo əl syəlq qəns jnq 'z'qeo'N 7219 'do/de r gə "sfpv 210 j3q xəs oAngodnpoi “əyə “sə)/su) z "O1 "EQZ "Op (D,D) suvoui ose 1-34 put) -[oq suj sol eq “səd o3, pizipo, (zı "efz "yaq -qoq sej (pue -314) ppp AX :49$ "ng. -1eq (Svj 3[2ds-siu) sej v,2p £9 "pj D DÖ 10) uoissodxa punoduuoə v -1uq $ej ANN izi uv cnopgp -9[K9 ss ,Aöansəp 03, popitibp í-Joq sei D,455-/,punu pp) Lux "diyy 142 1092 xeuiyoq se ,uonipiod 'uoneuutep, AX “uroy :611 Í1 'b£ -3o s:uj 5?) :s:ej aso[ əq 'usuad oj, ,pi(iÖ-/p 1901 "fiy :6 “rc: Jay -3ə sui ,pəZonsəp əq 'usuad oj, p/fioz ""njy AIX :6z£ [ $o ,paq 3ou st os1oq sip, möəş sv) yü nq sÁes ouo :(1pp4-]p) ,peq Sungue, sv IX zn$Q ",Si29[erp uerseong;), pue Zy MS pue (o9z 20 Aq peunuguoo) ;], pue "T. Ie MN ur pəsn os IS seA 3r $16 J]] ay o) Jurpioooy "əyil əq) pug ',peÁoujsop 'jso[, u£9Uui 0) SA 'xny uina Ayuo pəsn aq oş pouad jeaarpaur au) ur ətüsə şi “Əyil oq) pue ,peq, Ajeurdito sej g Sa 'uoWw '£9 "p onip 1ze1ej AIx "uix :1 'Pz "nog :nz:e1e3 upzua-|p Hx "dry 545 220 “209 nze1ej ,so[ps, AIX *uioy :(n$gin HM ex un £g1 np 19 “62 Təyy :nz:e18) ,DAQVUI ovipoz aq) Jo uzis aui, 'upziua-pp «ny AIX :£gz ,so|pos, nzeiuj VAL (uix Cxex) 1(ü93 p) 019 Sz 'ZL JT [) "png :6-g 'zt II IV ,SƏİƏS oui uo üləqş sind jr, 1nang[o əpurr S$nze1e; "uejJN "iA :SÁ(Q "HN ideoxa "VTB. ur "AT v SE 12540) Ul10j "aq uieDour 10J pəsn ose £ j[012s aqui ((p) 1/) dn ios 03 ətu pədləq eu, :jp$nan3 9niq :eüeur [o Ix *xex t9) Jo 'do-07) 5; o[ "deH (-p) -5n1m (T "(g214- 10119 ul *ugu]) y 'of ng -Snanp s»ppuppi :gf pi onip pppupə? -S$nugnj AIX :I1: “P£ "nopp (Jij- '10119 ur *jeredui) -$nanp ,(Sungjouos) jsuieHe $|jdnujs o), ppunpji iux "diy, :Zgi qm ,əsoddo o3, -$nanj AIX "ae :61 'gis irz "zgi í1z “oz [ puupapb poye[suvaj 7070 t (01d 'x:sur$nanj 'a:n$nanj) 5S6 /7 “Soy ,əuo 3ıq əv) (piuomipb :pojuo4juoo 10) paovj (uru) evs oui, :tp$nang :e[11q nin Si3pq IN *4ex "Quojjuoo 0j, -$nunp “ul L "uis() AJG ut Upursrs 1-anş | Jo 3 diəəy (pe) “nuni q "Öpəvusəi “aensəip) 96 77 und jo osneooq (ose o) posnjal, “$pyy) so^ooQ s3l ur Bnp [eurue əv), :jp$ejip urğe4n :rnnÁ :pouiso1n *umn$oan) $6 [[ So (ppo$nj) pauoisvj st 3! uauA. (qpq-],izpzi]) 100p e jo sieq au o[duuexo 10j '3uigjouros (puu,vj 1f) du do1d oj 3uid[oq 10j pəsn ose :,3u1 Qr pəpuəşuoə əq, 24pjbpp3 ippSəap :e[iiq üjueuur qo IX *xexX csoujua iəqyo O^) Áq pəqbüzdəs 21e 'pooe|dstur 3siy əq) "fv ur sonus pourguoo-j[os 0443 9g, "9ujoue auo *'jsuieBv 10 “uO ug9[ 03, 10) Ailensn “pursrs i-021n Jo 7 "drew (-p) -S$eun qd "Groursprag *ax:n$prg3] S6 /7 fos Suneduroo oy os[p “(dzipbuq pa ^ ^ ^ our) if) 8ungjoujos Suipioq do 3unos[[oo soy pəsn ospp (019) arnış aui (,puii if) 12)e3 0) əur pad[oq əv, :;p$r193 $ruro£ :eüeur qo IX “yEexX "qeou 5-19) Jo 'do-o) (-p) -$Hə) Gd -S$3G "A "sIq “n$n) əə n$unj iS “A81 qınğ Əəpnimnşe “əinisod, $nanj Alx *JeA X :9-S61 "op ,sşərienb pue suonejuojj -UO2 j! 31£2q 3snui əq, qo nduepyes ə36nn ve3$nun) ([911enb e sr ələq)) 16-g” J [ [ ,suon -ejuo4juo2 oşür 12jU2 şou Op, eur1Ieq ex$nang (snoiqnp 4194 2ulpeəi) exunnj (spouienb PIOAE) 'AI) "g HA "ŞAT) ",19uoue auo jsureze dn 3urpueis, A11201di521 yo uorjejouuoo v aA 0j sui9as yn əv) "Z4() ur :$nanp "us() "zv AAS ur f,əanisod 'apninie, 3uiugour Alensn qururrg -4n) p 743 N 7A9Q pə $nin q Suq "sıq Suq “Siq : Yss 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 600 
     
   
   
     nq '19]EA UAL p212402 321, (s03) e| pue 30$ ui jnq sjoo[EIp 3soul Ul əə, sUgauJ MMA Lizi JI] M 503 HN JO uto au sdeuiod sr 3p "1004, ax 2uiq3auios ueouir O) stuaos "qe ou sí qərqa "uéeq $o) süd eu ür $03 nA "Szi J[J SUN ,Os3 211 üəəaMəq Suluyəuios sı jnq osou 301 jo dn 301 JO SIEƏ 2t s9u5g2l M jeu) es üzə ouo jeu) 1ej os peəlds jou saop pue saÁa ati jo [2A9| Əuş səuəsər uorq« peəqəsoy sır uo oze[q £ Ulu 9s1OW r, DVİN D? puÁpq pupq om anfsn, vj pm, 1bapqniu puuupsn&amp; up ŞniqoX uu] p uj£puXp, vjpqnb py ninipaang ibjss ipnj,nspapf-]p ye 8: IX "N4eX "uaous se aq oj suiess Huiugaul 3Q] jnq 'sjoip Sui ur Á[ssioa1d paje[suej; ||f 3ou a1&amp; UOHP[sUEJ) 2i ul sura) [2101223 21) *o[ “deH Sin z (1A "£z AT :ooz [JJ "£o£ H "£oz [ S.L.L 1d snonuga ur pajou oo), $jp 'g AIX "ursQ :11 "qg1 "zy Sip "umi oyup 1*1 “0, “ap 031p AX :6£ py ontp AIX :9 “oz "nog] 6p u1is-jv Ix * dry : (uj0nb) gez 45 !022 "ƏƏ nip AIX "uox 7ə3ə “cr NAT togt qin() ,u1001, sp Alx :£-9L 720 ,s[ieod əyil 219: tp323 124, ppiə Şə) noun (Sip) 16h Gnue (jux '1exX :£1 u$61-upg u8no[d uopoo^ 9 uo 3nd si2uniej qərq əəərd uot aq, "udejaur pue (uşonb) urpusp $p :88! 724 41003, nuispu vui uppupp ^" : Sip 83 "B AX "Seo :obi íS “Ak &amp;up uun-p 16L fiq 591 'L Təyl ugjsrq1n , ut $: 5, Aiunoo no, ut $:rp uurs-]p "upnpy MIX to£ qox), $1) AZ *1£1 unseur -urs Gr&amp;r p ()uix “(ep 44£z "ore 1291 ,u9xo1q şou 21e üşəə) 1noÁ eq) os ənğuo) 1no&amp; uo qoje4 g dəəy, unsguuuis ün özəboy 1Tuüqn göy özi 'gt£ 3S1 'ri£ [[ uumsis: Surpnpour "oo Kjuam 1940 :$7t [IT DM ,o1eqs-ugno]d, jps4uj-njpwans $ü səsə Surgjauros 1o uBUL &amp; jo (4wis-jD) ,u1001 ən), sin Ix *Xex :£-z '£z /TA .L.L ,d1001 s,dop v, uiét) ar f'o7o'&amp; 126 7 Həvəs uoo), dirige $n AL 209” X LL 12-15 'o£ AT 070 101) * “og HI D) Mi9291 siq ut soA12U əv) (iz, p19[1rürs Gru “rels nie pog :59 XT JL 2^ 3H Mşəəş uyu, $n Şə) [de3] "uejq g utA "dán :v-£S '$oni7) (199) OM1-Áuti QA, urn xar PIE "uej "gir myanj "(5892 ad) sn 3nyeA t&amp;sp cum !$p p uso "zv MS "ABL 98N ur furenəəun st adueqo oui jo aep aui 1-:)-/-1aloqMÁ19A9 Mou Sİ pue *xex ur -:r- Á[utej122 se^ [2404 au, [e det? :,q001, (-p) $ r 'Sy£L AT "Yİ9 TII 7891 SJL.L d*r25:,2uojs, $vj -U AX *UISQ :7I "qzt "np 11 'g$ 1v1 “9$ "apyy oyip Ax :6 '£ mg $:ej onip "£9 "p[ onip Sel AIx :g-£ 'o£ :gr "$ ^nogp 8:83 4s2Dij-jo. müx "diyy :49 5522 'I22 $91 aurea (s 19][24s9f) “yoox “əuo3s, AIX "uy :8 NIA 0onip $e AX "eA X Geyeq) 81 U9z1 so" 19z "AEzz ups $ü) se aures aui $up i£ "1/81 'upg Sus (1) $) “(uonb) oZ1 2A ,2uojs, puispu pu. Bups ^ 7 " $Dİ 8) "J AX "Şe :g£t fip ti SL əypy 8:83. o[o2, axos-jp "wnjy AIX :oöz ,əuoşs £ W^, o[nq Sey (peau aui uo ug imp au) far :o9 sepqqad evs, $e3 xe$n (10 seunp pues eş ut sure jo səqumu auj junoo əuo üzə) gp (;)ux : (umn103) o£g “(Ass p) zrz goy :7070 o£ A[1eou 'zSi (ıq "SOM ,2uo)s, 4pOUi[-]U 8:0] IX "4UX De "ÖV "DEV 919Q (əvi 03) 2uoijs (EHOULəui) rəq) pəyəəzə, (e|dood 4ur :pnxp :9junq ui$e) Jg Xr "arx "O (unpüg) z “Sİ: "dg "ow 177 LA .L.L ML Uoululoə sp 4əƏ3unoə 2uojs €, $uj) "eZi [ jj ,(snp) suy oğul 2uojs inq: Huipunod, dnxyos əğöuy uru) nr aL) 1511 [4 LL Süəsəp ut, əpaşA üg doy "VA (sed uğrədoy, ao) seed Áuojs ut, əpaə4 $ej "png :Gm$oq) gr 'Z [ [2 142 :(-39) or -6 “ook Spa 'Gin-uppy w-ue[A "pg HIA :or -6 41 "ng ,2uois qjoouus e uo 242 dn şəs udis pu? uonduosur Aur peu T, urrpinvagá :ux$u useÁ yuz ujurngjeq uujdpiq 1104 7840 :(uonduosur snomqnp &amp;) b£ bpy (1)34n$vyp jo 1oqlpq 2uois 2tp, [speq]ieq $e3 xn$vy “üə A :,s2u0js (snörəəld) pue s[omof, Q:t1e[Svj ünuy:n5uoui snorsa yo sonienb ou saquosap (LS II A.L4) suəunəop dotop aui 'g HA (Sud udia10gy ur, ueaur p[noo :ep$ej inq *uone[sue1) joroxi| aui st 8103) v 7, ,pe[quiesse (i)uesop Áuojs pue qnios eu) ui pouleuio! ou^ əsouş, diugJAns :i5mujex :ep$e) sep 1(-3:19) 012 '£1 N [ ,2uois paquosur, $e) Shiq pu "əşə “zr S' / ,2uojs [er10uraui, $e3 :ngüoeq "uud aui ur seu [ejaAas sino20 $93 IIIA piun.L cpessnosip st usppn, "ay "-[ Área AAA € St unğüyi3 "HuojA] 12039qA uonsonb oui 21oua '£-SSg [[ 42f420(T "aq ut "-] v 1(ocz AX uiupuu[sp) ^^n7) ut qoğ/in5 *'uis() ut $e3 Apuəşsisuoə inq *unj , ut Ssep "Zvy AAS Anm TN ur$ep tSpurverg "usus ur pJow jeu jo sBurueour fensn au fiE ut ,əuoss, (-pz) $:e3 z "ELAT £29 [II **88 11889 1 S[LL $ü ' ^ * öy uud eu ur "dsə 'uounuoo Ái2A £ ,Əpisino ou), $vj 3[ods Áj[ensn $ep 1AX 03 AIX "UUSQ :21 "e*z "inp, 8e) anfp£ AX :£9 "p 21px“ip $ü AIX "diy 140 '[2D) unu pis -ino, AX "uroy :£Z1 qm) ,əpisıno, uneş 110123x3 əm), Sü) AIX "TEAVX :97 "AEZZ ONİp $ej se ous əv) $up :v "1481 "ung Güusip, pisq bo 4np (t) :(uionb) gönəşxə 'opis -1no, unm4iQ Dos asp (z) Sey t ((uyonb) oZ1 2/4 ,Əpisino, p4$vj $v3 "B AX "guj) :o6z ,əpisino ow, $e) fap "Yg£ “örz "oro iLie njunesq sXoo[ pi1oA siu jo əpisino 2i, rv) Snpprox exxyoawuriQx eur unfe nq sv (nx :tiez “Egg "oo £299 un əv) ueu) Jojo Sulu34us, un$ej epzos puox (Aes jou op) f£zg£ uru 1u04j Ae? noÁ pues 30u [rà Zunj əu3, $v3 9pzo pues JQW Áedeungprp due "ir (ucu g jo) əpısıno pue əpisur əqş 3səxouy 3eu) (poo) O, nömq $e) öy 4e gx :(camey) *Z [[ 108 “(7qV uv 3öu "ApV ue se snp popiegai "foy eu) Suneorpur Anüə uteur e) Stk 7 ((u)nupx) no üə ueur oq, :prieq unğu) də :$z “16 7 (upmaopoq 2149X) ,Apoq sit yo əpisino əv) uo 212 sau23o[q $, (EturuR ue, u:T)$u] :Is:eTe rypA 1z$1 yı "py ,&amp;nunoo udie10g &amp; 'pieÁ-11noo v, pg4nj-]po» p4u-]buua ,ppuf-jD a:9K $:u) !gusauned 9 jo əpisino ou, qonj-],njD4pDi [pi u:o) $a ix ^xex :(-:opy9) * 'SY "jw "Jg xi "arı ^O :(uurqres) gör cop ^o'e :o$1 J H ,əpis -jno əu) uo zəded Suiddei«, dogaoK opgex cüre) İLA .L.L Uu! uounuoo si ,[EulajXo, $93 "AT :'00'8 1€ 91 J7A4 E.L 918 ou) aptis -3no, epui$g3 druğidey "PS qq A ou əpis 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 601 
     
   
   
     The text on this page is estimated to be only 49.45% accurate 
     M ino, urj$e) (opH e doy ju24 [) y 49:74 ZZ (əyə 'safinoui jo) pisino ui04j Zuituoo eudəş “xə, r41eis. unuy/liyunsuş 199 "og 772) “peolqe * ^ 7 9u0Q 30, defis uijSu) * * * auis upóp "png :£1-$1 "Eb i(i) Z-S 'ot İH jy 1€Qis un$g; * * * j4eQis upi5p t(um-/unjfunp-/unp- j» 'un- xyjns oq uia "apy ue 3nq /gpr 24) şou əq 0) siüəəs 219q urj$vj) o6 XI LL 9914]u0n02 uiio10J ur pəsibad sı uru, Siue auis uij$ge "uv :9-S “gi I JA pisino uca xuup pue pooj Jno&amp; quia paxtur st qəra, qna4o depgx oxnd5j exse (25) uvjse3 up (sn ino4) y-ue[q gg rita D*Scn$,.peosqu, urpurpsaey "i f, peoaqe pue 'aunoQ je so2ugqunjsip osng2 [JI [,, ples əu, [de3] (x) urpurp$v) $puej u:r4eğinq uəq cədə HIA ^HÁQ) :tI N ][ 'z1 S [ ano pue apisur, (2:5) usiSey usd (paie102ap quio; 9? peQ [) ni^ nxan] “Sip, ápuoooi ədouu $vi/$ep TAX jnoqe [nun usc) tgp "unt, Ag "Sep ang, HN ut iXpurerg ÖÇ jo sisatgnue 3oexo 2t təyi 9). pue “ 4ayunoə üzirədoy pie “unoə “əpisino si ora Zurqj2uios (dul ətuos jo) əpisino do “önəşxə Ou), "NE sotunaulos “əpisino, “py do fpy uv Ajvaniou (-p ;j) $e) f "(£z qosiuav][) un,epió 7uogyr ur 1n5 ,9401$, pub in) st j2pis;no, -ünj) ut uu, pub "Sup -[sex/$v3 342ifa (4239 $2 3u0J5, ölə Sip "uus) u42pout ut pup si)/Sn st sodunDuv] AUN. pub JN. 9140$ UI ,2pisjno, jui] '$03 2uojs, pup $83 si pisino, "qan Dg ut pil spoof əyi ut papaya 4npanf si 2 :0042[fip. 2L. ^&amp;:eq. z[$vq | y “sp40az omi əyi fo suouppunuoad puidio oni ut 22u242[fip q024 v sjuos24do4 supp ig] 4vəp si )[ "Apoauoadso4 Step pub o66z "op si) s? 2uojs, pup "up ni Sup pup 6g6z "xoq m ui su) 51 2pisjno, '$:E) 240], puo Əpisino, loq siəds "SENİ gynogip cou Aieunuoíiq $:we3/$e) $q “uoyy "Lovs1 cun (-exan&amp;os pusu puooas ur urdaeur ur) -eganÁos anouou jo oqoi e 9AIB 0) (Gərni v Jo), (upijns-] qox unu urunun uj) p,pfox AX "diy :(jeganAos '-jeguncos osppg csujonb) izz 40 (2)0):) -vüun&amp;os (9uoouios) oj snorotad əq o), AIX “ulox igit NIA 881 qınğ (272p euoauios) o) shorovad əq oj -uyun4os/-eğanAos aix :Lhz co dump snomaid Augu oae əv, ipuyuin4os iupae dox (jux :1eAxX :(ujonb) t a6fz "HDS ,SIH pue sinoagj ƏAHİ o), uppaoy Sisxpq nn ups (iqəds) -egan£os :(suionb) iot 724 ,1noa?j gi xoop o) :s1jd. io Aniədold 9AIB O3, -49qy $nmx ən upgouup əa -dən spatid əa -42à ppu (239 “4-) -uğan4os "H AX "Şe i£6e onlp Yaz (ux :£z4z "oziz (oro “İgF9 ,ueQdio pug Aoplu j00d əq) uo Aid əasü 01 auo ou s! ələm), xo&amp; iqğeyin4os gSrunek nə Aeği3 “Fok, yəsino£ uo Aid oaeu, münzo uyuan4os (saəq)o 10j jjos1no&amp; əəyiiəus şou op) 1gz ,suis siQ (s Əəaldio) pue oav[s 4ddequn sIq3 uo Aşıd ocu, gnurey upynzez qiğan3əy deyun4os gninx Şnyünur nq gg ix "3ex 11 '619 "Öp ,spio« əşpuolssudtuoə pue əni), uraus uij $pure-pzos nÁexanÁos) (sS,BAEU) RT ON 7 “SEUETÇ pieat] 3Aet| 244) İzi 'z1g “an ,ssəaniş ie) uo (puəyl) Aid peu 4oui, aepipexanáos) zərpəySuyuiy " * * ezn sauq [o "png :£r11 jj; LL (s19uuis 1"puəH) ,uo Aid 948 o) pəusrəp ƏARU nOÁ, ziünexuaeÁ. nax5ujag (5) náexin4os "uv ^g rtu cg) "soJenaue[ Usrn T, oui0s ur 4[1u3221 (pun uo po212zui[ səqəs -lAlad jo juvi3 e, judgan£os "Əsəqi yo əuo puv 'of-gzz [ səfsəoqi əəs "aq Ul SAYT ƏlüBƏəq “A Sü) “ay SİN A9(1 Xu0[q-021n p, puc “Suy '939]^Á1243 3)9]oSQO 2q 6j SÜİƏƏS Mou inq poured igAərpəui əq) ur asuas sti ur "Buo[q tuo] p240110Q21 sea q 'pie*231 0) '(auoautos) o) An0A8J ^0Us 0j, *A([021)2E1d o10u1 ueaur o) ətə M BuoJA ut ! 2jeuorsseduioo əq 03 '(2uo2uios) uo Ayid əAvu 0), se^ üsiyun [, ur Hurueout ]euitiao ŞULL '[3^04 js1g ət) saxy qəl (Zorr 7320 'g£1 əsnəbH) -pyandos su "Buo]q ui cae] AHsə uy "(got'zi $3]£)) Anpəsəur "pur, 4,2; “06 "E1ed *£) p pr o£) "à ut paisasians se “qoud 'p1o« asoun^ e 2) ^A "ua(| -SEXAnÁOS) 4q “ASQ "SELL "$5 ga 5poq [njuis sı uio1j pənəsəq 9»q 9A Áeui, uingezo 3pzo)je Cr) gnpns nq “19 '£Sz 4p Jur dəq ur siouurs əsouş, Ju[rin[nuug) Snjáns) Jo !(1) e “Ib "op ej10tu Münəyns pur Injuis 2e, nun Sippgue gnis) 14) $ '6 7Ip p) spei 710ui 3[qu1asrur pue [njuis, rejgipur. (Çun 39ds) up Şny4ns3 png py ulA*dÁ() quoN “nyurs, ins) cGpocv/NOq 3ni4ns) aq ASG “sıq . "Zi tELCang Sui arğe Ansş “(nöuşup 6" op. ,sijnyj pue suis, n3upp Ans) pue xnze&amp; Ans) “onip Suri, ağu Áns) *,uis snoaaud, Ans (215) jeg “ud 9) ur pug jjasyr 4q uioq 717 7. ut uouiuoa A134 SI Ans) "png :gz sot 7 Jw unzeui[oq xnzu&amp; Ans "url :(in) 1 "e£ [7p jy. uis uca, [dv3] vpxnze&amp; upAns y-ue[q ia "Ş4n :8£ 'g [TL] [ded] vpAns iooe :Z£ "spni2) .pa^ep pue uis tra Sunudu, dnénüos undünpieÁ ums "ur, "gia nyan b “QS tpr« pesnjuoo aq o) jou í,us pioa uy "us əq) 10j uaxe) üəəq aaeq J93e[ Á&amp;UI uoi Ans 3[2ds sounjouos '131e[ pajou 3ou anq "s(] UT uOUuJUO) “(orö"ri saoji£)) Hutuvaui oUues “ms? 2s2utq7) "Ay ^-'[ foxi[ 9u3 pue ,UIS, Ans) 4 ASQ 'uoIq (15uge) ot “88 “491 ^2 "gu ŞAn ədəəy A1gugid, *ües) uj VN j89[ "deH c$es) dd '(-ugx) öz yy "ora :£ “özb jjj ,dumf ar aeui pue 3/oə (45D,-j») usxoiqun aq junoui uiiq səl, unsjarqss dnünur unso) :zot 7; spy ui uay04q 324 şou si QoIQa 3[02 e, p,Dg Dpoana ub) ipo] nagniu-jy unso) IX "xex :(-43np[nan3) z-ı "EZ cang (yoo 1(-so) 1apun poxopur pue 405; sü peaistur “vos) işəds) 6€ y. /TTA .L.L AX:jpárunoq uosoj jopiosip ui, (sui) mupu “ƏDƏ? yuxsueg '(-A1) *Sz "op "ori [4 II ,Snoloumu uour pp. (puəH) 3uəşor, $nxn 1iepqun unso) jigjex uaipeyx (pue oo1eos » aum ee 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 602 
     
   
   
     "Sirr cop (diusioujied 1no paa4J[ossip 24e 29A) ,uorssnoslp 193je, daşı ** “or “İŞ/) ,s^oj[o) se 12«joue auo 03 piss əavüq ən, zpuuyisə3 e3ur "AVQ :97 "op "08 for "89 [1I 11 (21224 01j040 ül qəəəds Aq pəpəə -aid) səqyous auo o) pres Aət) jgQA SI Sip, aappsa) n&amp;eqnóunus do) "png :£8 XT LL çar”. ” 8n 39[, aəqşouk ouo o) pres Aou, səriğə3 uue[de3] "uejq "giu "ŞAn “5011 JH 4 TəL "08 “qəl SN UID S9AjAgng cusuoue əuo 03 fes 0), 1-:33 Jo 3 “disə (-p) -$ə3z G1 'o6z TI S.L.L ,əərəd 01, -$əp AIX "US$ :9 "Eri "op (-rə3 pue) -6e3 vqpbo] !£ "qg "inj, “Sə (pue -1aj) pfpxoq fg 'SL sap -Sə) əsəd 'o10q o), p$pxpqQ pa pqobou Dm pqobo] AX ig 'LE-c nop uisa e HəAun 03, 4j1g-j,Uuoom vfp$ow os[p -Səp Surəəss 10 |Ioq e xoud oi, jpunanp-],om ,nimni-iOf-]ouns Davovf. iux. "ug Lf dry :((49 TƏD əvu$əş [oq s, AIX "uroyl) :(-55) og1 *gL1 qin(j onip -593 AIX "4e X (clə, se (Ab *-&amp;og jo "03g v? si qora) -$ə( jo Burpsoi -siuj € uo poseq si ,ənun “əsgəfər oj, -z93 uon -w|sug1j puoo2es $,]2/| 3803 3no pəsurod si 3 61 *A6VE£ ui) öz "aygr "upg' ,210q “əələtd o1, unpapu xpuns -693 !ggi 794 ,92191d oj, -ajé2 hləp iu,DK -Jop -593 'B AX “Şef) :(anuum3) ööoy HX ix «ex “Us g ə 'uonosuuoo -6-İ-1- əvi 910u) -yə) pue '-Ao “-30 "^ "uÁs 1-$əp *'ulXI "uls() "zw AS ur U3querg "əyi əqi pue 'j1oq “əəsərd o3, (-p) -8e3 1 "1 ^qge gn] (-dox pue) -Sei papf AX av "ng -$uj ,Mopio^o pue oum[o^ ur ose219UI O) "I9jbA JO, D4Df Dm pui], 0ppz 1£g "py 1240 (loq 01 “od v Jo, 4pib-],1549J -&amp;ej AIX "dry :611 Aj "££1 qınÖ oup -$u3 AIX *3€eA X :(sujonb) gz "1$$1 "ung Quepunqs *[nj-umiq eq o3 '^ogiaAo 0j 'exi[ oui pug 13384 yo, uppné unzíp pm Ap$-4vs pa» up 1-]udun pm qu ubpivq up&amp;4Unj -$e "gx "Qeö :ggt ,BƏS eu; usu) TəqğlU peA^opisAo pue 3t pəlu seq A[onio, zibə urpzjüo rp$v) rp[o3 gjeo (dn pərip sZunuds sir pue peurerp üəəq se uyrey poo2 jo oxe[ aun) "7p. (zx :Greuiseg *4:9593) zi JJ DOY 1euiejuooD 10 19AH 9 UlOIJ .pamopisAo 4Ə)BA Əv), :1p$vj Ans sÁvs əuo osiz pue ' (;oppf poi * * * şpapf) əpəxoyiəAo pue Á[sno1oS!4 pəfloq şod aui, :rp8sş örə IX “ex :Y61 [ [.L 1940 s|oq 3od ou, 1e$v) Səzmy "A "HüHA cHÁQ C-usep CGoN "ODE AN "Sə 'saSueq» ənəuoqd iounu A Tur "a19q -p [eniur feurduo üz jo ƏəXüəplAə ou sı 919g anq '$ej 7 (u^ ^A oruoudouroq E $8 pəşəəuuoə Á[[eonutulas :,MOpleAO 0), -$E) “Sd ^A "UOVV "6£ "pp ourp $n AIX 181 'ge "nop $up 4inz-jp 11x "dr :092 742) 1 [7)7). $m ,4spprur AIX “urox :('suionb) yz cigzr "up ,uoou “Asp -pnu, 4gn£ i-ibom vom zn4 uqu 8m “(suşonb) zız 194 04 198 o sul3əq uns oq uou Asp -prui, n&amp;pjfog pğuuzuş und wp * 7 7 hibpa qnjiny pqpy osje (,unsəsp,) 8m "B AX "Şe :(4ofos nq SəşE(SUE1) 384V) Əy 93 IO ,9IAI9)UI SIQ) UI exer e apeul yəsAur 1, umnzo nq üyüəur ej$nj nq rppüüeÁA sÁes 12un0j oui “iplo34v pue 3ury aq) üəəsşəq AarAl3jU! UE Ul "usua ofg ur s$1n220 osas “qoid pioa aui 1(9-)509€ (6 “xo4300103 113: 3se[ əyil s,Azpo) (HAR "passed seu 1qZiu əuo ! 4à0110UJ0) $1 3UO) 4əq 3291 [II (s1521) ,sauZiu pue sdojs (&amp;epptur) Áueur Aoq je 121J£, [o üm) $p3 e5eu isnisu epürue (jg ur sep eai) sr əhl JO ojoum ou) göy :(anuo]8n) $t ^A əv) gi 'Zzz [ ur ƏSA stu Jo "uyonb 12410 əü) ur) or *Z1 7/7 ,uiq) uo 3üdils spiiq 42124 dəqyo pue (,sxonp, Aj19doud) 2s323 ot, ,puc-], nap) una. mpna&amp;pg pay zzomi-.upf pzuot xegn&amp; xəpag anpop ön) Qvui (S12) yo) stuzəns qons 3no 1nod saÁa un) *Sz1 III Áeppuu, pp&amp;pb-],njbom pmioa pant(pp-]o :p:o Ssn) :o£t [ "sx aeg o) eum eu, :1b:0 $n) sÁes ouo 22uaq £ j[et] 0) aui əqi, pue * [eq ?, noq (uz)upb qpznu-]nibon va jrzupvut-p $m IX "ex “11008 Áquiejj90 SEM [940A eu “Spy ur söurəds sAngurej[e əv) Jo əşds ul "A pue "N snouogdouirou v 918 əsəq) 380) 3səö -Bns o) 3unouusip 03, jo əsuəs au) ül -5p3 MVA Suiueaur yo ÁAjynre[mrurs 3usrogjns si ərəq L ədəq Suoyəq [gj 'An?) jo sSuiuvoul aulog 'osuas sıqı ur Zpurers pue ,Aeppiur, uvaul 03 “ldu 0j aum 2tp, :pp:o 63 se "Jud üəns wr “əümə 3r 'Áepprur jg əpsuu Ájpeuniou sr j[Bt 8 92urs "əəuəq) 1 ,&amp;ou1nof s uo 3[eu e, Aileuliuo $n €  '£9z AT "8zz III :9v€ II "YVe I S.L "d'wyo f,umajp, $np 'galx "uso :II "wÉt "pnp Sm ueaip, müpubu AX *dry 1740 120 &amp;p) ,u21p, AIX "Uo :161 qun() $p3 Aix 19c£ 'o'w fic£ 'B() juea1p B uri usas peu eu 3eqa, ujaegagx (-pi) e$m. (rmx :1e gp, Qumelp, 6np IIX *'yemy :(uionb) $i "ghi "upg ureolp 8, pbuig uudpu mp "^ " qpmx 83 “(Çunonb) ziz 72/4 324408 $np Sm) "B AX "sö :(uónguagÁA) ZSr iir 'gS "oz 1061 "fiy 8:m3 12 "eg "Jeu 5np wnjni-],0m pé na-pp "unpy xx :oz£ ueo1p, $p3 Vər "$cc ,uio1p 8 SE [891 -un se, yex Şə) $n3 7p (nx pp 9868 'etgz *6—L6£1 'z££1 “oo f 1£z ,p|104 oxr-Ueo1p smi uio1j, urpun[e Şə) öm nq (ssed Ápjoinb noÁ) HM :(-:9$n3) 992 1(ğnag4) gi III "oo f$zi HI SM Qüsəip əv) (papqqo,) poyo1diojur au, “1pa:94 $:n3 ses ouo əəuəq :umea1p v, p&amp;,na-jp Bina s.Gəqnd. pəqəsəi seq olu Áoq e, wapojunus iqo$ u:ejgo $puriQx $:nj sÁes ouo ouo f uoissrure [euinjoou e, umnjnij-jp 5:3 IX "YÜX “Yələ) an) pue q 72 "unLL ut 5:np fuis) AS "AL 2[N ut $np “sə3usqə ənəuoud ioumu qura "fpururrg *ueoip, (-p) $:p3 € '(sj3xa1uoo au ur 1əHəyii SüTəəs pə si oure29q, rppoq nöm inq 'pury £ jo asuos saAIB stp :zZ1 "O rploq nsnj (sisuosud pue 4j1adoid jo [eap 38918 v j1noo smq goy pue 'ueZus umni(] pənp -qns uedey zn30) (i)uux *eAX) :,Anunoo eui yo ui0)sno au Aq pequosoad 3sa123ur ([euon -ippe) əvə tjr (240 [ 3eqAi) 9A13. A[[nJtpTO IHA I, uouring9q ruQx ənHiq $02 v3urüeÁA Tə Gqap oui Zuiéedaa ur əşey ura [ yi) 9 t de *uau pue sui) 3q3 jo 3üətləşaşs &amp; Áq pəusofloy Aensn sı sıq 1(asə) əəs pus) 039 z 'L ?z 'I 3səzəşul yo 3uauráed şsuyeğe aura 9uios (3o usof oui) pəsinbər (os-pus-os) 1 se, dnyoq xəsdə aoq oxsni (Nd) wüeur se uud uəns ut ACC “ĞA "NI 4YTAT 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 603 
     
   
   
       558 it has no connection with tos 'bodily humour" in Uyg. Civ. H II 22, 23, which is a l.-w. fr. Sanskrit doşa. Türkü vir ff. Man. (he ran away tearing off his garments) bir tos basipa tegdi. Ötrü özin ol tos basıpa kemisti yuntı aritinti “and reached a pool(?). Then he threvv himself in the pool and vvashed and cleansed himself” M 7 7, 18-21 (in this MS. ş is represented by s, mistranscribed tusbasiga): Uy£. vui ff. Man. A (in a very damaged passage referring to water and fish) [gap] tos bas [gap] do. 35, 13: Bud. (that Luşanta Buddha's nature is everything, earth, mountains, stones, sand, streams, river waters, all tos basi *pools' (brooks, waters, etc.) TT V, p. 15, note A 23, 17. 1 tu:ş (d-) basically 'equal, equivalent', hence 'opposite to, facing; survives with these and some extended meanings in NE most dialects tuş/tus R III 1499, 1508; Khak. tus; Tuv. dus; NC Kir. tus; Kzx. tus; NW Kk., Nog. tus; SW Osm. düş (sic?); Tkm. du:s; Cuv. tél. In the early period mainly in the phr. és tuş 'comrade'. Türkü vii ff. Man. Chuas. 197 (adaş): Uyğ. vini Su. S 1 (arkar): vit ff. Bud. tüzün Maytri burxanığ tuş bolalım “may we meet the good Maitreya Buddha” Pfahl. 8, ro, similar phr. TT IIl, p. 28, note 71, 3: és tuş TT VII 40, 83-5, etc. (és); o.o. TT V 24, 72 (adruk); VI 307-8 (1 tep), U IJI 6, 1-2 (iii) (?; ala:çu:): Civ. TT I 48 (é:s): Xak. xi tu:ş a/-kuf” “an equal; hence one says anın tu:şı: "his equal'; tu:ş qubdlatı”l-şay” “vhat is opposite something'; hence one says evim tu:şı: 'opposite my house” Kaş. III 125; a.o. III 355 (1 tep): KB tus is very common, usually in the phr. és tus soo, etc. (és) or parallel to and often rhyming with és 884, 910; by itself for “companion, equal' 336, 4889; o.o. 7 and 4181: (1 tep): xın(?) Az, (if an elephant was loaded with gold) anın tus1 bolğay bu sóznür azı "a few of these words would be equnl to it (in value)” 488; a.o. 24 (1 ten); Tef. ten tuş 298 (1 tep), 316: Çağ. xv ff. tuş dug geldi (sic); tus olğaç duş gelecek (quotn.); tuş also faraf 'direction' (quotn.) Vel. 212; tug (1) mugàárin “near” (quotn.); (2) samt wa taraf 'direction' (quotn.) San. 178r. 14: Xwar. xiv ter) tug 'equal'; tuş 'comrade' Quib 187; kindik tusinda 'level with the (Prophet's) navel' Nahc. 104, ız, a.o. do. 320, 7: Osm. xiv ff. dus, sometimes spelt tus, c.i.a.p. esp. in the phr. tus ol- “to meet” T'T'S 7 245-7, 706; II 347-8; HI 228-9, 688; IV 763-4 (the indexing " confused by the recent sound change dug 7» üş). 2 tu:ş 'buckle. N.o.a.b., but cf. tuga:which fixes the vowel, Cf. 2 toku:. Xak. xı tu:s. (bi7-ijbd', "with back vowel" “a belt buckle (ibzimu'[-mintaga) made of gold or silver which is fastened to the ends of straps" (al-suyür) Kaş, III 125: KB (there is gold in the bosom of the brown earth ; if it is extracted) begler basinda tug ol 'it becomes a buckle on begs' 213 (başında prob. here not specificaliy "on the heads"). MON. DS tö:ş (d-) “the chest” and more specifically “the upper part of the chest”, S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. minor phonetic changes; in SW Az., Osm. döş, in 'Tkm. dö:ş, in Yakut tüös, Pek. 2908; in NE Tuv. töş is “chest” and döş 'rising ground', perhaps the same word; with some extended meanings, e.g. 'anvil' in some modern languages. Cf. kógüz. A l.-w. in Pe., see Doerfer Ii 96s. Uyğ. virr ff. Man. töşi ol kamuğ tümen yılan “her chest is all innumerable snakes” M Il 11, 21; a.o. do. r2 (tültür-): Xak. xı tö:ş (br'I-samma 'with front vowel") al-qa şşa tea hiya ra'su'l-sadr “the upper part of the chest! Kaş. III 125; a.o. III 346 (tö:şle:-): xiv Muh. ai-sadr dó:$ Mel. 47, 13; (kógüz; al-zater “the upper part of the chest' tö:ş Rif. 141); a.o. rso (1 ba:ğ): Çağ. xv ff. töş sina “breast” San. 178r. 13 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv töş “breast” Qutb 184 (in the quotn., however, töş keldi is an error for tuş keldi): Kom. xiv. 'chest' töş CCI; Gr.: Kip. xi al-gadr dö:ş (mis-spelt dó:s;? a Tkm. form) Hou. zo, 19: xiv tóg al-sadr İd. 39: xv zaur töş Tuh. 17b. 13: Osm. xiv ff. döş “chest” in several texts T TS I 225; İl 321; IV 243. 1 tüş apart from one doubtful occurrence in Xwar., pec. to Uyğ. the basic meaning is not clear, prob. (physical) 'fruit', but it is more often used for (metaph.) “ruit”, that is "the consequence! of some act, or if it has been a good act, “the reward' for it. In this sense it is syn. vv, utl, q.v. It seems certain that it is this word and not another possible transcription (ölü, sişlz) which occurs in the phr. tüis etözi translating Sanskrit sambhogakáya the second of the Buddha's three 'bodies', for the other two see belgürtme: and no:m. UYyğ. vii ff. Man. (under the influence of the wind shrubs and trees grow, and put out branches and buds and) evin tüş bér[ür] “yield seed and fruit' Wind. 11; (the three men in their present existence) ayığ tüşke tegmis (spelt tekmiş) “attained evil consequences” (because of their previous misdeeds) TT H 16, 29-30, [gap] kihne tüşin ukittipiz "you have explained the consequences of . . . acts” TT III 11; kilmig edgüpüznüp tüşinte "as a revvard for your good deeds' do. 103; ol buyanınız tüşinte “as a reward for your merit” do. 105; 3.0. do. 169 (1 ó&amp;-): Bud. Sanskrit phalam karmànám “the fruit (i.e. consequence) of acts' kılınç tüşü TT VIII F.6; érámanyaphalam "the fruits of asceticism” toyin tüşi do. G.48, tüş yemiş aşlığlar 'fruit eaters' U II ör, 7; (you have long burnt in hell) anıp tüsin “as a consequence of that” U /TT 31, 6; o.o. do. 89, 12-15; 90, 19; (faith is the first cause) üzelenü tügke €ltmeknin 'leading to the highest rewards" TT V 20, 3; 0.0. U I 27, 15 etc. (utl); Sue. 475, ro-11: (amirtfBur-); Suv. 38, 14 ff. is a long passage on the Buddha's sambliogakáya tüş etózi: Civ. bu söğütnün tüşi "the fruit of this tree” 7T VII 28, 14; (if a man plants a tree) ol sógütte yeti tórlüg tüş yemiş “there are seven kinds of fruit on that tree! do. 42; in USp. tüş sometimes means "a crop! e.g. 28, 6 (üleş-), but is generally used  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 604 
     
   
   
      560 D toş- (d-) Recip. f. of to:- , "to fill” and the like. Survives only(?) in SE Tar. toş- "to be full; to come to an end” (i.e. to completion) R İT 1218; "Vürki toş- (of the hour of death) “to arrive' Tarring 312 (not, as there suggested, a Sec. f. of tas-). Uyğ. viii ff. Bud, [buyanlığ) bilge biliglig yivig tolğu toşğuka “to fill up and complete the equipment of merit and wisdom' TT V, p. 35, footnote r, l. 2; the word is also included, without references, in the vocabulary in U 7 sg as translating the Chinese phr. ch'ung man 'to fill (Giles 2,924 7,022). tuş- (du:ş-) “to meet” and the like; semantically connected as a homophonic V. vv. 1 tu:$. Survives only(?) in SW Tkm. du:s-, same meaning. Uy$£. viti ff. Bud. (when I was travelling in India) tuşdum sizin çoğluğ yalınlığ erigipizke barığınızka “I encountered (?became aware of) your brilliant (Hend.) activities (Hend.)' Hiüen-ts. 2078-9; 0.0. PP 17, 1-3 (udik); USp. 43, 4-5: Civ. (if a man cuts his nails on a Hen Day) edgü kilşike) tuşar “he mects a good man” TT VII 32, 14-15: Xak. xi ol mana: tuşdi: /agiyani tea ra'áni "he met, saw me” Xaş, IH 12 (tuşa:r, tusma:k); a.o. 1 26, 15: KB sevinçke tuşup “meeting (i.e. experiencing) pleasure' 95; yorip utru hacib okidi tusup "the Chamberlain went to meet him and invited him in” 576; o.o. 521, 2267, 2336, 2340 (arta:k), 5955, 5963: (xiu(?) Tef. tuşmak “meeting” 316): Xwar. xiv tus- (with Dat.) 'to mect, go to' Qutb 187: Kip. xiv tuş- zara “to visit” İd. 63. tüş- (d-) has a general connotation of movement downwards both voluntary, “to settle (somewhere); to dismount; to retire, withdraw (to somewhere)', and involuntarily “to fall (off something). S.ia.m.lg. with minor phonetic changes, and some extensions of meaning; düş- in NE 'l'uv.; SW Az., Osm., "km. An early L-w. in Hungarian as dól-. Türkü viii ol at anta: tüs[di:] “that horse fell there' 7. N 4; (the enemy) ógüzke: tüşdi: 'fell into the river” T 16; ben evgerü: tüşeyi:n “1 am going home (to stay there) T. 3o: vili ff. İrkB 46 (2 titig); 64 (toğra:k): Uyğ. vil tüg- occurs nearly ro times, usually in damaged passages; in the clear cases, esp. in the phr. yana: tüş-, it seems to mean “to withdraw with the intention of settling down', e.g. [gap] evi:me: eki:nti: ay altı: yanı:ka: tüşdim “on the sixth day of the second month 1 went to my home (to settle down)' $u. W 4: vit ff. Man.-A M 1 9, 13-14 (tópü:); a.o. do. zo, 3; [gap] yérgerü: tüşmişler erti "had fallen [from heaven?) down to earth” M 1I 7, 18; (theleaves) yerde tüşti 'fell on the ground' Man.-uig. Frag. 400, 7: Man. tünerig tamuka tügmeki bar “they descend into dark hell” M II 11, 9: Chr. U I 8, 16-17 (tópü:): Bud, yazukka tüse teginmegey ertimiz 'we shall not have ventured to fall into sin” PP 8, r, o.0. do. 61, 7 (kamıl-): U 11 4,8; III 33, 14 (étig); TT X 311, 358; TM IV 253, SS etc: Civ. alkamakka tüsgelir Sen “you are on the point of acquiring a high   MON. V. DŞreputation TT I 170-1; o.o. TT VII 27, 16 (uma:y); H I ::6: Xak. xi er attin tüşdi: “the man dismounted (nazala) from the horse'; and one says er ta:mdın tüşdi: “the man fell (sagata) off a vvall”, also off a horse or anything else that one falls off. Kaş. 17. 13 (tüşe:r, tüşme:k), over a dozen o.o. mostly translated zoaqa"a “to fall: KB tüstl (etc.) 'dismounted' 489 (bunad-), 520, 585, etc.; İşin tüşse “if a task falls to you” 586; (anything that leans over) turumaz tüser 'cannot stand but falls down' 807: xiii(?) At. bu ajun ribat ol tüşüp köçgülük, rıbütka tüşüğli tüger keçgülük "this world is an inn where one stops and must move on; whoever stops at an inn stops and must then pass on' 177-8; Tef. tüs- “to stop, settle, fall (lit. and metaph.)', etc. 320: xiv Muh. teaqa'a düg- Mel. 32, 5; Rif. 116: Çağ. xv ff. tüş- (-ti, etc.) düg-, and “to dismount” (én-) from a horse, and “to fall down' (düş-) from a high place, and “to alight at a stopping place' (bir menzilde kon-) Vel. 211 (quotn.); tüş- (öa-işba" *with -ü-") furrid dmadan "to alight', and uftádan “to fall'; and when it is used to make a Compound (nturakkab) V. with another V. it means pardáxtan “to complete', e.g. ata tüş- tir-andüzi bardüxtan “to finish shooting" San. 176r. 25 (quotns.): Xwar. xii düş- “to fall ' Aii 27; “to happen” do. 35: xiu(?) köktin bir kök yaruk tüşdi (?d-) “a blue light fell from heaven” Oğ. s1-2; uluğ ölüğ barğu tüşdi "large quantities of booty fell to the lot of” (the army, etc.) 272; yurtika üyke tüşti ketti “he went back to his encampment (Hend.)' do. 309: xiv tüs- 'to fall, to stay for the night', etc. Qutb 191; MN 43, etc.; Nahc. 104, 10 (2 ok); 320, 3; 415, r: Kom. xiv “to fall' tüş- CCI, CCG; Gr. 260 (quotns.): Kip./Tkm. xri nazala tüş- (also 6n-) /Zon. 33, 16; teaqa'a nina'l-suqü' tüiş- do. aş, 3: xiv tüş- both waga'a and mazala; also pronounced düşİd. 39; düş- taqa'a do. 48, habata “to descend, collapse', and scaga"a düş- Bul. 86r.: xv tüşnaxala Kav. 12, 12; 74, 9; Tuh. 37a. 1; 60a. 6; 69a. 4: Osm. xiv ff. düş- “to happen; to be overthrown; to fall on (i.e. attack, someone); to fall to the lot of”, etc.; c.i.a.p. TT 1246; II 348; 111 228; IV 264. Dis. DŞA tişi: (? dışı:) 'female'. The original vowels are uncertain; the Dat. f. tigi:ka: occurs once in Kaş., and judging by the analogy of at, til, tt:$, etc. this was prob. the original vocalization, but elsewhere the vowels are either unknown or -1- .. . -İ, Survives in NE most dialects tizi/tiji; Tuv. dili, SE "Türki tişi (Share, Jarring) İçişi (BS); SW Az., Osm. disi. In NC, SC, NW, and SW 'T'km. "female” is urğaçı or the like. Uyğ. vu ff. Man.-A tişi takıgular “hens” M 7 36, 9 (and erkek takığular “cocks” do. 10): Bud. tişi yekler “female demons' Kuan. 23; tişi tınlığ “female creature” do. 73-4 (U İl is, 3): Sanskrit hastinihdbhyám "of the two female elephants! tişl yapa:lgapl TT. VHI C.s; o.o. TT X 249,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 605 
     
   
   
            DIS. V. D$D- ET etc.: Civ. tigl occasionally occurs as a N. e.g. er tişi ikiğüke yormğı edgü “all is well with the man and woman' TT VII 29, 18-19; kayu tişinin kağukı tutunsar “if a woman suffers from strangury” H 7 37; but more often as an Adi. eg. tişi kişi "a female! H 7 zr, 121 a.o.o.: Xak. xi tişi: “the female (al-untà) of anything' Kaş. III 224; erkek tigt: “the male and female' 7 529, 8; 771 6, 2 (mis-spelt erlik); 178, 16: o.o. 7 396 (torum); II roz (tigr:ka:; kavuş-): KB (questioning is male and) cavvübi tişi ol 'answering is female! 979; tişike (sic) bir erkek bolur kör eri “a male becomes a female's husband” 980; o.o. 13031304, 4132: xn1(?) At. biliglig tişi er cáhil er tişi “a wise woman is (as good as) a man, a foolish man (no better than) a woman' 88; (a man dies) tişisi kalıp bir adın er bile “his wife remains with another husband” 275; Tef. tişi “female, woman' 303: xiv Muh. ("male erkek) al-untà digi: Mel. 45, 4; ditşi: 54, 11; Rif. ısı, ti:şi: do. 138: Caf. xv ff. tişl digi mu'annat ma'násina 'female' Vel. 179 (quotn.); tİŞİ máda toa unità ditto San. 195r. 17: X war. xiv tişi ditto Qutb 180: Kom. xiv "female (animal) tişi CCI; Gr. 246 (quotns.): Kip. xin al-atán 'female ass” tl:şi: eşek Hou. 12, 15; 0.0. I5, I ("evve”), 15, 8 ('nanny goat"); a/-untá “voman” tlsi: 24, 17: xiv tigl: al-untà İd. 39: xv al-untà min kulli'l-haywánàt 'female of any animal” tişi: Kav. 61, 21; nága 'female camel' tişi tewe Tuğ. 36b. r: Osm. xv ff. dişi “voman”, in several texts T'TS II 308; III 200; IV 231-2. ?D tusu: Hap. leg.; the language is obscure but seems to point to an original form tursu:, if so a peculiar Imperat. of turus-. Xak. in telling a donkey to stop (/7 igdf) one says tuşu: tugu:; a rd” comes(yadxul) between the tá' and şin but cannot be written in any expression ( fi “barati(n) mö) Kaş. III 224. Dis. V. DŞAtaşu:- (?d-) “to carry, transport (something Acc, to somewhere 2at.)”. S.i.a.m.l.g., usually as tag1-; NE Tuv. dafi-; SW Az. Gasi-; Osm. taşı-, "Tkm. daşa-. Xak. xi ol evke: yarma:k taşu:dı: “he carried (nagala) the dirhams (etc.) to the house" Kaş. III 266 (taşu:r, tagu:ma:k): Çağ. xv ff. taşı- “to transport (magl hardan) from one place to another” Sam. rssv. 20 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv taşı- ditto Qut 173: Kom. xiv "to carry away! taşı- CCG; Gr.: Kap. xiv taşı- naqala İd. 63: xv haumala “to transfer, convey” taşı- Tuh. 13b. 12. D tişe:- (d-) Den. V. fr. tiş (dı:ş), s.i.a.m.l.g.; in NE, NC, NW generally for 'to lose the milk-teeth', in SE, SC, SW with the same meaning as Kaj.; NE Tuv. dije-; SW Osm. dise-; Tkm. di:ge-. Cf. tisek. Xak. xi «ol» tegirme:n tise:di: haddada asnána'l-rahá "he sharpened the teeth of the mill-stone”, in this phrase the Object is abbreviated and the Predicate is not strictly apposite to it, since teğirme:n is a generic term for “mill” (a/-töhün) and it is only the teeth of the mill-stone that are sharpened; and one says ol orğa:k tişe:di: “he sharpened the teeth of the sickle' Kaş. III 266 (tige:r, tişe:me:k): Osm. xvi ff. dişe- “to roughen (a mill-stone)'; in several texts T'T'S I 212; 11 307; 111 zoo, İV 231. D tuşa:- (?d-) Den. V. fr. 2 tu:ş, “to hobble (a horse, etc.)'. S.i.m.m.l.g.; NE Tuv. dufa-; SW 'Tkm. dusa-. Xak. xi KB (good luck is like a stag and avoids men) kalt kelse bekle tuşa ham tiziğ “if it comes to you, make it fast and hobble its knees” 712: Kap. xiv tuşaqayyada “to hobble (an animal)” /d. 63. (D) töşe:- (d-) “to spread out (a mattress, etc.)' and the like. S.ia.m.lg.; NE Tuv. dóje-; SW Az., Osm., Tkm. dóse-. Uyğ. vini ff. Bud. [gap] töşeklerin töşep 'making their beds' U //T 35, 15-16; bi biçğu üze töşemiş yerlerde “in places mattressed with sharp knives (Hend.) TM IV 253, 41-2: Xak. xi (ol) töşe:k töşe:di: faraşa”/-firüş “he spread out a mattress” Kaş. 11] 266 (no Aor. or Infin.; appended to tüşe:-): xin(?) Tef. töşe- “to spread out, to cover (e.g. ground with tiles)". 310: xiv Mh, faraşa tó:ge:- Mel. şo, t; Rif. 113; al-farş dó:gemek 36, 14; 122: Çağ, xv ff. töşe- (spelt) gustardan "to spread to" San. 177r. 22 (quotns.): Xwar. xin dóseditto ' Ali 55: xiv tóge- ditto Qutb 184: Kip. xu faraga töşe:- Hou. 34, 7: XIV töşe- basafa “to spread out” İd. 39; faraşa töşe- Bul. 6or.: xv ditto Kav. 9, 11; 74, 3; Tuh. 28a. 13; alo. 84a. 6: Osm. xiv ff. döşe- “to spread out with some extended meanings T'T'S 7 225; 111 209; IV 243. : tüşe:- (d-) Den. V. fr. 2 tü:ş, “to dream”. Survives in NE (Tuv. düje-); elsewhere replaced by phr. like tüş kör-. UYĞ. viri ff. Bud. muntaf tül tüşeyük men 'I have dreamed the following dream” U II 24, 27 (TI 54, is), yavuz tül tüşeser “if you have a bad dream” TT VII qo, 38; a.o. Suv. 593, 23: Xak. xı ol tü:ş tüşe:di: “he dreamt' (ra'à ru'yà); also "he had a nocturnal emission' (ihtalama) Kaş, III 266 (tüşe:r, tüşe:me:k). Dis. DŞD D taştın Den. Adi. /Adv. fr. 1 tas; 'outside; situated outside; homophonic w. the A5/. of 1 tas but not to be confused with it. For occurrences see 1 tag. Dis. V. DŞDD 1 taşıt- Hap. leg.?; Caus. f. of tag-. Xak. xı bu o:t ol eşiç taşıtğa:n “this fire constantly makes the pot boil over” (mufawrwira li'l-qidr) Kaş. I 514; n.m.e. S2tagit- See taşut-. D taşut- Caus. f. of tagu:-; s.i.s.m.l. usually as tagit-. This sound change must have occurred rather early as the word is vocalized taşut- only once in the MS. of Kaş., elsewhere the şir is either unvocalized or carries a kasra. Kaş. xı «ol» tarığ taşutti: “he had  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 606 
     
   
   
     and father; also for bringing about a meeting between two sons (ibnayn); the original form was tuşurdum Kaş. // 178 (tuşğururmen, tuşğurma:k). Tris. D9G D tuşa:ğu: (?, d-) Hap. leg.; Dev. N. fr. tuşa:- Xak. xı óhe says at tuşa:ğu: boldi: “the time has come to put a hobble (tad””/-şikül) on the horse (etc.)' Kaş. I 446. D taşaklığ (? d4 P.N./A. fr. tagak; s.i.s.m.l, Xak. xı taşakl/ğ er “a man with testicles" (xuşya) Kaş. 1 497. D tuşağlığ (?d-) Hap. leg.?; P.N./A. fr. tuşa:ğ. Xak. xı KB tuşağlığ yıramaz tilekçe barır “a hobbled (horse) does not go far avvay, it goes vvhere you vvish” 316. D taşğaru: (d-) Directive Adv. fr. 1 taş, *outwards' and the like. S.i.s.m.l. vv. some phonetic changes; NE Tuv. daşka:r, SW : Osm. dışarı: Tkm. daşarı, Türkü vir ff. Man. tasğaru (sic) kemisti “he threw them out” M 17, 6-z: Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. tınliğlarığ taşğaru üntürdi “it raised mortals out of (the blue mud of samsára)! TT V 26, 85; o.o. PP 1, 1 (atlandur-); U İTİ 43,25; TT VII 41, 23; VIII I.3 (ta:şğa:ru:): (Xak.) xın(?) Tef. taşkaru “out of (somewhere .45/.)” 290: Çağ. xv ff. taşkarı faşra Vel. 170; taşkarı gáhir wa birün "outside, exterior'; in Rumi taşra San. 157r. ro, a.o. do. 5: Xwar. xırt(?) taşğarun (or ? d-) kalmasun "let them not remain outside (the realm)! Oğ. 294; çaşğarun (sic) kalmasun do. 310: xiv tişkaru (sic) “out(wards)! Quib 1:94: Kom. xiv “outside” tagkart: CCT, Gr.: Kip. xiv (after 1 tag), and one says taşkara: çık axruc barra(n) "get out! /4. 63: xv taşkarı barra(n) Tuh. 73b. 12; (some Turks elide -k- in some words, for ƏRƏ for taşkarı they say faşarı do. 83a. 8. Dis. DŞG D teşük (d-) Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. teg-; lit. “plerced”. S.i.m.m.l. usually as teşik for 'hole, cavity, opening', and the like; Kaj.'s meanings do not seem to survive; NE Tuv, dejik; SW Az., Osm., Tkm. desik; 1.-vv, in Pe., Doerfer II 1002. Uyğ. vin ff. Civ. PU teşik is included in a list of taxes in USp. 88, 44 (cf. tütün) but the exact meaning is unknown: Xak. x1 teşük a/-ddar 'ruptured' (in a medical sense; prov.): teşük (vocalized feşik, but see teşükle:-) a/-manhüm “a glutton', that is a man who fills his stomach, but does not satisfy his eyes (i.e. he thinks he still has a cavity in his stomach) Kaş. 7 387: Çağ. xv ff. téguk delik "hole” Vel. 188 (quotns.); tésük sürüx "hole” San. 195r. 15 (quotn.); VU tüşük described in San. as a corruption of teşük is listed with.quotns. in Vel. 211; San. 178v. 11: Xwar. xiv teşük "a hole' (in the ground) Nahc. 21, 4: Kom. xiv “hole” teşik CCI; Gr.: Kip. xv buxg 'hole' (tellk and) teşik Tuh.-7a. ız.  D tisek (d-) Dev. N. fr. tíge:- in the sense of "to lose the milk-teeth'; “a two-year-old sheep'. As such, Hap. leg.; but survives as tísege in Yakut (Pek. 2686) and şişek and the like in several NC, NW, SW languages, see Shcherbah, p. 115; a First Period 1.-vv, in Mong. hs şilegü (Haenisch 140). Xak. xı tişek a/-fani mina”lğanam 'a two-year-old sheep' Kaş. I 387: xiv Muh. al-cada' ditto şi:şek Mel. 70, ıq, Skge:k (sic) Rif. 172: Xwar. xiv şişek ditto Qutb 166; a.0. 27 (bakla:n): Kip. xri (under 'sheep') ibm sanatayn 'two-year old” Skgek Hou. ış, 2: xiv şişek al-tani mina'l-ğanam İd. ss, Bul. 7, 11: xv hatoli'l-ma'az “a one-year old goat” şişek Tuh. 13a. 2. D töşe:k (d-) Conc. N. fr. töşe:- , “mattress, bedding”, and the like. S.i.m.m.l. as tóge:-; l.-w. in Pe. and other languages, see Doerfer II göz. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. U III 35, 15-16 (tóge:-); Suv. 513, 13 (tólet): Civ. USp. 79 is a list of various kinds of töşek: Xak. xi töşek a/-firaş “mattress" Kaş. I 387; 11] 266 (tóse:-), and about a dozen o.o., usually spelt töşe:k: KB 1056 (ulu-): xnr(?) Tef. tósek *mattress, bed” 310: xiv Mu. al-firaş dó:gek Mel. 67, 13; tó:ge:k. Rif. 167; Çağ. xv tf. töşek a Dev. N. (Rdgil-t magdar) fr. toşe:meaning gustardan spreading out”, and also a Conc. N. for 'carpet, mattress! (5bísát ted naháli) which they spread out for sleep or rest San. 178v. r: Xwar. xiv töşek “bed, bedding" Qutb 185: Kom. xiv “mattress, bed” töşek CCI, CCG, Gr. 251 (quotns.): Kip. xiu a/-tarrüha “mattress” töşek How. 17, r:xiv töşek (“vith -6-) al-bisát, but in the Kitab Beylik töşek is al-tarráha wwa'l-firág and al-bisát is kili:m /d. 39: xv a/-firüş töşek Kav. 64, 5; tarrüha töşek Tuh. 23b. 6; 84a. 6. D tüşük (d-) Intrans. Dev. N./A. fr. tüş-, s.i.m.m.l. with a rather wide range of meanings, mostly pejorative, "fallen, dropping; (unpleasant) event; abortion; loss at gaming' etc. ; SW Az., Osm., Tkm. düşük. Xak. xı “a worthless, idle fellow' (al-saqrtu'l-kaslán) is called tüşük kişi Kaş. 7 387: K.B (he reached his house and entered it) könli tüşük feeling downcast' 1563; a.o. 6226: (Çağ. xv ff. tüşük is a Sec. f. of teşük, q.v.): Osm. xvi ff. düşük 'abortion'; in one or two texts TTS 7 248; 1I 349. D tüşgün (d-) Intrans. Dev. N./A. f. tüş-, s.i.m.m.l. meaning 'fallen, broken down, decayed, prone to (something), and the like; SW Az., Osm. düşkün. “There is no other trace of the metaph. meaning in Xak., but cf. tügürgü:n. Xak. xı tüsgün gacaru'l-katirà" dü gawh "the thorny tragacanth tree” Kaş. I 443: Çağ. xv ff. tüggün maf/üq wa uftáda *wretched, fallen” San. 178v. 7. Tris. DŞG D töşekçi: (d-) N.Ag. fr. töşe:k, n.o.a.b. Xak. xr KB (in lists of domestic servants) tösekçi 'bed-maker' 2557 (idigci:), 4148: xiv Muh. (in a list of craftsmen) al-farrás 'mattress 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 607 
     
   
   
       562 the wheat (etc.) transported (amgala) from one place to another” Kaş. 1] 307 (taşutu:r, tasutma:k); tava:r yuluğ taşuttum (sic) "1 ordered him to carry away (bi-naql) the ransom money” / 210, 22; a.o. 1 514, 17. D tişet- (d-) Hap. leg. (?); Caus. f. of tişe:-. Xak. x1 ol orğa:k tigetti: "he ordered that the teeth of the sickle should be sharpened' (bi-tahdid); also used for the teeth of a mill-stone Kaş. 1I 307 (tişe:tür (sic), tigetme:k). D töşet- (d-) Caus. f. of tóge:-; “to have (a mattress, etc.) spread out”. S.i.s.m.]. Xak. xı ol töşe:k tósetti: "he had the mattress spread out” (afrasa) Kaş. II ao? (tóse:tür (sic), töşetme:k): Xwar. xiv töşet- ditto Quib 185. Tris. DŞD D taştırtı: (d-) Adv. of place. fr. 1 taş, *outside'. N.o.a.b. Türkü vir ff. Man. M IH 19, 12 (ii) (belgürt-). Tris. V. DŞDD tügütlenil- (d-) Hap. leg.; Pass. Refl Den. V. fr. tügüt Active Dev. N. fr. tüg-. "This N. seems to survive only in SW Osm. düşüt “an abortion', common fr. xvi onwards, see 773. As the basis of this V. which seems to mean 'to adapt oneself, be adapted (to something) it must mean something like *falling into place”, Uyğ. viu ff. Bud. TT VII B.11 (éyin). Dis. DŞĞ D taşak (d-) Dim. f. fr. 2 ta:ş, lit. "little stone”, in practice 'testicle'. S.i.s.m.l., but the kind of word not widely listed in dicts. Xak. xı tagak a/l-xuşya "testicle”, and “the penis” (al-dahar) is also called taşak because the two are close together Kaş. I 380; o.o. / 438, 14; III 267, 19 (the same prov.): xiv Muğ. al-bayd "testicles” ta:şa:k Mel. 48, 3; taşak Rif. 142: Kom. xiv. 'testicle taşak CCI; Gr.: Kap. xii al-antiyán ditto taşa:k Hou. 21, 4: xiv taşak ditto 7d. 63: xv ditto Kav. 61, 6; Tuh. 4b. 2. D taşu:ğ Hap. leg.?; N. Ac. fr. taşu:-. Xak. xı tasu:ğ "the transportation! (rugía) of merchandise and other things Kaş. 7 411. D tuşa:ğ (?d-) Dev. N. (Conc. N.) fr. tuşa:-, “a hobble' for a horse. S.i.s.m.l.; cf. buka:ğu: which, though not originally syn. w. this word has displaced it in some modern languages, and kişe:n. Xak. xı tuşa:ğ şikdl yadayi'l-faras “a hobble on a horse”s legs” Kaş. 1 411; a.o. İ 479 (kösrüğ): Kip. xiv tuşak (PU) saccatu'l-faras ay qayduhu "a hobble” fd. 63 (şacca means “a wound on the head”, perhaps a scribal error for şikd/): xv şikdl tuşar (?error for tuşavv: Tkm. kişen, in margin tuşak, Tkm. köstek in second hand) Tuh. zob. 12. Dis. V. DŞĞD taşık- (?d-) Intrans, Den. V. fr. 1 taş, “to go out”. N.o.a.b. Türkü vırı kapim xağan DIS. V. D$Dyéti: yegirmi: eren taşıkmış "my father the xağan and seventecn men went out” (i.e. ? renounced their allegiance to China) 7 E rr, Il E 10; yazıya: Oğuzğaru: sü taşıkdımız “in the spring we and the army set out towards the Oğuz” 1 N 8; o.o. İİ E az (ilk), T 30, 33: virt ff. Man. M I 75, 11 (tu:l): Uy£. vir (he sent a message saying) Siz taşıkıp Cikig taşğarın . . . men taşıkayı:n “set out and bring out the Çik ... . 1 will set out myself Su. E 10; olo, E 5; S 8 (2): vr ff. Man. M IT 11, 20; olo. do. 14; M III 29, 13 (i): Bud. U II 56, 3 (tavışsız): Yağma:, Tuxsr, Kip., Yaba:ku:, some Tkm. xı er evdin taşıktı: “the man went out of the house” , most of the "Turks say çıkti taşıktı: Kaş, JI 116 (taşıka:r, taşıkma:k, the fd” is everywhere vocalized with Fasra as well as fatha): (Çağ. xv ff. taşık- (spelt) Rüfta tva xasta wa münda şudan dar mihnati wa şiddat “to be injured, wounded, abandoned in distress and affliction” San. 156r. 26 (fully conjugated but without quotns.) can hardly belong here; it might be a similar Den. V. fr. 2 ta:ş ("to be stoned") not noted elsewhere.) D tusik- Hap. leg.; Intrans. Den. V. fr. 2 tu:ş. Xak. xi KB (if my Lord asks me “vhat have you done?”, what excuse have I?) uvutka tugiktim 'I am hobbled with shame(?)' 6544. D taşğar- (d-?) Trans. Den. V. fr. 1 taş, “to bring, or send, out”, N.o.a.b. UyB. viii Şu. E 1o (tagik-): vir ff. Man. TT III 68 (1 :a:1): Bud. kızığ taşğarmış künde “on the day when you give your daughter in marriage" TT VI 343: Civ. kiz taşğarsar TT VII 39, 6. D taşğur- Inchoative f. of taş-, prob. a scribal error for tasgir-; the second occurrence is an example of the Inchoative form following tamçır-, q.v. Pec. to Kaş. Xnk. xı eşiç taşğurdiı: hàdatil-qidr an: tafür tea taxruc minhá'l-má' "the pot was on the point of boiling and the water of coming out of it Kaş. 11 178 (taşğura:r, taşğurma:k), same phr. 7I zor, 4. D toşğur- (d-) Caus. f. of toş-, “to fill'. Survives in SE Türki togkar-; cf. toltur-. Xak. xı ol evin tava:r birle: toşğurdrı: “he filled (ma/a”a) his house with property'; also used for filling a jar with water, etc. Kaş, J7 178 (toşğurur, toşğurma:k). D tuşğur- (d-) Caus. f. of tuş- , "to cause to meet”, N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vn ff, Bud, (may we receive from Maitreya Buddha commendation to the divine favour of Buddha, by the strength of that commendation) yüz kalp üç asanği altı paramıt tuşğurup 'causing us to meet the six ways of salvation for a hundred aeons and three immeasurable lengths of time' Pfahl. 8, 11-12 (but toşğurup filling! is a possible alternative): Xak. xı men oğulniı: ata:sıpa: tuşğurdım 'I brought about a meeting (arvqa"tu l-mulaqdt) between a son  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 608 
     
   
   
     564 ''RIS. maker' dö:şekçi: Mel. 58, 7; tö:şe:kçi: Rif. 157. D tóseklig (d-) Hap. leg.?; P.N./A. fr. tóge:k. Xak. xı (after töşeklik) and with -8 (i.e. töşekliğ) its owner, that is 'owner of a mattress! (a/-/firdş) Kaş. 1 509. D töşeklik (d-) Hap. leg.?; A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. tóge:k. Xak. xı töşeklik barçın 'brocade (etc.) designed to make a mattress” (al-firá) Kaş. 1 sog. Tris. V. DŞGD teşükle:- (d-) Hap. leg., Den. V. fr. teşük. Xak. xı ol anı: teşükle:di: “he reckoned that he was greedy, a glutton' (akü! marhüm). Kaş. 111 340 (teşükle:r, teşükle:me:k). D tüsgünlen- (d-) Hap. leg., Refl. Den. V. fr. tüggün, Xak. xı ta:ğ tüsgünlendl: “there were many gum tragacanth trees (sacaru'l-katirá') on the mountain! Kaş. 17 278 (tüşgünlenü:r, tüşğünlenme:k). Dis. DŞL D tüglüg P.N./A. fr. 1 tüş: n.o.a.b. Uy£. viri ff. Bud, (entering the island of the jewels of Buddhahood) kutrulmak tüşlüğ ertini alğalı uyur “he can take the jewel the fruits of which are salvation” TT V 26, 94-5. D tüşlük Hap. leg.; A.N. fr. 3 tüs; the phr. is a variant of the commoner phr. tüş ó:di:. Xak. xı tüşlük ó:di: soaqtıcl-ta”ris “(he time to halt for a rest" Kaş. 7 477. Dis. V. DŞLD teşil- (d-) Pass. f. of 1 teş- , “to be pierced, split), etc.; s.i.m.m.l.g. Türkü vır ff. Man. (the blood, pus and filth) yavlak tesilti (sic) tökülti “vere violently split and poured out” M I 5, 10-11: Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. (of a corpse) karını kéberip içegüsi teşilip “the stomach swells and the entrails are perforated' U 7/7 43. 24; 0.0. do. 78, 2-3 (içe:ğü), TT X 548: Xak. xi ka:b teşildi: “the wine-skin split” (Inşaqqa), verse Kaş. İT 127 (tesili:r (MS. in error tegildi:), teşilme:k): Çağ. xv fI. tégil(spelt) sirdx şudan "to be pierced" San. 194v. 15 (quotns.; earlier erroneous transcription tigil-, and translation, corrected): Kip. (xiv in Bul. 35r. balla “to moisten” is translated PU teşil-, ó:l et-, 5:1 eyle-; the first word is no doubt an error for yaşla- or the like): xv infacara “to be split, cleaved” (şıtın- ; in margin in SW (?) hand) deşil- Tu). 6a. r. D tişel- (d-) Pass. f. of tişe:- , s.i.s.m.]. Xak. xı orğa:k tişeldi: “the teeth of the sickle were sharpened'; similarly one says tefirme:n tiseldi: 'the teeth of the mill-stone were sharpened”, also the teeth of a saw (al-mingür), and the like Kaş. II 128 (tişelür, tişelme:k). : D tusa:l- (?d3-) Pass. f. of tuga:-; "to be hobbled” and the like. The only occurrence in Kas. is dubious, it is in a prov. quoted under DSG tuşan-, and both the actual appearance of the word and the vocalization, where tusa:lur would bc expected, suggest that it is a correction of tusa:nur by a Inter hand; but tuşals..s.m.l. Xak. xi(?) arslan kökrese: at ada:kı: tuşa:lır (sic) when the lion roars, the horse's legs are hobbled” (yazaşaklal) Kaş. 11 146, 26. D töşel- (d-) Pass. f. of töşe:- , "to be spread out”, etc, S.i.m.m.l.g. Xak. xi töşek töşeldi: furiga'l-firág 'the mattress was spread out” Kaş, Iİ 128 (no Aor. or Infin.): Caf. xv ff. töşel- (-ip, etc.) dógen- Vel. 211 (quotn.); töşel- gustarda gudan “to be spread out San, 177v. 11 (quotn.). D 1 taşla:- (d-) Den. V. fr. 1 taş, etymologically this V. could be either Intrans. 'to go out” (a meaning pec. to Kaş.) or Trans. "to send out. In the meaning “to throw' taşla(tasla-, tasta-) s.i.s.m.L, but it is an open question whether in this sense it represents this V. or 2 taşla:- in the lit. sense of “to throw stones'; the two V.s seem to be distinguished in San., but the translation in Kav. clearly suggests that 2 tasla:- meant, in general, “to throv”, Xak. xı er taşla:dı: ağtaraba”l-racul “the man went abroad” Kaş. İH 294 (taşla:r, taşla:ma:k): Çağ. xv ff. taşla- (-di) az- 'to throw our” Vel, 169 (quotns.ş in one taşkarı taşla- clearly implies an etymological connection vvith 1 taş), taşla- (1) birün andöxtan "to throw out” San. 156v. 7 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv taşla- “to throw away' Qutb 173. D 2 taşla:- (? d-) Den. V. fr. 2 ta:ş, “to throw stones (at someone), to stone' and in some modern languages 'to pave (a place) with stones”, S,i.s.m.L, see 1 taşla:-, Xak. xı ol ıtığ taşla:dı: “he threw stones (daraba . . . bi'l-hicára) at the dog” Kaş. III 294 (precedes 1 taşla:-, no separate Aor. or Infin.): xiu(?) Tef. taşla- "to stone” 290: Çağ. xv (f. tasln(2) sang zadan "to stone” San. 156v. 8: Kom. xiv ditto CCG; Gr. 237 (quotn.): Kip. xv racama bi'l-hacar “to stone” ta:şla- ; this is the original meaníng but some of them use it for the expression ramd mü fi yadik "to throw whatever you have in your hands! Kav. 76, 8 racama taşla- Tuh. 17b. 3. D tişle:- (d-) Den. V. fr. tiş (1 tı:ş), “to bite". See tiglat-. S.i.a.m.l.g. as the normal word for "to bite', but some NE, NW languages use ISir- as well or instead; SW Az., Osm.” digle-; Tkm. di:şle-. Uyğ. viri ff. Civ. 0pdün iki tişin otura tişlep 'biting it in half with the front teeth” H 7 152: Xak. xr ol anı: tigle:di: 'addahu bi-sinnihi “he bit him”, also used for “to hit in the teeth' Kaş. III 294 (tişle:r, tişle:me:k, corrected fr. -ma:k or vice versa): KB 460r (uvşa:k): Çağ, Sv ff. tigle- (spelt) “to seize with the tceth' (ba-dandün giriftan), usually in order to bite (gazidan), or in order to protect (ba-cihat-T muháfazat hardan) San. 194v. 22 (quotns.): Xvvar, xiv. tigle- “to bite' Qutb 180: Kom, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 609 
     
   
   
     DIS. DSR 565 xiv ditto CCT, Gr.: Kip. xiii "adda tişle:Hou. 42, 9: xiv. ditto İd. 39; Bul. 63r.: xv ditto Tul. 25b. 10. D tusla:- (?d-) Den. V. fr. 1 tu:ş, survives in some NE languages as tuşta-/tusta- “to meet". Xak. xi men anr: tuşla:dım (tahaddaytuhu wa. qumtu bi-hidáyihi sa. muwácahatihi “1 confronted him and stood opposite to, and facing, him” Kaş. III 294 (tuşla:rmen, tuşla:ma:k). D tö:şle:- (d-) Hap. leg. as a grammatical example; Den. V. fr. tö:ş. Xak. xı tó:gle:di: “he struck him on the chest” ('alà şadrihi), tö:ş al-sadr Kaş. III 346, 12; n.m.e. D 1 taslat- (d-) Caus. f. of 1 tasla:-; s..s.m.l.(?) but see 1 tagla:-. Xak. xi ol oğulnu: taşlattı: Zarraba ibnahu, "he sent his son abroad”, to be hardened by foreign travel Kaş. II 343 (taşlatu:r, taşlatma:k). D 2 taşlat- (? d-) Caus. f. of 2 taşla:-, s.is.m.. Xak. xi ol ant taşlattı: “he ordered that he should be stoned' (bi'i-darb bi'I-hicára) Kaş. 1I 343 (no separate Aor. and Infin., precedes 1 taslat-). D tışlat- (d-) Caus. f. of tişla:- (tisle:-); the Infin. has quite clearly -ma:k, which suggests that in the original MS. of Kaş. all the cognate words had back vowels. S.is.m.l Xak. xi ol anı: tişlattı: 'he ordered him to bite' (a'addahu bi”l-sinn) Kaş. İİ 343 (tislatu:r, tışlatma:k, verse "he sent a greyhound, ordering it to bite"). D tuşlat- (?d-) Caus. f. of tuşla:- , s.i.s.m.l. in NE. Xak. xı ol ye:riğ anar tuşlattı: “he ordered someone to take up a position on a piece of ground (yaq? maqdim ard) facing him in order to judge the distance from it” (br'/-qiyás min ba'id); also used of anything about which one conjectures (accepting Atalay's emendation of yatajiazzà fihi for yataharrü in the MS.) Kaş. II 342 (tuslatu:r, tuşlatma:k). D tóslet- (d-) Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of tó:gle:-. Xak. xı ol anı: töşletti: “he ordered that he , should be struck on the chest” ("a/Z şadrihi) Kaş. II 342 (töşletü:r, töşletme:k). D tişlen- (d-) Refl. f. of tisle:-; s.i.s.m.L, usually for “to clench the teeth'. Xak. xr oğla:n tişlendi: xaracat isndanu”l-şabi "the boy grew teeth”: and one says orğa:k tislendi: "the teeth. of the sickle were sharpened” (huddidat) Kaş. II 244 (tislenü:r, tişlenme:k). D tuslan- (?d-) Refl. f. of tuşla:-, n.o.a.b. Xak. x1 bi:r ne:p bi:rke: tuşlandı: “one thing was placed opposite (fa,maccaha . . . another and competed with it' (?; bürühu) Kaş. II 243 (tuşlanu:r, tuşlanma:k): Çağ. xv F. tuşlan- döyür wa müqörin sudan "to face and be adjacent to (something)” San.  D tüşlen- Refl. Den. V. fr. 3 tüş, s.i.s.m.l. for “to have a mid-day rest or meal'. Elgin in Kag.s quotn. is a specifically Oğuz word. Xak.(?) xi elgin tüşlendi: “the traveller halted (ta'arrasa) and dismounted to have a siesta and then go on again” (/f-yuqayyıl umma yanhad) Kaş. 1] 242 (slightly misplaced; tüglenü:r, tüşlenme:k), tüslenür ördek yuğak “the ducks and other water birds alight on them' / 222, 18 (see 3 tüs): Çağ. xv ff, tüşlen- jagtgáh gudaránidan "to spend the middle of the day (somewhere)' Sar. 177v. 14 (quotns.) Dis. DŞN D tüşün (d-) Intrans. Dev. N. fr. tüş“lodgings, inn”, and the like. N.o.a.b.; listed in R III 1590 as 'Cag.', but not in any Çağ. authority; possibly found in Abg. Xak. xı KB kirip kend içinde tiledi tüşün “he entered and looked for lodgings in the town' 488, afun bir tüşün ol gürun bir tüşün “this world is one inn, your grave is another” (when that inn vields you up the next world is your inn) 1390; a.0. 1443. D töşne:k (d-) Dev. N. (Conc. N.) fr. töşen(abbreviated); “a place where bedding is laid out”. N.o.a.b. Türkü vı ff. turüya: kuş tógne:ki:ye: konmi:ş “a crane alighted on its resting-place' JIrkB 61: Xak. xi KB negü aspi áxir kara yér koy1 anın töşneki ol yağız yer oyt “vhat is the use of it? The end ” is the bosom of the black earth, his resting place is a hole in the brown earth” 3570. : Dis. V. DSND tuşan- (? d-) Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of tuga:-. Xak. xı er ada:kı: tuşandı: “the man's legs were tightly bound (£a"a/laqat) and his thighs were rendered motionless (f/zaffat) by fear' Kaş. JI 146 (tuşa:nur (sic), tuşanma:k, prov., see tusal-). D töşen- (d-) Refl. f. of tóge:-; s.i.m.m.l.g., usually with a Pass. sense; SW Az., Osm. döşen- (Tkm. düşen- seems a recent form, it was earlier döşen-). Xak. xı ol ó:zipe: tóge:k tósendi: 'the man made it his business to spread out a mattress ( faraşa”/-firdş) for himself! Kaş. II 147 (töşe:nür (sic), töşenme:k): KB (in spring plains, mountains, high ground, and valleys) töşendi yadıp “have spread out (greenery) and made themselves a mattress of it 69; tirig ólgü áxir tógengü yérig "living beings will die, and at the last make their beds in the ground” 237; o.o. 1383, 1426: X war. xiv töşen- ditto Qutb 185. VUD tüşne:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. tüşün, lit, “to settle down in lodgings'. Xak. xı yaşın atıp yaşnadı: tuma:n tu:rup tüşnedi: “the lightning flashed, the mist rose and became stationary” Kaş. 1 236, 2; n.m.e. Dis. DŞR D taşra: (d-) Adv. of place fr. 1 taş, “out| 177v- 14 (quotns.). side”. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. taşra 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 610 
     
   
   
      DIS 566 which seems to have been borrowed fr. some other language, since all the cognate forms in Osm. begin with di-. "Türkü vir taşra: yoriyu:r “they are marching out” 7 E ri-12; a.0. 1 E 26, II E 21 (aşsız): Xak. xi tamğa: suvri taşra: çıkıp ta:ğığ öte:r “the water of the tributary comes out and pierces the mountain Kaş. 1 424, 17; n.m.e.: xiti(?) Tef. taşra 'outside; (to come) out” 291: Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 173: Osm. xiv ff. taşra (xiv and xv sometimes dasra) "outside, outwards'; c.ia.p. TT 1 684; 11 885; III 674; IV 745: xvitt tasra in Rumi, birün 'outside' San. 261r. 12; a.0. do. 157r. ri (taşğaru:). D tüşrük (d-) Hap. leg.; abbreviated Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. tügür-; lit. 'which is let fall, or caused to fall', or the like. Uy£. vir ff. tüşrilk xwa ceceklerig tize urip 'arranging in order the flowers deposited (on the altar)" U II 47, 75-6. D tüşrüm (d-) Hap. leg.; abbreviated N.S.A. fr. tügür-; the semantic connection is obscure. Arğu: xr tüşrüm kull dahaca mina'[-£azl (MS. 'azl) “a ball of thread” Kaş. 7 485. Dis. V. DŞRD taşur- Caus. f. of taş- , “to cause to overflow'. Survives with extended meanings in SW Osm. tagir- ; elsewhere tasir- scems to be the Caus. f. of taşu:- Kaş. xı ot eşiç tasurdi: “the fire made the pot boil over” (afárat); also used of any liquid that overflows its container Kaş. 11 78 (tasurur, taşurma:k), tasirka:n (sic; after -K-) kó:zlüg 'a man with protruding eyes” (al-cahiz) I 521. D tuşur- (d-) Caus. f. of tuş-, survives in SW Tkm. du:sur-. Xak. xi ol meni: sapa: tuşurdi: "he brought about a meeting (ateqa'a' [-muláqat) between me and you" Kaş. II 78 (tusurur, tusurma:k): KB 2370 (okçı:): Xwar. xiv tusur- seems to mean merely “to meet! Quib 187. D tüşür- (d-) Caus. f. of tüş- , “to let fall, to order to dismount', etc. 8.i.a.m.l.g., NE Tuv. düjür-; SW Az., Osm., Tkm. düşür-. Türkü vr: 7 27 (asm-): vir ff. Yen. inipizke: écipizke: ingen yüki: (sic, but dubious?) siz (?so read, Malov has :pz) tüsürtipiz 'you have allowed your younger and elder brothers to lay down a female camel's load' Mal. 28, 9 (an unsatisfactory inscription, the last words are improbable): Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. kişi üze tepri tüşüreyin '] will bring gods down to men” TT V 12, 122; 8.0. U IV 8, 12 (139, və, eBir): Xak. xi ol eliğdi:n yarma:k tüşürdi: “he dropped (asqata) the dirham (etc.) from his hand'; and one says men ant; attin tüsürdüm 'I made him dismount (arrzaltuhu) from his horse”, also for “1 made him fall off” (asgattulii) Kaş. 11 78 (tüsürür, tüşürme:k), kelse: öme: tüşürgil "if a guest comes, invite him to dismount" (anzilhu) II 316, 10; KB (the advantage of speech is great) yérince tüşürse begütür . DŞR kuluğ "it brings greatness to a slave if he lets it drop at the appropriate place” 1001; o.o. 2347-9 (1 to:y): Xwar. xii düşür- “to unload; to cause to fall' “AH 25, s: xiv tüşür“to help (somcone) to dismount, or come down' Quib 191; Nahc. 106, 8: Kom. xiv tüşür- “to unload' CCT; "to cast down (into hell)” CCG; Gr. 261 (quotn.). Tris. DŞR D tüsürgü: (d-) Hap. leg.; Dev. Conc. N. fr. tüşür-. Xak. xı tüsürgü: “the place where water discharges (fühatu'l-má') into a river, and, also the place where water discharges (mafragu'l-má') from a mill-stream into the river”, and the like Kaş. 7 490. D tüşürgü:n (d-) lap. leg.; Pass. Dev. N/A. fr. tüşür-, cf. tüşğün. Xak. xı tüsürgu:n “the gum tragacanth tree' (şararı”/-katirá') in one dialect Kaş. 1 $22. Dis. DŞS D tüşsüz Priv. N./A. fr. 1 tüş, n.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (if a man has no faith, even if he understands the meaning of the (mystical) letters) tüşsüz kuruğ kalır “it is without (beneficial) results and useless” TT V 26, 96. Dis. V. DSSD tuşuş- (d-) Recip. f. of tug-; survives in SW 'Tkm. du:şuş-, Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. adında ançulayu kelmişler birle tuşuşmakı bolur. “on the other hand, it means their meeting the Tathagatas” U TI 35, 26-8: Civ. bu tuşuşmak atlığ 1rk “this hexagram meaning “meeting” ' TT I 15. Mon. DY ta:y "a onc- or two-vear-old foal", older than a kulun, S..a.m.l.g., see Sheherbak, p. 91; l.-w. in Pe. and other languages Doerfer 11 863. Xak. xı ta:y al-midir 'a colt! Kaş. HI 1858 (verse); 4 313 (adgirlan-), a.0.0.: KB (if you ride a fine cross-bred horse or) tözi tay “an Arab colt' $803: xiv Muh. al-muhr ta:y[ta:y Mel. 5, ış, Rif. 79; (al-muhr kulu:n) al-filto 'foal' ta:y 69, 12; 170: Çağ. xv ff. tay (sic) hura-i asb “a foal), one or two years old San. 261r. 23: Kip. xin al-muhr ta:y (and al-muhru'l-sagir ku:lun) Hou. 12, 9; (al-muhr ibn sana ku:lun) ibn sanatayn ta:y do. 12, 12: xiv tay al-muhr İd. 67: xv ditto Kav. 61, 19; Tuh. 33b. 9. 1 to:y originally 'a camp' in the physical sense of an aggregate of tents; thence the people living in such a camp, “a community”, thence any "large gathering'; and finally "a feast', and esp. “a wedding feast'. In the last sense s.ia.m.l.g. See Doerfer III 1352. Türkü vitt ff. Man. (the whole people) toy kapğına tegi bardilar "went sa far as the gate of the (royal) camp” TT 77 8, 65 (see note thereon, which is open to some criticism): Uyğ. vırı ff. Bud. Sanskrit (samghát samgham “from religious community to religious community”   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 611 
     
   
   
      DIS. V. DYD- : 567 kuvra:ğtın küvra:ğka:) pugát bügam "from (civil) community to (civil) community” toytin toyka: TT VIII G.ş: Civ. (the bride's dowry, food) toy1 "the wedding feast” Fam. Arch., |. 170; toydakı koynka “for sheep for the wedding feast” do. 67: Xak. xı to:y al-mu'askar 'a (military) camp'; hence one says xa:n to:y “the camp of the xdgán'; the Oğuz do not know this word Kaş. /Z/I 141; (death) to:ydın anı: köçürğe:n yanfihim min mu'asharihim “drives them out of their camp' I 522, 5: KB tüşürse toyuğ körse ot suv talu “vhen he pitches camp, he should look for the best grazing and vvater” 2349; a.o. 2347: xın(?) Tef. toy “a gathering! 306: xiv Muh.. al-cumá' atu'l-katira “a large gathering" to:y Mel. 5, 13; 6, 4; Rif. 76 (quoted as a word containing -0:-): Çağ. xv ff. toy toy diydfat ma"ndsına 'feast' Vel. 225: toy (1) cagn wa macma'-i surür "a feast or joyful gathering! in general (quotn.) and sür wa "arüsi “a wedding feast” in particular San. 188r. 1o; foy ditto 261v. ro (quotn.): Xwar. xırı(?) (Oğuz Xan) bedük toy bérdi 'gave a great feast” . .. toydın sor “after the feast Oğ. go-4: XIV ditto Qutb. 181; MN 76: Kom. xiv "feast, wedding feast” toy CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kap. xiv toy al-walimatu'l-kabira “a great feast [d. 67: Osm. xiv ff. toy "feast; common TTS I 696; II gor, İİİ 684. 2 to:y 'potters' clay'. Survives only(?) in NE. Xak. xi to:y tinu'l-xazaf "potters” clay', hence "a clay pot' is called to:y eşiç Kaş. 111 141. VU 3 to:y Hap. leg.; perhaps to be connected with to:d monçuk, sce to:d. Xak. xı to:y “the name of a medicinal plant! (abt. vutadátwà bihi) Kaş. HI 141. S 4 to:y Sce to:d. S tüy See tü:. i Mon. V. DYtay- (? ta:y-) “to slip, slide, slip up", and the like, S.ia.m.lg.; SW 'Tkm. ta:y-. Uy£. vini ff. Bud. Sanskrit eyta “having sunk' (in the technical sense of sinking, or slipping down, to rebirth in a lower form of existence) ta:yma:[k] TT VIII C.13; yetinç kün tayıp eşğek karninta [gap] "on the seventh day I shall slip down (and be reborn) in the womb of a donkey' U III 26, 20-1; iya taya is read in U II 29, 18 and 24, the context is of a man in distress, 1y-, q.v., normally means “to oppress', which is hardly relevant, “slipping” might be, but the words may be merely a misreading of aya tapa 'asking and serving': Xak. xı er taydı: “the man slipped” (zalaqa); also- used of any animal vvhen its feet slip in rain or mud Kaş. III 243 (taya:r, tayma:k), 8.0. İİİ 166, 20: xın(?) Tef. ta:y- (of a camel on slippery ground) “to slip” 282: Çağ. xv ff. tay- lagzidan "to slip! San. 166r. 5 (quotns.): Kap. xv /asaqa tay- Tuh. 18b. 3. S tiy- See tiid-, 7 S toy- See to:d-. tuy- (d-) "to perceive, notice, feel”, and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE; SW Az., Osm., Tkm. duy-. Türkü vin (we crossed the Ertiş river and approached the enemy) kelmişi: alp tédi: tuymadı: “they said "'it vvould be difficult for them to approach” and did not notice us” T 38: vin ff. İrkB 61i (ilin-):; Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A kentü inca tuymazlar “they do not themselves notice this” M I 10, zo: Bud. in the account of the nidána series in U İl sff. the formula (I wondered why something happened and) sakınıp odğurak tuydum “after thinking I became vividİy avvare of” (the reason) occurs several times, s, 16, etc. , o.o. TT V 24, 79; VI 137, 460-2: Xak. xı er t:şın tuydi: “the man perceived (ahassa) what was hidden in the affair and noticed it” (şa"ara bihi) Kaş. III 244 (tuya:r, tuyma:k), ó:d keçe:r kişi: tu:yma:s “time passes, but a man does not notice it I 44, 18: Çağ. xvff. tuy- (with -u-”) fahmidan "to understand' San. 187r. 25 (quotn.): Kom. xiv “to notice, become aware' tuy- CCG, Gr.: Kip. xiv tuy- ahassa İd. 67 Mon. V. DYAtaya:- (d-) “to prop (something Aec.) up; to lean (it) against (something). Survives only (?) in SW Az., Osm., Tkm. daya-. Cf. tire:-. Xak. xı ol ant: taya:dı: “amadahu hatta nahada 'alayhi “he supported him so that he stood up” Kaş. III 274 (taya:r, taya:ma:k): Çağ. xv ff. taya- takiva dadan "to give support”, tayat- is used in the same sense San. 166v. 2 (quotns.): Kip. xiv taya- asnada “to support; lean (something) against (something) . 67. Dis. DYD E tuytrum See tütrüm. Dis. V. DYDD tayıt- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of tay-; cf. taytur-. Xak. xı ol anı: suvka: tayıttı: “he made him slip (aizagahu) into the vvater” Kaş. II 325 (tayıtu:r, tayıtma:k). D taytur- Caus. f. of tay- , s.i.m.m.l.g., SW Tkm. ta:ydir-. Xak. xı ol anı: suvka: tayturdı: “he made him slip (alzaqahu) into the vvater” (etc.) Kaş. III 192 (tayturcur?, tayturma:k). D tuytur- (d-) Caus. f. of tuy-; survives in SE Türki tuydur- “to notice' Jarring 315; SW Tkm. duydur- “to make known, to inform”. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. biliğ tuyturdaçı kertğünç “the faith which makes (a man) aware of wisdom' Up. s9, 5-6: Xak. xı ol mapa: sö:z tuyturdi: “he made me aware (aftanani) of the statement and informed me of it” ('arrafanihi (sic!) dülikha) Kaş. III 192 (tuyturur, tuyturma:k): Çağ. xvff. tuydur- (with -u-”) fahmdndan "to cause to understand' San. 188r. 6: Osm. xiv and xvi duydur-/tuydur- 'to inform, make aware'; in two texts TT.S 7 235; IV 254. ; 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 612 
     
   
   
      568 DIS Dis. DYG D taya:k (d-) Conc. N. fr. taya:-; lit. 'prop, support', but usually in modern languages specifically "walking stick', and the like. S..am.l.g.; SW Az. dayağ, Osm. dayak; 'Tkm. tayak (irregular, L.-w. fr. some other language); l.-w. in Pe. and other languages, Daerfer 11 863. Uy. xin ff. Bud, Sanskrit deitrayena (?sic) “by the two supports' 2 tórlóg ta:ya:ğ üze: TT VIJI A.4; edğüke teğmekli yük yüdmeknin tayakı tétir (faith) “is called the support for assuming the burden which leads to good” T'T V 22, 43; 0.0. do. 44: 24, $3-8o: Civ. TT I 191 (bütgü:): Xak. xi tayak a/-'agá 'staff, walking stick'; and one says kude:gü: tayak be:rdı: "the bridegroom (al-xatam) gave a maid-servant or slave, so that the bride dismounted from her horse supporting herself on him” (muttahiya(n) 'alayhi); this is a custom of the wealthy so that he (the slave) becomes the property (of the bride) Kaş. III 166 (prov.); taya:k 'asá 1 417, 6: KB (I have become infirm) tayak tutti elğim “my hand has grasped a staff' 5633: xiu(?) Tef. tayak 'staff 282: Caf. xv ff. tayağ/tayak degnek 'walking stick” Vel. 181 (quotns,), tayağ/ tayak rakiya 'support'; it is a Dev. N. fr. taya- fakiya düdan, and metaph. çüb-i dast “a walking-stick' San. 167r. 13 (quotn.): Kom. xiV. 'staff' tayak CCG.; Gr.: Kip. xui al-'akház 'staff, crutch' taya:k Hou. 39, 2: Osm. xiv ff. dayak “support, walking stick'; in scveral texts. T 7S İT 263; 111 676 (tayak); IV 747. : D tayığ Dev. N./A. fr. tay-; 'slippery, unstable. N.o.a.b. Xak. xi tayığ y€:r a[-mazlaqa mina'l-ard 'slippery ground” Kaş. III 165: KB (luck is faithless, disloyal, and fickle; it suddenly flies off and) adakı tayığ “its feet are liable to slip! 670: xin(?) Tef, tayığ, (of the ground) “slippery” 282. tayuk Hap. leg.; syn. vv, taylan, there must he some etymological connection between the two, but -lar is not a known Turkish Suff. and both may be l.-w.s. Atalay also suggests a connection with SW xx Anat. dayı “good, good-looking' (of a man or animal) SDD 408. Xak. xr tayuk er 'a voung, elegant, fastidious (al-şabbu I- zarifu'l-mutaqazziz) man" Kaş. III 166 S tuya:ğ See "tufa:ğ. D tuyuk 'closed, niggardly (i.e. with closed hands), and the like. S.i.s.m.l. in NE and NC; "Tus, duyuk; cf. tuyin, Pass. Dev, N./A. fr. *tu:- (see to:-) with euphonic -y- inserted. Xak. xı tuyuk kişi: "a niggardiy (al-munqabid) man”: tuyuk kün “a ramy, foggy (dacn wea dabab) day”: tuyuk kapuğ “a closed (muglaq) door” Kaş. III 166: Çağ. xv ff. tuyuk (spelt) cinás “a pun', which is one of the literary conceits (quotn.); and cinás in Turkish is a special metre which they called bar-i tüyüg; it is a raml musaddas maqsür as stated (with an example) in Navvi”Ys work on prosody Sam.   . DYG 188r. 23 (the tuyuk/tuyuğ is a well-known early "l'urkish verse form used, inter alia, by Qadi Burhanu l-din; the semantic connection is obscure). tayğa:n “greyhound, borzoi'; prob. an old animal name ending in -fa:n. Survives in some NEI anguages, SE "Türki, and NC Kir. ; in other languages tazı (/Persian') is usually used in this sense; l.-w. in some languages see Doerfer 11 866. Xak. xı tayga:n “a slim lopcared (al-aqabbu [-agdaf) kind of dog! Kaş. HI 174 (prov.); three 0.0.: xiv. Muh(?). salüqi "greyhound” fayğa:n Rif. 174 (only). VUF tayğu:n/toyğun n.o.a.b.; presumably some kind of high official. "The first syllable is prob. Chinese f”ay “great” (Giles 10,573); Vilh. 'Phomsen in Inscriptions de l'Orkhon déchiffrées, Helsingfors, 1896, p. 177, note 84 suggested that the second syllable was the Collective Suff. -ğun but this seems improbable. It is more likely to be a Chinese word, but there are phonetic objections to the suggestion that it is Awam “oflicial” (Giles 6,341). "The two words may be different, the second vowel in the second is uncertain. Türkü vin ığar oğlanınızda: tayğu:ninizda yeğgde: igidür ertiğiz “you fed (the people?) better than your sons and high officials! 7 SE, [rap] bunça: bedizçi:ğ toyğun elteber kelü:rti: 'brought so many decorators, high officials(?), and e/te5ers" 1 NE. Tris. DYG VU?D taya:ğu: "pebbles” and the like; the Uvg. spelling tuyağu occurs in a damaged passage and may be an error, but equally the word may be misvocalized in Kag.; tayn:ğu: is morphologically a Dev. N. fr. taya:- but there 1s no obvious semantic connection. Uyğ. vri (f. Bud. (now it has become our fate) utun yavız braman[lar|ntg taş (VU) tuyağu tef iriğ yavğlan yüz]lerin kórgeli “to see the faces of the shameless, evil Brahmans which are as tough and hard as stone and pebbles" U 7I] 17, 11-13: Xak. xt taya:ğu: al-nubla wa l-madara. 'pebbles and clods of clay! Kaş. HII 174. D tayaklığ (d-) P.N./A. fr. taya:k. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud, agnuki ikigüke tayaklığ tiriğ bolmak öğdisiz ol 'it is not praiseworthy to come to life with the support of thc first tvvo” T'T' V 26, 110; o.o. do. 28, 127-8. D tayakhk (d-) A.N. fr. taya:k; n.o.a.b. Uy. vin ff. Bud. (just as the sound constantly rises from a .drum . , .) eligke tayaklikin *with the help of the hand" (wood and leather) Suv. 375, 7-8, bu yağız yer tayaklıkın bütgülük neçe edler bar erser 'whatever commodities must be produced with the help of the brown carth” do. $30, 1-2; a.o. Hüen-ts. 1949: Xak. xi KB (do not take chances with the enemy, know that he is powerful) tayaklık yağıka temür kalkan ét “make an iron shield your support against the enemy” 4263.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 613 
     
   
   
     ' nurnə...... ————OÓO OQ — ii, —0.0—— —— ..—— — 5 —————  DIS. V. .D tuyağlığ P.N./A. fr. tuya:ğ (tuha:ğ), n.o.a.b. Türkü vırı ff. IrkB s (adğırlık, ?tuyo:ğlu:ğ): Xak. xı tuyağliğ yılkı: hayaredn dü hafir “a hooved animal” Kaş. III 178. D tuyuğsuz (d-) Hap. leg.?; Priv. N./A. fr. *tuyui, Dev. N. fr, tuy-; “vithout perception”, Uyf. viri ff. Bud, TT VI 460 (belgü:süz). Tris. V. DYĞD tayaklan- (d-) Refl. Den. V. fr. taya:k, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı er tayaklandı: “the man owned a walking-stick' ("aş2) Kaş. III 197 (tayaklanu:r, tayaklanma:k), a.o. 198, 8. D tayuklan- Refl. Den. V. fr. tayuk; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı yigit tayuklandı: tazayydá (-fatá bi-xayyi”l-zurfd” “he youth dressed elegantiy” Kaş. 711 197 (tayuklanu:r, tayukİayma:k). Dis. DYL (?D) taylap Hap. leg.; syn. w. tayuk, . Xak. xı taylan er al-raculu'l-zarifu'l-latifu'l-gaddi' [-wadiyu'l-lawni'[-naqiyu [-tatob "an elegant man with a graceful figure, a clear complexion, and clean clothes'; this is mainly . used of youths (al-fityam); one says taylan yigit “a fastidious (/nitaqazziz) clegant youth” Kaş. III 386. | Dis. DYN teyin (?téyip) “squirrel), and by extension “squirrel skin”, Kag.'s form and translation must be due to a misunderstanding. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SW, usually as tiyip/tiyin/ti:n, see Shcherbak, p. 142; the squirrel, skin was used as a currency unit in early Russia during the period when coins were scarce, and the word as ti:n still survives in some languages, including SW "km, for 'kopek'; l.-w. in Pe. and other languages in this last sense, see Doerfer 11 1013. Türkü vii kara: kişl:n kök teyinpi:n "their black. sable and grey squirrel skins! 77 N 11-12; S ız: Xak. xı tegip al-sammür “sable” Kaş. HI 370: KB afi quz teyin kiş alir sen térip 'you collect and acquire treasure, brocade, squirrel, and sable skins! 5367; teyin kiş ópi tutti dunya ici “the interior of the world assumed the (dark) colour of squirrel and sable” 5825: xiv Muh. al-sincab 'squirrel teyin Mel. 72, 8, Rif. 174: Çağ. xv ff. teyin (spelt) sincüb San. 203v. 5 (quotns.): Kom. XIV 'squirrel, miniver” ey CCI; Gr.: Kip. xı al-sincáb (VU) teyin Hou. ır, 13: Osm. xiv to xvın teyin "squirrel! in 4 texts 7 TS II 892; IV 752. F toyin (Buddhist) monk'; l.-w. fr. Chinese tao jén same meaning (Giles 10,780 5,624). N.o.a.b.; became a l.-w. in Pe. 9 Mong., and other languages, where it sometimes acquired other meanings, see Doerfer 1l 993. Yakut toyon 'master, governor, official, mayor', and the like, PeR. 2706, is clearly a Löv. fr. Mong. after it had acquired these extended meanings. Uy. viii ff. Bud. Sanskrit bhizşüu “mönk” toyin TT VIII A.19, C.4; o.o. H.1 (oki; spelt toyu:n), etc.; üküs midik toyinlar 'many  DYN- 569 laymen and monks” T'T IV 4, 10; o.o. U III 34. 5 (1); 36, 23; TT VII 40, 74, etc.: Civ. enetkek toyin “the Indian monk' TT VII 14, 1; toyin and toyin kuli *monk's servant! are fairly common in USp.; sometimes used as a P.N. e.g. as the name of a witness in 16, 2532: XIV. Chin.-Uyg. Dict. 'Buddhist monk" toyin Ligeti 268; R III 1175: Xak. xi toyin al-"ilc min ummati'l-kafara “an infidel among the pagans'; he has the same position among them as an 'álim or mufti among us; he lives constantly with the idols and reads the books and legal pronouncements of the pagans, God protect us from them Kaş. III 169; o.o. III 84 (yükün-); 377. 1 (tapığsa: k): Kip. xiv toyin (MSS. faymn) al-ra'is fi din Uygur "a leader in the religion of the Üyğur” /d. 67. D tuyin Hap. leg.; syn. vv. tuyuk, q.v.; presumably Dev. N./A. fr. *tu:- (see to:-). Xak. xi tuyin er “a mean, niggardly (ai-daninu'l-munqabid) man” Kaş. İİİ 169. D tayanç (d-) Dev, N. fr. tayan-, apparently a title of office; n.o.a.b.; cf. taya:gu:. Uyğ.B vir ff. Bud. (if a virtuous young man or woman) begke isike ınanç tayanç bolğalı küseser "wishes to become a confidant or assistant of a beg or his lady” TT VII 40, 52; a.o, U II 62, 2 (ii). S tuynak See "tuüa:ğ. Dis. V. DYND tayan- (daya:n-) Refl. f. of taya:-; “to support oneself by, lean on, or rely on (someone or something Dat.)'. S.i.a.m.l.g.; dayanin NE Tuv.; SW Az., Osm., Tkm. Türkü viu ff. Man. Chuas. 175-6 (nan- ): Uyğ. vint ff. Bud. söğütke tayanıp turdi “he stood leaning against a tree” U III 22, 14; adirtlamakka tayanıp “relying on discrimination” (between the good and bad in all doctrines) Suv. 302, 23; 0.0. do. 297, TO, 589, 4; TT VIII E.8 (igid- ); USb. 100, $: Xak. xı ol mana: tayandı: "he leant on (ittaka'a "ald) me”, also used when one leans on anything Kaş. İİİ 19o (tayanu:r, tayanma:k), o.o. HI 161, 2; 38o (taya:yu:): KB tayanma tirlglikke 'do not rely on life' (it passes like a dream) 1332: Çağ. xv ff. tayan"to lean' (takiya kardam) in general, and “to lean one's back against (something)' in particular San. 166v. 21 (quotn): Xwar. xiv tayan- 'to support oneself on (something Dat.) Qutb 168: Kip. xui ta'akkaza “to lean on” taya:n- Hou. 39, 2: xiv tayan- fstanada wa ittaka'a "to support oneself, lean on” İd. 67: xv tttaka'a tayan- Tuh. 4b. 9; a.o. do. 84a. 3: Osm. xv ff. dayan- (and tayan-) 'to rely on'; in sevcral texts 778 7 182; III 170; IV 193. D tuyun- (d-) Refl. f. of tuy-; to have, or acquire perception, or awareness'; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. Man. TT III 120 (atii): Bud. Sanskrit bodhyangá "the constituent parts of enlightenment” tuyu:nma:k bölökleri TT VIII A.ış, 21, 22; (how can they fill their  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 614 
     
   
   
     570 minds with it and vet) tuyunmasar 'not acquire enlightenment?” 7jüen-ts. 115; a.o. USp. 43, 9. Tris. DYN D taya:pu: (d-) Crasis of taya:ngu:. Conc. N. fr. tayan- ; n.o.a.b., but see Doerfer 11 994. Cf. tayanç. Xak. xı taya:gu: (mis-spelt in MS.) fi asli'l-lufati'l-hàcib. in the original terminology “Chamberlain”, then, when the word /Aiácib. came into use it became obsolete (turika) ; it is derived from the word tayandı: i'tamada "he relied on”: the king relies on the Chamberlains and the common people also rely on them to communicate their representations to him and get a reply from him Kag. III 380: xm(?). Tef. murtafaq 'resting place” taynnğu (or? tayapu) 282. Dis. DYS taysı: See tayşız. Dis. V. DYSD tuysuk- (d-) Hap. leg.; Emphatic (?, normally Pass.) f. of tuy-. Xak. xi er tuysukdi: fatuna'l-racul. mü yumkar ma'ahu a yuháyad "the man became aware of the trap and «nare that were laid for him” Kaş. III 195 (tuysuka:r, tuysukma:k). Dis. DYS F tayşı: a Chinese phr. which became a l.-w. in Mong., prob. direct and not through Turkish, in which case the Çağ. word was prob. borrowed fr. Mong. In Mong. it is a very high title (Kor. 1551 'vizir, prime minister”, Haltod 389 ditto). "Fhe first syllable is certainly t'ai "great" (Giles 10,573); “chief minister” is far tsai (Giles 11,490); this might be the word. in Türkü, if it was transcribed taysı, but can hardly be the word in Çağ. which looks more like t'ai shrh (Giles 9,683) “chief historiographer' (or 'astrologer); v. G. (Index to TT I-V, p. 42) suggested that the Türkü word was t'ai tzü (Giles 12,317) *prince', but this phr. actually means 'senior prince, heir apparent', and could hardly be used in the Plur. Türkü vırı ff. Man. kunçular taysılar (or tayşılar?) uluğ atlığlar “the: royal consorts, chief ministers(?), and notables TT II 8, 64: Çağ. xvff. taysi (spelt) in the language of the Chinese (Xitá"iyün) dabir voa hüdiq wa möhir ma ustad “secretary, expert, master-craftsman”, also spelt tayşı San. 167r. 17; tayşı in Mongolian, 'scribe (nivisanda), expert, master-craftsman” do. 261r. 25. Dis. V. DYSD tayış- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of tay-. Xak, xı ol anın birle: tayışdı: “he competed with him in sliding (fi'l-talazzug) Kaş. III 188 (tayışu:r, tayışma:k). Dis. V. DYZ D tuyuz- (d-) Caus. f. of tuy-; “to cause, or allow (someone) to become aware', etc. DIS. V. DYNN.o.a.b., cf. tuytur-. Türkü vir ff. Man. kimke [gap] égtürmez tuyuzmaz 'it does not allow anyone to hear or become aware of 22 M HI qo, 7 (ii): Uyğ. vir fL Bud. TT VI 335-6 (bildüz-). Mon. DZ ta:z (? d-) 'bald'; s.i.a.m.Lgr., vv”. some extended meanings, usually as taz/tas; NE Tuv. tas; SW Az, Osm. daz; lacking in ''km.; a L-w. in Hungarian as tar, borrowed fr. an early L/R dialect. Uyğ. vi ff. Civ. in a list of persons from whom a horse tax of "s coppers' was collected one of those concerned is (PU) Çoba Yıkmış and another (PU) Yıkmış Taz, possibly "the bald Yıkmış" (but other readings are possible) U.Sp. 54, 5; 2.0. H [I 18, aş: Xak. xı ta:z al-aqra" 'bald': ta:z at al-farasu'l-abras (not an ordinary word; the prov. below suggests either *with sore feet” or “unshod”) horse': fa:z ko:y "a hornless (al-acamm) sheep'; ta:z yér al-sabaxa qalila (omission) 'salty ground with scanty (vegetation 25”) ta:z at tava:rçı: bolmas “an abras horse is no use for carrying merchandise because its hooves are bad' (yahün radi'a'l-zufr) Kag.. HI 148; I 99 (ajmuk); a.o.o.: Çağ. xv ff. taz 'a person who, by reason of baldness (kaçal) has no hair on his head” Sam. tssr. 17 (quotn.): Kom. xiv. 'bald' taz CCT, Gr.: Kip. xiv. taz al-agra' İd. 63: xv ditto Kav. 60, 9; Tuh. 4a. 6: Osm. xiv ff. daz 'bald'; c.ia.p. T7S I 182; H 264; 11 171; IV 193. ) tiz (d-) 'knee'; s.i.a.m.l.g., usually as tiz/tis; 8W Az. Osm. diz, "Tkm. dı:z (sic). Türkü vir ff. 7rkB 60 (bedl:z): Uyğ. vir ff. Bud, U TT: 47, 78 etc, (cókit-): Xak. xı tl:z al-rukba "knec” Kaş. III 123: KB 712 (tuşa:-): Xit(?) Tef. tiz "knec" 30t: xiv Muh. al-ruhba di:z Mel. 48, s; Rif. 142 (in margin ti:z): Çağ. xv ff. tiz diz zönü ma"nüsına *knee' Vel. 188 (quotn.); tiz ("with -i-") zdi San. işar, 19 (quotn.): Kom. xiv 'knee' tiz CCG; Gr.: Kip- xut al-rukba. tiz Hou. 41, 6: xiv ditto İd. 38; diz al-rukba, also called tiz, but diz is commoner do. 48: xv al-rukba tiz Kas, 61, 7; Tuh. 16b. 8: Osm. xiv ff. diz 'knee'; noted in several common phr. TTS I 213-14; II 309; I11 201-2; İV 234. F 2 ti:z in spite of Kag.'s remarks almost certainly a l.-w. fr. Pe. diz/dij “a castle", esp. one in à commanding position. "The word occurs among the Mon.s in Kaş. but is sometimes vocalized teyiz, possibly implying té:z. Xak. xı tz Rulİ makán murtafi! "any high place'; the Pe. took this (word) and called their castles (qilà'aha) dis, ti:z the name of a summer station (musfáf) for Kaşğar, it is called Tarığ Art Ti:z because of its height (names of two other summer stations incorporating ti:z follow )Kag. İİİ 123; o.o.1 373 (turug): II 344 (tağlat-): xiv Muh.(?) (in the Chapter fi l-arg) al-tail "a hill tiz Rif. 177. : 1 to:z “dust”. Survives as toz in NW Kk., SW Az., Osm., and to:z in Tkm. In other 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 615 
     
   
   
        .us—..-——— —.—uu,.,-.,—...—.....5....................... 7  MON. DZ (0571 languages 'dust' is usually tozap/tozan or çan (? a L-w.). Cf. 1 to:ğ. Türkü vrrı ff. (clouds were stationary above) asra: toz turdi: “dust was stationary below' IrkB ış: Uy£. viii ff. Man. TT III 27 (batil-): Bud. TT VIII A.6 (topraklığ), U II 39, 89, etc. (topra:k): Civ. TT I 5-6 (topra:k): Xak. xı to:z ("with back vowel') a/-gubàár "dust" 2 III 123; three o.o. translated qasfal or hab” both “dust”, xiu(?) Tef. to:zin arasında * in the dust! 302: xiv Muh. ai-ubár to:z Mel. 75, 1; Rif. 178: Çağ. xv ff. toz gard wa gubár San. 175v. 7: Xwar. xiu ditto ' Ali 55: xiv ditto Qutb 183: Kom. xiv ditto CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xitt al-gubár do:z Hou. 5, 12: xiv toz al-gubár İd. 63; al-qatám voa'l-jabw wa'l-fubár *dust cloud, mist, dust” doz Bul. 5, 5: xv al-ğubar (oz Kav. 58; 115; Tul. 26b. 2. 2 to:z “birch-bark”. S.i.a.m.l.g. as foz/tos, in SW only Az.; l.-w. in Pe. and other languages, see Doerfer 11 960. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. (if one writes the dödrani) tozda “on birch-bark” (a leaf, paper. etc.) U II 7o, 4 (ii): Xak. xı to:z al-calizatu' lati yulbas 'ala'l-qisiy "a strip which is wrapped round a bow' Kaş, III 123: Çağ. xv ff. toz (mis-spelt tuz) (7) “the bark of the mountain almond tree' (pást-i diraxt-i büdüm-i khi) which is wrapped round bows to strengthen them, also called tos, Arabicized as füc San. 175v. 15; toS a corruption of toz which is wrapped round bows and the like do. 176r. 18: Kip. xiv toz “the bark (gişr) of a trce with which bows are covered' ( yugsa) İd. 38: Osm. xiv-xvii toz "a material used to wrap bows', including metaph. the beloved's eyebrows; in several texts TTS 7 698; IJI 685; IV 758. tu:z (?d-) 'sal'', sometimes used metaph. S.i.a.m.l.g.; NE Tuv. dus; SVV Az. düz, 'Tkm. du:z but Osm. tuz. Uy£. vir ff. Civ. (in a prescription) kara tuz 'black salt'(?; this might be toz 'birch-bark', the other ingredients are organic) H / 4; a.o. İİ 32, 39: Xak. xi tu:z ("with back vowels) al-milh *salt' Kaş. İİİ 123; six o.o. translated al-milh; andın tama:r tüke:] tu:z “all kinds of saltiness (ai-maláha; i.e. charm) ooze from him” 7 6o, 6, avlalur ö:züm anın tu:zı:na: “my soul is hunted by his saltiness (charm)” 7 296, 4: KB bu sü'ir sözi sözke kattı tuzi “this poet's remark added its salt to the remark” 711; 8.0. 1328 (etmek), 4222: xiri(?) At. taturmaz eseninde tuz dóstipa “he does not during his lifetime give his friend salt to taste' 263: xiv Muh. al-milh tu:z Mel. 75, 8; Rif. 178: Çağ. xv ff. tuz ('with -u-") (r) namak 'salt' San. 175v. 9 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 188: Kom. xiv ditto CCI; Gr.: Kip. xırı al-milh tu:z Hou. 17, 17; xiv ditto 1a. 53; at-milh (Oduz (sic) Bul. 8, 17: xv mik tuz Tuh. 35a. 5. tö:z “root, basis, origin”, and the like. Survives only(?) in most NE dialects as tós R 711 1264; cf. tü:b, 1 kök, yiltiz. A l.-w. in Pe., Doerfer II gör. Türkü vir fT. Man. (the five gods are . A, tözl yrltizi "the origin and root” (of everything on earth) Chuas. 47-8; do. ş-—6 (térin-); a.o.o.: Uyğ. viri ff. Man. öz tözlerin ukitip making them understand their own origin" TT III şo, köni tözin unitmisglarka- “to those who had forgotten their true origin” do. 123-4; 2.0.0.: Bud. ertipü terip tóz yıltız nomin 'the very profound doctrine of the root” (Sanskrit indrtya) TT VI 148; (faith is called) kértülerke kértülernip cin kértü tözipe kirmeknin tözi “the basis of entry into the (company of) believers and the true basis of the believers” TT V 22,23-4:0.0. TT VIII D 27, etc. (u&amp;us); U III 41,7 (1) (1 1:8), etc.: Civ. in TT VII 30, ız töz is used exceptionally instead of kut for 'element' (of the five elements); (in H I 104 tózin is an error for (esgek) tüsin 'donkey's hair): Xak. xr one says 6:l tö:z neteg Rayyfa"l-sotlaya wa'l-ra'iya *how are the realm and the subject people?' (this must belong here, it cannot belong to 2 to:z which precedes it): tö:z al-agl “origin” , one says anın tü:bl: tó:zi: kim mart aşluhu wa fid man yantamd 'who are his ancestors and to whom does he trace his origin?” Kaş. III 123: KB aydı Aytoldı kilki tózl “Aytold: told of his character and origin” 568; o.o. 855; 1704 (köçüt), (in 555 tózi is an error for (barçın) yüzi "the front surface of brocade"): xn(? KBVP tüb tözi ır: Çağ. xv ff. tó:z (with -6-”) bun-i güş “the lobe of the ear' Sar. 175v. 7 (quotn. with the phr. kulak tózi), tüz (d-) "level, flat, even”, with some extended meanings like “equal”. S.i.a.m.l.g.; usually as tüz/tüs; SW Az., Osm., Tkm. düz; the "Fkm. forms suggest that Kaş.”s alternative spelling tü:z is prob. an error, due to the voiced final. Türkü vi: (the rulers and ministers were wise and tough) beğgleri: yeme: bodunı: yeme: tüz ermiş “both their begs and their people were orderly” I E 3: Uy$. viri ff. (Man. the reading tüz kerinçsiz in TT III 66, etc. and some Bud. texts is an error for tüzgerincsiz q.v.): Bud. tüz sometimes translates directly, or via a Chinese translation, Sanskrit samazd “impartiality”, e.g. (a vvell-disposed merciful mind, a cheerful mind) tüz köpül “an impartial mind” (attains knowledge of all the Buddhas) TT VI 77; when used to translate a Chinese calendar character tüz represents p'img “level, even, equal' (Giles 9,310) do. 258 (and note); 0.0. TT V 26, 86 (tapla:ğ), Suv. 134, rz (arka:), etc.: Civ. (various ingredients) tüz ülüş “in equal parts” H 7 4, so, 166; o.o. do. 147 (otura:), TT VII 42, 1 etc. (uldap): Xak. xı tüz 'anything level” (or “equal” ; mustazei(2)); hence one says tüz yö:r “level ground' Kaş. I 325; one says tü:z yé:r matwdi' mustawiya "a level place” 7/71 123; bé:s erpe:k tü:z erme:s *the five fingers are not equal' 7 128, 8; (all men) tü:z erme:s “are not equal” (/aysa . . . bi-sawd") I 376, 21; a.o. İ 433, 7; and see erentüz: KB kilmçi siliğ erdi kılkı tüz-e "his conduct was pure and his character equable” 42 (cf. tó:z); (a three-legged stool does not lean over) üçegü turur tüz “the three (legs) stand level” 8oz, yatğu tüz “he  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 616 
     
   
   
     572 will be İying flat! 1427; (if a man gets drunk, he becomes mad) bu télve işi kör kaçan tüz bolur 'how can the acts of this madman become reasonable(?)” 2099: xitt(?) Tey, tüz 'smooth (ground); straight (road); upright (Rgure) 317: Xwar. xın düp düz 'quite level “AH: 57: xiv tüz "level' Qutb. 198; "appropriate! MN 248; 'cqual' (shares) Nahc. 256, 8: Kom. xiv tüz “level: equal; upright; a steppe' CCI, CCG, Gr. 261 (q.v.): Kip. xv müştahib 'kceping company with one another" tüz Tuh. 32b. 4 (this is proh. one of the places where a "Turkish translation of a word, and the next Ar. word, in this case ?mustaci(n) have fallen out of the text). Mon. V. DZtez- “to run away, fiy”, with some implication of “to succeed in running away, to escape'. Survives as tez-/tes- only(?) in some NE dialects and SW 'Tkm., elsewhere displaced by kag-. Türkü vırı (the Uluğ İrkin and a few men) tezip bardı: 'escaped' 7 £ 34: neke: tezerbiz üküş teyin “vhy should we run away because they are numerous?' T 38-9; o.0. II E 38, 41; T 43: vitr ff. (a son got angry with his parents and) tezipen barmts "ran away (from home)” IrkB 58: Man. M I 7, 11 (tu:1): Uyğ. vir Karluk tapa: tezip kirti: 'he fled in the direction of the Karluk and entered (their country?)' Su. S 10; o.o. N 11 (bar-); Sa.: vur ff. Bud. tezdi PP 58, 1; tezip bardı do. 59, 7; te:ze:r e:irse:it. TT VIII C.1s5 (Sanskrit lost); ao. U 711 8, 3: Civ. tütüş kerişte tezgil “fiy from disagreements and quarrels! TT 7 48; a.o. do. 141: Xak. xt keyik tezdi: “the deer (etc.) ran away' ( farra) Kaş. H 8 (teze:r, tezme:k): xın(?) At. tili yalğan erke yırak tut teze “keep away from a Har, fly from him” 153: Kip. xiv. dez-(t-) (sic; described as *with back vowel") “to stray' Cöra) that is, of sheep, etc., to leave the flock ld. 48. tiz- (d-) 'to arrange (things) in a tow; to string (beads), and the like. Semantically close to tüz-, q.v., and confused with it in Sar. and some modern languages. S.i.a.m.l.g.; diz- in NE Tuv.; NW Kk. and SW Osm.; but in SW Az. and Tkm. düz- is used in this sense. Uy£. viit ff. Bud. (her wonderful white teeth) yürün yinçü tizmis teg “like strung white pearls! U IV go, 51-2; a.o. U İİ 47, 75-6 (tüşrük): Xak. xı ol yincü: tizdi: nazama"l-lu'lu! “he arranged the pearls (on a string)”, similarly for sazama'l-kalám "he put his remarks in (a logical) order” one says só:z tizdi: Kaş. II 9 (tize:r, tizme:k); a.o. I] 31, 19zı: KB yinçü tizip 4427: xu(?) KBVP kamug barçasına bógüler sözi tizip yinçüleyü kamuğ tüb tözi “putting in a logical order the words of the sages for all people and stringing together like pearls their basis and origin” rr: Çağ. xv ff. tiz- diz- Vel, 188; tiz- muhra ba-rigtih (MS. in error bar sina "on the breast!) kagidan "to arrange beads on a string'; also pronounced tüz- San. 193v. 13 (quotn.); tüz- (^vith -ü-") (3) muhra baMON. DZ  -rigtih (sic) kagidan wa intizam dadan “to arrange beads on a string and put them in order'; and in this last meaning tiz- is also used do. 173r. 23: Rip. Xv nazama tlz- Tuh. 37a. 1. toz- apparently a V. homophonous w. 1 to:z meaning “to become dust, to volatilise', and the like, In the carly period very rarcland used only of odours. Survives in these and similar meanings, and some so different that they may have a different origin (perhaps a Caus. f. in -Z- of to:-) in SE Türki, NC Kir, Kzx.; SC Uzb.; NW Kk,, Nog.; SW Osm., 'Tkm. Türkü viti ff. Man. (the foul blood pours out of the corpse) toza yidiyur 'volatilizes and stinks' M I 6, s: Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. (all the time from their bodies) alku ten adınçığ yid yıpar tozar üner bolti “all kinds of fragrant odours volatilized and rose” TT V, p. zo, note A 117, l. 3: (Xak. xı toza:r, tozma:k are erroneously given as the Aor. and Infin. of tozar-, q.v., but see tozit-): Xwar. XIV tOZ- is "Trans. "to scatter (something) like dust" 183: Kip. xiv. toz- frbadta Pğubar "of dust, to be raised'; a and one says 1pa:r yıyısı: tozdı: "the smell of musk was diffused'(fàxa) İd. 63. tö:z- “to suffer, endurc', and the like. Almost exclusively Kip.; survives only in NC. Kzx. and some NW languages; a L-w. in Hüngarian as zür- fr. an carly L/R dialect. Kip. xı er tumluğka: tó:zdi: “the man suffered acutely (xarişa) from the cold” Kaş. IJI 182 (tó:ze:r, tó:zme:k): xut şabara “to endure' dóz- How. 34, zo, xiv töz- şabara İd. 38; dó:z- (described as with back vowels") şabara do. 48: xv şabara wa tabata "to endure, to be firm! tóz- Tu. 22b. ro, fáqa wa fabata “to be able to support, to be firm' tóz- do. 248. 1r; istamarra (to be firm') wa .tabata töz- do. sb. 9: Çağ. xv ff. töz- (-medin, etc.) şabr et- ve táqat götür- Vel. 208 (quotns.); tóz- (spelt with -ü-”) (1) tahanmmul hardan "to endure', also tözlen- Sar. 173r. 22 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv. töz- “to suffer, endure! Qutb 185; Nahc. 86, 7: Kom. xiv ditto CC], CCG; Gr 252 (quotns.). tüz- (d-) a V. homophonous vv. tüz, “to level, straighten, put in order', and the like. Survives in SE Türki tüz-; SC Uzb. tuz-; NW Krim tüz-/düz-; SW Az., Osm., Tkm, düz- , other languages use Den. V.s fr. tüz like tüze- in this sense. See tiz-. Uyğ.vır ff. Bud. işlerin tüzgell “in order to put their affairs in ordet” Hiüen-ts.151: Xak. x1 beg é:lin tüzdi: sawwa'l-amiru'l-ziláya “the beg put his province in order”, and one says ol ye:riğ tüzdi: “he levelled (satezea) the ground” (etc.) Kaş, 179 (tüze:r, tüzme:k): KH ('Atiq was the first, believing in God and) köpül til tüze 'ordering his mind and tongue' sr: (one takes the sword and) bodunuj tüzer 'organizes the people" 268; o.o. 755 (ünde:-) 93, 146, 877, 2272, £151, etc.: xiv Mit, nazama (cf. tiz-) tüz- Mel. 3:, 13; Rif. 116 (mis-spelt tür-): Çağ. xv ff. tüz(^with -ü- )()sec tóz- ; (2) sáxtan wva drástan 'to makc, put in order, arrange; (3) see tiz- San.   mum————————————s—m—Uao—sN——Àá HL HYMN EEERERRUR BILILIIIIIN...LL O ııı 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 617 
     
   
   
     DIS. 173r. 22 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv tüz- (and metri gratia tüzü-) 'to arrange, set in order' Qutb 191; 'to tune' (a lute) MN 22: Kip. xiv düz(^with front vowel") nazama'l-say' İd. 48: (xv in Tuh. sb. ro satwteá is written in a second hand under töz-):- Osm. xivíff. düz- "to arrange, put in order, correct", etc.; c.i.a.p. TTS 1I 249; II 352; III 232; IV 268. Dis. DZA D tüzü: “all”: prob. like alku: a Dev. N./A., but the semantic connection with tüz- is tenuous. Pec. to Uyg. and KB. UYyğ. vtri ff. Man.-A M I 28, 12 (arka:); do. 16 (üdrül-): Man. kiltipiz edgü tüzüke "you have done good to all” TT III 103; olo, do. 67-8 (ozğur-), 154, 174—7: Bud. savlarığ barça olarka tüzü tüketi sözledi “he communicated the statement in full (Hend.) to all of them” U II 21, 19-20; o.o. of tüzü tüketi TT X 59-60; PP 35, 273; 0.0. TT V, p. t4, note A.23, 10; Tis. 462. 3 ff. (artuk) Hüen-ts. 162 (tul-) Xak. xı KB tüzü barça mupluğ sapa “ali (Hend., creatures) are in need of Theec” 24; törütti tilek teg tüzü “Alamiğ “He created the whole world as He wished' 125; o.o. 9 (erkliğlik), 31, 827, 2685 (örtğüsüz), 3815. Dis. V. DZAD tuza:- (?d-) Den. V. fr. tu:z; 'to salt (something). Survives in some NE dialects; "Tuv. duza-. Cf. tuzla:-. Xak. xı ol et tuza:dı: "he salted (ma/laha) the meat; used in place of tuzla:- Kaş. JI] 263 (no Aor. or Infin.). ] Dis. DZC D tuzçı: (?d-) N.Ag. fr. tu:z, 'salt-maker; salt merchant'; s.i.s.m.l. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. tuzçıla:rnın suza:kı erse:r “if it was a village of salt-makers” TT VIII C.3 (Sanskrit missing). — Dis. DZD D tüzdem (d-) Hap. leg.?; Den. N./A. connoting resemblance. Uyğ. viu ff. Bud. (if a man's mind and knowledge are stable) etózi tüzdem €tiğliğ erip “and his body is wellproportioned and active" Sut. 594, 13-15. Dis. V. DZDD tezit- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of tez-. Xak. xı ıt keyikni: tezitti: “the dog scared (anfara) the deer” Kaş. II 305 (tezitü:r, tezitme:k). D tozut- (? tozit-) Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of toz- ; in the MS. of Kaş. the second vowel is once -ubut otherwise unmarked. N.o.a.b. Xak. xr ol. topra:k tozuttr aygaza'l-£ubür ma atárahu "he raised the dust (Hend.)' Kaş. 17 3o5 (VU tozutu:r, tozutma:k): Kip. xiii! ğaböara mina'l-gubür "to raise the dust” dozut- (?sic MS. do:zat- and -gil) Hou. 42, 14: xiv £abbara translation irregular toza:ttı:, dozudurmen, dozdun, and other forms imperfectly vocalized: Bul..66v. Dbz6Ğ . $73 Dis. DZĞ tuzak (?d-) “trap, snare”, and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g.; NE Tuv. duzak; NW Kk. duzak; SW Az. duzağ, Tkm. duzak but Osm. tuzak; l.-w. in Pe., Doerfer 11 962. Türkü virt ff. IrkB. 61 (ilin-): Xak. xı tuzak al-facc wa'l-hibalatu'llati yuşdd bihi "a trap or noose used in hunting' (verse): tuzak a word (Ralima) used by a man to his beloved when he is complementing her (i/stamlahahda), it is emphasized by attaching -r, tuzakı: Kaş. I 380; o.o. I 204 (ilin-); 425, 19; / 380, etc. (oğrı:), 111 304 (yapsa:-, spelt tu:za:k); 358, 25 (tu:zak): KB tuzakka ilinme “do not get caught in the trap” 4824; a.o. 3637 (2 a:ğ): xii(?) At, 456 (elik): xiv Muğ. al-facc tu:za:k Mel. 61, 5; Rif. 160 (al-ğalaq *wooden lock' tu:za:k Rif. 179 is an error for yu:za:k Mel. 76, 8, a medieval word also occurring in CC1): Çağ. xv ff. tuzağ/tuzak düm “trap” San. 175v. 19 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv tuzak “trap” Qutb 188: Kom. xiv ditto CCG; Gr.; a.o. under ilin- Gr. 106: Kip. xim al-facc tu:zak Hou. 10, 17: xiv tuzak ai-sarak 'snare" İd. 63; Bul. 12, 6: xv ditto Tuh. zob. 12; facc tuzak do. 28a. 1: Osm. xiv in a verse quoted in TTS II 910 tuzak 'snare' rhymes with tuzak for Pe. düzax “hell” (as there is no ' Turkish etymology for tuzak the possibility of some such foreign origin might be explored, but obviously “trap” cannot be derived directly fr. 'hell"). ?D tuzğu: “a gift of food given to a traveller”, not quite syn. vv. ertüt or armağa:n. In Turkish n.o.a.b., but a lw. in Pe., Mong., and other languages, see Doerfer II 900; its form in these languages makes -u- in the first syllable certain; it is therefore perhaps a Den. N. fr. tu:z, salt being a traditional form of food gift. Xak. xı tuzğu: “a gift of foodstuffs! (al-hadiya mina'l-at'ima) brought to a man who is going on a journey by his neighbours"*r acquaintances Kaş. 7 424; tuzğu: mançu: sezinmen “do not suspect (là tazunn) that a gift of food is (intended as) wages for (some) task” (ucrata'l-'amal) I 419, ro: KB (all the workmen came and appeared) tapuğ tuzğu birle ner ertüt kilip 'presenting their services, gifts of food and (other) things' 1769: Xwar. xiv tuzğu “a gift ' (said to be of money, but this seems doubtful) Quib 183 (tozgu). D tozğa:k Dev. N. (connoting repeated action) fr. toz-; 'powder' and the like. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (to me this whole great universe is as unimportant as) ifen tozğakı U 111 71, 1; (the Sanskrit original suggests that the meaning is 'the pollen of maize cobs”, iğen is otherwise unknown and may be a misreading of ekin): Çağ. xv ff. tozğak (spelt) “a spherical fungus the size of a small melon (dastanbuh) which grows in the fields; it has a thin outer skin and its intetior is full of a soft powdery substance; when the outer skin is touched it bursts! San. 175v. 22 (i.e. the fungus called in English “puff-ball”).” 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 618 
     
   
   
     574 Dis. V. DZGD tazgir- l!lap. leg.; İnchoative Den, V. fr. ta:z. Xak. xı er başı: tazğırdı: (MS. tazğardi): "the man's head was almost bald" (kada an yataqarra) Kaş. II 178 (tazğıra:r, tazğırma:k,, D tozğır- Hap. leg.; Inchoative Den. V. fr. 1 to:z. Xak. xı yér tozğırdı: "the ground was almost dusty' (hada . . . an yahubb minha'l-habá'u'l-mantür) Kaş. II 178. (tozfira:r, tozğırma:k). Tris. DZĞ D tuzakçı: N.Ag. fr. tuzak, “a trapper”. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. (fowlers, deerhunters, fishermen, hunters, netters) tuzakçı “trappers” PP 1, 8; alo, in a similar list TT IV 8, s6: Xak. xi KB tuzakçı is a fairly common simile for “this world' 3564—7, 4824. D tuzkiya: (? d- -kina:) Hap.leg.; Dim. f. of tu:z ; lit. “little piece of salt', but used as a term of endearment, Xak. xı meplig kara: tuzkiya: “my black-moled charmer' (maliha) Kaş. IHI 359, 8; n.m.e. Tris. V. DZGD tuzğulan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. tuzğu:. Xak. xı ol mana: tuzğulandı: “he gave me a present o” food (etc.)” Kaş. III zor (tuzğulanu:r, tuzğulanma:k). Dis. DZG tezek 'dung'; more specifically “animal dung'. S.i.a.m.l.g. unchanged; 1.-vv, in Pe. and other languages, see Doerfer 11 goz, Türkü vri ff. IrkB 23 (bul-): Xak. xi tezek razetu'l-faras 'horse dung! Kaş. 1 386 (prov.): Çağ. xv ff. tézek (spelt) sargrm-: damvabb "animal dung' San. 194r. 21 (quotn.): Kip. xim ziblu'l-faras "horse dung! tezek Hou. 13, 1: xiv tezek 'dry dung' İd. 38; dezek ditto 48: xv ci//a 'dung' tezek Tuh. 11b. 2; zibl tezek do. 18a. 11. D tezig Dev. N./A. fr. tez-. O. Kir. ix ff. tezi:ğ keyikde: alp men '[ am tough among the flying deer' Mal. 44, 2 (text as in Shcherbak's revised edition): Xak. xı tezig al-nifàr bayna'l-qatem *panic in the tribe; and one says teziğ kişi: “a man who shies away (al-nafür) from something! Kaş. 7 386: KB keyik sán1 dawlat kişike teziğ 'luck shies away from men like a wild creature" 712; tapuáka tezig “shying away from service” 3628; a.o. 4760. D tiziğ (d-) Dev. N. fr. tiz-; “a row, line, string (of pearls), and the like. S.i.s.m.l.; NE 'Tuv. dizi; SW Osm. dizi. Uyf. vin ff. Bud. nom ertinilig kezigde tizigde 'in the series (Hend.) of jewelsof the lavv” TT V 24,57; kazlar tizigi teg 'like a string of geese' .X 160; yinçü tizigi teg “like a string of pearls' do. 450; 0.0. U I 29, 9; Suv. 642, 3-4 (ylvig): Xak. xı tizig “any row (saff) of things”, one says tizig térek (MS. tézek) 'a row of poplars' (al-hator) and bi:r tiziğ yinçü: “one string (nam) of pearls' Kaş. İ 387; (the mountain DIS. V. DZĞ sheep) tizgin (MS. unvocalized. with. qaf for fin) turup sekrişü:r “go bounding off (tatatcátab) in a line" 7 214, 19: xiv Muh. “a string (rra zm) of pearls, etc.” ti:zi:g Mel. 84, 9; Rif. 190 (mis-spelt fr:rf:g): Kip. xv(?) in the margin of. Tul. 34b. 6 manzüm 'strung' tizig, tizilmis. D tezgi: Hap. leg.; although this is indexed under fa'li it seems to be merely tezig with 3rd Pers. Sing. Poss. Sutf. abbreviated, Xak. Xt one says of a panic (al-hazáhiz) which breaks out in a tribe when the enemy approach and they fly (nafarti) from them tezgi: boldi: Kaş. I 429. D tezğe:k Hap. leg.; Dev. N./A. (connoting repeated action) fr. tez-. Xak. xı tezge:k er “a man who shies away (a/-nafür) from a task etc.” Kaş. HI 289. D tizgin (d-) Pass. Dev. N. fr. tiz-; lit. “arranged in a row', in practice 'reins'. To some extent displaced by l.-w.s, but s.i.s.m.l. in all groups; dizgin in NW Kk.; SW Osm. Cf. ti:n, yüğü:n. Xak. xı Kaş. 7 339 (ti:n); (the waters of the tributary pour out and pnss through the mountains) artuçları: teğre: ünüp tizgin yete:r hawalayhi qad nabata'l“-ar"ar şaffa(ıı) ha”annahu miqwad faras “the junipers grow round them in rows as if they were a horse's halter' (Kaş. may be right in seeing a pun between this word and the İnst, of tiziğ, but the words seem actually to mean "their (the waters") poplars grow round and lead them (as if with) a halter”) 7 424, 18; n.m.e. but see çetke:n: xin(?) Tef. tizgin “reins” 301: xiv. Muh. al-'inán 'reins' ti:zgin Mel. 72, r, tizBbn Rif. 174: Çağ. xvff. tizğin crlaw-i asb 'a horse's reins', in Ar. "inàn and zimám; in Rümi dizgin San. t94r. 24; a.o, 92v. 3 (yüğü:m): Xwar. xiv tizğin 'reins'. Qutb 175 (tezgin, error), 180: Kom. xiv 'reins' tizğin CCI; Gr.: Kip. xii al-'inàn tizgin (misvocalized -gen) Hou. 14, 4: XIV tizgin a/-sayrrelladi fi fa s”l-licüm min cánibayhi "the straps which are in fhe projections on either side of the bit”, one says at tizğinin ut amsikil-licám "take firm hold of the bit" d. 38: Osm. xvin dizgin in Rümi "indn-i asb San. 226r. 27: 8.0. 194r. 24 (Çağ.). S tezğinç See teğzinç. Dis. V. DZGD tezgin- See tegzin-. D tüzger- (d-) Trans. Den. V. fr. tüz; n.o.a.b. See tüzgerinçsiz. So spelt in Kaş. in the Perf., but the Aor. and prob. the Infin. have -gür-, which is the Türkü form. It is unlikely that this is tüzgür- Caus. f. of tüz-, which is itself 'Trans., and the -ü- is prob. due to labial attraction. Türkü viri ff. Man. özlerin saklanu arıtı tüzgürü (spelt tegürf)) tutzunl[ar] 'let them keep themselves, protecting themselves and guiding themselves strictly M 777 38, s-6 6): Xak. xi men anı:  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 619 
     
   
   
        ———— — ——— DIS.:V. DZL- 575 tüzgerdim uhdaytuhu “1 guided him” Kaş. II 179 (VU tüzğerürmen, tüzgerme:k), , . Tris. DZG D tüzügü n.o.a.b.; presumably tüzü: with the Den. suffix -gü: (usually abstract). Uyğ. vin ff. Man, kut koluntilar tüzügü “they all asked for divine favour' TT III 141; a.o. do. 98 (amra:-). D tiziglig (d-) P.N./A. fr. tizig; 'arranged in lines, in military formation”, N.o.a.b. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud, Suv. 627, 14-15 (yiviglig). D tüzgerincsiz formerly misread as two separate words tiz Rerinçsiz, and discussed at length in TT IX, p. 20, notes 7-8; X, p. 15, note 96; clearly a Priv. N./A. fr. a Dev. N. fr. the Refl. f. of a Den. V. in -ğer-, the suggestion there is that it is a Den, V., more or less syn. w. tübger-, fr. tö:z. "This is semantically unconvincing; there is no other trace of such a V., while tüzger-, q.v., is well established." Etymologically the word should mean *without being guided', but in practice it corresponds to Sanskrit anuttara “unsurpassable”, the connotation is perhaps 'requiring no guidance'. Uy£. vir ff. Man, (you came down to earth after the four(?) prophets) tüzgerincsiz burxan kutin bultuguz “you have acquired the unsurpassable majestic position(?) of prophet” TT III 66; o.o. do. 153, 178; 1X 8 (habitually spelt tüzkeringsiz in Man. Syriac script): Bud. the word normally occurs in the phr. tüzgerincsiz (yé$ or yég üstünki sometimes added here) burxan kuti translating Sanskrit anuttarasamyaksambodhi *unsurpassable perfect awareness' (or “knovrledge”) TT IV 12, 57; V zo, ro, VI 223, 305; X gö, tüzgerincsiz tuymak 'unsurpassable awareness! VI 137; tüzgerincsiz burxan yolı “the unsurpassable way of the Buddha' VI 118. Tris. V. DZG- i D tezekle:- Den. V. fr. tezek; s.i.s.m.l. for 'to manure (the ground). Xak. xi at tezekle:di: “the horse (etc.) defecated” (rdza) Kaş. HI 340 (tezekle:r, tezekle:me:k). UOTA Dis. DZL D tizlig (d-) P.N./A. fr. ti:z; “having knees'. N.o.a.b. Türkü vir 7 E ə, IJ E 3, etc. (1 başlığ). D 1 to:zluğ P.N./A. fr. 1 to:z, “dusty”. S.i.s.m.1., SW Osm. tozlu, Uy£ vin ff. Civ. tozluğ tupra:klağ (sic) [gap] 'dusty, earthy” TT VIII 1.8. : D 2 to:zluğ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. 2 to:z; *firmly wrapped in birch-bark”, i.e. sound and serviceable. Xak. xı oprak yasıkdın to:zluğ ya: çıka:r "a vvell-vvrapped bow (al-qawsu'l-macliüza) comes out of a shabby quiver' Kaş. III 16, 25; n.m.e. D tu:zluğ (?d-) P.N./A. fr. tu:z; “salty”. S.i.m.m..; SW Az. duzlu; Osm. tuzlu; "Tkm. du:zlt. Xak. xi Kaş, I 209 (usit-): xiv Muh. al-málih "salty” tu:zlu: Mel. 56, s, 66, 4; tu:zlug Rif. 154, 165; (baytu'l-milh “a salt store” tu:zluğ 69, 5; tu:zluk 170): Çağ. xv ff. tuzluğ/tuzluk namakin wa málih 'salty" San. 175v. 25 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv tuzluğ mu Qutb 189: Kip. xiv fuzlu: al-mölih . 63. "t D tózlüg P.N./A. fr. tö:z, "having a root, or origin; originating in', and the like. N.o.a.b. Türkü vr ff. Toy. 5-6, etc. (ol, intl:z): Uyğ. vr ff. Man. TT II 17, 8o-z (utsuk-); Bud, yel tözlüğ iglerig 'illness originating in wind (or demoniac possession?)' U 77 68, 1-2 (ii) a.0.0.; o.o. TT V zo, 9 (tüblüğ), 24, 65— 68; VIII E. 4 (spelt töslög), Suv. 588, 19-20 (tórci-): Civ. 1t toprak tózlüg yıl “the Dog, Earth-element year” TT VII 17, 3; a.o. do. 17, 17 (see tö:Z), sa:rığ tözlüğ su:vsa:lık “thirst originating from bile” TT VIII L11; 0.0. do. ız, H 1 139. Dis. V. DZLD tizil- (d-) Pass. f. of tiz-; 'to be arranged in a row; (of pearls, etc.) to be strung'. S.i.m.m.l.; dizil- in NE Tuv.; SW Osm. Xak. xı yingü: tizildi: nuzima”l-hi”lu” wva'l-sí'r the “pearl was strung, and the poem was strung together' (sic, cf. tizig-); also used of things which get in line of their own accord (intazama bi-nafsihi), Intrans. and Pass. (yata"addü wa là yata"adda) Kaş. Il 127 (tizilür, tizilme:k), tümen çeçek tizildi: “countless flowers have come up in rows' (intazamat) I 233, 26; bu ne:n ol bi:r bi:rke: tizilğe:n (MS. terilge:n) "these things are always arranged in a row (yantazim) one after the other” 7 523; o.o. 1 331, 1; İİİ işı, zi: KB 54 (titir): Çağ. xvff. tizil- ba-rigtih haşida şudan "to be arranged on a string” San. 193v. 27 (quotns.); and see tüzül-. D tüzül- (d-) Pass. f. of tüz- , survives in SC Uzb. tuzul- (sic), but most modern languages use instead tüzel- Pass. f. of tüze- (not an early word) Den. V. fr. tüz. Türkü vim (settling in the Otüken mountain forests) tavğaç bodun birle: tüzültim 'I lived on equal terms (or the like?) with the Chinese people” 7 S 4-5, II. N 3: Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. tüzülmişke tegürdeci köni yorığ ol 'it is upright behaviour which brings (a man) to equability” U T 35, 2-3 (Suv. 524, 3-4); 0.0. Suv. 137, 12; Hüen-ts. 2053: Civ. tört yıpak tüzülti “the four quarters were set in order” TT I 121; 2.0. do. 137: Xak. xr yér tüzüldi: “the ground was levelled' (sttotetyat); and one says ış tüzülda: “the affair was in good order” (istaqüma) Kaş. I1 127 (tüzülür, tüzülme:k), a.o. İl 71, 135 (tutuş-): KB ajun ençke tegdi tüzüldi tórü 'the world attained peace, the customary law was properly organized' 103; o.o. 6o (tadu:); sosr (bulğafuk): Çağ. xv ff. tüzül- (spelt) (1) müntazam gudan “to be arranged in rows' (? Sec. f. of tizil-); (2) kük şudan süx "of a musical instrument, to "be tuned” San. 174v. 10 (quotns.); (tüzel- similar 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 620 
     
   
   
     $76 DIS. V. DZLmeanings 174v. 2 (quotns.)): Xwar.xiv tüzül"to be arranged, set in order” Qut 192: (Kip. xiv tüzel- (sic) rstared “to be equal, level, in good order” İd. 39: xv intazama tüzen-, in margin in second hand tüzel- Tiu. sb.6). D tazla:- (d-) Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. ta:z. Xak. xı ol anı: tazla:dı: "he ascribed baldness (qara') to him, and called him bald” (aqra") Kaş. I1I 293 (tazla:r, tazla:ma:k). D tizle:- (d-) Hap. leg. ?; Den. V. fr. ti:z, Not to be confused with tézle:-, a Rumi word meaning "to hurry! in Sar. 194r. 18 which isa Den. V. fr. Pe., téz. Xak. xı buğra: erig tizle:di: "the came! stallion knelt (baraka) on the man while rutting (f? ğalamatihi) and crushed him (dağafahu) with its knees'; also used of anyone who kneels (catá) on something and erushes it Kaş. JI] 293 (tizle:r, tizle:me:k). D tuzla:- (?d-) Den, V. fr. tu:z; “to salt (something); s.i.a.m.l.g. w. some phonetic changes; SW Az. duzla- ; "Vkm. du:zla-, but Osm. tuzia-. Xak. xı ol et tuzla:dı: translated “he salted (j/na/lahia) the cooking pot, the meat, etc.'. Kaş. IT] 293 (tuzla:r, tuzla:ma:k), a.o. III 263 (tuza:-): Kip. xiv tuzIa- mallaha İd. 63; mallaha tuzlat- but other conjugational forms duzla- and duzlat- Bul.81 v.: xv mallaha tuzul- corrected in margin to tuzlaTuh. 35b. 6. : D tizlet- (d-) Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of tizle:-. Xak. xı ol tizletti: ne:pni: “he ordered that the thing should be crushed by kneeling on it” (5/-dağt”l-şay” bi'l-rukba) Kaş. II 342 (tizletü:r, tizletme:k). D tuzlat- (? d-) Caus. f. of tuzla:-; s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı ol et tuzlattı: “he ordered that the meat should be salted” (bi-tamlih) Kaş. 11 342 (tuzlatu:r, tuzlatma:k): (Kip. xiv see tuzla:-). D tizlin- (d-) Hdb. leg.; Refl. f. of tizil-. Xak. xı yinçü: tizlindi: “the pearls (etc.) were strung” (intazama) Kaş. I1 243 (tizlinü:r, tizlinme:k). D tuzlan- (?d-) Refl. f. (often used as Pass.) of tuzla:-; s.i.s.m.]. Xak. xı et tuzlandı: “the: meat was salty' (tamallaha) Kaş. II 243 (tuzlanu:r, tuzlanma:k): Çağ. xv ff. tuzlannamahsüd şudan "to be salted' San. 174v. 18. D tüzlün- (d-) Refl. f. of tüzül-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı tüzlündi: ye:r “the ground (etc.) was levelled' (sutotwiyat), a variant (/uğa) of tüzül- ; similarly one says rg tüzlündi: “the affair (etc.) was in good order” Kaş. 11 243 (tüzlünü:r, tüzlünme:k); a.o. 7 349, 13 (tegi:). Tris, DZL D tizildürük (d-) Hap. leg.; Dev. N. (Conc. N. fr. tizil-, Xak. xı tizildürük fulüs rreüsi”l-xuff “small coins (sewn) on the toes of slippers' Kaş. I 529. Dis. DZM D tizim (d-) N.S.A. fr. tiz- , 'row, linc, string (of pearls, etc.)”, and the like. S.i.s.m.l,, usually for “a list (of things)”, NW Kk. dizim. Xak. xı "a string (nazm) of pear]s' is called bi:r tizim yinçü: Kaş. 1 396: Kip. xiv düzüm (sic) "a string” (al-manzüm) of pearls and the like; one says bir düzüm “one string” İd. 48 (one MS, has dizim in both places). D tizme: (d-) Dev. N. fr. tiz-, s.i.s.m.l., but not in this precise sense. Xak. xı tizme: “the waistband of trousers! (nayfaqatu'l-sarátoil) ; and anything like it, for example the top (ra's) of a leather bag, which is made like a waistband and has a string inserted in it and drawn tight Kaş. 1 433. Dis. DZN D tüzü:n (d-) Intrans. Dev. N./A. fr. tüz-, “self-controlled, well-behaved, gentle”, and the like; not to be confused with tüzünl: Ace. of tüzü:; n.o.a.b. Türkü virt ff. Man. ol tüzün er “that well-behaved man” M I s, 12: Uyğ. vitt ff. (Man.-A tüzün barça “all” is a scribal error for tüzü: M 7 28, 25): Man. biligligim tüzünüm yarukum “my wise, well-behaved, bright one” M 77 8, 11: Bud. tüzün is common both by itself and in phr. like edgü tüzün "good and well-behaved' U 1/7 34, 3 (ii), and tüzün yavaş edgü “vell-behaved, peaceable and good” TT IV ro, 15-16 etc.; it is commonest in the phr. tüzünler oğlı tüzüler kızı, v. G.”s translation in TT VT 146 and elsewhere suggests that the connotation here is 'well-born' rather than 'wellbehaved', but this is not etymologically justifiable; Sanskrit dryamargo “the noble path' (Bud. technical term) tózón yol (sic, but the spelling in this text is eccentric, örtül- is spelt ürtül- in the same line) TT VII A.15: Civ. agnuki tüzünler tórüsin 'the customary law of well-conducted people of earlier generations" TT VII 3o, 2: Xak. xı tüzikn al-halim 'gentle, considerate! Kaş. I 414 (prov.); a.o. Il 221, 18 (same prov.) KB (the Prophet) tüzün erdi 'was gentle' (modest, etc.) 43; 0.0. 107, 1659: xiit(?) At, uluğ boldukupca tüzün bolup “as you come to manhood become better behaved then ever' 355: xiv. Muh.(?) al-halim (opposite to 'spiteful' ócge:l) tü:zü:n Rif. ısı (only); Rbg. ditto R LII 1584(quotns.): Xwar. xin(?) ditto Og. 314 (uk-), 324-5. Dis. V. DZND tezin- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of tez-. Xak. xr ol tezindr “he pretended to run avvay” (yahrab) Kaş. II 146 (tezinür, tezinme:k). D tizin- (d-) Hap. leg.?; Refl. f. of tiz-. Xak. xı ura:ğut yinçü:sin tizindi: “the woman strung (nazamat) her own pearls' Kaş. II 146 (tizinür, tizinme:k). 'Tris. DZN D tüzünlük (d-) A.N. fr. tüzü:n; “gentleness” and the like, N.o.a.b. Xak. xı kazğan oliç 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 621 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. DZS- (577 tüzünlük “my dear boy, acquire gentleness" (al-hilm) Kaş. II 250, 4; tüzünlükin kayıştım "ataftu "alayhi bi-lilmi 'I sympathized with him in my gentleness” 7/7 188, 21; n.m.e.: KB tüzünlük is included withamulluk, órüglük, etc. in a list of desirable qualities in 326; tüzünlük bile sen kecür ay küsüş “pardon me in your gentleness, O my heart's desire' 1155. Dis. V. DZRD tazar- (d-) Hap. leg.; Intrans. Den. V. fr. ta:z. Xak. xi tazardr ne: “the thing became bald' (tagarra'a) Kaş. II 77 (tazaru:r, tazarma:k). D to:zar- Intrans. Den. V. fr. to:z; "to be dusty, turn to dust'; s.is.m.L.; SW Osm. tozar-. Xak, xı to:z to:zardı: safa"a”l-habd “the dust spread in every direction” Kaş. III 186 (in a Chap. for V.s with three Consonants; to:za:r, to:zma:k, error due to haplography in Aor.). D tüzer- (d-) Hap. leg.; Intrans. Den. V. fr. tüz. Xak. xr yér tüzerdi: 'the ground was level (/stawat) Kaş. II 77 (tüzerür, tüzerme:k). 8041125 Dis. DZS D tüzsiz (d-) Hap. leg.?; Priv. N./A fr. tüz, *disorderly, undisciplined'. Türkü vin 7£ 6, II E 6 (üçün). Dis. V. DZSD teziş- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of tez-. Xak. xi ola:r ikki: tezigdi: 'they two were scared of one another” (tandfard) Kaş. II 99 (tezişü:r, tezişme:k). D tiziş (d-) Hap. leg.: Recip. f. of tiz-; for the translation cf. tizil-, Xak. xi ol menip birle: yincü: tizişdi: “he competed with me in stringing (fi nazm) pearls' or (in stringing together) verses; also used for helping Kaş. IJ 100 (tizişü:r, tizigme:k). D tüzüş- (d-) Hap. leg.?; Co-op. f. of tüz-, for the reasons stated under tüzül- the scribe vocalized the Aor. and Infin. tüzeg- in the MS. Xak. xı ol mapa: yér tüzüşdi: "he helped me to level (f? tasrefiya) the ground" (etc.); also used for competing Kag. II 99 (tüzüsü:r, tüzüsme:k; see above). 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 622 
     
   
   
       INITIAL VELAR PLOSIVE Mon. GA ka: Preliminary note. Fox G. tas so doubt right in suggesting in "VT. X, f. 47 that Kat in the phr. ka: kadaş is a L-w. fr. Chinese chia “family” (Pulleyblank, Middle Chinese ka; Giles 1,139). Kag.'s etymology of kadaş is therefore demonstrably terong, and the question arises. schether. the «word. ka: “vessel? tcas not invented to justify this false etymology. Kaş. is the only authority for the word, and it seems likely that if it really. existed it, too, was a Chinese l.-w., but there is no obvtous origin for it. F 1 ka: 'family'; see above. Found only in the phr. ka: kadas, which is n.o.a.b. "he evolution of this phr. into kab kadas, also n.o.a.b., is odd and perhaps due to the false etymology mentioned above. It should be noted that both elements in the phr. are declined separately. Uy£. viii ff. Bud. ka kadas “family and kinsmen” is common, e.g. ka kadaş oğul kiz ed tavar 'family and kinsmen, sons and daughters, movable property, and livestock' U 1/1 6, 2 0), kamın kadaşımın do. 36, 35; kası kadaşı Sut. 5, 7; 3.0.0.: Civ. ka kadaska tartınğuçi bolur 'he becomes closely attached to his family and kinsmen” TT VII 37, 13 (note ka not declined); in the provisions in commercial documents prohibiting relatives from objecting to an agreement one typical list is écim inim kam kadaşım “my clder and younger brothers, my family and relations" USSp. 107, 11; 108, 11; 110, 9-10: Xak. xi KB (a man must associate) kab (sic in MSS.) kadaşlar bile 3209; 2.0. 3213: Xil(?) Tef. kab kadaşımnı (sic) “my family and kinsmen'; kabt kadaşını 198: Xwar, xiv kab kadasim Qutb 126. PF 2 ka: 'vessel, container'; see above. N.o.a.b. Cf. ka:b. Xak. xr ka: a/-sarf vva'l“red “a vessel or container! but used only for vessels containing liquids; hence one says ka: kagca: zarf tea wi'à as a Hend. Kag. IJI 211 (followed by a para. on -Ka: as the Dat. Suff.); (under tü:des) hence (i.e. by using the Suff. -deş) one says kadas for “brother, kinsman' (I l-ax tva'l-garib); the base is ka: and -daş is attached to it, the meaning is that both relatives come from the same vessel (zarf) that is their mother's womb 7 407; a.o. /İİ 238 (ka:ga:). kr: Exclamation; Atalay in Kaş. I1] 212, note says that it is still used in Anatolia. Xak. xi kı: exclamation (fiarfu'[-nidá) corresponding to the (Ar.) yd'w'I-nidá; hence one says ki: berü: kel "hil come here”, pronounced with a very long vowel (?; yumadd bayna'l-qàf wva'l-càrr) Kaş. III 212 (followed by a para. on -kt: as an affectionate Suff. attached to terms of relationship, e.g. ata:kı: ya nbayyd “my dear father"). Mon. V. GAka:- lHap. leg.; the morphological connection with ka:la:- is obscure. Yağma: xi ol esicke: otup ka:dr "he heaped (ağaffa) firewood round the cooking pot'; one also says ol to:nuğ ka:dı: "he packed (abba) the garment into the cupboard'; the more correct. form (al-afsah) is ka:la:dt: Kaş, 7H] 249 (ka:r, ka:ma:k). *ko:- Sce kop, ko:d- ; ko:n-. Mon. GB ka:b properly “a leather bag, water-skin, sack'; sometimes more vaguely 'vessel, container. S.iaam.lg., usually as kap, with some extended meanings like 'the cover, or binding (of a book)'. L.-w. in Pe. etc,, Docrfer Iİ 1364. Cf. 2 Ka: and see 1 kar, ÜYyÜ. vir ff. Civ. yarım kab bor “half a skin of wine" USPp. 1, 3; 0.0. do. 1, 5; 4, 1 TL, 10, 6 etc.; Xak. xt ka:b al-ziqq *winc-skin': ka:b al-zarf “a vessel' and any container (al-wi'à) is called ka:b, just as in Ar. al-fars (MS. al-faras) means properly “to break the neck” but is also used more generally for “to kil): ka:b "the caul' (al-ğirs, MS. al-'irs) in which the child is wrapped in the womb, and (sometimes) born in; such a child is reckoned fortunate (al-mubarak) and is called ka:blığ oğul: ka:b fa kinsman”, metaphorically (al-garib “ala tariqi”l-isti"dra), one. says ol menin birle: uya: ka:b ol “he is my kinsman' as if he was born in the same container (zarf) Kag. III 146; about a dozen o.o., mostly translated al-zarf: KB 3209 (1 ka): xın(?) Tef. 198 (1 kaş): xiv Muh. al-ğılaf "sheath” ka:b Mel. 40, 3; Rif. 129; ğimdu”l-sayf 'sword scabbard' krli:ç ka:bı: 71, 5; 173; gişrn İ-xaşab 'the bark of a trce” ka:b 78, 7; 182: Çağ. xv fT. kab "a vessel' (zazf) in general and “a wine-skin' (cureal-i latari) in particular San. 265r. 7; kab kaçak “"vessel”, kab is used by itself in this sense, but kaçak is used only in the Hend. do. 265v. 7: Xwar. xiv Qutb 126 (1 ka:) Kom. xiv “sack” xap CCG, Gr.: Kip. xi al-wi'à kab Hou. 17, s: xiv kab al-qişr İd. 67; kaw “the thin skin (al-qijr) which a snake sloughs' do. 76: Osm. xvi kav “a sloughed snake's skin', in one text T'T:S IJ 6or. kap/kip an alliterative Prefix to Adis., mainly of colour, indicating intensity; s.i.a.m.l.g. Cf. 1 ap. Uy£. vir ff. Bud. (to a dying man the sun seems) kap kara 'quite dark” TT III, p. 26, note s, ro, kap kara tünle “on a pitch black night” do., p. 28, note 71, 3: Xak. xr KB (the partridge's) kaşı kap kara 'brows are quite black” 76: xin(?) Tef.    
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 623 
     
   
   
       MON:ĞB kap kara 198: xiv Muğ. sadidu'l-sawád 'pitch black” kap kara: . . . şadidu”l-humra 'bright red” kip kizil Mel. 68, 4-6; Rif. 168: Çağ. xvff. kap kara siydh-i mahd "pure black” San. 265v. 10 (quotn.): kip kirmizi surx-i mahd "pure red” do. 293r. 9: Xwar. xın(?) kap kara Oğ. 300; Kip kizil do. 166: Kip. xi aswad halik 'pitch black” kap kara:; ahmar qün “deep red” kip. Kizil ITou. 31, 5: xiv kap kara: al-şadidu”l-sandd, kip kizil al-sadidu'l-humra İd. 68: xv (they say) fi ta'kidi l-humra "to emphasize redness” kip kizil, and to emphasize blackness kap kara: Xar. 5, 9; to add emphasis, as in the Ar. words aşadd and abyan you can say ... ne kip kizil dir bu and ne kap kara dir bu Tu. 85a. 6. 1 ka:v 'tinder'; s.i.a.m.l.g. in a wide variety of forms:- kav, kaw, ko:, ku:, kağ, koj. L.-w. in Pe. etc., Doerfer 111 1542. Xak. xi ka:v “the tinder” (al-hurrága) which is ignited with a strike-a-light” Kaş, 1I] rss: Çağ. xv ff. kaw 'wood gathered under trees and prepared and made into tinder' (pida) which is ignited with a strike-a-light; in Ar. Aurrága and in Pe. bia San. 279r. 12 (quotn.): Xwar. xtv kaw (sic) 'tinder' Qutb 136: Kom. xiv 'tinder” kow (sic) CCI; Gr.: Kap. xui al-şüfan “tinder" kasvv Hou, 17, 17: xiv kaw al-şüfdn which is ignited with a strike-a-light; also used for al-harraq İd. 76: xv harrág (PU) ko Tuh. 13a. 9. 2 ka:v in the phr. ka:v ko:v, a quasi-onomatopocic; n.o.a.b, Xak. xi if a garment is wrinkled (inzawd) and torn (imxaraga; MS. inharaqa) in the tailoring one says to:n ka:v ko:v boldı: Kaş. JI] 129 (the main entry is ko:v), one says to:n ka:v ko:v boldi: “the garment was shrunken (ingabada) and wrinkled owing to bad tailoring” 71] 155 (main entry ka:v). F 3 kav. l.-w. fr. Chinese ko “one-tenth of a pint! (Pulleyblank, Middle Chinese kap; Giles 3,947 6,056). N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. (in R list of things which might be used dishonestly in trading: balances, scales, feet and inch measures) şen kav 'pints and one-tenth : P pints” U 7I 77, 25; 86, 43; Suv. 135, 9. S 4 ka:v Scc ka:b Kip., Osm. Kip See kap. : K1v practically syn. vv. küt and nearly always used in association with it; originally prob. “divine favour', hence, more vaguely, “good fortune'. N.o.a.b. Türkü vir ff., Man. (the five gods are) kuti kivi 'divine favour (Hend.)' (. . . to all on this earth) Chuas. 45-6: UYĞ. vini ff. Man. (may he give) küt kiv küç basut 'divine favour (Hend.), strength, and help” M İH 42, 15 (i); alo. M II 5, 3-5 (ii) (bógü1en-): Bud. kuti kivi US. 102, 26; a.o0. U İV 10, sr (ço:ğ): Xak. xı kiv al-baxt wa'l-dawla "good fortune” Kaş. 7 332; anın küt lav tozu: (MS. tovf:) tuğdı: "and so the dust of good fortune (Hend.) rose” 7 301, 2; küt kiviğ berse: idim ku:lipa: “if my Lord gives good   579 fortune (al-dasola) to his servant" 1320,25: KB the word is spelt ktvt and precedes kut; the contexts indicate that the author took it to mean “fickle” e.g. küvenrne kivr kutka kutluğ kişi “O fortunate man, do not rely on fickle fortune' 668; o.o. of kivi kut 1045, 1332; Chap. xx (vv. 1045 ff.) is headed kut kivilidin. dawlat irsellikin bayin kilur 'describes the fickleness (Hend.) of fortune (IIend.): Xwar. xiv meni yandursa kandursa kıvını (glossed sgalwa) “if he fires me, and satisfies (my) desires” (sic) Qutb 149. VU ko:b Hap. leg.? Xak. xı one says ol menu: körüp ko:b kildr: "he was delighted (Ragga sva'rtühd) when he saw me” Kaş. III II9. kop when qualifying a V. connotes comprehensive action; when qualifying an Adj. means 'thoroughly, completely'; when qualifying a N, means “all”: v. G. ATG, para. 3oz suggests that this is a Ger. in -p fr. *ko:-, adducing in support the longer Ger. f. kopan read by Radloff in T 36, but neither photograph nor squeeze show any sign of the -an there; the theory is possible, but semantically unattractive. Not noted later than Kg. Cf. barça:, köp, etc. "Türkü vırır kop occurs about zo times in /, JI and T, e.g. (to the far east, vvest, south, and north) anda: içreki: bodun kop mapa: kórü:r fertu:) “vithin these limits the peoples all looked to me” (i.e. obeyed me) 7 S ə, İİ N 2; ança: bodun kop etdim “all these people I thorougbly organized' I S 2-3; tórt bulup kop yağı: ermiş *the people of the four quarters were completely hostile” 7 E 2, IJ E 3: viu ff. (in the third year) kop esen tüke:l körü:şmiş “they all met one another safe and sound” İrRB 15; 0.0. do. 15, 29; (if a man wears this stone) kopka: utğay “he will be successful in everything” (and whatever work he undertakes) kop[da:?] işı: york bolğay “his work will be completely satisfactory” Toy. 17-20 (ETY II 58): Man. (if we have said) edgüğ anığağ kop tepri yaratrnış ol "got created good and evil, both of them” Chuas. ] 27-8; kop kanka bulğanmış “completely saturated with blood": M 1 6, 6: Uyf. vin ff. Man.-A kop yerde açığ emgek kórtükin “having experienced grievous sufferings in all places! M 7 9, 5-6: Man. (may he protect us) kop adada tudada “in all dangers (Hend.) M III 36, 4 (ii); koptin sipar él uluşlarığ keztipiz "you have traversed realms and countries in every direction" 77 III 60: Bud. kop kamağ edgü bütmeki bolur 'it is that all (Hend.) good things are achieved' T'T III, p. 30, note 131, 3; kop tórlüg agir tsuy 'all kinds of grievous sins” IV ız, 39; 0.0. do. 14,64; V 24, 51-4; VII 40, 96; VIII K.9; U III 29, 2-3 (t:d-); Sus. 92, 19-20: Civ. kop İşin “all your affairs” TT I 148, 156: Xak. xr kop harf mubáleja wa ta'kid “a particle giving emphasis'; hence one says oğul kop bedü:di: 'the boy has grown a great deal (Z&amp;yata(n)) bigger', and kop edgü: 2:9 “an extremely (cidda(r)) good thing” Kaş. 319.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 624 
     
   
   
       580 ko:v 'backbiting, persecution', and the like; first noted as below, but see kovla:- (Türkü). Cf. kov-. Kip. xiv ko:w al-£iba “backbiting” İd. 76. Mon. V. GB1 kap- “to grasp, or seize, with the hands, teeth, etc.'; s.i.a.m.l.g, Türkü virt ff. (a falcon, saying "there is a bare") tenri:din kod... kapmi:g 'swooped down from the sky (and tried) to catch it" JrkB 44: Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. anı üçün méni kapip éltdi "he has therefore seized me and carried me off” U III 69, 26 fT.: Xak. xr er tom knapdi: “the man snatched (xalasa) the garment! (etc.); and one says oğlamığ yö:l kapdt aşdba Lşabi sa"fa mina'l-cinn 'demoniacal possession took hold of the boy'; also used of the wind when it blows away (Aabbat) a garment and the like Kaş. 77 4 (kapa:r, kapma:k); several o.o. generally translated £xfalasa “to steal, take stealthily': KB 6110 (üzepü:): xiv Muh. ixtatafa “to snatch away' ka:p- Mel. 20, 1; 22, 4; Rif. 99 (kap-), ro2: Çağ. xv ff. kap- (with -p-”) "to seize (rabidan) with the hands, or grasp (giriftan) with the teeth', of a dog and the like San. 263v. 9 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv kap- 'to seize, grasp” Qreb 126: Kip. xin xafifa "to snatch away! kap- Hou. 35, 19: xiv ditto İd. 67; Bul. 43v.: xv ditto Kav. 9, 3; 75, 8; Tuh. 15a. 4: Osm. xv kap- “to snatch away'; in one text 7TS IV 466. 2 *kapkapfa:k. See kapak, kapığ, kapğa:, *kav- See kavir-, kavış-, etc. kop- “to rise'; prob. originally in the sense of "to rise in the air”, but Kaş. also translates it, like tur-, by gária “to stand up, rise in onc”s place", Survives in SE Türki; NW Kar. L., T. and, with extended meanings, in SW Osm. Cf. 1 ağ-, ün-, tur-. Türkü vrir ff. (a falcon went hunting river birds) utru: talim kara: kuş kopu:pan barmi:ş "a predatory eagle flew up to meet it /rkB 43: Xak. xı er yoka:ru: kopdi: “the man rose (gàma) from his place”, and one says tüpi: kopdi: “the wind rose” (/tabbat); and kuş kopdi: “the bird (etc.) rose in the air” (valada) Kaş. II 4 (kopa:r, kopma:k); about ro o.o. translated qàma, tala"a (of the moon) “to rise”, Adca (of the alarm, tumult, etc.) “to be raised”: KB kop- is common, both lit. e.g. (of the morning breeze) “to rise 71; (of birds) "to fly upwards 73; (of a man) “to stand up” 3498; and metaph. e.g. kişi söz bile koptı boldı malik “some people have risen by speaking (eloquently) and become kings! 173; a.o. 602; bu bordın kopar mir yazukka yürek "because of this wine (a man's) heart rises to countless sins' 1338; (of understanding) “to arise! 1834; a.o. 4232 (yağı:lığ) : xiu(?) 4t. 179 (10); Tef. kop*to rise; to stand up; (of the dead) to rise again', etc. 213: XIV Rbğ. R I 1217 (örü:), Muh. qüma kop-, ko:p- Mel. 7,18; Rif. 79 114 (Mel. 30,3 dur-): Çağ. xvff. kop- (-ti, etc.) yermden halk- “to rise from one's place” Vel. 335   MON. ĞB (quotns.), kop- (“vith -p-") bar xástan “to rise, stand up" San, 281 v. 18 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv kop- “to stand up” Qutb 137; MN 246; "to get up” (at night to pray) Nahc. 318, 7: Kom. xiv “to rise' kop- CCI, CCG, Gr. zoo (quotns.): Kap. xir fára. mina'l-tatearán "to rise! kop-; and one says of dust rising do:z kopti:; and one says kop- of a limb which leaves its position and is dislocated (imfakha); similarly when a man stands up (gáma), and when a man rises and stands erect (tàra tva nahada qd"ima(n)) Hou. 39, s: xiv kop- inba'ata “to rise' as in toz koptr: “the dust rose”? and in the Kitáb Baylik kop- irtafa"a "to rise, be exalted” İd. 67; irtafa"a (of dust and the like) kopBul. 26v.: xv qabba “to stand up” kop- Tu. 30a. rr: Osm. xiv ff. kop- “to rise, appear', etc.; c.La.p.. TTS I 483; 1I 649; III 475; İV s39. kov- (?ko:v-) a V. homophonous vv, Ko:v, q.v.; 'to follow, pursue, chase', and the like with some extended meanings, e.g. 'to persecute”. S.i.m.m.l. in a wide range of forms including ku- and koğ-, in SW Osm., Tkm. kov-; although the vowel is short in Tkm., Kag.s alternative form Ko:v- is prob. the original one. Xak. xi 1t keyikni: kovdi: “the dog chased (farada) the wild game”, also used of anyone who pursues (farada) something and follows in its tracks Kaş. JJ 16 (kova:r, kovma:k): er atın ko:vdt: “the man drove (saqa) his horse and pursued it”, also used of anything clse Kaş. 777 183 (no Aor. or Infin.): KB (the fighting man) laçın kuş kovar teg töker kanları 'hunts them like a falcon and sheds their blood' 2381: xın(?) Tef. kov- "to hunt” (deer) 215 (kuv-): Çağ. xvff. kaw(sic))kawla- yandan wa dür hardan 'to pursue, drive away', in Ar. farada San. 278r. 17 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv ka:w- (sic) "to pursue, drive”, kov- ditto Qutb 136, r41: Kip. xiv kovv- talaba bi-cahd "to pursue vigorously! /d. 76: xiv. şahata mina'l-siháta “to importune" (kowala-/) kow-(/tilen-) Tuh. 21b. 9: Osm. xiv kov-, occasionally spelt koğ- “to pursuc'; c.ha.p. TTS I 488; II 654; III 48o; IV 544. Dis. ĞBA kaba: “thick, protruding”, and the like, esp. of hair, the beard, and so on. Survives in NC Kzx. kaba 'bushy' (beard); NW Kk. kapa ditto; SW Osm. kaba ditto; also 'coarse, common, ordinary. Xak. xr kaba: a/-murtafi' "high, protruding' of anything; hence one says kaba: yü:ğlüğ ok “an arrow with protruding feathers' Kaş. III 217 (in the first case, but not the second, three dots put below the öd” by a second(?) hand): Çağ. xv ff. kaba sitabr wwa faxim wa bar amada ba-gakl-i habab 'thick, dense, swollen like a bubble" (quotn.); also pronounced koba; also the name of a place in the province of Andicán San. zöşr. 9; kobn 'udr-i(?) bar amada wa faxim 'a swollen thick limb'(?), also pronounced kaba; also a place-name do. 282r. 16: Kip. xur kaftu'l-lihya. tea. "urdihá with a bushy  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 625 
     
   
   
         DIS. V. GBCbeard” kaba: sakallu: /7ou. 25, 19: xiv kaba: al-say'u'l-muntafig "anything swollen or fluffed out”, one says . . . tulbandı: kaba: dur “his turban is broad' (zoğsr"a) and kabtan kaba: dur "his robe is broad, voluminous” İd. 68: xv al-hihyatıu” l-muhabcara "a bushy beard' kaba: sakallu: Kar. 59, zo: Osm. xiv to xvi kaba “thick, massive' (e.g. of a tree); in several texts T TS 7 398; II 559; IV 448. kuba: 'pale, pale yellow, pale grey”, of a horse or cow 'dun'; of a man 'fair-haired' ; used both of men and animals and also natural features like the steppes. S.ís.m.l. in NE, NC, NW. Xak. xi Kuba: at 'a horse of a colour between chestnut (al-as/ab) and yellow" (al-aşfar), also used for the colour of anything Kaş, III ziy: KB kuba körklügüğ Kör “see the fair-haired beauty” 2468: Kom. xiv kuv (sic) 'pale' CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv kuba: a/-latnu'l-abar 'dust-coloured' İd, 68: kuwu: ditto 76. PU 1 kovva: Hap. leg.; al-sanbür is not noted in ordinary Arabic dicts., but the meaning is fairly clear. Xak, xi kowa: 'the nose cover (?; al-sanbur) which is part of the Turkish bridle and stands erect over the horse's nose' (muntagiba(n) "ala anfi'l-xayl) Kaş. ITİ 237. S 2 kovva: Sce kovğa:. VU(D) kovr n.o.a.b., cognate to kovuk, kovğa: which seems to indicate that the first vowel was -0-; morphologically both could be Dev. N.s fr. kov-, but there is no semantic connection. “The two meanings given by Kaş. can reasonably be regarded as lit. and metaph. Türkü vnrff. 7728 36 (uçru:ğlu:ğ): Uyğ. vi ff. Bud. kamağ kutsuz kovi ters biliglig tinliBlar “all unfortunate mortals who do not enjoy the favour of heaven and have false (or heretical?) ideas” TT VT 24; a.o. do. 19: Civ. iki köpül könül (sic, but ?dittography) tutup kovı bolsar éltin xantin açığ bolur mu? 'if a man has a divided mind(?) and is unfortunate, should the realm and xan be angry? 77S 7 178-80 (translation conjectural): Xak. xı kovt: yığa:ç al-quffa vata l-sacaru'l-báli “a rotten (i.e. hollow?) trec; also pronounced kowr with -w-: Arğu: xi kovr: er “an unlucky (al-mudbir) man” (prov.) Kaş. III 225: KB (if an ambassador is quick-witted wise and alert, his master benefits and thereby retains his colour, i.e. reputation) yalavac yavuz bolsa kivcak kovi sézigsiz tüker anda begler suvi “if an ambassador is bad and unlucky(?), undoubtedly his masters” honour is impaired” (lit. *water', an abbreviation of yüz suvi a calque of Persian db-i rü metaph. “honour”) 2639; bu kivcak kovi dunyà keçki ajun neçe beğ karitti karımaz özün “this unIucky(?) svorld is an old world, however much it makes 5egs aged, it does not age itself! 5133 (kivçak is noted only in these two passages; the other supposed occurrences of hob: *empty' in R IJ 659 are based on misreadings): Kap. xiv kuv ağaç “a hollow tree' CCG; Gr.  581 Dis. GBC VU?D kowuc Hap. leg.; the -w- suggests that the word is Oğuz, if so, prob. a crasis of *kovBuc Dev. N. fr. kov-, meaning lit. something like 'persecution'; the alternative form kovvuz, specifically described as Oğuz, looks like the Imperat. of a Caus. f. of kovused as a Pass. Kag.'s etymology is, of course, preposterous. Oğuz(?) xı kovvuç arar kull sa'fa mina'l-cinn “the symptoms of demoniacal possession'; the victim is given treatment (vu'alac), cold water is thrown in his face, and at the same time the words kowuc kowug are recited, then he is fumigated with rue and aloes-vvood (bi-harmal sca “üd), I reckon that the word is taken from the expression kaç kaç “go away and clear out, evil spirit! (uhrub wa firr yd cinni): ... . kowuz alternative form of kowug; an Oğuz word; hence one says yé:l kowuz bitigi: 'zdatu'l-cinn wwa'l-sa'fa “an amulet against evil spirits and demoniacal possession” Kaş. 11] 1635. D kapçak Hap. leg.; Dev. N. fr. kap-; perhaps a crasis of *kaptsak lit. 'grasping one another”, which suits the actual meaning. Xak. xi kapçak “the place at which the waters from the branches of a river (mina'l-sateá' id), flow into one another” (yatanátah) Kaş. 1 471. D kabçuk Dim. f. of ka:b; “a small bag or sack, pocket', and the like. S.i.s.m.l. as kapcik/kapcuk. L.-vv. in Pe., etc. Doerfer III 420. Uyğ. vii ff. Civ. H I 99-1oo (bó:z): xv Chin.-Uy£. Dict. 'purse, small bag” kapçuk Ligeti 161; R II 430: Çağ. xvi ff. kabcuk 'a kind of purse (Asa) which is hung from the neck, and a wallet (xwurgini) made of leather' San. 265v. 8. (D) kivcak n.o.a.b.; Den. N./A. fr. ktv, but the meaning “unfortunate” hardly fits. Xak. xı KB 2639, 51353 (Kovi:). Dis. V. GBCkavçı:- as such Hap. leg., but Var. 307 lists a SC xix Uzb.(?) word kapçi- “to catch (something falling), and in xx Uzb. kapçi- “to rush away', Bor. 604, is described as a dialect f. of sapçi- do. 355 which ərter alía means “to rush at, attack (someone)'; there cannot be any connection between this word and sapçi- but it seems to be the original form of kapçi-. Xak. xı arı: kişi:ke: kavçı:dı: “the hornet attacked (ğamala "ala) the man to sting him”) also used of a man when he is angry (£adiba) with someone and gives vent to his anger on him (inhamaka fihi) Kaş. III 276 (kavçır, kavçı:ma:k). D kavçıt- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of kavçı:-. Xak. xı ol anı: kavçıttı: “he made him angry? (ağdabahu) in order to incite him to do something which he had determined not to do; and one says oğla:n arr:nı: kavçıttı: “the boy incited the hornet to sting” Kaş. /7 329 (prov.; kavçıtu:r, kavçıtma:k, with -f- for -veverywhere).  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 626 
     
   
   
      582 DIS Dis. GBD S kawut See ka:ğut. PU?F Kiftu: 'scissors'; discussed at length in Doerfer 1 318; prob. a L-w., but as Doerfer points out, no plausible Chinese origin has been suggested. Survives as Kipti and thc like in most NE and some NW languages, Yakut kiptiy, Pek. 1403. Most other languages for “scissors" have (the Mong. 1.-vv. ?) kayıçı, Doth these words are 1.-vv.s in various foreign languages, see. Doerfer.. Cf. biçğu:ç, sindu:, Çigil xr kiftu: a/-miqrad 'scissors' Kaş. I 416 (qaf unvocalized): xiv Muh(?) al-müqaşş 'scissors' kiftu: Rif. rsg (only): Kom. xtv 'scissors' kipti. CC/; Gr.: Kip, xii How. 23, 11 (bıÇğu:ç): xv al-migass kipti: (-5-) Kav. 64, 95 Tult. 34a. t1. VU(D) kovdak Hap. leg.?; meaning quite uncertain; morphologically Den. N.(?) fr. ko:v. Cf. kovdasg. Xak. xı KI (cither go to meals, or do not go; cutb your appetite, eat sparingly and keep your health. The man who overeats becomes sickly) sarığ menzi kovdak atı (or eti) él bolur “his yellow complexion and his ?reputation (or, preferably?, flesh) become notorious' 4672. F kafta:n Persian xaftün 'outer garment, robe' became an early l.-w. in Turkish, and later reappeared in Pe. and Ar. in its "Turkish spelling described as a L-w. fr. Turkish. S.i.s.m.l. in NW, SW. Xak. xı kafta:n a/-qabá' "robe” Kaş. I 435; three o.0.: xiv Muh.(?) al-qabá' kafta:n Rif. 166 (only): Çağ. xv ff. kaptan cáma 'garment' Vel. 314 (quotns.); xaftan “a kind of garment (/ibás) split up on both sides', in Rümi called kaba, also used in the corrupt form kaptan San. 222v. 13; kaptan corruption of xaftan, same translation do. 263r. 24 (quotns): Xwar. xiv kaftan 'robe' Quib. 128: Kip. xiv kaptan (-5-) al-qaba, derived fr. Pe. xafran "an iron breastplate” (dir' min hadid), the Turks borrowed it for al-qabd” and gave it the Turkish pronunciation kaptan /d. 67. VU(D) kovdaş Hap. leg.?; meaning quite uncertain; morphologically ?N. of Association fr. ko:v, cf. kovdak, In the Vienna MS. ayı is glossed /eaze/ “fear”, obviously a muddle with Mong. ayu- “to fcar', and kovdaş sar rma- şyida *with an unwashed head', which suggests that the scribe was quite at a loss. Xak. xt KB (do not reach out and take a mcat ball in front of someone else, take whatever is in front of you and eat it. Do not draw a knife or carry off a bone) ayı bolma kovdas “do not be excessively quarrelsome” 4599 (see silkim), Dis. V. GBD ?D kavid- Hap. leg.; etymologically obscure. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. (in a description of a nightmare) üç kógürcgen atayı(?) laçınka kavıdur erken “vhile three doves were protecting their father(?) from a falcon” Sur. 620, 20-1.   . GBD D kıvad- Hp. leg.; Den. V. in -ad- (Intrans. ?) fr. kiv, no doubt morc or less syn. vr, kutad-. Uyf£. vir ff: Man.-A kutadmak kıvadmak bolzun tüzü üdrülmiş arığ dındarlarka “may heavenly favour (Hend.) be upon all the chosen pure Elect! M 7 28, 15-17. D kavdin- lap. leg.; Refl. f. of kavıd-, Xak.xreroflipa:kavdindi: (MS, kavdundi:) “the man protected (ajfaqa . . . "ala) his son”, and made it his business to ward. off dangers from him Aag. // 249 (kavdinu:r, kavdınma:k). D kaptur- Caus. f. of kap-; sim. m.lgr. with some extended meanings. Xak. xt ol apa:v tava:r kapturdi: Hamalahu 'alà ixtilaqi (sic, error for ixtilasiy l-mita" "he urged him to embezzle the property! Kaş. II 189 (kapturur, kapturma:k): Çağ. xv ff. kaptur- Caus. f. of kap- ; not translated San. 263v. 21: Xwar. xii kapdur- “to order to scize' "AF 28. Tris. V. GBDD ?F kiftu:la:- Den. V. fr. kiftu:; survives as kiptila- and the like in some NE languages. Xak. xı ol kiftu:la:di: bö:züğ “he cut (qarada) the linen with scissors” (bi I-miqrag) Kaş. III 352 (Kiftu:la:r, kiftu:la:ma:k). Dis. GBG kabak/kapak Preliminary note. AMorphologically kabak Dim. f. of kasb, and kapak Dev. N. fr. 2 *kap- are quite different words. They are still distinguished phonettcally in SW Az. (ğabağ/ğapağ) and Osm. (kabak/ kapak) but in early texts they are spelt and, in some modern languages, pronounced. exactly the same, and it is not always casy to determine which word is intended. Exceptionally, in SW Tkm. 'pumphin! is | sometimes ka:bak, but ğa:bak means *eyelid' and Bapak “cover, lid”. D kabak Dim. f. of ka:b; lit. “a small containcr', in practice 'gourd, pumpkin, marrow', and the like (but not 'sweet melon"). S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE(?) w. some phonetic changes. L.-w. in Pe., etc., Doerfer 111 1419. Xak. xi kabak a/-dubba” wwahwa'l-qar' “a pumpkin', that is a gourd which is caten fresh (ra/?) Kag. I 382 (between two translations. of kapak): Çağ. xv TE. kabag/kabak (with -b-”) (1) Radi *gourd'; (2) metaph. “a target (nig&amp;na-n&amp;ma) which they fasten on the top of a tall pole and shoot at (quotn.); originally in shooting competitions they put a pumpkin on the top of a tall pole and so the word came to be used for “target” San. 265r. 14: Kom. Xiv “pumpkin” kabak CCI; Gr.: Kip. xit al-qar" wa'i-yagtin ('marrow') kabak Hou. 8, 11: XIv kabak 'a pumpkin at which they shoot arrovvs” Id. 68: xv al-qar' kabak Kav. 63, 13; Tuh. 293. 3. Osm. xiv ff. see kapak, D kapak Dev. N. fr. 2 *kap- lit. 'something which covers or closes”, usually used for *a lid, or other cover”, and “eyelid”. S.t.a.m.l.g, vv.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 627 
     
   
   
     at  DIS some phonetic changes. L.-w. in Pe., etc., Doerfer 111 1367, 1545. Türkü vri ff. Man. (just as one throws) ótsüz (damaged, uncertain) kapakuğ “a. . . lid” (in running water and cleans it with onc's hands) M HI 14, ro11 (iii): Uyğ. virt ff, Bud, kózi kapakı tüp tüz “her two eycs and eyclids were exactly alike' U IV 3o, 48; ao. TT X 436-7 (tü:): Xak. xı kapak cafnu'l-'ayn 'cyelid', also called kó:z kapakı:: (kabak follows here): kapak 'udratu'l-'adraà “a virgin's hym”n”ş one says ol kiz kapakı: si:di: “he deflowered (igtadda) the girl” Kaş. I 382: xiv Muh. al-cafn kapa:k (-6-) Met. 46, 13; Rif. 140: Çağ. xv ff. kabağ/kabak ('with -b-”) 2. (3) pust-f çaşm 'eyelid' San. 265r. 14 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv kapak 'eyclid' Quib 126: Kip. xiv kabak (sic?; 'target' and) cafnu'l-'ayn (and al-nuxdla 'bran'; all three simultaneously) /d. 68 (sce kabak, kavik): xv cafn kapak (?; -b-) Tuh. 11a. ız: Osm. xivxv kapak “eyelid” TTS 7 398; II 559; III 392; /V 448 (here spelt kabak; the word is also noted in all periods meaning 'drinking cup”, for which kabak is perhaps right): xvii kapak ('with -p-”) in Rumi, sar büş "cover, lid” San. 265r. 17. D kapığ Conc. N. in -ığ fr. 2 *kap-; 'door, gate”. The second vowel was originally -1but became -a-in Man.-A and some Uy£. (Uy£.-A) texts and later became -u- by labial attraction. Survives in some NVV languages and SW Az. Osm., Tkm.; elsewhere displaced by ésik, L.-w. in Pe., etc. as kapu, etc., Doerfer 111 1368. Türkü vir temir kapığ “the Iron. Gate”, a pass between Balkh and Samarkand is mentioned several times in /, I7, T, Ix.: vini ff. Man, tamu kapğına “to the gate of hell” Chuas. 126; kapağın acti “he opened its gate” M 7 13, 7; 0.0. do. 812; M III 23, 2 (i); TT II 8, 65: Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. kapağ (si) 'gate! is common in PP: Civ. tepri kapığı "the gates of heaven” TT I 144: a.o.o.: Xak. xı kapuğ (sic) al-bab “gate” Kaş. I 375; over 30 o.o.: KB (some flowers) acti hapuğ "have opened a gate' (with their beauty) 97; 0.0. 264, 2529 fT. : xırı(?) Tef. kapuğ/kapu 'gate, door! 198-9: xiv Muh. al-darısaxa 'gate' kapuk (sic) Mel. 73, 13 (Rif. 179 adds wa darbu'l-sir “and town gate', translation kayğa:, ?for kapğa: q.v.) al-bab kapu: 76, 5; kapuğ 179; a.o. 26, 9; 109 (yaptur-): Çağ. xv ff. kapu ('with -p-”) dar-i saray “palace gate', also called eşik, kapu ökçesi “the bottom pivot of a door', and metaph. “threshold”, in Ar. 'ataba San. 265v. zo: Xwar. xir] kapuğ 'door' “AER iz: xiv kapağ/kapuğ: “door” Qutb 126-;; MN 275; Kom. xiv ditto kabağ/kabak CCG; Gr.: Kip. xit: al-bàb kapu (-5-; also eşik) Hou. 6, 4: xiv kapu (sie, *with -p-"). al-bab, one says kapu aç and kapuni: aç "open the door” 14. 68; a/-bab ka:pr/ka:pu: (-b-) Bul. x4, ir: xv al-báb (eşik and) ka:pu (-5-, so read?) Kav. 59. 10; kapu (-5-) Tuh. 8a. s. kavik 'bran'; n.o.a.b. Cf. kepek; the existence of two similar words with this meaning  . GBĞ 583 suggests that they may have a common foreign origin. Uy£. virt ff. Civ. kavik kilip ala kigike sürtser alası kéter “if one makes bran and rubs it on a man with a blotchy skin, his blotches disappear' TT VII 23, 4-5: Xak. xı kavik 'bran' (al-nuxála) of millet, Kaş. 7 383; a.o. 1 221 (estür-), kavvik “millet bran', the -w- changed from -v- //7 16s: KB kavuk sókti yém tap 'a diet of millet bran (Hend.) satisfies me” 4767; a.o. 4768: Kom. xiv kovax (sic) 'scurf on the head” CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv kawuk ai-sawiq “millet or barley gruel' /d. 76; o.o. do. 68 (kapak), 76 (kovuk). (D) kavuk morphologically Pass. Dev. N. fr. *kav-; 'the bladder' (of a man or animal). S.i.m.m.l.g. vv, considerable phonetic changes; some modern forms are liable to be confused with those of kovuk. 'The alternative form kafuk in Uyğ, Civ. may be the original form. Uy$. viri ff. Civ. (the r4th letter is called fruriu(?)); kavuk üze urğu ol “one must place it over the bladder' TT VII 41, 13; kağuk sızlağka em “a cure for an ache in the bladder! H I 165; a.o. do. 37 (tigi:): Xak. xi kavuk al-matána "the bladder” Kaş. I 383; kavvuk ditto alternative form (/uga) of kavuk III 165: Çağ. xv ff. kawuk (spelt) mafana San. 279v. 8: Kip. xiv kawuk al-matdna İd. 76: Osm. xiv ff. kavuk 'bladder'; c.i.a.p. TTS I 435; II 602; III 424; IV 484: xvii (after Çağ.) in Rümi kawuk has the same meaning and also means a kind of turban Sar, 279v. 8. E kuvak read by Radloff in several documents in USp., and translated 'assessment' is an error for kuvra:f. (D) kovuk 'hollow, emptv'; cognate to kovt:, q.v.ş survives only(?) in SW Osm. kovuk, but the syn. words Az. ğovuş/koğuş and Tkm. $ovalc, &amp;ovuz are cognate. Xak. xi Kovuk ne:p “anything hollow' (acwaf) Kaş. 1 383, kowuk ditto; alternative form (lufa) of kovuk //7 164: xi(?) Tef. kovuk (mis-spelt kavak) 'hollow' rgr: (Kom. xiv “hollovv” kovvuş (sic) CCG; Gr.): Tkm.(?) xiv kowuk “anything hollowed out and empty' (mucazwtvaf. fárif); in Kip. used for aí-satiq “millet gruel ld. 76. D kapğa: Dev. N. in -i$a: which seems here to be an Elative, fr. 2 *kap-; 'a great gate, town gate'. Survives in NC Kir. kapka; Kzx. kakpa; NW Kaz. kapka. Xak. xi kapğa: al-darb “a great gate” Kaş. I 425: XIV Muh. Rif. 179 (?, kapığ). (D) kovğa: 'pail, bucket'; cognate to kovuk, A L-w. in Mong. koboğalkoboğo "bucket, trough” (Kor. 896, Haltod 203). Survives in NW Krım kopka R II 654 (which together with the Çağ. forms may be a reborrowing fr. Mong.) and SW Osm. kova; Tkm. &amp;ova. Cf. kónek. Uyğ. vırı ff. Man.-A kov£asin [gap] suv içre kemişmişler “they lowered their buckets . . . into the water' M 7 35, 16-17; 2.0. do. 36, 20: Çağ. xv ff. kobğa (mis-spelt IIPNPNEINEENNNEPNENNNPENNUEEEN E eu LLLLOI)LIAALi'LpLABADIOLL— CLP c. ——Á—A— A C. Le uu -— ——-——. t o m 9000 ER. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 628 
     
   
   
     584 DIS koyğa) "a bucket (koga) for drawing water from a spring” Vel. 334 (quotns.), kobğa (spelt) dalw-i üb “vater bucket' San. 282r. (quotns.): Oğuz xı kowa: al-dalte "bucket, pail” Kaş. HI 237; 2.0. I 147 (urukluğ): xiv Muh.(?) al-dahe kowa: Rif. 181 (only): Xwar. xiti ka:vvğa: (sic)/kowa 'pail' "Ah 11, 57: kobka Nahc. 113, 12; 357, iz: Kowa do. 112, 12; 357, 13: Kip. xiv Kowa: a/-dako İd. 76: xv dalw (text in disorder; in margin in SW(?) hand) koğa Tuh. 15b. 5. D kapğa:k Dev. N. (connoting habitual action) fr. 2 *kap-; “lid, cover”, A l-w. in Mong. kabkah (Ko. 728) and Pe., etc. Doerfer 11] 1422. Survives (or reborrowed from Mong.?) as kapkak in NE 'Tel, Tob.; SE "Türki and SC Uzb. (kopkok). Cf. kapak, yapğuç. Xak. xi kapğa:k a/-"ifaş wahwa makabbatu'l-kinàna "a leather stopper, that is the cover of a quiver” Kaş. I 471. F ka:fğar Hap. leg.; no doubt like other similar names of fabrics, a l.-w., of unknown (?Western) origin. Cf. barçın. Xak. xı ka:fğar | al-harirwl-bahramán “yellovv silk” Kaş. HI 438. Tris. GBG D kava:ğu: Conc. N. fr. *kava:-, Den. V. fr. 1 ka:v, with which it is synonymous. As such Hap. leg. but see below. Uy£. vii ff. Bud. kuruğ kavağu 'dry tinder” U II ro, 23: (xiv Muh.(?) al-harraq 'tinder' kawa:k. Rif. 169 (only), perhaps a later form). D kapığçı: N.Ag. fr. kapığ, 'gate-keeper, door-keeper”, Survives in SW Osm. kapıcı/ kapuci; but ''km. Éapig: means "one who begs from door to door. L.-w. in Pe., etc. Doerfer 1M 1369. Uyğ. viti ff. Bud. kapağçı (sic) "rate-keeper” PP ar, 5; az, 5; 44, 6: Kapığçı do. 66, r: (Xak.) xiv Muh. al-banımab 'gate-keeper' kapu:çı: (-5-, wa oda:ct:) Mel. 56, 14; kapu£gt: (-5-) Rif. 155: Xwar. xiv kapuğçı ditto Qurb 127: Kip. xu al-bawwàb ka:pu:es: (-b-) Hou. 24, 4. D kapaklığ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. kapak, Xak. xı kapakhg (MS. kapikli) kuz al-'adrà' "a virgin! Kaş. I 496. D kabaklık A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. kabak; n.o.a.b. Xak. xr kabaklık anbitu'l-qar' “a pumpkin bed” Kaş. 7 505; a.o. 505, 18. D kapığlığ DP.N./A. fr. kapığş s.is.m.l. Xak, xr kapuğluğ ev “a house with a door' (bab) Kaş. I 495. Tris. V. GBGD kapğaklan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. kapfa:k. Xak. xı kö:ş kapğaklandı: “the quiver had a cover” ("ifaş) Kaş. II 275 (kapğaklanu:r, kapğaklanma:k). D kapakla:- Hap. leg., Den. V. fr. kapak. Xak. xı er kr:ziğ kapakla:dı: "the man deflowered (iqtadda) the girl? Kaş. III 338 (kapakla:r, kapakla:ma:k). . GBĞ Dis. ĞBL kiva:l Hap. leg. Xak. xı kiva:l burun a/-'irninu'l-agamm | wahwa mahmüd a: wellshaped bridge of the nose” it is much admired Kaş. I 412 (verse). ?PF kawla: (?or kavla:) n.o.a.b., but sec kavlalik; prob. a l.-w., ?Chinese. Uyğ. xiv Chin.-Uvg. Dict. ts'ai 'culinary vegetables? (Giles 11,513) kawla R II sz, Ligeti 165 rcads lai 'goosefoot, QChenopodium | murale! (Giles 6,691), but kawlalik shows that the text must originally havc had ts'ar. D ka:blığ Tap. leg.?; P.N./A. fr. ka:b; (of a child) “born in a caul'. Xak. xi Kaş, 111 146 (ka:b). D kıvlığ P.N./A. fr. kiv, 'enjoying divine favour'; syn. vv, kutluf and found only in Hend. with it. Uyğ. virff. Bud. kutluğ kivlié U 7I 36, 47; 111 7,6; 80, 19; TT VI 100-1, etc.: Civ. ditto VII 28, 17. kapla:n a large feline, prob. “leopard” rather than 'tiger', but the vagueness of oriental terminology makes certainty impossible. One of a number of animal names ending in -la:n. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE, see S/icherbah, p. 138, where an implausible etymology is suggested. Uyf. vini ff. Civ. Koço tağında kaplan yok 'there are no leopards in the Xoço mountains! (and no fish in a wel) TT VII 42, 7: (Xak.) xiv Muh. al-nimr “tiger” kapla:n (-5-) Mel. 72, 4; Rif. 172 (adding al-babr "leopard'); sanatıcl-nimr “the leopard year” (pa:rs yt:lt: sea) kapla:n (-5-) yt:li: So, 19 (only): Çağ, xvff. kaplan (“vith -p-”) palang 'Icopard' San. 26şv. 12 (quotn.): Kip. xın al-nimr kapla:n (-5-) Hou. 11, 2: XIV ditto Bul. 10, s: xv al-nimr kafla:n Kas, 62, 6 (-fis not uncommon for -p- in this text); nimr koplan (-5-; corrected in margin to kaplan) Tuh. 36a. 12. Dis. V. GBLD kapıl- Pass. f. of 1 kap-, “to be scized, grasped'. S.i.a.m.l.g. Xak. xr er evde: kapıldı: “the man. was detained (Juibisa) in the house”: one also says anın to:nr: kapıldı: “his garment was snatched away' (or stolen, uxtulisa) Kaş. II 120 (kapılu:r, kapilma:k); a.o. I s20: Çağ. xvíff. kapil- girifta ma rabüda şudan "to be grasped, seized' San. 263v. 21. D kovla:- Den. V. fr. ko:v, q.v.; practically syn. vv, kov-. N.o.a.b., Türkü viri ff. Man. yeme yazuksuz kişiğ nece kovladımız erser “if we have persecuted (or falsely accused?) an innocent person” Clas. 103-4: Çağ. xv ff. kawla- (-r, etc., sic) kov- Vel, 325 (quotns.); a.o. San. 278r. 17 (quotns.; kov-): Kip. xiv iğrdba "to backbite”, etc. İd, 76: xv Tuh. 21b. 9 (kov-). D ka:blan- Refl. Den. V. fr. ka:b; Hap. leg. in Kag.'s meaning, but fr. Xvvar, xiv onwards kaplan- was used as the Pass. f. of kapla 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 629 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. GBR"to put a cover on (something); to bind (a book)', and more generally 'to cover, surround, besiege, contain', etc. Xak. xi er ka:blandt: “the man became the owner of a vvine-skin" (ziqq) Kaş. III 199, 6 (in a passage on the functions of -lan-); n.m.e. Tris. ĞBL D kivilik “fickleness” See kiv Xak, xi KB. DF kawlalik (or kavlalik?) A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. kawla:; 'vegetable garden'. Pec. to Uyğ. Civ. Uyğ. vii ff. Civ. a kavlalık is mentioned as one class of property subject to a particular tax USp. 14, 14; 0.0. do. 15, 3 (tegzindür-); 30, 7 and 22-4. Dis. GBN F kapan “a large dish or tray'; Chinese l.-w. compounded of Aa, perhaps 1 ka:, q.v., and pa'n 'dish, tray' (Giles 8,620). N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. Chr. U 7 7, 4-5 (ur-): xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. p'am (see above) kapan Ligett 158; RII 439. F kabın 'dowry'; Chinese 1.-vv, prob. compounded of ka, perhaps chia “to give a daughter, in marriage! (Giles 1,141, Middle Chinese Ka), and gön '(financial) capital” (Giles 8,846). Except in Uy£. spelt vv. front vowels. Noted in (Iranian) Xwarazmian as kábina and a l.-w. in Pe. as kábin, kabin, habin, Doerfer 111 1614. NW Kaz., SW Az. kebin 'betrothal, marriage' R II 1194; SW xx Anat. ditto SDD 863 are prob. a Pe. l.-w. Uyğ. vit ff. Civ. kabın 'dowry' occurs several times in Fam. Zrch.: Osm. xiv kebin 'dowry'; in two texts 7TS II 610; HI 429. Dis. V. GBND kapın- Refl. f. of kap-; s.i.s.m.l., usually as kabin- vv. various meanings. Xak. xı er tava:r kapındı: “the man pretended to carry off( yaslub) the goods'; and one says oğla:n yel kapındı: aşdba”l-şabi sa'fa 'demoniacal possession attacked the boy” Kaş. 7I 154 (kapınu:r, kapinma:k). S kuvan- Sec küven-. Dis.GBR D kavrığ Hap. leg.; Dev. N. fr. kavirUyğ. vir ff. Dud. (if a man is thrown into prison, or commits a robbery and is arrested, or) berge kağıl ulatı kısığ kavrığ emgeki kelser “the pain of being (flogged vvith) whips, rods, etc., and imprisonment and confinement comes to him” TT VI 110-11. D kuvra:ğ Dev. N. fr. kuvra:-, lit. 'crowd, gathering”, but in Uyğ. usually the standard translation of Sanskrit samgha 'a monastic community”. More or less syn. vv. térin and bursap, q.v. One of the Buddhist technical terms borrowed by Mong. in Turkish spelling as kuvarag (Kos. 975, Haltod 223); n.o.a.b. 'Türkü vin ff. Man. (the king himself came) dındarlar erigli kuvrağğaru “to the as585 sembly where the Elect were' TT IJ 6, 34; a.o. M III 21, 13 (térin): Uyğ. vii ff. Man. vréstiler kuvrağına “to the community of the apostles” TT LX 95; a.o. do. 97 (térin): Bud. kuvrağ for 'monastic community” is common, e.g. Sanskrit samghát samghám “from community to community” kuvra:ğdın kuvra:&amp;ka: TT VIII G.5; o.o. do. C.5 (utuz-); TT IV 6, 45 (erksin-); VI oo, etc. (térin); but it is sometimes used more generally for 'gathering, crowd', e.g. (he sat down at the cross-roads in the middle of the town) kalin kuvrağ ara “in a dense crowd' PP zo, 5-6; 2.0. U II 23, 18; and, even yekler kuvrağlı) “a horde of demons! TT X 312: Xwar. xiv kurağ (read kuvvrağ) “a festive gathering, usualy in the Hend. maclis ku(vv)rağ, fairly common Qutb 144. Dis. V. GBRD kabar- Intrans. Den. V. fr. ka:b; lit. 'to become a container', that is 'to form a blister, vesicle, and the like', hence, more generally 'to swell up”. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE, SE. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. kabaru kelmiş etindeki sól suvin “the serum in his swollen flesh” U III 41, O-1 (ii); a.o. do. 45, iz: Xak. xt ba:ş kabardı: "the wound swelled up” (or became puffy, intafaxa) originally ka:bardr, but the form with a short vowel is the more elegant (al-afşah) Kaş. II 71 (kabarur, kabarma:k): Çağ. xv ff. kabar- (spelt) ábila karden, “to form a blister", and metaph. waram ardan "to swell; the Rümi corrupt it to keberik (sic) in the second sense Saz. 264r. 11 (quotns.ş the last statement duc to a misunderstanding of the Ar. 1.-vv, kiber 'becoming great”): Kip. xiv kabar- zanaffata” Hcurh "of a wound, to form a blister”, (after kaba:) one says ba:ş kabardı: izrafaşa"l-şa"ruhu "his hair was fluffed out” (sic, ? a misunderstanding of the phr. in Kaş.) ld. 68: xv intafaşa kabar- Tuh. 6b. 9; baqbaqa “to form a blister” kabar- do. 8b. 5: Osm. xiv, xvı kabar- metaph. (of a battle) “to become more intense” in two texts TTS 7 399; İl 559. D kavir- Caus. f. of *kav-?; 'to bring together, collect', hence 'to constrict', and the like. N.o.a.b., cf. tér-, kuvrat-, Uyğ. vui ff. Bud. kavir- usually occurs in the Hend. térkavır- “to collect, bring together', e.g. tenri burxannin edgülerin tere kavira sózledim '[ have collected (Hend.) and described the good deeds of the Buddha' U III 73, 24-5; 4.0. TT X 29—(the Buddha for the second time) odğuratı belgülüg kavira nomlayu bérdi 'put together with vivid clearness and preached' (the commandment which he had promulgated) TT VI 296; a.o. TM IV 255, IIO: Xak. xı bile:zük küp eligin kavurdi: “the bracelet constricted (or pinched, dağafa) the slave girl's arm'; also used of anything that constricts something Kaş. II 82 (kavra:r, kavurma:k); bu: bile:zük ol bilek kavurÉa2:n “this bracelet always constricts the wrist I $18: Xwar. xiv kavra kug- “to embrace closely! Qutb 136. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 630 
     
   
   
     586 S 1 kavur- See kavır-, S 2 kavur- Sce kafur-. D kopur- (kopor-) Caus. f. of kop-; 'to raise, cause to rise', and the like. S.i.a.m.].g. except NE; NC Kir. kobor- R [II 659, elscwhere kopar-/kobar- Xak. xr ol meni: ornumdin kopurd: “he made me risc (aqdmani) from my place”, also used of anything when one raiscs it (/tayyacahu) from its place Kaş. 11 72 (kopurur, kopurma:k): KB sevük savçı birle kopurfil meni 'raise me (from the dead) with the beloved Prophet 30; kişiler evinde bu koprur tütün “he (the evil man) raises smoke in people's houses' 341; kopurdi kutr künde Öğgdülmişiğ “the favour of heaven raised Ögdülmiş from day to day” 1751; 0.0. 47, 103 (Örü), 269, 3975, 5792 (yöle:-): xi(?) Tef. kopar- “to raise, erect", ctc. 213: xiv. Rb. kopar- “to erect' R IJ 658 (quotn.); xiv Muh.(?) qala"a "to uproot” kopar- (?; unvocalized) Rif. 114 (only); a/-qal' koparmak 1:20 (mis-spelt kobmaR): Çağ. xv ff. kopar- (- mak, etc.) bir nesneyi kaldurub yücelt- "to lift something up” Vel. 335 (quotns.); kopar- (spelt) bar-xizándan “to raise, erect San. 282r. 3 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv kopar- “to lift; to erect” Qutb 137; Nahc. 39, 4; 328, 11: Kom. xiv “to erect, build" kopar-/kobarCCI; Gr.: Kip. xin fakka "to separate, loose, disentangle”, etc. kopar- (-5-, misvocalized kapar-) Hou. 42, 19: xiv kopar- (-5-) natafa “to pluck out” 7d. 68 (also kubar- iğbarra "to be dust coloured”, Den. V. fr. kuba:); a.o. do. 98 (yemdü:); qala'a kopar- (-b-) Bul. yar: xv fakka kopar- (-b-) Tuh. 28b. 2: Osm. xiv ff. kopar- with several meanings; c.La.p. TT.S I 483; HH 649; III 475; IV 539. (D) Kuvra:- 'to come together, assemble'; prima facie a Den. V. fr. *kuvur; the -u- is certain, which makes a derivation fr. *kavimpossible in spite of the semantic connection, unless this is a very early case of labial attraction. Survives in NE Şor kura-, Khak. xura-; NC Kir, Kzx. kura-. Türkü viu bunça: bodun kuvrap yoğladı: "so many people assembled and celebrated his funeral” Ix. 27: Uyğ. vir ff. Bud, ulus bodun alku kuvradi 'the people of the country all assembled' PP 71, 2-3; a.o. do. 72, 2; sansız tümen yağı yavlak kuvrap 'innumerable enemies and bad men assemble! Kuan. 42. D kabart- Caus. f. of kabar-; 'to cause to form a blister, swell', and the like. S.i.m.m.l.g. Xak. xr etük ada:kığ kabarttı: “the boot made the foot swell' (warrama), that is it brings up blisters (yifrayyic müfaxat) from the swelling; hence one says ol só:züg kabartti: faxxama”l-halüm "he made a haughty speech'; hence a man because of his self-importance (I? I-nafx) is called kabartga:n Kaş. III 430 (kabartu:r, kabartma:k): Çağ. xv ff. kabart- (spelt) Caus. £.; (1) abiladar sáxtan "to raise blisters on (something)” , (2) mutawarram hardan "to make (something) swell'; in Rümi corrupted to kebert- in the second sense Sar. 264r. 26 (quotn.). DIS. V. GBRD kopurt- (koport-) Caus. f. of kopur-; survives in SW Osm. kopart- ; Tkm. ğopart-. Xak. xı ol erig ornindin kopurtti: “he had the man removed (anhada'l-racul) from his place” (ctc.) Kaş. HI 43o (kopurtu:r, kopurtma:k): Xwar. xiv kopart- 'to have (something) erected' Qutb 138. D kuvrat- Caus. f. of kuvra:-; 'to collect, cause to assemble', usually in the Hend. té:rkuvrat-; n.o.a.b. Türkü vii Z S 10, 11 N 7 (çığa:fn), 1 E rz, HI E 11 (téir-): vini ff. Man. böş tenri yarukin kuvratığlı 'collecting the light of the five gods! Clas. 223-74; üdrülmislerig kuvrattı “he assembled the chosen ones! 1 IJI 6, 1-2 (v): Uyğ. vitr Su. N 5 (t6:r-): vur ff. Bud. kilmiş kuvratmis alku ayığ kilinclarimin “all my evil deeds which I have committed and accumulated! U 77 77, 19-20; 0.0. of kil- kuvrat- of sins do. 78, 39: Suv. 134, 18; 137, 4 (in thc last two transcribed Aurat-). D kavrıl- Pass. f. of kavır-, n.o.a.b. Xak. xr KB (may the world continue to exist, constantly revolving) kodi bolsu düşman basi kavrilu “may the enemy be kept down with his head constricted' 119. S kavrul- Sec kafrul-. D kuvran- Refl, f. of kuvra:-; “to assemble, come together'; n.o.a.b. Türkü viri T 4 (2 ta:ş): Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A M I 35, 19 (téril-). S kavruş- See kağruş-. D kopruş- Tlap. leg.?; Co-op. f. of kopur-. Xak. xı ol mapa: kuş koprusdt: “he helped me to put up( f? in/dd) the bird" also used for lifting(fi raf”) anything from its place Kaş. 1I 218 (kopruşu:r, koprugma:k). Tris. GBR D kabarça:k, etc. ; words of this general form are recorded in forms and with meanings so various that it is at first sight doubtful whether they can all be traced back to a single origin. lf they can it must be a Dev. N. fr. kabarand should mean etymologically “blister, pustule', and the like. Such a word could be used metaph. for 'the carapace' of a tortoise, and perhaps even for 'box', but it is hard to see how it could have come to mean 'puppet, doll”. "The modern words NE Alt. kabireik; Bar. kabirdzak; "Tel, kabirçak R [I 451; NC Kir. kabırçık, Kzx. kabırşak all meaning 'fish-scale; mollusc shell; a thin layer (of ice on water, of skin on milk)' seem to be survivals of such a word, but show the unusual sound change -a- 7 -1- in the second syllable; how old the change is is uncertain, the vowel points in the MS. of Kaş. look like later additions. The situation is complicated by the fact that Mong. kobogor “hollovved out”, hence “container, case, quiver' (the change in meaning may have arisen from confusion with koboğa/ hoboğo, the Mong. form of kovfa: q.v.) 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 631 
     
   
   
                                 became a l-w. in Çağ. or Osm. as kobur/ kubur Sar. 282r. 22 and Pe., Doerfer 1 268, and forms like koburçuk are prob. Dim. f.s of this l.-w. Xak. xı kabırça:k (on vocalization see above) al-tàbüt wa ahtar yusta'mal fi töbütvl-mayyit "a box", usually "a coffin” Kaş. I soi: xiv Müh.(?) (under “household goods' al-şandüq "box, coffer' (VU) kabarçak (bà' unvocalized) Rif. 169 (only); (under 'toys and games") al-[u'ba 'puppet, doll” ko:burcuk 162: Çağ. xv ff. kabarçuk (spelt) ábila wa tabxal “blister, pustule' Sam. 265r. 12 (quotn): Xwar. xiv kavurçak/kavvurçak “doll, puppet Quib 136-7: Kom. xiv “small: böx” kuburcuk CCI; Gr.:: Kip. xm (under *women's clothes and other personal possessions') a/-hu"ba (aba:k, also called) kabarçu:k) Hon. 18, 6—7; (and al-sulalifa 'tortoise' (VU) kabarcuklu: (unvocalized) bağa: that is a frog with a [Ar. corrupt, presumably *carapace'] do. 7, s): xiv kaburgak al/-huqq “box, casket'; (and kaburçaklı: bağa: al-sulahfa) 1d. 68; (al-sulahfá(VU) kabırçaklı: (only ba” vocalized) bağa: meaning 'a frog with a dome! (al-qubba) Bul. s, 2): xv şandüq kabarçak, Tkm. (VU) kübürçük (in margin in SW(?) hand kabırçak) Tuh. 22b. r, lu'ba kavvurşak do. 32a. 2: Osm. xvi kaburçak “a box for perfumes! in three dicts. 773 II 560; IV 449: xviii (kubur (spelt) in Römf, qàb wa zarfi "a container! (Hend.) in which things are put, e.g. “a quiver' is called kubur-1 tir); kuburcuk Dim. f. of kubur in Rumi, "a box” (qüti) in Ar. huqqa San. 282r. 23. D "kabarçaklığ P.N./A. fr. kabarça:k, q.v. (Kip.). (D) koburğa: 'owl'; old animal name ending in -ğat N.o.ab.; cf. ü:glt: Uyğ. vi ff. Bud. kuzğun koburğa 'ravens and owls', included with ogres, demons, etc. in a list of illomened animals 77T VI so (kobhurğa VIII O.4): Xak. xı koburğa: al-háma mina'l-tayr *owl' Kaş. I 489. : (D) kivirÉa:k n.o.a.b.; the contexts indicate a meaning 'grasping, misetly”, or the like. Presumably a Dev. N. (connoting habitual action) fr. *kivir-. Uy£. vttr ff. Man. [gap] kivirğak (spelt hifrrkak) saranlar 'grasping miser! TT II] 9o: Bud. küni kivirğak köpülnün tölüki uğurında "by rcason of the violence of jealous, grasping thoughts” So. 102, 3-4; 0.0. TT III, p. 29, note go, 2; VI 5 v... (2 kiz). D kabarğa:n Hap. leg.?; Dev. N. (connoting. habitual action) fr. kabar- Xak. x1 kabarga:n "a pimple (or blotch, batra) which appears on the body because of skin disease (/rkka) or heat' Kag. I 516. S kavurmaç See kağurmaç. D kuvrağsız Hap. leg.; Priv. N/A. fr. kuvra:j; “vvithout religious communities". UyÉ£. viri ff. Bud. Suv. 299, 10-11 (térinsiz).  DIS. V. GBS- 587 Tris. V. GBRD kıvırğaklan- Hap. leg.?; Refl. Den. V. fr. kivirfa:k; “to be grasping, miserly"”. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud, Suv. 136, 15-16 (2 azlan-). Dis. GBS F xafsı: Hap. leg. ; as Brockelmann points out, 1.-w. ultimately derived fr. Latin capsa via Syriac gafsá; no doubt brought to Central Asia by the Manichaeans. Xak. xı xafsı: al-huqqa “a small box” Kaş. 7 423. Dis. V. ĞBSD kapsa:- Desid. f. of kap-; lit. “to wish to seize', but fr. an early period used as a Sec. f. of kavza:-, q.v., “to surround, attack”, and the like. Survives in this meaning in some NE languages and SE Türki. Xak. xı anın tegre: kişi: kapsa:dı: Ppaffa”H-nüs hanlahu “the people surrounded him”, and one says ol anip tava:rin kapsa:dı: “he wished to carry off( yaslub) his property” Kaş. III 285(kapsa:r, kapsa:ma:k); usıtğa:n kuya:ş kapsa:dı: "the parching heat of the sun surrounded us" (ahdtat binü) I 155, 16; tumh£ kelip kapsa:dı: “the cold came and surrounded (the world) I 463, 9: xın(?) Tef. kapsa- “to surround, envelop” 199: Çağ. xv ff. kapsa(miş) iháta "to surround! Vel. 314; kabsa(so spelt) ná-gahán dar miyàán giriftan wa firi giriftan 'to attack and seize suddenly' Sam. 264t. 29 (quotns.; pointing out that in one of them Vel. (314) misread kapsamak as kapfamak): Xwar. xiv kapsa- “to surround, envelop” Qutb 127; Nahc. 322, 7. D kopsa:- Desid. f. of kop-, Hap. leg.; the medieval word kobsa-/kopsa- is a Sec. f. of kopza:-, q.v. Xak. xı ol yoka:ru: kopsa:dı: “he wished to rise” (or stand up, al-nuhüud) Kaş. III 285 (kopsa:r, kopsa:ma:k). Dis. ĞBŞ D kapış Dev. N. fr. kap-, “plundering” and the like. S.is.m.l. Xak. xı kapış al-intiháb wa'l-ixtilás 'plundering, embezzlement' Kaş. I 369. D kavşı: Hap. leg.; Dev. N./A. fr. kavış-. Xak. xı kavşı: ka:ş al-hácibu'l-maqrtinu'l-azacc 'conjoined arched eyebrows' Kaş. 7. 424. D kavşut Activc Dev. N. fr. kavış-, survives in NC Kir. kapşıt/kapçıt (r) "the point where the four felts covering a yurt meet; (2) “the side of a yurt. Xak. xi kavsut musáfahatu'l-malikayn tva muşülihatuhuma li-amni'l-sciláya *an agreement between two kings and the conclusion of peace between them for the sake of the security of the realm;' hence a man is called Kavşut Kaş. I 451; a.o. II 102, 29 (kavis-). Dis. V. GBSD kapış- Recip. f. of 1 kap-; “to seize one another” and the like. S.i.a.m.1.g. Xak. xı ol   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 632 
     
   
   
     The text on this page is estimated to be only 49.41% accurate 
     noÁ u3j pag J, (um l5ev :epunseÁK xar səuryzis "gxpcary cQ :oP-oz '8e [[A Ll ,Kesak suni (( ƏAPIS 'a'I) UEUI € JI, es3ey ISDX "AQ "B HA (ğAn : (urei129un 3uirpga1) 6 idu) peg 3əq imp, apöey ğəq HA nun "-zəy jo $qpedergs tmv uni fes O3, -5ex OD A "UOV "zgz TT SoN ,S3802 3uralip ur pəsn (uotjeuue[pxa us), z,viu-],pu1Q bpsn&amp; Sod Sod 1x “ex “ez jo 'uoneum[oxq ue t'Hop:dvgp (25) 3ou nd “160509 əəs Sox S "öz z əə Seug ILI "ALQZ "up 4 &amp;ugui mou, pupJ uan] uru HIAX "UIs() 169 "p| 49194) 21€ Áugur Au, inp Suy, sus ouo *uupy Suiueaur suonsanb ur pəsn pio^ € ((5uyua,) 5ex AIX izi “99 "nop :aSou se ÁeA auis əq) ur pəsn si uorqa (Jny pəzreooasıul) Sey “r doy (favif) uorssa1dxo 1eQjoue sr ələ) pug (Arb “əəəu) uy rix :dry :1£€ J[ M 4s4sp Aucul ^Ou 30), əpləqunx Óvx "qr AIX Soz ,Aəy v, ux aiq [ux AL :12 ,sp10* aj, zos Sey uy G)ux:t£$ sqreur1 ios atəy əsəü), vurqjied 5ex nq qAG M ()ux “5155 (sdunp şo) ,Spubi oj asetp, ğnyio) Sey nq :25g '2£t ,SBunp aj ssouj, Gau Sex sıq nq göy :o7 “göy [ !(8ni193) 9^ [ oro 51z£ 7 py pres I əApU sounj Áueul Aou, unpáe :ejgex Sey SÁes ouo əəuəu í,soum), (u)piD44Du4 SUIUvQUI spneg € Sex "(ərəq s«o][0j Sox) 119418 əq pıp SuDi41p. KügUl OU, :fpa:9q s:;eur1eÁ Sex s&amp;vs auo a2uaq !,; Ausu AOQ, D: Surueaul əyər -ueq [zorioumu e,'pppp [avt] 5ex IX *qex :Jubit paquaosugaismu £ *gr1 :£ 'zS "oput 12 “Eg "op "o'e İy “gi op (&amp;auoui oq1) dəəy [ syuour Augur 1342 -Axou, uauries)ni Ae Sex v “zi 497) |pus[ yo sjo21ed ferəAəs yo əərid 3uránq au, rdrjes ürusaə4 xnioq Jex :8-Z£1 "op "oe 12-92 T H Əpeq 221) (yo səəərd) oj v. Surumq, dnanánx wxjo unisex 5uği Sex 41) :(-sv) 9-* “02 dd 9*9 :$-t "zoz "ang ,jsuoseal Jo spurn[ usul Aot qoy, ozn selğun Snr1o3 Sex “4-9 *££ “op sÁep maj e unpra, opurS ün Sex ig '£z qd Sənin [B1oAoS vos 0) 9UOd pet] oq, dyipi ex4nqe3 e3ex 5e (10jies 9) png :9 'z£ "op *'o'w íz1-11 "QI / jy ,Su1oQ A048 jou saop Áexuop zo osiOt[ &amp; “Azul je^ QUIOO, Z9ULlQ yznAnur üəuyəğsə Gvuje üəu üəu Sey y-ueJA "B mA "ŞXn :6z “iz “oz , əyil eun do íeui 3eqək euro, qəszə Gou Sex ITA pyuamL "Jepex əu əyi səu qra "iud euros 10 'o$ou *eSuex Aqeunou sr ,;Áueur Aou, soBendue[ ieqio ur fuis) MS ut (;)Mquo saAraing 7239 “Ab *nu:ex uir ÁApeoiSo[ourKje paj»suuoo pjo^ p[o A124 V "Əyil əq) pue “yo xəqumu ureş -192 g ÜMƏy € '[E19A25, 10j uorzjouuoo 3Ane2o1 -19jU: jnOQjiM poesn sauijaujos jnq ',; Ausur Ao, Suruzaui "uo1q "3o112;u] ue A[rodo1d öy 025 UN 1 “or "dg *Z1gt csi-uang fr 'ge 'op 'o'o íot-6z “o£ [T] [] (suspreu AfuəApəq yo pAorə g Áq) (puəH) ,pepunozins Zürəq, njgezaex npgeSany : I£ p. ITIA LL ,uaui HAƏə pue sonuaua Aq poapunouins, Qrəds os) a;s[S8rui[DeZA:ex cəzm pep;eÁA rğıuA peie[sugi; qəəqəu ou? uo pojunoui Sutasu, pupnapwuussuA4gp2 jaxsuveg "png ^pginA "An "qeou :-jezaex jo 7j 'ssed -qnuezAex (T -Z82 'A'SHL "Şöb 7 fp (amizout) 1e31n8 10 əşni € SUMO OtA UEUI E, :$pi dnjzndoo IX "ex "zndox 4j "Vl'N'd $03» "deH Snizndoy (T Zu9'suL "Opeur$ezdoy '1:n$ezdox) ozz JT "fnr əni eui Zui&amp;e[d ur 19tgioue 3UO Qua pəsəd -uuoə spi3 əvi, siıpsezdoy r:e[zux 1X "48X "-sezdow jo j “do-oo) "Səf “deH -$ezdo» «(T 'St£z JI] vox piow stp jo (oğn)) unoy oAneurae '-s- ua “ipesdoy *Opeupezdox '(215) iin ezdox) ,pa&amp;e[d sea ain[ oui, :tippezdox zndo» 1x "sex "-wzdox yo j 'sseq :; Sep “deH -ezdoy (T mi HTA .L.L (Gpds os) dinsezasəy (;),gurpunoz -1ns, p4D414pd 3usueg 'png "BH "HÁD "-aezA€X yo 7 'snej Bə) “duH -3ezAex (T 450 1022 -vsdox (əsə suiesd) 3urs 03, Arx *uroy :(uionb) $ "12g7 "upg 29104 pno[ e ur Suis 03, uoyxpoipu ppiang-vq (]ods os) -usqoy *g ax "Şer :959 /7 s əyni 2t o1 uraod snp Sues sioSurs o[peursp ou), 1eprp&amp;u Tul $ nq desdox 1epeqrijnur gy Arx :£r 'Ór 7 "oz '(y:eurezdox 'a:ezdox) £gz 77 "vx əyni oui poár[d ou, pn,-j,Dquaop :1p:ezdox zndoy Jo IX "NEX "qeow 'ema3 eub "oy auis io 'Áe]d oi, fzndoy p ^A "uaqp -:ezdoy (T "9A "pp (BSurqyouios) əAləsəid “yo uorssessod oxwj “səügeğ 0), pop? -ƏZAMY Ax "diy ($ '£r 7; [) puo € ur un punoi 3es, re[rpinjo n&amp;ezaAex opujsaJ8e) (pue dur oq 210J9q pa^oq ' * * suapieur aui) 'ppg "Hana WA b '-sesdex o) paidni -102 əvloəəq peq ir IX Ag "-AVX« JN “əd ZIAUX UJ ^A "A9(p 8 Aqqsumsəid əlöyələq) SI 3: 'urej1o2 əmə sui[eds oui jnq pəşsəns AHood He əs -[nezAex '-jezAwx S) “ƏD eq pue pio sri) :,punoims o), -:8ZAEX (q) “ZEƏ "A "SI 'ónA4oxX9»5 znaoy zs "PQT JI[ SU ,SUVA ot Uroiş 1uourtpas ou (xxou) aAoUia1, 1:2939s| ulpğrpns ZnAAOX SÁES əuo əəuəq £,əUlA Ut (ppob-jp) auauupas eu, (mpo pue fob ou) uoo^isq Áquo puuupp əuo) znOW IX *Xex "Burueaur snp qi pio« jusiaprp w seq adenZue[ Qs! -xim AdəAə A[meou “47 g sdeuiod 1,əUTA ur qusunpes ən), t Je[ 'depgp zna4ox [| 6A "oPS Ap iLLY [IT 1089 IT *gh I SLL "Siorp ur sjuaumjsur pəğuus jo saureu SuBsi -sue1) qoy 'dso 'd'z' r2 zndox y Aix *uisQ :89 "pr s8uis pue s&amp;ejd ouo qorqa uo (40$) Sur uwoux-[[^ ən) (,-d- (Q4) zndox AIX :z1 “yz "nogp :$zndox pəlrə s! 31 s4eyd oua auo xo.” Vər SA CRT CTAT 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 633 
     
   
   
        588 menin birle: tobik kapışdı: "he struggled with me to snatch (xölasani) the ball in playing polo” Kaş. II 88 (kapışu:r, kapışma:k), a.o. II 113, 15: Çağ. xv fi. kapış- ('with -p-") hamdigar-rà giriftan wa az ham rabüdan “to seize one another, to grasp one another” Sar. 263v. 20: Xwar. xiv kapus- ditto Qutb 126. D kavis- Co-op. f. of *kav-; 'to come together, assemble'. S.is.m.l in NW, SW. "Türkü vr altu:n yış üze: kavışalım “let us assemble in the Altay mountain forest” T zo, o.o. 7 12 (üçegü:), 21: Uyğ. vı kavisalim Su, E 11; kavışıp do. IW 6: viri ff. Bud, inisi birle kavışdı "he met his elder brother again” PP sz, 6, birle kavışmış “united” (kinsfolk) U ZTT 33, 16; kavış- is fairly common in TZ T V mcaning (of two families) “to meet” 311; (of husband and wife) “to live together” 314; “to have sexual intercourse' 321, 328; (of the warp and woof) “to be interwoven! 394; künli aylı karışu kavışu yoriyur "sun and moon move in opposition and conjunction' 324; o.o. TT X 486; U İl ro, zo, ctc.: Civ. (if a man cuts his nails on a Sheep day) edgü öğlisi bilen kavışur “he meets someone well disposed to him” TT VII az, 11-12: Xak. xi erkek tişi:ke: kavusdti: “the male mated (nakaha) with the female'; the original concept is one of the conjunction of one thing with another (tigalu'l-gay' bi”l-şay)), hence one says kada:ş kada:şka: kavuşdi: “one kinsman joined (it^agala) another” , hence məldqat”l-malihayn bi l-sulh “peace negotiations between two kings” are called kavsut (prov.); and it is permissible to substitute -vv- for -v- Kaş. II ro2 (kavuşu:r, kavugma:k); kugusup taki kavustum “1 embraced and befriended him” (şdhabtuhu) HI 188, zo: KB tapuğ birle kavşur sana edgü és “because of your service a good companion befriends you” 4053; 2.0. 6176 (erki:): xiv Rbg. iki kavustilar "the two mated' R JI 471: Çağ. xv ff. kavvuş(spelt) ba-/tam paywastan "to be joined together” San. 278v. 25 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv kavuş- “to mcet, to embrace' Quib 137: Kom. XIV “to join one another” kovus- (sic) CCG; Gr.: Kip. xv alqd “to mect' kawug- (or kos- ?) Tuh. 6b. s. D kopuş- Hap. leg.?; Co-op. f. of kop-. Xak. xr ol menin birle: kopuşdı: “he competed with me in standing up” (/77-qiydm), also used for helping Kaş. 77 88 (kopuşu:r, kopusma:k). D kovus- Recip. f. of kov-, s.i.s.m.l., sometimes much distorted, e.g. NC Kir. ku:g-. Xak. xı ola:r bi:r ikindi:ni: kovuşdı:la:r “they pursued (fárada) one another” Kaş, II 103 (kovusu:r (?or kovşu:r), kovusma:k). S kovşa:- Sec 2 koğşa:-. S kovşat- See 2 koğşat-. S kovşal- See koğşal-. DIS.V.ĞBŞ D kavşur- Caus. f. of kavış-, “to collect, bring together, put together”, and the like. N.o.a.b.; cf. kavıştur-, tö:r-. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud.U I22, 12 (tla:-); U I1 46, 70-1 (1 aya:); TT V, p. 16, note A s4, 8 (çıça:muk), TT VI 391 (arkuru:), TT X 145, 262, 299; U HII 28, 13; 29, 6; 66, 3 (i) etc.: Civ. budanı kavsurup yip birle yórgep “put (the two halves of) the liquorice root togcther and tie them with thread' 77 I rgo; ao. TT VIII L.35 (*ékke:gü:); Xak. xi KB elig kavşuru tut 'fold your arms” 4056: Xwar. xiii kawşur- "to bring (someone cc.) into contact with (someone Dat.)' “AZ 38, 45: xiv kavşur“to fold (the arms)' Quib 136. S kovşaş- See 2 koğşaş-. Tris. ĞBŞ D kavışğusuz Hap. leg.; Priv. N./A. fr. a Dev. N. fr. kavış- ; “not coherent, amorphous”. Uyğ. viirff. Bud. Suv. 71, iş (bütğüsüz, q.v.). Tris. V. GBSE kavşatıl- See kavzatıl-. D kavışığsa:- Hap. leg.; Desid. Den. V. fr. a Dev. N. fr. kavis-. Üyğ. viii ff. Man, kaşı körtlem kavışığsayurmen 'I long to be united with my lovely eye-browed one” M IJ 8, 7. D kavuştur- (kavistur-) Caus. f. of kavış-, survives in SW Osm. kavuŞtur- “to bring together, unite, join, fold (the arms)', etc. Cf. kavsur-. Xak, xı KB bu Aytoldi kirdi kavusturdi kol 'Aytoldi entered and. folded his arms (in respect) 766: Çağ. xv ff. kawugtur- (spelt) Caus. f.; 5a-ham paysvasta kardan *to join together' San. 279r. 8 (quotn.). Dis. GBZ kopuz “a stringed instrument” of the guitar type, but no doubt used for several varieties of instrument. Àn early (First Period) l.-w. in Mong. as kuğur/ku”ur (Kot. 386); the N.Ag. hu'urgin occurs in the Secret History (Haenisch 177). "The Mong. word became a l.-w. in Pe. and other languages, see Doerfer I 314; III 1546, where the nature of the instrument and the history of the word is discussed at length. S.ia.m..g. with minor phonetic changes (-p-/-b-; -z/-s). Uyğ. vi ff. Bud. PP 7o, 6-7 (uz): xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. “stringed instrument” kopuz R // 661; in Ligeti 168 the translation is the Mong. form kubur: Xak. xr kopuz a/"7diclladi yudrab bihi "a musical instrument, the lute' Kaş. 1 36s; İİİ 173 (po:gr) and 3 o.o.: xiv Muh. al-watar "string” (?'stringed instrument”) kopuz Mel. 63, 2; Rif. 161 (misvocalized kapuz); al-ribab *viol' ditto 161 (Mel. PU yaxlığ): Çağ. xvff. kobuz (so spelt) barbat "lute', a well-known kind of musical instrument (sáz) "San, 282r. 24 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv kopuz "lute! Quib 138 (kobuz): Kap. xiu. al-qobuz ma'rüf "the well-known (instrument) , and 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 634 
     
   
   
     590 my (family) in my fortieth year' Mal. 16, 3 (dubious, prob. a misreading of aztım): Xak. xı er kaçdı: “the man ran away' (/iaraba) Kaş. II 5 (kaça:r, kaçma:k), about 20 o.o., translated “araba, farra “to run away' or nafara (of an animal) “to break loose”: KB yigitlik kaçar ol tiriglik uçar 'youth flees and life flies away' 231; ikide biri bol üçünçte kaç-a 'become one of the (first) two, flee from the third? 267; o.o. 361, qor: xır(?) At. (the young man grows old) kaçar quw watt “his strength leaves him” 196; (the world) terk kaçar 'quickly fices' 222; Tef. kaç- “to flee 206: xiv Muh. haraba kag- Mel. 14, 5; Rif. 9o; ditto ka:şı- 32, s; kaç- 116; al-harb kaçmak 35, 12; 121: GaB. xv ff. kackust kaysa gerek Vel. 316; kag- (with -ç-)) gurixtan “to flee” San. 267v. s (quotns.): Xwar. xim kaç- “to run away' (of a slave) ' Ali 35: xin(?) ditto (of an enemy) Og. 168, etc.: Kom. xiv dito CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xit haraba kaç- Hou. 34, 16: xiv ditto İd. 69; şarada (of a horse, "to run away!) vta haraba kaç- Bul. 52v: xv haraba kaş- Kav. 9, 9; 74, 18; kagTuh. 38a. r, farra kag- do. 28b. 6. kug- "to embrace', often, but not necessarily, in a sexual sense. Survives in SC Uzb. kuç-, SW Osm. koç-, Tkm. Éuc-, but elsewhere generally displaced by kuçakla:-. Türkü viit ff. Man, olügüg kucup 'embracing the corpse (sexually)! M I s, 5: Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (the son) kucup “embracing” (his father) U IJI 64, 14: Xak. xi ol meni: kucdt: 'anagani "he embraced me" Kaş. IJ s (kuga:r, kugma:k): KH (this wicked world . . . fastens on those who flee from it and) adakın kuçar 'clasps their legs' 401; (he summoned his son and) tutup kugti 'seized and embraced him" 1160; (worship God and) anın kapğı kuç 'clasp the door of his (temple)! 1451; 0.0. 1500-10-62, 3609: xın(?) At. yazar kol kugar teg “it opens its arms as if to embrace you' 222: XIV Muh. 'ánaqa ku:g- Mel. 28, 13; (kucağla:-, in margin ku:ş- (sic) Rif. 112): Çağ. xv ff. kuc- (sic, “vith -u-") agus kagidan wa bağal kardan 'to embrace, to take in one's arms' San. 283v. 3 (quotns.): Xwar. xin kug- “to embrace! 'Ali 30: xiv ditto Quib 142; 136 (kavır-): Kom. xiv “to embrace” kuc- CCI CCG; Gr. 202 (quotn.): Kip. xim 'ánaga mina'l-mu'ünaga kuç- Ce) Hou. 42, 11: XIV kuc- (with a -c-”) 'ánaqa İd. 69; Bul. 62r.: Xv kus- (sic) ditto Kam. 9, 9; ditto (kucakla-, in margin) kuç- Tuh. 25b. 8: Osm. xiv ff. kuç- (or koç-?) "to embrace'; c.ia.p TTS I 473; HI 463; IV 528. Dis. GCA ?F ka:ga: 'vessel, container'; cf. 2 ka:, perhaps a L-w. Survives only(?) in SE "Tar. R II 334; Türki; there is also a SW Osm. phr. kab kaçak 'pots and pans' which may be a reminiscence of this word. Xak. xı ka:ça: al wi'ü "a container'; hence one says ka: ka:ça:, also pronounced kaça: with a short vowel Kaş. JI] 238; a.o. İH zir (2 kas): (Çağ. xv ff. kab kaçak Sar. 265v. 7 (ka:b)). MON. V. ĞC ?D kiçi: “mustard”, L-w. in Mong. as kici (Kom, 2543); survives in SE Turkt; NC Kir.,, Kzx. (KiS1) but elsewhere apparently displaced by L-w.s; see kiçila:- Xak. xi krgr a/-xardal “mustard” Kaş. III 238: xiv Muh. xardal ki:çı: Mel, 78, 3; Rif. 181: Çağ. xv ff. kici (sic?) 'a herb (tara) which they crush and put in sour milk” (mást); in Ar. sarmaq (' Atriplex, orache') and in Pe. xardal-i barrt San. 293v. 14: Kip. xv xardal kiş (in margin kic) Tuh. 14a. 11: Osm. xvi Kici translates several Ar. and Pe. names of herbs in dicts. TTS II 622; İH 442; IV sos. Dis. GCC ?F 1 kaça:ç n.o.a.b. ; one of several words for silk fabrics, prob. a J.-w.; cf. barçın. Xak. xt kaçaç dibdc sini “Chinese brocade' ; more correctly (al-asalir) kaga:e; a slave girl (al-imá") is called kaça:ç after it Kaş. 17 285: xiv Mu. (?) al-nasic woven fabric” kaça:ç (-c-, e; misvocalized i-) Rif. 167 (only). S2 kaça:ç Sce kaka:ç. Dis. GCD D kagut Caus. Dev. N. fr. kaç-, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı kaçut “a rout' (al-tiràd) in battle, etc. Kaş. I 356; another Suff. is -t as in kaçut al-tirád derived fr. kaçdı: haraba I ız, 2. E kictin in USp. 42, 14 is an error for sigan TT VH 36, 1. Dis. V. GCDD kaçıt- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of kaç-, cf. kaçtur-, kaçur-. Xak. xi ol anı: kaçıttı: “he put him to flight" (a/rabahu) Kaş. İT 300 (kaçıtu:r, kaçıtma:k): (Çağ. xv ff. kaçtıp "being routed, put to flight' Vel. 315 is no doubt an error for kaçıp). D kaçtur- n.o.a.b.: Caus. f. of kaç-, cf. kaçıt-, kaçur-. Uyğ. viri ff. Civ. (in a contract for the hire of a donkey) kaçturmatın (so read) yanmışta “vhen [ return without letting it run away! USp. 3, 6: Xak. xı «ob erig kaçturdı: "he put the man to flight (ahraba) in the sense that he told someone else to do it (ie. he had the man put to flight by someone else) Kaş. II 189 (kaçturu:r, kaçturma:k). D kuçtur- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of kuc-; later displaced by kucaklat-. Xak. xi ol meni: kuçturdı: "he urged me to embrace him” ('alá'I-mu'ünaga iyahu) Kaş. II 189 (kucturur. kuçturma:k). Dis. ĞCĞ S kaçak See ka:çar, D kaçığ N.Ac. fr. kaç-, lit. 'running away, füght'. S.i.s.m.L in this sense vv. some phonetic changes. Owing to an overliteral translation of some Sanskrit. word it was adopted as a Buddhist (and thence a Manichaean) technical term corresponding to Sanskrit vişaya “an  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 635 
     
   
   
       object of sensual perception'; similarly kaçığ orun was used for Sanskrit àyatana "an organ of sensual perception", of which there were six (eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind), corresponding to the six vijayas. Uy&amp;. viii ff. Man. alti kaçığ üze azmışlarka “to those led astray by the six objects of sensual perception” TT 11] s? (and see note thereon): Bud. (just as fire is produced by the combined action of a strike-a-light, tinder and the man using them, so also is sensation produced by the combined action of) kaçığ yol atkanğu törü bilığ köpül 'objects of sensual perception, the rule of attachment to this world and the mind” U II ro, 26-7; same phr. with the superfluous yol omitted do. 19-20; alti kaçığ oruniar bolmasar bürtmek bolmaz “if the six sense-organs did not come into existence, sensation would not come into existence' do. ız, 18-19; o.o0. Suv. 371, 7 (atkangu:); 595, 7: Xak. xr ol kaçığ kaçdı: farra firár ayy firár "he ran for his life” Kaş. 1 386, 17 (grammatical example); n.m.e.: xiv Muh. al-hazima, 'disorderly flight, rout kaçuk Mel. şo, 7; kaçağ (sic) Rif. 149: Çağ. xv ff. kaçağ (sic) guriz “light, rout' San. 267v. 20; kaçu in the idiom of the people of "urün and Xwarazm 'a general flight, stampede' do. 267v. 23. E kiçik in US). 42, 25 is a misreading of saçığ TT VII 36, ız. D kuçak Conc. N. fr. kuç-, “the bosom, lap”, hence by extension 'an armful' and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g.; in SW Az., Tkm. ğucak, Osm. kucak. L.-w. in Pe., etc. Doerfer 111 1432. Xak. xı one says bi:r kuçak bö:z “an armful (rdbára) of linen” (etc.) Kaş. 7 382: Çağ. xv ff. kucağ (sic?) agis “bosom” San. 283v. 28: Kip. xitt al-hidn “bosom” ku:şa:k (sic) Hou. 21, 5; ditto (after kuç-) kuçak (misvocalized kuguk) do. 41, 11: xiv küçak (-c-) ditto /[d. 69: xv al-şadd "package, bale' (i.e. 'armful'?) kuşak Kav. 63, 18; ditto kuçak (-c-) Tuh. 21a. 1 (not to be confused in Kip. with kuşak — kurşa:ğ, q.v.). ?D kuçik 'the constellation Cancer, the Crab'; noted only in KB and the quotn. from KB in Rbj.; 'crab' is normally yepgec, q.v., and this word like sevit may have been invented by the author of KB as a Dev. N. fr. kuç- in the sense of “the animal which clasps (its prey. Xak. xı KB in the list of the signs of the zodiac in :39-41 the fourth sign 'Cancer' is kugik: xiv Rb. ditto (a direct quotn. fr. KB) R II 1009. D kaçğın Intrans. Dev. N. fr. kaç-, 'fugitive' and the like. S.i.m.m.l.g. usually as kaçkın and the like. Xak, xı (in the grammatical introduction) kaçğın er yétsikti: ulhiqa'l-raculu'l-fárr *the fugitive was caught' Kaş. I zr, 10; &amp;o. IIl 106 (yétsik-); n.m.e.: xıı1(?) Tef. kaçğın 'flight" 206: (xiv Muh. after kaçığ, q.v.; al-munhazam “put to flight” ka:çğu:nçı: Mel. so, 17; Rif. 146) Çağ. xvff. kaçğun guriz “fight, DIS. .GCM    591  (kaçğunçı gurizanda "fecing, running avvay”) San. 267v. 22. S koçğar See koçna:r. Tris. GCG VU kuçğundi: Hap. leg. Cf. so:ğun. Cigil xı kuçğundi: a/-başal 'onion' Kaş. 1 493. Tris. V. GCGD kuçakla:- Den. V. fr. kucak; “to embrace, take in one's arms'. S.i.m.m.l.g. Cf. kuc-. Xak. xı ol barçın kuçakla:dı: “he took the "brocade in his arms” (fa'abbata) Kaş. III 338 (kuçakla:r, kucakla:ma:k): xiv Muh. Rif. 112 (kug-): Xwar. xiv kuüçakla- “to take in one's arms! Quib 142: Kip. xiv küçakla(?; -c-) ihtadana ditto İd. 69: xv Tuh. 2sb. 8 (kuc-). Dis. V. GCLD kaçıl- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of kaç-, used only impersonaly. Xak. xı ölümdin kaçıldı: “death (etc.) was fled from” (furra mina'l-matt) Kaş. 11 134 (kaçılu:r, kacilma:k). D kuçul- Pass. f. of kuç-, n.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. Sanskrit antarbhujopagüdham (a child) 'carried in the arms! koyında kuculmisij TT VET D.ir. Tris. V. GCLD kaga:a:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. kaga:. Xak. xı ol ne:pni: kaça:la:dı: “he put (or stored?) the thing in a container' (azo“4), originally ka:ça:la:dı: but shortened Kay. III 323 (kaça:la:r, kaça:la:ma:k). D kıçı:la:- Den, V. fr. kiçi:, “to tickle”, As such, Hap. leg.; these are the only two words in this group noted in the carly period, but there are in some modern languages words like SW Osm. (in a Tkm. form), Tkm. ğıcık “a tickle' and ğıcıkla- “to tickle', which are obviously cognate and seem to go back to a V. *kic- “to irritate, tickle”, which seems first to be noted in P. de C. 444. Xak. xı ol meni: kıçı:la:dı: "he tickled (lakka fi) my body in "places like the arm-pit or the sole of the foot, which, if a mari touches them, provoke laughter” Kaş. IH 323 (Kigrla:r, kigrla:ma:k): (xiv. Muh.(?) dağdağa "to tickle” kigikla:(-c-, unvocalized) Rif. 108 (only)). Dis. GCM D kuçam Hap. leg.; N.S.A. fr. kuç-, the -a- is unusual, snd perhaps a scribal error. Xak. xı bir kuçam nen “an armful (a/-idbàra) of something” Kaş. I 398. ?D kigmik n.o.a.b.; apparently “small fragment, dust', and the like; v. G. in a note in U IV, p. 27 A254 suggests that this is a Dev. N. in -mik fr. *kic-; this is possible, but there does not seem to be any other instance of such a Suff. and there is no close semantic connection. Uyğ. vrir ff. Bud. (if there were as    
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 636 
     
   
   
       592 DIS many demons as) yağız yer arkasındakı topraknip paramanu koğ kıçmik 'atoms (Sanskrit paramánu), dust and fragments of soil on the back of the brown earth” U JV zo, 25344; 2.0. Hüen-ts. 322-3 (tepit-). Dis. GCN (D) kaçan an Adv. both Interrog. and Temporal; *when?, when, whenever'. Morphologically obscure but cognate to kac and ka:fiu:, q.v. S.i.a.m.l.g., but not always with the full range of meanings. Uyğ. virt ff. Man. kaçan iduk kanımız kalıkdın kodi éntipiz when you, our holy father, came down from the sky” T'T III 34-5: Chr. kagan . . . teğdiler erser *when (the Magi) reached' (Bethlehem) U 7 6, 7-8: Bud. birók kayuda kaçan yalapuk ajuninta tuğmakı bolsar "if somewhere and sometime he is reborn in human form” U 77 29, 11-13; kaçan kayu kün *whenever' (followed by Conditional) do. 79, 54; kaçan 'when' U /II s4, 18 (damaged); 0.0. PP şı, 5-6; 76,4; TT X 537, 546, 567; Hüen-ts. 78, etc.: Civ. kaçan “vhen” (followed by Conditional) U Sp. 6, 4; 49,6; there does not seem to be any clear case of Interrog. Kaçan in. Uyğ.: Xak. xı kaçan a Particle (harf) meaning ztatá *when?'; hence one says kaçan keldir *when did you come?'; it also means law 'if', hence one says kaçan barsa:sen “if you went'; it also means igd “vhen”, but the first meaning is the original one Kaş. I 403; senip barğu:n kaça:n (sic) “vhen will you go?, but the Oğuz say senin bara:sıp kaça:n IJ 69, 7; o.o. I 352, 10; 467, 8 (both ida), IJI 207, 22 (law): KB (1 will tell the king) kaçan kelğü öz 'when you yourself will come” s10; 0.0. 950, 4425 (İÇ), 6176 (erki:): xi?) At. olardın osanmak kaçan ol mana “vhen shall 1 ever weary of them”? 32; three o.o. of *when?'; Tef. kaçan/kaçan kim “vhen” 206: xiv Müh. mahmà “vhenever" kaça:n Rif. 94 (only); mata kaçan Mel. 17, 8, 95: Çağ. xv ff. kaçan (spelt) kay wa fih waqt *when?' (quotn.); kaçanğa tégrü “till when?' (quotn.; kaçanğa ca ditto (quotn.) San. 267v. 20: Oğuz xi see Xak.: Xwar. xur kaçan “vhen?” “Al 17: xiv ditto Quzb 127; MN 7s, etc.:: Kom. xiv “vhen?” kaçan, "when, if” kaçan/kaçan kim CCT, CCG; Gr. 188 (quotns.): Kip. xii rafi kaçan, several quotns.; it also means idá Hou. 55, 20: xiv kaçan (-c-) mat İd. 69; Bul. 15, 6: xv matü kaşan (sic) Kav. 16, 14; kaçan, also used for the Conditional (şarfiya), in the latter case (the V.) requires the Conditional Suff., e.g. kaçan kelse kelirmen “vhen he comes, I shall come” Tuh. 65a. 12 f.: Osm. xiv ff. kaçan *when?; when', and in various idioms; c.La.p. 77S I 400; 1J 560; III 398; IV 449. kocpa:r “ram”, l-w. in Mong. as Auyga (sic; Kow. 940); s.1.a.m.l.g., in one or two NE languages as kuga (reborrowed fr. Mong.); in SW Az., Tkm. ğoç, Osm. koc elsewhere usually kockar or the like. See Shcherbah, p. 111; cf. irk. L.-w. in Te., etc., Doerfer III rsşo-r. Uy. vin ff. Civ. (in a list of livestock, etc.)   . GCM bir koçğar "one ram” USp. 36, 3; kocupar H II 12, 106: Xak. xi kogpa:r a/-Rabş “ram” (prov.); kocpa:r ba:şı: the name of a town Kaş. 11] 381; o.o. İİ ror, 9 (süsüş-), 1/1 102, 18: xiv. Muh. al-kabş ko:ç Mel. yo, iq, Rif. 172; 8.0. 18, ri 97 (özğe:): Çağ. xv ff. kockar ('with -c-”) hoyun koci Vel. 337 (quotn.); koçkar (spelt) “a ram '(krf), usually a wild (Rühi) ram, or a domesticated one (dayr kühi) San. 283v. 28 (quotn.): Oğuz xr koc al-kabs; originally kocga:r. Kaş. 7 321; a.o. II 184 (süstür-, not specifically Oğuz): Xwar. xiv koçkar ditto Na/tc. 216, 2: Kom. xiv. (ram! koçkar CCI, CCG, Gr.: Kip. xii al-habş 'Tkm. koç //on. 14, 23: XIV koç (-c)/koçkar (-c-) al-kabg Id. 69; Bul. 7, 12: XV al-kabg koçka:r (-c-) Kav. 62, 1; Tuh. 3ob. 13. Dis. V. GCND kagin- Reft, f. of kac-; s.is.m.l. Xak. xi ol mendin kaçındı: “he pretended to run away (yahrub) from me” Kaş. II 154 (kaçınur, kaçınma:k). Tris. GCN VUF xuçu:nek (24/) Map. leg.; no doubt a L-w., prob. Iranian. Xak. xr xugu:nek “a colocynth' (al-Itadaca mina'l-battix); it has a sweet smell and is particoloured (or 'with a rough surface', munaqqaşa) Kaş. 1 488. Dis. GCR D kaçar Distributive f. of kac 'how many each?' and the like. Survives in SW Osm. In the quotn. below the vocalization is not clear, but no other explanation of the word seems possible. Xak. xı yeti:ge:nig kaçar sa:dim 'adadtu damarün banüt na"ş mirdra(n) 'I counted the number of revolutions of Ursa Major Kaş. III 247, 24; n.m.e. Dis. V. GCRD kaçur- Caus. f. of kaç-, “to put to flight, drive away', and the like. S.i.&amp;.m.lg.; cf. kaçıt-, kaçtur-. Xak. xı men anı: kaçurdum anfartuhu sva suqtühu münhazim matrüd hárib “1 scared him away and drove him awny in disorderly fight” Kaş. 77 75 (kaçururmen, kaçurma:k), about ro 0.0. usually translated ahraba “to put to flight. D ki:çur- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of Ykiç-, see Kigilla:-, but the semantic connection with this group of words is rather tenuous. Xak. xı ol apar kirçürdi: Jámahu fi amr toa agmata 'alayhi wa fariha bi-mà aşübahu mina'l-hamm *he criticized him, and was pleased at his misfortunes and was delighted at the anxieties which assailed him” Kaş. III 187 (krugura:r, ki:curma:k). D kaçurt- Caus. f. of kaçur-: s.is.m.l. Xak. xı ol anı: kaçürtti: “he urged. him to drive nway ("atd”l-ihrüb) someone else" Kaş. 111 431 (kacurtur, kacurtma:k). D kaçrus- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of kaçur-. Xak. xı ola:r ikki; kaçruşdı: “the two of  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 637 
     
   
   
       MON. GD them drove one another away' (tarada) Kaş. II 218 (kaçruşu:r, kacrugma:k). Tris. V. GCRD kaçrumsın- lap. leg.; Hefl. Simulative Den. V. fr. a N.S.A. *kacrum fr. kaçur-. Xak. xı ol ant: kaçrumsındı: “he pretended to put him to flight and drive him avvay (yuharribuhu: swa. yattariduhu), but did not really do so” Kaş, JI 261, 9 (a grammatical example), n.m.e. Dis. ĞCŞ D kaçış IHap. leg.; Dev, N. (connoting joint action) fr. kaç-. Xak. xı kaçış al-munàáfara wa'l-mutarada | bayna'l-qawm “general panic and disorderly flight among the people” Kaş. I 369 (prov.). D kugus Dev. N. (connoting reciprocal action) fr. kug-. S.isml. Xak. xi kugug al-mu"anaqa "mutual embracing! Kaş. I 369. Dis. V. GCSD kaçış- Recip./Co-op. f. of kag-; s.i.s.m.l. for 'to run away from one another', or 'to fly together in confusion'. Xak. xi ola:r bi:r bi:rdin kaçıştı: tanáfará "they fled from one another” Kaş. II gz (kaçışu:r, kaçışma:k), D kucus- Recip. f. of kuc-; “to embrace one another”, S.i.s.m.l. Uy£. vir ff. Bud. PP 52, 8 (öpüş-): Xak. xı ol menin birle: kuçuşdr: 'üánaqani "he exchanged embraces with me” Kaş. 11 92 (kugusu:r, kucugma:k); a.o. 7/7 188 (kavış-): Çağ. xv ff. kucus- "to embrace (mu"dnaqa tva bağal-giri kardan) one another” San. 283v. 20 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 142. Mon. GD ka:d 'snow-storm; blizzard'. Survives in SW "Fkm, ğay, xx Anat. kay SDD 854 in the latter case sometimes for 'heavy' or 'fine rain'; listed in Sami ro44 but described as “obsolete”, Xak. xı ka:d "a snowstorm' which kills people; hence one says ka:d boldi: hayácu'l-damag (sic) “a snow-storm came on?” this happens in the mountains both in summer and winter, but in the plains (a/-şahdri) only in the winter Kaş. İTİ 147 (verse), same verse /1 223, 10 (Ösne:-): Çağ. xvff. kay haría yağan yagmur 'rain and snow mixed” Vel. 327; ditto San. 281r. zo: Kip. xiv ka:y al-barad wa'l-matar ma'a(n) "hall and rain simultaneously" İd. 77: Osm. xiv to xviii kay 'heavy rain'; fairly common TTS 7 436; I1 603; İİİ 425; IV 485. kat Preliminary note. Ağazt from 1 kat and 2 ka:t below kat has also been read as the name of the mythological monster in Xwar. xin(?) Og. 22 ff. This is certainly an error. Sinor has pointed out that these scriptions are attempts to represent one or other of two Sanskrit swords ganda and khadga or Prahrit forms of them, all meaning 'rhinoceros'. Khadga (prob. in a   593 “Tohharian” form) appears in U III 74, 7 as ktki and also in the Chin.-Uyğ. Dict. mhere ch'i lin, usually translated 'unicorn' (Giles 1,044 7,186) is translated kat R II 273; Ligeti 164. 1 kat basically "a layer” of something, hence “a fold' (of a blanket), “a story” (of a house) and the like; thence, on the analogy of a number of layers, “times” in such expressions as "so many times'. C.i.a.p.a.l, L.-w. in Pe., etc., Doerfer III 1429. Türkü vil ff. (a great house was burnt) katı:na: tegl: kalmaduk *down to the (ground) floor nothing remained” IrkB 9 (cf. 2 bük), a.o. do. so (öçürgü:): Man. on kat kök “the tenfold heavens” M I 14, 6-14; a.o. Chuas. 42-3 (asra:): Uyğ. viri ff. Man. TT III s9 (alkat-): Bud. PP 39, 5 (karım), Tig. 47b. 8 (aju:n): Civ. on kat kaş oyun “the tenfold kaş game” TT I94; (if a mouse) kat kat ısırsar “bites through several layers (of a garment)! TT VII 36, 6: Xak. xı kat “a fold' (tiny) of anything; one says to:n katı: “a fold of a garment; hence the folds and bends (ma'àtif . . . wa maháni) of the mountains are called (kat? kadra:k (sic) Kag. I 320; o.o. I azı (kadra:k); 17/ 27 (yétti:): KB yağız yer katındakı altun taş ol “there” is gold ore in the strata of the brovvn earth” 213; (if I remain alone) kara yer katın “ina layer of black earth” 395; o.o. 883, 1371, 4102: xin(?) Tef. kat "layer , katımda, etc. “by my (etc.) side” and similar blr. 203: xiv Rbg. (heaven and earth were) bir kat 'a single layer' (by His might He divided heaven and earth and made them) yeti Kat “seven layers! R II 274: XIV. Muh. "inda “at, near, by, beside”, etc. katinda: Mel. 18, 17; ka:tinda: Rif. 98; o.o. 17, 2-3; 95: Caf. xv ff. kat fabaqa “layer, story” San. 267r. 18 (quotns.): Oğuz xı kat a Particle (arf) which corresponds to "inda; hence one says beg katında: “by the side of the beg”, beğle-r katin 'inda'l-umarà Kaş. 164, 14 (in a Xak. verse): Xwar. xiti kat with Poss. Suff.s 'beside' “AF 22: xiv kat (1) ditto; (2) “layer”, kata/katla (so many) “times” Qutb 135; Kit (sic) as kat (1) do. 149; kat in both meanings MN 4, etc.; (the Prophets have) balà kat kat 'numerous trials! Nahc. 34, 13: Kom. xiv kat (1) “layer”, (2) with Poss. Suffs. "with, near” CCI, CCG, Gr. 196 (quotns.): Kap. xrit "nda is katin (sic) in Turkish as in senin katında: 'indak... menüm katumda: "indi, etc. Hou. 54, 7: xiv. kat taq “layer”, one says bir kat “one layer”, iki: kat 'two layers' İd. 68; kat 'inda do. 73; "indi menüm katimda: Bul 14, 15; a.0.o.: XV senin katinda: Kav. 27, 15; a.0.0. do. 32, zo, 36, 1-3; "inda kat Tuh. 89b. 3; a.0.0.: Osm. xivff. kat (occasionally kit) with Poss. Suffs “near, beside, in the presence of”, c.i.a.p. TT.S 1 431; II 597; III 419; IV 480: xvitt Kat in. Rümi, hudür "presence”, kat kat “layer on layer, fold on fold' San. 267r. 18 (the second perhaps Çağ.). 2 ka:t (ka:d) a generic term for 'berry'; survives in some NE languages R II 275 and   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 638 
     
   
   
     594 MON. GD Tuv., the particular kind bcing indicated by an Attributive. Xak. xr ka:t Aamlu'l-'idáh acma' “a generic term for the fruit of thorn bushes'; onc says avılğu: ka:tı: “the fruit of the qurm trec', and (VU) sançğam kartı: hamlu'l-idàh; this fruit is crushed and mixed with curdled milk and used to colour tutma:; in Yeme:k, Kip., Ka:y, Tata:r it is used for “the fruit of any kind of tree Kaş. 7I 146. kut originally in a rather mystical sense “the favour of heaven', thence, less specifically 'good fortune' and the like, and thence, more generally, “happiness”, In KB, where it is regarded as syn. vv. Ar. darcla, it came to mean, more neutrally, “fortune”, either good or bad. S.i.a.m.l.g., usually for “göod fortune, happiness”, and the like, but in one or two languages, esp. in NE, it seems rather to mean 'soul, life force'. More or less syn. vv. kiv, q.v. İn two late Uyg. Civ. texts the word transcribed Rut is a transcription in TT VII az, 4 of (Ar.) qutcteat. 'strength', and in USp. 88, 24 of qüt “food”, Türkü viii Umay teg ógüm xatu:n kutipa: 'because my lady mother, who resembles (the goddess) Umay, enjoyed the favour of heaven” 7 E şı, o0. 1S 9, II N 7 (üçün), TT E 35 (tapla:-): vur ff (a god speaks) kut bérgey men "1 will give you my divine favour' IrkB 2; tenri: kuti:nta: "by the favour of heaven” do. 15; o.o. do. 36 (uçru:ğlu:6), 47: Man. (if we have bowed down to false doctrines and) kut kolu yüküntümüz “veorshipped asking for divine favour! Chuas. 150; 0.0. do. 45-6 (kiv); M HI 16, 6 (ii): Uyğ. vur ff. Man, tükel kut bulmakıpız [bolzun] “may you attain complete divine favour M III 42, 12 (1); 0.0. M 11 s, 4 (i) (bógülen-); TT 111 66 (tüzğerinçsiz), in one passage kut seems to mean “a personification of divine favour, a benevolent spirit', yér suv kuti irinür ot suv kuti iBlayur 1 1$ac kuti uliyur “the benevolent spirits of land and water are miserable, the benevolent spirits of fire and water weep, the benevolent spirits of shrubs and trees lament” M II 12, 3-6: Chr. (let us go and worship) anıp uluğ kutipa “His great mağesty” U 15, 1 (here an attribute, not a gift, of a divine personage): Bud. kut is very common, both in the sense of “the favour of heaven”, and in a sense of which the best equivalent is “mafesty” , the first meaning appears in such passages as (the prince reached the island) kutı ühüği üçün “because he enjoyed the favour of heaven and good fortune” PP 33, $, and the second in kapım kuti “His Majesty my father' do. 6, 4; the meaning of the common phr. burxan kuti is less obvious; it is usually translated "the blessed state of being a Buddha' and in some contexts it must have that meaning, e.g. kayu kün burxan kutin bulsar *when (you) attain the blessed state of being a Buddha' PP 40, 6-7, but in others it looks more like “the divine favour of the Buddha”, o.o. TT IV ız, 51-2 (al-); U IV 10, 51 (ço:ğ): Civ. ay tepri battı kutur üze “the moon has set on your zood fortune iQ. 2 o. do 6 (ata:-): in the astronomical texts T'T VII 4, ro, 18, etc. küt (and less often tó:z) represents 'element' in the sense of the five elements, fire, water, carth, metal, and wood: Xak. xi kut al-dawla qca”l-cadd "good fortune! (Hiend.), hence a man is called kutluf, Kaş, I 320 (verse; the basic meaning of daivla is “change, vicissitude”, hence 'fortune' and esp. 'good fortune); 7 163 (1 uc-) and about 10 o.o. translated dazc/a, cadd or baxt 'good fortune': KB kut, which is clearly syn. w. dawlat and is often associated with it, as in the title of Chap. XX (1045 ff.) küt kiviliBt dawlat irselliki "the fickleness of fortune and the untrustworthiness of luck', is very common, commonest for “good fortune', but. *majesty' is also common; the two are combined in tirilsüni terken knti mii kutun “may your Majesty live in all kinds of good fortune'; 0.0. rog (terken), 456, etc.: xiu(?) Tef. kut 'good fortune! 219: Çağ. xv fT. kut, in Mong. (sic) maymanat :wa sa'üdat 'good fortune, happiness' Sam. 283r. zo: Xwar. xiv küt 'good fortune, happiness, majesty! Qutb 146: Kip. xiv. küt ai-yunmn 'happiness, good fortune'; hence kutlu:; also pronounced kut but kut is the original form; one of their curses is kut korsun “may his good fortune vvither” (yaybis); also used in the meaning “may his intelligence and understanding wither' İd, 68: xv baraka 'blessing' kut Jui. 7a. 6: Osm. xvi al-yumn translated. kut in one dict. TTS II 670. : Mon. V. GDka:d- Preliminary note, Töe only V. actually noted in this form is that listed in Kag., but der. f.s like 2 kadit-, kadir-, etc. show that kay-, q.v, must originally have been. pronounced Ka:d-. 1 ka:d- homophonous with ka:d, q.v.; as such Hap. lcg., but survives in NC Kir. kayı-. Xak. xr er ka:dtı: "the man died as a result of a blizzard' (mina'l-damaq) Kaş. Ill 440 (ka:da:r, ka:dma:k). 2 *ka:d- See kay-. 1 kat- “to mix (two things)', and more specifically "to add (something cc.) to (something else Dat.). S.i.a.m.l.g. except SC(?); sometimes used for “to twist (vvool into thread)'. See 1 kar-, (Türkü vu katdimi:z in T 55 is a misreading of akıtdımız): Uyğ. vii ff. Man, ınça k[alti isi] suvuğ kim tumlığ [suvka] katsar “ust as if one adds warm water to ice cold water' (it becomes potable) Wind. 40-2; a.o. do. 47-9: Bud. kan yirin arığsız birle katı “mixing blood, pus, and filth” TT X 549-50; katip 'adding' (their own good deeds to the evil deeds of mankind) TT VI 355: Civ. (take various ingredients and) borka beginike (so read) katıp “mix them with wine and beer' H 1 52-3; many similar phr. in H 7, H I1 6,9; TT VII 22, 20; VIII L.17 (öpre:ki:), M 33: Xak. xı ol sirke:ni: uğrutka: kattı: “he mixed (»azaca) the  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 639 
     
   
   
       MON; V. GDvinegar with clotted milk (yogurt)'; also used of anything which is blended (xulifa) with something else Kaş. II 295 (2 kat- follows); 0.0. 1 386, 24 (is:z); 432, 16 (1 kar-); 440, 21: KB bu sü'ir sözi kattı sözke tuzi “this poet's remark added its salt to the conversation” 711; n.o. 1064: xiti(?) At, (this world holds honey in one hand and) birin zahd katar 'adds poison with the other” 206; Tef. kat“to add” 203: xiv Muh. al-mazc ka:tmak Mel. 13, 1; 37, 1; Rif. 89, 122; mazaca ka:t- 31,5; 115; fatala “to twise, spin" ka:t- 29, 13 (113 tavra:t-); a/-fatl katmak 35, 5; 120 (misspelt kamak): Çağ. xv fI. kat- dmixtan wa mamezüc hardan “to mix, blend', also katışturSan. 265v. 25 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv kat- “to add to, mix with (something Dat.)' Qutb 135; "to confine (someone) in (some place)” Nahe. 19, 11; 0.0. 389, 5; 421, rı (ya:S): Kip. xtm “to blend' (xa/ata) in the sense of blending one thing with another kat- (misvocalized Rot-) Hou. 38, 2: xiv kat- “to join (damına) one thing to another'; hence katik 'the scasoning (al-idüm) which is mixed in bread” İd. 69: xv xalata kat- (and karı-) Tuh. 15a. 4. 2 kat- 'to be hard, firm, tough', and the like. S.i.s.m.l, in all groups; l.-w. in Mong. as kata(Kom. 773), see Doerfer 1 283. Üyğ. viii Su. E 6 (birle:): Xak. xt (after 1 kat-) and one says yumşa:k ne:p kattı: "the soft thing became hard” (saluba) Kaş, II 295 (kata:r, katma:k); tut&amp;un bolup ol kata:r translated fa'l-àn iştadda ba'd raxáwa bihi "and now he suffers hardship after leading a comfortable life” 7 205, 6; tamğak kata:r translated “his jaw stiffens (yagtadd) owing to the dryness of his mouth' 7 467, 9: KB 1059 (bosut-): xiv Muh.(?) qawiya "to be strong, tough' kat- Rif. 114 (only): Çağ. xv ff. kat- (-1p, etc.) hatt ve şaxt ol- “to be hard, tough! Vel. 315 (quotns.); kat- saxt şudan San. 265v. 25 (quotns.): Kip. xiv kat- işfadda İd. 68. kıd- (?krd-) as such Hap. leg, but the original form of kiy- which s.i.a.m.l.g. with a rather wide range of meanings. In view of the similar wide range of meanings below it is hard to determine the original meaning. "Türkü vin (if one man offended) uğuşı: bodunı: beşükine: tegi: kıdmaz ermiş "they did not spare(?) his clan and people right down to (infants in) the cradle' 7 S 6, II N 4: Xak. xı er só:zin kirydi: xálafa'l-racul fi kalümihi va “idatihi "the man went back on his word and promise'; and one says ol yığa:ç kıydı: qata"a”l-xaşab muhrifa(n) “he cut the piece of wood on the slant” Kaş. IlI 246 (kiya:r, kıyma:k): KB (one kind of bad men is the liar) munipda basası sözüğ kıyğanı “the next is the man who goes back on his vvord” 338; (if he is bad-tempered and irritable or a drunkard) yü kıyğan eliğ “or dishonest” (? ie. withdrawing his hand from a promise?) 850; (an envoy is not to be blamed) sözin kıymasa “so long as he does not distort the message (entrusted to him)” 3816; a.o. 2013 (umunç): Çağ. xv ff. kiy- (5a-işba"-i kasra,  595 presumably *with -1- not -6-”) (1) ratod düştan 'to allow, approve, consent'; (2) riz riz wa şarha şarha hardan “to cut into small pieces or slices” Sar, 299v. 6 (quotns.): Kip. xiv kiyxüta xiydta rümiya "to do needlework in the Greek fashion”, (2) casara “ala şay” “to venture on something” /d. 77: xv hüna "to become base or contemptible” kiy- TuAh. 38a. 4. ?D ko:d- prob. an Intensive f. of *ko:-; originally “to put down, abandon, give up”, thence more indefinitely "to put” and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. usually as koy-, in SW Osm. raore usually ko-; cf. ko:n-, koyuf, koyul-. "Türkü vrrı (so many people came and brought innumerable blood horses and furs and) kop kot(t)ı: 'deposited them all (on the grave)' II S 12: (the "Türkü people . . . got a xarı of their own; then) xanı:n kodup tavğaçka: yana: içikdi: “they abandoned their xar and submitted to China again” T 2; a.o. T 3: viit ff. İrkB 9 (2 bük), 42 (idi:ş): Uyğ. vir (I did not destroy the common people or take their property . .) turğuru: kot(t)im “I raised them up and left them alone” (or 'settled them. down'?); (I said “you are my people, follow me”, and) kodup bardım Şu. E 2; kot(t)ım 'I put” (my tents at Ersegün) do. N 6: viri ff. Man. (just as a craftsman, if he cannot get suitable raw materials) işin barça kodur “gives up his work entirely M I 17, 2; apam birok muniteg ari$ nomuğ nomlap kodmasar 'if you had not exhaustively preached the pure doctrine like this' TT III 64-5 (note kod- is here an Aux. V.); a.0. do. 62-3: Bud. Sanskrit abahdya “abandoning” and abösya 'laying aside' both translated kodop (MS. £otop) TT VIII D.18-19; vihanti “they give up” kodor (kotor) do. 39; barçaka kumaru söz kodti “left (these) parting words with them all” PP 76, 3; o.o. TT X 259, Hüen-ts. 92 (iz); 98: Civ. (take various ingredients and) burunka kodsar “deposit them in the nostrils” H 7 88, 161; o.o. TT VII 6, 8-13; VIII I.7: Xak. xı ol t:gin ko:dti: “he abandoned (taraka) his work' (or anything else) Kaş. IJI 440 (verse; ko:du:r, ko:dma:k), ol ne:p kottt: “he abandoned the thing”, originally ko:dtt: but assimilated 77 295 (kodu:r, kodma:k): 5 or 6 o.o. translated taraha, avlap meni koymanız *when you have caught me, do not desert me” (lá taxdulini) II 45, 25: K B kod- “to lay aside, abandon', etc. is common, e.g. (i£ you cannot do this) kod£il bilig “lay aside reasonableness” (and reach for a sword) 222; (this kind of position as beg is no use to me) kodurmen sapa 'I yield it to you” 925; kod£il bu söz “do not talk like that” 1080; 0.0. 1130, 2003, etc.; in other contexts it means rather “to bequeath' e.g. (knowing he was dying . . .) bitip kodmiş atın tirigke bitiğ "he wrote his reputation in a book and bequeathed it to the living” 258; 0.0. 755, 1231, 1354: XIti(?) At. kod-, usually spelt koy- in the MSS., "to lay aside, abandon' is fairly common, e.g. (put on the garment of righteousness) koyup eğrilik 'laying crookedness aside” 167; a.o. 407 (2 yé:r-); Tef. kod-/koz-[koy  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 640 
     
   
   
       596 “to put” 210-11: Xiv Muh. taraha ko:y- Mel. 24, 5; Rif. 106; al-tark ko:ymak 36, 1; 121; wada'a “to place, put” ko:y- 32, 3; ko:- 116; wada'a "to allov” ko:y- 39, 18; ko:- 128: Çağ, xv ff. koy- (-ar, etc.) ko-, ya'ni terk eyle- Vel. 347 (quotns); koy- gudágtan "to abandon, relinquish'; in Rümi ko- San. 291v. 29 (quotns.): Xwar. xır ko- “to put” ' Ali 27: xiv kod-/koy- “to put, put down' Quib 138; ditto and “to abandon' Na. 31, 5; 238, 13: Kom. xiv "to put; to lay aside' koy- CCI, CCG, Gr. 198 (quotns.): Kip. xri xallà “to let go, release' koy- Hou. 35, 5; 39, 18; hatfa “to put, lay down! Koy- 39, 14; 52, rg, koyas an Aux. V. do. 36, 7 (tik-) and Rabba “to turn upside down' dóndürü: koy- do. 43, 9: XIV koy- taraka bi-ma'nà wada'a İd. yy: xv xalla koy- Kav. 77, ız, Tuh. rab. rr: Osm. xiv ff. ko- 'to put aside, abandon; allow; release; hinder'; c.i.a.p. 773 1 479; III 469; IV 534; San. 291 v. 25 (Çağ.). kud- “to pour out (a liquid)'; practically syn. vv, tök-. S.i.a.m.l.g. as kuy- and the like, often in the more restricted sense of 'to cast (metal objects)'. Uyğ. vırı ff. Bud. Sanskrit dkirya “having filled' kudup (spelt kutup) TT VIII C.9: Xak. xı er küpke: su:v kuydi: the man poured (sabba) water into the jar, or tipped it in (qa/labaha) ; also used of any liquid Kaş. LI 246 (kuya:r, kuyma:k); o.o. translated şabba III 39, 12; 171, 17 (kuya:r): Çağ. xv ff. (after koy-) also used for “to pour out water' (rixtan üb) San. 291v. 29: Xwar. xiv kudditto Qut 142; kuy- ditto 143: Kip. xiv kuy- sabba wa dà'a ("to squander) d. 77. Dis. GDA D kata: “times” in the sense of “(so many) times”, morphologically obscure, der. fr. 1 kat, perhaps a crasis of the Loc., but there does not seem to be any actual occurrence of katta:. N.o.a.b. Türkü vir ff. iki:nti: kata: :*a second time” Toyok IVr. 2 (ETY II 180): Yen. Mal. 31, 4 (tegzin-): Uy£. vri ff. Man. M I 29, 14 (1 oki:-): Bud. (if one listens to this dháram) bir kata “once” U II 34, 12; kaç kata “several times” PP 23, 8; a.o.o.: Civ. üç kata “three times” H 1 127; a.o.o.: Xak. xı kata: a Particle (/tarf) meaning marrata(n) 'time', hence one says bir kata: aydim "1 said once” Kaş. IJI 218; o.o. I 321 (kaç), 498, zo: xir(?) At. mip kata “a thousand times” 67, Tef. kata ditto 203: Xwar. xiv ditto Quib 135; Nahe. 248, 6. D kod: Adv. (? Ger.) fr. ko:d-; 'downwards'. Survives only(?) in SC Uzb. kuyı (sic). Türkü vir Selepe: kodr yoripan *advancing down the Selenga river" İT E 37; a.o. T 27: vini ff. İrkB so (yadrit-): Uy£. virt Selepe: kodt: Şu, E 4: vir ff. Man.-A özümin kodi ıdayın “1 will launch myself downwards' Man.-nig. Frag. 401,2; a.0. M I 26, 26 (ilğerü:): Man. TT III zo (üstürti:); 35: Bud. orunlukdin kodi öz kemişti “he threw himseif down from his throne” PP 61, 5-6; o.o. U III 31, 8 etc. (örüş), TT X 311, MON. V. GD498—with a different shading of meaning in Sanskrit öragödhavedanü “strong perception' kodı (spelt koti) te:ginme:ki TT VIII A.4; Şılabadrı açarı 1dmayukipa ayı kodi öpkesi kelip “becoming extremely angry because Silabhadra Acarya had not sent him” Hüen-ts. 286-8: Civ. kodı asıra (sic) kişiçe tutsarmen 'if I treat him as a low and inferior person” USp. 98, 2-2: Xak. xi kodt: 'thelower part (al-asfal) of anything'; hence one says kodı: ildi: nazala iá'l-asfal "he descended" Kaş. III 220; 11 0.0., once spelt ko:di: and three times in error ko:dı:: KB 72 (kakr:Ja:-); 119 (kavril-); ross (egil-): xur(?) Az. (ignorance) erni çökerdi kodi “makes a man kneel down' ro2; (God) kemşür kodi 'casts down' (the proud man) 282: Tef, kod/kodi/ kodu/kozi *down' Tef. 210-11: Çağ. xv ff. koyı aşağa 'down' Vel. 346 (quotns.); koyt zir dadd-i bala “under, down', opposite to "Over, up” in Ar. faht San. 292v. 24 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv kodi/kodu 'below' (someone ZA.) Quib 138. D i VU kutu: in KI “a class or group of people”, perhaps s.i.s.m.]. as kutifkutu "a small box”. L.-w. in this sense in Pe., etc. Doerfer III 1569. Xak. xı KB bulardin naruki kalin bir kutu “apart from these a large group of people” (follows them) 2710; tarığçı turur kör tak: bir kutu “the farmers, see, are another group' 4400; a.o. 4456. Dis. V. GDAkadu:- “to sew or stitch (e.g. a garment) very firmly'; as such Hap. leg. but survives with the same meaning in NC Kir. kayı-, cf. kadut-, kaduş-. Xak. x1 ol to:nuğ kadu:dr: şamraca'l-xiyáta ta'l-darz "he sewed the needlework or seam firmly" Kaş. III 26o (kadu:r, kadu:ma:k). Tris. GDC ?E kudu:cak See kudurcak. Dis. GDD D katut Active(?) Dev. N. fr. 1 kat-; n.o.a.b., the semantic connection of the second meaning is tenuous. Xak. xı katut al-mizdc "a liquid mixture'; hence one says katutluğ ok “an arrow impregnated (a/-mamztüc) with poison': Barsğa:n xı katut "a segment' (al-faliq): hence one says armut katuti: “a segment of pear”: Xak. xı katut al-zarf "the glue' which shoemakers use Kaş. II 284. Dis. V. GDDD kadht-, etc. Preliminary note. Al] these V.s are listed under the cross-heading -D- together roith bedüt-, q.o., and Kag.'s note thereon makes it clear that ihis spelling was. deliberate, but etymologically this must have been only a dialect form. The MS. actually has -d- almost everytohere. R D 1 kadit- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of 1 ka:d-, but hardly Caus. in meaning except perhaps in the  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 641 
     
   
   
     DIS. ĞDĞ 597 sense of 'to allow oneself to be frozen to death'. Xak. xı (after 2 kadıt-) also of a man when he dies of cold and is frozen stiff (?; idà máta mina'l-bard fa'stadda) one says er tumluğka: kaditti: Kaş. İT 301 (no Aor. or Infin.). D 2 kadıt- Caus. f. of 2 *ka:d-; but hardly Caus. in meaning, cf. 1 kadıt-, “to turn back, return”. S.i.s.m.l. in all groups as kayt- and the like. See katar-, kadır-, kaytar-. Uyğ. vini ff. Bud. Up. 97, 20-1 (ké:rü:): Civ. ditto H II əş, 32: Xak. xi er barrr erke:n kaditti “the man turned back (raca'a) from the direction in which he was going after he had set out on his journey and met obstruction” (rmtana'a) Kaş. II sor (kadıta:r, kadıtma:k): KB (a modest man) yağı birle karşur kadıtmaz öçün 'fights the enemy and does not turn back from revenge'(?) 229go: xu1(?) Tef. kayt- “to turn back” (to a place Dat.):194: Çağ. xv ff. kayt- (-mayıp, etc.) dön- "to turn back” Vel. 327-8 (quotns.): kayt- (spelt) bargaştan "to turn back, return” San. 279v. 22 (quotns.) Xwar. xii kayt- ditto “Ali 31: xiv kayt-/kayit- ditto Qutb. 129; Nahc. 274, s: Kom. xiv ditto kayt- CCI, CCG; Gr. go (quotn.): Kip, xili raca'a kayıt- Hou. 34, 17ş:Vada mina'l-'awd same meaning kayıt- do. 42, s: xiv ka:yıt- raca'a İd. yy: xv ditto kayıt- Kav. ro, 8; kayt- do. 74, 19; kayıt- Tuh. 17a. 10; radda bi-ma'nà raca'a kayt- Kav. 78, 1; qafala (in margin ay raca"a) kayıt- Tuh. 30a. 9; wallá wa radda kayıt do. 38b. 8: Osm. xv kayıt- “to turn back” , in two texts TTS (I 438); II 607. D kadut- Caus. f. of kadu:-, “to have (something) sewn firmly'. Survives in NW Kaz. kayıt- R 7I 98; a superfluous Rasra is added below the düf in the MS. Xak. xı ol to:nuğ kadutti: “he ordered that his garment should be sewn firmly' (yuxáf mugamraca(n)) Kaş, II 301 (kadutu:r, kadutma:k). D Kidit- Caus. f. of kid- ; survives as NE Şor kiyit- "to put on one side” R IJ 721; for the meaning in Kaş. cf. kıdığ. Xak. xı ol bórkin kıditti: amara bi-xiyáta hitdr qalansuwatihi "he ordered that a brim should be sewn onto his hat” Kaş. II 301 (kiditu:r, kiditma:k). D kuta:d- Den. V. fr. kut, apparently both Intrans. 'to enjoy divine favour, or good fortune' and Trans. 'to bestow divine favour, or good fortune'. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vrir ff. Man.-A M I 28, 15-17 (Kivad-): Bud. (a new house) iyesipe kutadur *brings good fortune to its owner' TT VI ıoo, kopka kutadur agilur *he is fortunate in everything and increases in strength' do. 348; o.o. Kuan. 6o (erdem), zı, 218: Civ. taşdın ünser kutadur “if he goes out he is fortunate! (if he stays at home aşılur) TT VII 28, 32-3: Xak. xr er kutatti: “the man enjoyed good fortune' (cidd wa danla toa baxt), also used of anything which enjoys good fortune Kay. II 299 (kuta:tur, kutatma:k, these forms seem dubious): KB the title Kutadğu: Biliğ must mean *wisdom which brings good fortune'; the word is fairly common 350 (kutadsu), 352, 682, 1663, etc.; sometimes clearly Intrans. e.g. bilig bilse künde kutadur kóni 'if a man is wise, he is truly fortunate every day” 1814. Tris. GDD D katutluğ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. katut, "impregnated with a mixture". Xak. xı Kaş. II 284 (katut). Tris. V. GDD D kutadturul- Hap. leg.; Pass. Caus. f. of kuta:d-. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. ol teğreki (so read) yer orunnun yavlak adalar amrilip kutadturulmışın sakınıp “thinking that the grievous dangers of places in that locality have been neutralized and made to yield good fortune' US). 103, 22-3. Dis. GDG PU kadağ in the phr. mün kadağ can hardly be a mistranscription of katığ although kadakin in M 1 28, 26 is an error for katağın the Man.-A form of katığın, but it is difficult to find any other explanation; the phr. seems to mean “defect, shortcoming”, and the like. N.o.a.b. Kadağ in Kaş. II 190, zo (kaztur-) is an error for kuduğ. Uyf. vırı ff. Bud. edgü kutluğ yalapuklar üze yok kuruğ yala urup mün kadağ sözledim erser 'if I have cast unfounded suspicions on good men enjoying the favour of heaven and ascribed shortcomings to them' Suv. 135, 5—7; (they neither understand the right way nor) tuğmak ólmeknip [mün]in kadağın bilirler 'know the evils of (the cycle) of births and deaths' U H 4, 4; uluğ élig köpüldeki nece yirintilig [mün] kadağlar bar erser 'whatever sinful shortcomings there may be in the mind of the great king' U III 73, 25-7. D kadığ (kadu:ğ) Dev. N. fr. kadu:-; apparently survives in NE Alt, Şor, Tel. ka:yı “hem, trimming, fur edging”, etc. R II 93, but semantically this word is nearer to kıdığ. Xak. xr kadığ al-xiyafatu'l-mu'akkada 'reinforced stitching! Kaş. I 375. ?S kadik Hap. leg.; semantically this looks like a Sec. f. of kazuk in the sense of something dug out; not an earlier form of kayık which is a Sec. f. of kayğuk. Arğu: xı kadik sagiru'l-xaşab "a wooden trough' Kaş. 7 382. D katığ Dev. N./A. fr. 2 kat-, “hard, firm, tough”, and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. as kattığ/ katifkatti/kattu: Türkü vır ff. IrkB 65 (ağız): Uyğ. vir ff, Man.-A M I 28, 26 (bütün): Bud. bek katağ kértgünclüg 'with a firm strong belief' U II 88, 75; bek katığ Süzük kertğünç kópüllüg '*with a mind full of firm, strong, pure belief” TT VII 40, 117; öz etózin alp katağ üze tutar erdi “he kept his own body in a state of toughness and hardness! U IV 34, 49-50; o.o. U III 26, 13-14; U IV 8, 8 etc. (yavla:k), zz, 295 (alakırış-): TT X 445 (tiÉra:k), etc.: Civ. kadır katkı katığ sav “a grim, harsh, firm speech' TT I 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 642 
     
   
   
       $98 DIS. GDG 14-15; 0.0. do. 187, 193: Xak. xi katığ “hard” (or tough, al-suib) of anything Kaş, I 375; kudruğ katığ tüğdümüz “ve knotted (our horses") tails tightly' (bi-s1dda) I 472, 10; several o.o. usually translated şulb: KB katığ is common: usually as an Adv., e.g. katığ kur badı "he fastened his belt tightly! 542; emger katığ 'suffers acutely' 689; 0.0. 714, 773, 842, 964 (ba:-), 1275, 2504, 5609; sometimes as an Adj., e.g. negü bar ağunda ólümdin katığ "what is there in the world more unyielding than death?” 1139; soğuk suvka yunmak yanutı katığ “the reaction to washing in cold water, is violent' 3584: xiri(?) At, katif kizle razın “keep your secret firmly hidden' 169; katığ ya okun “vith a tough bow and arrow" 228; Tef. katığ/katı ditto 203-4: XIV Muh. qa:iya “to be strong, tough” katı: bol- Mel. 30, 9 (Rif. 114 kat-); şal “stingy” katı: 52, 3; 148; al-baxil “miserly” katı: 52, 11; 149: Çağ. xv ff. katığ/katık kaf: . . . saxt ma'nàásina “hard”, etc. Vel. 315; ditto saxt wa sulb San. 267r. 29 (quotn.): Xwar. xri ditto "Al 12, 54: XIV ditto 'strong; strongly, vigorously' Qutb 135; MN 8, etc.; Nahc. 30, 6: Kom. xiv “hard, tough! kati/katti CCI, CCG; Gr. 196 (quotns.): Kip. xiu al-şadid mütla"l-ma"cün “solid, firm', like dough (opposite to “soft” yumşak) katı: How. 28, 1; (among P.N.s) ka:tı: yazlu: “vith a strong (qazısı?) bow' do. 30, 6: xiv kattı: (v.]. kati)) al-sadid; one says kattı yalu: (vl, katı yalu:) "with a strong bow" İd. 68; ka:ti: al-şadid do. 73; XV qatewi kati (and berk) Twh. zgb. 9; soa. r: Osm. xiv ff. katı both Adj. and Adv.; c.i.a.p. T TS 7 431; H 598; HI 419; IV 481. D katik (katuk) Dev, N. in -uk (Pass., this must have been the original form) fr. 1 kat-, “something mixed into something else; seasoning, condiment', and the like. S.is.m|l. in similar meanings. Xak. xı katık 'seasoning' (al-şibğ) such as vinegar and curdled milk which is put into tufma:ç: katik 'something which is mixed' (a/-mizdc) with anything Kaş. I 382: Çağ. xv ff. katığ/katık idam sva nànxtvuriş 'seasoning, condiment San. 267r. 29 (quotn.): Kip. xiv katik ai-idám İd. 68; a.o. 69 (1 kat-): xv idám katik Tu. 5a. 2. D kıdığ Dev. N. fr. kid-; basically “the edge” of something, in such applications as "the sea shore; the frontier (of a country), the lip (of a cup), and the like. S.i.s.m.l. with these and extended meanings, usually as kiyiğ/kıyı. Uyğ. viu ff. Bud. PP $2, 4-5 (teBür-); TT V 4, 10-11 (egin); VIII 4.6, etc. (1ndin); Hüen-is. 99, etc. (1 u:g): xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. *frontier' kidiğ R II 790; Ligeti 166. Xak. xı kidiğ “the side” (cönib) of anything like the sea or a canal or river; also “the rim” (bitdr, MS. tàá' undotted) of anything; one says arik kidiği: “the bank (şaff) of a canal', and ayak kıdığı: “the lip (safir) of a cup”, and ya:r kidigai: safa'l-curuf “he edge of an eroded river bank” Kaş. 1 375; and see kayığ: (xin(?) Tef. kırığ in such phr. as dary&amp; kırığı “the edge of the sea” seems to be an error for kıdığ 209): xiv Muh. al-sáhil “the (sea) shore' kıyığ Mel. yy, 1; Rif, 180: Xwar. xin(?) itil mürennin kudujida (sic) “on the bank of the Volga” Oğ: 158: xiv (teniz kirğinda ?error Qutb 149); darya kıdiğına Nahe. 329, 7; 2.0.355,13: Kip. xin al-salül tepiz kiyi: (2; MS. Euyi:) Hou. 7, 3: Osm. xviri kiyi (spelt) in Rümi, kanür-i daryd "the sca-shore" San. 3oor. 3. D kuduğ Conc. N. fr. kud-: lit. 'something which pours out (water)', in practice “a well'. An early l.-w. in Mong. as kuduk (Haenisch zo, Kot, g18). S.i.a.m.l.g.; in NW, SW kuyi/ kuyu and the like; elsewhere kuduk, reborrowed fr. Mong., is used. Cf. 2 ca:t. Uyğ. vit ff. Chr. U I 8, o (antaga:): Civ. terin kuduğ TT I 102; o.o. do. sı (üze:), TT VII 29, 2 (bulnk); 39, 4; 42, 7 (balik): Xak. xt kuduğ al-bi'r "a well' Kaş, 7 375 (prov.); about 10 o.o., habitually translated al-bi'r; in II 190 (kaztur-) it is mis-spelt kadag and mistranslated 'cana!'; in the examples of kaz- and its der. f.s kuduğ alternates with arık and in this case the translation of arık was inadvertently used—kuyuğ al-bi'r, dialect form of kuduğ III 166: KB (this world is a prison or) karapku kuduğ “a dark well' 5423; (some dig the earth and) suv kudufda İçer 'drink water from a vvell” 1735: xi(?) Tef. kuduğ/fkuyuğ *well 216: xiv Muh. al-bi'r kuyuk Mel. 77, 8; kuyuğ Rif. 18:: Çağ. xvíff. (after koyl (kod:)) and metaph. (kuyı) means "well" (çah) San. 292v. 24: Xvvar, xii kuduf (sic?) *well “Ali 37: xiv kudu£ "well Qutb 142; MN 275; Nahc. 135, 4) 335, 13; 385, 11; kuyug Qul 143: Kom. xiv “vell” kuyu CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xıv kuyu: al-makánu'l-mustafil min bii zva fayrihi “a depression, well, etc. 7d. 76; al-bi'r kuyt: also used for any 'depression' Bul. 3; 15: Xv ö”r küyü Tuh. 7a. 13. D katkı: "harsh, hard hearted”, and the like morphologically obscure, perhaps Dev. N./A fr. *katik- Emphatic f. of 2 kat-. N.o.a.b.. Uy£. vini ff. Civ. TT I 14-15 (katiğ): Xak xt. al-raculu'l-'asiru'I-tab'i'lladi 18 yanqdd d -ahad "a man with a harsh character who doe: not obey anyone' is called katkı: kişl: Kaş I 427; katğı: (sic) yağı: “the violent (al-sadid enemy” 7 441, rr: K B(a humble man is popular among the people) sevüksüz bolur könl katkı kişi “the hard-hcarted man become: unloved' 2232; bodun katkist 2233. (?D) kadğu: 'sorrow, grief, care, anxiety", anc the like: perhaps Dev. N.|A. fr. 1 ka:d-, bu the semantic connection is tenuous. S.i.a.m.l.g except NE(?) as kayğı/kayğu and the like Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. Mağad uluştakı kadgu: ları “he distress in the country of Magadha TT X 247; a.o. U II 11, 6 (busuş): Civ kadğu bar “there is anxiety! TT 1 zo, o.o do. 79 (belğü:), etc.: Xak. xı kadğu: al-hamn toa! l-hiuzn. 'anxiety, sorrow' Kaş. I 425; fiv o.o. translated a/-hamm, al-huzn or al-ğamn 'gric: KB kamuğ kad&amp;usr erdi umma üçün “all His (the Prophet's) anxiety was fo the people” 4o; sevinç kolsa kadğu tutas yorir "if a man asks for joy, sorrow alvvay 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 643 
     
   
   
     Əh aəy “Ed iıə ə A ''RIS. comcs” 434; kokuz boldi kadğu sevinci tolu 'sorrow became non-existent and his joy full 617; o.o. 681, 1231, 6275: xin(?) At. (know wealth for what it is) bu kün kadğu sakınç “today anxiety and carc” (tomorrow a burden and a curse) 426; Tef. kadğu ditto 192: Çağ. xvff. kayu (sic) hayğu ve fğuşşa ('anguish') Vel. 326; kayğu/kayku gamm wa andüh ('care'") San. 281 v. 6 (quotn.): Xwar. xiii kadğu (rare)/kayğu ditto “AZ ro, sz: xır(?) kayğu 'sorrow' Og. 164, 306—7: xiv kadğu/kayğu ditto Qutb 128; Nahc. 236, 16-17 (antağ): Kom. xiv sorrow, anxiety' kayğı CCG, Gr.: Kip. xii hazina “to grieve' kayğı: tat- Hou. 35, 13: XV hamm wa hüzn (God protect us from them!) kayğı Tuh. 37b. 11; a.0. 83b. 7: Osm. xiv to xvi kayfu in such phr. as kayğu yé- “to be sorrowful'; in several texts T'T.S I 436-7; 11 604; III 425; IV 486. S kodkir/kotkt: See kodiki:, VU kodğu: “a fiy”, prob. an animal name ending in -Éu:; there is no obvious semantic connection vv. ko:d- or kud-. Pec. to Kaş., displaced by sipek and, later, çıbın. Xak. xı kodğu: al-dubáb “fiy” Kaş, I 425i a.o. III 367, 9. VU(D) katkuc Hap. leg.; completely unvocalized; no doubt a der. f. of some kind. Arğu:xı katkuç “a thing which stings(yaldag) like a scorpion' Kaş. 7 455. Dis. V. GDGD kadgur- Intrans. Den. V. fr. kadğu:, "to be grieved, sorrowful; to be anxious (about something Dat.y. S.ia.m.lg. except NE(?) usually as kayğır-/kayğur-. Uyğ. vin ff. Man. kadğurarmen kadğurduk (üçün) "1 grieve, and because I grieve” M II 8, 6: Xak. xi men anar kadğurdum :ihtamamtu H-aclihi 'T was anxious about him” Kaş. II 192 (verse, kadğura:r, kayğura:r in those languages which turn -d- into -y-, kadğurma:k), er kayBurdt: zitamma'l-racul, dialect form for -d- III 193 (kayğura:r, kayğurma:k): KB kilnç edéü tut nepke kadğurmağıl “do what is right and do not be anxious about anything! 1:305; sakınçın kadaşı üçün kadğurup “feeling anxious about his kinsman” 6276; a.o. $445 (eligles-): xiu(?) Tef. kadğur- hazina "to grieve' 192; kayğurditto 206 (mistranscribed kığur-): Çağ. xv ff. kayğur-(-mas) kayur- Vel. 329; kayğur(spelt) Zamnak şudan “to be sorrowful' San. 28ov. 17 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv kadğur- “to grieve' Qutb 128; Nahc. 233, 8-14: Kom. xiv “to mourn” kayğır- CCG; Gr.: Tkm. xiv (antat-) hazina (this is a very western(garbiya cidda(n)) word, the word now normally used is the Tkm. one) kayğur- İ4. 24: xv al-hamm “to be anxious! kayğırmak Kav. ör, 16; huzn kayğamak (in margin kayğırmak) Tuh. 12b. ro, kayğırdı do. 83b. 7; bala “to be anxious” kayır- do. 8a. 13: Osm. xiv ff. the word occurs in two forms, kayğur- xiv-xvi GDG i 599 “to gricve” TTS I 436; II 604; İİİ 42$: kayır-/kayur- “to be anxious; to care for; to guard against; to prepare'; c.i.a.p. / 437; II 605; III 426; IV 486: xvii kayir- (spelt) in Rumi, işfaq wa mihraböni hardan "to show kindness and favour” San. 281r. 18. (D) katğur- “to laugh wildly', a stronger word than kül- with which it is often associated; morphologically obscure; prima facie an Inchoative f, but without any obvious semantic connection with 1 or 2 kat-. Survives as katkir- in several NE languages. Xak. xı er külüp katğurdı: dahaka'l-racul hattà ahzaqa fihi wa'stadraba "the man laughed until he laughed to excess! Kaş. II 192 (katBura:r, katğurma:k), (the lover) katğura:r yahziq fi'l-dahk II 188, 11; a.o. II 201, iş, bu er ol üküs katurğa:n (sic, the position indicates that the spelling was deliberate) “this man is always laughing, enjoying himself, and boasting” J 516: KB ünin óttl keklik küler katğura “the partridge sings his song laughing wildly' 76; (after rain) çiçek yazdı yüz kör küler katğurar “the flowers open their faces and laugh wildly! 80; a.o. 4173 v.l. S kutğar- See kurtğar-. (D) kudğur- See kuzğır-. Tris. ĞDĞ D kodiki: Den. N./A.S. fr. kodi:; lit. “situated below', but normally used metaph. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. Sanskrit zyunapurusanüm “of inferior men” kodiki (MS. kutiki) ere:nleirniyp TT VIII A2: Civ. TT I 128-9 (örüki:): Xak. xr kotkr er al-raculu'I-mutatàdi' “a humble man” Kaş. J 427: KB süçiğ tutğu til söz me kodkı özi “he must keep his tongue and speech svveet and himself humble' 547; (the man who finds me must be modest (alcak) and) köpül kodki “vvith a humble mind” 703; 0.0. 1696, 1705, 2231. D katığdı: (katığtı:) Adv. fr. katığ, "tightly, firmly'. N.o.a.b.; after -ğ the Suff. should be -tı: in Türkü, this is the spelling in IrkB 14 but in do. 33 and 7 S 2 it is -di: and in 7 N 11 -di: (sic). Türkü vri edgü:ti: eşid katığdı: tıpla: “hear well and listen attentively” 7 S 2; katığdi: sakıntım “1 thought earnestly! 2 N 11: Viil ff. IrkB 14 (edgü:ti:), 33 (ur-). D katığlık A.N. fr. katığ, "hardness, harshness, severity”, and the like. S.i.s.m.l. vv. some phonetic changes. Xak. xı kelse: kalı: katığlik “if misfortunes and hardships (balà' za şidda) come to you” Kaş. III 233, 15; n.m.e.: xıı1(?) At. (if I receive Your grace, my soul is saved) agar bolsa "adlın katığlık mana “if Your justice, I shall have a harsh fate' 40; Tef. katığlık/katıklık (physical) hardness; hardship”, etc. 204: Xwar. xiv katığlık ditto Qutb 135. D katıklığ P.N./A. fr. katik; “mixed, containing an admixture”. N.o.a.b. Türkü vri ff. Man. inca kaltı katıklığ altun (PU) kısada 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 644 
     
   
   
     600 arıyurça "üst as one crushes(?) and refines base gold” M HI 14, 7-9 (i): Uyğ. viui ff. Bud. (four kinds of illnesses, those due to demoniac possession, those connected with mucus, those called (in Sanskrit) samnibdta and) katıklığ ig “diseases of mixed origin'(?) Suv. şor, 10: Civ. banıt katıklığ küncit *sesame seed flavoured with honey (l.-vr.) TT VII 16,16: Xak. xi katıklığ (sic in MS.) er al-raculu'l-hacin "a man of mixed ancestry' (for example the son of a free man and a female slave); also “one who has a seasoning to season his food” (fdöm vu'tadam bihi) Kaş. I 496; xın (2) 4r. bu ajun mazasi katiklığ maza “the flavour of this world is a mixed flavour' (more bad than good) 437. D kıdiğliğ P.N./A. fr. kidiğ , “having an edge” and the like. N.o.a.b. Uyf. vir ff. Civ. in a list of töşek, “mattress” or the like, two are described as kıdığlığ USp. 79, 11-12 (örtüğ): Xak. xı kıdığlığ börk “a hat with a brim sewn onto it” (Aitár muxayyat) Kaş. 1 496. D kuduğluğ P.N./A. fr. kuduğ, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı kuduğluğ ev “a house with a well (bi'r) Kaş. 1 496. D kadğuluğ P.N./A. fr. kadgu:; 'sorrowful, anxious”, and the like. S.i.s.m.l. usually as kayğılı/kayğulu. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. PP 3,8 (busuşluğ): Civ. TT I zr? (busuşluğ): (Xak.) xın(?) Tef. kadğuluğ/kayğuluğ/ kayğuluk 'sorrowful' 192-3: Çağ. xv ff. kayBuluk (sic) ğüşşahı aca: kaygulu Vel. 326; kayğuluk gamnák 'sorrowful' San. 23v. 13; kayğuluk kuş cuğd 'owl', in Pe. also called bü timár "bitterm” (sic) do. 281 v. 7. D kotktltk: (kodikilik) A.N. fr. kotki: (Kkodik1:); n.o.a.b. Xak. xr kotkilikin tapinfib 'serve him with humility” (br'l-tawàádw) Kaş. H 140, 9; n.m.e.: xın(?) At. 270 (Kilik). D kattksiz Priv. N./A. fr. katik; 'pure, unalloyed”, and the like. S.i.s.m.]. Xak. xi KB bir ol bir katıksız kariksiz arığ '(God) is onc, one without admixture (Hend.) and pure” 3899: xii(?) At. 211 (um-). D kıdiığsız Priv. N./A. fr. kidiğ, without an edge, border”, etc. N.o.a.b. Uy£. viii ff. Bud, Suv. 584, 12 (ugguz): Civ. US. 79, 11(0rtüg). D kadğusuz Priv. N./A. fr. kadğu:, “free from grief, anxiety, etc.”, S.i.s.m.]. as kayğısız and the like. Uyğ. viii ff. Man.-A M I 29, 29 (busuşsuz): (Xak.) xırı(?) At. tilekçe tiril enç farığ kadğusuz "live as you wish, at peace, relaxed, and free from anxiety' 415. Tris. V. GDGD katığla:- Den. V. fr. katığ, Hap. leg. and prob. an error for katığlan-, q.v. Not to be confused with the Den. V. fr. katik, which is first noted in xiv Muğ. xalata "to mix” katugla:- (sic) Mel. zs, 15; kayığla:- (sic) Rif. 108 and s.i.s.m.l. as katikla-. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud, işlerin tüzgeli ayaların kavşurup katığlamaklar [ol] “placing their palms together TRIS. GDG they strive to set their affairs in order” /7üen-ts. 150-2. D kıdığla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. kidiğ. Xak. xi ol börk kıdığla:dı: "he sewed a brim (xàta hitar) onto his hat” (etc.) Kaş. 111 336 (kidiğla:r, kidiğla:ma:k). D katığlan- Refl. f. of katığla:-, lit. "to harden oneself”, in practice “to exert oneself, strive, and the like. S.i.s.m.l. in NW and SW, e.g. Osm. katilan- 'to become hard', and perhaps even NW Nog. katlan- 'to grow corns on the feet”, Türkü vırı ff. Man. özütlüğ işke edgü ktlinçka katiğlantılar "they exerted themselves to (perform) spiritual work and good deeds! T T 1I 10, 87-8; 0.0. do. 6, 29 (incek); M 11I zr, 1 (ağız): Uyğ. ix (my sons, when you grow up be like my teacher, serve the xar) katığlan 'exert yourselves" Siuci 9: viir ff: Man.-A M . IH g, 6-8 (udik): Man. kértü tórülerte katığlanu “striving (to obey) the truc rules" TT III 136; a.o. do. 139: Bud. (if a man) atın atayu tapinu udunu katağlansar (sic) 'exerts himself to call the names (of the Bodhisattvas) and serve and follow them” Kuan. 85; o.o. TT VIII A.5 (büt-); U III 41, 8 (1) (üz-); Suv. 235, 12 (1 ir-); PP 27, 5 etc.: O, Kir, ix ff. katizglanip otu:z ya:şımğla:) óge: boltum "by exerting myself 1 became a Counsellor at the age of thirty” Mal. 45, 3; 0.0. do. 10, 7; 11, 2: Xak. xı er katığlandı: "the man exerted himself” (rctahada) Kaş. 11 268 (prov.; katığlanu:r, katiflanma:k); ao. 1/7] 159, rr: KB (my good youth . . .) katığlanğıl 'exert yourself! 360; 0.0. 1317, 2157, 2503, 3638 (tiren-), 3944: xti(?) Tef. ditto 204: xiv AMuh.(?) ictahada, in margin, katıkla:n- Rif, 102 (only): Xwar. xiv katığlan- "to strive, exert onesclf' Quib 133: Kom. xiv ditto katulan- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv katilan-/ katlan- (sc) taşaddada wa şabara "to exert oneself, to persevere” /4. 68 (and see katil-). D kıdığlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of kidigla:-; in two places with -d- in error for -d-. Xak. xt kıdığlandı: ne: “the thing was provided with a border or brim” (Aifaf wa hitar) Kaş. 11 268 (kidiBlanu:r, kidiğlanma:k). D kadğulan- (kadğu:lan-) Refl. Den. V. fr. kad£u:; so spelt, but in a section in which the second vowel is by implication long. S.i.s.m.]. as kayğulan-/kayğılan- "to be anxious, to grieve”, etc. Xak. xı ol bu: ska: kadğulandı: "he was anxious (//ranıma) about this affair Kaş. IJI 201 (kadğulanu:r, kadğulanma:k). VUD kodğulan- (kodğu:lan-) Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. kodğu:: see kadğulan-, Xak. xı at kodğulandı: | dabba'l-farasu'l-dubáb min nafsihi “the horse drove the flies away from itself Kaş. HI 201 (kodğulanu:r, kodğulanma:k). D katığlantur- Caus. f. of katığlan-, “to urge (someone) to exert himself'. N.o.a.b. Türkü vir ff. Man. TT IJI io, 88-90    
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 645 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. (ötle:-): Uyğ. vii ff. Man.-A M I 13, 4-5 (odğur-). D kodikartur- Hap. leg.?; Caus. f. of an Intrans. Den. V. fr. kodiki:, Uyf. vir ff. Bud. (if I have said that a lie is the truth and what is not is) yavızığ edgü tép kókedtürüp edgüg yaviz tép kodikarturup 'exalting evil, saying that it is good, and disparaging good saying that it is evil” Suv. r35, tt-12. Dis. GDL D kutluğ P.N./A. fr. kut, q.v.; originally 'enjoying the favour of heaven”, hence, more generally, 'fortunate, happy, blessed', and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. w. some phonctic changes, L.-w. in Pe., Doerfer 111 1568. "Türkü viri(?) kutluğ bolzu:n "may (our journey) enjoy divine favour! Xoytu Tamir İ 5-6 (ETY 11 108): viir ff. kutlu:ğ bolzu:mm /rkB 23; a.o. do. 56 (adğır): Man. TT II 10, 87-8 (ülüglüg): Uyğ. ix Boyla: Kutluğ Yarğan, Kutluğ Bağa: Tarxan Óge: P.N.s Suci 2, 3: vur ff. Man.-A M HI zo, 2 (ii) (ülüglüg): Man. arımış kópüllüg kutluğlar “the divinely favoured with purified minds” TT III 140: Dud. uluğ küçlüğ kutluğ bodisavatlar 'the great, powerful, divinely favoured Bodhisattvas” PP 45, 2-3; 0.0. do. 21, 4 etc. (ülüglüg); U III 75, 13; 8o, 27 (ulBad-); U II 36, 47 etc. (kıvliğ): Civ. TT VII 28, 17 (kivliğ) in the astronomical texts, 7T VII 1, 6, 8 and g kutluğ means "having . . . as an element” (see kut), Kutluğ is a common component in P.N.s in USp.: Xak, xr kutluğ ne: 'something blessed” (muödrak), also used as a Proper Name Kaş. / 464; kutluğka: “for the lucky man” (i-sáhibi'l-cadd) III 60, 24; several o.o. translated smubárak: KB kün ay kutlugi bar yeme kutsuzi “there are lucky and unlucky days and months” 4386: xin(?) Tef. kutlığ/kutluğ 'blessed, fortunate” 219: xiv. Rbg. (a man of truthful speech and) kutluğ yüzlüğ 'with a lucky face” R TT 997: Muh. al-mubárak kutluğ Mel. 52, 1; 56, r, Rif. 148 (kutlu:ğ), 153: Çağ. xv ff. kutluğ/kutluk mubdürakh Vel. 336; San. 283r. 23 (quotn.): (Xwar. xiv kutluk “good fortune! Qutb 146): Kom. xiv 'fortunate, blessed' kutlu CCG; Gr.: Kip. xim al-mubárak (opposed to 'unlucky! kutsrz) kutlu: Hou. 27, 3; kutlu: bars P.N., falid mubörah do. 29, 3: xiv İd. 68 (kut): al-mubárak kutlu: olsun (sic) Bul. 5, 13: Xv ka'b mübarak “(having) a blessed ankle' (kut tobukli; in margin) kutlı tobuklı TuA. 30b. 6: Osm. xiv ff. kutlu “blessed, fortunate", etc.; c.La.p. T TS I şoz, II 670; İİİ 491; IV 557. D katlış abbreviated Dev. N. (connoting mutual action) fr. katil-. S.i.s.m.]l. Xak. xr katlış “a swirl (mu'tarak) of water at the meeting point (tanátuh) of separate streams'; one says Su:v katlıştı: (sic, i.e. Perf. of *katlis-, or a scribal error for katlışı:?) Kaş. I 460: xın(?) Tef. katılış “the junction between two bodies of vvater” 205: Çağ. xv ff. ĞDL- 601 katılış (spelt) “a place where two streams meet San. 267v. 3 (quotn.). Dis. V. GDLD kadul- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of kadu:-; spelt with -d- for -d-; a superfluous kasra is added everywhere below it. Xak. xr to:n kaduldi: “the garment was sewn firmly! (sumrica) Kaş. II 134 (kadulur, kadulma:k). D katil- Pass. f. of 1. kat-; 'to be mixed with, or added to (something); with metaph. meanings like “to associate with (someone)'. S.i.m.m.l.g. Türkü virff. Man. (gods and demons, light and darkness) o1 ódün katildi “then mingled with one another” Chuas. I 7; Tyavlak?) biligipe katilip 'mingling with their evil(?) knowledge "do. 1 12-13; 0.0. do. 39, 176; M I1 5, 7 (ölüğ): Uy£. viii xan süsi: [birle:?] katıltım 'I joined up with the xan's army (Şu. N. 7 (damaged); (the Oğuz and Türkü who had formerly been in China) t[asik?]mis anta: katilmis “came out and joined (me) there' do. S 8: viri ff. Man.-A (the five gods) Ezrwa tepri üze kedilip birle katılıp erürler "are put on the god Zurvan (like a garment) and mingle with him” M I 21, 3-5 (1); a.o. do. 16, 5-6 (1 tas): Bud. ög kan birle katıldımız erser “if we have had sexual intercourse with our mother or father” TT IV 6, 35-6; él bulğakın katildimiz erser 'if we have taken part in civil disturbances' do. ro, 18; tınlığlar birle katılu karilu “mingling (Hend.) with mortals” Suv. 133, 14-15; a.0. TT V 8, s1-2: Xak. xr arpa: ügür birle: katıldı: “the barley was mixed (ixtalaja) with millet', also used of anything that is mixed with something else; and one says er ura:ğutka: katıldı: “the man had sexual) intercourse (edma"a) with the woman' Kaş. II 121 (katilur, katilma:k); bu er ol kişi: birle: tutçı: katılğa:n karılğa:n transİated “this man is an intriguer and meddler” (mixlat mizyal) "lit. is constantly meddling with people” 7 520; a.o. IJ 134 (karil-); 7 106, ro (toklı:): KB katil-, usually "to associate vvith”, is common: sakışka katılmaz senin birlikın "Thy unity is not mingled with plurality” 9; kuzt birle katlıp böri yoridı “the wolf associated with the lamb” 461; oyunka katilmasa 'a man should not get involved with gambling! 709; o.o. ro, etc. (karil-); 874 (ótgüng); 1040; 1304; 4354 (edgüleş-), 5928 (bağlan-), etc.: xin(?) Tef. katil- "to associate with; to be mixed with', etc. 204: Caf. xv ff. katış-/katıl- daxil şudan wa mamzüc şudan wa ba-ham dmixtan "to belong to, be mixed with, mix with' (Sar. 266r. 22 (quotns.): Kip. xiv katil- (v. katılan-) qatwiya “to be strong” İd. 73; ditto katil- Bul, 73v. (these are corruptions of katığlan-): xv ixtalata (kari-, sic ?error for karıl-, and) katıl- Tuh. 6b. 6. D kutal- (kuta:1-) Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of *kuta:- Den. V. fr. kut, Xak. xı kutaldı: er “the man was fortunate' (/macdid), derived fr. the phr. kut aldı: “he received good 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 646 
     
   
   
     602 DIS. V. fortune! (a/-cadd) Kaş. II 121 (kuta:lur (sic), kutalma:k). D *kodul- See koyul-. D kudul- Pass. f. of kud-. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (the king looked with anger at the deer) közine karakipa kan kudulup "his eyes and eyeballs suffused with blood” U 7V 38, 127-8: Çağ. xv ff. and Kip. xiv see koyul-. D kutul- Sec kurtul-. katlan-/ka:tlan- Preliminary note. The only early V. of this form is ka:tlan- belotv, Katlanthe Refl. Den. V. fr. 1 kat, “to form layers! and the ihe, iş first noted in San. 2660. 13 and s.Ls.m.l.. Katlan-, as an abbreviation of katığlan- is first noted in At. 299 (tarığlık) and Tef. 205 and also occurs in İd. 68 and prob. San. 266v. 13 tahammul wa şikibi”i kardan “fo be patient and long-suffering'. D ka:tlan- Hap. leg.?; Refl. Den. V. fr. 2 ka:t. Kip., Yeme:k, Oğra:k xr yığa:ç ka:tlandı: “the tree bore fruit! (famarat), among the other (Turks, including Xak.) this word is used only for the fruit of thorn bushes (al-"idah), and for cultivated (a/-ahliya) trees the word used is yemişlendi: Kaş. III 196 (ka:tlanu:r, ka:tlanma:k). ?E katlış- See katlis. Dis. GDM D katma: Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. 1 kat-; s.i.s.m.]. but not in this special sense. See Doerfer I11 1375. Xak. xi katma: yuwfa: “brcad crumpled up (mufaddan) and cooked in melted butter" (sarın) Kaş. 1 433. Dis. GDN kadın "related by marriage'; perhaps originally specifically 'father-in-law' and later used more generally. S.i.a.m.lg. vv. some phonetic changes, usually kayin and now seldom used except to qualify some other term of relationship, e.g. kayrn ata 'father-in-law'. L.-w. in Pe., etc., Doerfer YI 1611-13. Cf. yurç. Uyğ. vl ff. Bud. öz kadını yéripe teğdi "he reached the country of his own father-in-law' PP 64, 3; kadını xan "his father-in-law the king' do. 72, 5 (mistaken by Pelliot for a geog. name Kadım): xiv. Chin.-Uvg.. Dict., Lageti 159; R I 226 (ana:); O, Kur. ix ff. Mal. 17, 2 (uyar, dubious): Xak. xr kadın al-gihr “relation by marriage! Kaş. 7 403 (prov.); o.o. I 528 (kadna:ğun), İT 11o, 3 (tüpür), III 245, 7 (same prov): KB iki kadın erdi küdegü iki 'two of them were his fathers-inlaw, two his sons-in-law' 5o: ximn(?) Tef. kayın ata 'father-in-law' 194: xiv Muh. al-hamü *father-in-law' ka:yın ata:; al-hamàá “mother-in-lavv” ka:yın ana: Mel. 49, 13; Rif. 144: Çağ. xv ff. kayn (spelt) "wife's brother”, kayn ata 'wife's father; kayn ana 'wife's mother”, also spelt kayın Sar. 281v. 11; kayin the same as kayn do. 17; a.o. do. 345r. GDL 2 (yurç): Kip. xi (after Xak.) and in Vip. with -Z2-, ie. kazın Kaş, 1 403: Yağma:, Tuxsi:, Kıp., Yaba:ku:, Tatar, Ka:y, Çumul, Oğuz xı the Turks call a/H-şikr kadın, but these call it kayın Kaş. I 32, 11: Kom. xiv 'father-in-law' kayın CCI; Gr.: Kip. xii al-hamü kayın ata:, a/-hamü kaym ana:, azcladıc-ahmü” kayın karında:şla:r How. 32, 4 (all misvocalized 2oyrə): xiv ditto kayin afa... kayın ana:; /jamici kayınum atası: (ic) Bul. 9, 7: Xv hamá (küyew and) kayın ana Tul. 12b. 4. kadın 'birch tree, Betula', and in the early period “a vessel made of birch bark”, S.i.a.m.l.g. usually as kayın, SW "km. fayig; exccptionally in Osm. kayın now means 'becch tree' and, with. qualifying Adjs. 'hornbeam, alder', etc. Uyğ. vir fF. Civ. (take various ingredients and) bir uluğ kadip yuğurtka bulğap stir them into a large birch-bark vessel of yoğurt” H I 169) 0.0. du. 192-3: xiv Chin.- Uyg. Dict. 'birch bark vessel' kadın R JI 322; Ligeti 159: Xak. xı kadın ai-xalanc "bitch tree” (?, a Pe. l.-w. not translated precisely in the ordinary dicts. of either language); and in the prov. kadın ka:sına: sógüt só:lipe: “the birch trce for its bark, the willow for its sap” Kay. İİİ 369; same ptov. I 356, 20; II 134, 13; 151, 7: Yağma:, Tuxsi:, Kip., Yaba:ku:, Tatar, Ka:y, Çumul, Oğuz xi the "Turks call ai-xalanc kadın but these call it kayın Kaş. I 32, 8: (Kom. xiv 'pine tree' iy kayın CCG; Gr. 191): Kip. xit a/-xalanc kayin 14, 7. F xa:tun "lady! and the like. Although attempts have been made to connect this word etymologically with xağan/xan there is no reasonable doubt that it is taken fr. Sogdian xvat'yn (xwatér); in Sogdian xret'v means "lord, ruler! and. xwt'yn “the wife of the lord, ruler', which is precisely the meaning of xatu:n in the early period. This should normally be transcribed xatu:n, although in Kaş. the spelling is ka:tu:n in Turkish and xa:tu:n in Arabic. Survives in NE Tuv. kaday, SE "Türki xatun/xotun, NC, NW katın, SC Uzb. xotin; SW Az. ğadın, Osm. kadın meaning only "married woman, wife', with a slightly honorific flavour. Türkü virt ófüm Élbilge: xatu:niğ “my mother Queen Élbilge: 7 E 11, ILE 10; olo. 1 E25, IL E21; IE31;I N 9; xatun yok bolmiş erti: “the queen has died! T' 31: vı ff. avımçu: xatun bolzu:n “may the concubine become a queen' IrkB 38: UyfÉ. vin xatu:nin anta: altim “1 captured his queen there” Su. N ro, a.o. do. TV 8: vin ff. Bud. (a girl) Sac: xatun teg “like Queen Saci” U I/ 22, r, Kuligabati xatun “Queen Kulisavati' U III 27, 15; (my father, my mother) xatunlarım “my consorte! TT VI 40, 144; 0.o. TT X 162-3, 307, etc. : Civ. xatunka kelser 'if one comes to the queen' TT VII 29, 12: Xak. x1 ka:tu:n 'the word for any woman who is descended from (min Bandit) Afrasiyab”, prov. xa:n rg bolsa: ka:tu:n rsgr kalı:r 'if the xaqdn has a task to perform, the xátün's task is postponed! Xaş. I 410;  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 647 
     
   
   
      DIS. GDR 603 o.o. I 138 (oğla:ğu:), 376 (terken); 777 240 (kunçu:y): xın(?) Tef. xatun 'queen; lady, wife! 347: xiv Muh. xötün ka:tun Mel. 52, 14; Rif. 149: Çağ. xv ff. xatun “a name for great ladies and wives of notables” (quotn.); also “a married woman' (zer-i şathardür) (quotn.) San. 222r. 20: Xwar. xiv xatun (great) lady” Qutb 55; in Nahc. 6, 8 ff.; 192, ro ff. xatun is used specifically for “a legal wife' and kuma for “a concubine': Kom. xiv katun/xatun is fairly common and means both 'queen, lady” and 'wife, woman' CCI, CCG, Gr. 196 (quotns.): Kip. xim al-sitt “ady” ka:tu:n Hou. 28, 16: xiv katun al-sayyida “lady”, Arabicized as xàátün İd. 73: xv sayyida xatun Tul. 18b. 8: Osm. xiv to xvi xatun/xatun klsi hardly morc than 'married woman'; in several texts T TS I1 485; IV 382. Dis. V. GDND 1 katin- Hap. leg.; Reft, f. of 1 kat-. Xak. xı er talka:nka: ya:ğ katındı: "the man pretended to mix (yacdal) oil with the parched grain” Kaş. II 154 (katinu:r, katinma:k). D 2 katın- Refl. f. of 2 kat-, n.o.a.b. The Uy£. passage is obscure, but seems to belong here. Uyğ. vii ff. Civ. katığ boldt tép o:tin katunsar küzeç taşar “if it is exposed(?) to the fire on the assumption that it is strong the jug boils over” TT I 193-4; a.o. VİT 30, 14-15 (ağrığlığ): Xak. xi tulumluğ bolup katindiy "nov that you have become fully armed, you have become tough' (tagaddadta) Kaş. I 498, 21; n.m.e. D kutan- (kuta:n-) Hap. leg.; this V. which immediately follows 1 katin- is completely unvocalized and the second consonant undotted, but the -a:- in the Aor. shows that it is a Den. V. and Atalay was no doubt in restoring it as the Refl. f. of *kuta:-, see kutal-. Xak. xı kutandı: ne: “the thing became fortunate” (macdüd) Kaş. II 154 (kuta:nur, kutanma:k). D kodun- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of ko:d-, and practically syn. vv. it. Xak. xır(?) KBVP bu kaç harfkına men kumaru sana kodundum “1 have left these few words as a legacy to you” 53. D katna:- Hap. leg., but cf. katnat-; misspelt kayza:- in the MS. but between sógne:and kasna:-. Semantically connected with 2 kat-, presumably Den. V. fr. *katin Dev. N. in -ın. "Yhis word has no connection with Çağ. katna-, Sam. 267r. r which survives in SC Uzb. in such meanings as 'to attend (school) regularly; (of a bus) to maintain a service'. "This seems to be merely a Sec. f. of Çağ. katra-, ditto, which is immediately a l.-w. fr. Mong. katari- "to trot” (Kom. 781, Haltod 165) whether or not that is a native Mong. V. or derived fr. Pe. (see the translation in Sazt,). Xak. xı er anar katna:dı: a7-racul ta'abbà qabüla'l-amr soa 'atá "ala”l-ümir ava radda haldmahu "the man refused to obey the order and was insolent to the man who gave it and contradicted what he said” Kaş. IJI 302 (katna:r, katna:ma:k , see above). D katnat- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of katna:- but with no obvious Caus. meaning. Xak. xr ol anıp Só:zin katnattı: raddada halümahu marra ba"d uxrd “he violently contradicted his statements time and again” Kaş. 1] 349 (no Aor. or Infin.). Tris. GDN D kadna:ğun Hap. leg.; Collective f. of kadın. Xak. xi al-afimá' wa'l-aghàr “a woman's and a man's relations by marriage' are called Po kadna:ğun as a Hend. (a/-itba") Kaş. 528. Tris. V. GDNDF ka:tu:nlan- (xa:tu:nlan-) Refl. Den. V. fr. xa:tu:n; n.o.a.b. Xak. xr ura: fut ka:tu:nlandı: tazayyati'l-mar'a. bi-zayyi'l-xátün "the woman dressed herself up in the clothes of a great lady” Kaş. III 206 (ka:tu:nlanu:r, ka:tu:nlanma:k): xır(?) Tef. xatunlan- "to marry (a vvife xatun)” 347. Dis. ĞDR kadır 'grim, brutal, oppressive, dangerous”, and the like. The close phonetic and semantic resemblance to Ar. qadır to which Kaş. calls attention has caused some confusion and it is consistently spelt &amp;adir in the MS. of Kaş. but correctly as kağır in KB. Survives as kazır in several NE languages R I1 379; Khak. xazır, Tuv. kadır, See kayır Preliminary note. "The phr. kadir kış in Xak. suggests a connection with 1 ka:d- but that V. is Intrans. and can hardly be the base of this word. See Doerfer HI 1381. Türkü vr Kadirkan yış ('mountain forest”), which is tentatively identified with the Khingan mountains, 7 E 2; do. zı, II E 17; do. 39 may contain this word (see Xak.), or kadırğan, q.v.: viri ff. Yen. kadrr yağı:da: “among the brutal enemy” Mal. 27, 6: Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-A (the five gods can be recognized by five characteristics . . .) ikinti kadaran 'secondly by ruthlessness' (like the : god Wadjiwanta) M I 24, 11 (cf. yumsa:k): Bud. kadir yavlaklarığ "brutal, evil men” U II 58, 1 (iii); a.o, do. 59, 4 (ii); kadır sarsığ övkeliğ 'brutal, rough, and bad-tempered” TT VI 66 (and VIII O.9); a.o. U I1 35, 21-2 (azığlığ): Civ. TT I 14-15 (katığ): O. Kir. IX ff. kadır yağı:da: Mal 19, r: Xak. xt kadır (so rcad, see above) ne:p “a difficult (sa'b) thing”, hence one says kadır yé:r “a difficult place”, that is one in the mountains where there is much snow and ice: kadir kış al-zamharir 'severe cold”: Kadir “an oppressive, brutal (al-cabbàru'l-sa'b) king”: hence a/-xöqdniya have the title kadır xa:n; this word agrees with the Ar. because oppressiveness comes from power (a/-qadr), and an oppressor is one who can do (yagdir) what he likes Kaş. 1 364: tumluğ kadir Kislaka: “in the severe cold of winter // 54, 3: KB (do not be slothful, watch) ay kilkt kadir “oh man of 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 648 
     
   
   
     604 strict character' 447; (bright summer turns to) kadir kışka 1052. katir 'mule'. A l.-w. in Mong. as Façır. Survives in SW Az., Tkm. Éatir; Osm. katir, but in all other language groups, except NE, where the word is unknown, the forms kaçır/ kaşır and the like are reborrowings fr. Mong., see Shcherbak, p. 95. 1t would prob. be fanciful to see an etymological connection between this word and 1 Kat- arising fr. the mule's mixed ancestry. L.-w. in Pe., etc., Doerfer II 1395. Xak. xı katir a/-bağl “mule” Kaş. 1 364; ajo. HT 302 (kişne:-): KB (many horses in the fields) akurda katır “mules in the stables' s37o: xiv. Müh. al-bağl kastir Mel. 7o, 7; Rif. 181: Xwar. xiti(?) Og. 273 (u:d): Kom. xiv. ^mule' katir CCI; Gr.: Kip. xii al-bağl ka:tir Hou. iz, ro: xiv. katir. a/-bağl, also with -t- İd. 68; katir ditto 73; 5ağdi katirlar Bud, 16, 8: xv öağl katır Kar, 39, 6; ör, zo, Tuh. 7b. 8 a.o.o.: Osm. xiv TTS I 7 (ağız). kotur various kinds of cutaneous disease, human and animal, 'scrofula, scurf, scab, the itch, mange”, etc. S.i.a.m.L.g.; cf. uduz. L.-w. in Pe., etc, Doerfer 1I 1549. Uy. vui ff. Civ. kotur emi “a remedy for the itch(?)” H 7 169 (ay-), 174; a.o. 11 22, 27: (Xak.) xiv Müh. al-carab “the itch”, etc. kotur Mel. 65, 3; Rif. 164: Çağ. xv ff. kotur xasta wa da'if kalb "a sick, weak (dog)! Vel. 335 (quotn.); kotur (spelt) “an animal whose hair has fallen out (zixta bágad), in Ar. carab, in Pe. gar (quotn.); also used for gari “mange” (quotn.) Sar. 283r. 25: Xwar. xiv kotur 'scrofulous' and the like Qutb 141: Kom. xtv "scurf” kotur CCG; Gr.: Kip. xv kotur is included in a long list of words translating ka/b “dog” Tuh. 30b. 11. D kadrak (kadra:k) Conc. N. in -k fr. *kadra:-, Den. V. fr. kadir, see kadran-, lit. 'something hard, rough', and the like. Survives as kayrak “vhetstone” in NC Kir., Kzx.; SC Uzb. (kayrok) and several NW languages (cf. bile:ğü:). In NC Kir. it also means "hard, unirrigated land”, and in SVV Osm. 'shifting sandy soil', which seems a further development of this concept, but in Osm. it now more often means 'slippery ground”, perhaps owing to some confusion with 2 *ka:d-. "The translation in Kaş. is perhaps influenced by a supposed etymological connection with 1 kat. L.-w. in Pe. and Mong., Doerfer H1 1599. Xak. xi kadrak (MS. kadra&amp;) ma'átrfu'l-cibül va mahaünihd 'folds and contortions in the mountains'; hence one says kat kadrak (kadrak) ditto Kaş. I 471; a.o. I 320 (1 kat): Çağ. xv ff. kayrak sang-i fasán “vhetstone”, also called bilew Sar. 281: v. 3. (D) kudruk “the tail of an animal'; morphologically Pass. Dev. N. fr. *kudur-, cf. kudurğa:k, kudurgu:n; the origin of Mong. kudurğa 'crupper' (Haenisch 7o, Kow. 919). S.i.a.m.l.g., usually as kuyruk, Türkü viri ff. tığ at kudru:kun “the roan horse's tail' rk B 50; a.o.(?) in a corrupt phr. in do. 16: Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. (in a list of constellations) irbiş DIS. GDR kudruki “the panther's tail' 7T' V/ 93: Xak. xı kudruk (MS. in the main entry Rkudruh, elsewhere usually kudruk) a. gencric term for "the: tails! (adiáb) of all kinds of animals; one says ko:y kudruki: “a sheep's fat tail' (alya); at kudruk:i: 'horse's tail (gan?) (verse), kuş kudrukt: "bird”s tail' (prov.): kudruk used metaph. (vukná bii) for “anus” (al-fagha), so one says kudruki: ötğe:n (unvocalized) kişi: insán. nabbádcul- (first two letters undotted, Atalay's emendation) faqla “aman who is constantly breaking wind' Kaş, [ 472; o.0. I $13 (Sabit-); HI 164 (suvvik), 256 (sabi:-), etc.: KB balık kudrukt “the tail of (the constellation) Pisces” 66: xırr(?) 7ef, kuyruk "tail 216: xiv. Mu. al-alya ku:yruğ yağı: Mel. 66, s, Rif. 165 (kuyruk); a/-danb kuyrik 69, 14 (one MS. only): Çağ. xv ff. kuyruğ/ kuyruk 'tail' (dun), in Ar, danb; also the name of the star "Canopus! Sam 292v. rq: X war. xiv kudruk 'tail' Qutb 142; Nahc. 53, 2: Kom. xiv. 'tail kuyruğ CCI; Gr.: Kip. xut al-alya kuyruğ ya:ğı: Hou. ış, 18: xiv kuyruk al-danb İd. yy, al-alya kuyruk, also al-danb Bul. 5, iş: xv. dühnü l-alya kuyruf yağı: Kav. 63, ış alya kuyruk Tu. 4b. 3. Dis. V. GDRVUD katar- pec. to Kaş. and described as the "Turkish (i.e. Xak.) equivalent of kaytar-, q.v.; prima facie a crasis of *kadtur- Caus. f. of 2 *ka:d- or 2 kadit-, but the second -a- is a difficulty, perhaps a scribal error for -ucaused by a false analogy w. kaytar-; see katart- and katrun-. Xak. xı ol ati katardı: radda"l-xayl sva. şarafahd "an wachihi “he turned. the horse back and prevented it from going in the direction in which it was going”, similarly one says (01) yağı: katardı: "he turned the enemy (etc,) back" Kaş. 77 74 (verse; katarur, katarma:k); a.o. III 193 (kaytar-); katarğa:n 7 5:7, 16 (sec kaytar-). D kadir- “to twist back, turn back (Trans.)', and the like; presumably Caus. f. of 2 *ka:d-. S.r.a.m.l.g. as kayır- and the like, except SW where kayır- is a Scc. f. of kadğur-. Xak. xı ol anın boynin kadırdı: "he twisted (/azered) his neck' (etc.); and one says ol anın só:zin kadırdı: "he contradicted (or refuted, radda) his statement” Kaş. IJ 76 (kadira:r, kadirma:k); o.o. 7 370, 22; 508, 2; II 74, 13; 164, 14 and / 144, 9, where the text is in some disorder: KB sózin kadra kördüm 'I tried to contradict (or refute) his statement! 6244: xm?) Tef. kadrafkayra Ger. used as an Adv. (to turn, send, come) “back, backwards' 192-4: X war. xiv kayra Adv. (of movement) *backwards'; (of time) “again, afresh' 128: Kom. xiv “to take back” kayra/kayrı/kayırı al- CCI; Gr. D katur- Caus. f. of 2 kat-, “to harden', lit. or metaph. S.i.m.m.l.g., not NE or SW. Xak. xı ol yumga:k ne:pni: katurdt: “he hardened (sallaba) the soft thing" ş as soft iron is annealed (yudakkar); and one says ta:ş yer anı: katurdi: foreign countries (i.c. travel abroad)  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 649 
     
   
   
      DIS. V. ĞDRhardened him), that is made him experienced (mucras muhakkak) Kaş. II 74 (katurur, katurma:k); (katurğa:n in / 516 is an error for katğurğa:n). D kattur- Hap. leg.?; Caus. f. of 1 kat-; cf. kartur-. Xak..xı ol yrp katturdi: “he ordered that the thread should be twisted (bi-fatli'l-xayt) into the needlc'; and one says ol talka:nka: ya:ğ katturdı: "he had the parched grain mixed (acdaha) with oil; also used of any two things when they are mixed (xuittz) Kaş. II 189 (katturur, katturma:k). D kutar- See kurtğar-. VU kodur- (MS. Kkodur-, but between kadir and kedür-) Hap. leg.?; morphologically obscure, Xak. xı ol bu: t:ska: kodurdi: “he took great trouble (cadda) over this affair and made strenuous efforts over it" (bölağa fihi) Kaş. II 76 (kodurur, kodurma:k); the word may also occur in 7 144, 7 but is not translated there. *kudur- See kudruk, etc. VUD 1 kutur- 'to pour out, empty', and the like; prima facie a crasis of *kudtur- Caus. f. of kud- ; it is, however, odd that it survives as kotar- with the same meaning in NW Kk., Nog. and for “to dish up (a meal) in SW xx Anat. SDD 964, since this suggests an earlier form *kotor-. Xak. xı ol unuğ kuturdi: “he poured (afra£a) the flour from one vessel into another” Kaş. JJ 71 (kuturur, kuturma:k), ka:b kuturdi: "he emptied (/arrağa) the vessel of its contents" TI 164, 16: kuturmis ka:b “an empty (mafrüg) vessel! IJ 170, 6: KB sevinçin tolu tut sakingin kutur “keep his joy full and pour away his anxiety' 117; a.0. 1455: Kom. Xiv. "to pour out, empty' xotar- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xın ğarafa "to dish up” (VU) kotir- Hor. 34, $: XIV afrağa (VU) kotar- (the vocalization is chaotic and partly lacking, but this seems the likeliest) Bid. 29r.: xv garafa'l-fa'àm (VUY kotar- Kav. 74, 17; Tuh. 27a. 1: Osm. xiv to xvi (VU) kotar- (1) “to empty'; (2) “to dish up”: in several texts T7TS 7 487; Il] 479; IV 543. (D) 2 kutur- 'to be excessive, exceed reasonable limits” in various applications. Morphologically obscure but cognate to kutuz. S.i.a.m.l.g., usually 'to rave, be mad', and the like. Cf. Doerfer H1 1439. Uyğ. viu ff. Man. övke nizvani üze kuturup 'suffering from the passion of anger to excess' TT 111 29-30: Xak. oğla:n kuturdt: "the boy was lighthearted and persisted in his wantonness' (rtáha . . . wa lacca fi mucünihi); and one says tarif kuturdi: “the crop, vegetation, etc. thrived' (zağd), originally (it meant that) something “exceeded its due measure' (cágvaza "an miqdürihi) Kaş, II 74 (Aor. omitted, kuturma:k); kuturma: /à ta'du fawrak "do not behave outrageously' 7 508, 3: xiv Muh. (?) bafrün “pert, overbearing', and the like kutu:rmiş Rif. r49 (only): Çağ. xv ff. kutur(spelt, “vith -u-") diweána şudan “to be mad” 6o Sah. 282r. 27 (quotn.), kudur- ('with -u-") same as kutur- 284r. 3 (quotn.): Kom. xiv “to be overbearing' kutur- CCG, Gr.: Kip. xıl al-kalab 'hydrophobia, rabies! kuturmak Hou. 33, 4. D kadirt- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of kadir-. Xak. xı ol anıp boynın kadırttı: alwá "unuqahu “he had his neck twisted' Kas. 7/7 431 (kadirtur, kadırtma:k). D katart- (?katirt-) Hap. leg.; vocalized as below; Caus. f. of katar- which was perhaps really katir-. Xak. xr ol atığ katartfı: “he ordered that the horse should be turned back' (bi-radd) Kaş. III 43o (katirtur, katirtma:k, stc). D kadril- Pass. f. of kadir-; “to twist (Intrans.); to be twisted (Pass.)'. S.i.a.m.t.g. usually as kayril-/kayiril-. Xak. xı anin bo:ynı: (mis-spelt bo:yrni:) kadrıldı: “his neck twisted' (/tatod), also used when it is twisted by someone else (altàáhu ğayruhu), Intrans. and Pass. (yata"addü wa là yata"adda) Kaş. II 235 (kadrılu:r, kadrılma:k): Kip. xv /atod kayrıl- (and mayrıl-) Tu. 32a. 12. VUD 1 kutrul- Hap. leg.?; Pass. f. of 1 kutur-. Xak, xı su:v olma:dın (MS. alma:din) kutruldi: “the water (or any other liquid) was poured (ufriga) from the şar” Kaş. II 234 (kutrulu:r, kutrulma:k). S 2 kutrul- See kurtul-. D kadran- Hap. leg.; Refi. f. of *kadra:-, which s.i.a.m.lg. except SW as kayra-/ kayıra- “to whet, sharpen' and, less often, “to gnash the teeth'. See kadrak. Xak. xı beg apa:r kadrandı: “the beg was furious (Farida) with him and his conduct and dealings with him were harsh' ('asura) Kag. II 249 (kadranu:r, kadranma:k; these two with -d-); 2.0. 7I 267 (kadirlan-). D katrun- Refl. f. of katar-, lit. 'to turn oneself back'. 'The form suggests that the basic V. must have been katir- or katur-, n.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (when he saw the demons King Castana) yürekin katrunup (assumed the form of the chief of the warriors) U IV 8, 15; v. G. translated 'steeling his heart', implying a Refl. f. of katur-; this may be right, though the word would be Hap. leg., but the narrative implies some change and 'changing his mind” seems likelier: Xak. xı küle:r er katrundi: “the laughing man stopped himself" (laughing; imtana'a); its origin is changing one's mind about something (al-harràm fi'l-amr); hence one says ol mana: yarma:k bé:rür erke:n katrundı: "he was giving me money (etc.) and then changed his mind and refrained” (harina sva mtana'a minhu) Kaş. II 249 (katrunu:r, katrunma:k). (E) kutrar- Atalay lists this as a Xak. word, but in fact Kaş. İT 199, zı ff. says that “to save” might perhaps logically be kutrar- but is in fact kutğar- (kurtğar-) because kutrar-, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 650 
     
   
   
     606 particularly in the Aor. kutrarur would have had too many rs in it. D kadris- Recip./Co-op. f. of kadir-; both forms Hap. leg. Xak. xı ol menin birle: boyu:n kadrışdı: "he competed with me in twisting(fi layy) necks' (etc.), and one says ol ikki: sö:z kadrışdı: “they two contradicted (or refuted, zadda) one another's statements” Kaş, H 218 (verse; no Aor. or Infin.): ola:r ikki: boyu:n kayrışdı: "they two competed in twisting necks' (etc.) 277. 194 (kayrışu:r, kayrışma:k). VUD 1 kutruş- Hap. leg., Co-op. f. of 1 kutur-. Xak. xı ol mapa: ka:b kutruşdi: "he helped me to empty (fi 1fr42) the vessel” (etc.) Kaş. 11 218 (kutruşu:r, kutruşma:k). D 2 kutruş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of 2 kutur-. Xak. xı oğla:n kutruşdi: “the boys played and enjoyed themselves! (/a"/5a . . . ta maşafü) Kaş. 11 218 (kutruşu:r, kutruşma:k). Tris. GDR VUD koduru: Ger. of kodur- used as an Adv. qualifying V.s and less often Adjs.; properly 'energetically, vigorously" znd, more vaguely, 'extremely'. Pec. to Uyğ. Uy£. vit ff. Bud. munga koduru ingiklayu “lamenting so vigorously U III 35, 27; a.0. 22, 17; koduru tıplan 'listen attentively” TT VI 383; Kuan. 176; koduru tanlançığ erürler “are extremely marvellous" Suv. 348, 3; 0.0. U II 7, 6 etc. (kolula:-). VUD kodurçuk Hoap. leg.; Dev. or Den.(?) N. origin obscure; al-kayd is normally an A.N. meaning 'cunning, deccit', and the like, but must here be a Conc. N. meaning “doll”, Cf. kabarçak. Xak. xı kodurguk “a doll” (a/-hayd), that is models in the shape of people (tamátil 'alà sirati'l-nàs) which girls make to play with Kaş. 7 sor. PUD kudurçak Hap. leg.; this word appears in a section headed fa'al'al of words containing five consonants of which one is -W- or -y-, e.g. bulğayuk, sarkayuk but is spelt kudu:(ak or kuru:gak; the meaning suggests that it is a Dev. N. fr. *kudur-, and the text perhaps originally had kuyu:rgak. Xak. xt kudurgak(?) al-'uj'ug “the tail-bone, coceyx” Kaş. Hl 179. D kadırğa:k Hap. leg.; Dev. N. (connoting repeated action) fr. kadır-, lit. “something constantly twisted, or vvrinkled”, Xak. xt kadırğa:k maclı”l-yad mina'l-'amal “a blister on the hand caused by manual labour” Kaş. I şoz. D kudurğa:k Pec. to Kaş., Dev. N. fr. kkudur-. Xak. xı kudurğa:k ahad zaylayi'l-qaba xalfa(n) “one of the two skirts of a robe at the back! Kag. I 502; a.0. 7 17, 3. PUD kadirja:n perhaps Dev. N. (connoting repeated action); since both in the Brahmi texts and Uyğ. script the same letter is used DIS. V. GDRfor t and d it is uncertain whether it is derived fr. katir- or kadir-, both of which are semantically possible. N.o.a.b. Türkü vri sec kadir: Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. Sanskrit kofátakt a kind of tree, Trichosautus diocca TT VIII 4.39 (spelt hatırğan): xiv. Chin--Uyğ. Dict. huat 'Sophora japonica, a kind of acacia' (Giles 5,028) R II 327; Ligeti, p. 159 (transcribed Aa-ti-érh-han ?kadırğan or - kan). PU katturğa:n See kakurğa:n. D kudurgu:n N.o.a.b. Pass. or Intrans. Dev. N. fr. *kudur-; 'crupper'. Xak, xi kudurğu:n fafarı”l-sarc 'the crupper of a saddle Kaş. 1 518; a.o. 1 17, 6. D katırlığ Hap. leg.?, P.N./A. fr. katır. Xak. xı katırlığ er "a man who owns mules' (bagl) Kaş. I 494. D kuturma: Hap. leg.; Pass. Dev. N. presumably fr. 2 kutur-; the cap in question may be that worn by high Uyğ. dignitaries with vertical peaks described by v. G. in 'Die Dreizack-Kappe uiguriseher Würdentráger', UAŞ 36 (1964), p. 331. Xak. x1 kuturma: bórk 'a cap which has two peaks (or flaps, canáha, lit. wings') in front and behind” Kag. İ 490. Tris. V. ĞDRD kadraklan- Hap. leg.; partially mis-spclt; Refl. Den. V. fr. kadrak. Xak. xi ta:ğ kadraklandı: kaiura. facacu'l-cabal wa. huzunuhu 'the mountain had many ravines and rugged places! Kaş, II 27s (kadraklanu:r, kadraklanma:k). D kadirlan- Refl. Den. V. fr. kadir; survives in NE Sag., Sor, Tel. kazırlan- “to rage, to be angry” R II 38o. (Uy. vur ff. Bud. this word has been misread for katığlan- in U 77 46, 58, sce kin-): Xak. xı er kadırlandı: “the man pretended that he had a harsh nature” ('asura tab'uhu); its origin is kadrandı: (mis-spelt kadrindi:) and this is more correct (aşahh) Kaş. 11 267 (kadırlanu:r, kadirlanma:k). Dis. ĞDS D kutsuz Priv. N./A. fr. kut, “not enjoying heavenly favour, unfortunate, unlucky”, and the like. S.i.s.m.1. Uyğ. viri ff, Bud. (they perished in the sea) kutsuz suvilar (error for suvları) üçün “because of its ill-omened waters' (they all perished) PP 54, 1; a.o. TT VI ; (ülüğsüz): Xak. xı kutsuz al-mudbir fi'l-umür *unlucky in one's affairs” Kaş. I 457 (prov.): KB 4386 (kutlug): xu(?) KBVP bu kutsuz yavuz tép 'saying “this is unlucky and evil”” 49: xın(?) Tef. kutsuz “unfortunate” 219 (under kut): Kip. xır ali-maşüm 'unlucky, inauspicious' (opposite to al-mubürah kutlu:) kutsuiz Hou. 27, 3: XV maşüm kutsız Tuh. 33a. 7; ha"b mahş (? meaning; opposite to ka'b mubürak, see kutluğ) kutsız tobikli do. 3ob. 7: Osm. xivff. kutsuz 'unlucky, ill-omened”, ctc.; c.i.a.p. T'TS I 503; 11 672; İİİ 492; IV 558. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 651 
     
   
   
      DIS. Dis. GDS DF kadas (ka:das) N. of Association fr. 1: ka:, q.v.; lit. “member of the same family, kinsman', sometimes used more vaguely for *ncighbour, comrade, friend”. N.o.a.b.; in the medieval period became corrupted to kadaş and thence ultimately to kayaş, its form as a l.-w. in Pe., Doerfer III 1592. Türkü viri ff. Man. Chuas. 197-8 (adag): Yen. kuyda: kadaşıma: kuncuyima: adrılu: bardım “1 have been parted from my kinsfolk in the women's quarters and my consorts and have gone (from this world)! Mal. 29, 3: Uyğ. vin if. Man. (stand up) kamuğ begler kadaslar 'all begs and kinsmen' M 7I 9, 4: Bud. kadas “kinsman”, sometimes more specifically 'brother', occurs sometimes by itself TT VIII N.4; PP 35, s, 53, 4: 69, 4, but more commonly in the phr. ka kadaş see 1 ka: Civ. kadaş normally occurs in the phr. ka kadaş see 1 ka:, but occasionally in USp. in the phr. tuğmışım kadaşım “my progeny and kinsfolk': O. Kir. ix ff. kadaş 'kinsfolk, fellow clansmen' is very common in funerary monuments as one of the groups from whom the deceased has been parted by death; it sometimes occurs by itself (though there usually in association with wife and sons), and in the phr. ekinim kadaşım Mal. 3, r, 1I, 5; 45, 7; 6şim kadaşım do. 16, 2(?); 18, 4 and yüz er/yüz kadaşım do. ro, 2; 42, 2; 49, 1: Xak. xı kadaş al-garib mina'l-ixwàün “a kinsman” I 369; o.o. / 407 (2 kaz) and about a dozen others translated al-qarib or al-ax 'brother', sometimes spelt kada:ş or kadaş: KB (knowledge is) ked bağırsak kadaş “a very compassionate kinsman” 317; bilişip ne barmu adaş ya kadaş “vhat acquaintances have you, comrades or kinsmen?” 524; 0.0. 1327, 2575, 3209 (1 kaz): xın(?) Tef. kadaş/kazaş “brother, kinsman” 192-3; a.0. 198 (1 kat): xiv Muh. al-qaraba *kindred' ka:ya:ş Mel. 49, z (Rif.ı43 yağu:k): Çağ. xvff. kayaş is used in Hend. with uruk, for example they say uruk kayaş majád wa aqwám 'descendants and clans'; uruk can be used by itself but not kayaş San. 281r. 22 (quotns.); o.o. Vel. 98; San. 7rv. 10-14 (uruğ): Xwar. xiv kadaş 'kinsman' Qutb 127; kayaş ditto 128; a.o, 126 (1 ka:); kadaş Nağc. 48, 15; kayaş do. 120, 6; 383, 8. kadış 'strap'; s.i.a.m.lg., usually as kayış, its form as a l.-w. in Pe., Doerfer IIl 1414. Cf. Sidrum, yarındak. Xak. xı kadış “a strap' (al-sayr) which is cut as a strip from the hide of a slaughtered beast! Kaş, 1 369; o.o. do. 499 (bakanlığ), JII ro (yétiz); 325 (toku:la:-): xiv. Muh. (under “cobbler”) ai-sayru'l-£aliz “a thick strap! ka:yı:ş Mel. 59, 14; Rif. 158; (under 'horse furniture") a/-sayr qa:yış 71, 105 173 (but translating sadadu'l-sarc 'saddlestraps); a.o. 71, 14; 174 (üzepü:): Çağ. xv ff. kayış “a strap (fasma) that is a long strip of leather San. 281 v. 16: Kom. xiv 'strap' xayş CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv kayış al-sayr İd. 77: xv al-sayr kays (sic) Kav. 64, 4; kayış Tuh. | 19b. 3.  GDY 607 Dis. V. GDS- : D kadus- (MS. in error?, kadig-) Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of kadu:-. Xak. xr ol mapa: tom kaduşdiı: "he helped me to sew the garment with strong stitches' ( fi şamraca . . . wahwa xiyata mu'akkada); also used for competing Kaş. 11 93 (no Aor., kaduşma:k). D katış- Co-op. f. of 1 kat-; s.i.a.m.l.g. except SE(?) with some extended meanings. Xak. xı ol menin birle: talka:nka: ya:ğ katışdı: translated "he helped me to mix (f? cadh) oil with the parched grain'; also used for competing Kaş. /1 89 (katışu:r, katigma:k; the. two alternative. meanings inadvertently reversed): Çağ. xv ff. San. 266r. zə (katıl-): Xwar. xiv katış- “to mix, or associate with' (people Dat.) Qutb 136: Kip. xv muxlat 'mixed together' katışıptır (sic) Tuh. 34b. 12. D kıdış- Co-op. f. of ktd-; survives with a rather wide range of meanings as kıyış- in some NE languages and SW Osm.; Tkm. Éryis-. Xak, xi ol mana: börk kidisdi: "he helped me to sew a brim (bi-xiyàfati'l-hatàr) on the hat'; also for helping to sew anything which has a surround or border (/ahu istidüra ta kifaf) Kaş. II 93 (Kidigu:r, kidigma:k, MS. everywhere 2ıdış-): ol mapa: yığa:ç kiyigdt: “he helped me to cut the wood on a slant' (muharrafa(n)) ; also used for competing Kaş. III 189 (kiyişu:r, kiyişma:k): KB(?) “aziz ol kıyışmaz anipdin bu “izz “he is gracious and does not deprive him of this grace' verse, prob. spurious, in the Vienna MS. after 1248: Xwar. xiv (if you do not walk in their ways and) bir yapka kıyışsap *turn aside in another direction' (I will loathe you) Nahc. 318, 135. 7 D koduş- Recip. f. of ko:d- ; survives, with much the same meaning, only(?) in SW Türki koyaş-/fkoyuş-. Xak. xı ola:r bi:r bi:rke: xg koduşdi: “they left (taraka) the matter to each other and relied (ztzakala) on one another” Kaş. I2 94(kodusu:r, koduşma:k, MS. everywhere kodug-). D *kudus- See kuyus-. Tris. GDS DF kadaşlık Hap. leg.; A.N. fr. kadaş. Xak. xı kadaşlık al-uxwwswa wwa'l-gáraba 'bloodrelationship, kinship” Kaş. 7 503. Tris. V. ĞDŞD kağışla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. kadış. Xak. xı ol kö:nüğ kadışla:dı: qadda mina'l-şayrim sayr "he cut a strap in a strip from the tanned leather” Kaş. ZE 335 (kadışla:r, kadışla:ma:k). Dis. ĞDY VUF kutay n.o.a.b., Rad. and Thomsen were no doubt right in translating this word, which occurs in two lists of precious objects, as “silk fabric! of some kind; it is presumably  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 652 
     
   
   
       608 a Chinese phr.; the second syllable might be tai 'girdle' (Giles 10,554). Türkü vri (their white silver) kırğağlığ kutayin “bordered silk fabric(?)' (and musk-scented embroidered brocade) 4I N 11; alo, do. 3 (ésgü:tl:). Dis. GDZ D kağız “the bark of a tree', and in the early period specifically “cinnamon bark'; perhaps Dev. N. fr. 2 *ka:d- in the sense of something which detaches itself or is detached from the tree. Uyğ. vir ff. Man.-A (in a series of similes) yétincsiz bilğe ığaç kadızı “the bark of the broad tree of wisdom' M TT 31, ı (ii): Civ. kadiz 'cinnamon bark” appears, together with pepper, cardamom, and other spices in several prescriptions H 16, 107; TT VII 22, s: xiv. Chin.-Uyg. Dict. kuei hua “cinnamon flower! (Giles 6,435 5,002) kadiz çeçek Ligeti 159; R II 329: Xak. xı kadiz lihá'u'l-sacara "the bark of a tree” Kaş. 1 365. VUD koduz n.o.a.b.; the precise meaning seems to be 'femme sole', that is a woman who no longer has a husband because he is either divorced or dead, less narrow than tu:l widow". Prob. Dev. N. fr. ko:d- in the sense of something abandoned. "Türkü vı T 48 (ağız): Uyğ. vir (I defeated them and) yilkrsin barımı:n kizi:n koduzrn kelürtim 'carried off their livestock, movables, (unmarried) girls and femmes soles” Şu. E 3: Xak. xı koduz al-mar'atu'l- tayyib "a femme sole” Kaş. I 365. kotuz (kotoz) “yak", Survives in this meaning in SE Türki kotaz: NC Kzx. kodas, Kir. kotos: SC Uzb. kütas, SW Osm. kotaz/ kotas (Red. *vulgarly xotoz”), see Shcherbak, p. 103. In SW Az., Tkm. &amp;otaz; Osm. kotaz also means 'a tuft of yak's hair worn as an ornament”. L.-w. in P'e., etc. in both meanings, Doerfer 111 1414, Xak. xi kotuz bagaru'l-rcahş 'a wild bovine! Kaş. I 365: KB(as vicious as a bear) kotuz teg Öçi “as spiteful as a yak” 2311 (but this might be kutuz “mad dog”), ya kuzda yorığlı kalın köp kotuz “or large herds of yaks ranging the northern slopes of the mountains' (or bulls, cows, and oxen in the plains) 5372: Kip. xiv kotuz a/-barcam (Pe. pargam) "a yak's tail', that is (a tuft of) hair which is hung on horses' necks 14. 73. (D) kutuz “mad”, and esp. “a mad dog”, connected etymologically with kutur-. Survives in SW Osm. kuduz “rabies”, mad, unrestrained”, of animals, human beings and even some kinds of vegetation. Xak. xı kutuz ıt al-kalbu'l-kalib “a mad dog” Kaş. I 365: KB 2311 (?, see kotuz): Çağ. xv ff. kutuz (spelt) dücdna “mad”, also pronounced kuduz Sar. 283v. 1 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv kutuz it Quzb 146; Kip. xv "uqur mina'l-kiláb "of dogs, prone to bite' kutuz Tul. 25b. 1. Tris. GDZ D kadızğaklığ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. a Den. N. fr. kadiz. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud, (cold-faced Brahmans) kadızğaklığ éligin “vith their   DIS. GDY hands rough like the bark of a tree! U //7 17, 18. D kotuzluğ Tlap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. kotuz. Xak. xr kotuzluğ er "a man who owns wild cattle (i.e. yaks)' Kaş. 1 495. "Tris. V. GDZD kadizlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. kadiz; the basic f. survives as kayızla- "to remove the bark of a tree' in NW Kaz. R 1I 98. Xak. xi yığa:ç kadızlandı: sabata [i'l-şacar lihà “the tree grew bark” Kaş. II 267 (kadizlanu:r, kadızlanma:k). VUD koduzlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. koduz. Arğu: xı er koduzlandı: “the man married a femme sole” (fayyib) Kaş, II 267 t&amp;oduzlanu:r, koduzlanma:k). Mon. GG ka:ğ ko:ğ/ka:k ko:k Hap. leg.; onomatopoeics. Xak. xt ka:z ka:ğ ko:ğ etti: "the duck (properly “goose”) made a noise (sáha) like this onomatopoeic' (al-/kàya) Kaş. İT 128— ka:z ka:k ko:k etti: “the duck (goose) made a noise in this way' (al-nazw') III 130. 1 kak/ka:k the general connotation is 'something dried', often with the implication that it is so dry that it is splitting. S.i.a.m.l.g. L.-w. in Pe., etc., Doerfer III 1397. Xak. xi kak al-faliq 'a dried segment of something'; hence one says erük kakı: 'dried split plums' (etc.): kak et a//alımı”l-qadid meat cut in strips and dried', also used of anything that is cut in strips and dried (faqaddada): kak al-ğadir “a dry river- or lake-bed” (verse) Kaş. 11 282: (after ka:k ko:k) and a/-/a/iq is called ka:k ko:k (MS. ka:ko:k) as a jingle ('alà tariqi'I-itbà') III 130; ka:k 'dried split plums' (etc.) III i55: xiv. Muh.(?) (under *'horses") ai-masbüq “the loser! (opposite to a/-sábiq "the vvinner”) ka:k Rif. 171 (only; the same word used metaph.?): Çağ. xv ff, kak 'anything dried" (Rurumug); in Xorasan and Samarkand they dry melons like other fruit, and when they need them they moisten them with water and they become like fresh melons Vel 323 (quotn.); kak (1) xuşk 'dry' (quotn.); (2) 'rainwater which collects in open ground (daşt) and forms a pool (tálàb) and disappears' San. 274v. ro: Kip. xiv ka:k af-qalt, that is “a hole in the rock in which water collects! Id. 73; al-qadid kak et/ (PU sógrük/kuru: et) Bul. 8, 9: xv qadid kak Tuh. 29a. 6. 2 kak Hap. leg.; the name of a game bird, prob. of onomatopoeic origin, cf. ka:ğ ko:f. Xak. xr KB kak is included, with swan, pelican(?), crane, bustard, and three other unidentified birds in a list of birds which can be hunted 5377. S 3 ka:k See ka:f. ki: "animal dung', particularly when used as a fertilizer. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE(?) as kiğ/ kiy; cf. komuk, 1 yin, etc, Uyğ. vir ff. Civ.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 653 
     
   
   
      DIS. V. GGAH II 26, 84 (ükmek): Xak. xı kı:ğ 'dung' (al-zibl) with which land is manured (yuzbal) Kaş. III 129: Çağ. xv ff. kik bişkil 'sheep's dung! (San. 297v. 27: Tkm. xri: al-ba'r “animal dung' kr (miss-pelt kayg; Kip. mayak) Hou. 15, s: Osm. xiv ff. kiğ 'dried animal dung'; c.La.p. 7TS 1 asa: İl 623; III 443: İV 506. ?D ko:ğ “dust” and the like; perhaps Dev. N. fr. *ko:- in the sense of something that settles on the ground. Survives in some NE languages as kok “ashes, scurf” R II 507; xox Khak. *burning ashecs”, Sag. “barley chaff” Bas. 289; NW Krım kok “dust” R IJ soy. Cf. to:ğ, to:z. Uyğ. viu ff. Bud. (we too at the end of a long life) munçulayu koğ bolur “vill become dust like this" US). 97, 17; (Sanskrit lost) dyanlığ koğı erser meaning uncertain; acc. to v. G. the parallel Sanskrit text requires some meaning like “the axle of meditation' TT VIII A. 34: Xak. xı ko:ğ al-qadá fi'l-'ayn awil-ta'àm 'fine dust in the eye or in food" Kaş. III 128: Osm. xiv to xvi koğ “hot ash, spark'; in several texts T TS III 464; IV 530; xvii ko in Rümi, şixara-i ataş “hot ash, spark” Sar. 288v. 21. Mon. V. GG*ka:B- See ka: fut, ka:ğıl, ka:gu:n, ka:ğur-. kak- “to strike, tap", esp. “to knock on (a door); prob. onomatopoeic by origin, S.ia.m.lg. with some extended meanings. Xak. xi ant: bagda: (? so read, not bagra:) kakdı: “he tapped him lightly (gara'ahu . . . xafifa(n)) on the head” Kaş. II 293 (kaka:r, kakma:k); yaşnat kılıç başı: (MS. in error başını:) üze: kakkıl yara: “make your sword flash over his head, strike, and split it” 7I 356, 18; o.o. İ 73, 9; 102, 4: Çağ. xv ff. kak- “to strike (zadan) one thing against another” San. 274r. 8: Xwar. xiv kak- 'to knock on (a door) Qutb 131: Kip. xi daqqa mün qar'i'l-bàb "to knock on a door' kak-, also safaga'l-rahn “to strike hands on a bargain' Hos. 40, 4: xiv kak- gara'a Íd. 73: Osm. xiv ff. kak(occasionally xiv, xv kax-) normally “to knock on a door'; in some texts looks like a Sec. f. of kalk- 77S I 404; II 565; 111 396; IV 453. 1 kok- properly 'to give out a smell of burning”, hence by extension “to smell unpleasant or putrid, to stink'. Survives only(?) in SW Az. ğoxu-/koxu-, Osm. kok- ; Kaj.'s alternative form ko:k- may be an error. Xak. xi ya:ğ otta: kokti: “the smoke of the (burning) oil rose in the air” (irtafa'a); it is like when a lamp is extinguished and smoke rises from it; similarly when meat is burnt and its smell of burning (qutáruAu) rises, one says et kokdi: Kaş. HI 293 (koka:r, kokma:k); et ko:kdi: *the smell of burning meat rose' also of the smoke of a lamp when it is extinguished (2 ko:k- follows) 777 184: Xwar. xii kok- (or kbku- ?) “to smell' (Intrans.) “AZ 29, $8: Kip. xiv kok- fáhat ráyihatu'l-haráq “there was a smell of burning! İd. 73: xv fáha koku(Tkm. koksu-) Tu. 28a. ro. 8641125 609 ?D 2 ko:k- 'to decrease, diminish', and the like; perhaps Emphatic f. of *ko:-. Survives in the same meaning in NE Sag., Sor kok-; Kumd. ko:k- R 7] 508-9; Khak. xox-, Uyğ. vill ff. Civ. (your advantages and honour have diminished) edin tavarig kokti “your property and wealth have decreased' T'T I 58-9: Xak. xi su:v ko:kdi: “the water. decreased (ğdda) from what it had been and subsided” (sahana), and one says 8r:Ş ko:kdi: “the swelling suhsided” (sakana) Kaş. III 184 (ko:ka:r, ko:kma:k). Dis. GGA kikr: Hap. leg.; onomatopoeic; cf. kikir-, kakı:la:-. Xak. xı ort: ktki: calaba tea. şiyah 'outcry, shouting” Kaş. II/ 227. kuğu: 'swan'. S.i.m.m.l.g. as ku, sometimes only in ak ku 'white swan'; NW Kumyk, Nog. kuv; SW Az. ğu, Osm. kuğu, Tkm. fuv. L.-w. in Pe., etc., Doerfer 111 1543. Türkü vii ff. (a man) kuğu: kuşka: soku:şmi:ş 'encountered a swan' IrkB 35; a.o. do. (ur-): Uyğ. virrff. Civ. TT I 225 (ug-): Xak. xı kuğu: al-hawàsil Kaş. III 225 (and 240, 25); there is considerable doubt of the exact meaning of this word which ís also used to translate korda:y, q.v.; Red. 812 translates it, inter alia, as “pelican” in Osm., but Brockelmann translates it as 'swan' in one place and *cormorant' in the other: KB (geese, ducks and) kufu 72; o.o. 365 (tü), 1101, 5377: XIV Muh. al-ğurnüq 'stork, or crane?' (NB. not crane, which is turüa:) ku:ku Mel. 73, 5; Rif. 176 (Rif. also *white water bird” kuğu:): Xwar. xiv kuvu (misvocalized kavu) 'swan' Qutb 137; ditto (correctly vocalized but with -k- for -v-) 140; ku 'swan' MN s: Kıp. xiv (in the list of birds) al-marzam 'swan' kuw Bul. 12, 3; ku: (?kuw) ditto (misvocalized al-mirzam 'the star Rigel) Id. 76: xv tamm "a kind of goose' (Steingass) ku (in margin in second hand kugi/kugu) Tu. 8b. 13. Dis. V. GGAkakı:- “to be angry (with someone 5/7), to abuse'. Survives, with same meaning, only(?) in SW Osm. See Doerfer III 1400. Uyğ. vini ff. Bud. övkeleser kakisar “if he is angry” (Hend.) Suv. 595, ro: Xak. xı ol andın kakı:dı: "he was angry with him (Zadiba 'alayhi) and annoyed (dacira) with what he had done” Kaş. III 269 (kakırr, in Arğu: kakıyu:r, the Arğu: form all the Aor.s in this chapter in this way but it is irregular and incorrect, kakı:ma:k): Xvvar. xıv kakı“to be angry” Qutb 131: Kom. xiv “to abuse" kağı-/kakı- CCI, CCG; Gr.:: Tkm. xiv kakı- ğadiba İd. 73; ijtüza, wàca'a “to be angry, hurt' kakı- Bul 33v.: xv al-ğayz ka:kimak Karv. 61, 16; ğadıba ka:kı- do. 76, 12; iğtaza (Kip. yanır-) Tkm. kak- (in margin in second hand, ğadiba kakı-) Tuh. 6a. 7: Osm. xiv ff. kakı- “to be angry, to reprimand'; c.i.a.p. T7TS I 402; II 565; III 395; IV 452: xvii kakı- in Rumi, xigmnák şudan "to be enraged” Sar. 274v. 10. MU —À!—nos— sÜn—MÓ— e ae 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 654 
     
   
   
     610 DIS Dis. GGC kakaç 'dirt' and the like; perhaps a Dim. f. of 1 kak in the sense of a dried incrustation of dirt, but more likely to be a quasi-onomatopoeic, esp. considering the alternative pronunciation. Xak. xi kakaç al-ıcasx sca'l-daran “dirt, filth”, hence one says to:n kakaç boldi: "the garment has become filthy” (zcasaxa) Kaş. I 358, kaça:ç al-daran; hence one says to:n kaça:ç boldi: darana”l-tarb, the -ç- was altered from -K-, the original form was kaka:ç (sic) 14 285: Kip. xv atlas 'worn out, shabby, dirty' kakaç Tuh. 4b. 12. Dis. ĞĞD D ka:ğut Dev. N. fr. *ka:B-; survives only (?) in SW Osm. kavut 'roasted wheat ground to flour; a gruel made out of such flour'. See Doerfer YI 1413. Xak. x1 ka:ğut “a kind of food made of millet” (a/-duxn), the millet is boiled, dried, and crushed, and the flour from it is mixed with melted butter and sugar; it is a food for parturient women (a/-nafös, sic) Kaş. I 406: kawut dialect form (luda) of ka:ğu:t (sic) for the food of parturient mothers (al-nifas), millet flour (sawiq) is mixed with melted butter and sugar and eaten /// 163: xiv. Muh. al-sawig ka:vvu:t Mel. 66, 1 (Rif. 16s talka:n): Kip. xiv ka:vvu:t ma'rüf wa husva qibcági "a well-known Kip. word' İd. 73; al-qünut qibcágiya Bul. 8, 16: xv sawiq (karuk, below the line) kawut Tuh. 19a. 6: Osm. xiv ff. kavut 'flour made from parched grain'; c.i.a.p., esp. in dicts. 7TS I 435; 1I 603; III 425; İV 48s: xvırn kawut (spelt) in Rümi, "wheat and pulses made into flour and eaten', in Ar. satwiq San. 279r. 24. Dis. V. GGDD kakıt- Caus. f. of kakı:-, n.o.a.b. Xak. xt ol anr: kakıttı: ağdabahu sa adcarahu hattd a"rada "anhu “he angered and annoyed him so that he avoided him” Kaş. 77 308 (kakıtu:r, kakıtma:k): Xvvar, xiv kakıt- "to annoy' Qutb 131. D kokit- Caus. f. of 1 kok-; survives with a wider range of meanings in SW Osm. kokut-. Xak. xı ol apar söğlünçü koktttu: “he overcooked (gattara) the roast meat until smoke rose from it'; also used when one extinguishes a lamp and makes a disagreeable smell rise from it Kaş. II 3og (kokitu:r, kokitma:k; the anar is not translated, and scems to be superfluous); (in a grammatical section) ol bilikni: ko:ki1ttr: “he extinguished the Jamp (lit. “vick”) and made it smel?; the base (a/-aşl) is kozkdiz and it is made Causative (yu'mar) as kokit-, the -0:- is eliminated (saqatat) from it 7I 323, 13. D kaktur- Caus. f. of kak-; s.i.m.m.l.g. Xak. xı ol anı: başda: (? sic, not bajra:) kakturdi: "he urged and incited him to strike (Çala”l-qafx) him on the head” Kaş. JI 1x91 (kakturur, kakturma:k): Çağ. xv ff. kaktur- Caus. f., kübàánidan “to order to strike or beat” San. 274r. 27 (quotn.). .66c Dis. GGG D kakığ Dev. N. fr. kakr:-; "anger”. N.o.a.b, Xak. xi kakığ a/-ğadab rea” H-murdğama 'anger, opposition'; one says men anar kakığında: bu: rs kildim “1: did this in spite of his opposition' (ragma(r) lahu) Kaş. I 376. ?S kağuk Sec kavuk. E ka:ku:k error in the MS. for ka:k ko:k; see 1 kak. Dis. GGL D ka:ğıl Dev. N. in -11 (normally Pass.) fr. Yka:ğ-, basically “a willow shoot'; in the Hend. berge kağıl in Uyğ. it must mean “a rod used for chastisement”. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. kiliçi biçğesi kağılı tsun tsun sınar uvşanur “their svvords, knives, and rods break into small pieces and are shattered” Kuan. 27-8; berğe kağıl TT IV ro, 7 (bedük), 18 note B 7, 2-3 (tonla:-) a.o.o.: Xak. xı ka:ğıl qudbün xilaf ratb fresh willow shoots” used to fasten vines (to the trellises). Kaş. I 409 (prov.): KB 1055 (egil-). PU koklik Hap. leg.; there is no clue to the meaning of this word; it has hitherto bcen translated “perfumes” owing to a supposed connection with 1 kok-, but morphologically it could not be derived from that V. and that meaning could not be obtained from it. Türkü vr (five hundred men, led by Li Sün "ai Chiang-chün, came (from China to the funeral) koklik [one or two words] altu:n kümüş kergeksiz kelürti: “they brought large quantities of . . . gold and silver” Z7 S r1. Dis. V. GGLD kakıl- Pass. f. of kak-, "to be struck, tapped”, etc. S.i.m.m.l.g. Xak. xı (ol) başda: (so read, not bagra:) kakıldı: “he was struck (quri'a) on the head'; hence one says kakildi: Sokuldt: "he was beaten (duriba) and struck when he was humiliated” (or “despised” diullila) Kaş. I1 135 (kakılur, kakilma:k); bu er ol telim kakılğa:n sokulğa:n “this man is humiliated and slapped (dalil . . . mulakkad) by everyone! İ 520; s25, 12: Çağ. xv ff. kakıl- (spelt) &amp;übida sudan “to be beaten' San. 274r. 24 (quotn.). D kakla:- Den. V. fr. 1 kak, “to dry (meat etc.)'; s.i.a.m.l.g. except SW(?). Not noted before xii but cf. kaklat-, kaklan-. Kip. xin şarraha min taşrihbl-lahm "to slice (meat) in order to dry it" kakla- Hom 41, 8: xv qaddada “to dey" (meat etc.) kakla- Tuh. 30a. 12. D kaklat- Caus. f. of kakla:-. S.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı ol anar et kaklattı: “he ordered him to dry (57-taqdid) the meat! Kaş. II 348 (kaklatu:r, kaklatma:k). D kığlat- Hap. lcg.; Caus. f. of kiğla:-, Den. V. fr, ki:ğ, which survives in SW Osm. Xak. xı ol yérig kığlattı: admala ardahu bi'l-sircin "he had his land manured with animal 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 655 
     
   
   
       TRIS. dung'; and one says ol atın kiğlattı: “he made his horse stale' (aráta) Kaş. 11 348 (kiğlatu:r, kığlatma:k). D kaklan- Refl, f. (sometimes used as Pass.) of kakla:-; s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı et kaklandı: "the meat dried” (taqaddada), and one says su:v kaklandı: istanqa'a'[-mà' wa şüra $udrán fi'l-aglát “the water collected and formed pools in hollows' (i.e. and then dried up) Kaş. JH 252 (kaklanu:r, kaklanma:k). Tris. V. ĞĞLD kakı:la:- "to cackle” and the like; Den. V. fr. *kakr,, an onomatopoeic cognate to kiki, q.v. Perhaps survives in SC Uzb. kakillaand kakilda- in several NC, NW, and SW languages, R 11 ör, which are more or less synonymous. Xak. xi KB (geese, ducks, and swans fill the sky and) kakilayu kaynar yokaru kodti 'swirl up and down cackling' 72: xiv. Muh. na"ata”l-ğurab "of a crow, to croak' kakı:la- Mel. 31, rs, Rif. 116. Dis. GGN F xağan a title of great antiquity taken over by the Türkü in the specific sense of “an independent ruler of a tribe or people”. İts earlier history is discussed by Pulleyblank in Asia Major IX, Part 2, pp. 260 ff. It is first noted in an immediately recognizable form as a royal title of the Juan-juan and T'u-yü-hun round about A.D. 400, but Pulleyblank believes that a Hsiung-nu royal title hu-yü (Ancient Chinese ywax-ywáy) mentioned in connection with events at the end of the rst century B.C. is an earlier Chinese transcription of the same word. In Türkü and Uyg. texts it is habitually transcribed kağan, but as both x- and kwould have been represented by the same letter in these texts it was almost certainly xağarı. "The relationship between it and xa:n, which is practically syn. w. it, is obscure; the two cannot morphological be connected in 'T'urkish but may have been alternative forms in the languages from which they passed to "Turkish. It became an early l.-w. in Mong. as kagan|ka'an (Haenisch 54-6) and re-entered Çağ. in the latter form. It was Arabicized as xüqün at an early date and in that form remained one of the imperial titles until the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire. Türkü vu xağan is very common; it is normally used of the Türkü ruler himself, but also of the Emperor of China, tavğaç xağan / N ız, the King of Tibet Tüpüt xağan 7 N 12, and junior members of the royal family installed as the rulers of subject Turkish tribes, Türges xağan, Kırkız xağan ] N i15: UYyğ. vur xağan was the title assumed by Uyg. rulers when they became independentin A.D. 742 Su. İN 1, etc.: viri ff. Bud. adınçığ iduk xağan xan süsi "the army of our elect, sacred ruler (Hend.) TT VII 40, 123-4: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. huang tí “Emperor” (Giles 5,106 10,942) xağan Ligeti 160; R II 71: Xak. xı (under xa:n) it is the title given to the descendants of   611 GGN Afrasiyib, r'aAiwa' l-xáqdn, it is used both in the short and the long form Kaş. III 157: KB xa:ka:n is the title given to the poet's patron 85-6, 102-4, 115: xiv Muh. al-malik “king” xa:ka:n Mel. şo, 4; Rif. 145 (in margin xa:n): Çağ. xv ff. ka'an (also a Pe. word) xáqán ma xan Vel. 313 (quotns.); ka'an gàh-i şahdan “king of kings'; in this connection the Mongols call their own supreme Emperor (pádigáh) to whom other pádigahs are subject ka'an San. 263v. 8, xakan alternative form (murddif) of ka'an that is “king of kings” (quotn.), and they call Emperors in general and the Emperor of China in particular xakan 222r. 23 (followed by a list of other royal titles). ?D ka:ğu:n 'melon'. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE with great phonetic variations, but usually as kavun/kawun; morphologically could be a Dev. N. fr. *ka:B- but except for xa:tu:n, which is a L-w., this seems to be the only "Turkish word with two long vowels, and it is perhaps also a l.-w. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (vegetables, fruit) ka:ğun TT VIII K.4: xiv Chin.-Uyğ. Dict. “vater melon' kağun Ligeti 160; R 1i 77: Xak. xi ka:ğu:n al-baftix “melon” Kaş. I 410; about a dozen o.o. with same spelling and translation: KB neçe körklüğ erse kağun taş yüzi 'however beautiful the outside of a melon is” (if it has no taste throw it away) sıro: xiv Muh.(?) badru'l-baftix “melon seed” ka:wu:n uruğ Rif. 181 (only): Tkm. xı al-battix Ka:wun Hou. 8, rr: xiv kawun al-battixu'l-agfar "a yellow melon” İd. 76; xv ditto ka:vvun Kav. 63, 15; “a yellow, or other, melon” kowun (between the lines "and kavvun”) Tul. 6b. 12. VU?D kokun Hlap. leg.; perhaps an Intrans. Dev. N. fr. 1 kok-, but the semantic connection is tenuous. Xak. xı kokun al-şarara “spark” Kaş. 7 404. Dis. V. ĞĞND kakın- Refl. f. of kak-, “to strike oneself”. Survives as kağın- “to beat one”s breast, clap one's hands', and the like in some NE, NC, NW languages R II 73. Uy£. vinff. Bud. tsuy irinçü ağır ayığ kılınçların ökünüp kakınip bilinip ukunup 'repenting his sins and misdeeds, beating his breast and knovving and understanding (his own faults)' Suv. 139, 23 ff.; 8.0. do. 140, 11. Tris. GGN DF xağanlığ P.N./A. fr. xağan. N.o.a.b. "Türkü vir xağanlığ bodun ertim *we were a people ruled by (our own) xağaz” I E 9, II Eg9;oo.IE1s,II E 13; 1 E 18; II E 24. D kağunluğ Hap. leg.?; P.N./A. fr. ka:ğu:n. Xak.xı kağunluğ er “a man whoowns melons' I 499. D kağunluk A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. ka:ğu:n, “a melon patch'. S.i.s.m.l. Xak. xri kağunluk al-mabtaxa "a melon patch” Kaş. I 504; a.o. I 505, 18.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 656 
     
   
   
     612 TRTIS. VUD kckunlu:.2 Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. kokun. Xak. xr kokunluğ o:t zdr dát şarara “a fire making sparks” Kaş. I 409. Tris. V. GGNDF xağanla:- Den. V. fr. xağan. N.o.a.b. Türkü vii xağanladuk xağanı:n “their xağan whom they had set up” £ E 7, IT E 7 (1:4-)ş a.0. Ongrn 2. D ka:ğu:nlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. ka:Bu:n. Xak. xı er ka:ğu:nlandı: "the man owned melons” Kaş, /11 206 (ka:ğu:nlanu:r, ka:ğu:nlanma:k). D ka:ğu:nsa:- Hap. leg. mentioned only in a grammatical section; Desid. Den. V. fr. ka:ğu:n. Xak. xı er ka:ğu:nsa:dı: "the man wanted a melon and longed for it” Kaş. 7 280, 4; n.m.e. DF xağansıra:- Hap. leg.; Priv. Den. V. fr. xağan, “to be without a xagan'. Türkü vii 1 E 13 (élsire:-). DF xağansırat- Caus. f. of xağansıra:-, n.o.a.b. Türkü virr xağanlığığ xağansıratmiş '(we) deprived peoples who had (their own) xağans of their xagans' I E 15, II E 13; 8.0. I E 18. Dis. V. GGRD kağur- Caus. f. of Fka:ğ- ; “to parch' (grain and the like); later, more generally, “to bake, roast'. S.i.s.m.l., usually as kavur-/kawur-. Cf. kakla:-; the difference between the two words seems to be that kağur- implies the application of heat, and kakla:- merely exposure to the sun and air. Uy£. viii ff. Civ. (crush (1ku stone and) bakır ésgicte sarğargğinça kafurup 'heat it in a copper vessel until it turns yellow' H 1 172-3; a.o. 11 16,23: Xak. xı ol tarif kağurdı: “he parched (qalá) the wheat' (etc.), kavurdi: alternative form (luda) with -v- for -ğ- Kaş. 11 81 (kağurur, kağurma:k, the two Perfs. arc vocalized, ? by a later hand, Kkog-/kov-): Çağ. xv ff. kawur(spelt) biryàn kardan “to roast! San. 278v. 13 (quotn.): Kip. xmi qallà min tagliyatr'I-lahm “to roast (meat)! kawur- lou. 43, 7: XIV kawur- qald İd. 69 (misplaced), 76; qalá ka:wur- Bul. 72v.: xv qalü kowur- (sic) Tuh. 30a. 8. D Kikir- Intrans. Den. V. fr. kiki:, “to shout'. Sporadic occurrences of kakir- are similar Den. V.s fr. *kakt:, cf. kaki:la:-.. Survives as kiyfir- in several NE languages and NC Kzx. R II 693; Kir. kiykir-.. Uy£. vii ff. Bud. kafığ ünin kıkıra “shouting in a loud voice” U IV 36, 89; 38, 138; o.o. TT X 34, 363-4: Xak. xi er kikirdi: “the man shouted (şaha) calling people at the top of his voice” Kaş. II 83 (Kikira:r, kikirma:k); olo. I 142, 14; 441, 8: KB kikirma (so Fergana MS., others kakirma) “do not shout (at meals)! 4113: xı (?) Tef. Kikir- “to shout” (to someone Dat.) 207: XIV Muh. tanahnaha "to cough, clear the throat' ka:kır- Mel. 24, 13; Rif. 106; za"aqa GGN “to sheut” (ça:ğır- and) VU kifir- 26, rs, 110 (ktfir- in margin only): Xwar. xiv kikirt- (?krkir-) “to shout Qufb 149: Kom. xiv. "to clear one's throat' kakır- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv. vada bdülü tea. ümir(an) "to shout loudly, giving orders' (çağır- and) kiBurBul. 8sr., Tkm. kifir- nadü İd. 73: xv tanaxxama “to clear one's throat! kakır- Juli. ga, rz: Osm. xiv ff. kiğir- “to shout, call out (to someone); c..a.p. 779“ 1 455; IL 623; III 443; IV soy: xiv kağır- “to clear one's throat'; in two texts 7 402; IV 4$2: xviM kakir- (spelt) in Rumi, faryüd hardan “to shout” San. 274v. 10. VUD kakrıt- Hap. leg.; occurs in a section headed fa'landi muşaddadatırl-dal fi harakátihi "of the form CVCCVC- with the last C a -t-, with various vocalizations'. 'lhe section contains about roo V.s; vowels of all kinds occur in the first syllable; in the second syllable the vowel is usually (correctly) -a-/-e-, but -r-/-7also occurs, this word has -a- in the MS., but morphologically -r- seems to be required; presumably Caus. f. in -t- of *kakir- Caus. f. of kak- lit. “to cause to hit or tap'.: Xak. xı ol kakrıtğu: (MS. kakratgu:) kakrıttı: “he beat on a watchman's drum (şarercata tabla”l-natür) to keep the sparrows etc. away from the sown seed' Kaş. II 334 (kakritu:r, kakritma:k). VUD kokrut- Hap. leg.; in the same section as kakrit-, q.v., and vocalized kokrat- in the MS.; presumably Caus. f. in -t- of *kokur-, Caus. f. of 2 ko:k- ; “to reduce' or the like. Cf. kokrus-. Xak. xi ol su:vuğ kokrutti: naggaga'l-má' “he reduced the (supply of) water, or some other liquid Kaş. II 334 (kokrutu:r, kokrutma:k). D kağrul- Pass. f. of kağur- ; s.i.s.m.l. usually as kavrul-/kavvrul- 'to be roast'. Xak. xı buğda:y kavruldı: “the wheat (etc.) was parched” , alternative form of kağruldı: (luğa fi'l-dayn) Kaş. II 235 (kavrulu:r, kavrulma:k), (when the fire of passion takes hold of a man) öpke: yürek kagrulu:r "his lungs and heart are roast' (tataqalla) II 144, 7: Çağ. xv ff. kawrul- (spelt) biryàm şudan “to be roast San. 278v. 23: Kip. xv inqald "to be roast' (Kowurun-; in margin in SW(?) hand) kawrul- Tu. 7a. 1. D kağruş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of kağur-. Xak. xı ol mana: tarif kavrugdt: “he helped me to parch (fi galy) the wheat' (etc.); kağruşdı: with -ğ- alternative form (luga fihi) Kaş. II 219 (kavruşu:r, kavrugma:k). D kıkrış- Recip./Co-op. f. of Kikir-; “to .shout to one another, to shout all together'; it is sometimes imğossible to determine which meaning is intended. S.i.s.m.l. Uyğ. vin ff. (the demons) kikirisu U IV 8, 9; kikriştilar do. 22, 295--(the hunters) kıkrışup (with loud voices) do. 32, 4-21: Xak. xi eren kamuğ kikrigdi: “the men all shouted and called out together” (şöhatz . . . tva calabü) Kaş. II 220 (kikrişu:r, kikrigma:k; in addition 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 657 
     
   
   
       DIS. V. ĞĞŞto the hasras, dammas have been placed over the K-, they do not belong here and may have been placed here inadvertently instead of on the following word, q.v.). (VU)D kokruş- Hap. leg.; vocalized harag-, but obviously a Co-op. f. of *kokur-, see kokrut-. Xak. xi su:vla:r kamuğ kokrusdi: "the waters ebbed' (or flowed away, cazarat (MS. in error carazat)); also used of any liquid when it becomes less (qalla), and of swellings when they subside (sakanat) Kaş. II 220 (kokruşu:r, kokrusma:k). Tris. GGR D kakrıtğu: Hap. leg., Dev. N. (N.I.) fr. kakrıt-, q.v., "a watchman's drum'. Xak. xı Kaş. II 234 (kakrıt-). PUD kağurğa:n Hap. leg.; MS. kakur£a:n, lies between taşurğa:n and kavurğa:n, the obvious emendation is kağurğa:n, but katturfa:n is a possible alternative; Dev. N. (Conc. N.) fr. kağur-. Xak. xı kağurğa:n *bread which is kneaded (yu"can) with melted butter and baked (yufbax) in an oven” Kaş. I 518. D kağurma:ç Dev. N. (Conc. N.) (designating foodstuffs) fr. kafur-; survives in SW Osm. kavurmaç, same meaning; the parallel Dev. N. in -ma: (Pass.), same meaning, also survives in Osm. Xak. xı kağurma:ç (misvocalized kog-) “parched (al-magliya) wheat'; kavurma:ç with -v- alternative form (/uga) Kaş. I 493: (Kip. xri (under “foodstuffs”) ai-tagliya "roast meat! kawurma: Hou. 15, 18: xiv kavvurğa: (sic, ?error) 'parched (az -magliw) grain'; and “roast meat' (al-maglüzo müna”?l-lahm) is called kawurma: İ4. 76). E kuğursak See kurufsa:k. Dis. V. ĞĞSD kaksı:- Simulative Den. V. fr. 1 kak. N.o.a.b.; it is difficult to connect the Kip. word semantically with this word. Xak. xr et kaksrdt: ftaqaddada'l-lahm da hàda düliha münhu "the meat dried (in the sun) or almost dried” Kaş. III 286 (kaksrr, kaksı:ma:k): (Kip. xv zanaxa “(of oil) to be rancid' kakşıTuh. 18a. 13; zanax wa'l-murawwah 'rancid, odorous (oil) kakşıptır (sic) do. 18a. 9). Dis. ĞĞŞ koğuş Preliminary note. Prima facie this word ^is a. Dev. N. in -us, but there is no trace of *koB-, and even if this was taken to be an alternative form of kov- there is no semantic connection. Equally it seems impossible to find a common basis for the two meanings of the word. ?D 1 koğuş "leather'; n.o.a.b. Cf. kön. Uyğ. vit ff. Bud. (just as a sound constantly arises from a drum by the combined action of the wood) koğuşka “the leather” (the drumstick and the hand) Sut. 375, 7-8; Civ. koğuş - 613 "Jeather' H II 22, 22: Xak. xı koğuş “the hide (cild) of a slaughtered beast, whether tanned or untanned” Kaş, 7 369; o.o. translated cild II 205 (türtüs-); //7 140 (kó:n); translated al-sarm "tanned leather! 77 210 (sürtüg-); 355 (yağlat-), JI 308 (yağla:-), 319, r. ?D 2 koğuş basically “a groove' with various special applications. Survivesonly in SW Osm., where traditional meanings are not traceable later than xvii (see below); it now means *a large room, hospital ward, dormitory, school room', perhaps because these are, metaph., grooves in the plan of a building. Xak. xı koğuş a/-mat"ab wa'l-mizáb “vvater-course, drain; koğuş mat'abu'l-táhün 'the spout of a grinding mill”, one says teğirme:n koğuşı:: koğuş taridatu'l-nabbàl "an arrow-straightener used by arrovv-makers” (i.e. a groove through vvhich the shaft is forced to straighten it) Kaş. I 369: xiv Rbj. bu ne koğuş turur “vhat is this vvater-course?” R II $19: (Çağ. xv ff. koğuş “gutter, drainage ditch, ground floor” P. de C. 433; origin obscure, no trace in any Çağ. authority): Osm. xvi koğuş oki TTS I 476; IV 174 (s.v. çiğre) and kovuş oki 7V 174 translate Pe. riwak 'cross-bow arrow' (i.e. one shot from a groove): xvii koğus oku ditto III 153 (s.v. çiğre): kovus translates al-tarida I 488. D koğşa:k Dev. N./A. fr. 1 koğşa:-, survives in SW Tkm. ğovşak: xx Anat. koBsak (SDD 950) “soft, weak, flexible', and the like. Uyğ. vin ff. Civ. TT VIII I.4 (burki:): Xak. xt koğşa:k ne:p “a thing in which there is softness and vveakness” (al-futür wa'l-scahan) Kaş. I 474. Dis. V. ĞĞŞD 1 kakış- Recip. f. of kak-, "to hit one another”. S.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı ola:r ikki: başda: (so read?, not başra:) kakışdı: "they two hit one another (taqdra"d) on the head” Kas. II 104 (kakışu:r, kakigma:k): Çağ. xv ff, kakış- (spelt) "to hit (Ribidam) one another” San. 274r. 24. D 2 kakış- Recip. f. of kakı:-, n.o.a.b.? Xak. xı eren kamuğ kakışdı: “the men were al angry with one another” (tağaddaba) Kaş. IH 104 (followed by 1 kakış-). D 1 kofsa:- 'to become soft, weak', and the like; presumably Den. V. fr. 1 koğuş used metaph. as something soft and pliable. Survives in SW 'Tkm. ğovşa-, cf. kevşe:-. Türkü vii ff. Man. TT II 6, 3o(1 a:z): Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. ertipii koğşayurmen 'I become very weak' U III 37, 6; o.o. do. 48, 1; Suv. 118, s (alapad-): Civ. (he vomits and) koğşar *becomes weak' TT VIII 1.3: Xak. xi katığ ne: koğşa:dı: “the hard thing became soft” Kaş. III 287 (koğşa:r, koğşa:ma:k): Osm. xiv koxşa- “to become weak' 773S I 476. D 2 koğşa:- Den. V. fr. 2 koğuş, n.o.a.b. Uy£. vii ff. Bud. kép yétiz alını kovuşamış (sic) teg "with a broad (Hend.) brow (looking) as if it had been smoothed' U IV 30, 49-50:  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 658 
     
   
   
        614 Xak. xi er oknr kovşa:dı: “the man strafghtened the arrow | with an arrow-straightener” (tarrada . . . bi-tarida); and an alternative form (/uga) with -6- Kaş. HII 287 (kovsa:r, kovsa:ma:k). D 1 koğşat- Caus. f. of 1 koğşa:-, survives in SW "Tkm. ğovşat- “to soften, weaken', etc.; xx Anat. koğşat- “to soften (the ground) by ploughing' SDD 9s5o. Xak. xi kuya:s anı: koğşattı: “the heat of the sun sapped his strength” (azehana quiercataliu) ; also used. of anything hard when its strength is sapped; there is an alternative form (/uğa) with -x- in place of -É- Kaş, II 337 (koğşatu:r, koğşatma:k). D 2 *kofsat- Hap. leg. , Caus. f. of 2 koğşa:-. Xak. xı ol ok kovşa:ttı: "he gave orders for the straightening (bi-tamlis) of the arrow in the arrow-straightener' Kaş. II 338 (kovşatu:r, kovşatma:k). D *ko£sal- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of 2 koğşa:-. Xak. xı ok kovşaldı: “the arrow was straightened (furrida) in the arrow-straightener so that it might become straight' (Ii-yatamallas) Kaş. II 236 (kovsalu:r, kovsalma:k). D 1 koğşaş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of 1 kofişa:-. Xak. xi kişi:le:r kamug koğşaşdı: “the men's strength left them” (da/mbat quscà'l-ricál) because of the heat which overcame them or the like; there is an alternative form (/uğa) with -X- in place of -É- Kaş. II 350 (koğşaşu:r, koğşaşma:k). D 2 "koğşaş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of 2 koğşa:-. Xak. xi ol anın okın kovşaşdı: “he helped him to straighten (f? tatrid) the arrow in an arrow-straightener' Kaş. IJ 350 (kovşaşu:r, kovşaşma:k). Tris. V. ĞĞŞD koğuşlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. 2 koğuş. Xak. xı su:v koğuşlandı: "the water flowed down a channel (reading fnta'aba (see the translation of 2 koğuş) for inba'ata 'flowed' in the MS.) Kaş. II 268 (koğuşlanu:r, koğuşlanma:k). Dis. GGZ D kokuz (kokoz) Dev. N./A. fr. 2 ko:k-, survives in SW Osm. kokoz 'penniless, destitute', described by “Red, and Sami as 'vulgar'; xx Anat. koguz 'inadequate, deficient, half fulT, and other meanings SDD 950; Tkm. kovuz 'empty, deficient. Xak. xr KB kokuz is fairly common, usually in antithesis to tolu: “full”, e.g. (if you love someone, his faults are virtues, his crookedness straight) kokuzi tolu “his emptiness full” 536; o.o. 617 (kadğu:), 1626, 4718, sz906-—(he said good-bye to his friend and went home) kópli kokuz 'in the depths of depression” $448: Kr1p. xrv kokuz al-inasedt'u'l-mustafil (MS. mustagill) Ra'l-güita wa l-hafzra sva l-citra. “a low-lying place like a valley, hollow, or hole” İd. 73; al-Zitfa Kokuz   DIS. V. ĞĞŞBul. 3, 11: xv tvatá' "a depression! kokuz Tuh. 38a. 7: Osm. xiv to xvi koğuz 'partly, or completelv, empty'; in several texts. 77S I 47655; HI 465; IV 530. Mon. GL kal “vild, savage, mad", and the like, Survives in NE Sor, "Tel, kal (of a man) 'coarse, shameless” RH 219; Sag. xal “strong, daring! 7Jas. 268. Uyf. vir ff, Man. (existence as) kal ağuluğ yılkıda “a wild, poisonous animal” TT III 26; a.o. do. 115 (télve:): Chr. (blind, dumb, lame, crippled) kal 'insane' (diseased) M HI qo, 4: Bud. U IJI 76, 13-14 (télve:): Civ. kal it tartmış kişi “a man bitten. by a mad dog” H I 63; o.o. do. ss, 79: (Xak. xt an unvocalized word in a prov. in Ka. 7 409, s translated a/-şayx has been transcribed kal, it is no doubt kul “a servant (of God), thc prov. mcans 'the words of a religious teacher are not disregarded, the willow shoots tying (vines) to the trellis are not untied”): Kom. xiv. “vild” kal CCG; Gr. kil "a hair”, esp. a horse hair or bristle; sometimes uscd as an abbreviation of kil kudruk (sec below). C.ra.p.a.]. L.-w. in Pe. etc, Doerfer HI 1607. C£. tü:, saç. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. (the successors of the Buddhas are not cut off and) kilça egsümez tegşilmez “do not decrease or change as much as a hair's (breadth) TT VI 205-6: Xak. xı kil “the hair” (al-şa"r) of a man, etc.: kil küş a/-sabad “the swallow', it is a bird like the goose which comes at the beginning of spring; the 5egs (al-umarà) give one another presents at the beginning of spring (i.e. when it arrives); it is also called kil kudru£ that is *with a tail (like a) hair” Kaş. I 337: KB (gecse, ducks, swans, and) kil kalıkığ todi 'swallows have filled the air” 72; yolun kılda yinçğe “your road is narrower than a hair” 6082; a.o. 2154 (ükek): xiv. Afuh. mu'xaru'l-faras “the back (i.e. tail) of a horse” kil Mel. 69, 14; Rif. 171: Çağ. xv ff. kil ssi “hair” Sam. z98v. rr (quotn.), ki kuyruk “a bird like the bağrı kara (Red. in Osm. ? ^wood grouse, Tefrao urogallus') which flies in large flocks ( farec farec), in Pe. (PU) xarbata(?) do. 17: Xwar. xiv kil 'hair; string” (of a musical instrument) Qutb 147: Kip. xii al-qatá "sand grouse, Pterocles bicinctus” kil kuyruk, that is “its tail is a hair” (şar) Hou. 10, 9: XIV ditto İd, 74; Bul. 12, 4 (mis-spelt); kil a/-şa İd. 74. ko:1 properly "the upper arm', as opposed to elig 'the forearm, hand', but in some modern languages more generally “the arm' and even “the hand'; also has various metaph. meanings, e.g. "a wing' of an army. S.i.a.m.l.g, L.-w. in Pe. etc., Doerfer 111 1571. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. kol is common, e.g. Sanskrit b/iuja 'arm' kol TT VIII D.25; kolin yétip “taking him by the arm' PP 25, 1; 36, 3; (dancing and) kolin sala “vaving her arms! U II 24, 4; a.o.o.: Civ. (on a Snake Day the soul) kolta bolur 'gets into the upper arm! Z"T VH 19,7; kolin butin sışlatur “it makes his upper arms and thighs:  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 659 
     
   
   
      MON. V. GL- 615 swell' do. 25, 2: Xak. xı ko:l a/-"adud “the upper arm'; ko:l "the word for what descends (inhabafa) from the peak (al-quila) of a mountain and rises (rrtafa'a) from the bottom (garár) of a valley', one says o:br: ko:li: (mis-spelt ko:rii:) the upper part ('adud)of a valley”: ko:l “the central ridge” (al-satiba) of a sword or knife, it is an elongated strip (fariga mumtadda) which is often gilded ( yrematotah bi'l-dahab) and is called kiliç kozli: 'adudu'l-sayf. Kaş. ITİ 134; (in a final note on words of the form CVvC) we call words in this section 'abbreviated' (manqus) because the medial long vowel (al-harfu'l-awsatu'l-layn) disappears and the word becomes a biliteral in speech (not in writing) although the letters all appear in the written text (a/-safr), for example the word for “upper arm' is ko:l, but one says anıp koli: aldı: “he grasped him by the arm,, so that it becomes like the word for 'slave' kul owing to the disappearance of the -0:- 711 161, 15; a.o. III 288 (sıtğa:-): K.B 69 (étin-), 766 (kavuştur-): xiu (?) At. iki kol dinár 'two armfuls(?) of money” 312; a.o. 222 (kuc-): Tef. kol 'arm; (of an animal) leg; side; valley'; kol kaş 'valleys and ridges! 211—12: xiv Muz. al-'adud ko: Mel, 47, 7; Rif. 141; (among military terms) al-cináh "the wing (of an army)” ko:l so, ro, 145: Çağ. xv ff. kol (1) “small hills (depeler) on the flank of a mountain which abut on the plaíns' (şaZrd) (quotns.); (2) saff ve alay ve taraf "military formation, flank'; (3) ei 'arm, hand' (quotn.) Vel. 343; kol (1) 'from the tip of the fingers to the point of the shoulder', just as él means 'from the tip of the fingers to the wrist joint'; also used metaph. for 'hand' (dast) (quotn.); (2) 'hills and hillocks on the flank of a mountain abutting on the plains' (quotn.); (3) samt “direction” etc. (quotns.); (4) qa/2-r lagkar "the main body of an army', which is the commander-in-chief's battle headquarters (quotn.) San. 289v. 10, a.o. 1J2v. 3 (elig): Xwar. xiv kol (r) 'arm'; (2) “valley” Qutb 139; MN 110; kol etini 'the meat of (a sheep's) thigh' Nahc. 33, 10: Kom. xiv “hand” kol, “arm” kol CCI, CCG; Gr. 198 (quotns.): Kip. xiii a/-roddi “valley” kol How. s, 18; al-ibt "arm-pit” kol “vith back (mufaxxam) -1' do. zo, 10: Xiv kol (mufaxxarm) al-'adud ilá'l-agábi' “the (upper) arm as far as the fingers! 1d. 73: xv al-yad 'arm, hand” kol (and el) Kar, 61, 1; dira' 'forearm' (arşın and) kol Tuh. 16a. ro, zand *wrist' kol (and bilek) do. 17b. 11; 'adud kol do. 24b. 7: Osm. xiv ff. kol (r) 'arm'; (2) 'direction'; fairly common TTS H 646; III 467; IV 532. kul "a (male) slave'; the masculine equivalent of kün. C.ia.p.al, now usually, less specifically, 'servant'. In a Moslem context often specifically “the slave of Allah”, i.e. a devout Moslem. L.-vv. in Pe. JDoerfer III 1572. Türkü vr: beglik urt: ofl:n kul kit: “they made their sons, who were fit to be begs, into slaves! /7 E 7, 1 E 7 (with bolti: in error for kilti:); a.0.0.: vir ff. kül savi: “the words of a slave! IrkB 54; bitge:ci: isi:zz yavı:z kul biti:dim 'I, the scribe, the wretched, worthless slave wrote this” Tun. IV ro, 11; (he sent) kuli: elginte: “by the hand of his slave” Toyok IVr. 5-6 (ETY II 180): Uyğ. vir kulim küpim “my male and female slaves' Su. E 1: vri ff. Bud. (if I have made good, well-behaved people) kul künU 7/87, 51; (mother and father, members of the same family) küp kul (quarrel with one another) TT VI 64 (VII O.7); a.o.0.: Xak. xr kul a/-"abd 'slave' Kaş. 1 336; I 409, s (kal); IJI 161, 26 (ko:l); about 30 o.o.: KB bu muplu£ kuluğ “this miserable slave” 28; o.o. 152, 235, 958, etc.: xın(?) At. (O God, forgive me) neçe me xatáli$ kul ersem sana 'however sinful a slave I may be to You” 38; a.o.o.; Tef. kul “slave”, kul kün 216: xiv Rbg. kul 'slave' (i.e. Moslem) R TI 966 (quotn); Muh. gulam “servant” (with Poss. Suffs.) ku:L Mel. 11, 10-16; Rif. 85; al-'abd kul şı, 9; ku:l 147; kül isr (only): Çağ. xv ff. kul (with -u-') 'abd tva banda 'slave' San. 289v. 16: Xwar. xii kul 'slave* ' Ali 32: xiv ditto Qut 143; MN 71 etc.: Kom. xiv ditto CCG; Gr.;: Kip. xur al-mamlükh “slave” kul Hou. 29, 4; 32, 15: XIV ditto /d. 73: xv ditto Kav. 44, 6-8; Tuh. 32b. 5; and many o.o. Mon. V. GLkal- basically “to remain'; with some idiomatic meanings like 'to be only, to continue to be; to stop, come to a halt; to remain behind, become obsolete'. C.ia.p.a.] "Türkü vir (when my father died) ózüm sekiz yasda: kaltim “1 was only eight years old” 77 E 14; a.0. I E 30; Az bodun yağı: kalt: “the Az people continued to be hostile! 7 N 2; (may the country which our ancestors held) idisiz kalmazun “not remain without a master” I7 E 16 (I E 19 bolmazun), olo. 7 E zo, ITE 17 etc.: VIII ff. (a blood horse, exhausted in the desert) turu: kalmi:ş “came to a halt' JrkB 17; 0-0. do. o (1 kat), r3 (yurt), etc.: Uyğ. vit tümen kofi kalmış “ten thousand sheep remained! Su. W 9; a.o.o.: vill ff. Man.-A anap kalmış ağı baramı “the property (Hend.) which he left behind (when he died)” M III 1ş, 6-7 (q): Man. TT Hİ 46 (ulinciğ): Bud. (of the property (Hend.) in the treasury) azğına kalt: “onİy a little remained” PP 7, 5-6; 3.0. do. 3o, r (negülük); (if a man without hands reaches an island of jewels) kuruğ kalır “he remains frustrated' (because he cannot pick them up) TT V 26, 93; a.o.o.: Civ. (we have paid roo of the 6oo yastuks due) kalğan beş yüz yastuk caw kaltı “the remaining 5oo have remained unpaid” USP. 12, 6, a.o.o.: O, Kir. ix ff. beş yaşımta: kansı:z kalıp “1 was left fatherless at the age of five' Mal. 45, 2: Xak. xı er ké:din kaldı: “the man remained (5agiya) behind”, and one says ol oyunda: kaldi: "he gave up (taraka) in the game'; also used of anything that remains of gives up; (prov.) 6:1 kaldı: tórü: kalma:s "the realm has ceased to exist (furrkat), but the traditional law does not cease to exist! Kaş. I1 25 (kalı:r, kalma:k); about 30 o.o.: KB ajun kalmazunı sizinsiz kuruğ “may the world not remain empty without you” 108; (all that  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 660 
     
   
   
       616 is born dies) kalir belgü sóz 'his words remain as a sign of him' 180; olardın kalu keldi edgü tórü 'good traditional laws have remained from them and come to us' 269; 3702-3 (1 a:r-): many o.o.: xır(?) At. ajunda atı kalsu “may his name remain in this world' 70; a.o.o., Tef, kal- “to remain” 196: xiv Muh. baqiya ira taxallafa (to stay behind") ka:l- Mel. 24, 1; Rif. 105; al-baqà* kalmak 34, 6; 119: Çağ. xv ff. kal- mándan "to remain! San, 274v. 21 (quotns): Xwar. xit1 ditto “AZ 26: xnn1(?) (when Oğuz Xan saw her) usi kalmadı ketti “he lost his senses' 63, 0.0. 254 etc.: xiv kal- “to remain! Qutb 129; MN 37, etc.: Kom. xiv kal- “to remain; to stay behind; to come to an end' CCI, CCG; Gr. 191 (quotn.): Kip. xiti 5aqiya müna"l-baqd” wa ta'xir kal- (with back -1-*; spelt kol-) Hou. 38, 6: xiv kal- gabara (to remain, stay”) tva baqiya İd. 74; baqiya kal- Bul, 36r.: xv kalbaqiya qca ta”axxara Kav. 10, 5; baqiya kalTuh. 8b. 3; düma (to continue”), baqiya, inqata'a (to come to an end”), ta'axxara kaldo. 13a. 7: Osm. xiv to xvr kal-, in addition to its ordinary meanings, is noted as meaning “to be attached to (something Dar.) in several texts. TTS I 407; 11 568; İİİ 399; IV 487. Kil- "to do (something); to make (someone something)" and the like; very often used, like 6:t-, q.v., to form Compound V.s with. N.s, esp., in the later period, L-w.s. C.i.a.p.a.l. Türkü vir c1gari bodunığ bay kiltum “1 made the poor people rich” 7 S ro, I2 N 7; II E 7 (kul); a.o.o. (this is the only usage in these texts): virt ff. Man. baş kiltimiz erser "if we have wounded' Chuas. 53; kilingin kilu umaz biz *we cannot do what they (the Hearers) do” 322; a.o.o.: Uyğ. vir yok kilmadim “1 did not exterminate” (the common people) Su. E 2; a.o.o.: vir ff. Man. (the wind) kecgülük yaraşı edgü yıdlığ yıparlığ kilur *makes (all places and waters) fit to cross and fragrant (Hend.)' TVind. 29-30: Bud. kil- is very common in two usages, (1) e.g. ayığ kılınç kilur “they perform evil. deeds? PP 2, 1; ÖDi ópi kazğanç kılmak ayu bérdiler “they suggested various ways of making profits' do. 13, 1-2; (2) e.g. (then King Brahmadatta) badra kızığ . .. üstünki yég kunçuy kilti “made the maiden Bhadra . . . his chief wife" U III 53, 4 ff.: Civ. kil- is very common, e.g. buyan Kil “do virtuous deeds! TT VII 28,2; negü ış ktlayın “vhat shall I do?” do. 3; çurni kilip (reducing (various ingredients) to powder' H I 4, 8 etc., sovuk kilip “chilling” do. 135: O. Kir. ix ff. Külüg Totok écim kişi: kıldı: “my elder brother Külüg Totok brought me up” (lit. “made me a man”) Mal. 6, 2: Xak. xı er rs kildi: 'ariila'l-racul the man did something'; and one says er kı:zığ Kildi: "the man copulated (cáma'a) with the girl”, this is an allusive phrase (Rimdya) for copulation, and the Oğuz therefore avoid the use of this sword, and substitute é:tti: lit. "to put in order” (aglaha) for kıldı: in the sensc of 'amila'l-gay'; for example, they say er yükünç é:tti: "the man prayed' (aş/ağa”/-şalat)  MON. V. GLwhile the "Turks say kildi: Kaş. 77 25 (Kilu:r, kılmn:k), over 40 0.0.; sometimes by itself, e.g. o9 mundağ kil 'act in precisely this way' I1 36, 20; sometimes with an Object, e.g. edgülüküğ . . . kil “do good” 7 44, 2; and sometimes to form Compound V.s, e.g. terk kil asri" 'hurry' 7 350, 6: KI kil- is very common in the same usages as in Kaş.: xi(?) K BVP (everything came into existence as He wished) kimi kim tilese kilur ol uluğ "whatever He wishes that Great Onc docs! 6: xın(?) KBPP neni kim tiledi erse kildi 3-4; At, kil- is very common, esp. in forming Compound V.s with l.-w.s; Tof. ditto 208: xiv Muh. “"amila kil- Mel. 8, 5-6; Rif. So, al-fa"l "to do” kilmak 8, 6; 8o; fa'ala kil30, 1; 113; a.o.o.: Çağ. xv ff. kil- (- Bur, etc.) eyle- Vel. 332; Kil- kardan 'to make, do' San. 297v. 27 (quotns.): Xwar. xin ki- “to do” “Ali ız: xın(?) ditto, and to form Compound V.s Oğ. passim (ét- does not occur): xtv ditto Qutb 147, MN s, etc.: Kom. xiv Kil- “to do; to make (something ee.) ; and to form Compound V.s CCG; Gr. 206 (quotns.): Osm. xiv ff. kil- “to do, or make (something Acc.) and in Compound V.s; fairly common T'T'S I 457; HH 625; İİİ 445; İV 509. kol- “to ask for (something cc.) ; there are possible traces of an alternative form kolt-, sec kolğu:çı:, but prob. only as a Sec. f. Survives only(?) in NW Kar. L., 'T. R I1 584. Türkü virt ff. (a man. met a. god and) küt kolmi:ş “asked for his favour! IrkB 47; Man. suyumuzni yazukumuzni bosunu kolmak kergek erti 'it was necessary to pray to be freed from our sins (Hend.)” Chuas. 263-5; a.o. do. 288 (a similar phr. in 279-80 has ötünmek for kolmak); krmsuxn koltt “he asked for pardon (Sogdian L-w.) TT II 8, 36; a.o. M İİİ 22, 3-5 (ii) (6tigHg): Uyğ. viit ff. Man.-A tegzinti busi kolti “he walked about asking for alms' M I 32, rz: Man. küt kolurbiz TT III 172-3; M II ro, 4; kiv kolurbiz same meaning do. 10, 6: Bud. adin afilik kolti “he asked for another (gift of) treasure” PP 7, 4; kut kolti do. şr, 2; 0.0. do. 48, 4; 64, s, U I 31, 4 etc.; Xak, xı ol mendin ne:) koldı: “he asked me (sa'a/a minni) for the thing” Kaş. II 2s (kolu:r, kolma:k); o.o. 7 224 (àmlüg); 274, 17: KB boldi kolmiş kamuğ “all that He wished came into existence” 4: seni koldı rabbdın adın kolmadı “he asked God for you and nothing else” 38, töşek koldi yattı "he called for his bed and lay down' 5673, 6212; 0.0. 39 (emgek), 432(erej), 442: (alis), etc. :xrn(?) At. (if he is given two armfuls (see ko:l) of money) üç kol kolur "he asks for three” 312; Tef. kol"to ask for” 212; xiv Rbhg. ditto R II s85 (quotns.): Çağ. xv ff. kol- (-mak) dile- "to ask for (permission, or a girl in marriage) Vel. 342 (quotns.); kol- xrmástan tva talab hardan "to ask for, request”, the narrower meaning given by the Rmi author (i.e. Vel.) is erroneous; it means 'to ask for' other things as well San. 288v. 23 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv ditto Nac. II, 45; 321, 12; 385, ra: Kom. xiv ditto CCI,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 661 
     
   
   
     -*  TRIS. GLB 617 CCG, Gr.: Kip. xv şalla "to pray' kol- .. .; the word means both “to pray' (a/-şallat) and "to ask for" (al-du'd) Kav. 78, 5; o.o, do. io, 5; ız, 13 (everywhere vocalized Kkil-, apparently QURE to confusion with the syn. phr. namaz 11-). Dis. ĞLA (D) kalı: the normal word for “if” in Xak., used with the Conditional mood; occasionally means "hövv?”, perhaps a later form of kalti, q.v.; not traceable earlier than Xak., in which it is very common, or later than Miuk. It has no connection with kal-, or kalt:st:z, q.v., but perhaps has some primeval etymological connection with ka:üu: and kaçan, q.v. Xak, xı kalı: a. Particle (harf) meaning Rayfa 'how?', lav “if, and idà *when, if”, (in a verse) kelse: kalı: katığlık “if (444) hardships and misfortunes come to you”, and one says bu: sen bu: ı:şığ kalı: kildip 'how (kayfa) did you do this?” (the first bu: seems superfluous); and one says Sen kalı: barsa:sen “if (aw) you go” Kaş. III 233; about a dozen o.o. with the Conditional meaning 'if' and usually translated idaà: KB kali | with the Conditional meaning “if” is common, 175, 213, 240, 295, 494, 750 (1:4-), 783, etc.—kalı sevmeyin kör bu edgü kişiğ 'how could I fail to love this good man?” 933; kalı kançaka kirme "do not go into questions of “hovv f” or ““vvhither ?”” 27: xin(?) At. kalı, with Conditional, “if” occurs six times: xiv Muh. harf law yanüb "anhu "the place of the Particle “if” is taken by” kalt: Mel. 16, 6; Rif. 93 (but the example is corrupt and contains the Conditional without kali:). kula: a word for the colour of a horse's coat; s.i.a.m.l.g., usually meaning “dun with a black mane and tail'; L.-w. in Mong., Pe., etc. Doerfer 1M 1524. Uyğ. xiv. Chin.-Uyg. Dict. huang ma “a yellow (or earth-coloured) horse" (Giles 5,124 7,576) kula at R II 967; Ligeti 169: Xak. xı kula: at al-farasu'l-xalüqtywl-laton "a dun horse' Kaş, III 233: Kip. xri (among horses! colours) al-asfaru'l-mi'sam bi'l-sawàádi'l-maxfüti'l-kafal with yellow legs and black stripes on the back'(?) kula: Hou. 13, 6: (xiv. VU al-anisa akula: (sic) kaz Bul, 12, 4 prob. contains the same word; Zaj. is no doubt right in regarding the a- as intrusive; al-anisa means “magpie”, but kaz 'goose implies a larger bird and he is prob. right in reading al-umisa (or wnaysa?) “flamingo”, though the colour hardly fits). VU kolu: a period of time; in the astronomical texts specifically “a period of ten seconds”, see TT VII, p. 61, note 8, 3, but in the phr. öd kolu as indefinite as English “moment” or “times and seasons', though no doubt much less than a day. Pec. to Üyğ. and perhaps a l.-w.; see kolula:-, Uyğ. vir ff. Man.-A M I 26, 20-1 (6:4): Bud. Pfahl. 6, 1 etc. (6:4): Civ. iki yüz altı yegirmi kolu ertmişte *when z16 periods of ten seconds (i.e. 36 minutes) have elapsed' TT VII 8, 3; (on the chi Ox day) tünle tokuzunç öğte yüz tört el(Dig fkolu . . .] “in the ninth hour of the night, when 144 [periods of ten seconds have elapsed ?]' do. 9, 32-4. Dis. V. GLA?D ka:la:- "to heap up” and the like; survives with the same meaning only(?) in SC Uzb.; the other verbs of this form collected in R 77 226 are l-w.s fr. Mong. kalaga- "to burn” (Kon, 787). Prima facie a Den. V. but not connected semantically with 1 or 2 ka: and hardly to be derived fr. ka:-. Xak. xr ka:la:di: is a more correct (afşah) form of kazdı: Kaş. 1II 249 (ka:-); n.m.e.: Çağ. xv fT. kala- (-d1) biri biri üzerine yığ- “to heap on one another” Vel. 323 (quotn.); kala- (spelt) bar sar ham çidan “to heap on” San. 275r. 11 (quotns.). kalı:- originally “to rise in the air', hence “to jump', and the like. Survives only(?) in NE several languages kalı- R II 239; Tuv. xali“to jump', and SW Tkm. Éal-. Türkü vir ff. (a man's horse tired; he met a swan, and mounted its wings and) anı:n kalı:yu: barı:pan “so rose in the air and went off” JrkB 35; (the falcon . . .) kalı:yu: barmlı:ş do. 44: Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. Hüen-ts. 1878-o (kalapur-): Xak. xı at kalı:dı: scafaba”l-faras wa camaha “the horse bucked and ran away' Kaş. İTİ 272 (kalı:r, kali:zma:k): KB kayada kalığlı bu ımğa teke “the wild goats (Hend.) jumping on the rocks' 5373 (thus the Vienna MS., prob. correctly, the other MSS. have yorığlı which occurs in the same position in the two preceding lines but is inappropriate here). Dis. GLB kalva: 'a blunt hunting arrow', used to kill small game without injuring the skin; n.o.a.b. Xak. xr kalva: al-cummáh twahwa'l-sahmu'lladi lá naşl 'alayhi wa naşluhu min xaşab mudaswwar "a blunt arrow, that is one without a (metal) head; its point is of rounded wood" Kaş. 1 426; a.o. 1 528, ro (3 ten). PUD kolbig an anatomical term, n.o.a.b., associated with b€:l *waist'; Arat translates it “armpit” which is plausible. If so, it is prob. a misreading of koltik, q.v. Uy&amp;. viri ff. Civ. belin kolbıçın barça ağrıtur “it makes the waist and armpits(?) thoroughly painful” TT VII 24, 23 (text fragmentary); (it makes his head and eyes ache; it makes his arms and thighs swell) yürekilen belin kolbigm ağrıtur 'it makes his heart, waist and armpits painful' do. 25, 3. kalbuz Hap. leg., but see kalbuzla:-. Xak. xı kalbuz a/-luqma "lump, gobbet'; one says kalbuzla:dı: ne:pni: “he cut the thing into hümps” (//taqama) Kaş. 1 458. Tris. GLB F kula:wuz “a guide'; no doubt a 1.-vv. Doerfer III 1504 points out that the word is first noted in tbn Fadlán (A.D. 923) in connection w. Jurjan and plausibly suggests that it  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 662 
     
   
   
       618 was borrowed fr. (Iranian) Khwarazmian. L.-w. in Pe. and other languages. Survivcs only(?) in SW Osm. kulavuz/kulafuz, now spelt kilavuz. Xak. xi kula:buz al-dalil 'a guide'; the -b- was changed from -w-; prov. kalin ka:z kula:wuzsu:z (sic) bolma:s translated “a flock of ducks (should be “geese”) does not fly except with a leader! Kaş. 7 487: KB (of the starsinthesky) .. . bir ança kulavuz "some are guides . . . bir ança kulavuz bolur yitse yol 'some become guides if a man loses his way! 128-9: xiv AMuh.(?) al-dalil ku:laswuz Rif. 155 (only): Çağ. xv ff. kolavvuz/kulavvuz (spelt; “both with -0- and with -u-") (1) dalil ta balad xa. rühnumd 'guide, escort” (quotn.); (2) “the emergence (birün dmadan) of the point of the grain from the husk” San. 289v. 28 (kulawuzluk follows): Kip. xir dalilu'l-fariq "a guide on a journey' kula:gu:z Hou. 25, 6; dalla 'alà'l-tarig kula:fu:zla:- (sic, with Raf), al-dalil fi'l-tariq kula:gu:z (sic) do. 40, 7: (xiv kula:wuzladalla Id. 74): Osm. kulavuz/kulağuz 'guide' ; c.i.a.p. in both spellings 7S II 662; III 484; IV sso. Tris, V. GLBD kalbuzla:- Den. V. fr. kalbuz; n.o.a.b. Xak. xt ol kalbuzla:dı: ne:mni: "he cut the thing into lumps” (r/tagama) Kaş. III 3so (kalbuzla:r, kalbuzla:ma:k); a.o. 7 458 (kalbuz). Dis. GLCkiliç "sword'. S.i.a.m.l.g. L.-w. in Pe. etc., Doerfer II] 1510. Türkü vir fi, altun kuru:ğsakımı:n Krhern kesipen 'cutting my golden belly with a sword' 7rkB 8; a.o. Miran Br. 10-11 (ET Y 1I 66): Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. süpü kiliç "lance and sword! TT V ro, 92; 0.0. U II 78, 3o-1 (bic-); TT X 356, 537; Kuan. 27: Civ. TT I 162-3 (üz-): Xak. xt kıliç al-sayf 'sword' Kaş, I 359 (prov.; verse); over zo 0.0.: KB kiliç aldı "he took a sword' 268; o.o. 222, 286 (biç-), 2139-41, etc.: xini(?) Tef. kiliç *sword' 208: xiv Mnt al-sayf kili:ç Mel. 8, 14; 71, 4; Rif. 81, 173; a.o.o.: Xwar. xın(?) ditto Og. 28 etc.: xiv ditto Qut5 147, MN yy, etc.; kilinç (sic?) Qufb 148: Kom. xiv. 'sword' kilic CCI, CCG; Gr.: rp. XIII al-sayf kuit:g Fou. 13, 14: xiv. ditto İd. 74; xv ditto Kas. 31, 6; 63, 19; Tuh. 19b. ro: Osm. xiv ff. Kilic notéd in various phr. TTS 1 456; 11 625; İİİ 444; IV 508. kulac 'fathom', the distance between the finger-tips of tvvo outstretched arms. S.i.a.m.l.g. as kulaç with minor phonetic changes in the -€. Both semantically and phonetically Kaj.'s suggestion of a connection with ko:l is impossible. L.-w. in Pe. etc., Doerfer III 1502. Xak. xr kulaç a/-54" 'fathom'; its origin is kol a2:c (sic) "open out the arms'; one says bl:r kulaç barçın “a fathom of brocade” Kaş. 7 358: KB (where is that man who seized other people's land?) kulaç yer alındı yatur inctkın “he has got himself (only one) fathom's length of land and lies groaning” 6439: xiv Muy. al-bd" kuzla:ç Mel. 47, 9; Rif. 141: Çağ, xv ff.   TRIS. GLB kulaç “an expression for the distance between the finger tips when the arms are outstretched' San. 289v. 19 (quotn.): Xwar. xır(?) Og. 364 (tiktür-): Kip. xırı a/-bd" kula:c Hou. zo, 18: xiv ditto Bul. o, ir, külaç (^with -ç”) al-bàá', and in the Kirdb Beylih kula: İd. 73: xv bat kulaş (sic) T'uh. 7a. 6. D kolcak Conc. N. fr. ko:l; survives in SW Az. ğolçağ, Osm. kolçak 'muff; gauntlet, glove', and the like. In Uvg. it looks more like a Dim. f., but -çak is not noted in this meaning. L.-w. in Pe. in Çağ. meaning, Doerfer III 1511, Uyğ. vrirff. Bud. (the child) iki ko:lıçakın (si) atası boy[unin] koçüp “clasping his father's neck with his two little arms(?)” U III 64, 13-14: Caf. xv ff. kolçak “a piece of armour (siláhi) made of steel and fastened to the forearm (sá'id) in battle' San. 29or. 10. Tris. V. GLCD kılıçla:- Den, V. fr. kilic; “to kill with the sword'. S.i.s.m.l. "Türkü (he lanced six men; his lance broke) yetinç erig kılıçla:dı: “he killed the seventh with a sword' / N 5: Xak. xı ol anı: kiliçla:dı: "he struck him with a sword' (sáfahu bi'l-sayf) Kaş. HI 331 (kiliçla:r, kiliçla:ma:k): Osm. xv-xvi Kiliclaoccurs in several texts TS IJI 444; IV 508 and the Recip. f. in xvi to xvin. D kulaçla:- Den. V. fr. kulag; survives in SW Az., 'Tkm. ğulaçla:-, Osm. kulacla- “to measure in fathoms, to walk fast waving the arms'. Xak. xı ol urukni: kulaçla:dı: “he measured the rope (etc.) in fathoms” (abá'a . . . bi-bá'ihi) Kaş. İL 330 (kulaçla:r, kulacla:ma:k): KB kayu yér kulaclayu yügrür yadağ “some run on foot striding over the ground' 1734. D kılıçlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of kılrçla:-. Xak. xr er kılrçlandı: "the man owned a svvord” Kaş, II 267 (Ktliclanu:r, kiliçlanma:k). Dis. ĞLD (D) kaltı: normally “hovv?” or '(just) as”, less often, with Conditional mood, '*when' or occasionally “if”. Not noted later than Uy£., and apparently an earlier form of kalt:, q.v. It has no connection with kal- but perhaps has some primeval etymological connection with ka:fu:, q.v. Türkü vur ff. kaltı: yürü:p taşığ alsar 'if a man takes a white stone” Toyok 14-15 (ET Y II 58); kalt: erkli “hovv powerful?! Toy. III 2v. 11-12; kaltt: uyun '"how shall 1 be able to get on?” IrkB 45: Man. (we know) yarukli karalı kaltı katilmiS 'how light and darkness were mixed" Chuas. 166—7; a.o. 170-1; ka[Iti] etóz kodsar biz 'when we lay aside our (human) bodies' TT II 6, 3: Uy&amp;. viri ff. Man.-A inça kalti Suv 1 1$ac kapağın yerde aça berürce 'just as water opens a door in the ground for bushes and trees” M I 15, 7-9; kalt1 ... yaraturca 'as a man makes” ..... (kaltı ... örtürürçe ... kaitı . . . erürçe) ançulayu ma “so also” do;  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 663 
     
   
   
                           14, 8-13; a.o. M II iz, 6 (iii) (when; konuk): Man. ınça kaltı . . . yeme 'just as ... so” Wind. 30-47: Bud. Sanskrit yathá "as" kaltı .. . ca TT VIII A.3; kalti puranı ulatı azağ nomluğlar sózleyürler “as the teachers of false doctrines, the Puránas, etc. say” U II B, 13-14; inça kalti “for example” (in a list of sins) TT IV 6, 26-7; o.o. of kalt . teg IHüen-ts. 324; TT VI 336; angulayu kaltı USp. 89, rr, 106, 32-3— kalti altı kün ertip bardı 'when six days had elapsed! PP zo, 1-2; kalti taluy ógüzke tegip “vhen he reached the sea-(shore)' do. 31, 3; kaltı ... erser *when...is' do. 38, 5-7: Civ. angulayu bolur kalti...teg TT I 51-2. D kaltuk (kaltok); prob. abbreviated Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. kalit- in the sense of something lifted up. L.-w. in Pe., etc. in the Çağ. meaning, Doerfer 111 1508. Xak. xi kaltuk “the horn (qarn) of a wild ox” which is hollowed out (yutqab), and broth (ai-xámiz) is drunk from it Kaş. I 475: Çağ. xvff. kaltak (spelt) “a leather attachment to the tree (hand) of a saddle, the saddle-tree itself” San. 275r. 21. D kıltik Den. N. fr. kit, Survives in SC Uzb. kiltik; NW Kl., Noğ. kilstk; SW Az. Étlcil; Osm. kilçik, "km. ğilçik meaning “the beard on a grain of wheat, rice, etc. ; a small fishbone; short, coarse hair', and the like. Cf. kildruk. L.-w. in Pe., etc. Doerfer 111 1509. Xak. xt kiltik (unvocalized) ibrryatu'l-ra's sa hazdzatuhu 'scurf (Hend.) on the head” Kaş. 7 475: Çağ. xv ff. kiltik/kileik (both spelt) (1) mizy “a hair” (2) xör-f máhi "a fish bone”, (3) xàrhà-i sirtis "the sharp spikes on grains of rice or barley”, in Pe. düsa San. 298v. 16. D koltuk Den. N. fr. ko:l; 'armpit. "The spelling koltik in Uyg. and Kaş. (but with Den, V. koltukla:-) may be the original form. S.i.s.m.l, ; 1.-vv. in Pe., etc. Doerfer III 1575. Uy£. viri ff. Civ. kimniy koltiki yıdığ bolSar 'if a man's armpits become malodorous' H I 28: Xak. xı koltik (sic) al-ibit 'armpit" Kaş. I 475: xm(?) Tef. koltuk ditto 212: Çağ. xv ff. koltuğ/koltuk zir-i bagal ditto San. 29or. 8: Kom. xiv ditto koltuk CCG; Gr.: Kip. xin al-ibif koltuk Hou. zo, 10: XIV ditto İd. 74: xv ditto Kav. 61, s: Tuh. ab. 2. D kidruk Hap. leg.; Dis., but completely unvocalized; abbreviated Conc. N. in -duruk fr. kil, Cf. Kiltik, Xak. xi kildruk sofa I-burr "the beard on vvheat” (etc.) Kaş. III 417. D koldaş N. of Assn. fr. ko:l; “comrade”, lit. .one with whom one links arms. S.i.s.m.l. L.-w. in Pe, Doerfer III 1507. Xak. xı koldaş "a comrade' (a/-qariz); the word is used only between servants of notables Kaş. I 461; a.o. III, 3: KB biligsiz kilinci yavuz koldaş 0l "his (own) actions are bad comrades for an ignorant man” 321; o.o. 1697-8 (adaş) 2276: xırı(?) Tef. koldaş “comrade, friend” 212: xtv Rhg. ditto R II 6oo (quotns.): Çağ. xı koldaş yör ve yoldaş ve dastgir “friend, fellow traveller, comrade' Vel. 344 (quotns.); hamdast "com  DIS. GLD- i 619 rade! San. 29or. 11 (quotn.): Osm. xiv and xv ditto in several texts 7 755 7 478; IV $53. Dis. GLDD kalat- (ka:lat-) Caus. f. of ka:la:-; survives in SC Uzb. kalat-. Xak. xı ol to:nuj$ kalattı: gallafa'l-tawb “he had the garment wrepped up'; also used of anything you have put in a wrapper or wardrobe (/ifafa am şun), originally ka:lattı: Kaş. 17 310 (kalatu:r, kalatma:k): Çağ. xv ff. kalat- Caus. f.; to order someone to heap up” San. 275r. 25. D kalit- Caus. f. of kalt:-; s.i.s.m.l. in NE. (Türkü vin this word has been incorrectly read in T 25, see uğraklat-): UyB. vin ff. Bud. (then the king of the dragons) kaltt(t) €lt(t)i 'raised him in the air and carried him” PP 52, 3: Xak. xi bu: er ol atın telim kalıtğan “this man constantly makes his horse buck' (yuwattib) Kaş. I $15; n.m.e. D kulad- Hap. leg.; Intrans. Den. V. fr. kul. "Türkü vii künedmiş kuladmış bodunığ "the people who had become female and male slaves! 1 E 13. D kaltur- Caus. f. of kal-; “to leave behind, to leave last', and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. İn SW Az., Tkm. ğaldır-, Osm. kaldir-, and kaldur- in the medicval languages mentioned below mean *to raise, lift', and the like and are a different word; in 'Tkm. it is the Caus. f. of ğal- (kalr-) kal- and kaltur- being pronounced Éa:l- and ğa:ldır-, in other cases it is commonly regarded as a crasis of *kalktur-, Caus. f. of kalk-, in some languages kalki-, which is a corruption of *kalik-, Emphatic f. of kalı:-. Uy£. vir ff. (E will return the vineyard) negüke kaltırmayın “vithout retaining it on any pretext” US?. 6, 5: Xak. xı ol barışda: (MS. yarışda:) kalturdi: sabaqahu fi'l-daháb wa tarakahu xalfa(n) "he outpaced him on the journey and left him behind'; also used if one has a bet with him (xátarahu) about something and leaves him behind (5aqqd) Kaş. II 191 (kalturur, kalturma:k): xiv Muh. amara bi'l-kawn "to order to be (?stay)” ka:ldur- Mel. 41, 4; Rif. 130 (mis-spelt kat); ka:tur- :31 (only); (rafa'a “to lift, raise" kaldur- 26, 11; 109: Xwar. xiu kaldurditto 'Ali 56: Kip. xv rafa'a'l-;jay' kaldirKav. 76, 1: Osm. xvi kaldur- in Rmi, crasis of kalkdur- (in 275r. 27 kalk- is said to be the Rimi f. of kalkı-) az cd bardaştan “to lift or remove from somevvhere” Sar. 275V. 13). D kiltur- Caus. f. of kil-; “to cause to make, do”, etc.; s.i.s.m.L, usually as kildir-. Uyf. vit ff. Bud. (if I have done (kiltim) these evil deeds myself or) adınağuka ayıp kilturtum erser 'spoken to others and made them do them” Suv. 134, 22 ff: Civ. işke kücké tartmağu kilturu yarlıkadımız “ve have ordered that they shall not be recruited for forced labour” (/Sp. 88, 22-3: Xak. xt ol apar r:ş kilturdr: “he made him do (a"maldhu) the work' Kaş. II 191 (kilturur, kilturma:k):  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 664 
     
   
   
     620 DIS. Caf. xv f. Kiüldur- kunàánrdan “to order to do” San. z9$8v. 8 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 147. D koltur- Caus. f. of kol-, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı ol mendin ne:p kolturdi: “he ordered someone to ask me (Pafi8 sa'ala minni) for the thing” Kaş. II 191 íkolturur, kolturma:k): xıv Roğ. Ya"qübnın kizin koldura kişi yiberdi “he sent a man to ask for yacob”s daughter in marriage! R 77 6oz. İen 2 H he A15. but imm a «ecuon for Dis. parentiy a Den. V. fr. *kaldur, which is presumably an onomatopoeic; cf. kaldurga:. Xak. xı to:n kaldra:dı: "the garment (etc.) rustled' (taqa"qa"a) Kaş. III 447 (kaldra:r, kaldra:ma:k).        Tris. GLD ment'; a scroll  Tris. V. en LDD koitukIn:- Den. V. fr. koituK ; “o carry under the erm like, S: m.m.lg. X xı ol otuy koltukla:di ta'ablata'l-xotab carried the firewood under his arm”, used for    “he also “to hit (someone) in the arm-pit” Kaş. III 351 koltukla:r, koltukla:ma:k). D koldaşlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. koJdas. Xak. xi ol meniry birle: koldaşlandı: “he reckoned himself to be one of my comrades' (ashábi) Kaş. II 272 (koldaşlanu:r, koldaşlanma:k). Mon. V. ĞLĞS kalk- Sec kaltur-, Dis. ĞLĞ D kahk Dev. N.fr.k ; normally phere” or, occa jiv by vsgally in ihe phr. kök kabhk, sky), in one or two cases perheps "a structure open to the sky” or the Jike. N.o.a.b. Uy£. vir ff. Man, kahğun (sic) kodi éntigiz “ou  “the air, şelf büt “the (visible)       came down from axle sky” dT TT 35: a.0. do. bz gm. arə Dua DAL ai? 6, X 134 his 4M  Ver ise queen) bi ih ita ödiz keahikta udivur erken "was ing asleep on a hi “b open b alceny(?) in the town! (and had a very had dicum) Suv. 620, 16 17: Civ. TT I 23 (ug-): xiv Chin.Uyğ. Dict. cing F'ung "bloc sky” (Giles 2,184 6,399) kök k- "nk L cei as; RH 240: Nak. xir kahk el kos” he air, atmosphere! Kaş, 1 383: 0.0. I 354, 25; İTİ 46, 5: NB (various birds) kshiib tedi "have 7 the air” 72; kahk kaşı tüğdi "he sky wrinkled its    has GLDbrow' (and pours down rain) 8o; olo, 94, 5378, etc.: Xin(?) 4t. kalik kuslari us bi i of the air 459: X war. xii(?) (the valis of ibis house were gold, the smoke hole silver) .. "s lar temürdin erdiler . . . ac kahk * windows (or balconies?) were of iron . (stay here and) “open the window (or s Og. 230-4. x: D kilik Dev. N. fr : Chacacter”     Uus. vin £. Buc. ire and) kihki ti orz Bh erineser character are not continuously stable Sue 304, 3-4: Civ. kihki yas “his character is müd(y TT VII 17, 22; &amp;o. do. 6 (éltis-). Xak. xı kibk asa wal-i işra ma'a'l-nà, "behaviour, pe: rsonal 77v also promned bv all, the uite is bumility' 266-50: ;e, solemn” 208) "character, pature' k ug z 14 (Rif. 150 kilmç): Çağ. xv ff. kibk P      ions, bebaviour! Pel. 332 (quoin.); Xii 'iburat ax xacud tabifat "an expression for pe ality or character” Sar, zo (guotn.): Xwar. xiv kilik “conduct, character” Qutb 148: (Kom. xiv kilikli “having a (good) character CCI, CCG; Gr. 206 (quotn.)): Kip. xır al-xulug kilik Hou. 19, 16: xiv ditto; one says kiliki eyğü: dür “his character is good”, and kılıkı yaman dur “his character is bad” /4. 74: (XV xulug kilği Tuh. 14a. 5; 9ob. 9): Osm. xiv and xvi kilik “character, behaviour! in two texts T7TS 1 456; IV 308. S kulak See kulkak. D kulluğ P.N./A. fr. kul, n.o.a.b. Türkü vir ol ödte: kul kulluğ (or kulliğ ?) bolmiş erti: "at that time (even) slaves had become slave-owners! 1 E 21, II E 18. D kuliuk A.N. fr. kul,  “slavery, tbe    Save. Saa m.).g except NE(Q) wi extended recanings. L.-w. in Pe., etc. " 111::58o. Üyğ. vii ff. Bud, kamağın edi Ü ógH tegine kulluk (sic, not Au//uij t “barırbiz “Re will al eo in the capacity af T» jpves 10 MEE 2.            d E birle *wus beldi : (to vou) the word «Ja : sün veleome! 389; a.0. 1918: xi eit) T«f. ... “service, or sub ion, to God" 217: Çağ. xv ff. 57: bandayi wa xidinat fthe su of «lave, service; end nictaph. 'erd-i ? anoo of TE rvice” San. 290r. 16: xw ar. süTViCC " Qutb 143: Kom. iv “se edity, respect kelluük CCI; Gr. 7 xiv ff. kuHok "en ceu dün ç fairly comnis ” s53. hu ME O«m. status of xlavc or servant; 1 595; 11 664; H1 486; 7   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 665 
     
   
   
     , DIS. ĞLM kulkak “ear , this seems to be the earliest form, but the word seems to have evolved Tier early via kulxak (there is no parallel jor -X- jn such a position) into kulak, in ahich form itsi.am.lg Türkü vii kózin körmedük kulkakın eşidmedük “vhat the eye had not seen nor the ear beard! İT N 11; zo. 11 S i2 (b1c-): Man. kózin kórüp kulJan .. 5 13: Uy£. vin ff. ears? TTIX jo: k  &amp;Kul»as, Us iiioz,io; di 4d 163. 107, 405; A go, "TM TV 254, 93; PP SO, 7 Hüen-ts. 159: Civ, kulka:k TT VIII Ls; iut ak TT VII 34, $; kulak do. 9-16; HI 6, 176: Xiv. Chin.- -Usg. Dict. 'ear' kulak Təşeti 169; R II 968: Xak. xı kulak alR ar'; some of them. say kulxak and ne! 266; TS kulak 'car' 2r XIV dun kula:k Mel. 46, 7; Rif. 139; 8. xv ff. kulag göş “car” Sen. 289v. end phr.): Kwar. xiv. kulak “car”   Quitb 343: Kom. xiv ditto CCI; Gr.: Kap. xin al-udun : 20, 1; 'donkey' (eşek and) kula:&amp;i: uzun “4ong-cared” do. 12 — xiv kulak al- udun, in the Kitàb Beylik kula:ğ Jd. 74: xv al-udun kula:ğ Kav. 60, 15; udun kulak Tuh. 4b. 1; sanata 'to listen' (tiple-; in margin, in second hand) kulak urdo. 23a. 2: Osm. xiv ff. kulak, occasionally kulax noted in several phr. TTS I 494; 11 663-4; III 485-6; IV 550-1. — kalkan “shield”, s.ia.m.lg. except NE(?). L.w. in Mong., ” Pe., etc. Doerfer 111 1538. Uyf. xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. 'shield' kalkan R II 254; Ligeti 161: Xak. xı kalkan “shield” (a!-turs) in one of the two dialects (al-Jugatayn) Kaş. 1 24: “q erse)ş kalkan al-zurs dialect kalkan 717 356; o.0. of Balkan m $9: Hl 82 (yaüpin-); 221 (fura): KB 7277 xın(?) Tef. kalkan “"shield” xiv Muh. al-turs kalka Mel. 71, 8, 173: Çağ. xv fi. kalkan sipar “shield” 27 (alin) Xwar. xın(?) ditto 38, 98: xiv ditto Quib 120: Kom. ditio Gr.: s xu -al- furs dot sn . "aqa Que Üacr 5 ika, "ih dı boween -K- and -É- büt neaser to    ob: Rif. San. 28 Sy. Og. / CC Gi  xv ig a    “k.t “öz. Əq, 1: daraga kəlkan Tuh. ish. 7 O*sm. xiv ff, kalkan noted in phr. T7TS I 395; IT z68; III 398. Dis. V. GLGD Lolfir- Hap. leg.; Tuchoative f. of kol-. Xak, xi o1 mendin ko Iğırdı: tə ask (Lad lI 165 “he ws about Ja an yas'al) roe for siiiething! Kaş. (EolYira:r, kolğarma:k). 621 Tris. GLG D kolğu:çı Dev. N.Ag. fr. kol-; 'beggar'; n.o.2.b.; in KB the two best MSS. have koltguci, and this spelling also occurs in PP; it seems however to be merely a Sec. f. (c£. külgü:): in PP it may be a mistranscription of kolunğuçı, q.v. Uy£. vin ff. Bud. kolguci a 7,2 3 (üzül-); koltğuçi do. 10, 3-5 (bar-) : Xak. xi KB (if a ruler takes pleasure i in 505 he ruins the rcalm) bold: özi kolbeggar 2093. D kula:kiğ P.N./A. fr. kulak (ku!ka “having ears'. S.isgml. Xak. x: kula:k! ne:n “a thing with ears” (udun) Kaş. 1 498: xiv Muh.(?) Rif. 139 (only ; ağır). Tris. V. GLGb nülabıı Den. V. İn. a k qanın    jh ed in this e Y Uy$. vin ff. Bud. TT FH 4. 16 (bekiz): Çağ. xv ff. kihil- (cur, -di) Eihz-, yan eylen- Vel. 332 (quon); krhl- b. xk y kalin- harda şüdan “Go be inade, done! Sun. 298v. 3 (quotn.). Tris. GLL D ka:lılığ Hap. leg.; presumably a P.N./A. fr. *kah: Dev. N. fr. kal- meaning 'having a remainder' or the like; opposite to kalı:sız, q.v. Uyğ. vniff. Bud. (Sanskrit missing) ka:hhg TT VIII F.13. Tris. V. GLLVUD kolu:la:- n.o.a.b.; the contexts and the fact that it is used in Hend. ve. sakin- suggest that it meant something like "to meditate” or perhaps “to investigate", Obviously a Den. M but with no semantic connection with kolu: E or with kol-. "kü vür ff, (one of   2051 2940) hair coser everything! Toy. JH 2r. 5-9 (TY Hai; 79): Uy. ukar und vnirff. Bod. koduru kolulap irü “after riediteting cernestly he fully erstands” U /1 D $ koduru kohilap Herb son ; 281. yen qo NH 79, 9-10 tir: inu bolulavar biz — wc think and meditste! (how wonderful sind sv ift it is) Hüen-ts. 1896, (ihe countless Budddbes) kalp ödün kolulasur biliğülük ermez cannot be known (even) if one incditutes for the period of a kalpa! Kun. 178; 2.0. do. 19377 (b uyanl]a:-), 216; T T. p Ms 14 21 (a dirt).        GUM :N.S.A.fnk Kal; mea ng contest SucpgestS sön icthing Ye fülehindorbecoinc əbsolete”, Dis. Jo kalm Tap. leg.7; obscure, ihe which has bus UN uunununununununununununununu—xxxıxxoxıxoxkkxspsbamqsss£sx,rur—rc———€—.€..—....—.—oıÜ—ü—.—U—ÜUILÖ-İİ LL ııı ıı ııı əə, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 666 
     
   
   
     622 Xak. xı KB tapuğka manma ay tapğı telim tapuğ kılğa axir başınnı kalım “O man with long service, do not rely on (long) service; in the end service will make your head useless(?)' 4755. Tris. GLM D kalı:ma: Hap. leg.; Intrans. Conc. N. fr. kali:- ; lit. 'something up in the air”, cf. kalık. Xak. xi kah:ma: al-jurfa "balcony” Kaş. III 174. Tris. V. GLMD kilimsin- Hap. leg.; Refl. Simulative Den. V. fr. “kilim N.S.A. fr. kil-.. Uy£. vii ff. Bud. siz ök kılımsındınız yarım nom taplağın örü tikmeklik “you seem to have been advocating satisfaction vvith the “half doctrine" (i.e. the Himaydsa)” Hüen-ts. 2087-8. Dis. ĞLN kalın (of a solid object) “massive, dense” , (of a crovvd) “dense” and the like, almost syn. vv. yoğu:n, the difference between the two seems to emerge in T 13-14 where kalın is contrasted with yuyka: (yuvka:) and yoğun with yincge:; on this basis kalin must mean “dense” in the sense e.g. of weighing a good deal per cubic foot, while yofu:n means *thick' in the sense of having a substantial distance between the two surfaces. "The semantic connection is too remote to justify the theory that this is a Dev. N./A. fr. kal-. S.i.a.m.l.g.; in some NE, NC, NW languages kalın. Türkü viri (when a thing is flimsy it is easy to crumple it up) yuyka: kalin bolsar "but when the flimsy thing becomes solid” (it is difficult) T 13: virt ff. Yen. kalin yağıka: kaymatin tegipen 'attacking the enemy and showing no respect for them' Mal. 28, 8: Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. kalın küvrağ arasinta “in the middle of a dense crowd' U III 53, 4 (iii) (U JI 23, 18); kalın kunçülyllarığ 'numerous consorts” U III 16, 19; o.o. PP 70, s, Kuan. 43 ff., etc. (all of crowds and the like): Civ. yüz el(l)ji&amp; kalin böz “ışo (rolls of) solid (thick) cotton cloth” U Sp. 16, s: Xak. xi kalın 'anything dense or thick! (Zaxin wa Baliz); hence a numerically strong (al-katif) army is called kalın sü: Kaş. 7 404; five o.o.: KB kalınyatara “among a crowd ofstrangers” 491; 0.0. 1021, 1697 (adas), 2178, 2710, 286r (y1:8), 5164: xiu(?) Tef. kalt “thick” (mattress) 196: Caf. xv ff. kalin mutarakkim wa anbüh 'thick, dense, numerous' San. 276r. 12 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv kalip (of a crowd) “dense” Qutb 129: Kom. xiv “thick” kalın CCG; Gr.: Kip. xut al-cafi 'thick, coarse" (opposite to “thin” yupka:) kalin Hou. 27, 9: xiv kalin galiz: xv taxin (sie, in error) kalin Tuh. 9a. 3; taxin wa gazir ('abundant') kalin do. xob. 13; cafir 'sheath' (kin; càafi? kalın do. rıb. r: Osm. xiv and xv kalin 'dense, numerous'; in several texts T'T I 406; II 567. 1 kalıp “bride price", that is a sum of money paid by a bridegroom to the family of his intended bride; cf. kabin, S.i.a.m.l.g. except SE, the modern forms varying between kalıp, DIS. GLM kalım (from which the Russian word Aalym is derived), and kalın. L.-vv in Pe. etc., Doerfer HI raoy. (Uyğ. ix kizimin kalipsiz bértim "1 gave my daughters (in marriage) without (demanding) a bride price” Suci 7): Xak. xt kalt a/-mahr "bride price” Kaş. İTİ 371 (prov.; verse): Çağ. xv ff. kalın “a sum of money (mli) which a suitor sends to the family of his (intended) bride when secking her hand in marriage! San. 276r. 14: Kip. xit mahrie'l-zateca kalın Hou. 27, ig: xv kalın al-mahr İd. 74: xv ditto Tuh. 35b. 2: Osm. xiv to xvt kalın "bride price”, in several texts T'T:S 1 406; HI 568; III 398; IV 456. S 2 kalt See kalın. kolan 'saddle-girth'. Survives in NE with some phonetic changes and in SW Osm. kolan; (Tkm. ğolap “the rope encircling a reed hut Xak. xı kolan ai-hizàm 'girth'; kolan eti: “the part of a horse which is encircled by the girth' Kaş. 7 404: xiv Mu. al-hizam kola:n Mel. 72, 1; Rif. 174: Xwar. xiv kolan (sic) 'girth' Qutb 143: Kom. xiv “girth” kolan CCT, Gr.: Kip. xti a/-hisüm kola:n Hou. 11, 8; 14, 2: Xiv ditto İd. 74: xv ditto Kav. 64, 3; hizàm (ayıl and) kolan Tuh. 13a. $: Osm. xviri, in Rimi, tang-i asb 'girth' San. 289v. 27; kolan (spelt) in Ritmi, same as kolan do. 28. kula:n “the wild ass, Equus hemtonus'. An early l.-w. in Mong. (Haerntsch yı, Kon. 922) and in Pe. etc. Doerfer III 1574. S.1a.m.l.g. except NE(?), see Shcherbak, p. 9s. Cf. tau. Uyğ. xiv. Chin.-Uyg. Dict. yeh ma *wild horse' (Giles 12,989 7,576) kulan tağı (misspelt fan) Ligeti 169; R II 974: Xak. xi kula:n himàáru'l-wahg *wild ass” Kaş. I 415; four o.o. translated a/-"ayr “vild ass”: KB 284 (bas-); 5375 (taf): xın(?) Tef. kulan 'wild ass” 217: xiv Muh. himáru'l-wa]i ku:la:n Mel. 72, 8; Rif. 175: Çağ. xv ff. kulan gür xar ditto San. 289v. 26: X war. xiv ditto Qut) 143: Kip. himaru”l-mahş kula:n Hou. 11, 8: xiv ditto İd. 74; Bul. 1o, 8: xv ditto Kat. öz, 7; himör (eşek and) kulan Tu. 153a. 4: Osm. xiv ff. kulan “vild ass”, in scveral texts T T'S I 477; HI 467; IV 532 (everywhere Kkolan). VUF xulip Hap. leg.; no doubt a Chinese phr., ho ling or hu ling?. Cf. barçın. Xak. xt xulip “a word for silk of variegated colours ('alà alwàán sgattà) imported from China” Kaş. II 371. kulun “a foal” from birth to one year, younger than a ta:y, q.v. S.i.a.m.l.g.; see Shcherbak, p. 90. L.-w. in Pe., etc. Doerfer III 1423. "Türkü vırı ff. IrkB 24 (emig): Xak. xı kulun a/-falc “foal” Kaş. I 404; 0.0. translated al-muhr “colt” T 215, 9; İT go, 11; translated al-fulüm III 92, 3: xiv Müh. al-muhr külün Mel. 69, 12; Rif. 170: Kip. xii (al-muhr ta:y) al-muhru'l-sagir (small”) kuslun, Dim. f. ku:lunça:k Hon. iz, 9: xiv külün al-fuliito İd. 74: Osm. xiv ff. külün (occasionally spelt kulan?) “foal”, c.i.a.p. TT'S I 496; II 665; III 487; IV 552.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 667 
     
   
   
      TRIS. GLN | 623: ?D kalpu: Hap. leg, but cf. kalpu:la:- ; possibly a crasis of *kalinf$u: Dev. N./A. fr. *kalin- Refl. f. of kal- in the sense of something that remains or stays by itself. Xak. xı kalpu: al-tuftzw "ala ra'si'l-mà' floating on the surface of the water; hence one says suvda: kalpu:la:di: “he floated (fafá) on the surface of the water' Kaş. 711 379. D king Dev. N. fr. kilin- ? 'act, deed, action”, as opposed to kilik which means rather “a course of action”, in Buddhist terminology normally translates Sanskrit karma, but in U II 8, 20 ff. bhava.. N.o.a.b. Türkü vrrr ff. Man. yek kilingiga “by his devilish actions' Chuas. 1 17; bu kihngin (özüti?) bosunmağay '[his soul?) will not be freed by this act' TT II 6, 31-2: Uyğ. viri (after this my father the xagán died) kara: bodun kilinc[1: gap] “the actions of the common people . . .' Su. N 12: vni ff. Man, bu buyan edgü kilinç küçinte “by the strength of these meritorious and good deeds' TT ZX 96; o.o. do. 100; 77 III 11: Bud. kilinç in such phr. as edgü kihnce 'good deeds! and ayığ kilinç: “evil deeds' is very common PP 2, 1; 3, 7; 12, 3 etc.; U III 42, 2; 89, 17; Index to TT Ito V, p. 37, Suv. 7, 11 (opar-): Xak. xt kilinc al-xuluq "behaviour'; hence one says edgü kilinc “göod behaviour! and also the opposite; kiline tafannucu'l-mar'a wa dalàluhá 'feminine coquetry (Hend.)'; one says to a woman üküş Kkiinclanma: “do not be such a coquette" Kaş. III 374; 8.0. I1 156 (kilin-): KB kiling is common 42 (kilik), ros, 149, 181, 340 (arkuk), etc.: xiv Muh.(?) xuluq va ta" 'behaviour, nature” kiline. Rif. 147 (Mel. 51, 14 kr:li:ğ): Xwar. xiv Kilinç “action” Qutb 148: (and see kilig): Osm. xiv to xv1 kilinç “action”, etc. in several texts; kilınç et-/eyle- “to: behave coquettishly” 77.5 I 457; 27 625; 2/1 444. : D kalpuk Hap. leg.; apparently crasis of *kalinf$uk, Dev. N./A. fr. “kalın-, cf. kalnu: syn. vv, kiltik but not connected etymologically. Xak. xı kalnuk (MS. in error halguk) 'scurf' (hazázatu'l-ra's), and also anything like fur or hide which is matted (ingabada) by contamination with something viscid Kaş. 111 383. Dis. V. GLND kihn- Refl. f. of kil-, usually in a Pass. sense 'to be made, created', and the like, but in the early period also (of a child) “to form its own character, to grow up”. S.i.a.m.Lg. Türkü vur inisi: eçi:si:nteğ kilinmaduk erinc oğlı kanınteğ Kihinmaduk ering 'apparently the younger brothers did not grow up like their elder brothers or the sons like their fathers! I E s, II E s, (1 myself, the Counsellor Toftukuk) Tavğaç élipe: kilintim '*grew up for (i.e. as a subject of) the Chinese Empire” T 1; o.o. I Er, 11 E 2 (asra:); Ongin 4: VIII ff. Man. kentü tuğmış kılınmış 'scifborn and self-created' Chuas. I14: Uyf. viiiff. Bud. sipirgelir oşuğluğ kKilinip  “making as if to swallow him up” U IV 8, 19; Çaştanı eliğ begig sançğalı urğalı kılınıp 'making as if to pierce and strike King Caştana” do. 40 ff., o.o. TT X 359; Suv. 138, 18-19; 610, 7: Civ. beğ bolğalı kılırıdın "you were making as if to become a beg' TT 1 36, kilinduk sayu iş büter 'everything which you do for yourself succeeds” do. 138-9; a.o. VII 30, 3: Xak. xı er teáme: kilinc kilindt: 'amila'l-racul. min kulli'l-'amal' “the man did everything (possible) , and if he wishes to do more than he should, one says to him üküş kılınma: “do not overdo it” (là tucáwizu'l-hadd) Kaş. II 156 (kilinu:r, kilinma:k); o.o. İ 64, 13; 394, 19; 508, 3; III 20, 16: KB (do not treat life lightly) edgü kilin “do good' (or make yourself good?) 1333; (look at the fair-haired beauty and) kilin özke fal “make him your mascot' 2468: xın(?) At. (if you are a believer) tavvadu" kilin “behave humbly' 286; a.o. 414; Tef, kilin- forms Compound Pass. V.s with Ar. N.s 208: Çağ. xv ff. San. 298v. 3 (kilil-): Xwar. xiv kilin- “to do (for oneself); to be done” Qutb 147: Kip. xiv kilin-. taxallaga. ma'ahu "to model oneself on someone'(?) /d. 74: Osm. xv and xvi kilin'to behave (in some way); to be made'; in two texts TS IV $09. D kolun- Refl. f. of kol-; survives only(?) in NW Kar. L., T. kolun- “to ask for (something) for oneself” R II 593; cf. kolungugi:. Uy£. viii ff. Man. TT III 141 (tüzügü): Bud. Hüen-ts. 231-2 (kerğeksiz): Xak. xı er ne: kolundt: “the man asked for (sa'ala) something (for himself) Kaş. II 156 (kolunu:r, kolunma:k); a.o. İ 22, 3. D kalnu:- Hap. leg.; Intrans. Den. V. fr. kalın, cf. kalna:d-. Xak. xı yuvka: ne: kalnu:dı: “the flimsy thing became dense or thick! (zaxuna . . . wa £aluza) Kaş. III 302 (kalnu:r, kalnu:ma:k). D kulna:- Trans. Den. V. fr. kulun; n.o.a.b. Cf. kulunla:-. Xak. xi kısra:k kulna:di: “the mare foaled' (natacat . . . falw) Kaş. 111 302 (kulna:r, kulna:ma:k); (in a note on yénl:-, q.v.) for a mare, since “foal” is kulun, “the mate foaled” (natacat) is kisrak kulna:dr; one should say kulunla:dı:, but the shorter word is used because -n- and -1- come from. the same point of articulation (maxrac) so that the two interchange and the word is shortened to this III oz, 5: Kip. xiv kulnavalada filw “to foal” İd. 74. D kalna:d- Hap. leg.; Intrans. Den. V. fr. kalin; cf, kalnu:-. Xak. x1 yuvka: ne:p kalnattı: “the flimsy thing became thick' (Zaluza); originally kalna:dtı: but assimilated Kaş, /7 350 (kalnatu:r, kalnatma:k; sic, no doubt in error for kalna:dur, kalnadma:k). Tris. GLN ?F koluna “the young shoot of a plant or tree; n.o.a.b. The word is not of a normal Turkish shape and may be an Indo-European (?Tokharian) l.-w. connected with LE. *gol—MÀ e ÀÀ— iii ERE (o, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 668 
     
   
   
     624 "branch'; Armenian Kolr "branch”, Tokharian B holyi "hair", Uyğ. vii ff. Man. Wind. 8-9 (eded-); Bud. (I will create the roots, twigs, branches, and leaves of various flowers and fruits) yana yeme 1 tarığ kolunasın “the young shoots of bushes and cereals” Suv. 529, 9. D kalınçu: Dev. N./A. fr. *kalin-, cf. kalpu:, kalpuk; 'remainder, residue', sometimes in a pejorativesense. N.o.a.b. Cf. kalınçsız. Uy£. virt ff. Bud. Sanskrit divasávasesena "for the rest of the day” künnürp kalınçusı üze: TT VIII G.7; (in a list of demons who are unclean feeders) kalınçu aşlığlar 'eaters of residues' U İl 61, 13; o.o. Hiüen-ts. 306, (sap-) 2011 (Çö:b, and further o.o. in note thereon); U.Sp. IOI, 12. D kulna:çı: N.Ag. fr. kulna:-; (of a mare) “in foal”. N.o.a.b. Xak. xr kulnaçı: kısra:k al-"aqüq mina'l-xayl "a mare in foal” Kaş. 1 491: Kıp. xın al-hicru'l-'ujár “a mare in the tenth month of pregnancy' ku:lna:çı: (?sic, MS. ku:nla:npi) Hou. ız, 8: xiv. külnaçı: (unvocalized) a/-hicru”l-hümil "a mare in foal” İd. 74. D kılınçlığ P.N./A. fr. kilinç, used only with preceding qualifying Adj.; n.o.a.b. Türkü vil ff. a:firığ kilinçli:ğ "evil doing! Toy. III iv, 2-3 (ET Y II 178); Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A edgü kılınçlığ 'doing good works! M I 10, 3: Man. edgü kılınçlığ ışlarığ 19lattipiz TT III 80; o.o. do. 113-17: Bud. ayığ kilinclığ PP 62, s, U III sə, 6 (ii); edgü kılınçlığ iş TT IV 12, 53; a.0.0.: Civ. edğü kılınçlığ iş TT I 53, 79: Xak. xi KB 340 (arkuk). D kalınçsız Hap. leg.; Priv. N./A. fr. *kaline (cf. kalincu:). Uy£. viri ff. Bud. kalınçsız v.l. for kalisiz TT IV 12, 60. D kolunğuçu: Dev. N.Ag. fr. kolun-; “beggar'. N.o.a.b.; perhaps a misreading of koltÉugr (see kolğuçı:) but that word may be a misreading of this one. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. irinç çığay buşıçı kolunğuçı tınlığlar 'miserable poor alms-gatherers and beggars” U III 10, 4-5. D kolonluğ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. “kolon Dev. N. fr. kol-. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. [gap] kópülin bir kolonloğ kóplin bu da:rnı boşğutup “teaching this dháram with a . .. mind and a prayerful(?) mind” TT VIII K.7. D kulunluğ P.N./A.'fr. kulun, “having a foal”. S.is.m.l. Xak. x1 kulunluğ kisra:k ramaha mutliya, that is “a mare which has a foal following her” (yaz/ühd) Kaş. I soo. D kalipsiz Hap. leg.; Priv. N./A. fr. 1 kalıp, *without demanding a bride price”, Uyf. ix Suci 7 (1 kali). Tris. V. GLND kılınçlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. kilinc; “to be coquettish”, Xak. xr Kaş. IJI 374 (kiling); n.m.e. ' TRIS. GLN D kulunle:- Den. V. fr. kulun; (of a mare) “to foal”. S.i.a.m.lg. with. some phonctic changes; cf. kulna:-. Türkü vri ff. IrkB 5 (2 bé:): Xak. x1 Kaş. III 92 (kulna:-); n.m.e.: Kom. xiv “to foal” kulunla- CCG; Gr. D kalgu:la:- Den. V. fr. kalgu:; pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı er suvda: kalpu:la:di: "the man floated (rafá) on the surface of the water'; this happens when he kicks (yarkud) his legs and moves his shoulders and is stationary (gà'im) being supported by the water Kaş. III 410 (kalpu:a:r, kalnu:la:ma:k, everywhere vocalized kaítgu:la:-); a.o. 111 379 (kalnu:). PUD kalapur- Hap. leg.; the etymological suggestions in the note on the passage are unconvincing, prob. a mis-spelling of *kalpurIntrans. Den. V. fr. kalpu:, “to float' or the like. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. (when I heard of your good health, that which could not be seen shone brightly, as if I had seen you in the flesh) kah[yu] kalapurdı kópülümüz “our mind rose in the air (with joy) and floated there' Hüen-ts. 1878-9. Dis. GLS D kulsığ Dev. N. fr. *kulsi:- Simulative Den. V. fr. kul. N.o.a.b Xak. xi kulsığ er “a man whose character (xwulquhu) resembles the character of a slave! Kaş. I 465; a.o. III 128, 19 (under -Ssığ, cf, ersig): KB adirmazmen begsig yà kulsığ kişiğ 'I do not distinguish between the lordly and the servile man' 809. Tris. GLS D kalıssız Priv. N/A, fr. *kali: Dev. N. fr. kal-; "without a remainder, without exception”, and the like. N.o.a.b. Türkü vir on ok bodunı: kalı:sız taşıkmış “the On Ok (i.e. Western "Türkü) people have taken the field in full force! T 30; a.o. T 33: Uy£&amp;. vin ff. Bud. (the rulers in all Jambudvipa) kalısız keltiler “came without exception" U 77 22, 23; alku nızvanılarığ idi yokipa tegi kalısız öçürüp “suppressing all emotions vvithout exception to the point of complete extinction” TT IV 12, 55-7; o.o. do. 6o (v.l. kalınçsız), TT X 129, 248; Suv. 49, 1; 137, 22; 138, I2 etc. VUD kolusuz Priv. N./A. fr. kolu:; n.o.a.b. In the phr. ödsüz kolusuz clearly “untimely” , in the phr. ülgüsüz kolusuz it seems to mean rather “not confined to a single short period; timeless, eternal”. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (just as the sin of killing living things is grievous; the merit and good deed of not killing them) ança ok ülgüsüz kolusuz tétir “is called equally immeasurable and eternal(?)' Suv. 21, 16-17) in TT VI 440 kolusuz is a v.l. for ülgüsüz in the phr. ülgüsüz etóz bodisatv 'the Bodhisattva with the immeasurable body”: o.o. do. 348-9 (6dsüz), 439. Dis. V. GLSD 1 kalış- Co-op. £. of kal-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xr (after 2 kalış-) also used when two men com  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 669 
     
   
   
     : 3 T i À ji i  DIS. V. pete in remaining behind (fi'l-tark. xalfa(n); MS. xalqa(n)) Kaş. II 109 (no Aor. or İnfin.): Caf. xv ff. (kalın- /kalış- (both spelt) sud pasmándan ya"ni büy kam àwardan "to stay behind, that is to run off' San. 275r. 8. D 2 kalış- Recip: f. of kalı:- ; s.i.s.m.l. in NE(?) R II 245. Xak. xı at adğır kalışdı: *the horses and stallions jumped at onc another" (tawátabat) Kaş. I1 109 (kaligu:r, kalışma:k). D kiliş- Co-op. of kil-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xr ol mapa: ı:ş kilisdi: "he helped me to do something” (fi'l-'amal); also used for competing Kaş. II 109 (kilisu:r, kiligma:k): Çağ. xv ff. kilis- Co-op. f.; bà yak digar hardan “to do (something) together' San. 298r. 29 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv bir biripizke hasad kılışmanız “do not envy one another” Nac. 412, 6. D koluş- Hap. leg.?; Recip. f. of kol-, Xak. xi ola:r ikki: ki:z koluşdi: “they asked one another for a daughter in marriage' (xafaba; MS. hataba in error); also used when two men ask (sa'ala) one another for something Kaş. II 109 (verse; no Aor. or Infin.). Mon. GM ka:m “sorcerer, soothsayer, magician', and the like. Survives only(?) in NE, most languages R II 476. L.-w. in Pe., Doerfer II 1409. Cf. kamla:-. Uyğ. vir ff. Man.-A (physicians will not be able to heal him) takı kamağ kamlar térlep ner tirgürmegey 'and all the sorcerers when they assemble will certainly not bring him back to life” M I 15, 8-9; o.o. do. 33, 17-18 (tenrilik), 22; Man.-uig. Frag. 400, 9 etc.: Bud. yekke içğekke kamka tapığçı tınlığlar üküş “vvorshippers of demons (Hend.) and sorcerers are numerous” TT VI oıy-ı8: Xak. xı kam al-hühin “soothsayer” Kaş. IJI 157; three o.o.: KB kerek tut otaçı kerek erse kam “get a physician or, it may be, a sorcerer' 1065; bu dunyü kamı “the sorcerer of this world' (cannot cure it) 2002; 0.0. 3873, 5244: Xiu(?) Tef. (you are not) kàhin ya"ni xam 346: xiv Muh. al-'arráf (sorcerer”) soa”l-hühin ka:m Mel. 5, 2; Rif. 75; al-'arráf wa'l-mu'azzim (snake-charmer”) ka:m 58, s, 156: Çağ. xv ff. kam tabib wa mu'álic wa hakim wa dünişmand “physician, healer, sage, wise man” San. 276v. 7: Kom. xiv “female exorciser” kam katun CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv kam al-tabib İd. 75: xv düya properly *midwife, foster mother”, here perhaps *witch' kam Tuh. 15a. 13. 1 ko:m “camel”s pack-saddle'. S.i.a.m.l.g. (SW "Tkm. ğo:m) in the same meaning or for “the pad on such a saddle; the fat on a camel”s back”. Xak. xı ko:m qatabu'l-ba'ir "a camel's packsaddle'; it is made as follows, the camel's back-cloth (Ais) is taken and stuffed with straw, and both side pockets of it (hawalayhi) are thus raised to the level of the hump; it is called tevey ko:mı: Kaş. IJI 136: Kip. xim al-hidáca wa'l-barda'a "camel saddle, pack-saddle” kom Hou. 5, 16. GMA- 625 2 ko:m “vave”, Survives in NE Alt. kom R I7 667; SW Tkm. ğo:m. Xak. xi ko:m mawcu'l-má' "a vvave” Kaş. III 137 (verse): xiv Muh. al-mawc ko:m Mel. 77, 3; Rif. 180; Kom. xiv “vave” kom CCG, Gr.: Kip. xti al-matoc kom Hou. s, 15: Osm. xvil kom “"vave, storm” 77. I 496 (Rum). kum 'sand'. S.i.a.m.l.g. L.-w. in Pe., etc. Doerfer 111 1525. UyÉ. viri ff. Man. M IH 37, 3-5 (ii) (3 al): Bud. yeri kumı alku kümüş “its soil and sand were all silver” PP 36, 6-7; kum sanınça burxanlar “Buddhas as numerous as (grains of) sand” U III 57, 12; o.o. Hüen-ts. 321-3 (tepit-); Kuan. 84, etc.: Çigil xı kum al-raml 'sand'; the Oğuz do not know this word Kaş. 7 338; seven Xak. o.o. translated a/-raml, al-turáb *dust', or al-'ánik "a heap of sand”: K.B (the mind of an ignorant man is) kum tef "like sand' 975; (this man's soul) kuruğ kumka okşar “is like dry sand” 3626: xırı(?) At. sanarmu ediz kum uşak taş sanı "can one count (the grains in) a high sandbank or small pebbles?” 6o: Tef. kum 'sand' 217: xıv Muh. al-raml ku:m Mel. 75, 1; Rif. 178: Çağ. xv ff. kum rig-i narm “soft sand" San. 290r. 29 (quotn.): Kom. xiv 'sand' kum CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xui al-raml kum Hou. 5, 15: XIV ditto İd, 75; Bul. 4, 10: xv ditto Kav. 58, 14; Tuh. 16b. s. Mon. V. ĞMkam- “to strike down'; more vaguely “to lover”, n.o.a.b.; cf. kamçı:, Uyğ. vit ff Bud. anta ok yerde kamdı “and then beat him to death on the ground” U TT 27, 24-5: Xak. xı ol anı: kamdı: darabahu fa-atxanahu wa awbagahu "he beat him unmercifully, beat him to death” Kaş. 17 27 (kama:r, kamma:k), o.o. III 230, 18 (t1$-); 382, 11 (misvocalized kum-): KB kamdı köz "he lowered his eyes” 5799: Xvvar. xiv kamar köz MN 108. kom- Hap. leg.; homophonous vr. 2 ko:m. Xak. xı su:v komdi: máca'l-mà' "the water was covered with waves' Kaş. II 27 (koma:r, komma:k). Dis. V. GMAkama:- the basic meaning seems to be 'to suffer discomfort' or the like, hence (of the eyes) “to be dazzled” , (of the teeth) “to be set on edge”. Survives only(?) in NC Kır., Kzx., but see kamag-. As the Aor. of this word and kam.- are identical and as both are used with köz, it is not always certain which V. is concerned. Xak. xi kó:z kama:dı: "his eyes were dazzled' (ismadarrat) by the glare of the sun; and one says anın trgi: kama:dı: “his teeth were set on edge” (kalla) by eating something sour Kaş. II] 272 (kama:r, kama:ma:k, prov.); o.o. / 340, 3 (“to be dazzled"); II 311, 19 (same prov): KB yüzi körklüğ erdi kórüp kóz kamar 'his face was so beautiful that any eyes that see it are dazzled' (or anyone who sees it lowers his eyes) 464 (and see kam-): Kom. xiv “to be dazzled' CCG; Gr.: 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 670 
     
   
   
      626 Osm. xvi kama- “to blunt (Trans.; the point of a nail)”, in several texts T'T.S 7 407; IV 457. VU komr:- "to long for (something)'; n.o.a.b. "There is obviously no connection with the word in Zef. and Nae. which clearly means “to shine”. Xak. xt er evipe: komi:di: naşata”/-racul wwa'rtáha şanıq ila baytihi "the man travelled about and felt a longing for his home”, also used of anyone who longs (fştdqa) for something and sets his heart (Aiáca qalbahu) on it Kaş. Ill 273 (komrr, komi:ma:k), er komiı:dı: (MS, in error kortndi:) "the man desired (háca fi) something! IJ 324, 7: KB taki arzuladı komidi kópül “and his heart desired and longed for him” 3854; o.o. 3854—7: (xi(?) Tef. (he told him to put his hand in his pocket, and when he had done so and drew it out again) elğindin nür komudi “light shone from his hand” 212: Xwar. xiv Koman- (sic, spelt koma:n-) “to long for”, seems to be a Refl. f. of this V. Qutb 143; yüzi tolun ay teg komtyur “his face shines like the full moon” Nahc. 23, 6, o.o. do. o, 8, 54, 7; 102, $). Dis. GMC kamıç "ladle'. Survives with minor phonetic changes in NE Koib., Küer., Sag. R IJ 486 and Khak. Cf. çömçe:, kaşık, Türkü vri ff. (a devout old woman stayed behind in a desetted camp) yağlığ kamı:ç bulu:pan (so read) “she found a greasy ladle” (and kept alive by licking it) /rkB 13: Xak. xı kamıç al-mığrafa "ladle! Kaş. I 359; two o.0.: xiv Muh.(?) al-miğrafa kamıç Rif. 169 (only): Kip. xiv kamug (sic) al-migrafa; wa 'urribat bpl-cumcd 'Arabicized as cumca' İd. 76. D kamçı: Dev. N. (properly N.Ag.) fr. kam-; “a whip'. S.i.a.m.l.g.; cf. berğe:, L.-w. in Pe., etc. Doerfer YI 1527. Uyf. vuiff. Civ. kamçı yép 'having been flogged' H I 181; kamçı berge yep ditto US). ss, 34: Xak. xı kamçı: al-sawt “a whip'; kiliç kamçı: al-mi'teal, that is “a whip containing a sword': kamçı: “the penis (gadib) of a horse, bovine, or camel', but usually used of a horse; one says at kamçı:şı: Kaş. 1 417: xin(?) Tef. kamçı *whip' 197: xiv Rbg. ditto R II 494 (quotn.); Muh. al-miqra"a *whip' kamçı: (-c-) Mel. 11, 6-7; 72, 1; Rif. 85, 174: Ga. xv ff. kamçı (spelt; “vith -c-") “a well known kind of whip' (taziyüna) (quotn.); in Ar. saz t; in the Qalmaqi language müla (Kot. 2025 milafa), and in the language of Rüs pilét(plet^) San. 276v. 7: Xwar. xiv kamçı "whip! Qutb 130; MN 72: Kom. ditto CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xi al-miqra'a kamçı: (-ç-) Hou. 14, 6: xiv kamçı: (-c-) al-mixsara “rod, stick” İd. 75: xv al-miqra'a kamşı: (sic) Kav. 64, 4: Tuh. 33b. ız (also çokmar). Tris. GMC D kamıça:k Hap. leg.; Dim. f. of kamıç. 1 xr kamıça:k a/-da"müş 'tadpole' Xaş, 487. D kamçı:ğu: Den. N. fr. kamçı:, Survives only(? in NE Tel kamçu: (Şor kamça)  DIS. V. GMAgangrene' R II 495. Xak. xr kamçı:ğu: "a swelling (or blotch, öazra)” which appears on the lips or fingers as the result of a violent blow, a skin irritation or fever Kaş. 7 491: xiv Muh.(?) al-niqris "a rheumatic or gouty svvelling” kamçığu: (MS. kamcagu:) Rif. 164 (only). D kamçılığ P.N./A. fr. kamçı:, s.i.s.m.]. with some phonetic changes. Xak. xi KB kör arslan münüğgli kılıç kamçılığ “sec, riding a lion and using a sword for a whip' 2354. Tris. V. GMC D kamıçla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr, kamıç. Xak. xı ol mü:p kamıçla:dı: “he ladled out (ğarafa) the broth with a ladle' Kaş. HİT 331 (kamiıçla:r, kamıçla:ma:k). D kamçı:la:- Den. V. fr. kamçı:, “to whip, fiog”. S.i.s.m.l. Xak. xi er atın kamçı:la:dı: “the man flogged (sara) his horse' Kaş. III 352 (kamçı:la:r, kamçı:la:ma:k). Dis. GMD F kamdu: Tlap. leg.; "a currency note”, no doubt a Chinese phr., kan (Middle Chinese kam) tu (M.C. du) or the like. Xak. xi kamdu: “a piece of linen (qita'a kirbás) four cubits by one span in dimension, sealed with the scal of the Uyğur xn and used in commercial transactions! (biha biyd"atuhum), when it becomes worn and tattered, it is patched up (yuraqqa") every seven years, washed, and resealed Kaş. 1 418. Dis. V. GMDD kamat- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of kama:-. Xak. xr küm kö:züğ kamattı: “the sun dazzled (Zayyarat) the eyes with its glare” ; and one says açığ avya: tı:şığ kamattı: "the sour quince (or something else) set the teeth on edge” (akalla . . . al-sinn) Kaş. II 311 (kamatu:r, Kamatma:k:, prov. containing kama:-); 2.0. ] 515, 6. PUD kamıt- n.o.a.b., the first syllable is not vocalized in the Fergana and Cairo MS. and in 8o2 seems to be spelt kaytt- in the first; in the Vienna MS. it is spelt kimit- ; it is, however, best explained as a Caus. f. of kam- in the sense of “to cause to throw down'. Xak. x1K&amp; B (every three-legged (stool) is incapable of leaning (emitmez)) ücegü turur tüz kamitmaz bolur 'the three (legs) stand even and cannot make it throw (the person seated on it) down' Soz, (if one of the three legs lean) ikisi kamıtar uçar ol eri “it makes the (other) two throw the man down and he goes flying' 803. VUD komit- Caus. f. of komt:-; “to cause (someone) to long for (something)', and more indefinitely “to arouse, inspire (somceone)'. N.o.a.b. Xak. xi üdiğ meni: komttti: hayvacani'l-gawq — 1al-mahbüb are”l-scatan "longing (for my beloved or my home) aroused me” Kaş. II 31x (komitu:r, komitma:k; verse), oğul meni evke: komıtğa:n “the boy constantly makes me long (mrşaroceiq?) for my home (etc.)' 7 515; o.o. 1 69, 8; II  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 671 
     
   
   
      | ! | | | | |  TRIS. 324, 7: KB (a man must be violent to pierce the enemy”s ranks) yitilik kerek ked komitsa erig 'he must be alert to arouse the men properly! 2328; komitsa köpül kör yoritsa kigig “if he arouses men's minds and sets them in motion' 370t. * D kamtur- Hap. leg., Caus. f. ofkam-. Xak. xı ol ani: urup kamturdi: “he ordered someone to beat him until he almost died and became speechless' (káda an yahlih wa xafata minhu gaswtuhu) Kaş. I1 191 (kamturur, kamturma:k). D komtur- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. ofkom-. Xak. xı yél su:vuğ komturdi: “the wind raised: waves (amdca) on the water' Kaş. Il 192 (komturur, komturma:k). Dis. ĞMĞ F kamağ (?xamağ) “all”, an early l.-w. fr. Middle Persian hm'g (hamg). "The earliest indisputable evidence for initial k- is in the Man. Syriac script, the Runic and Uy£. letters used might equally well represent x-, but there is no indisputable occurrence of x-. İn the Man. Syriac and Uyg. scripts the word is usually spelt in the Iranian form &amp;A&amp;mg or kma:ğ, the form kamuğ with labial vowel attraction. does, however, occur as early as "Türkü vırı ff. Survives as kamik/xamix in several NE languages and kamu in SW Osm, Cf. barça: etc. Türkü vir kara: kamağ bodun “all the common people” 7 £ 8, I1 E 8, kamağı: yeti: yüz er bolmış “they became zoo men in all” 7 E 12, İİ E 11; a.o. 1 E 18: viri ff. kamaf üze: yaruk bolti: “it became light over everything! JrkB 26; kara: kamağ Süsl: 'his whole army' do. 63; o.o. do. 53; Tun. IV 7 (ETY II gö), Toy. III 2r. 7-12 I 179); kamu:ğ (sic) taşların “of all the stones" Toyok 12 (II $8): Man. kamağ yer üzekinip "of everything on earth” Chuas. 45; o.o. do. 194, etc.; TT II 6,9 etc.; kamağağ alapadturur “he weakens all” M III 11, 12 (i): UYĞ. ix kamağ (on fragments) III A11; B2 (ETY II 37-8): vin ff. Man. kamağ Wind. 6, 28; kamığ (sic) TT III 55, 114; kamifun ?Collective f. do. 61, 125; IX 66: Bud. kamağ and the ?Collective f. kamağun are common U 11 65, 27; III 42, 13; PP 14, 8 etc.; TT IV 4, 16; 10, 28 etc.; V 24, 63; 26, 81: Civ. kamağ is common in TT I: xiv Chin.-Uyğ. Dict. 'all kamağ Ligeti 161: Xak. xi kamuğ a Particle (harf) meaning al-kull “all”, hence one says kamuğ kişi: tü:z erme:s “all men are not equal” Kaş. 7 376; about 6o o.o.: KB kamuğ “all” is very common, 4 etc.: xııı()) At. kamuğ tórlüg işde “in all kinds of things” rr5; a.o.o., Tef. kamuğ/fkamü 196-7: Çağ. xv ff. kamuk kamust. cumlast ma"ndsına "all of them” Vel. 324; Kamuk cami* “all” San. 276v. 13 (quotns.): Xvvar. xirti Kamu "Ali ız: xiii(?) kamağ Og. 14: xiv kamuğ Qutb 130; Nahc. 260, ro, kamuk MN 43 etc.” Kip. xiv kamu$ ai-cami' İd. 75: Osm. xiv ff^ kamu “all, everyone'; c.ia.p. TT'S I 407; II 569; III 399; IV 457. : : GMG | 62; VU?D komuk Hap. leg.; second syllable unvocalized; perhaps Intrans. Dev. N./A. fr. kom - in the sense of 'something that comes in waves'. Kaş, also lists the well-known tribal name Kumuk describing it as 'the name of one of the begs who was a friend of mine'. Cf. kı:ğ etc. Xak. xr komuk zarı” /-faras xággata(n) 'dung', more particularly horse dung Kaş. I 383. kamğı: n.o.a.b., but cf. kamğır-. Xak. xı anything which is 'shrunken (or creased) and crooked” (inzatwà wa a'wacca) is called kamğı:, hence (a man whose mouth is distorted by a paralytic stroke (allad: bihi laqwa) is called kamğı: yü:zlüg XKaş. 1 426: Kom. xiv 'crinkled, crooked” kamov CCG; Gr. (no doubt a later form of the same word). D kamğa:k Dev. N. (connoting habitual action) fr. kam-; lit. 'constantly throwing (or being thrown?) to the ground'; the word used for various plants the chief characteristic of which is that either their seeds, or the whole plants, are carried long distances by the wind; in the Soviet dicts. the normal translation is pberekati-bole. Survives in SE Tar. kamğak “salt-vvort, Salsula oppositifolia' R 11 490; "Türki kamğak 'salt-wort, Salsula collina! Shaw 223; BS 464: NC Kir. kamğak, Kzx. kapbak. Uyğ. vni ff. Bud. (I am like) kamğak kendirke tayaklikin köntülmiş “a salt-wort supported by a hemp plant' Hiüen-ts. 1948: Civ. kamğak barır teg edip ketti “your property has disappeared as a salt-wort goes away (with the wind TT 7 95-6: Xak. xi kamfa:k al-tumam 'a light grass, Panicum dichotomum' Kaş. I 475: Çağ. xv ff. kamğak (spelt) “a kind of plant like a wormwood bush” (bzta-i yütoşün) which is tangled and convoluted, with a very light weight; a gentle breeze rolls it(Zaltanad) across the plains Sam. 276v. 9 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv kamğak “camel thorn' and the like Qutb 130: Kip. xır "a dry tangled thorn bush (al-sawA) which is rolled about by the wind! kamka:k (sic) ; anyone featherbrained is called in derision kamka:k başlu: that is *with a brain as light as kamka:k' Hou. 9, 1. ?F kumğam jug, water bottle, flask', and the like; s.i.m.m.l.g. as kumğan and the like. No. obvious etymology, perhaps a corruption of Ar. qumquma, Xak. xı kumğa:n al-qumquma *jug, flask' Kaş. I 440; (under 2 turma:) the "Turks: call aí-qumquma kumfa:n but the Oğuz use the Pe. word aftabr I 432; a.o. IH 353 (yalrit-). Dis, V. GMGD kamğır- Hap. leg.; Intrans. Den. V. fr. kamfr. Xak. xı ani yü:zi: kamğırdı: “his face was almost distorted by paralysis' (kdda an yata'awwac wa yulqa), also used for anything that tends (aráda) to be distorted" Kaş. II 194 (kamğıra:r, kamğırma:k). Tris. GMG D kamağun See kamağ.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 672 
     
   
   
       628 Tris. V. GMGVUD komukla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. komuk. Xak. xi at komukla:zdı: “the horse staled” (rdfa), (also used for being related to Kumuk which is a man's name) Kaş. 1I] 339 (komukla:r, komukla:ma:k). Dis. GML F kumla:k “Hop plant, Humulus lupulus." L.-w. of Germanic origin found in various forms in many Germanic, Scandinavian, Slavonic, and Finno-Ugrian languages, the earliest form being vili-ix Latin Jumlo, humulo; der, fr. a Germanic V. meaning “to creep'; lit. “the creeping plant". Survives in NE Alt. kumdak, NC Kır., Kzx. kulmak, NW Tat. kolmak, Bashkir komalak, Cuv. xámla. Kip. xı kumla:k “a plant like the bean (a/-lablab) which grows in the Kip. country'; a drink mixed with honey is made from it; when the plant is put on board a ship, the sea develops waves (yamüc), and gets so stormy that it almost drowns the people on board Kaş. I 475 (cf. 2 ko:m), xiv (after ça:kır *wine') “and they have another drink made of fermented (a/-muğalld) honey into which they put a thing from the plant, which is like the top of a sugar-cane (ru”usu”/-qaşab), it is called kumla:k; this is more intoxicating than grape wine and they prefer it' Hou. 16, 6. D kumlf P.N./A. fr kum, 'sandy. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. some phonetic changes. Uyğ. vitr ff. Civ. kumluğ vaxarlığ "belonging to the monastery (Sanskrit vihara) in the sands" USp. 30, 11. : Dis. V. GMLD kamıl- Pass. f. of kam- ; lit. “to be struck dovvn”, but usually more vaguely “to fall to the ground”, N.o.a.b. Uy£. viii ff. Bud. (the king .. ) ölüğ teg kamiulu tüsti 'fell to the ground and lay like a corpse” PP ör, 7; öğsirep tinsırap kamıldılar “they fell to the ground unconscious and not breathing Su, 619, 18; 0.0. do. 625, 12-14 (tokst11-); U III 33, 14-16 (étig); do. 60, 7 (1); Xak. x1 er kamıldı: "the man lay prone” (idfaca'a) Kaş. II 135 (kamlu:r (?sic), kamilma:k; vocalized kamul-): xin(?) At. qawi erse kamlur kaçar quvvvvatı “if a man is strong, (in the end) he is throvvn to the ground and his strength leaves him” 196: Kom. xiv “to stagger, totter' kamal(sic) CCG; Gr. D kamla:- Den. V. fr. ka:m; 'to act as a ka:m, make magic', and the like. Survives in several NE languages as kamda-/kamnaR II 490-1. 'Türkü vir ff. IrkB iz (erklig): (Çağ. xvff. kamlamışı in the Jstilahat-i Muğül (see San., p. 13) tabübat wa mu'dlica “medical treatment, healing! Sar. 276v. rr illustrated by Pe. quotn.): Kip. xiv kamlafabba "to practise medicine" 7d. 75; fayyaba 'to heal' Bul. 58r. 2-— . —.—— —x—-— —- 5...” .2—  TRIS. V. ĞMĞTris. GMR F xuma:ru: "legacy, memento,, etc.; no doubt a l.-w., prob. Iranian. N.o.a.b. Uy£. viri ff. Bud. (the Prince gave generous presents to the soo mendicants and) barçaka xumaru (or kumaru?) sav kodti 'addressed (these) parting words to them all' (a speech follows) PP 76, 2: Xak. xı xuma:ru: a/-mirdt bi-'ayniht “a legacy' in the exact sense of the term, one says bu:nı: atamdın xuma:ru: buldim “İ received. this from my father as a legacy: xuma:ru: "a memento in the form of goods' (tadhira mina'l-amwàl); it is the custom of the Turks when one of the notables (al-akábira) of the kingdom dies for some precious (nafis) object from his property to be set aside for the king, and it is called xuma:ru:, that is a memento of him; it is also used as a masculine or feminine Proper Name; similarly a traveller leaves something as a memento with his neighbours and that is called xuma:ru: Kaş. 1 445; 2.0. İİİ 440, 19: KB kumaru (so spelt) is fairly common; in 269-70 (ölüğ) good customary laws are 'a legacy' (kumaru) from the dead to the living; in 1150 Aytoldi gives many kumaru to his friends; in 1341 a parting speech is given kumaru atı “the name of kumaru' , Chapter 23 (1342 ff.) relates to Aytold's kumaru bitig “vill”: xu(?) KBVP 53 (kodun-). kumursğa: “ant”: an old animal name ending in -ğa:. S.i.m.m.l.g., not SE or SW?. Cf. çüme:li:, karınçğa:, Türkü virrff. kumu:rs$a: 'ants' (eat an old ox) IrkB 37: Çağ. xvíf. kumursğa (spelt) mürca “ant” Sam. 290v. ir: Xwar. xri kumurska “ant” "AZ 48: xiv kimirsa (sic) Qutb 148: Kip. xir al-naml “ant” kumurska: (unvocalized; Tkm. karınca:) Hou. 11, 19: xiv kumursfa: ditto İd. 75; ditto kımirsağı: (sic) Bul. 11, 5: xv ditto kumruska (sic) Tu. 36b. 2. Tris. V. GMRDF xuma:ru:lan- Hap. leg.; quoted only in a grammatical section. Refl. Den. V. fr. xumq:ru: Xak.xr er xuma:ru:landı: "the man received a precious object (daxira) from the property of his friend or someone else" Kaş. III 205, 17; n.m.e. Dis, ĞMŞ kamış 'reed, cane, rush”, and the like; s.i.a.m.l.g., in Cuv. xaömöl, L.-vv. in Pe. etc., Doerfer İ11 1530. Türkü vir ff. IrkB 10, 38 (ara:): Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. iki kamış sış kilip 'sharpening two reeds to a point” PP 57, 8, a.o. U III zo, yo: Civ. (if a man chokes, you should pound the mixture and) boğuzıpa yürser (sic for ürser) kamış birle 'blow it into his throat through a reed” 71 I 185: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. chu 'bamboo' (Giles 2,316; misread by R. as fzü 'twin' 12,319) kamis Ligeti 161; R 11 487: Xak. xı kamış al-qagab “a reed” Kaş. 1 369; o.o. 1 438 (sarBa:n); III 193 (Kiytur-); 391 (sip-): xiv Muh. al-qaşab kamış Mel. 78, 9; kamı:ş Rif. 182; Xwar  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 673 
     
   
   
       əə   MON. ÓN 629 xiv kamış “reed, (sugar-)cane', etc. Qur? 130: Kom. xiv 'reed, rush! kamış CCG ; Gr.: Kip. xiv al-qaşab kamış Bul, 8, s: xv ditto Kam. 63, 15; Tuh. 28b. 10. D kamşa:ğ Hap. leg.; Dev. N./A. fr. kam$2:-; 'insecure'." Türkü vii 7 N 3 (2 éllig). VU?F kumsuy Hap. leg.; prob. a 1.-vv., ? Chinese. Xak. xi kumguy “a louse (or tick, al-halama mina'l-qirdàn) which is full of blood ; used metaph. of a man who suffers from retention of urine and cannot urinate Kaş. 111 241. Dis. V. GMSD kamaş- Co-op. f. of kama:- in the sense that the whole of the Subject is involved; s.i.m.m.l.g. meaning (of the teeth) “to be set on edge”. Xak. xr ti: kamaşdı: “the teeth were set on edge by eating a sour quince and the like” Kaş. 71 111 (kamaşu:r, kamaşma:k) a.o. İT 110, 5: xın(?) Tef. kamaş(of the eyes) “to be dazzled” 116: Çağ. xv ff. kamaş-" of the teeth “to be set on edge” (Rund şudan), of the eyes “to be dazzled” (xira şudan), the verb cannot be used except vvith teeth or eyes as the Subject San. 276v. 16 (quotns.): Kip. xiv kamag- “to be dazzled' (inbahara) by the sun, so that one can hardly look towards, it, as happens to a man with ophthalmia İd. 75: xv kalla kamasg- Tuh. 31b. 3. D komiş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of kom- in the sense that the whole of the Subject is involved. Xak. xi ola:r rgka: komişdi: “they rejoiced (ihtazzi?) in the work and took pleasure (nagat&amp;) in it; the origin is the phr. su:v komuşdiı: (sic) “the waves swelled (Airacatil-mawc) in every direction” Kaş. II 11:1 (komuşu:r, komuşmai:k sic). D kamşa:- Den. V. fr. kamış in the metaph. sense of "to move or sway' like reeds in the wind; n.o.a.b. Türkü vim ff. IrkB. 16, etc. (1 tur-): Uyğ. virt ff. Man.-A M Hİ 9, 15 (ii) (çokra:-): Bud. TT X 164, etc. (tepre:-). D kamşat- Caus. f. of kamşa:-, “to shake (something); to allow (one's feet) to waver, or (one's thoughts) to stray. N.o.a.b. Türkü vii F.N 5, HH E 3o (adak): vui ff. Man. Chuas. 187 (orun): Uyğ. vn ff. Man. Wind. 16 (bedüklentür-). Tris. GMS D kamışlığ P.N./A. fr. kamış, “full of reeds (etc.), covered with reeds (etc.)' S.i.s.m.l. Uyğ. vrir ff. Bud. tolp etözleri kamışlığ viçin t[eg] turginc (sic, ?read tarkınç) ara örtenür "all their bodies are burnt in confusion(?) like waving(?) reeds' TM IV 254, 72 (viçin Hap. leg.; perhaps Sanskrit vici “vave”): Xak. xı kamışlığ yér “a piece of round forming a reed-bed” (a/-maqşaba) Kaş. 7 495: Çağ. xv fT. kamışlığ (sic, but prob. the Çağ. f. of an A.N. in -lık) nayistán "reed-bed” San. 276v. 15: (Xwar. xiv kamışlağ (sic) *reed-bed' Qutb 130). Tris. V. GMSD kamışlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. kamış. Xak. xı yér kamışlandı: “the ground became a reed-bed” (maggaba) Kaş. II 268 (kamışlanu:r, kamışlanma:k). Dis. ĞMZ kimiz “fermented mare”s milk, koumiss'; s.L.a.m.lg.; l-w. in Pe. and many other languages, Doerfer 111529, in Russian kumys, fr. which it passed to other European countries; the origin of the -u- is obscure; the only comparable Turkish spellings are NE Koib., Sag. kumis R II 1049, but this may be a reborrowing fr. Russian. Xak. xt kımız al-amiş, that is “mare”s milk collected in vessels (arofd)), fermented (yuhammad), and drunk': kimiz almıla: “a sour (al-hámid) apple”, so called because it is like al-amig Kag. 1 365; 0.0. II 12 (bis-); III 197 (2 ko:rlan-): KB 4442 (azar): xiv. Muh. 'fermented (muhammad) | mare's milk” kımı:z, ra£watu'l-laban “the scum (or skin) on milk” kara: kimt:z Mel. 63, 7-9; Rif. 161: Çağ. xv ff. kımiz (spelt) *mare's milk fermented (turus karda) and drunk as an intoxicant” (maskirdt), in Ar. labanu'l-ramaka (“mare”s milk") Sar. 298v. 26: Xwar. xırn(?) kumuz Og. 8o, ktmtz do. 93 (çıbıka:n): Kip. xiv kimiz “ermented mare”s milk” /d. 75: xv kimiz is included among the translations of laban Tuh. 32a. 1: Osm. xiv ff. kimiz 'koumiss”, in several texts 77S I 458; II 626; IV 509. Tris. V. GMZD kımızlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. kimiz. Xak. xi er kimizlandı: “the man owned amij', that is fermented (al-hàmid) mare's milk Kaş. II 268 (kimizlanu:r, kimizlanma:k). Mon. GN 1 ka:n 'blood'; c.i.a.p.a.l. Türkü viri kanın suvça: yügürti: “your blood flowed like water' 7 E 24 (II E zo, but with ögüzçe: “like a river); a.o. T sz (tök-): vii ff. Man. kan iri 'blood and pus” M 1 s, 10-14; 6, 4: Uy£. viri ff. Bud, kan akip ünti 'blood poured' (from his eyes and. nose) U II 27, 22; (among the demons) kan içteçiler “blood drinkers” do. 6o, 1 (iii); PP 3, 4 (akit-); a.o.o.: Civ. H T 83 (Ótgek); a.o.o.: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. 'blood' kan Ligeti x61: Xak. xı ka:n al-dam 'blood' Kaş, III 157 (prov.); about zo o.o.: KB (the partridge) lazil ağzı kan teg “vith his bloodred beak” 76; kayu aydı kan tutmis emdi muni aça bergü iğçil (Arat ekpek, but the two best MSS. have əgçi?) akıtğu kanı “some said “he has high blood pressure, novv vve must open the invalid”s (vein) and let the blood flow out”” 1058; tökme kan “do not shed blood 1395: xım(?) Tef. kan “blood” 197: xiv Muh. al-dam ka:n Mel. 45, 14; Rif. 139; haccám *blood letter” ka:n alğuçuı 57, 4; 155: Çağ. xv ff. kan xür 'blood', in Ar. dam San. 277v. ış: X war. xii ditto * Ali 35: xiv ditto Qutb 130; MN 72, etc.: Kom. xiv ditto CCI, CCG;  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 674 
     
   
   
       630 Gr.: Kip. xn al-dam ka:n. Hou. 21, 18; al-fásid 'blood letter” ka:n a:zlıçı that is “taker of blood” do. 23, ro: xiv kan ai-dam İd. 74: xv ditto Kav. 61, 12; Tuh. 15a. 12; 18b. 8. 2 ka:n See xa:n. F xa:n a title at first practically svn. w. xağan, q.v., but later used mainly for a subordinate ruler; for the etymological connection between the two sce xağan. "lherc is no reasonable doubt that the original and normal pronunciation was xan, An early l.-w. in Mong. (Haenisch 59, Kos. 718); no longer a royal title, but still used as a title of honour in many Moslem countries, not all Turkish-speaking. Türkü virt xan does not occur in 7 or 11, but occurs six times in T in contexts where xağan, which also occurs in T, might have been expected, e.g. (the "Türkü people) xanı:n bulmayin 'because they had no xan of their own' (parted from the Chinese and appointed a xan, then) xanı:n kodup “abandoned their xan” (and submitted again) T z: vii ff. xan olu:rupan “a ruler, taking the throne' IrkB 28; o.o. do. 34, 63: Man. él(l)igler xanlar 'kings and rulers! M III 19, 14; él(1)i&amp; Bögö Xan 'king Bógó Xan' TT II 6, 33; a.o. do. ro, 88: Yen. Tüpü:t xanka: “to the king of "Tibet” Mal. 29, 8; Kara: Xan do. 3o, 4; 37, !, prob. the eponymous founder of the Karakhanid dynasty; a.o.0.: Uyğ. viii xan occurs six times in (Şız. referring to foreign rulers, including "Tavğaç xanı “the Emperor of China” W 3: ix xanka: tap “serve (your) ruler? Suci 9; a.o. do. 1: viii ff. Man.-A uluğ él(1)ig tepri xanı Ezrwa 'Zurvàn the great king, the ruler of the gods” M I 25, 32; Kaşu xanı "the ruler of Kagu' do. 27, 6: Chr. él(1)ig xan Masixa teprike 'to the divine king (Hend.) the Messiah! U I 6, 16-17; a.o. do. 7, 2: Bud. erkliğ xan lit. independent ruler, the title of the lord of the underworld, Sanskrit Yama U II 33, 7 (this title had a long history in "Turkish. Buddhism and still survives in Mong. as erlig kar); (él(l)ig beg U III 68, 4-8), él(l)ig beg xan do. rı, xan do. 16; many o.o. in which it is often combined, or alternates, with él(l)ig: Civ. erkliğ xan ésigi 'the threshold of Yama' VII 13, 33-4; 0.0. do. 29, 11; 30, 15; TT I 6o (busus): Xtv. Chin.-Uyg. Dict. chün “ruler, prince' (Giles 3,269) xan Ligeti 161: Xak. x1 xa:n al-maliku'l-a'zam. minhum “their (the Turks” supreme ruler'; anyone who is descended from Afrasiyab is given this title, zcasca'l-xa:ka:n ; both the long and the short forms are used Kaş. HI 157; over 20 o.o. translated al-malik: Çağ. xvf. xan means “emperor” (pádigah) and for this reason they call the emperors of the Turks xan; since the Sultans of Rüm are descended from the "Türkmen people (€?) they call themselves xan; after they captured Arabistin and the Hijàz they added to xan the title of su/tán, which means 'emperor! in Ar. Now in Persia governors and notables of the realm (/nkkám Tca a”ydn-i datclat) are called xan, there can be no other reason than  MON. GN as a sign of respect for their own amirs and notables gave them an imperial ( padigáhi) title they called them pasa which is a shortened form of padişah. After the empire of İran passed to the Safawi dynasty they too, contrary to the wishes of the Sultans of Rüm, called the notables of their realm xan and lower placed persons su/fán. After the Sultanate of Hind passed to the house of Gürgün they called themselves pádigáh, and the notables and chiefs of the realm they distinguished by thc title of xan San. 222v. 1: Kom. xiv kan/xan 'emperor' CCI; “king” CCG, Gr.: Kip. xii (in the list of Proper Names) temür xa:n “iron king” Hou. 30, 7: xiv kan ('blood', also used for) al-malik İd. 74: xv sultàn kan Tuh. 18b. 8; malik kan do. 32b. 3; 41b. 6. J kar) 'father'; the oldest Turkish word in this sense; it was gradually displaced in Uyğ. by ata: q.v. and did not survive into Xak. although kandaş, kapsik did. Cf. 1 ö:g. Türkü vii kay is common in 7 and 71, e.g. kaprm Elteriş Xağan 1 E 11, I1 E 10: vin ff. öğl:ne: kaprpa: teğü:rmi:ş “it brought him to his mother and father! Irk B 35; 0.0. do. $8 (2 öt), etc.: Uyğ. viri kaytm xağan Su. N 12: viri ff. Man.-A yarlakancuci kapamaz "our merciful father' M 7I ro, 3 (of God): Man. könlümin yarutuğlı kanım “my father who enlightens my mind” M TH 24, 9 (ii); a.o.o.: Bud. kar, often in association vv. 0:, is common; e.g. (the Princess said to her father (atası) the beg) kanım U TT ər, 3; (if I have sinned against) öğke kapka baxşılarka “my mother, father, or teachers! do. 77, 16: Civ. öğdin kandın edğgü sav eşitür “he hears good nevvs from his mother and father” TT VII 35, 3: O. Kir. ix ff. kapım Mal. 13, 3; 2.0.0. 2 kan onomatopoeic; ?Hap. leg. Xak. xi ka:z kar etti: “the goose (Kaş., in error, “dück”) made a noise like that” (şarczeafa kadalika), it is an onomatopocic for any such sound Kaş. III 358. 1:ki:n “sheath, scabbard”, S.i.a.m.l.g.ş although Kaş. lists both kin and kin, the second form, which survives in SW Tkm., was no doubt the original one. Uyğ. vri ff. Bud. kinintin yiti bicekin t[artip] 'drawing his sharp knife from its sheath! U 177 64, 9: Xak. xi kin cafnu'l-sayf. qea”l-sikhin "the scabbard of a sword and (sheath) of a knife'; one says kiliç kini: (sic) 'sword scabbard' Kaş. 7 339; kim same translation İT 140; two o.o. of kin and four of kinka:: KB (if a beg does not make his men love him) kilic kinda çıkmaz “the sword does not leave the scabbard' 2:38; kiliç kinka kirse “f the sword is sheathed” 2144: XIV Mnuh.(?) (in one MS. only) gimdu'I-savf 'sword scabbard” kin Mel. 71, 4: Çağ. xv ff. kin “the sheath (Zilaf) of a knife, sword, or the like” San. 299r. 28 (quotn.): Xwnr. xiv ditto Qutb 148: Kom. xiv ditto CCG; Gr.: Kip. xur Bilafu'l-sayf tva ğayrihi kin Hou. 13, 14: xiv kin qirábw'l-sikkin “the sheath of a knife' : i text should be   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 675 
     
   
   
     MON. GN restored as cafir 'sheath (kin; caf? 'thick") kalın. 2 kun (ki:ü) “punishment, torture', and the like; the variations in spelling point clearly to an original form ki:ü, cf. 1, 2 ko:fi, Survives in NW Kaz. kıyın 'punishment' R II 718 and prob. NC Kir., Kzx.: NW Kk., Kumyk, Nog. kiyin “difficult, embarrassing, complicated"”. L.-w. in Pe. and other languages, Doerfer 111 1609. "Türkü vir kiyniğ kópİünçe: ay 'prescribe punishments as you think fir T 32: Uyğ. vir kiyn aydım Şi, E 2: vin ff. Bud. kin kizğut bereyin 'I will inflict punishment (Hend.) U II 26, 14; o.o. do. zo, 1 (ii) (teBür-); U IJI 56, 7; TT VI 10-11, 255: Civ. kiyn enç bolur “the pain dies down' TT VII 22, 15 (medical); ağır krynka tegip 'receiving severe punishment' USp. 78, 16; 0.0. do. 111, ro, 115, zo: Xak. xi KB isizke bu kin berge zindàn yégi “for the wicked this punishment; flogging and imprisonment are best” 893; yağız yer katında kıyın yer basa 'afterwards he suffers punishment below the brown earth' 6140; o.o. of ktyin 3818; kin 5548 (evir-): xin(?) Tef. kiyin "torture" 207: Çağ. xvff. kin cerime ve işhanca ve zahmat ve magakkat 'punishment, torture, pain, suffering' Vel. 333 (quotns.) ; kin sihanca a “"adab ('punishment') San. 299r. 26 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv Kn “pain, torture Qutb 148: Kom. xiv 'suffering, martyrdom” kın CCG; Gr. 206 (quotns.): Osm. xiv kin 'torture, pain”, in two texts T TS 1 458. E kin in the phr. kin közin in U IV 38, 128 is no doubt an error for kıpir, as suggested in a note thercon; the supposed Instr. form kt9in quoted therein is no doubt a misreading of that word. 1 ko:f genericall "sheep”, and specifically *ewe'. One of the animals of the 12-year cycle. An early l.-w. in Mong. as Koni(nt) (Haenisch 66). S.ı.a.m.l.g., in SW Az, Tkm. ğoyun, Osm. koyun; elsewhere normally koy. L.-w. in Pe. (for the Sheep Year only?) and in other languages, Doerfer İİ 1590. “Türkü vrir (my father the Xağan”s troops were like wolves and his enemies) kof teg “like sheep' I E ız, II E 11; kofi yılka: “in the sheep year” 7 NE; this is also the date in Ong ız, misread by R. as lül yilka:: vrrr ff. bay er kofir “a rich man's sheep! IrkB 27; a.o. do. 29 (ut-); bir koü “one sheep” Tun. IV 9 (ETY lI 96): Uy£. vir kofi yılka: Su. N 9; W 2; alo, do. W 9 (kal-): virr ff. Man.-A M I 8, 8 (u:d); III ır, ro (1) (öpün-): Bud. (some people kill) koy lagzin 'sheep and pigs' PP 3, r, koy yılkı igidser “if a man keeps sheep and cattle" do. 13, 5—in other texts the form is koyn U TI 80,60; TT IV 8, 55; Suv. 4, 11 etc.: Civ. in a calendar text TT' VIII P.s, 29, etc. in the 12«animal cycle koyfi (sic); elsewhere koyn TT VII and USp. in dating formulae; M III 33, 2 (i); USp. 36, 2; H I 42, 138, etc.: Xak. xt the people of Arğu: change every medial and final y to n; thus the Turks call 'sheep' (al-£anam) ko:y, but they call it ko:n Xaş. 7 . 631 31, 10—ko:n al-sát “sheep” in Arğu: III 140; a.o. I 309, 25 (örü:le:-)—ko:y al-fanam; ko:y yılı: “one of the twelve years in ''urkish' III 142; over 7o o.o.: K.B koy 'sheep' 449 (bóri:), 1412, 4353 (erkec), 4765: xiu(?) Tef. koy, oyun “sheep” zır: xiv Muh. na'ca 'ewe' koyu:n Mel. 18, 11; ko:ryun Rif. 97; al-fanam ko:yin zo, 14; ko:y, in margin ko:yun 172 (adding na'ca kisir), sanatu'l-£anam ko:yin yılı: 81, r, 186: Çağ. xv ff. koy Royun Vel. 347-8 (quotns.), koy güsfand "sheep” San. 292v. 3 (quotn.); koyun . . (4) 'sheep' do. 23 (quotn.): Xwar. xır koy “sheep” ' Alt 19: xiv ditto. Qatb 138 (and koyun); MN 14 etc.; Nahc. 252, 2: Kom. xiv 'sheep' koy CCI, CCG, Gr. 198 (quotns.): Kip. xirr al-£anam mutlaqa(n) 'sheep in general” koyun . . . al-na'ca tigi: koyun that is 'female sheep' Hou. 14, 23 ff: xiv ko:yyun al-ganam İd. 76; al-fanam koyun (al-na"ca sağlık, mis-spelt) Bul. 7, 11: Xv al-xarüf "lamb! (should be al-fanam?) koyun (a/-ragi" (so read) kuziz) . . . al-na'ca tişi: koyun Kav. 61, zz fT., (taniyu'l-)fanam *two-year-old sheep' koyun Tul, 11a. 3; dd'in “sheep” koyun, koy do. 23a. 8. 2 *ko:fi 'bosom' and the like; does not survive in this form, but the close parallelism between the later forms of this word and 1 ko:fi strongly suggest that it, too, must originally have been ko:üi, the earliest recorded form ko:y seems to exclude the possibility that it was originally *kodun Dev. N. fr. ko:d- in the sense of '(the place) where one puts things”. S.i.a.m.l.g. as koyun with minor phonetic variations. "Türkü vilt ff. Man. koyinta ölüğ yatur “a corpse was lying in his bosom' M I 6, 3-4: Uy&amp;. vir ff. Bud. yek kizin koyinta kötürü alıp “he picked up and carried off the demon”s daughter in his bosom” U TT 25, 17; (when I reached that beg) koyunintin bir keğde bitig üntürüp 'he took a paper document out of his bosom' (and read it to me) Suv. 6, 8-9: Xak. xı ko:y hacru'l-qabà' "the bosom of a robe'; hence one says eliğ ko:yka: suk 'thrust your hand in the bosom of your robe' Kaş. III 142; o.o. I 199 (açın-), II 339 (karvat-); 346 (suğlıt-), ZİT 18, 2; 297 (suğlu-): KB (he took his son) koyupa (so read) kuça 'clasping him to his bosom” r500; a.o. 3570 (töşne:k): xın(?) Tef. koyn (?koyun) 'bosom' 211: Çağ. xv ff. koyn (spelt) (r) bagal 'armpit; embrace" (quotn.); (2) ag “bosom” (quotn.); also spelt koyun San. 292v. 16; koyun (spelt) (1) bağal (quotn.); (2) dğüş, in both cases also spelt koyn do. 292v. 19: Xwar. xiv koyun "bosom” Qutb 139: Kip. xi (sheep) koyun which also means 'ubbu'l-insán “a man's bosom' Hou. 14, 23: Xiv koyun “the space (a/-xalö”) between the stomach and the garment'; one says koynumda: bésledim 'I cherished him in that place”? it is what people call a/-"ub5 İd. 77: xv 'ubb koyn Tuh. 25a. 5. VU?F xu:n Hap. leg.; an unusual form, perhaps Persian xim “blood” used metaph., but not described as Oguz, which is the language most likely to have such a l.-w. Xak. xı xum ış al-amru'lladi là rifq fihi “an action with no  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 676 
     
   
   
      632 compassion in it", hence one says xu:n xara: (sre) 19lama: “do not act harshly! ("amal fihi'l-xurq) Kaş. III 138. kop survives in NC Kır./Kzx. kon/kop eti "the thick part of the thigh'; there is also a Kir. phr. kop karğa 'rook'; the connection between the two meanings is not obvious. Xak. xı kop et a/-"adala mina'l-lahm *muscle, firm flesh' Kaş. 711 358: Çağ. xv ff. kop (with -n) huzğun "raven” Vel. 345 (quotn.); ğoD (spelt) “a large black raven' (2a/46), also called ğuzğun (sic) San. 262v. 14; a.o. 287r. 26 (kuzğu:n). Mon. V. GNka:n- “to be satisfied, satiated”, and the like, both in a concrete and an abstract sense. S.i.a.m.l.g. Uy£. virrff. Man. kózünürteki küsüşleri kanzun “may their desires in the present world be satisfied! T'T IX 116; a.o. do. 47: Bud. köp küsüşleri kanar TT V 24, 54; 0.0. U 127, 9; TT VII 40, 130 (büt-): Civ. küsüşün barça kantı TT 7 115; ooo. do. 175; VII 27, 14 etc.; su:v içip ka:nma:z "when he drinks water, he is not satised' VIII I.2: Xak. xı ol su:vdin ka:ndı: bada'a'l-racul mina"l-mü” aca ratciya “he quenched his thirst with the water and was satisfied' Kaş. II] 184 (ka:nar, ka:nma:k); o.o. 7 377, 1; III 261, 13 ff. (in a grammatical section. where it is pointed out that kana:r (s;c) is the Aor. both of ka:n- and of kana:-): KB arzüm kanip “my desires being satisfied' 591; o.o. (with Su:V) 5516, 6035: Çağ. xv ff. kan-(-mağun) kan- Vel. 324; kan- “to be satisfied (sir gudan) ; the word is used of being satisfied with something other than food (for which the word is toy- (to:d-)), for example “to be satisfied with water', and sir-i ma'nà şudan “to be satisfied" in an abstract sense San. 276v. 15 (quotns.): Xwar. xim kan- “to drink to satiety' AU 30: xiv. ditto. Qutb. 130: Kip. xiv. kan- rarotya ld. 74. Ykan- Sce kayın-, *kafiak. kin- “to long for (something)' and the like; survives in NE Küer., Sag., Sor km- R 77 725; Khak, xın- “to wish; to love (somcone)”. İt is also stated in Zenker (R. loc. cit.) that the word existed in SW Osm. this cannot be confirmed but sce kintur-. Uy£. viir ff. Bud. turkaru kinmak katığlanmakka (mistranscribed hadulanmakka) tükelliğ bolup uluğ nırvanığ bulmakı bolur “it is to attain the great "irvàga by being perfect in constantly longing and striving” U 17 46, 57-9; kentü kópüllerintin kétergeli kınmak “they must remove desire from their own minds' Suv. 247, 13-714; tarğarğalı kınmak erür 'it is a longing to suppress' (all such emotions) Suv. 255, 9-10; a.o. USp. ror, 23(?): (Xak.?) xiv Muh.(?) haraşa “to long for, covet' kin- (unvocalized) Rif. 107: K1p. xiv kin- inba'ata “o he aroused' Id. 74 (cf. kıntur-). ^ ***ko:-, cf. Ko:d- ; (of a bird) 7' ffor the night   MON. GN on a journey), 'to settle down' (somewhere for an indefinite period). S.i.a.m.l.g., with various extended meanings; in some languages used as an Aux, V. Türkü virt (1 myself) Ötüken yeriğ konmis “settled down in the Ötüken country” T 17; o.0. / S s, 1I N 4 (yafru); 1S6,1I s (çoğay), II E 40: vin ff. (a falcon) kaya:ka: konu:pan 'scttling on a rock” 7rkB 64; a.o. do. 61 (töşne:k): Uyf. viri ff. Bud. kuş kuzğun konsa “if the birds and ravens settle! (on the trees) PP 8o, 4; 2.0. do. 6; nirvanlığ konuklukta konar “he will settle in the resting place of mirvdna” Pfahl. 8, 8-9: Civ. (the swan has flown away and) kölipe konmaz “does not settle on its lake" TT I 216: Xak. xi kuş ko:ndt: “the bird settled' (rcaqa"a) on something, and one says bodu:n ko:ndi: “the tribe settled down after being nomadic” (nazalat ba'da'l-za'n) Kaş. III 184 (ko:na:r, ko:nma:k); o.o. (of birds) I 319, 18; H 331, 22: xiti(?). At. (birds) karika konar ham kafaska kirür 'settle on the (fowler's) wrist and enter the cage' 460: xiv Rbğ. kon- (of a bird or fly) “to settle' R II 532 (quotns.); Muh. nazala mina l-rahil "to settle down after a migration! ko:n- Mel. 32, 12-17; Rif. 117; a.o.o.: Çağ. xv ff. kon- nigastan tea manzil hardan “to scttle down, to alight at an inn” San. 290v. rr (quotns.): Xwar. xi kon“to: settle down" "AZ 30: xiv ditto Quib 139; MN 242: Kom. xiv ditto CCG; Gr. 199 (quotns.): Kip. xri sakana mün sakni l-bayt “to take up residence in a house' kon- Hou. 37, 17: xiv kon- zazala ld. 75; nazala mina'l-mansil kon- Bul. 83r.: xv. daraba'l-xàm "to pitch a tent” kon- Tul. 67b. 6; báta “to spend the night” kon- do. 69a. r: Osm. xiv ff. kon(of a traveller) "to stop for the night”, c.i.a.p. TTS I 480; III 472; IV 536. kun- “to stcal, carry off” n.o.a.b, As the vowel is short -u- might be expected and this is confirmed in TT VIH. Uyf. vurff. Bud. Sanskrit dcchidya 'carrying “off” kufiup (sic) TT VIII D.ro, (the hero Arjuna) kunup éltü bardı “has gone carrying off' (your daughter) U 77 25, 23-4; (demons) karintaki kençiğ kundaçılar “vho stcal unborn children” do. 6o, 1 (i1); o.o. do. 76, 1 (tel-); TT X 443, 4063, s41, etc.: Xak. xı ofrr tava:r kundi: “the thief carried off (sa/aba) the property” Kaş. Iİ 29 (verse, kuna:r, kunma:k). Dis. ĞNA (D) kanı: See ka:fiu:. ka:fiu: (1) Interrog., "which? what?'; (2) İndefinite “some” and the like; with other Interrog. functions in oblique cases. "Phe word is cognate to kaç, kacan, kalt, kaltı:, kanı: and the whole group seems to go back to an earlier stage in the language when different Suffs. were in use, Ka:fiu: became ka:yu: at a fairly early date, but the oblique cases, which, except kanca:, are included here, retained -nside by side with -y- much longer, the two alternating in a most confusing fashion. In one form or another some of these words  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 677 
     
   
   
       DIS s.ia.m.lg., but the relationship of some modern forms like SW Osm./Rep. “Turkish hanği 'which?' to the original word is most obscure. Türkü vir kanı: “here?” 7 £ 9, II E 8-9 (1 €); kantan kelip/kelipen “coming from where?' 7 E 23, II E 19 (almost the only Abi. in -tan in Türkü): vırı ff. Man. kanyuda 'whercver'(?) 77 776, r1(damagced); kanyu kişi kim 'whoever' M III 19, 13 (ii): Uy£. ix kafiu: [gap] 771 C 3 (ETY Tİ 38): viii ff. Man. kayu ol “vhat ist” TT I1 16, 36; kayu tinli$. tüşer ^what mortal falls" (into the three evil ways?) M III 44, s (ii): Bud. Sanskrit yatra gatvá 'wherever he goes' ka:yu:da: ba:rıp TT VIII 4.36; ko tu(?) me 'who is mine?” ka:yu: erür incip menir do. C.13; in the 'Nidàna series, U II 4ff., kanyuda törüyür “in what circumstances does it come into existence?” 6, 13-16 alternates w. negüde tórüyür, same meaning, in parallel passages; ne baslikin kayu başutçın "from what beginning and with what helper? U II 9, 10-11; kaçan kayu kün “if some day” U II 79, sa: kayu kişi “vhatever person” (V. in Cond.) PP 11, 4; kim kayu tınlığlarka “to all people” do. 35, 3; kayusipa “for each of them” do. 6, 2; kayular ol on *what are those ten? TT V 20, 2; kanda: erser "wherever he is” TT VIII F7; o.o. TT IV 12, 45; VI 79 (étiglig); Suv. 475, 15; 478, 16 etc.: Civ. kayu kişi 'whatever person” (V. in Cond.) TT VII 12, 5; 27, 12 etc.; kim kayu kisi söğüt tikser "f anyone plants a tree' do. 28, 41-2; kayuda bolsa "wherever it is” USp. 17, 10; kim kayu cam çarım kilmazun “let no one object' do, 61,4; in T T VIII L. the word is spelt kayo (five times), ka:yo, kayu; kanta: “vhen” (V. in Cond.) do. ir: Xak. xi (after 1 ko:ü, q.v.) and the Turks say ka:yu: ne:n ayy şay” what thing?” and they (the people of Arğu:) say ka:nu: Kaş. 1 31, 14—Arğu: x1 kanu: a Particle (harf) meaning ayy? hence one says kanu: kişi: “vhat person 7”, the -n- being changed fr. -y- IJ] 237—Xak. xi kayu: alternative form (luda) of xayu: (Hap. leg.; n.m.e.) the k- bcing changed fr. x-, the Oğuz and Kipcak, who are a section (fağaqa) of the Xalaç change k into x and say xızım “my daughter' while the "Turks say kiztm; and they say xanda: erdin “vhere (ayva) have you been 2” while the "Turks say kanda: erdin 7/7 218 (misplaced, among words with -t- as the second consonant); düğ min kayu: tümenle:r “several thousands and some tens of thousands" III 367, 10—ka:nt:/kani: a Particle meaning *where?' (ayna), one says oğlum kanı: *where is my son?” IJI 237; a.o. do. (1 bu:)—kanda: an Interrog. Particle of place meaning “vhere?”, one says kanda: erdin *where have you been ?', the -n- changed fr. -y-, kayda:, originally kayu:da: 7 418; o.o. IJ] 218 (above); IJI 173 (below); I 46, 20; III 69, 2—kayu:da: I 99, 26 (ağruk), 418 (above); IJI 173 (below)— kayda: a l'article meaning *where?'; hence one says kayda: erdin *where were you?”, alternative forms kanda: with -n- and kayu:da: III 173; 0.0. I 52, 11; 418 (above): KB kayu is “common, usually as a Relative, e.g. . GNA . 633 kayuka bu baksa “vhomever he looks at" 133; kayu ódte erse “at whatever time it was" 220; (look for yourself and see) kayusı kolur "which of them you want' 239; 0.0. 251, 301, etc.; often repeated for “some . . . others” e.g. kayusı kopar kör kayusı konar kayusi çapar kör kayu suv İçer “some of them (the birds) soar, some scttle, some svvim, and some drink water' 73; 0.0. 97, 138, etc.—Loc. kayda and Abi. kayudin (sic, the difference in length ?metri gratia) occur, e.g. kayudin kopar kopsa kayda barur 'whence does it arise, and when it has arisen where does it go?' 1834; o.o. kayda r34; kayudin 583—kan! *where?', e.g. anundi kanı emdi kaçğu yolum 'where has my way of escape been prepared?' 1170; (the rulers of the world before you) kanı kança bardı kanı ol kücl *where are they? whither have they gone? where is their strength?” cr37: xın(?) KBVP kim erse munı teğ etermü kanı “has anyone made a book like this, and where?' 25; kayu kend 'each town' (has given it a different name) 26; a.o. 35: xın(?) KBPP (when this book reached) kayu padışahlıkka wa kayu iklimka “each Empire and clime” 16: Ar. "kayu 'which' and kanifkayda *where?' are fairly common; Tef. kayu 'which?'; kayu erse “any”, kayusı . . . kayusı “some... others”—kayda/kayuda — '*where?; vvhere, wherever'C-kanda ditto—kanı *where?'— kaydin 'whence?' r94-8: xiv Muh. ayy kay] ka:y Mel. s, 4; 17, 14; ka:yu:/kayu:/kay Rif. 75, 96—ayna kanda:; min ayna kandin 15, 4; 91: Çağ. xv ff. kayu/kay bir kanjis: (quotn.)—kaydın kandim (quotn.)—kay sarı kanğı tarafa (quotn.) Vel. 326-7; kanda “vvhere?” (and “in “blood”) Sam. 277v. 20 (quotn.), kandın *whence?' (and “from blood") do. 22 (quotn.), kay Interrog. Pron. Rudám *who?' (quotn.), also pronounced kayu; also used for kucá “vhere?”, e.g. kayda dur *where is it?” 281r. 18; kay bir “every one” (quotn.) do. 27; kayda “vhere?” do. 29 (quotn.); kaydin “vvhence?” 281 v. 1 (quotn.); kaysı kudámin *which of them?” do. s (quotn.); kayu (spelt) kudám do. ız (quotns.); kayı (spelt) ditto do. r5—kanı *where?' 278r. 14 (quotns.): Xwar. xiii kayda *where?'; kaysınız "which of you?; kanı/kanda 'where?; kandın "whence?" “AZ 17, 32: xiv kayu *who? which ?' Qutb 129; kanı, kayda, kandın do. 128, 131; kayda MN 111, etc.; Nahc. 343, a, kaya "wherever' MN 111: Kom. xiv kayın *who?'; kaysı 'which (Relative); vvhich?”, kayda “here, where?'; kaydan 'whence?'; kayma “any” CCI, CCG, Gr. 189 (quotns.): Kip. xiv (under kança) kayda: and kanda: also mean ayna, and in Tkm. karu, a crasis of kay yérke: İd. 75; kayı: ayy do. 76; ayna kanda: Bul. 15, 12: xv ayna kayda: Kav. 16, 15; Tuh. sa. 4 (a.0.0.)—fi ayna kanı (in margin hant) 28a. 4 (a.o.o.)—ayy kaysı 6sb. 7; 89b. : Osm. xiv ff. the word equivalent to ka:fu: is kanğı/kankı, other forms noted are kanda, kandan, kanı, c.i.a.p.; kayda is noted only once, in xiv TT'S 7 410ff.; II 572 fT., 604; III 401 ft.; IV 460 ff.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 678 
     
   
   
     634 Dis. V. GNAD kana:- Den. V. fr. ka:n; originally Trans., 'to bleed (a patient, animal, etc.)'. An early l.-w. in Mong. as kana-, also Trans. (Haenisch sg, Koto, 719). In the medieval period it became Intrans., the Caus. f. kanat- being used as Trans. ; the first signs of this transition are in Kaş., q.v. S.La.m.l.g., everywhere Intrans. except in NE Leb., Tel,, R II 109, where the word may have been reborrowed fr. Mong. Cf. kanr-. Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. TT VII zı describes the consequences of blecding and other forms of treatment (sce 2 ba:ş, töğne:-) on various days of the month; kanasar “if one bleeds him” 21, 11-14; 8.0. H II zo, 3: Xak. x1 ol atın kanazdı: madaca farasahu tva faşadahu “he cut his horse's vein and bled it” Kaş. JI] 273 (kana:r, kana:ma:k), a.o. 1I] 261, 17 (sce ka:n-); (in a section on forming the Caus. f. of V.s ending in vowels) er burnı: ka:nadı: (sic) “the man's nose bled' (Hend. ra'ufa . . . tra damiya); one puts it in the Caus. and says er burnin kanattı: “he made the man's nose bleed' (adma), in the Imperat. anın burnin kanat “make his nose bleed', the alif (i.c. -8:-) is omitted fr. ka:nadı: 77 323, 3 ff. (this would make better sense if ka:nadı: is taken as an error for kana:dı:): Çağ. xv ff. kana- (-p) kana- Vel. 324; kana- (spelt) xümin şudan 'to. be bloody, blood-stained' Sar, 277r. 5 (quotns.): Kip. xiv kana- card damuhu "of one's blood, to flow' İd, 75: xv indamá “to bleed' (Intrans.) Tu. sb. 13. D kanı:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. ka:n; Kaş. clearly distinguishes this V. fr. kana:-, q.v., but there does not seem to be any clear evidence that -1:-, a rare Den. Suff., was properly Intrans. and -a:- Trans. Xak. xi burum kanıdı: (MS. in error kanadt:) “the nose bled" (ra'afa), also used of any other place in the body when it bleeds (damiya); originally ka:nı:dı: but abbreviated Kaş. HII 273 (kanı:r, kanı:ma:k). D 1 kina:- Den. V. fr. 1 kin, “to sheathe” (a sword, etc.); survives only(?) in NC Kir., Kzx. kma- “to wrap (clothing) tightly round (someone)'. Cf. kinla:-. Xak. xr ol bice:kin kina:di: "he put a sheath (cafr) on his knife' Kaş. III 273 (kina:r, kina:ma:k). D 2 kina:- Den. V. fr. 2 ki:n (kizfi) “to punish, torture', and the like, S.i.a.m.l.g., in SW Az. B1na-; Osm. kina- ; Tkm. frna-; elsewhere kiyna- and the like, with some extended meanings. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. (if a man has committed grave offences against the begs, and they) ólürgeli azu kınağalı sakinsar 'contemplate killing or punishing him' Kuan. 27; ftinhiğllarığ kinaguci bukağuçi boltumuz erser 'if we have become torturers or gaolers of people” TT IV 8, 61: Xak. xı beg anı: kina:di: “the beg tortured him” ('addabahu); and one says tepri: anı: kina:dı: “God punished him” ("dqabahu) Kaş. III 273 (followed by 1 kina:-): KB kinağu "you must DIS. V. GNApunish" 642; kınama yalavne “do not punish an ambassador' (because he speaks the truth) 3817; a.o. 639 (erk): xır(?) At. 446 (ulaş-), Tef. kıyna- “to punish' 207; a.o. 77 (emğet-): xiv. Muh. "aqaba kı:na:- (or kiyna-?) Mel. 28, 15; Rif. riz: Caf. xv ff. kina- (spelt) şikanca hardan «ca ta"dib hardan “to torture, to punish' San. 298v. 27 (quotns.): Xwur. xiv kina(or kiyna-?) “to torture! Quth 147: Kom. xiv ditto kina-/kiyna- CCG, Gr. 205 (quotns.): Kip. xin canna müna"l-cindya "to punish” kina:- Hou. 39, 10: xv 'adaba (?read 'addaba) kina- Tuh. 26a. 2: Osm. xivíff. kinaC.i.a.p. ; originally “to punish', later rather “to censure, blame! T'T'S 1 458; II 629; İİİ 445; İV s10. : Dis. ĞNC D kança “vhithersoever, whither?' and the like. Morphologicaliy an Equative, but a very old word fr. the same base as ka:fiu:, q.v. S.is.m.L., but meaning 'how many?” (cf. ne:ce:)) Türkü vin ff. kança: barırmen "where am 1 going?' IrkB 42: Uyf. vin ff. Bud. kança bardı where has he gone?” PP 53, 6; kança barırsız do. 78, 1; 0.0. U II 25, 21; HI 36, ro, IV 14, 144 —bu kanga barğay kentü ólgey wherever he gocs, he will die” PP 57, 6—;: Xak. xı kança: bardın "where (or why?) have you gone?” 7 74, 17; kança: bardı: belgü:sü:z "no one knows where it has gone” (ilà ayy ciha tattacih) I 354, 17; kança: barsa: “vherever it gocs” 711 40, 1; a.o. 7 224 (ümlüg); n.m.e.: KB 27 (kalı:), 206, 5137 (ka:fiu:), 5202: xırı(?) Ar, kanı kança bardi *where and vvhither has he gone?” 386; Tef. kança (bar-) *whither?; wherever' 198: xiv Muh. ila ayna kança: (-c-) Mel. 17, ış, Rif. 96: Xwar. xir kança/kançaru 'whither? “Ali 17, 32: xiv kança barursen Nar. 410, 3: Kip. xiv kança: (-c-) barursen ayza tadhab İd. 75: Osm. xiv. to xvi (only) kanca/ kancaru are common T'T'S 7 409; II 570; IIl 400; IV 459. D Kkrner (kr:üçi) N.Ag. fr. 2 kin, “punisher, torturer'. Survives in NE Kumd,, Tel. kiyngi R II 697. Uyğ. vi ff. Bud. (then the demons below the earth) kiynçilar (v.l. kinçilar) ölütçiler alku ketğey “the torturers and executioners will all go away' TT VI 89. D ko:füçı: N.Ag. fr. 1 ko:fi, 'shepherd'. S.i.s.m.l, with the same phonetic changes. "Türkü vır ff. kofgrlerke: (sic) 2: yarık 'two suits of armour (were issued) to the shepherds” Miran C s (ETY II 67): Xak. xı KB bodun koy sanı ol begi koyçısı “the people are like sheep and their beg is their shepherd” 1412: xii(?) Tef. koyçı 'shepherd' arr: xiv Muh.(?) rafi "shepferd” koyma:nçı: (sic). Rif. 156 (?error for koyu:nct:; Mel. 57, ır bas yrlkrigi): Çağ. xv ff. koygtr çoban “shepherd” Vel. 348; koyçi (spelt) sabàn wa rá'i-yi rama 'shepherd, herdsman' San. 292v. 10 (quotn.). kancik 'bitch'. S.i.a.m.l.g. except. NE(?) w. some phonetic changes. L.-w. in Pe. etc., 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 679 
     
   
   
      DIS. V. GND- 635 Doerfer 111 1532. Xak. xı kancik 'bitch' (a/-kalba) ; and when a woman is abused (subbat) she is compared to one and called kancik (MS., in error, kr:npik) Kaş, I 475; alo. I1 188 (ilis-): Çağ. xv ff. kancik (spelt) sag-i mada “a bitch'; in Rrimi used more generally for the female of any animal San. 277v. 20: Kom. xiv 'bitch' kançık CCG; Gr.: Kip. xii al-kalba kançı:k (-ç-) Hou. 11, ro: xiv kancuk (-c-) ditto /d. 74; Bul. yo, iz: xv. kangcik is onc of several words translating “dog” 792. 3ob. 12. C kançok Hap. leg.; crasis of kança: and 2 ok, Xak. xi kançok kaça:r ol tuta:r *wherever he flies to, (we) catch him” Kaş. 7 195, 4; n.m.e. F kunçüu:y the Chinese phr. kung chu “daughter of the emperor! (Giles 6,568 (q.v.) 2526), which reached the Türkü when actual (or more often alleged) daughters of the Chinese Emperor were sent as brides to favoured xagans. Itsoon “came to be used for “consort, wife', even when neither husband nor wife were in fact royal. N.o.a.b., but also noted in Pe., Doerfer III 1585. Türkü vim (their ruler was Bars Beg) xağan atığ bunta: biz bértimiz, siplim kunçuyu:ğ bertimiz “ve thereupon gave him the title of xağan and my younger sister as consort” I E zo, II E 17; (my mother, the xatun, my stepmothers, my elder sisters, my daughters-in-law) kuncguylarim “my consorts” I N 9: vur ff. (a beg . . . came to his residence) üçü:nç kunçu:yı: uridanmis “his third wife had given birth to a son” IrkB 5: Man. (in a list of dignitaries, etc.) kunçuylar “the royal consorts” T'T II 8, 64; (in a similar list) tepriken kunçuy “the devout royal consort” M III 36, 4 (ii): Yen. kunçu:y, often in the phr. kuyda: kunçu:yim “my consort in the women's apartments! (see 1 kuy), is included in the standard list of persons from whom the deccased is parted by death Mal. 27, 2 etc.: Uyğ. viri ff. sizler lu xanı kunguyt mu sizler "arc you consorts of the dragon king?” PP aş, 3-4: içliğ kunçuylar 'pregnant vvives” TT X 37-8; a.o. U İİİ 54, 5 (HI 23, 19, kil-): Civ. (if a child is misplaced) kayu kuncuylarnir karninta “in the womb of any married woman' 77 VII 27, 15; a.o.? kunsgi TT I 156 (utli:liğ): O, Kir. ix ff. as in "Türkü vri ff. Yen.: Xak. xi künçü:y al-sayyida mina'l-nisá "a noblewoman' one step (bi-daraca) below the xát&amp;n; hence one says ka:tu:n kunçu:y Kaş. 11I 240. Dis. ĞND kanat (?kana:d) properly “a bird”s vving”, but also used in extended senses like “a fish”s fin, the fiy of a tent”, etc., and even abstractly for “protection” and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g.; in SW Az. Banad; Osm. kanat (before vowels kanad-); Tkm. ğa:nat. L.-w. in Pe. etc., Doerfer II]. 1531. . Türkü vri ff. IrkB 35 (ur-): Man. (the heat of the sun will come down on you and) senip kanatipm küyürgey "burn your wings' M Tİ 23, 3 (ii): Xak. xı kanat al-canáh *wing! Kaş. I 357; o.o. II 3 (sap-), 1:183 (saptur-): KB 3oos (1 er): xir(?) Tef. kanat *wing! 197: xiv Muh.(?) al-candh ka:nat Mel. 4, 19; 73, 8; Rif. 75: 176: Çağ. xvfT. kanat(1) 5a/-1 reyür "a bird's wing; (2) dümana-i xayma “the wall of a tent”: (3) xayma-i alá(üq “a felt tent” San. 277v. Ts (the last two phr. are prima facie metaph. meanings of this word, but there may be some confusion with Ar. qand(t), properly “a reed', but with some other [meanings a sa l.-w. in Pe.): Xwar. xiv kanat 'wing! Qutb 130: Kom. xiv '*wing" xanat CCG; Gr.: Kip. xii al-canáh ka:nat Hou. ro, 19: xiv kanat ditto İd. 75; Bul. 12, 6: xv ditto Tuh. rıb. 5. D konat (konot) Active Dev. N. fr. ko:n-, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı konat “any group (şirm) of people who bunch together (talabbada) with one another”, hence one says ol menin kona:tım (si) ol "he is one of the group (cumla) of those who bunch together with me” Kaş. 1 357: KB (be generous to the poor and they will intercede for you; do not ask them for wealth in return) yanuti bayat bérge edgü konut (?konot) “God will give you in return good companions (in paradise)' 4471. D kanta, kantın See ka:nu:. kandir Hap. leg. Xak. xı kandir “the membrane on the flesh (of a slaughtered beast, cildu l-lahm) which remains after the hide vvhich is suitable for tanning has been stripped off it” Kaş. I 457. D kapdas Hap. leg.; N. of Assn. fr. kan, *half-brother', son of the same father and a different mother. Cf, 0gdes. The word kadaş seems superfluous, and is perhaps a gloss incorporated in the text. Xak. xı kandaş kadaş (sic) bani l-'allát “half-brothers with the same father! Kaş. III 382 (prov.). kunduz “beaver”, S.i.a.m.l.g. including Cuv. xántàr, Ash. XVI 340. L.-w. in Pe. etc., Doerfer 111 1534. UyÉ. virti ff, Bud. (there were three friends, an ape, a Siberian panther, and) kunduz “a beaver” U IV 44, 6; a.o.o.: Civ. kunduz kayiri 'castoreum' F I 125: Xak. xı kunduz al-qudö"a wa hiya kalbatu'l-má' "a beaver', that is aquatic dog: kunduz kayrı: al-xazmiyán mina l-adwiya (MS. al-harmiyün mina'l-acdiya) “castoreum”, a kin of drug Kaş. 1 458: Çağ. xv ff. kunduz (spelt) *beaver' (sag-r abi), the fur of which is sewn on the edge of caps and coats, and used to make fur-coats; “castoreum” (eund-i bidastar) is its secretion (quotn.); (also a geog. Name); kunduz kayrı “the secretion of the beaver called cund-i bidastar” San. zgir. 26; a.o. 76v. 2 (oğul): Xwar. xiv kunduz 'beaver' Qutb 144. Dis. V. GNDD kanat- Caus. f. of kana:- ; “to make (something) bleed'. S.i.s.m.l. Uyğ. vr ff. Civ. (the patient must be given various beverages and) ka:n ka:na:tmış kere:k “must be bled” TT VIII I.24 (text damaged, the tentative reading ka:na:rmig is no doubt an error): Xak. xr ol 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 680 
     
   
   
     636 DIS. V. anıp burnin kanatti: “he made his nose bleed? (adma) Kaş. II 313 (kanatu:r, kanatma:k), bu ot ol burun kanatğa:n “this drug makes the nose bleed constantly' (mura"'if) 1 515; a.o. II 323, 6 (kana:-): Çağ. xv ff. kanat- Caus. f.; xün dlüd hardan “to make blood-stained' Sar. zyyr. 18 (quotn.). D kanıt- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of ka:n-; cf. kantur-. Xak. xi ógdi: ol erig kanıtğa:n "praise always. makes that man. cheerful" (mihizza) Kaş. 1 $15; n.m.e. D kinat- Caus. f. of 2 kina:- ; survives in NE Tel. kıynat- R II 696. Xak. xr beg anır: kinattr "the beg ordered that he should be punished” (52-7qabihi) Kaş. II 313 (kmatu:r, kınatma:k). D konat- (konot-) Hap. leg.; an unusual Caus. f. of ko:n-, the form perhaps influenced by konat, q.v. Cf. kontur-. Xak. xi ol ö:zipe: konum konattı: askana hawla baytihi "aşira tea. man talabbada bihim wa yu'inuhum “he settled round his residence a group of people vvho bunched together, and he helped them” Kaş. II 313 (konatu:r, konatma:k). VU kondi:- Hap. leg. ş not quite syn. vv, bile:-, etc. Xak. xı ol kiliç kondi:di: calaá'l-sayf brl-midwas 'he polished the sword with a whetstone' Kaş, 117 277 (kondrr, kondi:ma:k). D kantur- Caus. f. of ka:n-; “to satisfy, satiate'. S.i.a.m.l.g. with some extended meanings. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. köpülteki küsüşin kanturğalı sakınsar “if he contemplates satisfying the desires in his mind” PP 14, 5-6; similar phr. U III 29, 19; IV 44, 24 (kurinc); Hiüen-ts. 284; TT VII 4o, 87-91; USp. 104, 6; 106, 25: Xak. xı ol meni: suvka: kanturdı: “he satiated me (zracetedni . . tva abda"ani) with water'; originally kandurdi:, also used of other things besides water Kaj. Il 192 (kanturur, kanturma:k): Çağ. xv ff. kandur- Caus. f.; “to satisfy” (sir kardan) in the sense of 'to satiate with water' and in an abstract sense San. 277r. 4: Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 130: Kip. xiv kandur- areá ğayrahu İd. 74: xv ratotod kandır- Tuh. 17b. 9. D kıntur- Caus. f. of kin- , “to arouse desires (in someone)' and the like. Survives in some NE languages and until recently in SW Osm. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. (well-disposed people who preach the Mahàáyàna doctrine and) burxan kutma kınturğalı “make them desire the divine favour of Buddha' TT V 22, 19; kinturur erdi aruk tıtsılarığ ertinilig otruğka "he inspired the vveary disciples to long for the island of jewels' Hüen-ts. 1914-15: Kip. xiv kindur- ba'ata ğayrahu "to arouse, or incite, someone' İd. 75: Ösm. xiv to early xix kindur-/kindir- “to arouse, or incite (someone) to do (something Dat.)'; c.i.a.p. TT.S 7 499; 11 627; III 446; IV sir. D kontur- Caus. f. of ko:n-; “to settle (people somewhere); to put (someone) up for the GNDnight”, etc. S.i.a.m.l.g. Türkü viii konturmiş "they. settled' (the people eastwards as far as the Kadirkan mountain forest and westwards as far as the Iron Gate) 7 £ ə, 11 E 4; a0. 1 E 21, İT: E 18: virt ff. (a xan went to war, he conquered the enemy and) köçü:rü: kontu:ru: keli:r “comes back making them migrate and settle (on the land)! 7rkB. 34: Xak. xr ol evinde: kuş kondurdiı: “he made the bird perch (azcqa"a) in his house” and one says ol nltu:n üze: çaş kondurdi: “he set (raşşa"a) the turquoisc in gold'; also used for anything that is set in something Kaş, 7I 192 (kondurur, kondurma:k): Çağ. xv ff. kondurCaus. f.; nigándan “to settle (people)! San. 290v. 25 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv kondur- 'to receive as a guest' Qutb 140: Kom. xiv ditto CCG; Gr. 199 (quotns.): Osm. xiv ff. ditto; fairly c.L.a.p. 773 1 480; III 471; IV 536. Tris. GND VUD kondtr £u: Hap. leg.; N.T. fr. kondiı:-. Xak. xr kondi:gu: al-midcas *whetstone! and the like Kaş. I 491. D kanatlığ P.N./À. fr. kanat, “having wings'. S.is.m.l.g.. with minor phonctic changes. "Türkü virr ff. altu:n kanatlığ talim kara: kus men “1: am a predatory(?) eagle with golden wings! JrkB 3: (Xak.) xın(?) Tof. kanatlu “having . . . wings' 198. Tris. V. ĞNDD kanatlan- Refl. Den. V. fr. kanat, 8.i.s.m.l. meaning both literally “of a bird, to grow wings', and metaph. 'to hurry away, take wing'. Xak. xı er kanatlandı: “the man had a ftery ((driha) horse, flew (dra) on it, or was on the point of going (aşrafa “ald” -dahdb) to his destination'; and one says kuş kanatlandı: "the bird grew wings! Kaş. JJ 267 (kanatJanu:r, kanatlanma:k). Dis. GNG D kana:ğ Hlap. leg.; N.Ac. fr. kana:- ; “bloodletting”. Uy. vir ff, Civ. TT VII 42, 3 (tamar). D *kanak Dev. N. fr. *kafi-; 'the skin on milk, clotted cream", and the like. "The later form of such a word might be expected to be *haynak, but it is in fact kaymak which s.1.a,m.l.g, L.-w. in Pe., etc. Doerfer lI 1417. Xak. xı kayak al-dawaya “the skin on milk' Kaş, III 167 (verse); a.o. III 32, 3 (bigril-): Arğu:, Bulğar xı kanak al-dawáya, with -n- substituted for -y- 7 383: xiv Muh.(?) gagtatu'l-laban "cream on the top of milk kayma:ğ Mel. 66, 9 (one MS. only): Çağ. xvff. kaymak “a thin skin (parda) which forms on the surface of milk'; in Ar. hafdf and yağma and in Pe. tü San, 281v. 8: Xwar. xiv kaymak “cream” Qutb 128: Kip. xiv kaymak “cream (a/-qaşt) on the top of milk' İ4. 77: XV al-qaşta kaymak Kav. 63, 1; qaşt kaymak Tuh. 29a. 4.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 681 
     
   
   
      i TRİS. D kanığ n.o.a.b., prima facie a Dev. N. fr. ka:n-, the translation “cheerfulness, satisfaction” suits this etymology well, but in IrkB it obviously means some kind of animate creature and may have this second meaning also in Kaş., perhaps “a favourite, a favourite horse”, or the like. Türkü vri ff. kanığı: ölmiş kópe:kl: (sic, read kóne:kl:) toprni:s kanığı: nelük ólgey ol befli:$ ol kóne:ki: nelük topğay ol küneşke: olu:ru:r “his ham has died and his pail has frozen. Why should his Rarrığ die? It belongs to a beg. Why should his pail freeze? It sits in the sunshine' IrkB sv: Xak. xi kanif al-aryahiya “cheerfulness, satisfaction'; tutçı: yağar buli:ti: altun tamar arığ aksa: anıp akt:nı: kandı: meniy kanığ it describes the generosity of the queen and says 'the cloud of her generosity rains pure gold; if her stream flow over me my cheerfulness (xaşdöff) is complete, and I draw drafts of happiness” (ramwitu müna”l-surür) Kaş. I 376 (there is an obvious pun between the physical clouds and the clouds of generosity and there may be a parallel pun between a physical kanığ which has been satisfied and the abstract meaning). D kınığ N./A, Ac. fr. kin-; longing, desire', and the like. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vır ff, Man. (having eyes like copper and) kınığ [gap] TT IX 63: Bud. (if the Buddhas look on anyone they become honest(?) in their speech, good and gentle in their minds, and) katığ kınığ sakınçlığ *with thoughts of strong longing” U II 73, 17 (mistranscribed kaçığ(?)): kınığ kópüllüg arvışın sid sadan kılıp “performing the ceremony of siddhisádhana (obtaining magical power) by a dhárami of longing thoughts! U IV 22, 268;0.0.do. 38, 132; 48, 83; yiti kınığ tölükte turup 'standing under the pressure of sharp desire! Suv. 615, 6. D konak/konuk (konok) Preliminary note. There is no reasonable doubt that etymologically the scords meaning “millet” and 'guest' and the like are identical, both representing an Intrans.] Pass. Dev. N. fr. ko:n-, in the first case in the sense of 'something planted in the ground'. Both became early l.-w.s in Mong. as konok (konoğ) (Haenisch 66, Kow. 868), and survive in the same forms in modern languages, but it is more conventent to list them separately. D 1 konak (konok) some sort of cereal, originally “millet”, of which there are several kinds, but now sometimes used for other sorts. "The normal Ar. word for “millet” is a/-duxn (see üyür, tarığ), al-cáwars is a l-w. fr. Persian götcars, also “millet”, perhaps of a different kind. Survives in NE 'Tuv. xonak "Timothy grass'; SE "Türki konak “maize”, NC Kir. konok *Italian millet” (in some places 'maize; sorghum”), SC Uzb. künok ditto; NW Kk. konak “a particulat kind of millet”. Uyğ. virir ff. Civ. konak méni “millet flour" H 167,94; konak tügisi “husked millet TT  GNG | 633 'panicled millet” (Giles 904) konak Ligeti 168; R H sas: Xak. xı konak al-càwars *millet' Kaş. I 384 (prov.); o.o. 1H 167, 7 (mis-spelt hoyah), 347, 18: xiv. RO. (their tears turned into) konak “millet seeds” R /7 535 (quotn.): Çağ. xv ff. konağ/konak (r) cáwars San. 291r. 17. D 2 konak/konuk (konok) from an early period both (r) “a guest, a person who comes to stay', and (2) 'the place where one settles down (usually for a short time), lodging' and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g., in NE konok/konik; NC Kir. konok; elsewhere normally konak; SW Osm. seems to be alone in having both konuk *guest' and konak 'guest; inn; large house, official residence' and even 'a day's stage in a journey'. L.-w. in Pe., etc. Doerfer 1II 1539. Uyğ. viii ff. Man.-A kaltr konak(k)a olurSar 'when he sits down at a stopping-place' M IH 12, 6 (ii): Xak. x1 konuk al-dayf 'guest' Kaş. I 384 (verse); o.o. 7 45 (ağırl1ığ), 46 (1 6:z); 85, 4; 517, 19; İİ 312 (tünet-), kış konuki: o:t "winter hospitality (diyafa) is a fire” 7 332, 9: KB keçiğli konuk “the passing guest' 817; o.o. 3529, 5844; yaşıl suv kizil otka bolmaz konuk 'green water does not become the guest (or lodging?) of red fire' 2250: xır1(?) Tef. konuk "lodging; guest' 212: xiv Rbğ. konukka barurmen “1 am going visiting” R II 340; Muh. al-dayf konuk Mel. 38, 17; 65, 10; Rif. 126, 164: Çağ. xv ff. konağ konuk ya'ni manzil . . . wa mihmàn "lodging; guest” Vel. 345 (quotn.); konağ/ konak (2) mihmün San. 291r. 17 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv konak 'guest; night's lodging' Qutb 139; konuk 'guest' do. 140; Nahc. 235, 4; 253, 12: Kip. xim al-dayf kona:k (MS. kana:k) Hou. 32, 9: xiv konuk al-dayf ld. 74: xv ditto konak Kav. 23, 19; Tuh. 23a. 9 (in margin “also with -u-”): Osm. xiv ff. konak *dwelling, lodging”, etc.; konuk 'guest'; c.i.a.p. TTS I 479, 480; I1 647; HİT 470-3; IV 535-7; konak 'guest' /// 470: xvii konağ/konak... (3) in Rumi, also “house, palace (sarà), resting place' San. 291r. 17. D kunuk Hap. leg., Dev. N. fr. kun-, *robber'. Xak. xı KB (some men spend their life in the army . . . some grow old in fortresses) kayu oğrı tevliğ karakçr kunuk “some are thieves, cunning brigands, and robbers” 1737. D konğu: Hap. leg.; Dev. N. fr. ko:n-. Uy£. vil ff. Man.-A (in the monasteries) arığ yaruk küçlüğ vreştilernin konğusı “the dwelling-place of pure, bright, mighty angels (Iranian l.-w.) M I 27, 33-5. Tris. GNG D kana:ğu: N.I. fr. kana:- ; lancet'. N.o.a.b.; completely displaced by 1.-w.s, usually Persian viştüör. Xak. xı kana:ğu: al-mibda' "lancet” Kaş. I 447: xi Muh. al-mişrat ditto kana:ğu: Mel. 62, 7; Rif. 160. D kanrkr Hap. leg.; N./A.S. fr. kanı: (ka:hu:), 'situated vvhere?”, Xak. xı (the light | VII 14, 17 and 79: xiv. Chin.-Uyg. Dict. chi of my eyes has gone and taken my soul with  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 682 
     
   
   
     638 TRIS. him) kanda: erinç kanı:kı: ayna huica al-àn "where is he now?', lit, “vhere can he be, and where situated ?' Kaş. I 46, 20. D konukluğ P.N./A. fr. konuk (2 konak); n.o.a.b. Xak. xi konukluğ ev “a house containing guests' (adyaf) Kaş. I 498. D konukluk A.N. (and Conc. N.) fr. konuk (2 konak); survives in NE Bar. koniklik "a day's journey'; SW Osm. konaklik 'hospitality; a guest-chamber'; "Tkm. ğonaklık “the status of güest”, Uyğ. viri ff. Bud, Pfahl. 8, 8-9 (ko:n-): Xak. xi konukluk ev baytu'l-diyáfa "a guest house” Kaş. 1 504; a.o, 1274, 18 (girá "entertainment”): KB konukluk asi "food given in entertainment' 4574: xiv Mu. (under “food and drink') al-da'wa 'invitation' konukluk Ael. 65, 9; Rif. 164 (mis-spelt konu:luk): Çağ. xv ff. konagluk (sic) mihmáni *hospitality' Sar. 291 r. 19: Xwar. xiv konukluk ditto Qutb 140: Kom. xiv “inn” konaklik CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiv konukluk al-diyafa İd. 74: Osm. xiv ff. konukluk is noted as meaning “hospitality”, and, until xvı, “the status of guest TTS II 648; III 474; IV 538. Tris. V. GNG(D konakla:- in a grammatical para., 771 347, Kag. says that morphologically as a Dev. V. fr. 1 konak this V. could be used in such phr. as at konakla:dı: “the horse ate millet', but that in fact it did not exist.) D konukla:- Den. V. fr. konuk (2 konak); “to entertain (a guest). Survives in SW Osm. Xak. xi beg meni: konukla:dı: "the beg (etc.) entertained me” (adàáfami); and in languages other than Oğuz it means “to spend the night (yubit) in a house against the wishes (karha(n)) of its ovvner” Kaş. III 339 (konuk1a:r, konukla:ma:k; verse), a.0. 347, 19: xum?) Tef. konukla- ditto 213: xiv Muh. adáfa ko:nukla:- Mel. 22, 13; Rif. 103; al-diyáfa konuklamak 38, 17; 126: Xwar. xiv konakla-/konukla- 'to receive as a guest' Qutb ao: Kom. xiv ditto konakla- CC?) Gr. (CCG kondur-): Kip. xim dayyafa mina"l-diyafa konukla:- (MS. kanakía:-) Hou. 41, zo: xiv konukla- adáfa ld. 74: xv ditto konakla- Tu. sa. 11: Osm. xiv ff. konukla"to entertain as a guest'; c.i.a.p. 778 7 482; II 648; III 473; IV 538. D *kaünaklan- See kayaklan-. D konuklaş- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of konukla:-. Xak. xı ola:r ikki: konuklaşdı: “they entertained (ada/a) one another” Kaş. II 258 (konuklagu:r, konuklaşma:k, followed by a note saying that this V. and salimlas- are the only two V.s of this form fully conjugated; others are used only in the Ger. in -u: to state the stake in a bet). i Dis. GNL kaplı: "wagon, cart, carriage', and the like. "There is also a Tribal Name Kapli: and it is an open question whether the tribe was so called ĞNĞ because it used cnrts, or whether, as is more prob., carts were so called because the Kaplı:, a western tribe, were thc first "Purks to use them, see Clauson, "The Name Uyğur”, J.R. A.S., 1963, p. 147. As such n.o.a.b., but a [ater form Kaga:, which perhaps came into existence owing to 2 false etymology, see Og. below, still survives in NE Kac., Koib., Sag. R II 8o and Khak. Elsewhere it has been completely displaced by l.-w.s, usually araba, a corruption of Arabic “arrada, see (Şan. 36v. 6. Uyğ. vurff. Bud. Sanskrit sakafa “vagon” kanlı TT VIII 4.4; ratha 'chariot' ka:plı do. 4.34; the word is fairly common meaning "a (royal) carriage! U Tİ 22, 7; “a wagon for carrying goods! U İT 4o, 28 (urtur-); more generally *wheeled vehicle! TT V 26, 115-16 (boyunduruk), Suv. 133, zo (tilğe:n), 625, S etc.; in Hiüen-ts. 2119-21 (S1Bu:n) it translates Sanskrit yana “vehicle”: Civ. kanlı “a wagon for carrying goods! USp. 55, 24; 92, 6; kaplı yoli “a road for wheeled vehicles' do. 107, 20; 116, s: xiv Chin.-Uyjg. Dict. ch'é "wheeled vehicle! (Giles 574) kapht Ligeti 161; R II 84: Xak. xi kanlı: "a vvagon (al-'acala) for carrying heavy loads': Kaplı: “the name of a great man among the Kipçak” Kaş, III 379: xiv. Rbğ. kanlı “carriage, wagon' R IJ 84 (quotns.): Çağ. xv ff. kanklifkaph (both spelt) "arrdda tva gardün 'wagon; chariot” also the name of a tribe (24”2/a) of Turks Sa». 278r. 4 (quotn.; an account of the origin of the name, quoted fr. the Oğuz Nàma, seems to be a summary of that in Og): Xwar. xır(?) in Og. 277 fl. there is a story of a man who made and loaded kanğa, “vagons”, leading up to the invention by Oguz Xan of the tribal name Kanğaluğ (sic): Kip. xi “the wagon' (al-"acala) on which grain is loaded (araba:; also) kaph: Hou. 9, 13: xiv kanlı: (?representing kanlı:) a/-"acala, the sort which is loaded, not 'speed', opposite to al-but' 'slowness' İd. 75. D kanlığ P.N./A. fr. 1 ka:n; 'bloody, blood-stained', with preceding qualifying word— “having . . . blood”, S.i.a.m.l.g. w. minor phonetic changes. Uy£. viri ff. Man. kanlığ (PU) bacana teg karaki 'his eyeballs like a bloody ?' M II 11, 17-18: Bud. U İV 34, 52-3 (türtün-): Xak. xr ka:nlığ, not specifically translated, occurs in two proverbs Kaş. I 7o, 24; IIl 43, 2; n.m.e.: Çağ. xv ff. kanlığ/kanlık xünin .. . kanlu ma'násma . . . bir daxi xüni ya"nı kan eylemiş 'blood-stained ; bloody; bleeding” Vel. 324; Kanlığ (1) xünin (quotn.); (2) xünxwàh 'bloodthirsty'; in Ar. talib tar (quotn.); (3) qatil wa xüni *'nurderous, bloody” (quotn.) San. 278r. ro: Kom. xiv *bloody' kanlı CCG, Gr. DF xanlik A.N. fr. xa:n; s.i.s.m.l. meaning (r) “a kingdom'; (2) 'the position of xani", "Türkü vrir ff. xanlık süsi: “the army of the kingdom” IrkB 63 (ün-): Uyğ. viu ff. Civ. (in a list of payments, mostly of taxes) yana xanlık tep yarım böz bertim “1 also gave half a roll of cloth, as payment to the xan" USp. 38, 16: Xwar. xiv xanlik 'sovereignty,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 683 
     
   
   
        —....,,..—— ——.... — .-.......................2 DIS. reign! Quitb 54: Kom. xiv “kingdom, kingship' xanlik/xanlix CCG; Gr. 192 (quotns.). D klik (kifilik) A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. 2 kim, survives in NC Kir. kıyındık "hardship, difficulty”. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud, kinlikta yatsun “let him lie in prison” PP 63, 4; a.o. do. 63, 6; kinlikta kirip “being put in prison' Kuan 37. D kofili$ P.N./A. fr. 1 ko:fi; 'owning sheep'. S.i.s.m.l. with the same phonetic changes. Uy£. viii [gap] kofliğ [gap] Su. N 6: Xwar. xiv koyluğ kişi bórüdin korkğay “the sheep-owner will fear a vvolf” Nahc. 11, 10. Dis. V. GNLD kinla:- Den. V. fr. 1 Krn; survives in SW Osm. 'to make a sheath (for something); to sheathe'. Xak. xr ol biçe:k kinla:dt: "he made a sheath (cafn) for the knife (etc.) Kaş. III 299 (Kinla:r, kinla:ma:k): Çağ. xv ff. kinla(spelt) gUdáf kardan “to make a sheath, to sheathe' San. 299r. 16. DF xanlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. xa:n, Türkü virt (the Türkü people, because they had no xax of their own, separated from China and) xanlantı: “got themselves a xan' T 2. Tris. GNL D skaplı:çı: Hap. leg.; N.Ag. fr. kaplit; Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. Sanskrit smrti árakgasárathi who has a charioteer with thought as his protection' Óf üze: közetiğliğ (küze:tighg) kaplaçısı erse:r TT VIII A.34. Dis, ĞNM D konum N.S.A. fr. ko:n-; lit. “a single act of stopping, settling', etc, Survives in SC Uzb. künim “a halt on a journey; a place where one stops or spends the night”. In Kaş. there seems to be an antithesis between uğuş, “a group of people related by blood, a clan', and konum, “a group of people living close together'. Xak. xı koşnı: konum ufuska: (MS. afiha:) kılğıl apar ağırlık asir :à 'agiratik wa ahrimhum “be kind to your tribe and have regard for them” Kaş. I 114, 16; (he fought to the limit of his powers and) uğuş ko:num okıştı: tadá''ati'l-'agira summoned the tribe (to help him) İT 163, 25; 1I 313 (konat-); n.m.e.: XIV Muh.(?) (under 'kinds of people'; huma min mahallati “those from my district” (or my quarter of the town) ko:nda:ş), min soatani 'from my country” konu:m Rif. 144 (only). Tris. GNN D kanınçsız Priv. N./A. fr. “kanınç Dev. N. fr. “kanın- Refl. f. of ka:n-; 'insatiable'. N.o.a.b., and apparently used only of sight. Uyğ. vii ff. Man. kórü kanınçsız körgle (sic) körküpüzni “your lovely beauty which we never tire of seeing! T'T 111 81: Bud. (the beautiful Buddhas who are loved by all and are) kórü kanınçsız U III 71, 9; (looking at the Buddha) kanınçsız közün "with eyes that could not look long enough at him” T'T' X 152.  GNR 639 Dis. GNR kipir 'crooked', originally of the eyes in the sense of 'squinting', and hence 'angry (looking) , later used more generally in such contexts as 'curved (sword), crooked (road)', and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g., in NE kryir R II 719. Uy. viii ff. Bud. (the king, his eyes suffused with blood, looked at the maral deer) kig/r) kózin 'with angry eyes" U IV 38, 128 (see note regarding omission of (1r)); yekler raksaslar kanlağ kózin kipir (so read) körüp “the demons (Hend.) look askance with bloodshot eyes” do., p. 43, note C.128, 1, 6: Xak. xi kipir er "a man with a squint' (al-ahwal); and if you wish to say “vith a double squint' (al-agbal) you say iki: kó:zi: kipir *with both eyes squinting” (ahwalan) Kaş. III 363; ktpir kó:zin bakıştı: "they looked at one another with angry bloodshot eyes” (bi-'aym şazar) I 170, 18; 183,6; 359, 16; (he does not look to his neighbours but finds wealth an incentive) kadaş tapa: 1t kibi: ki:pru: baka:r "he looks at his kinsmen with angry bloodshot eyes as if they were dogs” III 23, 2 (Kr:yru: is Hap. leg. and perhaps an error for kipir); Kom. XIV “crooked” kipir; “squinting” kmir CCG; Gr.: Kip. xv afqam 'with a crooked jaw' kipir enek 7uh. 42. 8; a.o. ab. 5. 1 kopur (konor) originally of a horse's coat *dark chestnut' or the like; later used for a rather wider range of colours of a wider range of objects, e.g. fabrics. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. some phonetic changes, e.g. ko:r/xo:r in most NE languages. An early l.-w. in Mong. as Royğor (Haenisch 66, Kow. 873). L.-w. in Pe. etc., Doerfer III 1536. Xak. xi konuür ko:y “a brown (al-aghab) sheep'; also used of other things Kaş. II] 363: xiv Muh.(?) (in a list of horse's coats) muxalifu'l-nugat 'dappled' ko:pu:r Rif. 171 (only): Çağ. xv ff. konğur (sie, spelt) “a horse of which the colour verges on black” (má'il ba-tiragi ast) San. 291 v. 2 (the spelling is unusual and the supporting quotn. Pe., fr. V”aşşaf): Kip. xı al-ashab kongur (sic) Hou. 31, 10 (the position in the text suggests that it means (of a man) 'sunburnt'): xv şahlü (of eyes) “bluish, light grey” konur Tuh. zob. 6 (the word also sometimes means *squinting'; if so here, this might be an error for kipir): Osm. xiv ff. kogur “chestnut” in three texts 77 I 482; 11 649. 2 konpur Hap. leg.; but see 2 kopra:-, konrafu: Xak. xi konur ü:n al-satctu'l-abacc "a harsh, raucous sound” (or voice) Kaş. III 363. PE kıpru: See kipır. (D) kipra:k prob. Dev. N. fr. "kimra:- Den. V. fr. kigir in the sense of something curved or something which cuts crookedly; survives in NE Tel. kınırak R II 709; NC Kir. kıparak/kınırak “a rough two-edged knife used for cutting felt, scraping hides and sheepskins, and the like”, Xak. xı krpra:k jafra mitla'l-sátür "a knife like a butcher's cleaver', used for cutting meat and dough  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 684 
     
   
   
     640 Kaş. III 382 (in the text kırpa:k, corrected in the margin to kipra:k). VUD kopra:k unvocalized, but almost certainly Dev. N. fr. 2 konra:-, the Ar. translation is uncertain, but prob. al-cank 'harp, lute, eymbal”, a l.-w. fr. Pe. gang. Survives in SE "Türki konrak/kopğrak, SC Uzb. küpğirok 'a bell', esp. one hung on an animal's neck. L.-w. in Pe. etc., Doerfer I11 1537. Cf. koprağu:, Xak. xı konra:k al-cank(?) Kaş. II 383. Dis. V. ĞNR?E kanar- See kanatt-. VU kopur- (kopor-) “to uproot'; n.o.a.b. Cf. koprul-. Xak. xı er yığa:ç kopurdt "the man uprooted (qala'a) the tree' (etc.), also used of the wind when it uproots something Kaş. III 392 (kopurur, konurma:k): xın(?) Tef. kopur- “to uproot, destroy” 213 (and 198 mistranscribed kagur-); Çağ. xv ff. kopar(-di, -ay) (VU) hogur-, Ropar- “to uproot, tear (a door from its hinges)” Vel. 345 (quotns.); konpğar-/kopar- (both spelt; “vith -p-") az cá kandan 'to dig up, or tear out from its position' San. 290v. 27 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv boynını kopur- “to twist (someone's) neck” Qutb 140. D 1 kopra:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. 1 kopur. Xak. x1 ko:y konra:dı: “the sheep was brown' (ashaba) Kaş. III 402 (kopra:r, kopra:ma:k). D 2 kopra:- Den. V. fr. 2 kopur. Survives in several NE languages as kopra-/koproR II 523-4; Khak. xonra- “to jingle, tinkle, ring”, and the like. Xak. xr oğla:n ü:ni: kopra:dı: the boy's voice became husky' (Zaluza), as happens when he approaches puberty Kaj. III 402 (followed by 1 kopra:-). VUD koprul- Pass. f. of kogur-; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. (she dreamed that) azığ tışları ağızınta kopurulup tüşer bolur "her back teeth vvere torn from her mouth and fell out” Suv. 620, 19-20: Xwar. xiv (oh Mubammad, let this date-palm) yerindin koprulup kelsin 'be torn from the ground and come (to do obeisance to you)” Nahe. 35, 13; a.o. (kopurulup) 441, 1-2. Tris. GNR D konra:ğu: Dev. N. (N.L) fr. 2 kopra:-, s.i.s.m.l, with some phonetic changes, usually meaning “bel”, syn. w. kopra:k; SE Türki seems to be the only language in which both words survive. Cf. çan. Xak. xı koprağu: al-calacil “bells” (usually specifically those hung on animals! necks); koprağu: al-xaşşa” (in margin, that is a/-xuşaşd”) “the prominent bone behind the ear' Kaş. İİİ 387 (the latter metaph. because of its shape?); o.o. II 358 (c1prat-); III qoz (çıpra:-): Xwar. xiv koprağu (camel) bell” Qut? 144: Kom. xtv "a small bel? koprov CG; Gr: Kip. xiv konraw (?kopraw intended) al-caras 'bell', also called çıprağu: İd. 75 (and see çıpra:-). DIS. GNR Dis. GNS D kansık Dev. N. fr. “kansı:- Simulative Den. V. fr. kan. N.o.a.b.; Kaş. gives the same translation of this word and óge:ry, q.v., but the latter is the wider term and can also be used for females. Xak. xi kagsik ata: a/-rább 'stepfather' ; kapsik oğul al-rabib 'stepson" Kaş. 111 383. D kansız Priv. N./A. fr. kan, n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud, PP 7?, 6 (1 öğsüz): O, Kir. ix ff. üç yaşımda: kansı:z boldum 'I became fatherless at the age of three” Mal. 6, 1: beş ya:şımda: kansı:z kalıp “being left fatherless at the age of five” do. 45, 2. Dis. ĞNŞ D konşı: "neighbour”, Dev. N. abbreviated, fr. konuş-. The phonetic history of the word is complicated, and Kag.'s statement that the Xak. form was koşni: is hard to explain, unless it is a simple metathesis. S.i.a.m.l.g. in a wide range of forms; NE Sag. koncik; Khak. xoncix; SE Türki koşna/koşnı:, NC Kir. kopsu; SC Uzb. küşni, NW Kk,, Nog. kops:; Kumyk xonşu, SW Az. Éonsu; Osm. komsu; Tkm., £opst Uyf. vinff. Bud. evine yakın bir konşışı bir bayağut bolur erti "he had a neighbour near his house, a rich man” USp. rogb. 8-9; konaşı (sic) él(i)igler “neighbouring kings' Hüen-ts. 2009: Civ. (your sons and daughters are joyful; your elder sisters and sisters-in-law are happy) konşı kız utlılığ “your neighbours(?) and daughters dutiful' Z'T' I 156 (but kons1 here is prob. a Sec. f. of kuncuy “consorts”): Xak. xı koşni: al-cár "neighbour”, the Oğuz invert the -nand -S- and say kongi; both forms are regular and correct (giydsi hasan) Kaş. I 435; börl: koşnı:sın yeime:s “a wolf does not eat his neighbour, out of respect for neighbourliness' Ill 220, 17: KB kör arslan bile kosni buğday başı “see the Ear of Wheat (i.e. Virgo) is a neighbour of the Lion (i.e. Leo)” 140; yakın koşnısı “a close neighbour! 4097; 0.0. 4546, 4618: xiu(?) Tef. konşı ditto 213: xiv Rb. konşı (sic) R II 525; Muh. al-car ko:nşi: Mel. 49, ış: Rif. 145: Çağ. xv ft. konşi (spelt) hamsáya “"neighbour”, also called koşni San. 291 v. 10; koşni (spelt) hamsáya do. 288v. 13 (quotns.): Oğuz xı see Xak.: Xwar. xiv konşı “neighbour” Qut? 140; konşı Nac. 9t, 16: Kom. xiv. “neighbour” konşı/konşu CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xir al-cör kong: Hou. 32, 12: Xiv ditto İd. 74: xv cár kong (sic?) Tuh. iib. iz: Osm. xivff. konşi/ konpşi common till xvi TTS 1 481; HII 472; IV 537. Dis. V. ĞNŞD kınış- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of kin-,. Xak. xr yigitle:r r:gka: kinişdi: 'the young men were brisk (Zrtáha) at the work', that is when they enjoyed (/hfazsi) the affair Kaş. II 113 (kinişu:r, kinigma:k), D kunuş- Recip. f. of kun-; “to rob one another';n.o.a.b. Uy. ix kunu:Smak tartiş  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 685 
     
   
   
       MON. GR mak “robbing and fighting one another” III C 9 (ETY II 38): Xak. xı ola:r ikki: tava:r kunusdi: "those two plundered (salaba) one another's property'; also used for competing or helping Kaş. İİ 112 (kunusgu:r, kunugma:k): Kip. xiv künüş- &amp;arra “to return to the attack'(?) İd. 74 (meaning obscure; İd. is also apparently the earliest authority for konuş- cátwara “to be neighbours', also noted as Çağ. in San. 290v. 25). Dis. GNZ kopu:z 'beetle'; prob. a generic term covering several varieties; s.i.a.m.l.g. except SW; in NE with much phonetic change, e.g. Khak. xo:8, in Quv. only in the phr. xurt xàmár (ie. 1 kurt kopuZz) 'insects, bees'. L.-w. in Pe., Doerfer 111 1538. Türkü vit ff. Toy. 29 (ETY II şş, ağuzluğ): Uyğ. vir ff. Man. konkuz (sic; context obscure) TT III 93: Bud. (in a list of harmful insects) kopuz U II 35, 23; yorığma kurt kopuz 'crawling worms and beetles! U II] 32, 3: Xak. xi kopuz a[-xunfusá' “black-beetle” Kaş. İTİ 363: Çağ. xv ff. kopğuz (spelt; “vith -n-”) a black creature (cdrzwar) called in Ar. cu'al ('blackbeetle") and xunfusá', and in Pe. gügardának ('dung beetle") Sas. 291v. 8: Kip. xiv. al-xunfusà' konuz Bul. 11, s. Mon. GR 1 ka:r 'snow'; c.i.a.p.a.l.. Türkü vir 7 E 35, H E 2; (batim); T 25 (1 sök-): UyÉ. xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. 'snow' kar Ligeti 162: Xak. xı ka:r al-talc 'snow' Kaş. III 148; over ten o.o.: KB 6013 (1 bu:z): xiu(?) Tef. kar 'snow' 199: xiv Muh. al-afr "heavy snow' (?; properly “abundance”) ka:r Met. 79, 1o; Rif. 184 (and 75): Çağ. xv ff. kar barf 'snow' San. 270v. ro: Xwar. xiv ditto Quib 131: Kom. xıv ditto CCI; Gr.: Kip. xın al-talc kar Hou. s, 8: xiv ditto İd. 74; Bul. 2, 16: xv ditto Kav. 58, s, Tuh. 10b. rr. 2 kar Hap. leg. in the onomatopoeic kar kor, the resemblance to Ar. is prob. coincidental. Xak. xi kar kor etti: karin 'the stomach rumbled” (qarqara), this word agrees (sudfaqat) with Ar. in sound and meaning Kaş. 7 324. E 3 kar See karın. kir Preliminary note. Tere are two common words of this form meaning respectively “high ground' and the like, SVV Tkm. Bir, and 'grey', Thm. ğır. Kaş, gives two other meanings swhich can hardly be connected with either. sword. In a number of modern languages Kir also means 'edge', see R 11 733, but this may be an extension of the first meaning. 1 kir originally “an isolated mountain or block of mountains' ; in this sense and more generally for "high ground” s.i.a.m.l.g., but in some languages, including NW Nog., SW Osm. it hardly means more than 'plain, steppe, wilderness! without any connotation of height. L.-w. 8641125 Y 641 in Mong. kira (Kotv. 2546) and Pe., etc., Doerfer 111 1598. Xak. xi kir al-hadba mina [-cibál "an isolated mountain! Kaş. I 324; (you have crossed . . .) kirla:r ediz be:dük al-atwáda'l-gumm “the high, lofty mountains' I 94, 3; (the clouds) kirka: kodti: ol karın 'deposited snow on the mountain' (/i'[-cabal) III 39, 14: KB 69, 96 (opri:): xiv Muh. al-şuüd 'rising ground” krr ağış Mel. 74, 11; Rif. 177: Çağ. xv ff. kir (1) bulandi sar-i küh “a height, the top of a mountain' (quotn.) (2) the Turks of Kaşğar use it for bulandi-i kanár-i hardü which is an expression for marad "illness! (meaning uncertain, lit. ?'the height of the edge of a knife! (?reading kördü)) San. 295r. 4: Xwar. xiv Kir occurs three times; (this world is like) kararmış kir *mountains which have become dark'; (sometimes admiring her) kir teg karakin 'eyes like ?'; Kirdin kar 'snow from the mountains" Qutb 148: Kip. xiti (between 'heaven' kó:k and “sun” kün) al-falak kir Hou. 5, 2 (al-falak should here mean 'firmament', but there may be some confusion with its rarer meaning "a rounded hill): xiv Kir ra'su'l-rabiya “the top of a mountain”, and in Kip. (sic) al-ardu'l-şahşah "level ground' İd. zo, al-ardu'l-sahgáh kir Bul. 3,8: xv in Tuh. 7a. 12 kir is inserted in the margin opposite to barriya 'desert, waste ground': Osm. xvir kir... .. (3) and, in Rümi, böyabün-i bi-àbi “vvaterless desert” San. 295r. 6. 2 kir (?krr) 'grey' and the like, particularly as the colour of a horse's coat. Survives in NE Koib., Sag., Şor kir R II 734; SW Az. ğır, Osm. Kir; Tkm. ğır, L.-w. in Pe., etc., Doerfer 111 1596. Cf. bo:z, ca:l. Xak. xi kir at al-farasu'l-samand "a dun (Pe. 1.-w.) horse' Kaş. I 324: Çağ. xv ff. kir .. . (4) dü müya (of a man) 'beginning to go grey” (lit. twocoloured) San .[205r. 7: Kip. xv (under 'colours of horses') al-axdar 'dark-grey' (temir boz and) kir Tuh. 4b. 4. 3 kir Hap. leg., unless this is merely an extended meaning of 1 kir. Xak.xı kir a/-"arim wa'l-musannát "a dam” (Hend.) Kaş. I 324. 4 kir Hap. leg. Xak. xt kir yağı: al-'adütweu'l-mukágih "an enemy who bears a secret grudge' Kaş. 1 324. 1 ko:r 'loss, damage”, and the like. Survivesin NE Tel kor R /Z/ 550; Tuv. xora, and recently revived in SW Rep. Turkish but not an Osm. word. Uy$. viii ff. Bud, (how can they kill that man or) adın kor yas ktlu usar “do other damage or harm to him?” Kuan. 35; o.o. U II 58, 4-5 (i) (tutuş), TT VI 63 (egsü:-): Civ. (all your affairs prosper and) kori yok “bear no loss” TT 1 148; kor bölür VII 28, 4, 10, and 52: Xak. xı ko:r al-xusrán "a loss'; hence one says er ko:r kildi: “the man made a loss' Kaş. 1I] 122: KB sapa bolğa kor “you will suffer loss” 193; 0.0. 1297, 1316, 1706: xiv Muh. al-xasára ko:r etmek Mel. 39, 2; Rif. 126: Xwar. xiv kor 'damage, harm(?) Qutb 140 (might be 2 ko:r): Kip.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 686 
     
   
   
     642 xıl al-xasöra (opposite to 'profit' asığ) kor, a dialect word (/uga), the ordinary word is ziyön, which is Tkm. and a Pe. l.-w. Hou. 28, 2: (xiv see kut İd. 68 where the word may occur in a phr.). 2 ko:r apparently both 'the residue of sour milk used to make yogurt' and '(baker's) yeast, leaven'. Survives in the first meaning in SW "Tkm. Éor and in the second in NE Bar.; NC Kzx., Tara R I1 549, and Kir, Xak. xi ko:r xamiru'l-rá'ib “the solids in (sour) milk', that is the residue of curdled milk (subába mina'l-rd' ibi l-mudrik. atı” Hamişi”l-hümid) which is left in the bottom of a jar; then fresh milk is poured on it so that the solids are coagulated and sour milk (yogurt) is made Kaş. Iİ 122: KB sınamış karılar sözi söz kori “the words of experienced old men are the leaven of conversation” 723: xiv Muh. (under 'cooking materials”) a/-xamir 'yeast' ko:r Mel. 64, 5; Rif. 163. 1 kur “belt, girdle'; originally only that worn by a man, later more generally for "the girth round a vurt' and the like. S.i.s.m.]. Cf. kurşa:ğ. Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. (if a mouse) kur is1rsar 'gnaws the belt (of a garment) TT VII 36, 13: Xak. xı kur a/-mintaqa "a belt”, İç kur al-:igáh “a sash” Kaş. I 324; five o.o., same translation, spelt &amp;u:r: K B ajunka badı kör tükel kut kur: “he girded the world with a belt of complete divine favour” 461; katığ kur badı “he tightened his belt” 542; o.o. 1456, 1588 (umunçluğ, it is difficult to distinguish between 1 and 2 kur in KB): xiv Rbg. kurşanıp kulluk kurtn 'girding himself with the belt of service” R II 917; Muh. al-hiyaşa "belt" ku:r Mel. 67, 9; Rif. 167: Caf. xvff. kur “a belt (kemer kugag) of gold and silver which they call kur kusak Vel. 338 (quotns.); kur (r) kamarband “belt, girdle', also called kurşak San. 285v. 21 (quotns.); a.o. 286r. 11 (kurşa:ğ): Xwar. xiv kur 'belt' Qutb 144; Nahc. 81, ır: Kom. “belt, baldrik” kur CCI, CCG; Gr.: a.o. (altin): Kip. xiii al-hiyága (ku:şak,) kur (,bö:1 ba:ğı:) Hou. 19, 3: xiv kür ditto İd. 70: Osm. xiv and xv kür, esp. in the phr. kur kusak, occurs in several texts T TS 7 497; II 666; III 488. 2 kur meaning rather indefinite, basically perhaps 'rank' (as in “high rank") and “stage” (one of a number), hence “a line, a course of brickwork', and the like, Intextslike KB it is easily confused with 1 kur, and some of the medieval translations are hard to fit into this framework though they seem to belong here. Survives at any rate in SE, SW. Cf. kurdag-. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. (faith is the primary requirement) kut bulmis tüzünler kurinta keziginte barmaknıp “of the progress of good men who have found divine favour through the various stages (of existence) TT V 20, 6; (if they intend to embark) burxan kutilığ (sic) kurka keziğke “on the stages (leading) to the blessed state of Buddha” do. 22, 25: Xak. xı kur al-martaba 'rank'; hence one says menin kurim uluğ 'I have a high ('asima) rank' MON. GR Kaş. 1 324: KB kezikçe kelir bu ólümnüp kurt “the stage of death comes in due course” 1476; (what is understanding's face, shape, character, and conduct?) yaşı kur1 bod sin avinci ne ol “vhat is its age, rank, stature, size, and kindly disposition ?” 1849; kiçiğ kur uluğlar ara kirmese "let not (men of) lowly rank mingle with the grcat” 2587; bu beglik kurı “this rank of 5eg” $139; 0.0. 2586 (yortuğ), 4066, 4760: xin(?) Tef. "isa yagka kurğa tegdi 'Jesus reached years of discretion! 217: Çağ. xv ff. kur aqrán ve anıtdl "equals, contemporaries' Vel. 338; kur . . . (3) çiza-t ditwàár tea asás tea bunyád "a course (of masonry, etc.) in a wall or foundation”, . . . (5) halqa halqa nişastan “to sit in circles' (at a feast); (6) matl wa kafi” "an equal' as in tép kur aqràán toa amiál San. 285v. 21 ((1) is 1 kur, (2) 'weapon' is a misunderstanding of Mong. kor 'quiver'; (4) is kor “hot embers', a word now widely distributed but not noted before the medieval period): Kip. xiv kur ('belt', and also) al-waqt İd. 7o; kur al-waqt twa'l-sinn ya'ni al-'umr; one says bu kurda:ş dur hdgdd lida do. 71 (time, age, life” are all remote from the true meaning and seem to be an inference from the translation of kurda:ş as 'contemporary' when in fact it means 'of the same rank or social class”): Osm. xiv ff. kur 'rank', and perhaps 'equal in rank' occurs in several xiv and xv texts T'T'S 1 497; 11 667; meaning “course (of masonry, etc.)” it is common fr. xvi onwards / 485; İl 651; İİİ 447; IV sal (transcribed kor). ?S 3 ku:r this might be an unusual abbreviation of kuruğ as Kaş. suggests; but it is more prob. that it was inferred to provide a (false?) etymology for ku:rbaka:, q.v. Oğuz xı ku:r al-yabis 'dry' ; an abbreviation of kuru£; prov. kula:n kuduğka: tüşse ku:rbaka: ayğır bolur “if a wild ass falls into a well, the land frog (al-difda'u'l-barrz, i.e. toad?) becomes a stallion' Kaş. 141 122: xin(?) Tef. (wherever that fish went) kuruğ yol “the dry road” (behind him disclosed him , . . they went after him) kur yerde “on dry land” 217 (perhaps a simple graphic error). : Mon. V. GR1 kar- (?ka:r-) “to mix (something with something else). Note Kajg.'s remarks. "The Hend. 1 kat- 1 kar- seems now to be obsolete, but kor- in SC Uzb. is the only wotd for 'to mix', and in SW Osm. kar- in this and extended meanings and in "Tkm. ğa:r- exist as well as 1 kat-. The der. f.s of 1 kar- are more widely distributed. Xak. xti (in a para., s.v. 2 turma:, on the Oğuz language) the Turks, when they speak of “mixing” (xalafa) something with something else say kattı: kardı:, kattı: is the word for 'mixing' (xalf) and kardı: is a jingle (taba") after it; the Oğuz say kardı: xalafa'l-say' bi”l-şay), and leave out the main word Kaş, I 432, 16; n.m.e.: xui(?) Tef. kar- "to mix (something with (birle) something)” 199: xiv Muh. farrağa "to empty, or pour (something into something)” ka:r- Mel. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 687 
     
   
   
     DIS go, 1; Rif. 113: Çağ. xvff. kar- (-mak) harıştur- “to mix” Vel. 321 (sec Osm.): Kip. xiv kar- xalata, and one says kattı: kardr: damma wa xalata "he collected and mixed”, and kata: kara: yedi: “he collected and mixed (various foodstuffs) and eat them” İd. 7o; in Bul. 69v. farağa tüken- (q.v.) and kar- is a muddle of faraga tüken-, farrağa kar-: Osm. xiv ff. kar- “to mix (something with something)' is common until xvi (when it was displaced by karıştır-) TTS 7 426; II 593; TH 412; IV 478: xvin kar- in Rümi, mamzüc tva dàxil hardan 'to mix, to insert! San. 270v. 8 (Rümi quotn.). 2 ka:r- “to overflow and the like. Survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. kar- (of water) 'to pile up behind an obstacle! SDD 841. Xak. xi er suvka: ka:rdı: the man choked (sariga) : with the water'; and one says Su:v ariktin ka:rdi: “the water overflowed (fada) from the canal in the summer'; this happens when the snow and water have been frozen (in the canal) and water flows down over them until it overflows' Kaş. IV 182 (kara:r, karma:k; sic butin a section containing Mon. V.s with along vowel); a.o. İT 197, 27: xiv Muh.(?) sabba'l-má' "the water (over) flowed' şu: kardı: Rif. 111 (only): Osm. xiv ff. kar- (of the tide) 'to rise', in three texts between xiv and xviit. TTS / 426. 3 *kar- See 2 karı:, karış, karış-, 1 kargi,, etc. kir- originally 'to scrape, strip (hair)', and the like; in the medieval period it acquired more violent meanings “to break, smash, annihilate”, and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. vr. one or both meanings. Cf. kırt, kirk-. Xak. xrer yérrig kirdi: “the man scraped (qaraşa) the ground (etc.)” Kaş. II 7 (kira:r, kirma:k),) (my dog seized the wolf and threw it down) ani tü:sin kira: yuldi: halaga ga'rahu "it stripped off its hair” II 24, 4, (they followed and surrounded him) saçın kira: mendedi: natafü şa"rahu "and plucked out his hair” III 4or, 13: xiv Muh.(?) rahada "to trample on” krr- Rif. 109 (Mel. 26, 14 €8:p-); al-qaşş "to cut off, clip” kir(unvocalized) r22 (Mel, 36, :3 kirk-); al-maqtül “killed” kırmı:ş 146 (only: Çağ. xv fi. Kir- (1) xarágidan "to scrape, shave'; but xardşi(dan) used of an arrow, stone, etc. which grazes or passes close to something is kırp- ; (2) qatl-i "am huşiş-i mufrit “to massacre, exterminate'; (3) sikastan “to break” San. 293v. “ 17 (quotns.); a.o. agar. 17 (Kirp-): Xwar. xiv. kır- “to destroy, kill” Quib 149: Kip. xur mahaga "to annihilate” kir-. Hou. 38, 3: XIV Kir- &amp;otftara'l-qatl “to massacre! İd. “to massacre, destroy'; common TTS 7 462; 11 631; İV 514. kur- the basic meaning seems to be something like 'to put (something) in working order' with particular applications of which the commonest is “to string (a bow)'. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE(?) usually meaning 'to erect (a building, tent, 70: XV. afná "to annihilate” kır- Tuh. 6a. 13; fand (sic, : “to perish”) kir- do. 28b. 4: Osm. xiv to xvit  . GRA 643 Man.-A (then the sorcerers . . . took bows and arrows and) yasın kurdi 'strung their bows' Man-uig. Frag. qor, 7: Bud. katığ yasın kurup 'stringing their strong bows' U /Tİ ss, 4; 8.0. U İİ 78, 31 (at-): Civ. TT I 162 (at-): Xak. xı xa:n sü:sin kurdi: "the king mobilized (cama"a) his army”, and one says xan çovva:ç kurdi: "the king untied and opened (halla sva naşara) his royal umbrella' (kura:r, kurma:k; kir- follows); er ya: kurdi: "the man strung (watara) a bow' Kay. II ? (kura:r, kurma:k); the phr. ya: kuris common in paras. on conjugation 77 37 ff., etc.; a.o. /// 62 (3 yov-): KB (the brilliant spring) yana kurdi davvlat yasın "has strung again the bow of the changing seasons(?)' 65: xi(?) At. katığ ya kurup 462; Tef. kur"to set up” (scales) 217: xiv Muh. atctara'l-qaws ya:y kur- Mel. 23, 11; Rif. 105 (reading ya:): Çağ. xv ff. kur- ('with -u-”) (1) ördsfan “to set in order”: (2) naşb hardan "to set up, erect”: and of a bow (kamán) illa hardan "to string”: and so they say maclıs kur- “to organize a meeting”, ya kur- “to string a bovr”, the exact meaning cannot be determined without knowing the Object San. 284r. 8 (quotns.): Xvvar. xii kur- “to set up" ' Ali 30: xiv ditto Qutb 144: Kom. xiv “to organize (a meeting); to string (a bow) kur- CCG; Gr. 203: Kip. xil woatara min toatri'l-qawos kur- Hou. 37, 20: xiv kur- awtara'l-qaws wa nagaba'l-facc (to set a snare") İd. 7o: xv awtara kur- Tuh. 6a. 11; nagaba'l-cám “to set the wine cups in order” kur- do. 36b. 13. ' Dis. GRA kara: “black”, primarily in a physical sense, but with a great many metaph. meanings, often pejorative, e.g. kara: bodun 'the ordinary people” (as opposed to the aristocracy). C.i.a.p.a.l. ; an early l.-w. in Mong., and in Pe., etc., Doerfer III 1440. There are many collections of phr. containing this word, e.g. II 132-42; Red. 1448-50. Türkü vr kara: bodun “the common people” 77 E 41; kara: kamağ bodun 7 E 8, 71 E 8; o.o. İİ N 11; S :2 (teyin): T sz (tök-): vn ff. kara: “black” is common in JrkB and Toyok, kara: kuş “eagle” İrkB 3 (described as 'goldenvvinged”), 43: Man. yarukh karah “light and darkness! Chuas. 166, 170-1, etc. a.o.o0. of kara “dark”, kara bodun TT II 8, 69; ro, 81: Yen. kara: bodu:n Mal. 32, 6; o.o. do. 30, 4; 37, 1 (xam): Uyğ. vir kara: égil bodunığ “the ordinary common people” Şu. E zş.o. E 5, N 12: viri ff. Bud. kara “black” is common; kara kuş U İT 31, 54; kara bodun U III 27, 3 (i); TT X 17o, etc.: Civ. kara “black” is common; yılkı kara TT VII 28, 43; 29, 6; 33, 19 is a collective term for “Hvestock”, perhaps "horses and cattle'; kara bas “slave” (male or female) USp. ör, 3 f; 73,3 fE.; 116, 3 ff.; kara also occurs as a cornponent in P.N.s in USp.: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. “black” kara; "İynx” kara kulak Ligeti 162; R II 134: O. Kir. ix ff. kara bodun Mal. 3, 6 etc.; ürünü:m kara:m in do. ır, 3; 45, 7, | etc.); to establish (a society, etc.). UyB.virtff. “my white and black”, seems to be a phr. for 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 688 
     
   
   
     644 DIS 'livestock': Xak. xi kara: “black” of anything; and the Xakani kings are called by it, one says Buğra: Kara: Xa:ka:n; there is a story (a/-qissa) about this: kara: kuş a/-"uqab 'eagle" (prob. specifically “the golden eagle”): kara: kus “the star Jupiter! (al-mugtari), it is the one that rises at dawn, and is called kara: kuş yulduz: (Oğuz phr. here): kara: orun “the grave' (al-qabr) (verse), originally kara: orun meant “dark (a/-müzlim) place”: kara: ba:ş a word for “slave” (al-mamink), both male and female, it means “black head”: kara: ot 'aconite' (a/-biş), it is a vegetable poison: kara: ya:ğ al-naft 'naphtha': Kara: Sepir the name of a place in Barsğa:n (see Sepir): kara: étme:k the name of a kind of bread made as follows; meat is cooked to rags (hatta yataharrá) ; then flour, butter, and sugar are added to it until it thickens in the boiling (yuglaz bi'l-£alayan); then it is taken out and eaten; and one says as a jingle(fi'i-itbà') kara: kura: Kaş, III 221-2; 0.0. / 331 (Kuş), rso (égetlik); IJI 33, 2 (bup); 4o (yultuz); kara: also occurs in tribal and geographical names and is fairly common elsewhere: KB kara 'black' is common 22, 77, etc.; kara as an abbreviation of kara bodun 25o, 256 (2 tura:), 778, 988 (to:d-); kara “black ink” 2715; kara kuş “Yupiter” $675, 6219; kara kuş Opi “eaglecoloured” (i.e. “dark”) 3949: xın(?) At, kül kara baş 298; Tef. kara “black”, kara bas/ kara kul “slave” 199-200: xiv Röğ. kara baş 'slave'; yılkı kara and kara 'cattle! R II 140-1 (quotns.); Mu. al-aswad kara: Mel. ro, 17; 68, 2; Rif. 84, 168; al-cáriya 'slave girl” kara: ba:ş (mis-spelt ğu:ş) 51,9; al-surriya (concubine) tea'l-cáriya ma"a(n) kara: ba:ş 147; al-"uqdab kara: ku:ş 72, 13; 175; al-xarküh "tent kara: ew 76, 11; 18o: Çağ. xv ff. kara (1) siyah “black” (quotn.); (2) '?l/lat-i kabüs “a nightmare' caused by over-eating or flatulence (quotn.); (3) metaph. dad “ink” (quotns.) . . . (s) they say as a jingle (itbà") kele kara mard"i ma mavcaşi "livestock (quotn.); kele (?lL.-w. fr. Pe. galla) can be used by itself in this sense, but kara only in this phr.; (6) kişi kara atbàá' tea sá'tru'l-nàs "followers and the rest of the people” San. 270v. 12, followed by over 3o phr. beginning with kara including kara baş in İran “maidservant, and other meanings, kara kuş "uqab, kara kulağ “a predatory beast larger than a cat which follows the lion about and eats the residue of its kill”: Oğuz xı kara: koş (sic?) "the sides (atraf) of a camel's foot” Kaş. III 221: Xwar. xın(?) kara “black”, common in Og.: xiv ditto Qutb 131, MN 7, etc.; karawas Qutb 132; kul karawas Nahe. 17, 8; 284, 5 etc.; yılkı kara do. 17, 8; 309, 10: Kom. xiv “black” kara; 'eagle' kara kuş, "ink" kara; “maidservant” karavaş and several phr. CCI, CCG; Gr. 193: Kip. xi al-'ugáb kara: kuş Hou. ro, 1 ; (under “colours of horses') a/-adham 'black' kara: 135, 6; al-asmad kara: 31, 2; a.o. 31, 5 (kap); al-asmar *brown, swarthy' kara: ya:ğız 31, 10; al-cáriya (kirna:k and) kara:wa:s/kara:ba:S 32, 17: (there are several P.N.s beginning with kara: . GRA in 29): xiv kara: al-aswad; kara etmek a/-nayda “a kind of wheat paste” (sce Hul., p. 38; Dozy, Supplement İT 741), that is "black bread'; a.o. (yağız) /d. 69; karavvaş “an expression for slaves in general” ('àmmati'l-raqiq) do. 70; al-sawdá “black (ie. copper) coins! kara: yarmak Bul. 4, o, “black chcese” kara: kurut do. 8, 4; al-nayda kara: etmek do. 8, rs, al-uqab kara: kuş do. 7, ro: xv al-astoad kara: Kav. 59, 18; o.o. s, o (kap); so, r8 (yağız), 'abd 'slave' kara: do. 39, 7; al-"uqdab kara: ku:ş do. 62, 13; “cane syrup ('aslu'l-qaşab) of all sorts' kara: ba:l do. öz, rg, aswad kara Tuh. 4a. 1; adham kara do. ab. 5, etc.; 'abd kara do. 24b. 6; ama 'slave girl' (kirnak and) karavvaş do. ab. 13; “uqdb karaVVAŞ (sic) do. 25b. 9; and other phr. w. kara: Osm. xiv ff. kara ev, kara kulak, karavas, and other phr. vr, kara are listed in T TS I 4185 fL.; II 579fLl.; III 407fL; IV 467ff.: xvi kara... . (4) in. Römi, sáil-i darya “the sea shore” (Ar. l.-w. qara) San. 270v. 17(Rümi quotn.). 1 kart: 'old', normally only of human beings and animals; s.is.m.lg.; in SW Az., Osm. specifically “old woman', hence sometimes *wife'. Not to be confused with karı 'strange' in some NE languages, which is a Mong. 1.-w., or Ar. qári “a reader or reciter of the Koran'. "Türkü vr özüm karı: boltim uluğ boltim *'] myself have become old and advanced in years” T' 56: vil ff. bir karı: ökü:zü:ğ “an old ox” IrkB 37: Uyğ. vii ff. Man.-A M I 28, 19 (ağduk): Bud. sekiz on yaşayur karı erti “he was an old man eighty years of age” PP 24, 4-5; kim beğleri azu karı başları erser 'who are their begs or elders” TT VI 9-10, a.o. do. 96; Sanskrit vrddhatamaih “by the oldest” ka:rıla:r üze: TT VIII F.2; a.o.o.: Civ. rt karı bolsar yatip ürür 'when a dog gets old it barks lying down! TT VII 42, 6: XIV Chin.-Uy$. Dict. lao 'aged' (Giles 6,783) karı Ligeti 163: Xak. karı: al-musinn 'aged' of anything; hence one says karı: er “an old man” (al-şayx) and karı: at “a fully grown (al-mudakká) horse' (etc.) Kaş. IH 222; II 30 (bun-) and three o.o.: KB sınamış karı “an experienced old man' 723; o.o. 4387, 6111: Xiri(?) Tef. karı “old (woman)! 20r: xiv Mu. al-şayx karı: Mel, 48, 15; Rif. 143 (adding toa l-'aciiz "and old woman'); 152; Aöğ. karı abuşka/karı uluf: "old man” R 1] 167 (quotns.): Çağ. xv ff. karı koca “old man” Vel. 319 (quotn.); karı (1) pir wa musinn ditto San. 272v. 6 (quotn.): Xwar. xırı(?) karı bolğumdin "because I have become old” Og. 333: xiv karı “old” Qutb 133: Kom. xiv “old man” kart CCI, Gr.: Kip. xii (after 2 karı:) also a/-şayx Hou. 20, 12: xiv karı: al-şayx İd. 70: XV 'acüzuhu karısı: Kav. 44, 17; şayx karı (and someone older than oneself is abigka and kartay) Tu. zob. 3: Osm. xiv ff. karı 'aged', sometimes specifically “old woman'; c.i.a.p. TTS I 422; II 589; İİİ 413; IV 474. ?D 2 karı: perhaps Dev, N. fr. 3 *kar-, cf. karis; originally "the forearm”, but more often used as a unit of measurement “a cubit, the   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 689 
     
   
   
       DIS. V. GRA |. 645 distance from the elbow to the finger tips”. Survives in some NE languages; NC Kir.; SC Uzb.; NW Kk., Kumyk, Nog., with various meanings, 'forearm, upper arm, cubit, halffathom (the distance from the middle of the chest to the finger. tips); SW Tkm. fari means (1) 'the lower leg of a quadruped from the knee downwards'; (2) 'half-fathom'. See Doerfer 111 1477. Uy. vini ff. Civ, yeti karı böz “seven cubits of cotton fabric! USSp. or, 35; 8.0. do. 13, 2-3 (uzun): Xak. xi kart: dirá'w'l-yad "the forearm': karı: “the cubit (al-dirà") with which linen is measured( yudra'), taken from the first meaning; as in Ar. the same word is used in both meanings Kaş. III 223; a.o. / 117 (1 ellig): xu?) At, 460 (ko:n-): Tef. karı (r) (a dog's) 'forelegs'; (2) “a cubit” 201: xiv. Mu. al-dira" 'cubit' karı: Mel. 82, 11 (only): Caf. xv ff. karı/karu &amp;ol ve bázüi 'arms; upper arm' Vel. 217 (quotn.); karı karış . . . ve bannà arşum Ca span; a builder's cubit' de. 319 (quotns.)); karı (2) dar" (?error for gird" “cubit”) (quotn.); (3) the ' name of an implement (ölati) used to measure things (quotn.); (4) bàzi, a word for “(the arm) from the shoulder to the finger tips' (quotns.) San. 272v. 6: Kom. xiv *cubit' karı CCI; Gr.: Kıp. xiit (under 'parts of the body”) al-sa'id “the forearm! (blle:k and) kart: which is also dird"u” I-qumaş “a cubit of fabric” (and “an old man") Hou. 20, 12; (under 'professions and crafts") a/-dira" “cubit” karı: (and arsun (1.-w. fr. Pe. araş 'cubit') do. 23, 13: xiv karı: ... also a/-dirdf İd. 7o. VU 1 skuri: “vest”, like *ber and 1 “yır known only in der. fs, the Directional f. kurı:ğaru: “vestvvards” and a Locative(?) in -ya: (see berye:) 'in the west'; N.o.a.b. Türkü vri kurrfaru: 'westwards' occurs six times by itself in I and 77 and also in a phr. I S z, IN 2and r1 (batsik)—Ópre: kitafida: herye: tavğaçda: kurıya: (PU) kordanta: yırya: oğuzda: 'among the Kitaíis in the east, the Chinese in the south, Khotan(?) in the west, and the Oğuz in the north' T 14; a.0. 2 N 12 (batsık)—kurıyakı: . . . bodun “the people in the west! T 17: Uyğ. vir kuriya: on ok(k)a: kirti: “they joined the On Ok (Western Türkü) in the west' Su. N 11; kasar kurrdin “to the west of Kasar” do. E 8 (see E aksirak). VU 2 kuri: in the Reduplication kurx: kuri:; n.o.a.b.: obviously onomatopoeic; the word du'à' has prob. fallen out of the MS. before al-falitt, which occurs at the beginning of a line, in the main entry. Xak. xr in Kaş. 1 9 it is said that h is not really a Turkish sound but occasionally occurs in pause (/i'I-wagf) at the end of one or two onomatopoeics including vı "a call to a foal” kurih kurih a taşdid has been placed over both rá's, prob. by a second hand), kurr kuri: (a call to) a foal when it has been left behind by (taxal/afa "an) the mare'; also kurih kurih, the ya” replaced by Ahà' III 223. VU?S koru: Hap. leg.; as this is a Kip. word it may be a Sec. f. of korif, q.v. ; if so, of the various meanings of al-hasak 'hatred; a star thistle; chevaux de frise; prickly hedge” the last is likeliest.. Kip. xı koru: al-hasak Kaş. III 223. Dis. V. GRAF kara- 'to look at', exactly syn. w. bak-. 'This common Mong. V., noted as early as xıl (Haenisch 60), is first noted in Turkish in Çağ., San. 268r. 21, with the alternatives karaş-/karala-, and s.i.a.m.l.g. except SW. "There is no reason to suppose that it is a native 'Turkish word and the base of 1 karak. Karap, translated "looking at him”, was read by R in USp. 97, 3, but is certainly one of several mistranscriptions in this text. The supposed occurrence in Kom. (R İT 142) rests on a misreading by Kuun of the entry of karı:-, q.v. karı:- “to be, or become, old”, properly used only of human beings or occasionally animals; homophonous vv, 1 kart. S.i.s.m.)., but not in NW, SW. Türkü vi: Ix. 3 (bepi:): Uyğ. vil ff. Bud. kariyuk biz “ve have grown old” U LI ss, 19; o.0. U II 5, 14 etc. (tuğ-): Xak. xı er karı:dı: “the man (etc.) grew old” (saxa) Kaş. II] 263 (karrr, karrma:k; prov. arsla:n karrsa: “vhen a lion grows old"); karima:s "does not become decrepit” (/à yahram) I 147, 6: KB kari- “to grow old” is common; of men 181, 294 (bun-), 347, 1640 (opra:-); of good fortune or happiness 943, 1331; of this world 5133: xiri(?) At, harislik karımaz idisi karip “avarice does not grow old when its possessor grows old” 306; a.o. 448 (bun-): xiv Muh. gáxa ka:rı:- Mel. 27, 9; Rif. 110: Çağ. xv ff. kari- (-p) Rarr- ya"nı kocaVel. 319 (quotns.); karı- pir sudan “to become old” San. 269v. 18 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv however old a man may get (karısa) these two bad habits do not get old (karımaz) Nahc. 433, 8-9: Kom. xiv karıdım Latin serui “1 grew old” CCG (see kara-), “old age” karımak CCI; Gr.: Kap. xiv kari- şöxa İd. 69, kabira “to be advanced in years” kari- Bul. 77v: xv 'acaza (of a woman) “to grow old” karı- TuA. 26a. Ir. D kora:- Den. V. fr. 1 ko:r; 'to suffer loss, be diminished', and the like, Survives in NE Koib., Sag., Şor kora- R II 551; Khak. xora-. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. övkesi korayur “his anger abates” Kran. 65: Civ. under the hexagram koramak TT I s4; kişi kügl korasar “if a man's strength diminishes' 56; (if he goes to battle, he is wounded, if he is in the town) korayur 'he suffers losses' 68: Xak. xi KB (his illness increased and) koradı küçi 1062; koradı sevinç 'happiness has diminished" 6486: Kom. xiv 'to be weakened' xoraCCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv kora- vaqaşa “to decrease (Intrans.) İz. 7o. koru: “to fence in, or protect (a piece of ground)", and the like. S.1.a.m.l.g., usually as koru-, with the same and extended meanings. "Türkü viri Ongm 12 (ataç): Xak. xi (ob otığ korrdr Lamá'l-kalà' "he protected (or  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 690 
     
   
   
     646 fenced in) the pasture' (etc.) Kaş. III 263 (korrr, korrma:k) Çağ. xvff. koru(with -0-") man' teca harüsat kardan "to restrict, protect! Sar. 285r. 19. kurı:- “to be, or become, dry'. S.i.a.m.l.g., usually as kuru-, often with extended meanings. Uyğ. viii ff. Civ. suv tamiri kurisar yaş yavışğu kurıyur “if the supplies of water dry up, the fresh foliage dries up” TT 7 55-6; ağızı kuriyür “his mouth dries" VIT 25, 5; 0.0. do. z8, 8; VIII 1.2, 6 üsirken-), 7: Xak. xı kurrdr toin "the garment | etc.) became dry' (caffa) Kaş. III 263 (kurır, kurıma:K), do. 264 (kuzi:-) and three o.o.: KB kuri- “to be, or become, dry” is common, 67 (ığaç), 118 (of trees); 133 (of greenery); 943 (metaph. of desire), etc.: xıır(?) At. kurup yulları “its springs are dried up” 387; Tef. kurı- (of a tree) 217: xiv Muh. yabisa "to be, or become, dry' kuru- Mel. 32, 7; Rif. 116; al-yabs kurumak 37, 5; 123; al-muqallá 'parched' kurumiş 65, iz, ku:rimis 164: Çağ. xv ff. kuru-(-p) kurt- Vel. 339 (quotn.); kuru- ("vith -u-") xuşk şudan "to become dry' San. 285r. t9 (quotns): Kip. xiv kuriyabisa , kuri1- (MS. kur-) dabba “to be parched, faded”, . . . kuru- najafa “to sink in, be absorbed, dry up” İd. 69-7o: xv caffa kuruTuh. 12a. 9; naşafa kuru- 36b. 12; yabisa kuru- 39b. 12. Mon. V. GRBS kirp-. See kir-, kirk-. Dis. GRB ?F karvvı: n.o.a.b.; there is hardly any doubt that Kaş. is right in describing this as an Ar. Lev, Xak. xi karwr: ya: al-qatosu'l-fucwà 'a recurved (i.e. unstrung) bow'; and one says karvvı: kaşlığ kişi: “a man with arched (azacc) eyebrows'; this agrees with Ar. because al-qarte is the word for anything curved (muqteis) (Ar. quotn.) Kaş. 111 239; a.0. D 195, 1 (çovva:ç). PU ?C kırba:s Hap. lcg.; this word is deliberately listed under final -S, preceding the cross-heading -S, but it must surely be an error for kirbas compounded of 2 kir and 1 bas 'grey-head'. Kas. xi kirba:s er 'a man whose hair is falling out, and thin not thick" (yatanátar . . . fa-yaxiff tca là yakatt) Kaş. I 459. Dis. V. GRBkarva:- originally “to grope for (something which you cannot see)' later more broadly 'to grasp with the hands or tecth' and the like. S.a.m..g. w. a curiously wide range of phonetic changes; NE Küer., Leb., Sag., Sor karba- R II 213; Khak. xarba- (still with the original meaning); Tel. and all other language groups except SW karma- R II 216 (which is sometimes confused with karma:la:-); the modern SW forms are Az. ğavra-, Osm. kavra- (from about xvi?); 'Tkm. £$abra-. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. (HariDIS. V. RAĞcandra's consorts said) él(l)g beg uzati bizni bürter ert! karvayur erti “the king has for a long time been in the habit of feeling us and groping for us' (with his delicate hands) U III 17, 15-16: Xak. xi ol karapku:da: karva:zdı: "he groped for it (arodaqahu) in the dark, and touched it fecling for it (lamasahu fáliba(n)) with his hand in the darkness'; also pronounced karwa:dr; as we have already explained, anywhere where there is a -V- it is permissible to replace it by -w- Kaş. 11I 290 (karva:r, karva:ma:k): Çağ. xv ff. karma(spelt) rubüdan "to seize, snatch' San. 269r. 19 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv karba- “to grasp, seize' Qutb 133: Kom. xiv “to touch, grope for (something) karma- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xv cassa 'to feel (something) with the hand' (yokaand) karma- (and karmala-) Tuh. 12a. 13: Osm. xiv to xvi karva- “to grasp, touch, feel”, common 7TS I 429; 11 594; İİİ 418; IV 479. D karvat- Caus. f. of karva:-; survives in SW Tkm. Éabrat-. Xak. xı ol anıp ko:yunda: ne:p karvattı: "hec urged the man to search (yatlub) for something in his bosom'; also used for anyone who makes someone feel (amassa yadahu) for something in a place which he cannot sce with his eyes Kaş. 17 339 (karvatu:r, karvatma:k): Çağ. xv ff. karmat- Caus. f. ; rubüyánidan “to ordertoseize or snatch' San. 269v. 1 (quotn. and correction of Vel.'s form karmay£gil). D karvan- Refl. f. of karva:-; s.i.s.m.l. as karban- (Tkm. ğarban-)/karman-. Xak. xı ol yançık (sic) içre: yarma:k karvandı: “he searched for money in his leather bag”, also used for anvone who reaches back and gropes (arca"a wa 'ayyata, MS. in error Bayyaba) looking for, somcthing Kaş. JI 250 (karvanu:r, karvanma:k): Osm. xiv karvan- “to grasp'; in one text T'T.S 7 429. D karvaş- Co-op. f. of karva:-, s.i.s.m.l. as karbas-/karmas-. Sce karmas-. Xak. xi ol mana: suvda: ne:p karvaşdı: “he helped me to grope(f?'l-'awdaga) for something in the water'; also in the dark when one scarches (yatlub) for something with one's hands Kaş. İl 221 (karvaşu:r, karvaşma:k): Çağ. xv ff. karmaş- (-1p) harvag- ve tutuş- "to grasp or seize one another” l/cl. 321; karmaş- “scize or snatch (zuözidan) together, or one another”, and metaph. Rusti giriftan "to vvrestle”, thc metaph. meaning is commoner Sar. 269v. 5 (quotn.); Osm. xiv karvaş- “to grasp one another”, in one text TT'S I 429 (and see Çağ., Vel.). Tris. GRB C kurbaka: some kind of frog or toad, prob. the latter; baka: means 'frog' and Xaş. suggests that this is o Compound of 3 kur and baka:, but the status of 3 kur is very dubious and it is prob. a Compound with 1 kur meaning “a frog with a belt", or the like. S.i.s.m.l.; in NC Kir, Kzx. and some NW languages baka means 'frog' and NC kurbaka; NW 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 691 
     
   
   
     ated  EM LLL karga:-). “o kırçat- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of kirça:-, Xak. MON. kirbaka 'toad', but in SC Uzb. and SW languages both mean 'frog' and the latter only "toad” when preceded by some word like kara: or yér. L.-w. in Pe., Doerfer III 1449. Oğuz xı Kaş. III 122 (3 ku:r): xiri(?) Tef. kirbaka "frog” 209: xiv Mu. (under 'aquatic animals") al-difda' "frog! kurba:ka: Mel. 77,6; ku:rba:ka: Rif. r8o: Çağ. xvff. kurbağa wazag “frog” San. 28sv. 28 (quotn.): Kip. xit af -difda" kurbağa: Hou. 7, s: xıv ditto 7d. 71; Bul. s, 4: xv difda' (bağa, below in second hand) kurbağa Tu. 23a. 7. C karabaş See kara:. Mon. GRC karç Hap. leg.; onomatopoeic in the Reduplication karç kurç. Xak. xı one says er (VU) turmuzni: karç kurc yé:di: "the man crunched (akala . . . bi-xadd) the gherkin' Kaş. 1 343. kurç 'tough, hard”, originally in the physical sense, but also metaph. S.i.a.m.lg. except SW; particularly applied to metals; in some languages now means specifically 'steel'. L.-w. in Mong. (kurga, Kow. 972), Pe., etc., Doerfer III 1459. Xak. xı “steel? (a/-hadidu'l-dakar) is called kurç temür; and it is used to describe strong (al-cilad) men, they are called kurç eren “hard (şila5) men”, also anything which is solid and hard (muşmat şalb) Kaş. I 343: a.o. III 287 (kevşe:-): KB atım alp katığ kurç “a hard, strong, tough marksman” 1949) similar phr. 2271, 5911: xiv Muh. füldd "steeP ku:rç temür Mel. ör, 8; Rif. 160; Kom. xiv “steel” kurç CCG; Gr.: Kip. xi al-fulad kurç Hou. 31, 15. Dis. V. GRCD kirga:- Hap. leg., but see der. f.s. There is a clear semantic connection w. Kir-; there is an odd alternation between -Ç- and -Şş- in yapşın-, yapsur-, q.v., and it seems clear that this is a Sec. f. of *kirga:-, Den. V. fr. *kirig, Dev. N. fr. kir-. Xak. xi ol ok amaçka: kırça:dı: “the arrow hit the side of the target (cdanıba"l-hadaf) and passed on” (mada), that is it was a glancing (al-zálic) shot Kaş. III 276 (kirca:r, kirça:ma:k). D kurça:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. kurc. NE kurça- R İl 953 is a Sec. f. of kurşa:- and not connected, Xak. xr yumşa:k ne:p kurça:dı: “the soft thing became hard” (sa/uba) Kaş. HIT 276 (kurça:r, kurça:ma:k, in the MS. the Perf. and Aor. are misvocalizei x1 0] anın ka:şın kirçattı: “he threw a stone at him and hit the side of his eyebrow and split it” (şaccahu, so translated by Kaş., it should be “be made (a stone) graze his eyebrow"), also of other things; (verse); one also says ok ama:çığ kırçattı: “the arrow hit the side of the target and passed through it”  ĞRD 647 (nafada minhu) Kaş. 1I 328 (kirçatu:r, kircatma:k). D kırçal- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of Kirga:-; the grammar of the phr. quoted is odd. Xak. xi anın başına: ta:ş kırçaldı: translated. “the stone hit (aşdba) his head and split it” (şaccahu) Kaş. II 234 (kirçalu:r, kirçalma:k). Tris. ĞRC D kara:çı: apparently N.Ag. fr. kara: in its special sense of "the common people”, but the form is odd. An early 1.-vr. in Mong. as karagu (Haenisch 60) which is discussed in Doerfer I 274 (where it is not realized that it is a Turkish word); in Mong. it seems to mean 'a man of the common people, not related to the family of Chinggis', which perhaps explains the curious translation in the Chir.-Uyg. Dict. In Turkish n.o.a.b. Üyğ. xiv Chin.-Uy$. Dict. tsai hsiang “Prime Minister” (Giles 11,490 4,249; presumably so called because not a member of the royal family; clearly the Mong. word) karaçu Lígeti 162 (q.v.); R II söz: Xak. xı kara:çı: al-sa'ifu'ladi yatüfu'l-abwab 'a beggar who goes from door to door' Kag. I 445: xiv Muh.(?) sásáni "beggar” karaçı: (unvocalized) Rif. 156 (only): Çağ. xv ff. karacu rícál-i süyira 'nomads! San. 271r. 11 (one Turkish, one Pe. quotn.; Mong. form and meaning?): (Kom. xiv see karakqt:): Tkm. xiv karabçı: (-c-; sic) al-faqir "a poor man” İd. zo. |. Mon. ĞRD ?D 1 kart “an ulcer', that is a swelling which breaks the skin, as opposed to bé:z, one which does not; perhaps an Active Dev. N. fr. 2 ka:r-; survives only(?) in NC Kir. kart/ kakart 'the scab on a wound'. Another word kart meaning 'old' first appeared in Western dialects in the medieval period and is still current in NC, NW, SW; it is clearly cognate to 1 karı: but cannot morphologically be derived from it. Uyğ. vur ff. Bud. TT VI 443 (örmen): Civ. kart 'ulcer' is common in H I and Hİ, e.g. I1 8, 6—; etc. (ötğürgğü:): 20, ro etc. (örmen): Xak. xı kart al-garh “an ulcer'; hence “a bad-tempered (ai-;akisu'l-xuluq) man” is called kart er Kaş. 1 342; four o.o. translated qarh/qgarha: xiv Muh. al-'a injury, sore' ka:rt Mel. 65, 3; Rif. 164: Çağ. xv ff. kart (spelt) '///at-i rişta “filariasis, the disease of Guinea worm (Filaría medinensis), in Pe. piyük San. 271v. zo: (Xvvar. xmi(?) bir kart kişi “an old man” Oğ. 313: Kom. xiv “old” kart CCI; Gr.: Kip. xi af-şayxıcl-haram 'a decrepit old man' kart (misvocalized kort); also used of horses Hou. 24, 18: xv haram kart (and abışka) Tu. 37b. 8: Osm. xvtl kart "an old man”) in one text 7 TS 7 428: xvıul kart , . . and, in Rümi, xişt wa gati hayhal 'ugly, of formidable appearance” Sam. 271 v. 20). 2 kart Hap. leg.; onomatopoeic in the Reduplication kart kurt, cf. karç kurç. Xak. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 692 
     
   
   
     ——— 3  DIS. V. GRD- 049 kartal Mel 72, r3: Çağ. xvff. kartal abbreviation of kara tal, called in Ar. 'ugáb and in Pe. dal “a large black eagle” San. 271 v. 21 (apparently an attempt to provide a false Pe. etymology for the word): Tkm. xırı a/-nasr 'cagle' (Kip. köçgen) kartal Hou. 9, zo: xiv. karfal al-'ugàb İd. 70; al-nasr (kócgen and) karfa:l Bul, rr, 4: xv raxm 'vulture' (kerges, Pe. l.-w., and) kartal Tul. 17a. 6; in do. 36a. 13 kartal is added in a second hand below nasr: Osm. xvii kara tal in Rümi, “a bird with a strong body” (gawi-yi cutta), called in Ar. 'ugáb and in Çağatay (sic) bórgüt San. 271r. 4 (bórgüt is a Mong. word meaning *golden eagle"; there is no trace of this spelling in any Osm. authority). ?D kirtiş lit. “the surface of the human skin, the ground, a fruit, and the like; hence “complexion'; survives in the first meaning in several NE, NC, and NW languages. Morphologically it might be a Dev. N. fr. *kirt- Caus. f. of Kir- with which there is some slight semantic connection. Uyğ. viri Bud. kirtişi sarğarur “his skin (or complexion) turns yellow' U 7 37, 13; önl kirtişi “his colour and complexion' U İZİ aş, 1 (ii); a.o. Suv. 593, 21: Xak. xi kirtiş "the colour of a man (etc.)'s face”, one says kórklüg kırtışlığ kişi “a man with a good complexion' (fasan lawni'l-wach); and one says yér kirtişi: “the surface (adim) of the ground' and the like; but it is not used of the surface of anything else Kaş. I 460: KB kayu başka kirse kuğu kirtig1 "when the colour of a swan comes to a man's head” ror, ajun kirtigi boldi Zanfi yüzi “the world turned the colour of a negro's face' (i.e. became dark) 3948; similar phr. 4891, 4961, 6213; 0.0. 5449, 5669: XIV Muh.(?) bagaratu'l-wach "the epidermis” kirtiş: Pf. 140 (only): Çağ. xv ff. kirtiş (spelt) (1) riga 'down' (on the surface of the body) (quotns.) and also sabza-i taza damida “a newly sprouting beard' which will soon become down; (2) faraşi"tanning material”(?) which they put on leather to tan it Sar. 295r. 20: Kip. xın gigru'l-battix "the rind of a melon! kirtis Hou. 8, rz (MS. in error qisru): xv Tuh. 15b. 1 (ya:&amp;). korda:y a large bird, perhaps originally 'pelican'. Survives in NE Alt., Tel. kordoy *heron'; SE Tar. kordoy “pelican” R 77 576; SE Türki koday 'swan' Shaw 214, Jfarring 250. Xak. xı korda:y al-hawásil (sec kuğu:) Kaş. III 240 (verse); a.o. 11 177, 11: KB kuğu korday erse 5377. Dis. V. ĞRDD'karit- Caus. f. of kari:- , “to make (someone) old", Survives in NC Kır., SC Uzb. Xak. xı ödlek anı: karıttı: “time made him an old man" (şayx) Kaş. II 304 (karıtu:r, karıtma:k, prov., see talk-): K B üküş beg karıttı karımaz özl “(this -vvorld) has made many öegs old, but does not itself grow old” 404; a.o. 5133: Çağ. xv fT. karıt- Caus., f., pir kardan "to make old” San. 270r. 6: Xvvar, xiv ditto Qutb 134. E kurat- See kuvrat-. D kurit- Caus. f. of kurr:-; “to dry (something Acc.). S.ia.m.lg., usually as kurut- and sometimes with extended meanings. Cf. kurir-. Uyğ. vri ff. Civ. kuritip "drying! is a stage in the preparation of various remedies H I şə, 77, 79 (tül), in 60 metathesized as kutirip: Xak, xi kü:n tonuğ kuritti: “the sun dried (caffat) the garment (etc.) Kaş. II 304 (kuritu:r, kuritma:k); oo. İ 19, 9 (kurutti); 514, 5; 524, 25: KB kuritma közün “do not dry your eyes” 1239; €liğ seni sözleyü şük kurıtmaz tili “the king, when speaking of you, does not let his tongue dry up in silence” 3476; (the king, learning of Aytoldi's death, said) . . . kapuğum kurittin kor €ttın orun “you have left my door dry (i.e. unwatched) and made your place a loss' 1558 (note pun): xıı(?) Tef. kurit- “to dry' 217: xiv Muh. caffafa ku:rut- Mel. 25, 1; Rif. 107: Çağ. xv ff. kurut- (spelt) xuşk Aardan “to dry” San. 285v. 18: Kip. xiv naşşafa “to dry (e.g. clothes)! kuru:t- Bul. 84v. D karta:- Den. V. fr. 1 kart; “to remove the scab from (a wound)' and the like; n.o.a.b., but cf. karta:l, kartal-, kartan-. Xak. xi (the pain of misfortune burnt my innermost heart) bütmi:ş başığ (MS. yetmi:; yaşığ) kartadı: naka'ati l-qarha 'it removed the scab from the healed vvound” / 245, 15; bağrım basin kartadim naka'tu qarğa kibdi ba'd indimdliha "1 removed the scab from the wound in my liver after it had healed” 7 272, 16; a.o. II 255, 8 (kartan-); n.m.e. D kurtğar- “to rescue” and the like. Obviously cognate to kurtul- 'to be rescued', q.v.; the latter is a quite regular Pass. f. of *kurt-; but -Bar- is not a regular Caus. Suff. and it is not obvious why the Active f. of kurtul- should be a Caus. f. S.i.a.m.l.g. ; in SW Az. Éurtar- ; Osm. kurtar-, "km. ğutar-, elsewhere kutkar-, but in SE 'l'ürki only, and SC Uzb. alternatively, kutkaz-, w. some extended meanings in most modern languages. Uyğ. vin ff. Man. kürtğardıi yarut(t)1 “he rescued and enlightened” M III 35, 1 (ii); kutğar-/ kutkar- 77 77) 39, 61 (2 tap-); 67 (1 tüg), 119 (ulinçiğ): Bud. common in Ktuar., the normal form is kutğarur, v.1. kurtğarur in some MSS. in roq, rər, kutğarın “rescue me” PP şı, 7, kutarğaymen (src) 'T will save” (vou all) do. 76, 6, a.o. Sum. 166, s (ozğur-): Xak. xi tepri: meni: kutğardı: “God rescued me (naccáni) from suffering! Kaş. II 192 (kutğarur, kutğarma:k), a.o. J/ 201, 13; ina rather confused discussion of Caus. Suffs. in II 199 it is said that the -ğ- is introduced for the sake of euphony and that if this had not been done the word would have been kutrardi:; the basis of this statement is obscure but it may indicate that Kaş. was aware of the form kurtğar- : xin(?) Tef. kurtar-/kutkar-/ kutar- "to rescuc” (from sorrow, misfortune, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 693 
     
   
   
        648 MON. xı eliğ kart kurt etti: tafarqa'ati'l-agábi' "the finger snapped” Kaş. I 342. D krrt Dev. N./A. fr. ktr-; survives with the same meaning in NW Kaz. R II 75s (where it is falsely described as 'onomatopoeic"). Cf. kirk-. Xak. xı kirt ot al-nabtu'l-qasir "short grass'; and “short hair” is called kirt sac; and a *miser of bad character” (al-baxilu'l-sayyu'l-xulug) is called kirt kişi: Kaş. 1 342. 1 kurt(kurd) “vorm”. S.i.a.m.l.g. Türkü vii Toy. 28 (ET Y II sg, ağu:luğ): Uyğ. vri ff. Bud. U Ill 32, 3 (kopuz): Civ. tign1 kürt yéser “if a worin consumes a tooth” H I 70; (in do. 82 kurt is a mis-spelling of kurut): Xak. xı kurt “vorm” (a/-düd) among all the Turks, and the Oğuz call “the wolf" (al-di'b) kurt Kaş. I 342; a.o. III 6, 3 (tiril-): KB (when the body gets fat) yılan kurt anuk 'snakes and worms (get) ready (to devour it)” 5844: xiv^Muh. dabibu'l-ard “things that creep on the ground' yer kurdi: Mel. 45, 8; Rif. 138; al-düd ku:rt 74, 6; 177: Çağ. xv ff. kurt (with -u-?) (r) Airm “vorm,, in Ar. dud San. 286r. r (quotn.): Xwar. xiv kurt *worm' Qutb 145: Kom. xiv ditto CCI, CCG, Gr.: Kip. xii kürt... . is also al-ditd Hou. 11, 3: xiv Tkm. kurt (both a/-di'b and) al-düd İd. 70; Kip.(?) a/-düd kurt (d) (sic) Bul. 11, s: xv al-xunfus “black-beetle” donğuzla:n kurti: Kav, 62, 9; düd kurt (and other words) Tu. 15b. 3: süs wa'l-düd *wecvil, worm' kürt do. 19b. 1. 2 kurt (kurd) “volf”. A purely Western (Oğuz) vvord, early occurrences clearly representing Oğuz elements in the languages concerned. İt is not clear whether both this and 1 kurt go back to some more general word for 'an unpleasant creature', or whether 1 kurt was given this additional meaning in Oğuz for some unknown reason, or whether the words are entirely independent from one another. Survives only in SW Az. ğurd, Osm. kurt (kurd- before vowels); 'Tkm. fu:rt (?a false long vowel). Oğuz xı Kaş, 7 342 (1 kurt): xın(?) Tef. kürt “volf” 218: xiv Rbg. ditto sce Tef. 218; Muh. al-di'b kurt Mel. 72, 4; ku:rf Rif. 174: Çağ. xv ff. kürt ("with -u-) ... (2) gurg ' wolf, in Ar. di'b San. 286r. 1: Xwar. xiti(?) kürd. “volf” “AZ: 42: 'Tkm. xii ai-di'b ... kürt (Kip. bórü:) Hou. rr, 3: xiv kürt al-di'b (and also al-düd) İd. zo, ul-di'b (bórü:, also) kurt (d) (sic) Bul. o, 6: xv al-dvb (bözri:, also) kurt (MS. Aurut) Kat. 62, 7. Dis. GRD ?F karit Hap, leg.; the word has no obvious "Turkish etymology, and Keş, may be right, but al-gàra properly "invasion, raid, plunder'. Tkm. xı karit sab5 “abuse, insult”, I reckon that it is plagiarized (manila) from the Ar. görat Kaş. I 356. D kurut Dev, N. fr. kurr:-; 'dried curds used as a kind of hard cheese'. S.i.a.m.l.g., normally as kurut, but kurt in some NC, NW languages. L.-w, in Mong., Pe., etc. Doerfer III GRD 1472. Uy£. viii ff. Civ. nuşadır toğrağu kurt (sic) birle katip “crush sal ammoniac (Iranian l.-w.) and mix it with dried curds” H I 81-2; kurut is mentioned among articles subject to tax USp. 14, 12; 21, 12 (tütün): Xak. xı kurut al-igit 'cheese made of dried curds" Kaş. İ 357; o.o. Il] iş (soğ-), 81: (soğur-): KB 4442 (azar): xiv Muh. al-maşl '(concentrated) whey' ku:ru:t Mel. 66, 9; Rif. 166: Çağ. xvff. kurut &amp;kag&amp; 'dried curds' San. 286r. 23; kara kurut "whey which they boil and make into curds”, and the liquid they boil again until it coagulates; it is very acid and disagreeable (sard) and dry, and lowers the blood pressure (musakhin-i hiddat-i xün), called in Ar. magl do. 271v. 1; a.o. 207 v. 26 (syn. of cakiltak a word not noted earlier than San): Kip. xi ai-igaf swa huwa'l-(VU) cartàn (unidentifiable, see Hon.,, p. gö) kurut; and they have another very black substance which they make from milk and sour cream (?.al-mag;) and store in cleaned bladders (al-kurizj) and cut in pieces with a knife; it is more acid than pomegranate seeds and they call it kara: kuru:t that is “black cartam Hou. 16, 14: xiv kurut a/-igat; kara: kuruf “a black, very acid kind” /4. 7o; “black (VU) cartdn, very acid' kara: kurut(d) Bul. 8, 3: xv iqat kurut (and bışlak) Tul. sa. 3: Osm. xvi ff. kurut 'dricd curds' in several Ar. and Pe. dicts. TTS I sor, IV 556. ?D kardu: Hap. leg.; perhaps Den. N. in -du: fr. 1 ka:r, but the existence of this Suff. is doubtful. Xak. xı kardu: 'pellets (abbát) of ice of the size of hazel-nuts which form on the surface of water in sudden extreme cold' (f”l-zamharir) Kaş. I 419 (verse). (D) kurtğa: "old woman'; the feminine equivalent of avicga: and, like it, an old word ending in -fa:; n.o.a b. Türkü vii ff. IrkB 13 (tepri:lig): Man. M İİİ 11, is (i) (E ersi:-): Uyf. viri ff. Man. M IH 11, 16, etc. (tétrü:): Xak. xı kurtğa: a/-"acüz “the old woman! Keş, III 259, 19; n.m.c.: KB bu kurtğa 'thisold (world)' 1547; a.0. 399 (érsel): xın(?) Tef. (my wife is) kurtka: (sic) “an old woman' 218: xiv. Rbg. ditto R 1I 948 (quotns.): Çağ. xvff. kurtğa: (spelt) 'aeniza wa pirzál Can old man of authority") San. 286r. s: Xwar. xiv. kurtğa/kurtka “old woman' Qufb 145: Kom. xiv “old woman! kurtka CCG; Gr. D karta:l prima facie Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. karta:-; if so, perhaps originally 'spotted, striped', or the like; except in Kaş. it consistently means some kind of 'eagle" or 'vulture', perhaps originally "a spotted or striped bird”. Survives only(?) in SW Az. ğartal 'eagle'; Osm. kartal “the: Arabian vujture, Vultur monachus! (Red.). 1.-w. in Pe, etc., Doerfer 111 1454. Xak. xi karta:l et a/-lahmu'l-mucazza! 'sliced meat! (?this is the. normal meaning, but .Sfeingass gives the alternative meaning 'spotted'): karta:1 ko:y al-arqat mina”l-ğanam "a black and white spotted sheep! Kaş, 7 483: xiv Muh.(?) al- ugáb “gölden cagle” (kara: kug; one MS. adds) 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 694 
     
   
   
      650 etc.) 218-19: xiv Röğ, kutkar- (sic) “to rescue" Rİ 994 (quotn.); Muh.(?) xallasa (MS. xalaşa) t'a faraqa "to rescue; to separate! kutğa:rRif. ro8 (only): Çağ. xv ff. kutkar-(-u) kurtarVel. 336 (quotn.); kutkar- Caus. f.; xalaş hardan "to relcase” San. 282v. 28 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv kurtkar- “to release, rescue” Qutb 145; kutğar- do. 146; Nahe. 254, 13; 370, 14; kutkar- Quib 1:46: Kom. xiv “to release, redeem" kutkar-/kutxar- CCG; Gr. 205 (quotns.): Kip. xv faxallaşa kutkar- Tuh. 10b. 6; xallaga ditto 14b. 13. D kartal- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of karta:-. Xak. xı anip kartı: kartaldı: neki”at qarhatuhu “his ulcer had the scab removed from it" Kaş. II 234 (kartalu:r, kartalma:k). D kurtul- Pass. f. of *kurt-, see kurtğar"to be rescued, saved', and the like, S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE; in SW Az. ğurtul-, Osm. kurtul-; Tkm. ğutul-, elsewhere kutul-. Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-A (may our souls attain) kurtulmak bosunmak 'salvation and liberation' M I 29, 32: Man. [gap] kutrulti TT III 25; [gap] kutrultaci [gap] TT LX 28: Bud. both kurtul- and kutrul- “to be rescued, saved' are common, e.g. kurtulmak yol 'the way of salvation” PP 52, 1; kurtul- is common in TT VI and Kran. and occurs in TT X 273, but in one MS. of Kuan. the form is consistently kutrul- which also occurs in U 7/7 26,23; TT V 24, 78 (egrik); VII 4o, 32: Civ. kutrulti TT I 92: Xak. xr ura:ğut kurtuldi: zecaladati”l-mar a 'the woman was delivered of a child", and one says er emge:ktin kurtuldi: “the man was relieved (zacd) of pain”, (verse); the origin was kutaldı: (sic) Kaş. II 233 (kurtulu:r, kurtulma:k)—er emgektin kutuldtu, same translation (kutulur, kutulma:k); one also says ura:ğut kutuldi: “the woman was delivered of a child and saved from the weariness of child-bearing” , there are two points of view (tcachán) about this word; one is that it is an abbreviation of kurtul- "to be relieved from pain” and the other that it is a crasis of the expression kut bul"tö find good fortune' (tcacada'l-baxt) when one is saved Kaş. JI 121; a.o. 1 520: KB (all the Prophet's anxiety was for the common people) kutulmak tiler erdi 'he constantly wished for their salvation” qoş kutuldi özün “you have been saved” 671; a.o. 1040: XiII(?) (if 1 have Thy favour) kutüldi özüm “my soul has been saved' 39; Tef. kurtul-/kutul- "to be saved; to be delivered -of a child' 218-19: Çağ. xv ff. kutul- Rurtul- Vel. 336 (quotn.); kurtul- (spelt) xa/aş şudanı 'to be released", also pronounced kutul- San. 284v. 4 (verse, Vel?s spelling Autkul- corrected); kutul(spelt) ditto; also pronounced kurtul- do. 282v. 11 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv kurtul- 'to be saved' Qutb 145; kutul- do. 146; kurtul-/ kutul- MN 176, etc.: Kom. xiv “to be freed, to escape” kutul- CCI; kuttul- CCG; Gr. 205 (quotns.): "Tkm. xiv kurtul-, also pronounced kurtul- nacöş Kip. kuful- İd. 7o: xv (xallaşa kutkar- and) [xalaga] kutul- Tuh. rab. 13; nacá kutul-/kurtul- do. 372. 13.  DIS. V. GRDD kartla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. 1 kart, Xak. xı ol eriğ kartla:dı: nasabahu ila şahdsat l-xulq "he accused the man of being bad-tempered'; also used when one treats an ulcer (aslaha'l-garha) Kaş. III 445 (kartla:r, kartla:ma:k). D kurtla:- Den. V. fr. 1 kurt, s.i.s.m.l. as kurtla- (of fruit, mcat, ctc.) to be wormeaten, full of worms'. Cf. kurtan-. Xak. xi tewey kurtla:dı: "he rid (naza'a) the camel (etc.) of worms! Kaş. III 447, 3 (in a grammatical section); n.m.e. D kartan- Refl, f. of karta:-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xrer kartın kartandı: "the man treated (dátcá) his own ulcer'; and one says to someone ö:z kartıp kartan “treat and cure (dátwi wa 'álic) your own ulcer', meaning merely 'don't be unreasonable' (/a ta'du tawrak) Kaş. II 248 (kartanu:r, kartanma:k), (in a para. on the Refl. f.) for example the phr. er kartın kartandı: “the man treated (aş/aha) his own ulcer”, (the Refl. f. being used) in place of the "Trans. (al-lázim) V. karta:- İl 255, s. D kurtan- Hlap. leg.; Refi. Den. V. fr. 1 kurt, cf. kurtla:-, Xak. xı küp kurtandı: “the maidservant deloused herself” (/htakkat . . . mina'l-qaml); originally it meant 'looked for worms on shcep” (talaba'l-düd mina'l-fanam) Kaş. II 248 (kurtanu:r, kurtanma:k). D 1 kartur- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of 1 kar- ; cf. kattur-. Oğuz xı ol apar ya:ğ talka:nka: karturdi: “he told him to mix (acdahahu) oil with the crushed grain” Kaş. I7 rgo(karturur, karturma:k). D 2 kartur- Caus. f. of 2 ka:r-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı ol anı: suvka: karturdi: ağaşşahu bi'l-luqma wa aşraqahu bpl-nid” “he made him choke with a gobbet or with water' Kay. JI 19o (followed by 1 kartur-; the two Ar. V.s are synonymous, but seem to be used with solids and liquids respectively). D kirtur- Caus. f. of Ktr-; s.i.s.m.l. with the same range of meanings as kır-. Xak. xı ol apar ye:r kirturdi: kallafahis "ala qagri'l-ard “he set him to scrape the ground' (etc.) Kaş. II 190 (kirturur, kirturma:k). ”" D kurtur- Caus. f. of kur-; si.s.m.]. Xak. ol mapa: ya: kurturdi: "he ordered me to string ('alà tatetir) the bow'; and one says xa:n apar çovva:ç kurturdi: “the king ordered him to open (5i-naşr) the royal parasol'; and one says xa:n begke: sü:sin kurturdt: “the king ordered the beg to mobilize (bi-cam') his army” Kaş. H 190 (kurturur, kurturma:k); a.o. II 198, 15: Çağ. xv ff. kurdur- Caus. f. of kur- Sar. 284v. 2 (no translation). D kurdas- Hap. leg.; Co-op. Den. V. fr. 2 kur; it is unusual for Den. V.s to be formed with -da:- fr. N.s ending in -r. Xak. xi ol beg birle: kurdaşdı: calasa ma'a'l-amir fi martabatihi wa ğayruhu (sic? ğayrihi after amir intended) “he sat with the beg (etc.?) in his "  “  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 695 
     
   
   
      omms MI e e  MON. V. ĞRĞ- 651 (proper) position" Kaş. II 218 (kurdaşu:r, kurdasma:k). Tris. GRD D kurutluğ Map. leg.?; P.N./A. fr. kurut. Xak. xı kurutluğ kişi: “a man who owns dried curds' (al-iqif) ; it is the equivalent to the Ar. phr. racul támir soa labin that is 'who owns dates and milk" Kaş. İ 494. D kırtışlığ P.N./A. fr. kirtig; survives in NC Kir. kirtigtu: (land) “vith the surface intact' (ie. not ploughed); Kzx. kirtisti *covered with a layer! (of turf, fat, etc.). Xak. xı Kaş. 1 461 (kirtig). Tris. V. ĞRDD kurutsa:- Hap. leg.; Desid. Den. V. fr. kurut. Xak. xı er kurutsa:dı: "the man longed for dried curds' (al-agit) Kaş. II 332 (kurutsa:r, kurutsa:ma:k). D kırtışla:- Den. V. fr. kirtiş, survives in NE Alt, Tel; NC Kir kirttsta-; Kzx. kirtista- 'to remove the superficial layer (of something)', e.g. fat from a hide. Xak. xı ol sağrı:nı: kırtışla:dı: “he scraped the surface (qaşşara adim) of the raw hide” (etc.) Kaş. III 350 (kırtişla:r, kirtişla:ma:k). D kırtışlan- Refi, f. of kirtisla:-; survives in several NE and NC languages (R 27 756-7) with the same and extended meanings. Xak. xı ktz kirtişlandı: hasına rawonaqu'l-cáriya va nadára wachihà “the slave girl had a glovving, bright. face” Kaş. II 272 (kırtışlanu:r, kırtışlanma:k). Mon. GRG kirk 'forty'; c.i.a.p.a.l.; in some NE and NW languages pronounced kirik, Türkü vi kirk artuki: yeti: yoli: sülemiş “he made forty-seven campaigns” 7 E 15; ao. I NE: vir ff. Man. İki kirk tişin: "with 32 teeth' Chuas. 54-5: Yen. sekiz kirk yaşıma: “in my 38th year” Mal. 29, 4: Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. the pages of the chapters of Suv. are numbered ikinti ülüş otuz '7/ şo”, ikinti ülüş bir kirk “Z7 31'; etc.: Civ. the pages of TT I are similarly numbered iki kırk “3z” ro8 ff.: O. Kir. ix ff. tokuz kirk yaşımda: “in my 39th year” Mal. 10, 5; 23, 1; a.o.o.: Xak. x1 kirk al-arba'ün fi'l-'adad "torty” Kaş. I 349 (prov.): KB kimin kirkta keçse tiriglik yaşı “vhoever passes the age of forty” 364: xiv. Muh. arba"ün kirk Mel, 81, iş, Rif. 187: gap xv ff. kirk 'forty'; (also the name of an Ozbeg clan) San. 295r. 27: X war. xin(?) kirik (sic) “forty” Og. ra ff.: Kap. xiti arba'ün kirk Hou. 22, 11: Xiv ditto İd. 7o; Bul. ız, 12: xv ditto Kav. 39, 4; 65, 8; Tuh. 6ob. 9. Mon. V. GRÓ-. D kirk- Emphatic f. of kir-; 'to shear' (sheep and the like) S.i.a.m.l.g., occasionally as kirik- ; in SW the forms are Az. ğırp-, Osm. kirk-/kirp-; Tkm. ğırk-/ğırp-, the forms in -p- with some extended meanings. Cf. yupla:-. Türkü vii ff. Man. (they lay the sheep down and) yupin kirkarlar 'shear their wool' M III 33, 4 (ii): Xak. xı ol ko:yın (MS. ko:yun) kirkdi: “he sheared (cazza) his sheep' (etc.). Kaş. III 422 (kirka:r, kirkma:k): xıv Muh. al-qaşş “to cut off, clip” kırkmak Mel. 36, 13 (Rif. 122 kir-): Çağ. xv ff. kirk(spelt) rardşidan swa mü suturdan “to shave or shear, to remove wool'; fardşi of a carpenter (naccári, i.e. “to plane, shave down vvood”, etc.) is yon- San. 294t. 29 (quotn.); a.0. 346v. 28 (yon-)—kirp- (spelt) xarágidan az xwurdan toa gudagtan-i tir toa sang “to graze' in the sense of an arrow or stone which hits and passes on, but xaráji "to scrape', etc. of a file (suhán) and the like is Kir- 294r. 17; a.o. 293v. 17 (Kir-): Kom. xiv “to shorten” kirk- CCG; Gr.: Kip. Xin cazza “to shear” in the sense of shearing wool off a sheep kirk- Hou. 39, 8: xiv kirkcazza'l-süf İd. 7o; kirp- (with -p-”) xaffafa'l-ga'r “to shorten (lit. lighten) the hair” do. 71: Xv cazza ayya l-ja'r va”l-şüf kirk- Tuh. 12b. t; qaşşa kirk- do. 302. 1 (with a marginal note "also with -p-"). kork- 'to fear, be afraid of (someone or something)'; with the Object in the Dat. in the earliest period, and normally the ABI. later. C.i.a.p.a.l, occasionally as koruk-. Türkü viit neke: korku:rbiz *what are we afraid of?” T 39; korkmadimiz “ve were not afraid' T 41: vii1 ff. kişi: korkmi:ş korkma: temiş "the man was afraid; he said “do not be afraid" ' IrkB 2; 2.0. do. 19: Man. korkmak *fear' Chuas. 181; korkmatin "without fearing (God)” do. 211; o.o. TT II 6, 32 (bez-); M I 6, 9 (beliple:-): Uyğ. vrit ff. Bud. nızvanilarka ertipü korkup “being very much afraid of the emotions” (Sogdian l.-w.) U IIT 75, 6-7; ölüm adaka korksar “f (you) fear the danger of death” PP 32, 4; a.o. do. 11, 1-2 (bodun); Suv. 5, ro, etc. (beliple:-), etc., esp. in TT X: xiv. Chin. -Uyg. Dict. chü ba 'afraid' (Giles 3,021 8,539) korkup eymenip Ligeti 168: Xak. xı kul tepri:din korkdi: "the slave (i.e. Moslem) feared (xdfa . . . min) God” Kaş. III 421 (korkar, korkma:k; prov., verse) ; (the mouse born in a mill) kó:k kókrekipe: korkma:s “is not afraid of thunder? İH 282, zo, two olo, (in all the Object is twice in the Dat. and twice in the AL, the latter perhaps influenced by the Ar. idiom xàfa min): KB (if you look at the begs) korku tur kalı korkmasa sen küçün korkitur “stand in fear of them; if you do not fear, they will frighten you by their strength' 656; bu til yasıpa korksa emdi özün “f you yourself now fear the damage done by this tongue' 983; 0.0. (no Object) 773, 2288, 2299: xin(?) Tef. kork- (once spelt 2a:r2-) “to fear' (202,) 214: xiv Rbg. Ja'natdin özi korkmadı "he did not himself fear the curse' R II 563; Muh. xafa ko:rk- Mel. əş, 11; Rif. 108; al-xatf korkmak ış, 12; 36, 5; 89, 122: Çağ. xv ff. korktarsidan "to fear' San. 285r. 6 (quotns.): Xwar. xm(?) calap bulandın korukmaz (sic) turur (?d-) “he fears nothing and nobody ERE E — — SS 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 696 
     
   
   
     652 Oğ. 307: xiv kork- “to fear' Quzb 141; Nahc. ır, 10 (kofiliığ): Kom. xiv “to fear” (with Abl.) kork- CCI, CCG; Gr. 200 (quotns.): Kip. xii xafa mina'[-xawf kork- Hou. 39, 18: xiv kork- xafa İd. zo: xv ditto Kav. 11, s, 77, 12: fxtaşd (to be afraid") rca xdfa koruk(sic) Tuh. 6a. 1; xawf korukmak 14a. 6; xàfa koruk- 15a. 2; hába “to dread” koruk- 38a. 2: Osm. xiv ff. kork- (xiv sometimes korx-) c.La.p. TTS I 485; Hl 651. Dis. GRG E karağ See karğu: // E 37. D 1 karak 'eyeball'; prob. Dim. f. fr. kara: lit. “little black thing'; not to be connected w. F kara:-. Survives in NE; NC Kir.; SW Tkm. (Barak); in SE, NC Kzx. and SC forms of the Dim. f. karagik are used instead; in NW usually phr. like köz karası and in SW Az., Osm. bebek (Pe. 1.-vv.). Uyğ. vri ff. Man. M II 11, 18 (ka:nlig): Bud. (of a dying man) karakı aktarılur yürün karakı örü yoklayur "his eyes roll and the whites of his eyes turn upvvards” TT III, p. 26, note 5, 11; 0.0. U İV 38, 127-8 (kudul-); Suv. 595, 13: Xak. xi karak al-muqla 'eyebal': kara: karak sarcádu'l-'ayn “the iris (lit. black) of the eye”: ürün karak “the white of the eye”: ü:t karak náziru'l-'ayn “the pupil (lit. hole) of the eye” Kaş. I 382; a.o. (kara:k) IJI 29, s: KB kérügli karak “the seeing eye” 374; 0.0. 121 (yalın-), 2368 (basin-), 2205 (üster-): xiv Rbj. karakları cán alur “his eyes steal the soul avvay” R II 148: Çağ. xv ff. karağ/karak mardumah-i çaşm . . . wa mutlaq göz “the eyeball” and more generally “eye” Vel. 316 (quotns.), karağ mardumah-i çasm San. 271r. 24 (and see 2 karak, quotns.): Xwar. xiv karak “eyeball” Qutb 132; MN r33, etc.: Kip. xıl al-hadaqa “the pupil of the eye” karağ (MS. 2rrığ) Hou. zo, 4: xıv karak sawádu'i“ayn İd. yı: xv názirwl-'ayn karak (Tkm. bebek) T7uA. 36a. 9: Osm. xiv and xv karak “eye” (rather than 'eyeball' in several texts TTS I 416; I1 582; IV 469. 2 karak 'brigandage' and the like, hardly to be regarded as morphologically identical with 1 karak; not noted before the medieval period but see karakçı: karakla:- and cf. karma:. N.o.a.b. Çağ. xv ff. karak means 'brigandage, pillage' (yağma ve talan) since 'brigand' (Aarámi) is called karakçı Vel. 317 (two quotns. containing karakçı): (under karağ (1 karak)) “the Rumi author (Vel, 317) translated karağ 'arm' (báz&amp;t) the reason being that *'highwayman' (ráhzan) is called karağçı, and also translated it 'brigandage, pillage” and said it meant “black”, Nagiri followed him; all three translations are unknown and inappropriate (machül tea ğayr ma'qul) San. 271r. 26. D kirük Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. kir-; lit. 'scraped' or the like, and in the medieval period 'broken, destroyed'. Survives in NC Kir. Kirik. "slaughter, extermination! R IJ 740, but in Yud. 'close cropped pasture'; and MON. V. GRGSW Az. ğırığ, Osm. kirik; Tkm. girik “broken, fractured; a break; a broken piece, splinter'. It is doubtful whether the Çağ. word fits in here, the first meaning looks like a misreading of kidif, see 2 kirğa:ğ, and the second is a L-w. Xak. xr ktruk er a/-raculu'l-agall “a cripple, disabled man'; and one says kirük adak a/-richela"sam "a withered leg” Kaş. I 382: KB 1737 (basımçı:): Çağ. xv ff. kirig/ kirik. (1) kandr "edge, side, shore', etc. (quotns.) also called kırağ/kırak, (2) "a dry desert without water or vegetation” in general, in this meaning it is a "lurcization of Ar. qaraqlqariq “a level plain” (Qámus quoted); and in particular (the name of) a desert between "Tashkend and the city of Qüyà(?) which is seven days' journey in length; ((3) the name of a Türkmen tribe; (4) in Mong. “bound" (quotn. Wassáf)) Sarr. 295v. 7. D korığ (korı:ğ) Dev. N. fr. korr-; “an enclosure, enclosed area", particularly one enclosed by a ruler. An early l.-w. in Mong. as kori'a(n) 'courtyard, enclosed space” (Haernisch 67, Kot. 958); survives in SC Uzb. kürik 'virgin soil'; SW Az. ğoruğ “game reserve, prohibited area of forest or pasture'; Osm. koru “an enclosed area of forest or pasture". L.-w. in Pe., etc. in a wide range of forms, Doerfer YII 1462. Cf. koru:, Türkü vir IZ N 8, H E 31 (1 ımğa:), Ongin 12 (ataç): Xak. xı koriğ a/-himd li'l-umará “the private property of chiefs” (etc.), and any enclosed (mahüz) place is called korığ Kay. I 375; similarly their word korif al-himà; if you say korr it is permissible (cáza), but the word with the short vowel is more correct (afşağ) than that with the long one 7 18, zo: xu(?) KBVP (kings organizing) koruğı “their private property” (and affairs) 36: xtu(?). At. (its owner has gone and) kaldı koruğ teg yeri "his land has remained like a private estate' 202: Çağ. xv ff. (after kuruk) koruk man" 10a. hirdsat 'prevention, guarding” (quotn. with note saying the word is pronounced with -o-, but rhymes with fursüg in this verse); and metaph. “a meadow or pasture which is protected from grazing for the sake of the cattle of the Sultan's overseers' San. 286r. 26; (korıya kori, hünd ma'nasina Vel. 337 (quotn.); kortya diwár-i nay-basta "a reed fence! Sam. 286v. 11 (quotns., correction of Vel.'s translation): Xwar. xiv koruğ “royal estate' (?; Zaj. 'ambush') Qutb 141: Kip. xın koru: also al-himá Hou. 6, 1; 27, 1 (kuruğ). D 1 kuruğ (kurı:ğ) N./A.S. fr. kurt:-; 'dry', with extended metaph. meanings. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. minor phonetic changes. Türkü vir ff. Man. kuruğ öl yer 'dry and moist ground” Chuas. 58, 316: Uyğ. vir ff. Man.-A kuruüğ otun 'dry firevvood” M I 17, 12: Man. iki kuruğ tózin “the two dry (i.c. non-existent?) roots! TT Ill 159: Bud. kuruf physically 'dry' is common, e.g. küruğ y€riğ suvayu "watering the dry ground' PP r, 3, etc.; it is also often used in a metaph. sense, e.g. (if the treasure is exhausted) ağılık kuruğ bolÉanin "because the treasury has been drained 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 697 
     
   
   
     DIS. ĞRĞ dry! PP 5, 8; tünli künli kuruğ ertürser “if he spends nights and days aimlessly' U 777 28, 19; o.o. TT V 26, 93 (kal-); 96 (tüşsüz), the Buddhist technical term fZnyatá 'emptiness, non-reality', and the like is translated yok kuruğ TT VI passim; ulus kuruüğ kilip "laying waste to the country” TT X 54: Civ. kurug (physically) 'dry' is common 4 7 83, etc. (üzüm), TT VII I.19 (odğurak): Xak, xı kuruğ ev 'a house which is empty (xáli) of people or goods” ; and one says kuruğ olma: "a dry ( yábis) iar" ş the origin of the phr. is that any vessel which is emptied of its contents is called kuruğ, kuruğ 'dry' (al-yàbis) of anything; the first meaning corresponds (ráct'a) to this one Kaş. 7 375; kuruk (sic) kaşuk ağızka: yarama:s kuruğ sö:z kulakka: yakışma:s “a dry (ydabis) spoon is no use to the mouth, a remark vvhich serves no purpose (là manfa'a fihi) does not reach the ear” I 383, 5; &amp;.0. 711 82 ('false' yalal-) and others translated yabis: KB (why am I wandering about) kuruğ 'aimlessly' ? 467; o.o. 108 (kal-), 1576 (iril-): xiu(?) Tef. kuruf “dry” 219; a.o. 217 (3 kur): xiv Muh. al-yübis kurt: Mel. 54, 13; kuru: Rif. 151; al-qadid *dried meat! kuru: et 65, 10; 164 (mis-spelt Ruru:d et); a.o. 78, o, 182 (üzüm): Çağ. xv ff. kuruğ/kuruk xugk *dry' Vel. 339 (quotns.); San. 286r. 24 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv kurif/kuru/kuru£ 'dry; useless! Qutb 145; MN 8: Kip. xii aí-barr “dry land” kuru: also (al-himà, see koriğ), and al-yábis wa'l-nágif “absorbent” Hou. 6, 1; a.o. do. 27, 1 (opposite to *moist I? xiv kürü: al-xagin (rough) wa'l-yábis Id. 69; Bul. 8, 7 (üzüm): 8, 9 (1 kak): xv camad 'dry (soil, etc.) kuru Tuh. iza, 3; Kav. 63, 8 (üzüm): Osm. xv ff. kuru 'dry, empty, empty-handed, valueless', and the like; 'dry land'; c.ia.p. TTS I 499; 11 668; İİ 469; İV sss. ?D 2 *kurug See kuruğluğ. karğa: properly 'crow', but sometimes also used for other large black birds like 'rook' and *raven'; an old animal name ending in -ğa:. L.-w. in Pe., etc., see Doerfer 11I 1386. Cf. kuzğun. Uyğ. vırı ff. Bud. (one of seven undesirable forms of rebirth) karğanın “as a crov” U 1I 32, 55: Xak. xr karfa: 'crow' (al-ğurab) Kaş. 1 425 (prov., verse); o.o. 7 254, 20; 467 (?, tarmak); /I 26, 2: xiv Muh. al-ğurab karğa: Mel. 73, 1; Rif. 175: Çağ. xv ff. karğa kalàg “crov” San. 272r. 8: X war. xiv ditto Quib 133: Kip. xir a/-ğurab karğa: Hou. xo, 8: xiv ditto /4. 70; Bul. 11, 11: xv. ditto Kav. 62, 14; ğurüb karğa (and kuzğun) Tuh. 26b. 3. karğu: "a watch-tower with a beacon on the top to give raid warnings'. Kay.'s alternative form karğu:y is Hap. leg. but perhaps an earlier form, since in 7/7 E 37 the word looks more like kargufi than anything else and an evolution karğun x karğu:y — karğu: is quite plausible. Türkü vim: Selepe: kodi: yoripan karğun(?) kisilta: “marching down the Selenga river I blockaded the watchtowers! (and destroyed their dwellings and  653 movable property there) 77 E 37; karğu: T 34 (edé£ü:ti); 53 (olğurt-): Uyğ. viu Kem(?) karğu:sında: “at the watch-tower of Kem(?)' should perhaps be read in Su. S r for kem(?) karğu:-...dı:: Xak. xı karğu: "a thing built in the shape of a minaret (a/-manára) on the top of a mountain; a fire is lit on it when the enemy approaches, so that everyone can stand to arms (ya'xud . . . uhbatahu) Kaş. 1 426; karğu:y similar translation III 241. VU(D) korğu: n.o.a.b.; prima facie a Dev. N./A., not semantically connected with kurbut perhaps a crasis of *korkgu: fr. kork-. Xak. xı korğu: er al-raculu'l-tayyág “a heedless, irresponsible man” Kaş. 7 426: (example of a word ending in -uz) al-raculu'l-naziq ditto korğu: I 18, rz. D karğa:ğ Dev. N. fr. karğa:-, “a curse". Survives in NW Kk., Kaz. kar$aw; Kumyk, Nog. karğav, cf. karğış. Xak. xı karga:b (MS. karga:k, but among words ending in -8) “a curse' (al-la'm); hence one says tepri: karğa:ğına: ilinme: “do not incur the curse of God” Xaş. İT 288; (a.o. 7 467, error, see karğa:?). D 1 kırğa:ğ Hap. leg., Dev. N. fr. 1 kirfa:-. Xak. xı kırğa:ğ “the anger (Zadab) of a chief or king directed at his subordinates”, hence one says xa:n anı: kırğa:dı: “the king vvas angry (Zadaba) with him, and shunned him" (a'rada 'anhu); they distinguish between the curse of God on His servants and the curse of one servant (of God) on another of his own kind, by placing a fatha (on the qdf) in the first case and a hasra in the second; just as they distinguish between the envoy (rasil, i.e. Prophet) of God, and the envoy of a king, and call the first yala:vaç (-f-) and the second yala:var (-f-) in the Uyğ. language Kaş. 77 288. D 2 kırğa:ğ Hap. leg. but see kırğağlığ, Dev. N. fr. 2 *kirfa:-; there is an obvious connection with Çağ. kiri$/kirik (see kiruk) which looks like a Seç, f. of kıdiğ, the sound change d 7 r is not well attested in Turkish, but d x z does occur in some languages and Z2 rin the whole //r Turkish group (Studies, pP. 37 fT., etc.). Xak. xı kırğa:ğ kifáfu'l-tawb zoa turratihi “the selvages of a garment and its edge” Kaş. II 288. D kurğak (kurğa:k) Dev. N. fr. kurğa:-, “dry land; dryness, drought'. Survives in NE, NC, NW kurğak: SC Uzb. kurğok, SW Az. ğurağ: Osm. kurak: Tkm. ğurak, Ka;.'s PU kurka:ğ seems to belong here, but is a dubious form, it is out of alphabetical order and the qdf is not vocalized; kurğağ would be a more plausible form. Uyğ. viu ff. Bud. (if I have killed creatures that live in the water) kurğakda kemişip “by throwing them on dry land”, or kurğakdakı tinhi$larag 'creatures that live on dry land” (by throwing them in the water) U 11 77, 28; 86, 45-6; TT IV 10, 9-10: Xak. xı kurğak yılın f; 'ami'l-qaht "in a year ————— '——————— 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 698 
     
   
   
     654 DIS of drought" Kaş. 7/1 69, 2; (PU) kurka:ğ al-mart, that is “a desert (a/-mafdza) containing neither water nor vegetation' / 465: Xwar. xiv kurfak 'dry, vvaterless” Qutb 144: Kom. xiv 'drought' kurğak CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv kurak a/-sanatu'l-cadba "a year of drought İd. 71; (after the four seasons) al-yubs 'drought' yobrak Bul. 14, 1 may, as suggested by Zaj. be a scribal error for kurak, but looks more like toprak: Osm. xvii kurak in Rümi, xugki 'dryness, drought San. 285v. 27. D korkuğ See korkinc. D kırğıl Den. N./A. in -ğıl (associated with Colours) fr. 2 kir; 'grey haired, turning grey'. Now displaced in Osm. by kircil (a modern word). Xak. x1 kirfil er a/-kahl mina'l-ricàl 'a man of mature years” Kaş. 7 483: KB yağıçı ürün kırğıl ersiğleriğ yağıka alın kil 'confront the enemy with battle-hardened white- and grey-haired vvarriors” 2371; a.0. 2372 (yağıçı:): Kip. xır (between 'decrepit old man” and “youth”) al-hahl kırğıl Hou. 24, 19: Osm. Xiv to xvii kirgil 'turning grey; a grey-haired man”, common, esp. in Ar. and Pe. dicts. TTS I 460; II 630; III 448; IV şiş. D korkluk 'coward'; n.o.a.b.; irregular, Dev. N./A. with a Den. Suff, -Iuk. Xak. xr korkluk er al-raculu'l-xayifu'l-cabàn "a timid and cowardly man” Kaş. I1] 417: KB 2292 (alplik). D kirklim Hap. leg.; abbreviated N.S.A. fr. kirkil- , lit. "a single act of being shaved off”, hence 'of which the surplus contents have been scraped off, so that the vessel is full but not heaped”, Xak. xı kirklim sa:ğu: mikyál cammán balaga'l-kayl tufáfahu (MS. tugàfahu) *a full measure, of which the contents reach the brim' Kaş. 11] 418. D kırğın Dev. N/A. fr. kır-, s.i.a.m.lg. except NE(?) meaning “massacre, extermination; epidemic or epizootic disease'. T"he only early occurrence seems to mean 'punishment or turture”, Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (they subdue and suppress wicked men and) kiyn kirğin (vil. kızğut) tegürür “inflict severe punishment and torture on them' TT VI 255. kırkın originally “maiden, young woman', later perhaps more specifically “slave girl”. N.o.a.b. Cf. kirna:k, 1 ki:z, Türkü vir ff. Man. eki yégirmi tenpri kırkın “the twelve divine maidens” M 1I 16, 8 (ii): Uyğ. vri ff. Bud. in U HI 42, 23-4 the küydeki (sic) yincge kirkinlar 'the delicate ladies of the harem' rank below the queen and before the tégins and buyruks; o.o. do. 13, 4 (li): 14, 16 (i); 69, 3; in the account of the palace of the dragon king in PP 41 ff. the successive doors are guarded by: (1) “pure maidens” (kızlar) 41, 1—2; (2) 'four beautiful kırkın” 42, 1—2; (3) 'eight beautiful, marvellous, pure maidens' 42, 8 fI, described in 44, 6 as kapağçı kırkınlar: Xak. xı (he became my relation by marriage) kirkin taki: koluşti: “and asked for my daughter's hand” İT 110, 4; a.o, İ 326 . GRG ("slave girl”, 1 kt:z): Xwar. xiv kirkin “maidservant' Qutb 149. D korkinc/korkunc N.Ac. fr. korkun-; "fear”, S.i.s.m.l, in SE, NC, NW, and SW. The more regular form korkuğ N.Ac. fr. korkis not noted earlier than xıır(?) Tef. 214; xiv, Xwar. Qutb 141; Kom. CCG; Gr.; Osm. TTS I 485; II 652; III 477; IV şal, it s.i.s.m.l. in NE, SE, SC, NW, and SW. In languages having both words korkinc sometimes means 'danger, terrible', and the like. Türkü vı ff. IrkB. 36 (uçru:ğlu:ğ): Uyğ. vin ff. Man. üç yavlak yolka korkincin "out of fear of the three evil ways! TT III 143: Bud. U II 39, 93-4, etc. (aying); o.o. of korkmç in TT VIII, X: Xak. xi korkunc (second gdf unvocalized) ai-xawf 'fear' Kaş. IH 387; a.o. HI 168 (kuyim): xin(?) Tef. korkunç 2:4: xiv Muh. al-xawf korkünç Mel. 52, 9; Rif. 148: Çağ. xv ff. korkünç xatf Vel. 337 (quotn); (korku/korkus/) korkunc (so spelt) xatwf tva hiras wva bim 'fear, terror' San. 286r. 17 (quotn.): Kom. xiv 'fear' korkunç CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiv muxif "terrible, terrifying” korkuns (sic) Tu. 39a. 9. D karğış Dev. N./A. fr. karğa:-, “a curse'; often, but not always, “God”s curse'. S.i.a.m.l.g. Xak. xı karğış al-la"n "a curse'; hence one says tepri: karğışı: anu üze: 'God's curse be upon him”, it also occurs as an Adj. (sifa), so one says karğış kişi: “an accursed (malin) man” Kaş. 1 461; karğış kilur óme:le:r 'guests curse' (yal'an; a stingy host) 7 274, 18: KB (when a notorious sinner dies) karğış bolur “he becomes accursed” 246: xiv Muh. du'à radi' "a curse! ka:rkış (sic) Mel. 30, 3; al-du'à 'alayhi ditto karkış (sic) aytmak if. 126: Çağ. xv ff. karğış bad du'a 'curse' ; (and "confusion, quarrel') Vel. 318 (quotns.); karBis (spelt) nafrin “curse” San. 272r. 11 (quotns. and statement that only Vel.'s first translation is correct): Xwar. xiv karğış “curse” Qutb 133; Nahc. 12, 12; 250, 6: (Kom. xiv kar£isli/kargislu “accursed” CCZ, CCG; Gr): Kip. xiii ("span") karış, also du'a'u'l-si?. Hou. zo, 18: xiv karisg ('span' and) du'd' radi* İd. 69: xv in a para. on al-du'á Kav. 18, 1 ff. the V. alğış eyle- is continually used as an example, but karğış eyle- occurs once, untranslated; du'á'u-sarr (in margin al-la'n) karğış Tuh. 15b. ro. S karğu:y See karğu:. kırğu:y 'sparrow-hawk, Aecefpiter misus", s.i.a.m.l.g. except NE, usually as kırğuy, but in SE alternatively kurğuy, SW Az., Tkm. Éirfi (lacking in Osm.). In NE and some other languages displaced by the Mong. l.-w. kargigay. L.-w. in Mong. (kirğuy, Kom, 2552), Pe., etc., Doerfer III 1461. Cf. 1 çavlı:, etc. Xak. xı kırğu:y (mis-spelt kirku:y, but under the heading -B-; the first qüf has both fatha and kasra) al-büşiq 'sparrow-hawk'; and al-yu'yu', prob. "the merlin' is called cibek kırğu:y Kaş. III 241; a.o. 1 388 (çibek), kırğu:y supkurka: karışma:s al-bágiq là  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 699 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. GRG- 655 tirq lahu ma" akhbari'l-buzáh "a sparrow-hawk does not quarrel vvith the biggest of the falcons” II 95, 8: xiv Muh. böşiq kirğu: Mel. 72, 13; Rif. 175: ÇAĞ. xv ff. kirBu the name of a hunting bird of the same kind as a falcon (bdz) but smaller, which they call 'a sparrow hawk' (54şa) San. 295r. 24: (Korn. xt 'nightingale' korğuy (an inexplicable error) CCG; Gr.): Kip. xiv Kirfi: (?, vocalized korugi:) al-bágiq ld. yo, ditto kirğı: (sic) Bul, 11, 15; Xv ditto Tuh. 7b. 2. Dis. V. GRGD karık-. Intrans. Den. V. fr. 1 karr, lit. 'to be affected by snow'. Survives in some NE, NC languages, same meaning. Xak. xı er kö:zl: karıktı: "the man's eyes were dazzled by the snow' (qamarat . . , mina'l-tilc); if this is derived from 'snow' it should be ka:rıktı: (and is taken) from a shortened form (mina”l-manqüş), but if it is taken from the word karak 'an eyeball', then it is taken from the correct form (mina'i-sahih) Kaş. II 115 (karika:r, karikma:k; an etymological connection with karak, which would be quite normal in Ar. is, of course, impossible in Turkish: Çağ. xv ff. karığ/karık-(-dı, -mak) kara çok bakmadan göz alin- "to be dazzled by looking at the snovv for a long time” Vel. 318 (quotns.), karik- (spelt) ba-barf uftadan-i çasm "of the eyes, to be dazzled by: snow'; the V. cannot be used by itself, the Subject “eyes” must be mentioned San. 270v. r (quotns.). karğa:- “to curse". S.ia.m.lg., usually as karğa-, but SW Az. ğarğı-, Osm. karğı-, "Tkm. ğarğa-. See kırğa:-. Xak. xı tepri: anı: karğa:dı: “God cursed him, (/a"anahu) Kaş. III 290 (karğa:r, karga:ma:k); a.o. I 284 (2 arka:-): Çağ. xv ff. karğa-(-dı) bad dura eyle-, ilen- “to curse! Vel. 317 (quotn.); karğa- mnafrin hardan ditto San. 269r. 7 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv karğa- “to curse” Qutb 133: Kom. xiv ditto CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv (after karış) hence kara- da'à "alayht "to curse'; one says tenri anğa: karasun; and in the Ketab Beylik karğa- da'à 'alayhi la. 69: xv la'ana karğa- Tuh. 32a. 13. S kirfa:- “to curse' ; n.o.a.b. There is no other trace of a distinction of the kind suggested, and in 1 284 karğa:- is used with a human Subject. Xak. xı beg anı: kırğa:dı: “the beg cursed him hünd treated him roughly and shouted at him” (ab'adahu . . . xaşuna 'alayhi wea zacarahu); do you not see how they had distinguished between God's curse and the persecution (fard) by one servant (of God) of another servant like himself by putting a fatha on the former and a kasra on the latter? Kag. Il] 29o (kirğa:r, kirBa:ma:k; in all three places spelt kizfa:- in the MS.); a.o. // 288 (1 kiriga:&amp;). D kurğa:- Dev. N. fr. kuruğ, “to be, or become, dry'. S.i.s.m.l. in NE, NC. Xak. xı yer kurğa:dı: "the ground. became dry (yabisat) for lack of rain” Kaş. III 290 (kurğa:r, kurga:ma:k). D karğat- Caus. f. of karğa:- : s.i.s.m.]. Xak. xı ol ye:kni: karğattı: a/'ana'l-;jayfün "he had the devil cursed' Kaş. /T 338 (karfatu:r, karğatma:k). D(S) kırğat- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of kirğa:-. Xak. xı ol anı: beğke: kırğattı: "he urged the beg to be angry vvith him and shun him” (haniqa 'alayhi wa a'rada 'anhu) Kaş. II 338 (kırğatu:r, kırğatma:k). D kurğa:d- Hap. leg.; Intrans. (here Inchoative) Den. V. fr. 1 kuruğ, cf. kurır-. Xak. xı yer kurğatfı: "the ground began to dry out (axadat . . fi'l-cafaf) and was parched (qahıtat) for lack of moisture'; the original form was kurğa:dtı: but it was assimilated (udğima) Kaş. II 338 (kurğatu:r, kurğatma:k (sic); this seems to be an error, the -dshould be preserved, at any rate in the Aor.). D korkit- Caus. f. of kork-; “to frighten (someone)'. S.i.a.m.l.g., usually as korkutoften meaning “to threaten”, Türkü vırı ff. Man. Chuas. 87-8 (ürkit-): Xak. xı ol anı: korkutti: “he frightened him” (xawwafahu) Kaş. H 339 (korkutu:r, korkutma:k), a.o. II 365, 10: KB 656 (kork-): xın(?) Tef. korkat-/korkut- “to frighten, to let oneself be frightened! 214-15: (xiv Muh. al-tahşil "to obtain, acquire' korkutmak, an obvious error, prob. for kazbanmak Mel. 36, 1; Rif. 121 has karanmak, an error for kazanmak): Çağ. xv ff. korkut- Caus. f.; tarsánidan “to frighten' San. 285r. 17: Kom. xiv ditto CCG; Gr.: Kip. xir xawwafa korkut- (?; MS. kort-) Hou. 39, 19: xv ditto korkut- Kas. 77, 14. D karğal- Pass. f. of karğa:-, “to be cursed'. Survives in SC Uzb. and some NW languages; see karğan-. Xak. xr ye:k karğaldı: "the devil (etc.) was cursed” (/u"ina) Kaş. 11 236 (karğalu:r, karğalma:k). D Kirki- Pass.” of kirk-; “to be sheared'; s.i.m.m.l.g. Xak. xı yu:p k:rkildi: translated 'the sheep or some other animal was sheared' (cuzza) Kaş. II 236 (kirkilu:r, kirkilma:k). D korkul- Pass. f. of kork- ; used only as an Impersonal V.; survives with the same usage in SW Osm. Xak. xı ı:şdı:n korkuldt: xifa mina'l-amr “the affair was feared' Kaş. II 236 (korkulu:r, korkulma:k). D karğan- Refl. f. of karğa:-: survives in some NE and NW languages, but only in a Pass. sense. Uyğ. viu ff. Man.-A M I 9, 9 etc. (1 alkan-): (O. Kir. ix ff. kadaşlarınız karÉanu:r is read in Mal. 25, 6, but this part of the text is quite unreliable; ?read kazÉanu:r): Xak. xr er ö:zin karğandı: “the man cursed (/a"ana) himself because penitence came to him” (//-nadüma waqa'at lahu) Kaş. IT 249 (karğanu:r, karğanma:k). D korkun- Refl, f. of kork-; s.i.s.m.l., e.g. NE Tel. korkun- “to fear for oneself” R II 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 700 
     
   
   
     656 DIS. V. ĞRĞ564. Xak. xı er r:şdin korkundt: alassa”/-raculu'l-xawf wa admara fi nafsihi 'the man had a sensation of fear (over the matter) but concealed it within himself' Kaş. JJ 250 (korkunu:r, korkunma:k). VUD kurğiır- (?kurğar-) Hap. leg.; abbreviated Den. V. in fr. 1 kuruğ, 'to be dry', in contrast to kurğa:d- which means "to become dry'; the MS. has -1- in the second syllable, but the normal vowel would be -a-. Xak. x1 ye:r kurfirdi: “the ground (etc) was dry (yabisat) for lack of moisture! Kaş. // 193 (kurğıra:r, kurf£irma:k). VUD korğur- Hap. leg.; Intrans. Den. V. fr. korğu:, the MS. has -1- everywhere in the second syllable, but in view of the etymology this must be an error. Xak. xı er korğurdı: "the man (etc.) was heedless and irresponsible” (taşa) Kaş. II 194 (korğura:r, korğurma:k). D karğaş- Hap. leg., Recip. f. of karğa:-. Xak. xı ola:r ikki: karğaşdı: 'the two cursed one another” (fa/d"ana) Kaş. II 220 (karğaşu:r, karğaşma:k). D kırğaş- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of kırğa:-. Xak. xi ola:r ikki: kırğaşdı: “arada kull thid minhumá şühibahn meaning obscure; "arada with the Acc. normally means “to meet'; a"rada means “to shun', but is followed by 'an, see 1 kırğa:ğ, the sentence must, however, mean 'those two cursed (or were angry with, or shunned) one another” Kaş. II 220 (kirğaşu:r, kirğaşma:k). D kırkış- Hap. leg.?; Co-op. f. of kirk-. Xak. xı ol mapa: yu: kirkisdi: “he helped me to shear the wool and hair” (fi cazzi'l-sif tea. teabar) Kaş. II 221 (kirkigu:r, kirkişma:k). D korkus- Recip. f. of kork- , “to be afraid of one another”, s..s.m.]l. Xak. xi ola:r ikki: korkusdrla:r “those two were afraid (xàáfa) of one another” Kaş. I] 221 (korkusu:r, korkuşmn:k): Çağ. xv ff. korkus- bá-/iam tarsidan "to be afraid together! San. 285r. 17. Tris. GRG D kara:ğu: Den. N./A. fr. kara:; kara:ğu:ni: in Kaş. is obviously the Acc. of this word misunderstood. Survives in SE Tar. kariğu R TI 185; Türki kariBu BS 472; karğu Jarrimg 240; 'blind'. Cf. teglük, közsüz. Uyğ. vui ff. Civ. (if an ear is blocked) karağu sıçğannın ötin tamışsar açılur “if one drops into it the gall of a blind (?, “black” is more prob.) mouse, it is cleared' H I 56-7: Xak. xı kara:ğu: al-zác 'sulphate of iron': kara:ğu: a/-a"ma 'blind' Kaş. I 446: (among words of the form fa'rilalt) kara:ğuni: “the name of a children”s game vvhich they play in the dark” ('agiya(2)) III 243: KB sözüp bolsu közsüz karağuka köz “let your words become an eye for the eyeless blind man” 178; biligsiz karağu turur “the ignorant man is blind” r79, 271; o.o. 493 (biliş-), 1861: xın(?) Tef. al-a'má karağu kózsüz zoo: xiv Rbğ. (Adam looked at them and) ba"dını karağu kördi 'saw that some of them were blind' R IJI 152. kıra:ğu: “hoar frost'| Etymology obscure. S.ia.m.l.g.. L.-w. in Mong. (eragu(n) Kom. 2548) and l'e., etc., Doerfer 1101 1600. Uy. xiv Chin.-Mong. Dict. shuang 'frost' (Giles ro, 120) kırağu Ligeti 166: Xak. xi ktra:fu: “the hoarfrost (al-calid) which falls from the sky in cold weather! Kaş, 7 446: Çağ. xv ff. kiraw kirağu which falls from the sky to the ground on cold nights and whitens the round' Vel. 330 (quotns.); ktraw (spelt) sabnam-i barf, 'hoarfrost; in Ar. sa'iq San. 295r. 16: Xwar. xiv kiragu ditto Qut? (131 error), 149: Kom. xiv *hoar frost” kırov CCG, Gr.: Kip. xiv al-zumitá 'hoar frost” kirawu: Hul. 14, 1: xv zumità kiravv Tuh. 17b. ro: Osin. xviui kiragu in Rörmi, "hoar frost” San. 295r. TT. D kurt: £u: Hap. leg.; Dev. N./A. fr. kuri:-. Xak. x1 kuri:gu: ne:n “a thing which is on the point of drying' ('ala garafi'l-cafáf); also “the time when a thing dries” Kaş. 7 446. D karakçı: N.Ag. fr. 2 karak, in spite of the dubious status of that vvord there is no alternative. etymologyş 'brigand, highwayman'. $S4.a.m.l.g. L.-w. in Pe., etc. Doerfer III 1445 (with an ingenious but dubious etymology). Xak. xi K B (keep the roads safe and) karakçığ sekerçiğ arıtğıl arığ "make a clean sweep of the brigands and ?' 5577; a.o. 1737: Çağ. Vel. 317; San. 271r. 27 (2 karak): Xwar. xiv karakçı “brigand” Qutb 132; MN 135: (Kom. xiv “beggar” karakçı (?error for kara:çı:, q.v.) CCG; Gr.): Osm. xiv karakçı 'brigand'; in three texts T'T'S II 583. D korığçı: N.Ag. fr. korığ, survives in SW Osm. kor1ci/korucu “the guardian of a fenced tract of pasture or forest”. Xak. xı koriğçı: (MS. horuget:) hünül-himd "a guardian. of private property! Kaş. IJI 242. F koruğlun 'lead' (metal); the -j- and form of the word show that it is a l.-w. An early l.-w. in Mong. as korğolci, (Koze, 969) unless this is an independent borrowing fr. the same foreign language. S.i.a.m.l.g., in most cases with minor phonetic changes, but some NE languages use the Mong. word and SW Osm. has kurşun, "km, Éursun, and Az. ğurBuşun, In some languages also used for “tin”, usually qualified by ak 'white'. L.-w. in Pe.,. etc. in various forms, Doerfer 111 1466. Xak. korugjrn, “vith -1-”, al-usruf 'lead'; the Oğuz leave some letters out and say kosu:n (sic, in margin korsu:n, which was perhaps the original reading) Kaş. 7 sız: a.o. 11 293 (bat-): xiv Muh. al-raşaş 'lead' korsun; ali-usrub kara: korşun Mel. 75, 6; Hif. 178: Çağ. Xv ff. korğaşun kursun Vel. 338 (quotns.); ditto (spelt) surb "lead” San. 286r. rr (quotn.): Ofuz xi see Xak.: Kom. xiv “İcad” korğaşın, “tin” ak korğaşın CCI, CCG, Gr.: Kip. xii al-raşdş korğa:şun: Tkm. kurşun /7ox. 31, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 701 
     
   
   
      —.. LAS ET çəx » ŞA s 'TRIS. 13: xiv korğuşun (sic) al-ragág; Tkm. kurşun İd. zo, al-raşüş kurşun Bul. 4, 11: xv al-raşüş korğaşın (sic) Kav. 58, 13; raşüş korğaşın and kurşun 7uğ. 172. r. D kırğağlığ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. 2 kirBab; “having a selvedge or border”, Türkü viii 44. N i1 (kutay). karğıla:c 'swallow, swift', and similar birds; this is the earliest form of the word, with the ending -laç, which also appears in other bird mames; it was very soon metathesized to karlığa:ç, prob. because -Ba:g was a familiar, though in this context inappropriate, Turkish Suff. S.i.a.m.l.g., often with large phonetic changes, e.g. SC Uzb. kaldirğoç, SW Az. ğaranğuş, Osm. kirlanğıç, Tkm. garla:va:ç, L.-w. in Pe., etc., Doerfer Ill 1513. Uyğ. vui ff. Civ. karlığaç etin 'swallow's flesh' H I 94; a.o. do. g (1 uya:): Xak. xi karğıla:ç al-wapwát "svvallov”, karlığaç metathesized alternative form (/uğa bihi 'ala'l-qalb) Kaş. I 526; (in verse) karğıla:ç al-xuttaf “svvift I 529, 6; III 178, is: Çağ. xv fi. karluvvaç/karluğaç (spelt) piristüh “svvallovv” San. 272r. 18 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv karluğaç ditto Nahc. 42, 17: Kip. xii al-sunünü 'swallov” karla:ğa:ç Hou. 10, 10: xiv karlağuç a/-xuttaf, karlavvuç ditto /d. 7o; ditto karlığaç Bul. 11, 15; xv “the black sparrow ('usfir) called a/-xuttaf” karlağaş Kav. 62, 15; suntin huma 'ugfüru'l-bayt(?) . (three words illegible) the swallow; it is a house(?) sparrow' karla:ğa:ş (in margin, in different hands, a/-xutfáf and karlağuç) Tuh. 192. 13: Osm. xiv. ff c.i.a.p. xiv karluğaç (once): xiv to xvr karlaBug; xvi ff. karlanğuç TTS I 425; 1I 592; III 416; IV 478. D karaklığ Hap. leg.?; P.N./A. fr. 1 karak. Xak. xı karaklığ “any animal which has eyeballs” (zugla) Kaş. 1 497: (Çağ. xv ff. karağlik qaht tea ğald 'famine, drought” San. 271r. 28 (quotn.); the meaning is inferred fr. the quotn. which contains the phr. qaht wa karağlık but the word is clearly an A.N. fr. 2 karak meaning 'brigandage"). D korağlığ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. *koraf Dev. N./A. fr. kora:-. Uyğ. vii ff. Civ. (if a boy) korağluğ bolsar 'becomes sickly, loses weight' (put donkeys' hair on his head and) koranmaz bolur “he ceases to lose vveight” H I 103-4. D korığlığ Hap. leg., P.N./A. fr. korığ, *privately owned' or the like. Uyğ. vı ff. Bud. Chuas., Berlin, 27, 8-9 (evinlig). D kuruğluğ P.N./A. fr. 2 *kuru£, Dev. N. fr. kur-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı kuruflug ya: al-qatwsu'l-mutoattar "a strung bow' Kaş. 1 496; 8.0. İ Sot, 4-5. D 1 kuruğluk A.N. fr. 1 kuruğ, 'dryness'. S.i.s.m.l. Xak. xr kuru£luk 'dryness' (cafáf) of anything Kaş. 1 503; a.o. I sos, 6. D 2 kuruğluk A.N. fr. 2 *kuru£; 'bow-case'. N.o.a.b. Cf. kurma:n. Xak. xı kurufgluk ĞRĞ al-miqtvas "bovv-case", hence one says kö:ş kuruğluk “quiver and bow-case' Kaş. I 504; in J şor, 6 mis-spelt kuruğluğ, although kuruğluk is clearly intended. VUD korğuluk A.N. fr. korğu:, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı korğuluk al-fayş wa'l-zaqzaqa 'heedlessness, irresponsibility, volubility' Kaş. I 528: KB 2078 (yénik). ?D kara:ka:n perhaps Den. N. fr. kara:; some kind of tree or bush. An early l.-w. in Mong. as karagana 'thicket, scrub' (ITaenisch 60); ditto, also karaguna, karfana “the false acacia of Siberia, Robinia caragana” (Kon. 831-2, 844); see Doerfer I 275. Survives in NE Şor, Tel. karagan “Robizra siberiaca! R HH 151; Khak., Tuv. xarağan “a kind of ocacia bush', unless these are reborrowings fr. Mong. Xak. xı kara:ka:n “a kind of mountain tree' Kaş. I 448. D korkınçığ Dev. N/A. fr. korkin-, *frightening, terrible'. N.o.a.b. Türkü vrı ff. Man. M HI 45, 4 (i) (E etin): Uyğ. vri ff. Man. korkınçığ sansar “the terrible sayısdra (chain of rebirths)! TT III 141: Bud. korkınçığ yél 'a terrible wind' PP 18, 3; o.o. do. 18, 5; 26, 5-6 (adalığ), etc. D korkınçlığ P.N./A. fr. korkinc; 'terrified, full of fear'. Pec. to Uyğ. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. Kuan. 43-4 (busuşluğ), Suv. 620, 22. D korkinçsiz Priv. N./A. fr. korkimnç, 'fearless”, sometimes rather in the sense of "lacking (proper) awe'. N.o.a.b. Türkü vır ff. Man. korkunçsuz kópülümüz üçün “because our minds lack (proper) awe' Chuas. 253-4: Uyğ. vu ff. Bud. korkinçsiz köpülin *with minds lacking (proper) awe' U ZH 17, 18; same phr. “fearlessİy” do. 55, 2; a.o. Kuan. 52 (2 bugi:). 657 D kuruğsa:k 'stomach'; as Kaş. says, a Dev. N. fr. kuruğsı:-. S.i.a.m.l.g., usually as kursak and the like; cf. karın, Türkü vırı ff. IrkB 8 (kuliç) “Xak. xi kürüğsak a/-ma"ida, 'stomach'; and qörrişatı”l-tayr, "a bird's gizzard”, is called kuruğsa:k Kaş. I 502; o.o. I 17, 2; II 334 (kurugsr-): KB 375 (öç-): xiv Muh. al-ma'ida ku:rsa:k Mel. 47, 15; Rif. 142: Çağ. xv ff. kursak hawsala wa amd *stomach, intestines' Sar. 286r. 9 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv kursak 'stomach' Qutb 145: Kom. xiv 'stomach, bladder! kursak CCT, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xmi (under 'birds') al-hawsala kursak Hou. ro, 14: xiv kursak al-kabid “ver” ş and in the Kirab Beylik al-hawsala, and in another place al-fu'ád 'heart' İd. yo, Bul. ız, 7 (bokuk): xv ra'su'i-ma'ida 'the upper part of the stomach' kursak Tuh. r6b. 8; ma'ida ditto 32b. 8: Osm. xiv ff. kursak *stomach', and hasesala in the metaph. meaning 'intelligence'; c.ia.p. 77S I 498; III 489; IV 554. D karaksı:z Hap. leg.; Priv. N./A. fr. 1 karak. Xak. xi (after karaklığ) and one says karaksrz teğ körü:r yafağdmaz (sic, not yata'ámá as in printed text) f?'[-harb toa ğayrihi 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 702 
     
   
   
       658 TRIS. ha”annahu là yadri' (corrected in margin to yara”) l-muhárabin tea uhbatahum "he blinks in the battle (etc.) as if he did not know (see) the combatants and their weapons' Kaş. I 497. D karıksız Hap. leg.; Priv. N./A. fr. *karik, Dev. N. fr. 1 kar-. Xak. xi KB 3899 (katikSiz). D karğaşa: Dev. N. fr. karğaş-, 'quarrel, dispute', lit. 'cursing one another”. Survives in SW Osm. There are only three earlier occurrences, all prob. of xiv. Uy£. viii ff. Civ. in a late document, D. Z. Tikhonov, Khozyaistvo 1 obshchestvennyi stroi uigurskogo gosudarstva, X— XIV vv., Moscow-Leningrad, 1966, p. 24o, bu borlukta camm (sic?) karfasa yok 'there is no objection or dispute regarding this vineyard” II, 6-7; (let not any of my relations) cam karğaşa kılmazunlar l. ro: Kom. xiv “a quarrelsome man” karğaşa CCG; Gr.: Osm. xivff. karğaşa (rarely karkasa) 'quarrel, dispute'; in several texts xiv to xvii. TTS 1 421; III 416; IV 477. Tris. V. GRGD karakla:- Den. V. fr. 2 karak, “to pillage' and the like, Survives in NE Tel. karakta"to destroy! R II 149. Ya&amp;ma: xi col» tawa:rığ karakla:dr: gata'a'l-tariq tuva axada'l-màl *he cut the road and took the property' (?or livestock) Kaş, 111 338 (karakla:r, karakla:ma:k): Xwar. xiv karakla- “to steal' Qutb 132. D kuruğla:- Den. V. fr. 1 kuruğ: survives in NE Bar. kuru:la- “to give a child a dry napkin” R II 932. Xak. xı kuruğla:dı: ne:pni: ista"mala”l-şay” fi cafáfihi "he used the thing in its dry state” Kag. III 336 (kuruğla:r, kuruğla:ma:k). D kırğıllat- Hap. leg.; Caus. Den. V. fr. kırğıl, Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. (many years and months have passed and) başımız taki kara saçımız uci bölüki kırğil(l)atyuk “have turned the ends and (other) parts of our heads and black hair grey' U III ss, 15-16. D kuruğlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of kuruğla:-. Xak. xı ol ótmekni: kuruğlandı: "he reckoned that the bread was dry (qifar) and did not eat it” Kaş. JI 268 (kuruğlanu:r, kuruğlanma:k). VUD korğulan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. korğu:. Xak. xı er korğulandı: fàja'l-racul wa abda (MS. ayda) min nafsihi al-nazq (MS. al-zaq) “the man behaved heedlessiy and irresponsibly and displayed levity” Kaş. III 201 (korğulanu:r, korğulanma:k, emendations in printed text are convincing). D kara:ğur- Hap. leg.; Intrans. Den. V. fr. kara:ğu: “to be blind'. Xak. xı KB (do not forget death, make your preparations for it; do not forget yourself, know your own fundamental nature) karağurma dunyüka sukluk kilip “do not be blind, setting your heart on   GRG this world' (it remains, but you go, screaming in penitence) 6092. D kuruğsı:- Hap. leg.; Simulative Den. V. fr. 1 kuruğ, cf. kurğa:d-. Xak. xı kurugsr:dı: (ne:p» tarvaccaha”l-şay” li'l-cafàáf “the thing started to dry'; the stomach (a/-mi"4a) is called kuruğsn:k after it, because it dries (taciff) hour after hour, and a desire for food arises from it Kaş. 117 334 (kuruğsı:r, kurufsri:ma:k). Dis. GRL D karlığ P.N./A. fr. 1 ka:r; 'snowy, covered with snow, inclined to snow', S.i.a.m.l.g. Uyğ. vir ff. Suv. 590, 4-5 (buzluğ). D korluğ P.N./A. fr. 1 ko:r; 'loser, liable to loss', and the like. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. virt ff. Civ. korluğ and the opposite korsuz occur in a standing formula relating to the incidence of loss arising from a contract in USp. 16, 30, 107, 108, 110, 114; it provides that one party korluğ bolzun “shall be responsible for any 1oss”, and that the other korsuz bolzun 'shall not be responsible”: (Xak.) xiv Muh. al-xaşir “loser” ko:rluğ Mel. sz, s, Rif. 148: (Kip. xv al-mahqür 'despised, slighted' korluk Tuh. 332. 2; prob. a P.N./A. fr. Pe. xtur, same meaning). D korluk A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. 2 ko:r. Xak. xı korluk “an old skin container (a/-şaxn) in which sour milk (a/-amiş) is stored” Kaş. 1 473. Dis. V. ĞRLD karıl- (ka:ril-) Pass. f. of 1 kar-, “to be mixed (with something)”. Survives in SC Uzb. koril-; SW Osm. karil-; Tkm. ğa:rıl-. Uyğ. vn ff, Bud. Suv. 133, 15 (katil-): Xak. xi Kaş. II 134 see Oğuz: KB (undoubtedly "Thou art one, oh Everlasting Ancestor) katılmaz karılmaz sakışka (VU) seçü “Thou art not mingled (Hend.) with plurality' ro (the meaning of the last word is obscure); bularnip bile sen katıl ham karil 'associate freely (Hend.) with these people” 4401: Oğuz xı bir ne:p bi:rke: karıldı: "one thing was mixed (ixtalata) with another”, and the Turks use this word in Hend. ("ald farigi'l-itbà') and say katıldı: karıldı: Kaş. JJ 134 (karilur, karilma:k): Xvvar. xiv karıl- "to be mixed with (something Dat.)” Qutb 134: Kom. xiv üni karıldı "his voice was hoarse' CCG; Gr. (perhaps Pass. f. of 2 ka:r-): Kip. xv ixtalafa karı- (sic, and katil-, with karıl- added in the margin, and saxa “to be old” written below karı- in a second hand) Tuh. 6b. 12; izwarra (of food?) “to go the wrong way' karil- şa, 12; ğaşşa "to be choked” karil- 27a. 9 (the last two Pass. f.s of 2 ka:r-?): Osm. xiv karil*to be mixed; (of animals) to mate'; c.i.a.p. TTS I 423; İl 590; III 414; IV 475. D kırıl- Pass. f. of ktr-; s.i.s.m.l.g. with the same extended meanings as kir-. Xak. xt kirildi: ne: “the thing was scraped” (qugira); and one says ka:r kırıldı: “the snow was scraped (ceurifa) off the ground'; and er  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 703 
     
   
   
      ü DIS. ĞRM 659 kırıldı: “the man was impoverished” (rftaqara), that is when his property is taken from him Kaş. II 134 (kirilur, kirilmaik): Çağ. xv ff. kiril- (spelt) "to be scraped' (xardşida şudan), *to be massacred' (qat/-r müfrit-şudan), “to be broken' (şıkasta şudan) San. 294r. 13 (quotn.): Kom. xiv “to die” (iyfer alia) kırıl- CCG ; Gr.: Kap. xiv kiril- uhlika "to be destroyed” İd. 70. D kurul- Pass. f. of kur-, s.i.m.m.l.g. with the same wide range of meanings as kur-. XaK. xı er eligi: kuruldi: translated "his hands and feet were stiff' (or deformed, tagannacat); and one says ya kuruldi: “the bow was strung” (touftira) Kaş. 11 134 (kurulur, kurulma:k); a.o. / 520 (sinir): xiv Rbg. (a snake came and) ol yerde kurulup yattı 'settled itself on that ground and lay down' R I] gaz: Çağ. xiv kurul- murattab wa árdsta şudan “to be put in order, arranged'; and najb şudan "to be erected' Sar. 284v. 2 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv kurul- (of a bow) 'to be strung' Qutb 145; (of guests) 'to be assembled" MN zi: Kap. xv(?) xadara “to remain, stay put” kurul- Tuk. 15a. 9 in margin. D karla:- Den. V. fr. 1 ka:r; "to snow. S.i.s.m.l. Xak. xr bulit karla:dı: "the cloud snowed' (atlacat) Kaş. III 298 (karla:r, karla:ma:k); o.o. 7 463, 11; 117 319, 1. D kirla:- Den. V. fr. 2 (and 3) Kir; survives in NE Sag. kırla- R 71 753; Khak. xirla"to travel through the mountains'. Xak. xı ol yé:rig kirla:di: "he made furrows (axádid) in the ground', for melons and the like, also used for making a dam ('arim) Kaş. I1I 298 (kirla:r, kirla:ma:k). D kurla:- Den. V. fr. 1 kur; s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı ol kafta:nığ kurla:dı: “he made a belt (mintaqa) for the robe and fastened it over it” Kaş. Hİ 298 (kurla:r, kurla:ma:k): Xwar. xiv kurla- “to gird (oneself)” Qut5 145. D karlat- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of karla:-. Xak. xi tepri: ka:r karlattı: “God made it snow' (atlaca . . . al-tilc) Kaş. II 347 (karlatu:r, karlatma:k). D kırlat- Hap. leg., Caus. f. of Kirla:-. Xak. xı ol arik kirlatti rafa'a l'l-nahr 'arim wa şaft "he erected a dam and banks for the canal” Kaş. II 347 (kirlatu:r, kirlatma:k). D ka:rlan- (sic) Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of karla:-. Xak. xı art ka:rlandı: "the mountain. pass was full of snow' (göt £alc) Kaş. III 197 (ka:rlanu:r, ka:rlanma:k). D kırlan- Refl. f. of kirla:- , survives in NE Alt., Tel, kirlan- (of mountains) "to come to a peak' R II 754. Xak. xr yér kirlandı: “the ground contained dams and furrows' (sdrat . . . düt "aram (sic) wa axddid) Kaş. II 251 (kirlanu:r, kirlanma:k). D 1 korlan- (ko:rlan-) Refl. Den. V. fr. 1 korr; NE korlan-/korlon-, NC Kzx. korlan- R İI $75; Kir. kordon- “to be offended, ashamed, humiliated, insulted' may be survivals of this word but are more likely to be Den. V.s fr. Pe. xwur (see korluğ). Xak. xı er tava:rıpa: korlandı: translated “the man regretted that something was beyond his reach (tahassara . . . "ala fawt) and reckoned that it was lost' (xusrár); originally ko:rlanKaş. II 25o (korlanu:r, korlanma:k); er tava:ripa ko:rlandı: “the man was sorrowful and regretted the loss of (talahhafa wa tahassara) his property when it disappeared' (dahaba) 111 197 (2 ko:rlan- follows): (xiri(?) Tef. xorlan- 'to be despised', fr. Pe. xwur 348). D 2 korlan- (ko:rlan-) Refl. Den. V. fr. 2 ko:r, n.o.a.b. Xak. xr yoğrut korlandı: Baluza'l-ráà'ib "the curdled milk thickened” Kaş. II 250 (no Aor. or Infin., follows 1 kor1an-), kimiz ko:rlandı: hamuda'l-amis. min xamir hüna fihi “the sour milk fermented because of the yeast that vvas in it”, also used of curdled milk when it thickens (xatura) 111 197 (ko:rlanu:r, ko:rlanma:k). Tris. GRL D karilik A.N. fr. 1 karx:; "old age”. S.i.s.m.l.; in SW Osm. meaning *womanhood, vvifehood”. Xak. xi KB (whatever youth may have collected for me) karılık kelip aldı “old age has come and taken from me” 372; a.0. 1079: xm(?) Tef. karılık “old age” 201: Xwar. xıv ditto Qutb 134. S karlığaç See karğıla:ç. Tris. V. ĞRLD kara:la:- Den. V. fr. kara: s.i.s.m.l. for both (physically) “to blacken, defile and (metaph.) 'to denigrate, defame'. Xak. xr ol kara:la:dı: ne:pni: “he blackened (satetwada) the thing” (kara:la:r, kara:la:ma:k; followed by 1, 2 karrla:-); rt kara:la:dr: “the dog defecated' (salaha; no Aor. or Infin.) Kaş. HI 324; 8.0. 329, 14. D 1 kKarri:la:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. 1 kart. Xak. xı ol erig^kari:la:di: “he reckoned that the man was advanced in years (kabir) and attributed an advanced age (Atibar) to him” Kaş. III 324 (karı:la:r, kari:la:ma:k); a.o. 329, 29. D 2 karı:la: Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. 2 kart: Xak. xı ol yezriğ karı:la:dı: dara'a'l-ard “he measured the ground (etc.) in cubits” Kaş. III 324 (followed by 1 karı:la:-), a.0. 329, 15. ?E 3 karxla:- Hap. leg.; follows the second half of the entry of kara:la:-; prob. an error for karla:- inserted here by a later scribe. Xak. XI tüpi: ka:rığ karı:la:dı: a/-rih sefa -tak bi-dawi wa hafif “the wind blew the snow with a confused rustling noise' Kaş. III 324 (karı:la:r, karısla:ma:k). Dis. ĞRM D karım N.S.A. fr. 2 ka:r- “a moat, town ditch', and the like; lit. (a moat filled by) “a single overflow of water'. Survives with this . meaning in NE Tel. R IJ 183. Uy&amp;.(^ i 1 i 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 704 
     
   
   
     660 DIS... Bud. (all kinds of poisonous dragons and snakes lie) ol balık (erasure leaving -e at the end, tegre would suit the sensc) yeme yeti kat karam (Uyğ.-A form) içinte 'round(?) that town and in the seven-fold moat” PP 39, 4-5: Xak. xı K.B (if in a dream you drink half a goblet of water, half your life has finished as a debt; if you drink the whole of it) tükedi tirighk kazıldı karim “your life is finished and a grave (lit. ditch) been dug' 6063 (Arat reads kirim, but the word, which is unvocalized, rhymes with yarim and bérim): xın(?) Tef. bir uluğ karı:m (unvocalized) kazdurdi "he had a great ditch dug' (and a great fire lit in it) 209 (mistranseribed furim). D kura:m Hap. leg.; N.S.A. fr. *kura:-, Den. V. fr. 2 kur; lit. 'a single act of placing people according to their rank'. Xak. xı kura:m kisi:le:r a/-násu'l-culus 'alà'l-maràatib *people sitting according to (i.e. in the order of) their ranks' as they sit at the king's gate (bab), hence one says kışi:le:r kura:m olturdi:la:r “the people sat according to their ranks! Kaş. 1 413. korum “a massive rock, or pile of rocks'; survives in NE Alt., Leb., Şor, Tel, korum R 11 561; Khak. xorim Tuv. xorum; SE Türki koram/koyam/kura:m J7arring 252; the second element in the well-known name of the town Karakorum, originally an Uyg. capital, but mentioned in Mong. as early as xı (Haenisch 176). Xak. xı korum al-şaxr "a massive rock”, and 'abundant wealth' (a/-málu'l-camm) is called korum; one says ol korum buldi: cacada mal camm "he has made a pile! Kaş. I 398; o.o. III 61, 20; 105 (yuvluş-): KB (whatever country my laws reach) ol él barça étlür taş erse korum “that country is completely organized, even if it is (only) stone and rock” 830: xırı(?) Tef. korum taş “a rock” 215. ?D karma: 'pillaging; theft'; etymologically connected with 2 karak; not connected with SW Osm. karma in the phr. karma karışık 'muddled, confused' which is a Dev. N./A. fr. 1 kar-, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı karma: al-nahb “pillaging, theft'; hence one says (ol? ne:p karma:la:dt: “he stole (xa/aba) the thing” Kaş. I 433; Ka:ğu:n karma: bolsa: “if a melon has been stolen” (zultiba) 1 410, 11. D kirma: Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. kir-, lit. “scraped” i.e. to a particular shape. In Ar. xarata means “to turn (on a lathe)' and maxrüf normally *conical', but with “ball” it must mean 'spherical'. Survives in SW Az. ğırma “pellet, shot”, Osm. kirma pleat, fold, crease; broken'. Xak. xı kirma: a/l-maxrüf (turned on a lathe” of anything; hence one says kirma: tobik kura maxrüta “a spherical bal Kaş. I 433F kurma:n 'bow-case'; there is an apparent “vological connection with kuruğluk, same * but the word itself, which is only 773, seems to be a corruption of GRM Pe. qerhön, and that word, though not so far itraced in Ar. with this meaning, seems to be derived fr. qaraba, which tnter alia means 'to put (something) in a sheath or case”, "Vhe word seems therefore to be by origin Ar., or at any r: € Pe.-Ar., and one of a number of such words in Oğuz (see 2 turma:), and the connection with kuruğluk illusory. 'l'he long note on the word in P. Pelliot, Notes sur l'histoire de la Horde d'Or, Paris, 1950, p. 42, must be corrected accordingly. See also the discussion of Pe. qurbán in Doerfer 1I 1451. N.o.a.b. Oğuz/Kıp. xi kurma:n al-niqteas, “bov case”, one says ké:$ kurma:n 'quiver and bow case”, its origin is fr. ku:rma:n (sic; error for ku:rma:k) suddu'l-mintaga fi'l-wasaf "to fasten a belt round the waist' Kaş. 7 444; a.o. Hİ 16 (yasik): (Xwar. xiv kurban 'bow-case' Qutb 141): Kip. xv tirhüş (Pe. l.-w.) “quiver" (sic) kurman Tw. 8b. ır. Dis. V. GRMS karma:- See karva:-. S(D) karmaş- as such Hap. leg.; at a later period a Sec. f. of karvaş-, Kaş.”s etymology is, in doubt, correct. Xak. xr ol menip birle: tava:r karmaşdı: "he competed with me in pillaging (/7 nahb) property'; also used for helping (karmaşu:r, karmaşma:k), originally karma:laşdı: (karma:lasu:r, karma:laşma:k) Kaş. İl 221. Tris. ĞRM D kırmaçı: Hap. leg.; N.Ag. fr. kirma:; presumably 'turner', or perhaps more generally. “carpenter”, Xak. xı KB 4458 (in a list of craftsmen; blacksmiths, bootmakers, and) kırmaçı (painters, decorators, arrowmakers, bowmakers). D kara:muk Den. N. fr. kara:; originally "tares, corn-cockle', and the like. S.i.m.m.l.g. Xak. xi kara:muk ziwàánu'l-ta'üm — 'tares among the wheat! Kaş, 7 487: Çağ. xv ff. karamuk (1) 'a red-coloured fruit like a sour cherry' (ali balü), in Ar. za"rür (wild plum"); (2) “black seeds which appear in wheat', in Pe. şaylam ('tares, darnel”) or ziteán, beneficial when mixed with sulphur as an ointment for leprosy; (3) metaph., “a dangerous black pimple which appears on children" (?smallpox) San. 271 v. 12; 0.0. 209 v. 17 (syn. vv, Rümi çevrünti “tares”), 224v. 19 (syn. vv. Rümi delüce ditto): Osm. xvi ff. karamuk (1) 'tares'; (2) 'wild plum'; (3) (once, xvi) *pimple, rash'; in several texts TTS I 417; İI 585; III 409; IV 470. D korumlug Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. korum. Xak. xı korumluğ ta:ğ cabal dü canddil “a mountain covered with loose rocks” Kaş. I 498. Tris. V. GRMD karma:la:- Den. V. fr. karma:; “to pillage, steal'. As such pec. to Kaş., NE Tel, karmada-; SC Uzb. karmala-; NW Kaz.,   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 705 
     
   
   
       DIS. V. Krım karmala- "to grope about” R IJI 218 are ultimately der. fr. karva:-, although their morphology is obscure. Xak. x1 ol karma:1a:dı: ne:pni: “he pillaged (or stole, nahaba) the thing” Kaş. III 354 (karma:la:r, karma:1a:ma:k), a.o. 7 433 (karma:): (Kom. xiv “to hurry” (sic?) karmala- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv karmala- massa 'to touch' /d. 69: xv cassa 'to feel, grope' (yoka-, karma-, and) karmalaTuh. 12a. 13). D karmalaş- Co-op. f. of karmala:-; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (Sanskrit missing) élig uluşuğ kırmalaş [gap; sic] TT VIII E.17 may belong here, since 'pillaging the realm and country' seems a likely meaning, and a connection with kırma: is improbable: Xak. xı Kaş. II 221 (karmaş-). D karımsın- Hap. leg., Refl. Simulative Den. V. fr. *karim, N.S.A. fr. 2 ka:r-, quoted only as an illustration of this form of V. Xak. xı er suvka: karımsındı: "the man pretended to choke over the water' (an yaşraq br l-mà') Kaş. II 260, 24; n.m.e. Dis. GRN karın 'belly, abdomen'; a general term for the lower part of the body and its contents, les: specific than kuruğsa:k “stomach” and bağırsuk 'entrails'. S.i.a.m.l.g., often more specifically for *womb'. Türkü vırı ff. adığın karnı: yarılmiş “the bear's belly was slit open” IrkB 6: Uyğ. viu ff. Bud. Sanskrit garbhe 'in the womb' ka:rinda: TT VIII D.35; könullerin karınların irintürdüm .. . erser “if I have distressed their minds and feelings! Suv. 136, 10-11; o.0. U II 44, 28-9 (1 ö:g), U III 43, 24 (kéber-): Civ. karın is common in H 7 for 'stomach', e.g. aç karınka “on an empty stomach' 19, 64, 170; and *womb', e.g. (if a foetus dies) kisinin karinda 'in a woman's womb' 61; (in an unfavourable omen) kar icinde ig kirdi; ?read karin, 'if an illness has entered the belly' TT I1 18; o.o. TT VII 22, 16 (1 6t-); 27, 15 (arkuru:): Xak. xı karın al-batn “the belly'; karın atmak a beast is slaughtered and its paunch (karguhu) is set up as a target and shot at, and anyone vvho hits it gets a share of the meat Xaş. I 403; 16 o.o., same translation: KB (character and knowledge) karinda törümiş 'which are formed in the womb' 883, kara karnı todsa *when the common people's bellies are full” 988; ana karnı “his mother's womb' r387: xın(?) 4t. karın toklukin “a full belly” 186; Tef. karın aç- “to be hungry! 201: xiv Muh, al-batn karın Mel. 47, ış, Rif. 141; al-cáyi' “hungry” karna:c (crasis of karnı: a:c) 54, 16; 152; al-haml 'foetus" karında:kı: oğla:n :r43: Çağ. xvff. karn (spelt) szkam ta şihanba “belly” (Hend.); also called karın Sar. 272r. 23 (quotn.); same entry reversed 272v. 14: Xwar. xiv karin “belly” Quib 134: Kom. xiv ditto CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xir al-bafn karın Hot. 20, 19; $1, 2; al-kirg kartn zı, 17: xiv karın al-batn İd. GRN- . 661 zo: xv ditto Kav. ör, 5; Tuh. 7a. s; al-kirş karın 61, rr, 30b. s (also kebe). D kurun Intrans./Pass. Dev. N. fr. kur-; 'soot', lit. something which establishes itself (on a wall, etc.). Survives as kurun in some NE languages, but everywhere else as kurum (properly a N.S.A.). Cf. 2 iş. Xak. xi kurun 'traces of smoke (ataru'l-duxán) which adhere to the walls! Kaş. 1 404: (Kom. xiv 'soot' kurum CCG, Gr.). D kurinc Hap. leg.; Dev. N. fr. kurin-. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. közlüğ kurincimizni seni körmekliğ yağmur üze kanturalım “let us satiate (i.e. alleviate) the dryness of our eyes with the rain of seeing you' U IV 44, 22-4. D karna:k Hap. leg.; Dev. N./A. fr. *karna:-, Den. V. fr. karin; the preceding entry is Karna:k balda min biladi'l-juzziya "one of the Oğuz villages (or districts?)'. Cf. karna:ğu:. Xak. xı karna:k er “a man with a large belly' ('azimu'l-batn) Kaş. I 473. ?F kirna:k “a slave girl'; a specifically Western word, surviving only(?) in 5W Osm. kirnak; 'Tkm. ğırnak, Perhaps a corruption of Ar. gurnüq “a good-looking boy, or girl”. L.-w. in Pe., Doerfer III 147o. Basmil, Çumul, Ka:y, Kıp., Oğuz, Yaba:ku: xı kirnak al-cáriya "slave girl” Kaş. 1 473: xui(?) Tef. kırnak “girl” 209: xiv Muh. al-surriya “concubine” kirna:k Mel. 51, 9; Rif. 147; al-cáriya (opposite to élti: lady") kirna:k 152 (only): Çağ. xv ff. kırna:ğ/kırna:k (spelt) kaniza Cgirl') wa cöriya, also called ğırnak Sam. 295v. 7; ğırnak “a word occurring in two languages (mugtaraka), in "Turkish Raniza wa cartya, in Ar. mard-i camil "a handsome man" 262v. 17: Kıp,, xır al-cáriya kirna:k(/kara:vva:ş/kara:ba:ş/tüğe:) Hou. 32, 17: XIV kirnak af-cöriya İd. yo: xv ditto Kav. 64, ro (vocalized karnak); Tuh. 87a. s, ama 'slave girl kirnak (and karawas) do. 3b. 13: Osm. xiv ff. kirnak 'slave girl”, c.i.a.p. T T.S I 462; II 632; III 449; İV şıq. E kırpa:k See ktpra:k. Dis. V. GRND kırın- Refl, f. of ktr- ; survives only(?) in SW Osm. kirin- “to cringe' ; Tkm. £irin- “to cut (etc.) for oneself'. Xak. xı ol ne:pni: krrındı: “he pretended to scrape (or peel, yuqaşşir) the thing" Kaş. II 155 (Kirinu:r, kırınma:k). D koran- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of kora:-, “to lose flesh'. Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. H I 104 (korağh£). D korin- (kori:n-) Refl. f. of kort-; sis. m.l. as korin-/korun- “to defend oneself'. Xak. xı er tava:rına: korindi: (MS. korundi:) "the man was miserly and niggardly (baxila . . . tea danna) with his money" Kaş. IJ 155 (korrnu:r (sic), Korinma:k): Çağ. xv ff. korun kendüri sahın hifz eyle "protect, defend yourself! Vel.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 706 
     
   
   
     662 339; korun- mamni' tca mahrüs sudan “to be restricted, protected” Sar. 285v. r D kurın- Refl. f. of kurt:- ; survives in SW Osm. kurun- 'to dry oneself'. Xak. xı er kurundi: (sic) 'the man dried himself (tacaffafa) after washing! Kaş. II 155 (kurinu:r, kurinma:k); kürindi: ne:y “the thing dried' (caffa) I 505, 7; kurin 'dry yourself" II 160, 7. Tris. GRN S karınça See karınçğa:. D kurunçı: Hap. leg.; N.Ag. fr. kurun, morphologically this should mean 'something which catches or collects soot' or the like. Xak. xi kurunçi: 'felt which has been blackened (istwadda) from the smoke in a tent (etc.)” Kaş. Ill 242. S karınçak See karincfa:. karınçğa: “ant”, specifically a Western word; an old animal name ending in -ğa:, the form in Kaş. is aberrant. Survives only(?) in SVV Az. ğarışğa , Osm. karınca, Tkm. ğarınca, Cf. çüme:lı:, kumursğa:, Oğuz xr karınçak al-naml 'ant', also called karınça: Kaş. I sor, karınça: “ant” III 375: xiv. Rbğ. karincka (sic) mepizlik uşak “as small as an ant” R I7 174; Muh. al-naml sarincak (one MS. adds karinca:) Mel. 74, 6; sirinca: Rif. 177 (Muh. gives no word for 'locust'; the text prob. originally read al-nami «karmga:; al-carad) sarıncak): Çağ. xv ff. karınçğa (spelt) mürça “small ant”) also called kumursğa San. 272v. 14: Xwar. xiv karınçka “ant” Quib 134: Tkm. xiu a/-naml karınca: (Kip. kurnurSka:) Hou. 11, 19: xiv al-naml (kimirşağı: and) karınca: Bul. 11, 5: xv al-naml karinca: Kav. 72, 10; karincak (Kip. kumruska) Tuh. 36b. 2. D kırındı: Pass, Dev, N./A. fr. kirin-; survives in SW Osm. kirindifkirinti; Tkm. Éi1rindi "small fragments, crumbs'. Xak. xt kirindi: qaşara kull şay” 'scrapings of anything” Kaş. I 449. D karında:ş N. of Assn. fr. karın, lit. 'associated in the womb', that is “a brother (or sister, usually as kr:z karında:ş) by the same mother”, irrespective of seniority and so a more general term than écl:, ini:, eke:, sipil, etc. S.i.a.m.l.g., sometimes with a more restricted meaning, e.g. Kk. only 'sister' or a more general one e.g. Osm. also 'comrade'; in SW and some NW languages abbreviated to kardas. L.-w. in Pe., etc., Doerfer III 1471. Uyğ. viti ff. Civ. oğul kardaş yeneçim “my son, brother, and sister-in-law' Fam. Arch. 125-6. Xak. xi (after a note on the suffix -da:ş) hence two children (zoa/adayn) out of the same womb are called karındaş, karın means al-batn and when -daş is added to it, it gives the meaning mugáhibu'l-batn "associate of the womb' Kaş. ] 407: xi?) Tef. karandaş/ karındaş “brother” 200-2: xiv Mu. al-xáfa “maternal aunt! karınta:ş ana:; al-'amm *paternal uncle' ata: karıntaşı: (Mel. karDIS. V. GRN daşı:), al-uxt 'sister' kiz karınta:ş, aj-ax “brother” karınta:ş Mel. 49, 6-7, Rif. 144: Çağ. xv ff. kardaş birddar "brother”, an abbreviation of karındaş meaning ham-şiham "from the same womb' Sar. 271 v. 26 (quotn.); karındaş 'brother' 272v. 15 (quotn.): Xwar. xın(?) (Urum Kağan had) bir karundaşı “one brother” Og. 173: xiv karindas “brother” Qutb 134: Kom. xiv. “brother” karindas; 'sister' kız karındaş CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. al-amm (açkı:/) atn: karındaşı:, al-ax karinda:s; al-uxt kiz karında:ş, atwládu'l-alhmá' "brothers-in-lavv" kayın karında:şla:r Hou. 31, 19: xiv karında:ş a/-dx müna"l-batn d. zo, al-üx karinda:s; al-'amm ata: karinda:s(fecci:); al-'amma ata: kiz karında:ş, al-xàla ana: kız karında:ş(/tağza:) Bul, 9, 2: xv bi:nip kardaşı: "the bey's brother” Kav. 27, 5; üx kardaş, uxt kiz kardaş Tuh. ab. 12: Osm. xiv ff. karındaş common till xvi, sporadic till xviri; kartaş once in xv TTS I 424; II 591; HI 414; IV 476. D karapfu: der. fr. kara: but morphologically obscure; "dark, darkness'. An early lw. in Mong. as haranjfu|karagguy (Haenisch 6o, Kow. 838); sia. m.Lg. Uyğ. vin ff, Bud. karapğu kararığığ tarğarğu üçün “in order to dissipate the dark darkness” Hüen-ts. 185; o.o. Suv. ror, 16 (bitigsizlik); USp. 102a. 34 (emgeklig): Xak. xı karanğu: a/-zulma 'darkness! Kaş, III 388; (a bribe will settle) karapku: (sic) r:şığ a/-anıra”l-müzlim “a nefarious affair” III 217, 1; a.o. III 290 (karva:-): KB karapku tüni “the dark night 35, 288, karapkuda erdim “1 was in darkness” 383; karapku ev “a dark house” 1840: xui?) Tef. karanğu/karanku “dark, darkness” zoo: xıv /ayl müşlim "a dark night" kara:pu: tü:n Mel. 8o, o, Rif. 185 (tu:nle:); al-zalüm (opposite to “light” aydun) karanu: 152 (only): Çağ. xv ff. karapğu karagu Vel. 320; karanğu zulm wa tárik 'darkness' San. 271 V. 14: Xwar.xiv karapğu “dark” Quib 131: Kom. xiv “darkness” karapğu/karapğı CCI, CCG, Gr.: Kip. xii (light aydın) al-zulma kara:ğu: IIou. 26, 17: xiv al-zalàm karanı: Bul. 14, 1: xv zulma karanğı: Tuh. 24a. 11: Osm. xiv. karapu/karaguluk 'darkness'; c..a.p. TTS I 417; 11 585; İİİ 419; IV 471. D karna:ğu: Hap. leg.; Dev. NA. fr. *karna:- cf. karna:k. Xak. xr karnağu: er al-raculu'l-batin “a man with a large stomach" Kaş. I 491. D karınlığ P.N./A. fr. karın, s.i.s.m.l., usually for 'pregnant'. Xak. xi bedük (sic) karınlığ er “a man with a large stomach' (al-batin) Kaş. I 499. D kurunluğ P.N./A. fr. kurun; 'sooty'. Survives in SW Az. $urumlu; Osm. kurumlu (sic) Xak. xr kurunluf$ ev “a house blackened (muswwadd) by dense smoke” Kaş. I 499. Tris. V. GRND karınla:- Dev. N. fr. karın: survives in SW Rep. Turkish for (of a ship) 'to collide  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 707 
     
   
   
         DIS. with' (a jetty, etc.). Xak, xı (in a para. on the various meanings of Den. V.s in -la:-) ol anı: karınla:dı: bafanahu, "he struck him in the stomach” Xaş. III 345, 27; n.m.e. Dis. V. GRRD kara:r- Intrans. Den. V. fr. kara:; “to be, or become, black or dark”. S.i.s.m.l. Uy£. vir ff Man. kararmış kópüllüg 'with darkened minds! T'T III 8o: Bud. (of a dying man) tili ağızı kararıp “his tongue and mouth become black” Suv. 595, 14: Xak. xt tü:n karardı: “the night was dark” (azlama); and one says to:n karardı: “the garment (etc.) was black” (fsmadda) Kaş. II 77 (kara:rur (sic), kararma:k): xır(?) Tef. karar- “to become dark” zoo: Çağ. xv ff. karar- (spelt) “to become black or dark” (siyaàh wa tira) San. 268v. 18 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv ditto Quib 132: Kom. xiv ditto CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xv iswadda karar- Kav. 5, 14; (the Den. V. fr.) kara is karar- Tub. 83b. 5. D kurir- (kurı:r-) Hap. leg.; Inchoative f. of kurr:-; cf. kurğa:d-. Xak. xı kurirdi: ne:p “the thing began to dry' (tawaccaha . . . PL -cafaf) Kaş. Iİ 7; (kurırur (sic), kurtrma:k). D karart- Caus. f. of karar-; “to darken, or blacken'. S.i.s.m.l. Xak. xr ol anip Xo:nin kararttı: “he blackened (sawwwada) his garment” (etc.) Kaş. III 431 (karartur, karartma:k): K.B (the king was angry and) artuk kararttı mepiz "made his face even blacker” (i.e. fiercer) 629; a.o. 639: xıtı(?) Tef. karart“to blacken” zoo: Çağ. xv ff. karart- Caus. f.; siyah hardan “to blacken” San. 269r. 4 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 132. Tris. GRR D kararığ Dev. N./A. fr. karar-; "dark, darkness'. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viui ff. Man.-A M. III 9, 1 (tünerig); do. rg, rr (i) (alapadtur-): Man. kararığ nızvanıları “their dark passions' TT III 114: Bud. yeknip içgeknin kararığ 191pa “the dark doings of demons and vampires! TT VI 273; (in this world the sky is called “light”, and the brown earth below) kararığ “darkness” (the sun is called “light”, and the moon “darkness”, man “light”, and woman “darkness”) do. 319-21; o.o. Kuan. 66 (kógüzlüg); Hüen-ts. 185 (karaggu:). Mon. GRS 1 kars some kind of 'garment'; n.o.a.b. L.-w. in Pe., Doerfer III 1457. Uyğ. vr ff. Bud. PP 2, 4-5 (bodut-): Xak. xi kars 'an outer garment (al-kisà') of camels" hair or sheeps' wool Kaş. Iİ 348; (patch brocade with brockade) kars yama:ğı: karska: “and a vvoollen (garment, a/-şüf ) with woollen (fabric)” Kaş. IH 28, 17 (MS. has karış which makes no sense and is obviously an error for kars): Çağ. xv ff. kars (rhyming with pdrs) “a shawl (sdl) and anything (similar) which they wrap round their waists' San. 271 v. 29. GRS . 663 2 Kars an onomatopoeic for clapping; s.i.a.m.l.g. except NE, SW. L.-w. in Pe.(?), Doerfer İH 1458. Xak. xı one says ol kars kars aya: yaptt: 'he clapped (saffaqa) his hands'; it is an onomatopoeic for the sound of clapping Kaş. 7 348: Çağ. xvff. kars (rhyming with dars) dast bar-ham zadan 'clapping the hands', also called karş, in Ar. şafaqa San. 271v. 29. Dis. GRS karsa:k 'the steppe fox, Camis corsac'. An early l.-w. in Mong. as Rirsa (Studies, p. 232; Kom. 2553) and in Russian as korsak. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE where Tel. has the Mong. form Kirsa; in NC Kir. karsak is a generic term for 'fox, wolf', etc. and kirsa 'fox' (a word mainly used by women). L.-w. in Pe., etc., Doerfer İH 1459. UyÉ. viri ff. Bud. karsak is included in a list of predatory animals with wild cat, Siberian panther, and fox in Suv. $99, 16: Xak. xı karsa:k a/-fanah “steppe fox” Kaş. I 473: Çağ. xvff. karsak the name of an animal larger than a squirrel (sincab) which they import from the Rüs and "Türk (sic) countries; its skin is red, white, or parti-coloured, and more sweet smelling and warmer than those of squirrel or ermine; called in Pe. fanak San. 272r. 2: Kom. xiv “steppe fox (fur) karsak CCI; Gr.: Kip. xv banát áwá 'jackals! karsak(/sakal) Tuh. 7b. 9. S kursak See kuruğsak. D korsuz Priv. N./A. fr. 1 ko:r, "not responsible for loss”. Uyğ. vr ff. Civ. US. 16, etc. (korluğ, q.v.). Dis. ĞRŞ (D) karış perhaps Dev. N. fr. 3 *kar-, see 2 kart, karig- ; “a span, the distance between the tips of the outstretched thumb and little finger". S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. minor phonetic changes. Xak. xı karış al-;ibr “a span”, one says bir karış “one span” Kaş. I 369; a.o. II 365, 9; (in 171 28, 17 karış is an error for kars, q.v.): xiv Muh. al-şibr karı:ş Mel. 47, 7; ka:ris Rif. 141: Kip. xır al-şibr karış Hou. 20, 18: xiv ditto İd. 69; Bul. 9, ro: xv ditto Kav. 39, 12; Tuh. 20b. 8. D 1 karşı: Dev. N./A. fr. karış-, primarily a N./A. meaning “opposed, opposite; the opposite, a place opposite', e.g. the opposite bank of a river and the like, but often used as an Adv., “against” and the like. A l.-w. (not early) in Mong. w. extended meanings *obstacle, delay; evil, harm, ill-treatment', etc. (Kom. 847); s.ia.m.lLg. w. minor phonetic changes. Türkü vırı ff. karşısı:n 'his adversary'(?) IrkB 19 (a very obscure para.): Uyğ. vin ff. Civ. beği kişike yaraşmaz karşı bolur “he does not agree with the beg or people, he becomes hostile” TT VII 12, 7-8; adası karşısı [gap] perhaps “danger” (Hend.) do. 17, 10; in do. 24, 7(?); 25, 22 ölüm karşısı 'danger of death'(?); (on the dragon day) kişi bile karşı bolur "he gets at  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 708 
     
   
   
      664 cross-purposes with people' do. 32, 7; in TT VII P., an astrological text, the phr. köç karşı: occurs in 24, and köç ka:n karşıla:r in 11, 33, the first phr. being followed by 'the peach tree flowers'. "This can hardly be 1 köç “mügration”, and is prob. 2 köç “the hour is hostile'; ka:n may be “king” or some unknown word (?Chinese): Xak. xı karşı: al-didd 'the opposite'; one says tü:n kü:nniip karşı:sı: ol "night is the opposite to day”, karşı: “a disagreement. (al-ixtiláf) between two chiefs”, one says 0] beg anın birle: karşı: ol that beg disagrees(muxalif )vüthhim” Kaş. 1423; karşu: (sic, inerror?) süle: ağzı /ayhi mukáfalahu take the ficld and meet him face to face” III 272, 2: KB bu din dalı dunya dalı karşı ol "the branch of religion and the branch of the world are opposed to one another" 5311: xiti(?) Tef. (they will sit) yüzleri biri birine karsa karsu 'facing one another'; karsu keldiler "they came to meet him” 202: Çağ. xv ff. karşu (spelt) bar-à-bar tea mutahádi "face to face, opposite' Sar. 272r. 7: Xwar. xin(?) Oğuz xağanka karşu kéldiler “advanced against Oğuz Xağan” Oğ. 265-6: xiv karşu (usually with Dat.) “against” Quzb 133: Kom. xiv. karşt bardı “vent to meet him” CCG; Gr.: 194 (quotn.): Ktp. xiv kargu müqdbil “opposite” /d. 7o; al-muxalif I'i-jay! karşu Bul. 14, 8: xv. müqdbiluk karşında: Kav. 36, 1; müqabil karş (sic) Tuh. 35a. 13; 73b. 9 (a.o.o, with Poss. Suff.s): Osm. xiv ff. karsi/ karsu (ol-, bar-, etc); c.i.a.p. TTS I 427; II 594; İİİ 4317; IV 478. ?F 2 karşı: “(royal) palace”, prob. a l.-w. fr. 'Tokharian B kerctye same meaning; an early l.-w. in Mong. (Haenisch 62, Kow. 847) but becoming obsolcte so carly in "Turkish that in San. it is described as Mong. L.-w. in Pe., Doerfer 1 1460. Uyğ. viir ff. Bud. bara vayduri ertinin étilmig karşı “a palace adorned with choice cat's eyes” (Sanskrit vara vatdürva) TT V, p. 3o, note B 31, 1-2: xiv Chin,-Uyğ, Dict. tien 'palace! (Giles 11,202) karşı Ligeti 165; R II 207: Xak. xt karşı: qagri [-malik "a king's palace” , Kaş. I 423: 0.0. I 255 (emgen-); 717 374, 7: KB karşıka kirdi "he entered the palace” 1111; 0.0. 4118; 5263 (ordu:): xu(?) KBVP (in every town, country, capital) karşı 'palace' (and place) 26: xın(?) Tef. karışı (sic) “palace” 202: Çağ. xv ff. karşı the name of a district (zer/dyat) in "Fransoxiana to the south of Samarkand, also called Nasaf and Naxşab . . . in Mong. it means gür xàna “mausoleum” (Babur cited as the authority); the author of the Rawdatu'l-Safd said that the district was so called after a “castle” (gasr) built there, in Mong. karşı, and [lassáf said that karşı in Mong. meant káx-( xön ta bürgüh-i saltanat “the king”s palace and royal court” San. 272r. 3: Xwar. xıv karşı “palace” Qutb 133. D karşut Hap. leg.; abbreviated Active Dev. N. fr. karış-, syn. vv. 1 karşı, Xak. xi karsut al-didd "the opposite', like night and day Kaş. 1 ası.   DIS. ĞRŞ D karşa:ğ 1 lap. leg.; N.Ac. fr. karşa:-. Xak. xı karşa:ğ sgabru'[- tawb 'measuring a garment in spans'; hence one says ani) karşa:ğı: kö:r "see how he measures garments (etc.) in spans' Kaş. 1 464. D kurşa:ğ Dev. N. fr. kurga:-; survives in NE, several languages, kurçak/kurçağ/ kurçu:, NC Kir. kirgo:/kurgo:; Kzx. kursaw all meaning “barrel hoop; girth of a tent”, SW Az. ğurşağ, Osm. kuşak, "Vkm. ğuşak "belt", L.-w. in Pe:, etc., Doerfer III 1565. Xak. xı kurşa:ğ al-tanattuq. bi'l-mintaqa. 'girding oneself with a belt”: kurşa:ğ “a strip (furra) woven from wool used as the girth of a tent' (mintaqatuI-xibáa"); it is called ev kurşa:ğı: Kaş. 1 464: xiv Muh. al-minfaqa ku:şa:ğ Mel. 67, 7 (only); a/-hiyasa "belt" v.l. in one MS. kurşa:k do. öy, 9 (see 1 kur): Çağ. xv ff. kurşak kamarband “a belt”, also abbreviated and called kur San. 286r. 11; a.o. 285v. 22 (1 kur): Kip. xir al-Aiyága. ku:şak(/kur/ bé:l ba:ğı:) Hou. ro, 3: xiv kusak al-mintaga İd. 72 (for kutşa:k Hou. 21, $ and kugak Kar. 63, 18 sec kuçak). Dis. V. GRSD karış- Recip. f. of 3 *kar-, cf. karşı:, karsut, etc.; “to disagree with one another, to be opposite to one another', and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SC Uzb. and SW where BÉaris-/karig- is the Recip. f. of 1 kar-, “to mix with one another”, Uyğ. virff. Bud. (pacifying all quarrels and) karışmakığ “disagreements' U II 58, s (i), (mother and father, kin and kinsmen, maids and man servants) bir İkintike karışur "quarrel with one another” TT VI 64, o.o. do. 324 (kavig-), etc. , Sanskrit bhinna 'disunited, set at variance' ka:rışmışla:r TT |/III G.13; a.o. do. E.15: Civ. iki kópül karışdı: 'two minds were at variance! T'T I 71: Xak. xt böri: tr:şı: karışdi: 'the teeth of the wolf were at cross purposes! (fxralafat), this happens during its fasting days, because for one weck in each month the wolf does not cat and during that period lives on air; and one says tün kün birle: karışdı: "night and day are opposites' (ixtalafa), (in a verse) yn:y kiş bile: karışdı: "summer and winter had a disagreement and contended with one another” (ixtalafa swa tanázará); and one says ikki: begle:r karıştı:la:r “the two Pegs quarrelled and fought one another (ixtalafa . rea faqátalà); and one says ol mapa: yo:lda: karıştı: “he met mc (istaqbalani) on the road" Kaş. 11 97 (karisu:r, karigma:k); o.o. T 367, 23; I1 95, 8 (kirğu:y), III 11, 3: KB karışmaz yağılar "enemics who do not meet” 145; 0.0. 1053 (İçin), 2290 (2 kadit-), 2510 (esri:), 2384 (bodul-), etc.: (Çağ..(?) xv ff, karış- mamzic tva dáxil sudan “to mix, mingle' (Intrans.) San. 270v. 10 (prob. Rümi, immediately follows 1 karwhich is so described): X war. xiv karış- "to be mixed with' (birle) Qutb 134: Kip. xiv ixtalata "to mix” (Intrans.) karış- Bul. 32r.): Kom. xiv “to meet, defend'(?) karış- CCI; Gr.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 709 
     
   
   
       E EL ama s ya nn MON. V. ĞS- 665 D kırış- Co-op. f. of kir-, s.i.s.m.]. with meanings based on the later meanings of ktr-. Xak. xr ol mapa: yé:r kırışdı: “he belped me to scrape (f? qaşr) the ground' (etc.); also used for competing Kaş. II 98 (kirişu:r, kırışma:k). i D koriş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of kori:-, Xak. xı ol mapa: koriğ korisdi: "he helped me to protect the private property! (fi hifsi'l-hima) Kaş. II 98 (no Aor. or İnfin.). D 1 kuruş- Co-op. f. of kur-, s.i.s.m.l. with meanings derived from the later extended meanings of kur-, xı ol menin birle: ya: kurusti: “he competed with me in stringing (fi tawtir) a bow'; also used for helping Kaş. II 98 (kurugu:r, kurusma:k); a.o. 11:97, 14. D 2 kurus- (kurisg-) Co-op. f. of kuri:-, in the sense of simultaneous action of all parts of an organism. N.o.a.b. Xak. xi etme:k kamuf kurusdr 'acáffa'l-xubz. ba'duhu fi ba'd aczá'ihi “the bread became dry in all its parts” Kaş. II 98 (kuruşu:r, kuruşma:k). D karşa:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. karış, cf. karışla:-, Xak. xr ol to:nuğ karşa:dı: gabara'l-tawb "he measured the garment (etc.) in spans! Xaş. 111 286 (karşa:r, karşa:ma:k). D kurşa:- Den. V. fr. *kuris apparently a Den. N. fr. 1 kur; for a similar pair of words cf. 1 ba:ğ, 1 bağış. Survives vv. much the same meaning as kurça- in some NE languages and NC Kır., SE Türki kurşa-, SVV Az. ğurşa-, Osm. kuşa-, Tkm. ğuşa-. Xak. xt ol kaftan kurşa:dı: şadda mintaqata”l-qabd” "he fastened the belt of the robe” Kaş. IH 28; (kurşa:r, kurga:ma:k): Caf. xv ff. kurşa- (spelt) (1) kamar bastan "to bind the waist' ; (2) :hàáfa hardan tva dar miyàn giriftan "to surround, encircle” San. 284v. 8. D karsat- Caus. f. of karşa:-, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı ol bü:züg karşattı: agbara'l-kirbás “he had the linen (etc.) measured in spans” Kaş. II 337 (karşatu:r, kargatma:k); same phr., but adra'a properly “had measured in cubits' H 365, 7. D kurşat- Caus. f. of kurşa:-, survives in the same languages. Xak. xı men apar ku:r kurşattım “I told him to put on a belt (bi'l-tanattug) and he did so” Kaş. H 337 (kurgatu:r, kurşatma:k): Çağ. xv ff. kurşat- Caus. f.; kamar basta sáxtan wa thàáta farmudan “to cause to bind the waist; to order to encircle” San. 284v. 21. D kurşan- Refl f. of kurşa:-: survives in much the same languages. Xak. x1 er ku:rin kurşandı: “the man put on his belt” (tanattaqa 2o s. bi-mintaqatihi) Kaş. II 249 (kurşanu:r, kursanma:k) a.o. /7 255, 11. Tris. GRS D karşısız Hap. leg.; Priv. N./A. fr. 1 karşı. Uy. vir ff. Man. [gap]lar birle karşısız *without quarrelling with the . ..' TT III 106.  Tris. V. GRSD kurşatıl- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of kurşat-, "to be surrounded! Üyğ. vir ff. Bud. U 77 30, 29-30 (kavzatıl-). E karışıklan- in Uy£. vu ff. Bud. USp. 43, 6 is an error for katığlan-, this is the word required by the context and karışık is not a likely Uyğ. vvord. D karışla:- Den. V. fr. karış, “to measure in spans'. S.i.a.m.l.g. with minor phonetic variations. Cf. karşa:-. Xak. xı ol barçın karış1a:dı: 'he measured the brocade (etc.) in spans” (şabara) Kaş. III 33s (kamwsla:, karışla:ma:k): xiv Mu. şabara karışla:Mel. 27, 9; Rif. 110: Çağ. xv ff. karışla(spelt) tcacab kardan “to measure in spans” San. 270r. 7: Kip. xiv şabara karışla- Bul. sov. Tris. GRY VUD kurıya:/kuriya:kı: See 1 “kuri:, Tris. ĞRZ D karrza:n Hap. leg.; there is no doubt about the form of this word which is listed under the heading /fa'ilán after the crossheading -Z-; Den. N. fr. 1 karı:, but there is no other trace of a Suf. -za:n or anything resembling it. Xak. xr karrza:n al-sgayxu'l-haram “a decrepit old man” Kaş. 7 448. Mon. ĞS ka:s “the bark of a tree”, less specific than to:z "birch bark”. 'The word is entered under the cross-heading -S in Kas.; the spelling ka:z is prob. due to the fact that after long -a:- a -z might be expected. There is no widely accepted word for 'bark' in Turkish, most modern languages use kabik/kabuk a Dim. f. of ka:b and not an ancient word. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vri ff. Civ. kas “bark” H 11 16, 17: Xak. xı ka:z "the bark (gir/) of any trce'; hence it is quoted in the prov. ka:dın ka:sipa ("the birch tree for its bark”), [the züyl was changed [into] sir, because the záy came first (?,sabaqathd) and improved the euphony in speech (?,istacwfat hazzahá mina'l-kalám) but when sin followed it there was no room (macál) for it in speech and the záy was changed into sin, just as [in Ar. züy and şdd interchange]; (examples follow) Kaş. III 151 (the text is partially corrupt, but Kaş. seems to have been confused by the fact that after words ending in vowels an euphonic -S- is introduced before Poss. Suffs. and suspected the presence of a similar -S- in ka:S1pa:); o.o. of the same prov. / 356, 21; III 134, 14; 369, 22; a.o. I 382, 26 (kasuk, q.v.). Mon. V. ĞS*kas- Sec kasığ, kasna:-, etc. kis- 'to compress, squeeze, pinch', and the like; almost syn. vv, sik-, but the metathesis is prob. fortuitous. S.i.a.m.l.g. Türkü vırı (the leader of the revolt was the sad; he said  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 710 
     
   
   
     666 *collect the people" and I collected them) xağan-mu: kısayı:n tedim “1 said (to myself) "Shall I press (him to become) xağan?”” T 5; similar phr. T 6; usar idi: yok kisalim "if possible, let us completely annihilate them” T 11; similar phr. / E 32 and 34; I1 E 25; T zı, balbal kisdt: "thrust a memorial stone (into the ground)' O.3: Xak. xı kapuğ anıp ada:kin kisdi: “the door pinched (dağafa) his foot'; also used of anything that pinches something; and one says Ol anın to:nlukin kisdi: “he reduced (saqaşa) his allowance for the purchase of clothing” , also used when anything is held back (muna) from an allowance Kaş. Il 11 (kisa:r, kisma:k): KB özin kisğan er “a self-controlled man” 965; kalı kistact bolmasar “if (a father) does not control (his son)” 1220; (if a king is wicked, he ruins the world) kısığlısı bolmasa 'if there is no one to restrain him' (he strays from the path) 5282; a.o. 6366: xti1i(?) Tef. kis- “to squeeze! 209: xiv Muh. al-"aşr "to squeeze, press” kismak Mel. 35, 1; Rif. 120: Çağ. xv ff. kis- tang faşurdan "to squeeze tight! Sam. 296v. 24 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv ditto Nac. 7, 16: Kom. XIV “to compress” kis- CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv kigdti: dağata, kışti: (spelt kaşti:) “to shorten (qaşşara) a long garment” /4. 72: xv hazaqa "to compress! kiş- Kat, 76, 14 (misspelt xaraga); Tuh. 13b. 8; hágin 'suffering from retention of urine" kışıptır do. rzb. 8: Osm. xiv to xvi kts- “to compress, squeeze'; in several texts 7 TS 7 462; III 450; IV 515. kus- "to vomit”, s.i.a.m.l.g.ş cf. yarst-. Türkü vrır ff. Man. M 7 7, 13 (ança:): Uyğ. vun ff. Bud. (some mortals have gone to the next world) isiğ kan kusup “vomiting their life blood! TT X 4o: Civ. kusup ölür “he vomits and dies” TT VII zı, 7; kusa:r a:şağ ya:rsır "he vomits and regurgitates the food” VIII 1.8: Xak. xı er kusdi: “the man (etc.) vomited” (gd'a); and one says boduğ kusdi: nagsala'l-xidáb “the dye faded! Kaş. II ro (kusa:r, kusma:k): xiv Muh. qö”a kusMel. xo, 3; Rif. 114: Çağ. xv ff. kus- qay kardan "to vomit! San. 287v. 3: Xwar. xiv ditto Nahc. 395, s: 389, g: Kom. xiv ditto CCI; Gr.: Kip. xır taqayya”a "to vomit' kus(mis-spelt kug- ; also yondur- (sic ?; 4 yantur-)) Hou. 38. zo: xiv küş- qara İd. 72; taqayya'a kug- Bul. 41r.: xv ditto Kav. ro, 9; Tuh. 10a. 9; 83b. 8. Dis. ĞSA kası: Hap. leg.; possibly a 1.-w. Kaş. xt kası: “a wooden enclosure' (haşira) for sheep and other (animals), hence one says kası: ba:dım *] fitted together ('aqadtu) an enclosure” Kaş. III 224 (followed by Kası: the name of a place (matedi") of ours). Dis. V. GSDD Kistur- Caus. f. of kis-; s.i.m.m.l. Xak. xi beg anın ada:kin kisturdi: "the beg ordered that his leg should be compressed” (bi-daj; riclihi); also used when he tortured him with a noose ("dqabahu öpl-reahq), and one says MON.V. Ğs. (0D) anın aşın kisturdi: “he ordered a reduction (57-naqş) in the food (etc.) assigned to him”, and one says (MS. in error? agluhu “its origin is”) ol anın to:nin kisturdi: “he ordered the shortening (Pr-taqşir) of his garment! Kaş. II 190 (kisturur, kisturma:k), D kustur- Caus. f. of kus-: s.i.m.m.l. Xak. xı sücig erig kusturdi: “the wine made the man sick” (awwqa'a . . . fi'l-qayy); also used of anything when it makes a dye fade (arışola”l-xidáb) Kaş. 11 190 (kusturur, kusturma:k). E kistag- See kasnas-. Dis. GSG ?D kasığ morphologically a Dev. N. fr. *kasor *kast:-, cf. kasna:-; an anatomical term with a wide range of meanings; in 77 35o R. suggests that it was basically a part of the body on which there are folds in the skin or wrinkles, but kasna:- suggests that it was a part which wobbles. Survives in NW Kaz. kasik “the lower part (external) of thc stomach', and SW Az. ğasığ, Osm. kasık, "Fkm. ğa:sık 'groin', and in Az. also “scrotum” and “frontal bone", Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. in H I 95-6 a remedy for kasığ afmriB(n lies between remedies for an itching ulcer and tooth-ache; here perhaps “a pain in the jaw': Xak. xı kasığ al-sahr, that is, “the inside (dáxil) of the mouth on the right and left" Kaş. I 375: (in a note on Den. Vs in -la:-) like the expression ol ant: kasığla:dı: wakazahu "he hit him with his fist', from kasığ al-mádigán "the jaws, mandibles” III 345, 6: xiv Muh.(?) aglu'l-faxd “the base of the thigh” ka:sık (MS. £a:şığ) Rif. 142 (only): Çağ. xv ff. kasığ/kasık tahigàh “the hypochondria'; in Ar. xásira (*waist' ; and the people of the New World call their chiefs kasık (Haitian cacique)) San. 273v. 9. D kasuk Dim. f. of ka:s; lit. 'a small (piece of) bark”. N.o.a.b. Uyü. vrir ff. Civ. kasuk *bark' occurs several times in // J, (of a tree or shrub) 26 (ığa:ç), ror (cüsüm); also “peel” (of a peach) 38 (1 erük), (or garlic) 44 (osğun), and “the skin” (of a snake) 109 (spelt kasik): Xak. xı kasuk “a thing like a water-skin (a/-rüwiya) made of horse-hide in which milk, fresh or sour, is stored”: kasuk “the bark (há") of any tree'; its origin is Ka:s and the qüf is a Suff. (ziydda) Kaş. 1 382. D kısığ Dev. N. fr. kıs- , 'constriction, confinement”, and the like. N.o.a.b.; kisik 'confined, compressed! in several NW and SW languages is a parallel Dev. N./A. in -uk (Pass.) and not a later form of this word. Uyğ. vri ff. Man. TT HI 103-4 (ün-): Bud. TT IV, p. 15, footnote, l. s (tapiğ), VI 110-11: (kavrığ): Xak. xı Kisif a/-habs woa'l-diq “imprisonment, confinement”, one says ol beg kısığında: kaldı: “he remained in thc 5eg”s prison', and payment for something was demanded from him Kaş, I 376: Çağ. xv ff. kisik şrddat 'difficulty, hardship! San. 297v. 8 (quotn.): Osm, xiv to xvi kisu “pain,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 711 
     
   
   
      rf c ZI ET DIS. V. GSL- 667 embarrassment', and the like; in several texts TTS I 463; 11 633; IV 516. D kusığ N.Ac. fr. kus-, “nausea, vomiting'. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. (demons) kusuğ aşlığlar *who devour vomit! U II61,11: Xak. xı kusiğ ai-quyá' 'vomiting'; one says ant: kusığ tutti: “he had an attack of vomiting' Kaş. 1 376. kusik a vvord used for several kinds of tree fruit. Survives in most NE dialects as kuzuk normally 'cedar nut', but in Sor 'pine kernel'. L.-w. in Pe. as qusüg *pine kernel”, Doerfer III 1490. Xak, xı kusik al-cillawz 'pine-kernel'; slave girls (a/-dma") are named after it Kaş. I 382; (Den. V.s in -la:- cannot be formed from all N.s) e.g. it is not permissible to form a V. kusikla:di: fr. kusik ai-cillawz İİİ 347, 12. D kısğa: N./A.S. fr. Kíis- , “short” and the like. S.ia.m.].g., usually as kiska, but SW Az. isa, Osm. kisa; TTkm. ğısğa, Türkü vur Ix. 23 (uvul-): Uyğ. vin ff. Bud, U II 42, 27-8 (özlüğ): Xak. xı (prov., cut wood long (uzu:n) but) temür kısğa: kes “cut iron short” (gagir); ie. shorter than you need because it can be made Ə Kaş. IH zo, n.m.e.: KB yaşı kısğa 1siz “the shortlived sinner' 348; elig kısğa tuttum “1 have not been grasping' 6079; o.o. 964 (yaşlığ), 1533: xın(?) Tef. kiska “short” (not long; not tall) 209: xiv Muh. al-qaşir (opposite to “long” u:zu:n) kisğa: Mel. 48, ro, krska: Rif. 142 (in margin kr:sa:), kisğa: 152 (only); gagura "to be short” kişğal- (crasis of kişğa: ol-) 30, 7; kisal- 114; Çağ. xv ff. kiska ürdh “short” San. 297v. 8: Xwar. xiv kiska/kisxa “short” Qutb 149; Nahc. 435, 16; 436, 2: Kom. xiv “short” kisğa/fkiska CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kap. xıl al-qagir (opposite to 'long' uzu:n) kışka:/ kışa: Hou. 25, 15: xiv kişğa: al/-qaşir, in the Kitab Beylih kışka:, Tkm. kışa: » 72: XV qaşir kıska: Kav. 28, 4; 2.0.0.; Tuh. 29a. 2. D kısğa:ç N.I. fr. kis-; s.i.a.m.l.g. w. minor phonetic changes for 'pincers, tongs, (a crab's) claw', and the like; occasionally also for animals like 'the crab', and metaph. 'grasping, avaricious'. Uyğ. vii ff. Man.-A M I 8, ro (o1): Bud. 'shafts'(?) TT V 26, 116 (boğuz): Xak. xi kısğa:ç a/-halbatan "tongs, pincers' Kaş. I 485: xiv Muh.(?) kalbatán kisğa:ç Rif. 160 (only): Oğuz xı kısğa:ç “a small black animal (durcaybba sawdád) which bites men” Kaş. I 455 (?crab): Kom. xiv 'tongs' kiskaç CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiv kişğaç al-mi'sár "a wine, or olive, press'; kigkac al-sarafàán “crab” İd. 72, al-saratán kiska: € Bul. s, 1: xv al-baxil 7. kızğaş (sic, vocalized hazğiş) Kav. ; Tkm. sarafan kişkaş (in margin kisaş, fep. ilengiş (for *ilingec, not an ancient word, with yeneş in margin) Tuh. 19a. 9: Osm. xv ff. kısaç “pincers, tongs'; c.i.a.p. TTS I 462; II 632; III 449; IV 515. D kısğak Hap. leg.; N./A. of Habitual Action fr. kis- ; “mean, stingy, grasping'; cf. kısğan-. Uyf. viir ff. Bud. (generous men who give alms are scarce) kısğak buşı bérmez tınlığlar üküş “mean men who do not give anə are numerous' TT VI ş (some MS. read kız kıvirğak saran for kısğak). D kusğak N./A. of Habitual Action fr. kus-: n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. (his legs ache, his mouth is dry) kusğak bolur “he becomes prone to nausea” TT VII 25, s: Kip. xv side-note (in same hand) to the discussion in Tuh. 83b. of V.s and Dev. N.s, and kukgak (metathesis of kuşkak) from kusti. ' Dis. V. ĞSĞD kısğan- abbreviated Refl. Den. V. fr. kisiğ, "to be mean, grasping', and the like. S.i.s.m.l. in NE and SW. Türkü viii ff. Man. M III 21, 1-4 (i) (ağı): Uyğ. vini ff. Man.-A (hide your hidden treasure) arığ nomka: kısğanmatın “vithout being miserly regarding the pure doctrine”(?) M TİT ır, 8 (ii): Xak. xı er tava:rın kısğandı: "the man was miserly about spending money” (tadayyaqa bi-infaqi'l-mál); also about other things Kaş. I7 250 (kısğanu:r, kisğanma:k): Kom. xiv 'niggardiy” kısğanıp CCG, Gr. 208: Kip. xim hasada “to envy, grudge” kiska:n- Hou. 36, 7: xiv kişkan- ğöra mina'l-gira "to be jealous, to grudge' ld. 72; ditto kısğan- Bul. öşr.: xv baxila 'to be miserly” kızğan- (sic) Tuh. 8b. 4; şahha wa baxila ditto. kızğan- in margin do. 21b. ır: Osm. xvii. kiskan- (spelt) in Rümi, vk ma hasad burdan "to be envious, iealous" San. 297v. 5. Tris. ĞSĞ D kasukluğ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. kasuk. Xak. xı kasukluğ er "a man who owns a skin vessel (razwiya) full of sour milk” Kaş. 7 497. D kusikliğ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. kusik. Xak. xı kusıklığ er “a man who owns pinekernels (c///atoz) Kaş. I 497. Tris. V. ĞSĞD kasığla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. kasığ. Xak. xı ol kulin Fkasidla:di: wakaza 'abdahu wakza(n) “he punched his slave (on the jaw)" Kaş. III 336 (kasığla:r, kasığla:ma:k), a.o. 345, 4 (kası$). Dis. GSL D kisil Pass. Dev. N. fr. kis-; “a narrow gorge'. N.o.a.b., but also used as a geographical name of a place near Kucha, now called Kızıl, mentioned in an Uyg. Bud. colophon, U 7 14, 9 and a Civ. document USp. 17, 8-9. Uy£. viri ff. Bud. Himavant tağ kisilında kirip “entering a narrow gorge in the Himalayas' U II 26, 3. Dis. V. GSLD kısıl- Pass. f. of kis- , “to be squeezed, compressed', and the like. S.i.a.m.l. g. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud, TT IV, p. 15, note, l. 5 (tapil-): Civ. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 712 
     
   
   
     668 DIS. V. (if a man's hair is cut on a Leopard day) öz yag kisilur "his life is shortened' TT VII, 33, 6; a.o. H İT 8, 27: Xak. xı elig kapuğka: kisildi: “his hand was. pinched (indagafa) in the door'; also used of anything when it is squeezed (tadayyaqa) between two objects and cannot get out (baqrya fihi) Kaş. II 135 (kisilur, kisilma:k): KB tiriglik kisildi: "life is for a limited period” 6486: Çağ. xv ff. kisil(spelt) tang faşurda şudan “to be squeezed tight San. 297r. 5 (quotn.). D kisilt- Caus. f. of kisil-, 'to blockade' (a fort) and the like. Survives in NW Kaz. kisilt- "to force one's way into (something) R II 806. Türkü viri 77 E 37 (kar£u:). D kıslın- Hap. leg.; abbreviated Refl. f. of kısıl-. Xak. xi kislindi: ne:n “the thing was squeezed and pinched (tadayyaqa swa indağata) between two objects', as for example the foot is held (tabqd) between the two straps of a stirrup or between the door and the threshold Kaş. /T 251 (kislinu:r, kislinma:k; the reference seems to be to a primitive loop-strap stirrup without a stirrup iron; see kisma:k). Dis. GSM D kisma:k Conc. N. fr. kis-. Survives in NE Şor kispak “gorge, defile” R 7I 817 (cf. kisil); for the meaning see kıslın-. Xak. xı ktsma:k | sayrayt [-ríkábi'l-'aridayn. yakünu'l-rikab baynahumá “the two broad straps of the stirrup between which is the stirrup” : Üstirrup” here must be something like a platform on the stirrup leather, not a stirrup iron of modern shape): kısma:k a/-twahaq “a noose” Kaş. 1 474; a.o. II 219 (kisruş-). Dis. GSN F xasnı: Hap. leg.; no doubt an İranian ].-w. cognate to Pc. Ads 'endive, chicory'; a/-'ukka means normally “a skin for making butter in'; its meaning here is obscure. Xak. xr xasnt: “an Indian drug (dated) put in a child's 'ukka so that he can suck it and put on flesh" Kaş. I 4535. Dis. V. GSND kısın- Hap. leg.?; Refl. f. of kis-; cf. kisğan-. Xak. xı er tava:rin kisindi: baxila'l-racul bi-infaq siatihi "the man was mean about spending his property'; also used of a man suffering from strangury (a/-háqrn avcpl-haqtb) when his urine is retained Kaş. 11 155 (kisinur, kisinma:k). D kasna:- Den. V. fr. *kasin Dev. N. fr. *kas- or *kasr-, cf. kasığ, kasınçığ, "to shiver with cold”. This V. and its der. f.s are all pec. to Kaş.ş it is possible, but semantically improbable, that NE Bar. kasnal- 'to be chipped, slightly broken! R 77 354 is the Pass. f., since this V. is Intrans. Xak. xı er tumluğka: kasna:dı: daraba't-raculu'l-hanaka'l-a"la "ala”l-asfal mina'l-bard 'the man struck his upper jaw against the lower because of the cold' (ie. his teeth chattered); also used of GSL a dog when it whines (/rerra) because of the cold Kaş. III 3o2 (kasna:r, kasna:ma:k); kirdi: bodu:n kasnayu: "the people came in shivering with cold" (rrta'ada . . . mina'l-bard) II 223, 11 (misvocalized kusnayıc ); İTİ 147, 15. D kasnat- I!ap. leg.; Caus. f. of kasna:-. Xak. xr tumluğ ani: kasnattı: “the cold made him shiver (ar"adahu) so that he struck his upper teeth against the lower with the cold” Kaş. 11 35o (kasnatu:r, kasnatma:k). D kasnaş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of kasna:-, mis-spelt Aistag- in the MS. Xak. xit kamuğ tumluğdın kasnaşdı: “the dogs all whined (harrat) because of the cold and shivered” (irta'adat); also used of others Kaş, II 221 (kasnasdi: (sic for kasnaşu:r) kasnaşma:k). Tris. GSN D kasınçığ cither Den. N./A. fr. *kasin, sec kasna:-, or Dev. N./A. fr. *kasin- Refl. f. of *kas-; n.o.a.b. Uyf. vür ff, Man. kasinçığım ü[cün] kadğurarmen '] am uncasy because of my timidity' M 11 8, s: Bud. (the power of Kuan-si-im to bestow divine grace) kasınçığ uluğ tétir “is called. terrifyingly great” Kuan. 60; in v.s to TT VI 88-9, *demons below the earth, torturers and killers" kasınçığlar is inserted in one MS. and korkınçığlar in another, both meaning "terrifters”, D kusınçığ Hap. leg.; a N./A. of the same character as kasınçığ ultimately der. fr. kus-, “revolting” Xak. xı kuş bala:sı: kusınçığ “a nestling before it is fledged is something by which everyone who sees it is revolted” (şay” yastaqdir minhu man ra'áhu ; with a puppy it is the other way round) Kaş. /İIT 232, 14; n.m.e. Dis. GSR ?D Kisir perhaps Dev, N. fr. kis- in the sense of having the sexual organs constricted ; 'sterile, barren”, of a woman or animal. S.i.a.m.l.g. in the same sense, also more widely of trees, etc.; cf. arsalık, L.-w. in Pe., etc., Doerfer 111 1491. Xak. xi kisir 'barren' (al-'aqim) of a woman or any quadruped; and one says kisir kisra:k “a barren mare! (ramaka börü) Kaş. 1 364; a.o. HI 88 (yoza:-); in I 236, 3 adğır kisir is an error for adğır kisrak: xiv Muh.(?) al-na'ca "evve” kisir Rif. 172 (only; this is an addition to the original text, prob. some words have fallen out between the two parts of this entry): Çağ. xvíff. Kisir "an animal which is not pregnant! (öbistan) San. 297v. 8: Kip. xır al-icru'l-'ágir "a barren mare” kisir kisrak Hou. iz, 8: xiv. Kisir al-hà'il İd. yz: xv 'agim kisir. Tuh, zab. 9. D kisra:k Dim. f. of Kisir; originally "a young mare which has not foaled”, later, more generally, "a mare'. Survives in its original meaning in NE, NC, some NW languages and SW Az. ğısrağ and for “mare” in SW Osm., not used in SE, SC. Cf. be:, Xak. xr kısra:k a/-ramahatı”l-fatiya "a young mare”,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 713 
     
   
   
      MON. GS and in Oğuz “a mare of any kind” Kaş. 1 474 (prov.); about ro o.o. nearly always translated “mare”, in some contexts clearly a mare which has already foaled: xiv Muh. al-hicra mare! kisra:k Mel. 69, 12; Rif. 170 (adding 'a mare in foal or with a foal” bé:): Çağ. xv ff. kisrak mádyán 'mare'; the 'Türk-i Moğol use yunt and Rümi yund Sas. 297v. 6: Xwar. xiv kisrak 'mare' Quib 149: Korn. xiv "a young mare' kistrak (sic) CCI; Gr.: Kip. xii al-hicr kisrak (and “a mare with a foal” be:) Hou. 12, 7; 8.0. do. 12, 8 (Kisir): xiv kigrak ai-ramaka İd. yz: xv al-hicra kısrak Kan. 61, 19; Tuh. 13a. 3. Dis. V. GSRD kisur- Caus. f. of KiS-; 'to shorten, abbreviate'. S.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı ol uzun ne:pni: kısurdı: “he shortened (qasşara) the long thing” Kaş. 7I 78 (kisurur, kisurma:k);: KB 176 (uzatıl-), 4052: (Kip. xv in the discussion in Tuh. 83b. of V.s and related Dev. N.s kisar- in kıska, kisar- seems to be a later form of Fkisğar-, cf. kisğan-, rather than this word). D kısruş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of kisur-. Xak. xı ol anar kısma:k kısruşdiı: “he helped him to shorten his stirrup leather” (fi qaşr sayrt'[-rikáb; etc.) Kaş. II 219 (kisrişu:r, kısrışma:k sic). Tris. GSR D kasirku: (?kasırğo:) *whirlwind'; listed in Kaş. under -K-, which excludes the possibility of a scribal error, but prob. a dialect form of kasırğu: Dev. N. fr. *kasir- Caus. f. of *kas-. Survives in SW Az. ğasırğa, Osm. kasirfa; the -a suggests an earlier -0:, for which there is other evidence in the case of this Suff. Xak. xr kasırku: al-i'sár “vhirlvvind” Kay. I 489: Kip. xii al-zawba'a “hurricane” kaşırka: (unvocalized) Hor. 5, 13: xiv kaşurka al-zawba'a İd. 72: Osm. xvin kasırğa (spelt) in Rimi, gird-bad 'whirlwind', also spelt kaşırğa, in Ar. /"sdr San. 273v. 6, kaşırğa is another word for Rümi VU dola 'whirlwind' do. 225v. rg (dola is not traceable elsewhere). Tris. V. GSRD kisraklan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. kısrak, Xak. xı er kisraklandı: “the man became the owner of a mare' (ramaka) Kaş. II 275 (kisraklanu:r, kisraklanma:k); a.o. 279, 8. D kisirkan- Refl. Dev. V. fr. kis-; “to be miserly' and the like. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. kisirfan-. Cf. kisğan-, kisin-, Xak. xı er tava:rın kısırkandı: “the man took great pains to preserve (faşaddada . . . fi tahaffuz) his vvealth and vvas afraid to spend it” Kaş. II 263 (kisirkanu:r, kisirkanma:k; verse). Mon. GS 1 ka:ş properly 'eyebrow', hence metaph. "the edge or side” of a thing (cf. “the brow of a hill  669 in English). S.i.a.m.lg. in both meanings, except that in NE the Mong. l.-w. kómósge is generally used for 'eyebrow'; metaph. meanings include "the brow (of a hill), saddle bow', and the like; in some it is used in oblique cases with Poss. Suffs. in such phr. as kaşımda “in my presence, near me”, SW "Tkm. ğa:ş. L.-w. in Pe., etc., Doerfer III 1391. Türkü viti (when [I die, my relations”, beg's and people's) kózi: kaşı: yavlak boltaçı: “eyes and eyebrows will be sore (with vveeping)” I N 11 Uy£. viri ff. Man, kaşı kórtlem “my lovely eyebrowed one” M I1 8, 7: Bud. TT X 436-7 (tü:): Civ. opdin kaş tepreser “if the right eyebrow tvvitches” TT VII 34, 11: xıv Chin.-Uyğ. Dict. met 'eyebrow' (Giles 7,714) kaş Ligeti 164: Xak. xı ka:ş hácibu'l-'ayn 'eyebrows'; (2 ka:ş follows here); ka:ş the side, edge, summit', etc. (har/f . . . wa şafiruhu) of anything'; hence one says ya:r ka:şı: “the edge of an eroded river-bank” (etc.) Kaş. III 152; I 424 (kavşı:), 524, 6; İİ 328 (kırçat-): KB (the partridge with blood-red beak and) kaşı kap kara “dead black eyebrovvs” 76, tüğme kaşın “do not frown' 191; 0.0. 69 (étin-), 8o (kalik), 77o (açıt-), etc.: XII(?) At. 205 (alın), Tef. kaş 'eyebrow; mountain ridge” 206: xiv Muh. al-hàcib ka:ş Mel. 46, 1; Rif. 140: Çağ. xv ff. kaşıda yarrında “by his side” Vel. 322 (quotns.) ; kaş (ı) àábr&amp; 'eyebtow' (quotn.); (2) bar-a-bar wa hudür 'facing, (in the) presence (of)' (quotn.) San. 273v. 23: Xwar.xitm kaş with Poss. Suffs. *beside' ' 4/22: xini(?) kaş 'eyebrow' Oğ. 6:xiv ditto Qutb 134, MN 104, etc.: Kom. xiv 'eyebrow' kaş, 'saddle-bow' kaş CCI; Gr. 195 (quotn., see 3 al): Kip. xir al-hácib ka:$ which also means((1) see 2 ka:ş), (2) qumnatu'l-cabalt'[-mumtadda tüla(n) là irtifá'a(n) 'the brow of a mountain stretching horizontally not perpendicularly” Hou. zo, 2: xiv kaş al-hácib, also “the crest of a hill” (ra'su'l-rábiya) İd. 72; a.o. do. 41 (çat-): xv al-hàcib ka:ş Kav. 6o, ır, 74, 18; Tuh. 12b. 5; şaqif “a large rock" kaş do. zob. 2 (prob. (korum(?): safir) omitted): Osm. xiv ff. kaş 'eyebrow' and with metaph. meanings noted in several phr. 7TS I 430; II 595-6; III 418; IV 480. 2 ka:ş properly 5jade'; survives with this meaning, usually in the phr. kaş taş, in SE 'Türki; in other areas, where jade is unknown, it came in the medieval period to mean more generally “precious stone”, and in particular “the bezel of a finger ring”, in these meanings survives in NC Kir., some NW languages, and SW Az. Bas; Osm. kaş: Tkm. ğa:ş, see 2 ya:t. Uyğ. xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. yü shih 'jade stone" (Giles 1r3,63o0 9,964) kaş taş Ligeti 163; R II 389: Xak. xı ka:ş hacdra sáfiya “a translucent precious stone”, white and black; the white sort is used in finger rings (yuxtam) as a protection against thunderbolts, thirst, and lightning; ka:ş ógü:z two rivers which flow one each side of the city of Khotan; one is called ürün ka:ş ögü:z, the white translucent stone is found in it, and the river is called after it; the other is called kara: ka:ş  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 714 
     
   
   
     670 MON. GS öğü:z, the black translucent stone is found in it; this precious stone is not found in any part of the world except these two rivers Kaş, III 152; 0.0. 1 330, 25 (Savur-, q.v.), kimin bile: ka:ş bolsa: yaşın yakma:s “if anyone has ka:ş with him, that is a white translucent stone used in finger rings (yafaxattum bihi), lightning does not strike him', because this is its nature; and if it is wrapped in linen and put in a fire, it does not burn and neither does the linen 7/1 22, 4: xiv Müh. al-yagm 'jade' ka:ş Mel. 75, 9; Rif. 178; al-fass “bezel” gö:z ka:ş 53, 8; 150: Çağ. xvff. kaş... . (3) sigin-i anguştar "the bezel of a finger ring” San. 273v. 27: (Xwar. xiv kaş in neçe kaş içre ğavvhar izleğeyin looks like a misreading of taş “in however many stones I search for jewels' Qutb 134): Kip. xii fagsu'l-xátim “the bezel of a ring” ka:ş Hou. 17, 20; a.o. do. zo, 2 (1 ka:$): xv ditto kays (sic); and 'a ring with a bezel' is kayşlı: yüzük Kas. 64, 11. kış ^winter'; c.i.a.p.a.l. Türkü viri (in my 38th year) kigin “in the winter! 7I S 2: Uy£. vir ff. Civ. ak kigiy az "you have few white winters" TT I 159: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. “vinter” kiş Ligeti 166: Xak. xı kis al-şitd” *winter' Kaş. I 332 (prov.); about 10 o.o., once spelt ki:s: KB yayı boldi kiş “his summer has become winter! 367: xın(?) Tef. kis “vinter” 210: XIv Muh. al-şiti” kiş Mel. 28, 15; 79, 15; Rif. 184: Çağ. xv ff. kiş is the three months of the winter (zamtstüm) season, and yaz the three months of the summer season; they also call the first six months of the (Pe.) year yaz and the second six months kış Sarr. 297v. 22 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv kış “vinter” MN 36, etc.: Kom. xiv ditto CCI, CCG; Gr. 208 (quotns.: Kip. xiv kiş al-şifrd”, kig ("with a long hasra”) faslu'l-5ità' “ih? season of winter? ld. 72; al-şitd” kiş Bul. iş, 6: xv ditto Kav. 36, 16; Tuh. 21a. 6. ko:ş “a pair; one of a pair', and the like; s.i.a.m.].g. with some extended meanings; l.-w. in Pe., etc., Doerfer 111 1361. Cf. kos-. Xak. xi ko:ş at the name used for “a king”s led, or spare, horse” (canábatu'l-malik): ko:ş “a pair” (al zatcc) of anything; hence in Oğuz "scissors” (al-migrád) are called ko:ş biçe:k that is "a pair of knives” Kaş. III 126 (prov.); kos (sic) kiliç af-sayfdn 'two swords! 7 359, 4: xiu?) Tef. koş kos anlardın “some families of them” 215: Çağ. xv koş 'two full cups at a banquet which they call çift” (Pe. cift) (quotns.); koş koş beraber beraber ve (ifta rifta “in pairs! (quotn.) Vel. 340-1; koş iu with -0-”) (r) xàna wa manzil "house, dwelling” (there is no other trace of this meaning): (2) cift tva gawc (quotn.); (3) metaph. di? piyala 'two cups' which the wine-bearer gives in immediate succession (quotns.), (4) cift-i gátv-i hör "a pair of working oxen' (quotn.) and also mahall-i zirá'at "an arable field” San. 288r. ro: Oğuz xı Kaş. 7 331 (kuş), /Z/7 126 (see Xak.); 221-2 (kara:): Xwar. xiv koş (1) "a pair' (of anything); (2) “a double drink' (as a toast) Quib 141; MN 48, etc.: Kip. xiv (1) ko:ş al-farasu'l-cánib. "a led, or spare, horse'; (2) kos a/-qirdn 'a conjunction. of planets İd. 72; (2) only Bul. 2, 15. kus 'bird'; often used as a sort of appendage to specific names of birds. C.i.a.p.a.l. L.-w. in Pe., etc., Doerfer III 156:.. Türkü viii ff. küş Oflt: either generically "birds” or specifically “young birds! /[rkB is, öğüz kugr “river birds' do. 43; several occurrences as appendage, e.g. toğan kuş do. 4, 44 etc.: Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A takığu kuş 'domestic fowl' M I 36, 2 etc.: Bud. uçuğma kuş kuzğun 'flying birds and ravens' U //T 32, 4; a.o.o.: Civ. kök kalıkta uçar kuş 'birds flying in the sky” TT I 23; a.o.o.: Xak. xı kuş fbird” (al-fayr) a generic term, then some of them have specific names (yufarraq); "the white falcon” (a/-bazi) is called ürün kuş, kara: kuş 'eapgle' (a/-"ugüb); tevey kuş 'ostrich' (a/-na'ám); (PU) yon kuş 'peacock' (a/-?d”üs), (VU) il kuş 'vulture' (al-rahama); kara: kuş al-mugtari müna”l-nucüm “the planet Jupiter'; one says kara: kuş tuğdi: 'Jupiter has risen' (fala'a), it rises at dawn ('inda'l- subh) in their country; (Oğuz phr. follows); kız küş “a bird like the i (abü baraqiş) in colour! Kaş. I1 331; many : KB ular küş “the partridge” 75: xıu(?) At. (fortune) kus teg ucar 'flies away like a bird” 224; Tef. kuş 'bird' 219: xiv Muh. al-tayr ku:ş Mel. 72, 13; Rif. 175: Çağ. xv ff. kuş parvána 'moth' Vel, 340 (quotn.; as pointed out in Sam, a mistranslation); kuş (with -u-") fuyur 'bird(s) (San, 288r. 24 (quotns.; correction of Vel.): Oğuz xt although the following entry is embedded among names of birds it seems to belong to ko:sş, kara: koş atrüf axfaf”l-ibil “the sides of camels' feet" Kaş. 1 331: Kom. xiv fbird” kus; 'eagle' kara kuş CCG, Gr.: Kip. xii al-fayr muflaqa(n) “bird” in general ku:s . . . a/-"uqdb kara: kuş . . al-qubaysa "little sercech owl' ba:y kug (and many other names without kus appended) Hot. 9, 19 fL: xiv kus a/-fayr, kug kuyrugi: (bird”s tail') a/-dummal 'ulcer' İd. 72; Bul. 11, 9; IO, 2; al-macarra “the Milky Way" kuş yoli: do. 2, 13: xv (muflaqu'l-) tà'ir ku:ş Kav. 39, 85,62, rz, Tul. 23b. 6; al-'uqáb kara: kuş, al-na"üm dewe: kuş Kav. 62, 13-14. Mon. V. GSkış- “to deviate' and the like; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı er yo:ldin ki:şdi: “the man deviated (mála) from the road”, also used of the sun when it declines from the zenith (zalat “an kabidr'l-samd") Kaş. HI 182 (kişa:r, kişma:k): xin(?) Tef. kış- “to turn away' (from God) and the like 21o. koş- “to conjoin, unite (two things); homophonous vv, ko:s. S.ia.m.lg. vv. this and extended meanings, e.g. 'to string together (verses), to compose (a poem), to harness (animals). Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. (if I fall behind in my payments) birke bir kosup bérürmen “TI will pay two (rolls of cloth) for every one (overdue)” U Sp. 8, 7; üpüp kugnup süpükin yıpar birle koşup 'combine hoopoe's bones 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 715 
     
   
   
     DIS, ĞŞĞ with musk' (and rub them on the face) TT VII 23, 6: Xak. xi ol ko:yka: eckü: kogdi: “he united (garana) the goats and the sheep"; also used for uniting anything with something else; and one says Ol yrr kogdir zazama'l-fazal wa'l-si'r “he composed an ode or poem” Kaş. II 14 (koşa:r, kosma:k): K B ukar erse şir ham koşar erse öz “if he understands poetry and composes it himself' 2631: Çağ. xiv koş- (1) amwát-rá nubüha hardan "to eulogize the dead”, (2) ham-rüh hardan wa ámixtan “to put (travellers) on the road together, to mix” Sar. 287v. 5 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv kog- "to compose (poetry) Qutb rar: Kip. xiv kogcanaba (to lead (a horse) beside someone") wa qarana İd. 72; a.o. do. 7 (ebe:): xv qarana koş- Tuh. 30a. 11; (alqd “to meet” koş- do. sb. 12 and rassama ay algà koş- do. 17b. 5 are prob. mis-spellings of kavuş-): Osm. xiv ff. koş- “to add (one thing to another), to associate, to attach (someone to someone else)”, c.ia.p. T'T.S I 486; I1 652; III 478; IV 542. Dis. GSA D koşa: Gerund fr. koş- used as a N. or Adv.; s.i.s.m.l. L.-w. in Pe., etc., Doerfer 111 1567. Xak. xi (the mother being deceitful makes the bread thin; the son being intelligent) koşa: kapa:r 'filches a double ration' Kaş. III 33, 27; kutluğka: koşa: yağa:r "the man favoured by heaven gets a double ration of rain” 71] 6o, 24; n.m.e.: Xwar. xiv koşa kaşında “in your two eyebrows! MN 271: Osm. xiv to xvi koşa “a pair, double”, in several texts T'T:S I 485; I1 652; IV 542. Dis. V. GSA*kaga:- See kaşap, kaşan-. kaşı:- "to scratch' and the like, s.i.a.m.l.g. except NE(?) vv. minor phonetic changes, including final -1:- — -a:-. Xak. xı ol meni: kaşı:dı: “he scratched (Jiakka) me” Kaş. III 267 (kaşı:r, kagrma:k; prov.); same prov. I 438, 15: xiv Müh. hakka ka:gi:- Mel. aş, 7; Rif. 108; al-hakk kaşı:mak 36, 5; 122: Çağ. xv ff. kaşıp kagryup Vel. 323; kaşı- (spelt) xöridan "to scratch'; boyun kaşı- “to scratch one's neck' is an idiom for şarmanda şudan “to be confused, disconcerted” San. 273v. ro (quotn.): Xvvar. xıv kaşı- “to scratch” (oneself) Qutb 135: Kom. xiv “to scratch” kaşa-/ kaşı- CCI, CCG, Gr.: Kip. xin masaha min mashi'l-faras "to curry-comb a horse' kaşı:- Hou. 36, 16; hassa min hassi'l-faras ditto kaşı:-, hakka kagt:- do. 39, 13: XIV kaşı- hakka ld. 72: xv ditto Tuh. 13b. 3; Kas. 77, 9 (-S- represented by Öd” with three superposed dots and the remark “betvveen cim and şir”), Dis. GSC D kuşçı: N.Ag. fr. kuş, 'falconer'.. S.i.s.m.l. L.-w. in Pe., Doerfer III 1564. Uyğ. vim ff. Bud. (in lists of people who kill animals) kus[c1] PP r, 7; kusci TT IV 8, 57: Xak. xı K B (in a list of royal servants) kuşçi 4148. 671 Dis. V. GSDD kaşıt- Caus. f. of kaşı:- , s.i.s.m.l, Xak. xt er tanrn kaşıttı: “the man had his body scratched” (ahakka) Kaş. II 307 (kaşıtu:r, kaşıtma:k), a.o. 7 sıq: Çağ. xv ff. kaşıtCaus. f., xördndan “to order to scratch” Sar. 273V. 20. Dis. ĞŞĞ kaşak ?pec. to Kag.; but a l.-w. in Buriat Mong. as xalaxan, the context in /7 328, 17 suggests that al-halfá here means “bulrush” rather than 'alfalfa'! Xak. xı kagak al-haifá Kaş. I 383; a.o. II 328, 17 (terpek). D kaşığ Dev. N./A. fr. kaşı:-, pec. to KB. It clearly has a metaph. meaning of some kind, perhaps 'trim, conscientious”. Xak. xi KB "if a wazir is clean-shaven, he is kaşığ: if a tazir is kaşığ, he does his work well' 2217; “a brave man must be kaşığ and clean-shaven; his reputation must be widespread and he must be famous. He must be kaşığ to evil-doers, so that they fear him, and kind to the vvell-behaved so that they love him” 2298-9. D kaşuk Pass. Dev. N. fr. kaşı:-, 'spoon', lit. 'something which has been hollowed out by scratching'. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE, usually as kaşık, SE Türki kaşuk/koşuk, L.-w. in Pe., etc., Doerfer 111 1393. UyB. vini ff. Civ. bir kaşukça “about one spoonful' H 7 169; a.o, İl 18, 63 (aşnu:): Xak. xı kaguk a/-mil'aqa “spoon” Kaş. İ 383 (prov.): xiv Muh. al-mil"aqa ka:şuk Mel. 68, 14; Rif. 169: Çağ. xv ff. kasuk ma'rüf 'well-known' (i.e. as a ].-w. in Pe.) San. 274r. 4 (quotn.): Kom. xiv “spoon” kaşuk CCI; Gr.: Kip. xır al-mil'aga ka:şu:k Hou. 17, 10: xiv kaguk ditto /d. 72: P4 ditto ka:şuk Kav. 54, 16; 64, 7; Tuh. 348. 6. D koşuğ Dev. N. fr. koş-, normally "poem, song' but with other potential meanings, see koşuğluğ. Survives as Kogu with several such meanings in SW Osm. “The forms kosuk/ kosak; NW Kk. kosak in some modern languages seem rather to be the Pass. Dev. N. which would have the same meaning. Xak. xı koşuğ al-si'r wa'l-racaz toa"Hqaşö”id 'poem, metre, odes! Kaş. I 376 (verse): Çağ. xv ff. koşuk ürgüstak uşülinda irlanan terkib "a composition sung in the örğüştak mode” Vel. 342 (quotns.), kosuk “a kind of composition" (tasnif); a technical description by MNated'i follows San. 288v. 5 (quotn.). kaşğa: originally (of an animal) *with a white head and darker body” or *with a white blaze on the forehead'. An old word ending in -ğa:, s.i.a.m.l.g. except SW vv, the same meaning, and sometimes (of a man) 'bald-headed'. L.-w. in Pe., etc., Doerfer III 1495. Xak. x1 kaşğa: ko:y al/l-arxam mina'l-fanam “a sheep with a white head and a black body”, kaşğa: at al-farasu'l-mubarga' "a horse with a white blaze on the forehead'; a camel with a white blaze (al-asqa') is also called this Kaş. 7 426 (followed by Kaşğa: Buğra:, the name of 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 716 
     
   
   
     672 DIS two places): Çağ. xv ff. kaşka (spelt) (r) “a horse or other animal with a blaze of white or some other colour on the forehead' ; (2) Rüni), (3) “a kind of weapon (silált) made of iron which they fasten on a horse's forehead on the day of battle! San. 274r. 1: Kom. xiv 'bald' kaşka CCG, Gr.: Ktp. xiv kaska: al-£urra sa blaze on a horse's forehead' İd. 72: xv ditto Tuh. 26b. 6: Osm. xvi kaşka . . . (2) in Rümi, dilir pig-cang "a brave advance-guard' San. 274r. 2. D kişki: N./A.S. fr. kiş, 'wintry' and the like. S.is.m.l. in NE. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. üç aylar bolur kışkı ödler "three months are the winter season” Suv. 589, 12-13: Xak, xi KB (of the signs of the Zodiac) üçi kiski “three belong to the winter' r42: xiu(?) Tef. (in the surnmer you gave me) kiski ni'matni *the amenities of the winter' 210. D kuşğa:ç unusual Dim. f. of kuş, 'sparrow'; s.i.s.m.l. in NE, SE. Xak. xı kuşğa:ç al-'usfür 'sparrow' Kaş. I 455: xiv. Muh.(?) al-'ugfür (serge:; in margin) kuşka:ç Rif. 175 (only). VUF kışğun a corruption, or dialect form, of ışğu:n, q.v., an Iranian l.-w.; neither word is vocalized. N.o.a.b. Kaş. xı kışğu:n 'fresh reeds (al-qaşab) which are eaten by cattle'; kışğu:n dialect form (/uğa) of işğu:n “sorrel” (al-ribüs) Kaş. I 440. Tris. ĞŞĞ D kaşukluğ Hap. leg.?; P.N./A. fr. kaşuk. Xak. xı kaşukluğ aya:k qaş"a düt mil'aga “a bowl] with a spoon” Kaş. 7 497. D kaşukluk A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. kaşuk, s.i.s.ni.l, in such. meaniogs as 'spoon rack”, Xak. xr kagukluk (MS. kaşık)k) müpüz “a horn suitable for making into a spoon” (a/-mil'aqa) Kaş. I so4. D koşuğluğ P.N./A. fr. kosu£; n.o.a.b. Uy£. viui ff. Bud. yüğrük atların koşuğluğ kaplida olurup 'seated in a chariot harnessed to swift horses! Suv. 625, 5: Çağ. xv ff. kosukluk mamzüc wa ámixta “mingled, mixed' San. 288v. 9. D kaşğalak Dev. N. fr. a Den. V. fr. kaşğa:, 'coot, bald coot”, S.i.s.m.L; e.g. SC Uzb. kagfaldok. L.-w. in Pe., etc., Doerfer 111 1493. Xak. xi kaşğalak “a kind of waterbird smaller than a duck” Kaş. 7 528 (verse): Çağ. xv ff. kaşkaldağ (sic) “a black water bird, the flesh of which is rose-scented', in Pe. mdğ ("a kind of cormorant; a kind of pigeon”, Srermgass) San. 273v. 29. Tris. V. GSGD kaşukla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. kaşuk. Xak. xi ol ba:lığ kaşukla:dı: “he licked (la'iqa) the honey in the spoon' (al-mil'aqa) Kaş. İl 338 (kaşukla:r, kaşukla:ma:k). D kaşuklan- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of kaşukla:-. Xak. xı er kaşuklandı: “the man owned . 6ŞĞ a spoon' (mil'aqa) Kaş, 11 268 (kaşuklanu:r, kaşuklanma:k). Dis. ĞŞL D kaşlığ P.N./A. fr. 1 ka:ş, usually preceded by a qualifying word, "having . . . eyebrows', S.i.s.m.l. Uyğ. viri ff. Man. toliliğ bulit teg (PU) tonki kaşlığ “vvith frozen(?) eyebrows like a cloud full of hail' M 1H i1, 16-17 (tonkt is Hap. leg., perhaps a misspelling of *topki, N./A.S. fr. 1 top): Xak. xı Kaş. III 239 (karvr): (xiv Mu. (al-kundur. "Trankincense” sakiz); xidabı?l-hacib 'dye for the eyebrows' kaşlık if. 162 is the parallel A.N. (Conc. N.); in Mel 63, 15 xıdabıcl-hdcib has fallen out and kaşlık comes below al-kundur ; see sakiz). D kigla:$ Conc. N. fr. Kigla:-; "winter quarters'; opposite to yayla:ğ. S.iaam.l.g. with some phonetic changes and extended meanings, e.g. in SW Osm. kisgla is merely "barracks”, L.-w. in Pe., etc., Doerfer I11 1496. Türkü vırı ff. (I am a predatory eagle . . .) kıznl kaya: kişlağım “a red rock is my winter quarters! JrkB 51; a.o. do. 56 (kuşluğ): Xak. xı kışla:ğ a/-maşattd” *winter quarters Kaş. I 464 (prov.); two o.o.: xiv Muh. al-magattà' kışla:ğ Mel. 76, r, kr:şla:ğ Rif. 179: Cağ. xvff. kişlak “a warm place in which one spends the winter', in Ar. maşif (error, maşif is “summer quarters) San. 297v. 25. D Kisglik A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. kiş, survives in some NW and SW languages. Cf. kışla:ğ, Xak. xı kışlık “a residence for the winter" (baytu'l-gatatwoi); also anything that has been made ready (u'idda) for the winter Kaş. 1 474: Kip. xıv kişlik al-praşatıd” "a winter station” İd. yə. D kuşla:ğ Conc. N. fr. kuşla:- ; n.o.a.b, Xak. xı kuşla:ğ a/-mafira, that is "a place where there are many birds and they are hunted” Kaş. I 465: Çağ. xv ff. Xucandnın avlağı kuşlağı bisyür yaxşı dur “in Khojend the areas for hunting game and wild birds are particularly good” R II 1029, quoting Bábur. D kuşluğ P.N./A. fr. kuş, “full of birds'. S.i.s.m.l. Türkü viu ff. (ID am a stallion . . .) kuşli:ğ iğaç kislapim “trees with lots of birds in them are my winter quarters! JrkB 56. D kuşluk A.N. (and Conc. N.) fr. kuş, a specifically Western word surviving only(?) in SW Osm. kuşluk, Tkm. ğuşluk (r) “the early part of the day” (when birds are most active) (2) 'aviary, place haunted by birds”, and the like. Oğuz xı kusluk a/-dalrea "the early part of the forenoon” Kaş, 1 474: xii(?). Tef. ditto 219: xiv. Mh. al-ğadöü” "early morning meal' kusluk Mel. 65, 10; Rif. 164; al-dahà *forenoon' ku:sluk 8o, r, kusluk 184: Çağ. xv ff. kuşluğ (sic) (r) çöşrgah “the time of the mid-morning meal'; (2) murgiyat toa. fayriyat "a bird-like character” (quotn.) San. 288v. 9; 2.0. do. 178v. 10, where it is described as Rümi: Kip. xi al-daha kusluk, derived    
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 717 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. GSN(mugtaqq) from the fact that the birds then go to look for food Hou. 28, 14: xiv kusgluk (r) dahwatu'l-nahàr ; (2) al-naglu'l-'arid "an arrow with a broad head used for shooting birds' İd. 72: xv al-dahá kuşluk Kav. 36, 13; Tuh. 72b. ro, al-dahwatu'l-kubrá ulu: kusluk Kas. 36, 13. Dis. V. GSLD koşul- Pass. f. of koş-, “to be joined, united (to something)' and the like; also Intrans. 'to join (something Dat.)'. S.i.a.m.l.g. Uyğ. vir ff, Bud. Sanskrit dharmayukta 'yoked to dharma” (the true doctrine) nom üze: koşolmış TT VIII A.33: Xak. xi bi:r ne:p bi:rke: kosuldir “one thing joined (qarina) another”, also used when someone else joins them (qaranahuı gayruhu); hence one says yır kosuldi: “the ode was composed' (nuzima) Kaş. II 135 (kosulur, kosulma:k); bu kuzi ol sağlık birle: koşulğa:n “this lamb is constantly in the company (yuqdrin) of that ewe' / 520; ölüğ birle: kosuldi: “he has been united with the dead” /7 128, $, sağlık sürüğ kosuldi: “the flocks have been collected (dummat) for milking” 111 102, 19: Çağ. xv ff. koşul-(-ğuçı) kogul- ve ula- Vel. 341; koşul-/koşuş- (both spelt) ham-ràh şudan wa ámixta şudan “to be fellow travellers, to be intermingled” San. 287v. 28 (quotns.): Kap. xiv koşül- igtarana İd. 72. D kaşla:- Den. V. fr. 1 ka:ş, survives in NE kaşla-/kaşta- “to fit a saddle-bow; to fasten the reins to the saddle-bovv to walk along the bank (of a lake, etc. R IJ 396-8; and SW Osm. kasla- 'to make a sign with the eyebrows' (also “to fit a bezel to a ring”, which is a Den. V. fr. 2 ka:ş). Xak. xi (ob arik kaşla:di: "he made a side bank ('arim) for the canal'; also used for hitting a man on the eyebrow (al-hácib) Kaş. IİI 299 (kasla:r, kaşla:ma:k). D kışla:- Den. V. fr. kış, "to spend the winter, to go into winter quarters'. S.i.m.m.l.g. Türkü vii 7 N 8, TI E 31 (1 iımğaş): Uy£. vil Su. E 5 (1 1mfa:): Xak. xı er evinde: kışla:dı: “the man spent the winter (tagattà") at home” (etc.) Kaş. 111 299 (kışla:r, kişla:ma:k): xiv Muh.(?) 'abara'l-sità' “to pass the winter' kışla:- Rif. rrz (only): Çağ. xv ff. kigla- ğışlah hardan, that is "to spend the winter in a warm place' San. 297v. 9 (quotns.): Kom. xiv “to spend the winter! kışla- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv şattd” kigla-. Bul. şər. D kuşla:- Den. V. fr. kuş, "to hunt birds”. S.is.m.l. Türkü vı ff. toan ógüz kusi: kuşlayu: barmil:ş “a falcon went hunting river birds! IrkB 43: Xak. xı beg kuşla:dı: "the beg hunted (şdda) birds” Kaş. III 299 (kuşla:r, kugla:ma:k): Xwar. xiv kusladitto Qutb 146. D kışlat- Caus. f. of kışla:- , s.i.s.m.]. Xak. xı ol anı: evinde: kışlattı: "he accommodated him for the winter (şaftdhu) in his house”, that is he took care of him and looked after him 8641125 .673 (ta"ayyarahu wa hafagahu) Kaş. II 348 (kışlatu:r, kışlatma:k). D kuşlat- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of kuşla:-. Xak. xı ol apar kuş kuşlattı: “he urged him to hunt (“ala iştiyad) birds' Kaş. 11 348 (kuglatu:r, kuglatma:k); a.o. // 343, 16. D koşlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. ko:ş. Xak. xı er ózipe: at koşlandı: "the man provided himself with a spare, led horse' (caniba) Kaş. II 252 (koşlanu:r, koşlanma:k). D koşlun- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of koşul- in its Intrans. sense. Xak. xı iki: ne:p koslundi: 'junction was effected between (qurina bayn) the two things”, this is Intrans. (lazim), just as one says that one sheep is close in the company (yugárin) of another and their heads are kept level (yastaw?) on one rope; also of two horsemen when they bring their horses together (aqrazıd) and travel in such a way that their heads are level Kaş. 17 251 (koşlunu:r, koşlunma:k). Tris. V. ĞŞLD kışlağlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. kışla:ğ. Xak. xı ol bu: yé:rig kişlağlandı: “he reckoned that this place vvas his vvinter quarters (magattáhu) and spent the winter in it” Kaş. II 273 (kışlağlanu:r, kışlağlanma:k). D kuşlağlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. kuşla:ğ. Xak. xı xa:n bu yé:rig kuşlağlandı: “the xa:n took this place as a hunting place for birds' (mistád mutayyara) and hunted birds in it Keg. II 273 (kuşlağlanu:r, kuşlağlanma:k). Dis. ĞŞN D kaşan Dev. N./A. fr. *kaga:- which must have meant something like “to relax (something), to relieve the pressure on (it)', cf. kaşan-, "lazy, sluggish, idle', of men, horses, etc. S.i.s.m.l. in SE, NC, NW vv. this meaning. L.-w. in Mong. kajag, same meaning (Kotr. 767). From this basic meaning it came to mean *underdeveloped, lean” and became a lL-w. in Pe. and other languages as qaşang “slim, elegant” Doerfer III 1498. Cf. erinçiğ. Xak. xı when a slave is being abused (subba) you say to him kagar “you vile fellow' (yd la'im) Kaş. III 370: Çağ. xv ff. kaşan (spelt) xira a sumuc "lazy, unpleasant' San. 273v. 28 (quotns.). ?E koşü:n See korugjrn. S koşnı: See konşı:, Dis. V. ĞŞND kaşan- Reft. f. of *kaga:-, cf. kaşan, “to urinate', esp. of horses. Survives in SW Az., Osm., cf. sıd-. Uyğ. viri ff. Civ. (a woman suffering from strangury . . .) bat kaşanur *promptly urinates” H 7 39; a.o. do. 128: Xak. at kaşandı: “the horse urinated' (bala), also of other animals, but particularly horses Kaş. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 718 
     
   
   
     674 II 155 (kaşanu:r, kaşanma:k): Çağ. xv ff. kaşan- (spelt) bate! Rardan "to urinate', in general but esp. of horses San. 273v. 22: Xwar. xiv kaşan- (of a horse) “to urinate' Qutb 134: Kip. bála'l-faras at kaşandı: Hou. I2, 21. D kaşın- Refl. f. of kaşı:- “to scratch oneself”. S.i.s.m.l. in NW, SW, often as kaşan-. Xak. xı kaşınma:k al-hikka “irritation” Kaş. I 261 (emrit-), n.m.e.: xın(?) Tef. kaşın"to scratch oneself” 210: Çağ. xv ff. kaşınxwud-rá xáridan "to scratch oneself” San. 273V. 21. Tris. GSN D kaşanığ Dev. N. (Conc. N.) fr. kaşan-, n.o.a.b. Uy£. viri ff. Bud. (demons) kaşanığ İçteçiler *who drink urine” U 7I 61, 13: Civ. kaşanığ yoli “the urinary duct' H 7 38. Mon. GY F 1 kay 'street'; l.-w. fr. Chinese chieh “street” (Giles 1,434; Middle Chinese 2df), see U IV, p. s4(Index). N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viu ff. Bud. kay beltir sayu “every crossroads" U IV 8, 13; kaydakı oğlanığ “children in the streets! U III 65, 5 (i); kay (mistranscribed 2:y) sayu bodun sayu bar£u 'going to every street and every people” USSp. 97, 33. S 2 kay See ka:d. S 3 kay See ka:fiu:, S 1 ko:y See 1 ko:fi, S 2 ko:y See 2 *kotfi, kuy Preliminary note. Kuy 'the tveomen's apartments, the private part of a dwelling', a l.-to, fr. Chinese kuei, same meaning (Giles 6,440; Middle Chinese kuoi) is very common in O. Kir. and occurs in Türkü vin ff. Yen. İt is also prob. that it reappears in Uyğ. as küy, but Müller transcribed this as kün, and was perhaps right, see 2 kün, It is possible that, voith their. different social arrangements, the Turhs took this l.-w. as meaning merely “a secluded spot' and that 2 ku:y below is the same word. F 1 kuy 'the women's apartments', Chinese l.-w., see above. Occurs only in the Loc. in the stock phr. below. Türkü vii ff. Yen. (1 have been parted from) kuyda: kunçuylıma:) “my consorts in the women's apartments! Mal. 27, 2: kuyda: kadaşıma: kuncuyima: “from my kinsfolk and consorts in the women's apartments' do. 29, 3: O. Kir. ix ff. the phr. occurs nearly a dozen times, kuyda: kuncuyim. Mal. 3, r, kuydaki kuncuyimga: 6, 4; kuyda: kuncuyimfa: 7, 4 etc.: Uyğ. vut ff. Bud. küydeki U TİT 42, 23-4 (kirkin). 2 ku:y basically perhaps “a secluded spot” or the like. Survives in most NE languages as kuy “a cave! R I1 887; Khak. xuy; Tuv. kuy, perhaps also behind other longer words like SW Osm. kuytu 'sheltered from the wind; DIS. V. GSNa sheltered nook', although the morphology of such words is obscure. Xak. xr ku:y garáru'l-seádi “the bottom of a valley! Kaş. IJI 142; (who can withstand his arrows?) tağığ atip uğrasa: ö:zi: kuyr: yirtilu:r 'when he shoots purposefully at a mountain, the centres and bottoms of the valleys (aresafu'l-zeádi wa garáruhu) are torn to pieces! 177 106, 15; a.o. 111 65, 14 (oğruğ). Mon. V. GYkay- (2 *ka:d-) although it has not actually been noted, various der. f.s make it certain that this V. must originally have been *ka:d-. 'The basic meaning was prob. 'to bend or turn oneself', hence 'to bend in respect' and 'to turn away or back”, Survives in NE Alt., Tel. kay“to turn back” R JI 4; Khak. xay- “to pay attention to (something)'; Tuv. xay- 'to visit, supervise; to deviate from'; (to look) xaya *backwards'; and in SW Osm. kay-; Tkm. ğa:y- with some extended meanings hard to connect with the original one. Türkü vırı ff. Yen. Mal. 28, 8 (kalin): Uy&amp;. vin ff. Bud. kirtü nomuğ (v.l. nomka) kaymadin 'paying no respect to the true doctrine" TT VI 41-2: Xak. xı kada:gipa: kaydı: "he showed respect ('afafa) to his kinsmen'; prov. kadaş (MS. kadaş) tö:miş kayma:duk, kadın t6:miş kaymış “if you said “kinsman”, he showed no respect to him (Id yaltafit ilayhi), if you said "relative by marriage", he showed respect ("afafa) to him”, (verse); and one says ke:ru: kaydı: “he turned back” (iltafata halfa(n) Kaş. III 245 (kaya:r, kayma:k), 0.0. İ 403, 22 (same prov.); İT 45, 26 (ay1k); and see 2 kaya:: Osm. xiv kay- “to turn aside or away'; in two texts 7 TS 11 607. S Kiy- See kid-, S koy- See kod-. 1 kuy- (of a horse) “to shy'. Survives in NE Sag. kuy- R II 889; Khak. xuy-. Xak. xı at kuydt: 'the horse (etc.) shied' (nafara) Kaş. III 246 (kuya:r, kuyma:k). S 2 kuy- See kud-. Dis. GYA 1 kaya: 'a rock', more particularly 'a sharp upstanding rock or rocky cliff'. An early Mong. word Rada (Haenisch ss, Kow. 770) has exactly the same meaning. This suggests that this was originally *kada:, perhaps a Dev. N. fr. 2 *ka:d- in the sense of “a leaning object'. S.ia.m.lg. except SE, NC. Türkü vir ff. UR de (1 1mja:); sr (kişla:ğ), a.o.0.: Yen. bepkü kaya: “memorial rock” Mal. 39, 1; mepkü: kaya: do. ş: Uyğ. viri ff. Civ. kuruğ kayada suv akar 'water flows among the dry rocks” TT VII 29, 13: Xak. xı kaya: al-şald mina'l-cabal *a hard, bare place on a mountain" Kaş. III 170; o.o. III 7 (yalt), 19 (yalim): KB (some are born wise, some tough, some brave and) kaya teg yalim “as hard as a rock” 6393; a.o. 1535: xiti(?) Tef. kaya 'cliff' 193: 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 719 
     
   
   
        DIS. V. GYD- 675 Çağ. xv ff. kaya küh-i buland "a high mountain! San. 281r. zr (quotn.): Kom. xiv “rock” kaya CCG, Gr.: Kip. xır al-şaxr "a mass of rocks' kaya: Hou. 17: xiv kaya: al-şaxra “a rock” İd. 76: xv şahrd "a broad desert” kaya Tuh. 22a. 1; (after al-nahr 'river) mandi"ı”l-sayl "the bed of a'torrent' kaya do. 36a. 6; wáàdi 'valley' (tere (d-) and) kaya do. 38a. 7. D 2 kaya: Ger. fr. kay-, used only in the phr. kaya: bak-, kör-, and the like in the sense “to look back, or behind one”, Such phr. survive in NE Tel., Tuv. R 11 89 (xaya Pal. 454). It seems clear that this is the only form and that the spelling ktya which might be taken as a similar Ger. fr. kiy- (kid-) is an error. Uyğ. vin ff. Chr. (they threw the stone in the well) anca barıp kaya kördiler "and so going on they looked backwards' U I 8, 11 (Müller, in error, kay *what?'): Xak. xı kaçış bolsa: kaya: kórme:s "if there is a panic, no one stops (yu'arric; should be “looks back”) for anyone else” Kaş. / 369, 8, (the hunted wolf) kaya: kö:rüp baku: ağdı: turned back towards me (iltafata ilayya) and when he sav me he climbed” 77] 219, 17: KB 4095 (eşimsin-, -Arat Rıya, but the MSS., though they vary, do not confirm this): xin(?). Tef. kaya bak- 195. : S kayu See ka:üu:. Tris. GYC D kaya:çuk morphologically Dim. f. of 1 kaya: but meaning "a small rock plant'. R 77 92 lists a SW Osm. phr. kayacik ağaçı “a kind of tree', not noted elsewhere. Xak. xi kaya:çuk “a sweet-scented mountain plant (nabt); I reckon (ahsibuhu) that it is al-zarnab (translations vary widely, the most plausible are 'saffron' (Steingass) and 'the fragrant leaf Flacourtia cataphracta! (Red.)) Kaş. HI 177. : Mon. V. GYDD kayt- See kadit-. Dis. GYD E kiyit in the phr. eméekler kıyıtlar in St. 117, I5 seems to be an error for kiyin (kif), *pains and tortures'. SD kayda, kaydan See ka:fiu:. Dis. V. GYDD kuyit- Hap. leg.; Caüs. f. of 1 kuy-; vocalized both kuyit- and. kuyut-. Xak. xr ol ati kuyittt: “he made the horse shy” (anfara) Kaş. II 326 (kuyitu:r, kuyitma:k). D kaytar- Caus. f. (with unusual vocalization) of kayt- (kadit-); “to turn, turn back” (Trans.).: S.i.a.m.]l.g. except NE. Oğuz xı ol atığ kay-: tardi: “he turned (şarafa) the horse from the direction in which it was going” ("an toachihi), the Turks say katardı: Kaş. IJI 193 (kaytarur, kaytarma:k); a.o. (not matked Oğuz) Oğrak sü:sin kaytarğa:n “he drove back (radda) the Oğrak army by his firmness' 7 $16, 35; in 517, 16 the Xak. form katarğa:n, which is the only possible one in this section, seems to have been altered to kaytarğa:n by a second hand: xıı:(?) Tef. kaytar- "to tum (someone) avvay” 194: Çağ. xv ff. kaytar(-mak etc.) döndür- "to turn back” (Trans.) Vel. 327 (quotns.); kaytar- (spelt) Caus. f., bar-gardánidan ditto; and metaph. qay wa istifrüğ hardan “to cause to vomit” San. 28or. 6 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv kaytar- 'to turn, turn back, return” (Trans.) Qutb 129; Nahe. 286, 17: Kip. xri arca'a ğayrak “to turn someone back” kaytur- (sic) Hou. 34, 17; radda kaytur- (sic) do. 4o, 13: xiv (ka:yıt- raca'a); kaydur- (sic) radda; the Imperat. of the first is ka:yit and of the second kaytar (sic); the original form was ka:yıtdur, then the -d- was assirnilated to the -t- and it became kayıttur, then it was shortened by omitting one of the assimilated (-t-s), the second, and it became kaytur, then the -u- became -a- for the sake of euphony (falaba(n) h”l-taxfif), we reckon that it was the second -t- that was elided for two reasons, (r) the first (-t-) is part of the root (aşltya) and the second of a suffix (z4'ida), and the suffix part would be elided before the root part; (2) there is a precedent for the elision of the -t- and the retention of the -r- in such words as İçür-, keçir- İd. 77: xv (radda in the meaning of raca"a kayt-), but raddada, Caus. f. in the sense of “closing” a door or bale of merchandise (raddada'l-bàb asoi'l-sal'a) is kaytar- Kan. 78, 2. D kaytur- Caus. f. of kay-; survives in SW Osm. kaydir-; Tkm. ğa:ydır- but only in extended senses. Xak. x1 (ol) apar kayturdi: translated “he urged him to help his brother and show respect to him” ('affiit "alayhi) Kaş. III 193 (kayturur, kayturma:k): (Kip. see kaytar-, ?mis-spelt). D kiytur- Caus. f. of kty- (kid-); survives only(?) in NE Tel. kıydır- (r) “to order to cut on a slant'; (2) “to lose one's way' R II 699; Khak. xıydır- (r) only, and NC Kzx. neke kiydir- “to have a marriage celebrated” R IT 699 (neke is Ar. mikah “marriage"). Xak. xı ol anar kamis kıyturdı: “he ordered him to cut the reed (etc.) on a slant' (bi-gat' . . . muharrafa(n)) Kaş. III 193 (kiyturur, kiyturma:k). D kuytur- Caus. f. of 2 kuy- (kud-); s.i.s.m.l. for "to order (someone) to smelt (metal), Xak. xı ol menip eliğke: su:v kuyturdi: "he ordered (someone) to pour (5f-şabb) water on my hands” Kaş. III 193 (kuyturur, kuyturma:k). D kaytart- Caus. f. of kaytar-; survives in NW Kaz, R II 3s. Xak. xı 1tka: keyik kaytartsun yujriya'l-kalb "ald raddi”l-şayd ilaynü "let him incite the hounds to drive the game back to us” Kaş. III 429, $, n.m.e. D kaytış- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of kayt(kadit-); vocalized Rayıfış-, but in a section  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 720 
     
   
   
     676 containing Dis. V.s, Xak. 1x ola:r ikki: kaytışdı: “they two turned round and looked ('aqaba) at one another” Kaş. III 19s (kaytışu:r, kaytışma:k). Tris. V. ĞYDD kaytarıl- Pass. f. of kaytar-; survives in NW Kaz. R II 35. (Xak.) xin(?) At. kada kaytarılmaz katığ ya kurup 'fate cannot be turned back when it strings its strong bow' 462; Tef. kaytarıl- "to be turned back” 195. Dis. GYG S kayak See kafak. VUD kayığ Dev. N./A. fr. kay- (2 *ka:d-); the existence of this word is doubtful; in the entry in Kaş. the qaf carries a fatha and the yà' is unvocalized, but this entry follows koyuğ and the normal order of words with the same consonants in Kaş. is the usual one, fatha, damma, kasra; in this position therefore kıyığ, a Sec. f. of kıdığ, would be expected, and the resemblance between the translations of this word and kiyik in Kaş. makes this all the more probable. 'The word in Vel., if correctly translated, is more likely to be a Pass. Dev. N./A., but San. does not mention this meaning and lists only kayuk (kayğukK), and it is very prob. that Vel.'s is a mistranslation. Xak. xi kayığ (?kıyığ) yér ai-mawdr'vl-munkarifa 'ani'l-cádda wa ğayrihi "a place at an angle from the (main) road, etc.” Kaş. III 166: Çağ. xv ff. kayık/kayuk kaykı . . ardına egilmiş ma"ndsınd "bent backvvards” Vel. 329. S kayık/kayuk See kayğuk. S kıyığ See kidig. D Kiyik (*kiduk) Pass. Dev. N./ÀA. fr. kiy-; 'crooked, cut on a slant', and the like. Easily confused with kıyığ (kidiğ) in some modern languages. NE Tel. kiyik 'anger' R 77 716; Khak. xıyıx "injury, insult” may belong here; the word certainly survives in SW Osm. kıyık *minced, chopped up' (the translation 'fainting fit” in. R 7I 716 is not confirmed elsewhere); 'Tkm. ğiyik "crooked”, Uy£. viri ff. Civ. kímnip közin ağızın yél tartip kiyik kilmiş erser “f a man”s eyes or mouth are made crooked by demoniacal possession” (i.e. a paraİytic stroke) H 7 124: Xak. xi “a breach of promise' (xulfu'l-wa'd) is called kty1k; and it is used as an Adj. ( yisaf), one says kiyik kişi: *a man who breaks his promises” (muxlàf li'l-ida); kiyik ne:p 'anything crooked', for example a reed-pen cut at an angle (jmuharraf) Kaş. III 167; a.o. 1 7o, ro: KB (he served his master faithfully and) kayırça kıyik kilmadı *did nothing which was as crooked as a sanddune” 1723: Çağ. xv ff. kiyik sih küga 'triangular' (quotn.), also used for a triangular towel or woman's veil (quotn.) San. 3oor, 4. kuya:ğ *breastplate, cuirass'; an early İ.-vv. in Mong. (Haenisch 74, Kom. 945); survives as DIS. V. GYDkuyak in most NE languages (including Tuv.); SE Tar., NC Kzx. R H goi. Cf. küpe:, 2 yarık. Xak. xi KB (he gave him the rank of wazir, a seal, a title, and together with a standard a drum and) kuyağ "a breastplate' 1036: Çağ. xv ff. kuyak “a piece of armour (stlah) like a katlaw which they wear on the day of battle” , the difference between it and the katlaw is that they sew the scales (barghàá) of the latter on its surface, and those of the former they put between (the layers of fabric, dar miyàn mi-gudarand) San. 292r. 6 (katlaw is a medieval word, presumably der. fr. 1 kat "layer, fold"). D koyuğ (koduğ) Dev. N./A. fr. koy(ko:d-); of a liquid, 'thick, viscid'; the semantic connection is not close, but cf. koyul-. S.i.a.m.l.g. with minor phonetic changes and extended meanings. L.-w.in Pe., etc., Doerfer lIl 1589. Uy£f. xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. 'thick, viscid” koyuğ Ligeti 168; R I1 528: Xak. xt koyuğ ne:p a/-/axinecl-ğaliz mina'l-máyi'àt 'a thick, viscid liquid'; hence al-rubb 'fruit syrup” is called koyuğ sücig saráb raqiq galiz “a weak (?non-alcoholic) thick drink” Kaş. 711 166: K B (listen to the man) bilgi koyuğ “vith profound knowledge' 3829: xin(?) Tef. koyu yaşıl “dark green” zir: Çağ. xv ff. koyuk “viscid” (ğa/iz) of a liquid, also *which has sediment at the bottom” Saz, 292v. 18: Xvvar. xiv koyuğ kan taki irin kusti “she vomited thick blood and pus” Nağe. 395, 5. S kuyuğ Sce kuduğ. kuyka: “skin, fur”, A L-w. in Mong. kuyika "the skin of the scalp” (Koso, 855, Haltod 212). NE Kaç,, Koib., Sag. (and Tuv.) kuyğa R /7 89o, NC Kir, Kzx. kuyka, with the latter meaning, scem to be reborrowings fr. Mong. Xak. xı kuyka: basically (fi agli l-fuga) 'skin" (al-cild), 'fur' (al-furta) is called kuyka: after it; hence one says ol ko:yuğ kuyka:1adı: "he burnt (a/iraqa) the hair off the sheep so that the skin appeared, but did not flay it' (am yaslux); that is the process of roasting (al-tasmit) Kaş. III 173: (kuy£a: 'town gate' in Rif. 179 is an error for Kapğa: and koyğa in Vel. 334 a misprint of kobğa (kovğa:)). D kayğuk Dev. N. (Conc. N.) fr. kay-; “a small boat'; etymologically perhaps (a boat of which the prow, and perhaps stern are) 'turned. upwards'; smaller than a kemi:. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE (where only keme (sic) is used) vv. some phonetic changes. L.-w. in Pe., etc., Doerfer 11I 1415. Cf. uçam, Xak. xı kayğuk a/-zatıraq "a small boat! Kaş. III 175; 0.0. I 100 (b6g-); 186, 13: xiv Muh.(?) (after “ship” kemi:) al-zatoraqu' l-kabir “a large boat' ka:yğa:k (MS. ka:nja:k; “small boat kici: kemi:) nf. 161 (only): Çağ. xv ff. kayuk (spelt) "a small boat' (zatrag); the Rümi spell it kayık San. 281v. 14 (quotn.). Dis. V. GYGS kayğur- See kadğur.-.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 721 
     
   
   
      -—  DIS D koyğaş- Recip. f. of koyfa:-, Den. V. fr. 2 koy (2 kon), "to embrace one another”. Koyğa- “to embrace' survives in NE Şor R I7 503, and koy£as- in that language and Tuv. (xoyğaş-). Xak. xi koyğaşıp yatsa: anıp yü:zi:pe: man düca"ahu wará'i waclihi *whoever lies hy his side face to face with him' Kag. 1 243, 10; n.m.e.: Kom. xiv “ve lay with one another” biz koyğaşıp yattık CCG; Gr. Tris. GYG D koyuğluk A.N. fr. koyuğ, “viscosity”. S.is.m.]. Xak. xi koyu£luk “viscidity” (al-taxdna) of liquids Kaş. III 178. D kiıyiksiz Priv. N/A. fr. kiyik 'unswerving; not guilty of breaches of faith; loyal'. Pec. to KB. Xak. xi KB (anyone entering the royal service . . .) tapinsa kıyıksız yarutsa yüzin “must serve loyally and cheerfully' 482; tapındı kiyiksiz bağırsaklıkın “he served with unsvverving kindliness' 608; a.o. 952. Tris. V. GYGD kuyka:la:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. kuyka:. Xak. xı Kaş. 111 173 (kuyka:); n.m.e. D kayaklan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. kayak (kafak); everywhere misvocalized kayuklan-. Xak. xı sü:t kayaklandı: “skin (ai-datwáya) formed on the surface of the milk” Kaş. III 197 (kayaklanu:r, kayaklanma:k). Dis. V. GYLD kiyil- Pass. f. of kiy- (Kid-); s.i.m.m.l.g. with rather various meanings (cf. kıd-). Uyğ. viti ff. Bud. baxşımıznı kiyildi "our teacher has died' Hüen-ts. 1887-8 (the Acc. form must be a scribal error;! “our teacher (Nom.) has been cut off (from life)' could have this meaning): Xak. xı kü:n kıyıldı: “the sun sank (zalat), and one says ó:d kiyildi: “the time passed' (madd), and yığa:ç kryildi: "the wood was cut on a slant” (muharrafa(n)); and só:z kıyıldı: "(he promise was broken' (wxlifa'l-ida wna'l-kalám) Kaş. III 19o (kiyilü:r, kıyılma:k): KB (from this day forward) kiyilma tapın “serve and do not fail in your duty! 597; 0.0. 607 (érte:); 1652. D koyul- (kodul-) Pass. f. of koy- (ko:d-); s.i.a.m.l.g. except NE(?), usually “to be placed', etc., but in NC Kir, Kzx. also “to be thick, viscid”. Xak. xı yuğrut koyuldt: “the yogurt coagulated” (xağura), also used of other liquids when they become viscid (ğaluza) Kaş. III 190 (koyulu:r, koyulma:k): Çağ. xv ff. koyul- gudágta şudan “to be relinquished, abandoned' (and, of water, “to be poured out”, ie. kuyul- Pass. f. of 2 kuy- (kud-)) San. 292r. 21: Kom. xiv 'to be placed' koyulCCG, Gr.: (Ktp. xiv kuyul- harra (?read hurra) "to be poured out” Id. 77; hazza “to shake, brandish”, error for hurra kuyul- Bul. 86r. (the dot of x is not at all clear): Osm. i xiv fi, koyul- (1) “to be placed” , (2) “to attack”  . ĞYM | 677 (and kuyul- “to be poured out”), in several texts T'T.S 1 489; III 481; IV 545. D koyluş- (kodluş-) Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of koyul-; vocalized koyuluş- but in a section containing Dis. V.s. Xak. xı süz:tle:r koyJugdr: “the milks (or any other liquids) all coagulated” (xaturat) Kaş. III 195 (koyluşu:r, koyluşma:k). . D kuylus (kudlus-) Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of kuyul- (kudul-); vocalized kuyuluj-, but see koyluş-. Xak. xı ta:ğdın su:vla:r kamuğ kuyluşdı: “the waters (or other liquids) all streamed down (ingabbat) from the mountain' Kaş. III 195 (kuylugu:r, kuylusma:k). Dis. GYM D kuyim Hap. leg.; the gáf is unvocalized, but there is no doubt that this is a N.S.A. fr. 1 kuy-. Xak. xi kuyim 'fear and panic (al-xawf wa'l-faza') which breaks out among the people of a province on the approach of an enemy; one says korkinc kuyim boldi: Kaş. 11I 168. D kıyma: (kidma:) Pass. Dev. N. fr. kiy(ktd-); lit. “cut on a slant', but normally the name for a form of foodstuff so prepared. S.i.am.l.g.. L.-w. in Pe., etc., Doerfer III 1608. Xak. xı kıyma: ügre: "the name of a kind of noodles (aí-i?riya); the dough for it is cut on a slant (muhrifa(»)) like sparrows' tongues; it is called kıyma: ügre: (sic) Kaş. III 173: Çağ. xvff. kıyma 'meat cut into small pieces' (riz riz karda) San. 3oor. 2: Kip. xiv kıyma: “a well-known form of cooked meat (al-tabix) İd. 77: xv mudaqqaqa *minced meat kiyma Tuh. 35a. 4. D kuyma: (kudma:) Pass. Dev. N. fr. 2 kuy(kud-); s..s.m.l. in SE, NC meaning 'cast (metal), a cast”. Xak. xı kuyma: the name of a kind of cake made with butter (al-xubzu'l-musamman) made as follows; the dough is flattened in (pieces) the size ('ald qawám) of the dough for sweet cakes (al-qatáyif) and placed in butter heated in a pot, flattened until it is thoroughly cooked, sprinkled with sugar, and eaten. And any tool (ala) made of bronze (falizzi'l-ard) which is cast (mafrüğa) and not forged with a hammer, for example a mortar or candlestick (or lamp, ai-sirác) or hammer is called kuyma: Kaş. // 173: (there is a cognate form in Kip. xiv kuymak “a thick soup (harira) cooked with butter'; also "a sweet pancake' (al-zalabiya) İd. 77; 'dough cooked with butter', also “a sweet pancake” kuymak Bul. 8, 15). D kıymaç (kidmaç) Dev. N./A. fr. kiy(Kid-); an unusual use of a Suff. normally used for names of foodstuffs. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı kiymag börk “a white hat (galansuwa) of goats! hair” (al-mar'izzi) worn by the Çigil Kaş. III 175: Çağ. xv ff. krymac çaşm-i ahwal "an eye with a squint' San. 3oor. ə. S kaymak See kaüak.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 722 
     
   
   
      678 MON. Mon. GYN S kiyn See 2 krn (krü). S koyn See 1 ko:f. Dis. ĞYN S kayın See kadın. S kayig See kadın. koyan (kodan) 'hare'; not actually noted before the medieval period but certainly much older for two reasons: (r) some NE forms go back to *kodan which must be an old word; (2) while kuyan is a fairly recent word in Çuvaş there is evidence for the existence of a really old Çuvaş form xoran (with -rfr.-d-), see V. G. Yegorov, Etímologtcheskit slovar” chuvashskogo yazyka, (Cheboksary, 1964, p. 122. Survivesin NE Alt., Leb., Tel. koyon/kóyón R II 526, 1240; Koib., Sag., Sor kozan do. 629; Khak. xozan; Tuv. kodan/koyğun, in some NC, SC, NW languages koyan and the like. Cf. tavışğa:n. (Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A koyan in M 18,8 is the Man.-A form of koyun (1 ko:)): (Xak.?) xiv Muh. al-arnab 'hare' ko:ya:n Mel. 72, ro, Rif. 175 (mis-spelt ko:ba:1): Çağ. xv ff. koyan (inter alia) tavgan 'hare'" Vel. 346; koyan (spelt) xargüş "hare” San. 292v. 7: Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 138: Kom. xiv ditto CCI; Gr.: Kip. xır al-arnab koya:n (Tkm. tawsa:n) Hou. 11, 4: xiv koyan al-arnab İd. 76; ditto (also called davvuşğan) Bul. ro, 6; xv arnab (tawsan and) kıyan (sic) Tuh. 4b. 8. S 1 koyun See 1 ko:fi, S 2 koyun See 2 *ko:fi. S kiyngi See kringr.. Dis. V. GYNkayın- (*kafi-) “to boil' (Intrans.); the main entry in Kaj. is kayin- and this form is confirmed by the Caus. f. kayintur-, but everywhere else, even in Kaş. (unless these other passages have been misvocalized), the form is kayna-, the form in which the V. s.i.a.m.l.g. This situation is best explained by assuming that the original form was kafi-; cf. kafiak, Uy. vir fi, Bud. (the pot called wupanat (Sanskrit L-w.) full of ashy water) üzüksüz tolu kayinar 'is continuously full and boiling' TM IV 255, 132: Xak. xt fritas tayanand kuyun-) esic kayındı: (later revocalized kaynadı:) "the pot (etc.) boiled' (£aía); in a prov. kayna:r ögüz “a river which is swollen and in high flood” (yaciş teca yafür mö”uhu) Kaş. III 191 (kayna:r, kayınma:k, later revocalized kaynama:k); kayna:r eşiç I 166, 12; 248 (amrul-); 39o, 18; kóplüm anar kaynayu: (sic, rhyming with oynayu:, boynayu:) “my heart boiled (edşa) for him” I 225, 27; kaynap yana: yumşalım “let us intensify (naştadd, our attacks) and then make peace' I 441, 10; a.o. 711 280 (çokra:-), (in III soz kayna:- is an error for katna:-): KB 72  GYN (kakila:-): xin(?) 7ef. kayna-(-r, -yu) “to boil' 194: xiv Muh. ğala kayna- Mel. 29, 9; Rif. 113; ma” mağli 'boiling water! kayna:r su: 77, ro: 181: Çağ. xv ff. kayna- (spelt) cügidan 'to boil' San. 281r. 6 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv kayna- “to boil' (İntrans. ş lit. and metaph.) Qutb 128; MN 119: Kom. xiv ditto CCG; Gr. 190 (quotn.): Kip. xiv kayna- £alati'l-qidr İd. 77; falà'l-mà' Bul. 66v.: xv ğala kayna- Tuh. 27a. 3. D kuyun- (kudun-) Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of 2 kuy- (kud-). Xak. xı ol ó:zlpe: su:v kuyundi: “he made it his business to pour (sabb) water over himself! Kaş. III 191 (kuyunu:r, kuyunma:k). S kayna- See kayin-. D kaynat- Caus. f. of kayna- (kayin-); 'to boil' (Trans.) S.i.a.m.l.g., cf. kayintur-. Xak. xı ol eşiç kaynattı: “he boiled (ağ/d) the pot' Kaş. TI 357 (kaynatu:r, kaynatma:k): Kom. xiv “to botl (Trans.) kaynat- CCT; Gr.: Kap. kaynat- ağla İd. 77; agla'l-mà' kaynatBul, 28v. : Tris. V. GYND kayıntur- Caus. f. of kayin- ; pec. to Uyg.; cf. kaynat-. Uy$. vir ff, Bud. (you must administer) kayınturmış yağlarığ 'boiled oil” (to sufferers from jaundice) Stmv. 592, 17; a.o. TM IV 254, 100: Civ. kayintur- is common in H 1, e.g. kayınturup *boil' (two joints of goat's meat 1n one cup of wine and one cup of water) 17; 0.0. do. 106—7, 112, 135-6; ka:yıntrup TT VIII M.33-4. Dis. GYR kayir Preliminary note. Neither of the words beloto can be explained as Sec. f.s of kadir; but NE Leb., Tub. kayr, Tel. kayir in the alternative meanings of 'steep, precipitous R 1I 20, 94 are such Sec. f.s. 1 kayir survives in NE Tuv. kayr/kayir/ xayır “a salt steppe or marsh in the mountains' RİH zo, 95; Pal. 445; and kayır 'sandbank' (on land or in a river) in NC Kzx.; NW Kk., Nog.; SW Osm. Xak. xi kayır al-dahás mina'l-ard "soft level ground' among the Turks; the Oğuz call 'sand' (al-raml) kayır Kaş. III 165; o.o. I 158 (esil-); 166 (2 es- ; in both cases translated 'sand' although these words are not specifically Oguz): KB 1723 (kiyik): Oğuz xt see Xak.: Kip. xri af-hagbá* “small pebbles” kayir Hou. s, 16: xiv kayir al-ramlu'l-galiz *coarse sand! İd. 77; al-raml kayır (and kum) Bul. 4, 10: xv /alah 'hillock" kayır (or kir?) Tul. 27b. 2: Osm. xiv to xvt kayır, usually in Hend. with Kum, 'coarse sand, fine pebbles'; fairly common T'T'S I 437; 11 605; Iİ 426; IV 486. 2 kayir 'castoreum, the odorous secretion of the beaver'; survives only(? in NE Sag. kayir; Tob. kayr R II 19, 95. UYĞ. vir ff. Civ. H I 125 (kunduz): Xak. xı Kaş. I 458  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 723 
     
   
   
       'MON. GZ | “079 (kunduz), n.m.e.: Çağ. xv ff. Sar. 291r. 26 (kunduz). D kuya:r Tlap. leg.; Dev. N./A. (Aor. Participle) fr. 2 kuy- (kud-). Xak. xi kuya:r sabb yusabb bihi "a term of abuse” addressed to animals and slaves, hence one says bu: kuya:r (MS. kuya:rı:) hüdü şübb wa müc bi-fihi (MS. bintuhu) "this man who dribbles and froths at the mouth”, taken fr. the phr. su:v kuydt: “he poured out water' (etc.) Kaş. III 171 (as convincingly amended by Atalay). S kayrak See kadrak, Dis. V. ĞYRS kayrış- Sec kadrış-. Tris. GYR D kayırlığ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. 1 kayir. Xak. xi kayırlığ y€:r ard. dahsa “soft level .ground' Kaş. III 178. Dis. GYS S kayaş See kadas. S kayış See kadis. kuya:ş originally “the blazing heat of the (midday) sun”: later, more generally, “the sun”. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE, SW in the latter sense as well as, or instead of, 1 kün, Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. isiğ kuya:şka: emge:nmis kişi “a man suffering from sun-stroke' TT VIII I.10: Xak. xı kuya:s hamáratu'l-qayzg wa şidda twoaq'i'l-gams 'intense midsummer heat and the violent impact of the sun” Kaş. III 172; o.o. Iss (usit-); 353 (türk), I7 337 (1 koğşat-): Çağ. xv ff. kuyaş it is generally known that they use this word for güneg 'sun' Vel. 346 (quotn.); kuyas àftàb “the sun” San. 292v. 5 (quotns.): Xwar. xır kuyaş “sun” (but kün commoner) "Ali 49: xiv ditto Qutb 143; MN 16, etc.: Kom. xiv “sun” kuyas (and kün) CCG, Gr.: Kip. xii al-şi"a" "the sun's rays' kuya:ş ( Tkm. küne:ş (MS. Rüne:s)) Hou. 5,2: xiv kuyaş bafğanda: “at sunset'; kuyas st'à'u'l-sams also used for al-sams İd. 77, a.o. 8s (künes); si'a'u'l-jams kuüyaş Bul. 2, ir: xv ditto Kat, 58, 8, si'à' (yartk and) kuyaş Tuh. 20b. 1. Dis. V. GYSD kayış- Recip. f. of kay- ; s.i.a.m.l.g., usually for "to bend, bow', occasionally “to show sympathy to”, Xak. xı ola:r ikki: bi:r bi:rke: kayışdı: “they showed respect ('atafa) to one another” Kaş. III 188 (kayışu:r, kayışma:k, verse), S kıyış- See kidis-. D kuyuş- Co-op. f. of 2 kuy- (kud-), s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı ol apar su:v kuyüşdi: “he helped him to pour out (f? sabb) water' (etc.) Kaş. III 189 (kuyusgu:r, kuyugma:k). Mon. öZ PF 1 ka:z “goose”. — S.ia.m.lg.; Kaş. consistently translates 1 ka:z al-batt 'duck' and ördek al-iwazz 'goose', but this must be an error. The word is generic, particular species being identified by preceding qualifying words. Almost certainly an early l.-w. fr. some İndo-European language, prob. Tokharian, cf. Sanskrit hamsa, Old English gös, German Gans. L.-w. in Pe., etc., Doerfer 111 1389. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. kazlar begipe oxşatı "like the leader of (a flight of) geese” TT X 133; ao. do. 160 (tizig); o.o. Pfahl. 6, 6 etc. (üyür, q.v.), Suv. 4, 12 (ördek): Civ. TT VIII M.əş (üyür): Xak. xı ka:z al-batt (see above) Kaş. III 149; about a dozen o.o.: KB kaz 'geese' (ducks, swans, and swallows) 72: xiv Muh. (under 'water birds") al-batt wa'l-iwazz ka:z Mel. 73, 5; Rif. 176: Kom. xiv 'goose' kaz CCI; Gr.: Kip. xii al-iwazz ka:z Hou. ro, $: xiv kaz al-wazz (sic, Sec. f. of iwazz) İd. yı, karaca: ka:z al-lağlağ (according to the Kdmüs not the same as al-laglaq 'stork', but not further specified) do. 70; ditto (both entries) Bul. rr, 11: xv al-iwazz ka:z Kav. 39, 4; 62, 12; Tuh. 4b. 11 (and tópe kaz). 1 krz basically “girl, unmarried woman', but often used with a more restricted meaning *daughter, slave girl”, and the like. Although the main entry in Kaş. is kız the original form was certainly kr:z, SW Tkm. still ğı:z. C.i.a.p.a.l.: cf. kirkin, kirnak,: L.-w. in Pe., etc., Doerfer III 1601. Türkü vir silik kız oğlun “their pure (i.e. virgin) daughters” (as opposed to urt: oğlı:n “sons”) 7 E 7, ITE 7; (1 wedded) kizimin “my daughter! (to the 'Turges xağan and took) Kizt:n "his daughter' (to marry my son) JI N 9-10; a.o. T 48 (ağız): viti ff. ol kiz “that girl Toyok IV ir. 6(ETY II 180): Uyğ. virr eki: kizi:n tapığ bérti: “he gave his two daughters to serve me” (i.e. as hostages) Şız, W 4-5; a.o. do. E 3 (koduz): IX (1 had three sons and) kizim üç “three daughters! Suci 6; a.o. do. 7: vini ff. Man.-A (the Light Goddess) amrak Kiz1 “the benign daughter' (of the God Zurvan) M I 25, 33: Bud. kiz “girl” is common, e.g. Badra kız “the maiden Bhadrà' U II zo, 2; o.o. in PP 41 ff. (kirkin); it also often means 'daughter', e.g. (said by a mother) amrak kizim U III 84, 9; o.o. TT VI 146 (tüzün): Civ. kiz is common in TT VII, usually for 'daughter'; a.o. TT I 156 (utili): O. Kir. ix ff. (I1 could not stay with) oğlanım küdegü:lerim kız kelinlerim *my sons, sons-in-law, daughters, and daughters-in-lavv” Mal. 5, 6; kız oğlım “my daughters' do. 22, 1; a.o. do. 16, 1 (yalpu:s): Xak. xı kız al-cáriya 'slave girl”, hence one says kız kirkin al-camdri, kiz al-bint “daughter”, one says menip kizum “my daughter'; and “a virgin' (a/-"adra”) is called ew (sic) kızı: that is “(a girl) kept (muxaddara) in the home”: yinçge: kız ai-surriya 'concubine”, this word is used both for “a young free woman' (al-Rurratu' l-fattiya) and 'a slave girl (al-cáriyatu'l-mamlüka), but originally meant *virgin' (a/-"adrd”) and the other meanings were taken metaphorically (ustu'ira) from it: kız kuş the name of a bird which flutters 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 724 
     
   
   
      68o (yataköfih) round a man as if it wishes to alight on him (yaqa' 'alayhi) Kaş. I 326, the word, nearly always spelt krz, is very common in Kaş., both 1 and 2 kt:z occur in the prov. kalip bé:rse: krz alır kere:k bulsg: ki:z alt:r if a man pays a bride price he gets a virgin for a bride (al-'artis bikra(n)); if. he wants something and must have it (Autea muhtác ilayhi), he inevitably pays high for it” (yaştariyahu gàliya(n)) TH 371, 20; the Oğuz and Kip., who are a section (fabaga) of the Xalaç, say xı:zım “my daughter', and the 'urks say ki:zzim 7/7 218, 21: KB (the Prophet gave him) iki kizin “his two daughters' $6; (the partridge calls its mate) silik kız okir teg köpül bermişin “as a pure maiden calls him to whom she has given her heart” 75; 0.0. 564 (2 kı:z), 2380, 4477 (ev kızı): xın(?) Tef. kız 'daughter' 207: xiv Muğ. al-bikr 'virgin' evdeki kı:z Mel. 53, 1-13; aru: kiz Rif. 149; art: kiz 150; al-bint kvz 49, 9; 144; 2.0. do. (karında:ş): Çağ. xv fT. kiz düxtar-i bákira 'unmarried daughter! San. 296v. 3: Kom. 'virgin, daughter! kiz, “sister” kiz karandaş (sic); "maid-servant” (sic) evdegi kız CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xit al-bint kiz Hou. 24, 21; 32, 3; al-brkr kiz oğlan do. 25, 1; a.o. do. az, 1 (karında:ş): xtv kiz a/-bint wa'l-bikr; one says kizi kiz-mu durur “is his daughter a virgin?” İd. 71; al-bint kiz Bul. 9, 2; 0.0. do. (karında:ş): xv al-bikr kiz Kav, 59, 14) Tuh. ya. 4ş a.o, do. 3b. 4 (karında:ş). 2 kr basically 'costly, expensive”, hence 'rare', and by a further extension, “miserly”. N.o.a.b.; it survived until recently in SW Osm. but is now displaced by kit, not an old word. Uyğ. viti ff. Bud. TT VI 5 vil. (kisğa:k): Xak. xi an 'expensive' (a/-ğalı) thing is called kız ne:p; hence one says bu at kiz aldım 'I bought this horse for a high price” (£aliya(n)) Kaş. 1 326; a.o. İH 371, 20 (1 kr:zz): KB (men like this) bolur idi kız, bu kiz kizliki kildi kız atı kız “are very rare, the rareness of virgins made the word kiz mean "virgin”” 564; "men are not kiz (“girls”), it is kindliness that is kız ("rarc”), men are not az ("ermine”, a pet name for a slave girl), it is uprightness that is az” ("rare”) 866: xın(?) 4t. (a combination of skill and luck never occurs) kamuğ kizda ol kızrak ol “that is the rarest of all rarities” 444; a.o. 48o (çuz): xiv ğa/d kiz ol- Mel. 29, 9 (only); al-ğali (opposite to “cheap” u:guz) kiz 55,9; Rif. 153: Kip. xiii (daughter?) kiz, also al-say'u'l-gàli Hou. 24, zı, al-ğali (opposite to *cheap' uçuz) kiz do. 24, 2: xiv kiz al-gáli İd. 71; galá'l-si'ár “the price was high” kiz oldi Bul. 66v.: xv ğdli kiz 26b. 12; ğald (kayna“to boil" and) kiz bol- (and kici-, q.v.) 27a. 3: Osm. xiv ff. kiz 'costly, rare'; fairly common down to xvi 7 TS. I 466; 11 636; III 452; IV 518: xvir kiz... . (2) in Rümi, kamán 'rare, costly", opposite to arzán 'cheap' San. 296v. 3. F ko:z "nut), and more specifically *walnut' ; a corruption, prob. Oğuz, of Ar. caros, cf. the Pe. corruption gatez. First noted in xt, survives in NW Kk. ğoz, Krım, Kumyk, Nog. koz; SW Az. ğoz, Osm. koz; Tkm.   MON. GZ xo: (Uyğ. viu ff, Civ. R's reading and translation of U Sp. so, 2 koz yarmış üçüpü tört bakir berdim “1 paid four copper coins for a nut-cracker” is certainly wrong, the first word is prob. k08; the second and third (which must be Dat.) prob. mistranscribed): xiv Mu. dahnu'l-cawz 'nut oil” ko:z yağı: Mel. 66, 7; Rif. 16s; al-catoz ko:z 78, 13; 183; (al-catozá' 'Gemini' (in the signs of the Zodiac) ko:z 183 (only) is either a transcription of a/-catwzá' or an error for koş): Çağ. xv ff. koz girdgön "walnut', in Ar. cacz San. 287r. 22: Kom. xiv 'nut' koz; 'nut oil” koz yağı CCI, CCG, Gr.: Kip. xii al-catoz koz Hou. 8, 3: xiv. ko:z al-cawz, "Turcicized. (jutarrak) fr. the Ar. by substituting K- for c- /4. 71: xv catez koz Tuh. 11b. rr. kuz (ku:z?) 'the northern side of a mountain seldom reached by the sun'. Perhaps still survives in SW Osm., base of the word (etymology obscure) Az. ğuzey, Osm. kuzay/ kuzey; "Vkm. ğuzay north, northern”, "Türkü vii: T 7 (çoğay): Xak. xi al-maqnuteattél-cabal "the shady side of a mountain! is called kuz ta:ğ, that is the side which the sun does not reach until it has passed the zenith, and is to the left ("ar yasör) of the sun; frost and snow reign there; prov. kuzda: ka:r egsü:me:s 'there is no shortage of snow on the shady side of a mountain! Kaş. 7 325; ku:z ta: same translation 777 124: KB $5372 (kotuz): Kip. xiv kuz 'a place which the sun does not reach when it first rises! İd. 71: Osm. XIV to xv1 Kuz “a place which the sun does not reach'; in several texts T'T'S 71 672; III 492; IV ss8: xvii kuz..... (2) in Rümi, “(a part of) the mountains on which the sun does not shine', and, more generally, 'shade' (sáya) San. 287r. 22. Mon. V. GZkaz- "to dig, dig out”, s.i.a.m.l.g. with some extended meanings. Cf. 3 es-. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. toprak kaza 'digging up the earth” (to lay the foundations of a house) TT VI 82: Civ. kudu£g kazsar “if he digs a well' TT VII 39, 4;.0. 29, 2(1 bulak): Xak. er arik kazdı: “the man dug (ğafara) a canal' (etc.); and one says at kazdı: “the horse was restive (camaha) and dug up the ground with its feet” Kaş. 77 10 (kaza:r, kazma:k): KB 1734 (tupul-): xın(?) At. (pardon the sins of the sinner and) 'adawat kökini kazıp sen köçür “dig up and remove the root of hostility (to God)” 338: xiv Muh. hafara ka:z- Mel. 9, 3-7; 20, 12; 25, 7; Rif. 81, 100, 107; (among kinds of dogs) al-háfir kazğa:n 174 (only): Çağ. xv ff. kazkandan "to dig” San. 272v. 16 (quotns.): Xvvar. xitt ditto ' Ali 3o: xiv ditto Quib 137: Kip. xii /iafara kaz- Hou. 37, 17: Xiv ditto; kazdı: atnı: “he stopped (isfateqafa) his horse! ; and a horse which is stopped is called kazağuç (so vocalized) İd. 71 (this seems to be a misunderstanding of Kaj.s secord meaning? kazğuç, Dev. N./A., would be apt to describe 2 horse which paws the ground): xv hafara kaz- Tuh. 13b. 5.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 725 
     
   
   
          DIS. GZG (0 681 kız- basically “to be red”, hence (1) "to be red hot”: (2) "to be red” (with anger, shame, etc.). S.i.a.m.l.g. (in SE Türki kiz1-; SC Uzb. kizi-) usually 'to be hot", but NE 'T'uv. “to blush'; SW Osm. “to blaze with anger'. Sce kizfur-. Türkü vırr T 4o (ört): Xak. xi KB kızğu mepiz “his complexion will be ruddy' 480; 0.0. I1OO, 1164, 2385, 3845 (1 09-), 4524 (eplig), 5761 (all relating to the face): xiv Muh.(?) al-dafa” “to be warm' kizmak Rif. 119 (only; MS. Rirmah): Çağ. xv ff. kiz-(-ğan) kix-, garm ol- “to be hot” Vel, 331; kiz-/ kizig-/Kizit- garm gudam San. 295v. 29 (quotns.): Kom. xiv “to glow with heat” kizCCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv kiz- hamiya "to be hot” İd. 7: Osm. xv kiz- “to be hot; to be red” in two texts TTS IV şzo. Dis. GZA kazı: s.i.a.m.l.g. except SE, SW meaning "the fat on a horse's belly', hence "a sausage made from such fat”. L.-w. in Pe. as gai, Doerfer II 1356. Xak. xi kazı: "rolls of fat (uen) on a man's belly, and fat (sian) on a horse's belly; hence one says yund kazı:sı: ya:6 “the fat on a horse”s belly is (real) fat” (sam); it is the favourite meat of the Turks Kaş. /TI 223. kuzi: "lamb'; a very old, First Period, 1.-vv. in Mong. as Rkurigan (Haenisch 72; Studies, p. 235). S.ra.m.lg., in some SE, NC, NW languages as kozi, which is prob. a Sec. £.; some NE languages use the Mong. word reborrowed, see SAicherbah, p. 113. Uy. viri ff. Man.-A kuzi buzafu “a lamb and a calf! M 1 8, 4; 2.0. 18, 4 (ii): Man. kuzi etin yenler “eat the flesh of a lamb” M III 39, 2 (iii): Civ. (small numbers of various animals) beş kuzi 'five lambs” USp. 36, 3: Xak. xı kuzi a/-hamal "lamb' Kaş. III 224; I 444 .(bakla:n); szo (kosul-); 7/7 270 (bula:-), a.0.0, sometimes translated a/-saxla “amb”: KB kuzi is common both in its lit. meaning 461, 1040, etc.; as a term of endearment ay kuz1 “my darling! 695; and for the constellation 'Aries' 66, 139: xin(?) Tef. kud1 “Tamb” 210 (kodi): xiv Muh. al-hamal ku:zi: Mel. 70, 14; Rif. 172; ditto (Aries) ku:zy: 79, 4; 183: 6. xv f£. kuzi bara “lamb” (quotn.), also *Artes! (burc-i hamal), and metaph. “a human child” San. 287r. 28: Xwar. xiv kuz1 'lamb' Qutb 142: Kom. xiv lamb! kozi (sic) CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xmi al-xarüf 'lamb' kuzu: Hou. ış, 2: xiv. küzi: al-xarüf; kuzu: (sic) kulağı: al-hummayd 'sorrel', that is 'lamb's ear” İd. 71; ('middle-sized lamb” toklı:) “small one” kuzi: Bul. 7, 13: xv there is some confusion in the list of animals in Kav. ör, 19 ff. (22 “donkey” eşek), a/-xarüf koyun; öz, r al-ramis (unintelligible, ?read a/-rag?" “suckling”) kuzt:, Dis. V. ĞZA?S kazı:- both semantically and phonetically half-way between kaz- and kaşı:-, perhaps a Sec. f. of the former, survives in SVV Az. $azı- “to carve, engrave'; Osm. kazı- “to -Scrape, scrape off, shove off, erase", Xak, xt 5 ə a 02 02-03 ol y€-riğ kazı:dı: "he dug (/iarafa) the ground and scraped it” (baliatahá) ; also used when one scratches off a scab (anká'[-garha) and the like Kaş. III 264 (kazır, kazi:ma:k): xiv Muh. qala'a “to pluck up, uproot', and the lke ka:zıMel. 30, 9 (Rif. 114 kap-): Kip. xv carada 'to strip off (e.g. bark); to clean (e.g. the ground of weeds)' kazı- Tuh. 12b. 2. D kıza:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. 1 kiz, Xak. xi Ol krzif. kiza:di: “he deflowered (iftadda, MS. iqtadda) the virgin' Kaş. 111 265 (kiza:r, kıza:ma:k). D kizu:- Hap. leg. Den. V. fr. 2 kiz, Xak. xı tava:r Kizu:di: ğalat as'áru'l-sila' “the price of the merchandise went up” Kaş. III 265 (kizu:r, kizu:ma:k). S kuzr- Hap. leg.; Sec. f. of kurt:-; an interesting case of an -T-/-Z- interchange in reverse in a standard Turkish language; misspelt kurt:- in the MS. but listed between kazt- and kizu:-. Xak. xi anın boğzı: aşka: kuzi:di “his throat dried (caffa) with the food'; this word is in current use (al-musta'mal); but the correct form is with -r(not -z-) and this word is irregular (gaddat) just as the phr. süt emizdi: arda'ahu 'he made him drink milk” is irregular Kaş. III 264 (kuzi:r, küzi:ma:k). Dis. V. GZD(S)D kuzit- Caus. f. of kuzii- ; n.o.a.b.. Uyğ. vil ff. Bud. lésip tózlüg igliBke kuzitğu emler yaraşur “for someone suffering from an illness caused by mucus (Tokharian 1.-vv.) drying drugs are beneficial” Suv. 592, 19-20: Xak. xı ol anip boğzın kuzutti: aşdı. -ta"dm "he excited a desire for food in him”, the original (sound) of the -Z- was -r-, as if someone had dried (caffa, i.e. emptied) his throat of food and he longed for it; this is irregular (sádd) because (sic) the Caus. f. of Intrans. V.s is formed only with -r- Kaş. II 306 (kuzutur, kuzutma:k; in all cases spelt Rkurut-, but under the cross-heading -Z-). D kaztur- Caus. f. of kaz-, s.i.a.m.l.g. Xak. xı ol anar kuduğ (MS. apparently kadağ) kazturdı: “he gave him the task of digging (hafr) a well (Kaş. inadvertently 'canal') and he dug it Kaş. II 190 (kazturur, kazturma:k): xıı(?) Tef. kazdur- ditto 193: Çağ. xvff. kazdur- 'to order someone to dig' (kandan) San. 273r. 1. Dis. GZG D kazuk Hap. leg.; Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. kaz- ; not to be confused with later forms of kazğuk. Cf. kadık. Xak.xı kazuk arık “a canal which has been dug' (mahfür) Kag. I 382. : D kızğut Dev. N. fr. kiz-; “punishment”, lit. 'something which makes a man blush'. N.o.a.b. Uyf. vnrff. Bud. U II 26, 14 etc. (2 kın): Xak. xi kızğut al-nakàl “a public or exemplary punishment; the man is  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 726 
     
   
   
     682 DIS. publicly disgraced (yufdah) for a crime, and punished for it (yu"dqab "alayha), while others look on and reproach him (yarzacir minhu) Kaş. 1 451. D kazğuk Conc. N. fr. kaz-, “a peg driven into the ground”. S.i.a.m.l.g. usually as kazik (not to be confused with kazuk above). L.-w. in Hungarian as kar. The Xak. form is Hap. leg. and seems to be a parallel Dev. N. fr. kazın-, Cf. talğuk. Uyğ. vırı ff. Man. (her black-coloured nipples are) kazğuk teg M II 11, 18: Bud. (I cut the magic spells of all these demons with a sword and) vacır üze kazğuk tokryurmen 'peg them down with avajra' U II 61, 18; a.o. do. 62, 19 (on p. 102 there is a picture of such a kazfuk; there are others in Pfahl.); (just as when one) temir kazğukuğ yérke tokısar 'drives an iron peg into the ground” TT IV 12, 42-3: Civ. yerde kazğuk bekürü tokryurmen 'I will fasten a peg firmly in the ground' TT 7 185-6: xiv Chin.-Uyğ. Dict. “the Pole Star” altun kazuk (lit. “golden peg) Ligeti 165; R II 383: Xak. xı kazpuk (vocalized kazupuk, but under fa'lal) "a peg' (al-teatad); hence the Pole Star (al-qutb) is called temür kazpuk (ditto), that is 'iron nail' (mismár) because the sky revolves on it Kaş. III 383; ao. III ao (yultuz): xui(?) Tef. kazuk '(tent) peg' 193: xiv Muh. al-rtatad ka:zuk Mel. 69, 3; Rif. 169; watadu'l-xayma “tent-peg” ka:zuk 76, 11; 180; al-qutb temü:r ka:zuk 79, 8; 183: Çağ. xv ff. kazuk (spelt) (r) mix-i buzurg “a large nail”, (2) sitára-i qutb-i şimüli the Pole Star”, which is an expression for cudayy (same meaning); they also call it temür kazuk San. 273v. 1; (in 45v. 14 it is said that ekseri, a Greek L.-w. in Rumi, means “a small nail (mix) used in carpentry”, and that large ones fixed in the ground are called kazuk): Xvvar. xtiu(?) (a mole on the forehead) altun kazuk teg Oğ. 49: Kip. xiv kazik al-watad İd. yı: xv al-cudayy temir xa:zuk, meaning that it is fixed and does not set Kav. 58, 7. E kızğak See kısğak. D kızğıl Dev. N./A. fr. kiz-; 'reddish'. Survives with the same meaning in NC Kir., Kzx. kızğılt (sic); in other languages prob. absorbed by kizil Uyğ. vinff. Civ. közi kızğıl (Ktzkil) bolu:r "his eyes become reddish” TT VHI L6: Xak. xi kızğıl (MS. kisgul) at "a horse which is somewhere between blackish and greyish' (?; al-athal ma”l-aşhab) Kaş. I 483. D kazğa:n Dev. N. fr. kaz-; in its etymological meaning noted only in Kaş. and San.; San.'s first translation seems to supply the transition to “cauldron”, which is the meaning elsewhere. "This meaning, which s.i.a.m.l.g., must be a very old one, as the word in this meaning survives in Cuv. xuran /4sh. xvi 216. L.-w. in Pe., etc., Doerfer III 1390. Xak. xt kazğa:n y€:r 'ground which is full of banks undermined by water, crevices, and cracks' (curuf tva axdqiq wa şuqüq) Kaş. I 439 (prov.): xın(?) Tef. kazan “cauldron” 192: xiv Muh. özöĞ (among household utensils) a/-qasğdn (sic) ka:za:n Mel. 68, 14; Rif. 169: Çağ. xv ff. kazğan “a circular object made of wood and reeds” ; when they take a cauldron (dig) off the stove (öfdğ) they place it on it; the author of the Burhan-i Qdti" recorded it as Pe. and translated it dig; it also means 'digging, dug, to dig” (kananda sua handa tva kandan) San. 273r. 27; kazan (1) 'a kind of small large-bore cannon' (tip) (quotn.); (2) dig-i fabàxi "a cauldron for cooking'; (3) “a large goblet' (rikdb-i pahn); (4) a tribe of the Salur "Türkmen use this word as a rallying cry for one of their sections (firqa) when they pitch camp; (5) the name of an emperor (pàádigáh) of the family of Çingiz (details given); (6) one of the kingdoms (mamlakat) of Rüs; in all six meanings also pronounced with Zayn, i.e. kazğan do. 273r. 22: Xwar. xiv kazan “cauldron” Qutb 137; Nahc. 125, 9: Kom. xiv ditto CCI; Gr.: Kap. xır al-qidru"l-nahas goa”l-mircal "a copper cooking-pot or cauldron' kaz£a:n, also called kaza:n Hou. 17, 8: xiv kazan 'a large copper cooking-pot' İd. 71: xv (among household utensils) a/-dast “copper pot' ka:zan Kav. 64, 6; qidr kazan Tuh. 29b. 4. kuzğu:n properly 'raven', but also used for other large black birds. S.i.a.m.l.g. vr. minor phonetic changes, sometimes metaph. for 'greedy' and the like, L.-w. in Pe., Doerfer IIl 1480. Türkü vir ff. kuzğu:nu:ğ iğacka: bami:ş “they tied a raven to a tree' J[rk&amp;B 14; 2.0. do. 54 (yalvar-): Uy&amp;. vir ff. Bud. kuzğun “raven”, usually in the Hend. kuş kuzğun *birds and ravens”, is fairly common PP r, 4; 75, 3: 8o, 4 (ko:n-); U III 32, 5; TT VI sg: Xak. xı kuzğu:n al-£udáf 'raven' Kaş. I 439 (prov.); a.o. 2I 240, 26: KB kara kuzgun erdim 'I was a black raven' 1098 (see 8:1); 2.0. 365 (tü:): xiu(?) Tef. kuzğun 'raven' 216: xiv Muh. al-záf "rook, carrion crow' kuzBu:n Mel. 73, 3; Rif. 175: Çağ. xv ff. kuzğun (spelt) "a large black raven' (or crow, hulağ) also called ğun San. 287r. 26 (quotn.); reverse entry 262v. 16: Xwar. xiv kuzğun 'raven' Qutb 147: Kip. xiv küzğun nat": mina'l“Şurban “a variety of crow', with a long bill and a long tail İd. 71: xv al-ğurabu”l-asmad "black crow" kuzğun Kav. 62, 14; Tuh. 26b. 3 (kar£a:). D kazğanç Dev. N. fr. kazğan-, survives only(?) in SW Az. ğazanc, Osm. kazanç, 'Tkm. ğazanç 'profit, gains, earnings". Türkü vir ff. çığaf er oğlı: kazğançka: barmlış “a poor man's son went out to earn money” IrkB ao: Uyğ. vit ff. Bud. (the common people . . .) kazğanç tileyür “seek to earn money” TT VI 13; (or if he goes trading) hazğançı ükliyür aşılur "his profits increase" (Hend.) do. 104; o.o. PP 12, 2 (üze), 13, 172; 16, 4; Kuan. 77 (kazğan-): Xak. xi kazğanç al-kasb 'earnings, profits” Kaş. III 386: KB sarüy ol ajun kör bu kazğanç yeri “this world is a merchants! inn, a place for making profits! 1444: Xtti(?) Tef. kazğanç (mis-spelt harğanç)lkazanç 'profits! 193, 201: xiv Muh. al-kasb kazğamç Mel. 85, 1; Rif. 191: Çağ.    
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 727 
     
   
   
     DIS xv ff. kazanç/kazançlığ/kazğanç/kazğançhk cahşil wa ihtisdb 'profit, gain, earnings” San. 273r. 26: Kip. xıl takassaba “to seek to earn' (kazan-/) kazanc eyle- Hou. 38, 16. Dis. V. GZG- E kızğa:- See kirfa:-. D kazğan- basically “to carn (wages by labour), to gain (profits by trade)', with some more general meanings; Refl. f. of *kazpa:-; morphologically this could be a Den. V. fr. Ykazığ Dev. N. fr. kaz-, but the semantic connection is tenuous and it is more likely to be a very old V. in -&amp;a:-. Survives only(?) in SW Az., Tkm. ğazan-, Osm. kazan-. Türkü vir kazğan- is fairly common; (r) without an Object it seems to mean “to strive for success'; e.g. (when I came to the throne I did not sleep by night or rest by day, fomes with Kül Tegin and the two $ads) ölü: yétü: kazğantım ança: kazğanıp “1 nearly worked myself to death, and so striving . . .' 7 E 27, II E 22; (2) governing €:l, with or without törü:, it means “to strive to acquire”, e.g. 2 E 9 (1 €:1), Z1 E 36 (yéged-); (3) otherwise it means 'to acquire', e.g. kapgrmiz écümiz kazğanmış bodun atı: küsi: yok bolmazu:n “may the fame and reputation of the people whom my father and ancestors acquired not perish” 7 E 26, II E 22; 8.0.0.: vIIL ff. Yen. élipiz üçü:n kazğanu: 'striving for success on behalf of your realm' Mal. 26, 4; El-çor éli:pe: kazğantım 'T strove for the success of Él-cor's realm' do. 32, 8: Uyğ. vil ff. Bud. kazğan-, which is common, normally means “to acquire, earn', e.g. kay kazğansar “if a father acquires (wealth) PP 8, 3; ağı barım kazğansar 'if one acquires treasures and property! do. 12, 7; 8.0. do. 14, 4; yığmış kazğanmış “collected and acquired” U 7/ 34, 13; atamız kazğanmi$ tavarığ “the property acquired by our father' U III 81, 13; (Kuan-şi-im Bodhisattva) ertipü üküş edğgü kılınç kazğanç kazğanur 'acquires (i.c. performs) very many good deeds” Kuan. 77; al çeviş bilge bilig kazğanç ertipü üküş kazğanmış üçün “because he has acquired very many (clever) devices (Hend.) and (much) wisdom' do. 187-8: O. Kar. ix ff. (I went to the emperor of China and because of my manly virtues and toughness) kazğandim “1 acquired' (gold, silver, etc.) Mal. ır, 9; xanıpız yoklaya:r kadaşlarınız kazÉanu:r "your xar rises in importance, your kinsmen gain (vvealth)” do. 25, 6 (?so read, but the text is not reliable): Xak. xı er tavva:r kazğandı: “the man acquired (kasaba) wealth' Kaş. II 249 (kazğanu:r, kazğanma:k, verse): KB (if a man takes my words for his companion) kümüş kazğanur "he acquires silver” 189; (the sword holds the realm and) bodun kazğanur “acquires people” 2714; 0.o. 3666, 3923: xin(?) At. kamuğ kazğanığlı ajun mölını “after acquiring all the wealth in the world' (he could not enjoy it) 273; Tef. kazğan-/fkadğan-/kazan- “to acquire" (wealth) 192-3: xiv Muh. haşşala "to acquire” . GZL 583 kazan- Rif. roy (MS. karan-); al-tahşil kazğanmak (this must have been the translation, the edition has korkutmak) Mel. 36, 1; kazanmak Rif. rar (MS. karanmak): Çağ. xv ff. kazğan- (spelt) kasb wa tahşil kardan, also pronounced kazan- San. 273r. 3 (quotns.): Kom. xiv “to acquire' kazan- CCI; kazganCCG, Gr.: Kom. xii takassaba “to seek to acquire! kazan- (MS. karan-) (and kazanç eyle-) Hou. 38, 16: xv haşşala kazan- Tuh. 13b. 12. : : D kızğur- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of kiz-, hit. “to cause to blush'; cf. kızğut, kizil-. Xak. xı ol anı: bu: r:sta: kizğurdi: "he inflicted exemplary punishment on him (vağala bihi) for this act, and made him experience the evil consequences of it so that he should not do it again” Kaş. II 194 (kızğurur, kızğurma:k), 2.0. 200, 22. SD kuzğır- (kudğur-) Hap. leg.; Inchoative f. of kuz- (kud-); the word is clearly spelt kuzfir- and, as it is Kip. this may be correct, but it is listed between kadğur- and kur£ir-, so the original text should have had kudğır-. Kip. xr ka:r kuzgirdti: (in the MS. the -ğ- has both fatha and kasra) “the snow came in masses like flocks of birds' (gd'bib bi-tayrün) Kaş. II 193 (kuzğuıra:r, kuzğurma:k). Tris. V. GZGD kızğutlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. kızğut. Xak. xı er r:sti:n kizğutlandı: “the man was deterred (fmtana"a) from the act, when he realized the evil consequences of it and was put to shame (iftadaha) over it” Kaş. II 271 (kizButlanu:r, kizğutlanma:k). Dis. GZL D kizil Intrans. Dev. N./A. fr. ktz-; “red”, S.i.a.m.l.g.; l.-w. in Pe., etc., Doerfer III 1481. Cf. 2 a:1. Türkü vi kizil kanım “my red blood' T şz:vrrff. kizil kaya: “a red rock” IrkB. 51: Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. kizil sağızğan “the red magpie' (name of a star) TT VT 95: Civ. kizil orduluğ “having a red palace” TT VII 13, 34: kizil çından “red sandalvvood” H 7 91; a.0.0,: XIV Chin.-Uyğ. Dict. ch'ih “red” (Giles 1,967) Kizil Ligeti 167: Xak. xi kizil al-ahmar 'red' of anything (prov., verse); Kizil the name of a river in Kaşğar (verse) Kaş. I 394: I 4o (2 en), a.o.o.: KB (in spring the trees adorn themselves with mauve, crimson, yellow, blue, and) kizil 67; o.o. 120, 954, 2312 (alçı:), etc.: xın(?) At. 26 (2 ep); Tef. kizil “red” 207: xiv Muh. ahmarı”l-şa"r “red-haired” kızıl saç Mel. 46, s, Rif. 139; o.o. 68, 2-6; 78,15 168; 181: Çağ. xv ff. kizil (r) surx “red”, (2) dgkár wa şadid "manifest, intense'; (3) “a kind of red bird”, (4) “a kind of falcon” San. 296v. 9 (quotn.; followed by several phr. beginning with kızıl): Xwar. xim(?) Ataş K1z1l "as ted as fire” Oğ. 6; kip kizil “deep red” do. 166: Kom. xiv “bright red” kızıl CCT, Gr.: Kip. xir a/-ahmar kizil Hot. m 2: XIV ditto; kip kizil al-şadidu”l-humra İd. 71:  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 728 
     
   
   
     684 DIS. xv fi ta Ridi I-humra kip kizil Kav. $, 9; ahmar kizil Tuh. 68b. 3; a.o.o. D kizla:k Hap. leg.; ?abbreviated Dim. f. of kizil; “reddish”. Xak. xı Kaş. / 473 (kót); n.m.e. D kizhk Preliminary note. Kizhk z/2e A.N. of | kuz /"'virginity, the duties of a girl', etc. s. m.m.l.g., but is not noted before Kip. xiv ld. 71; the A.N. of 2 kiz survived until recently in SW Osm. but has now been displaced öy kitlik, a modern word. D kızlik A.N. fr. 2 krz; 'costliness, rarity”, and the like. Xak. xı K.B 564 (2 krz): xın(?) Tef. kızlik “famine, scarcity' 207: Xvvar. xii kızlik “costliness" '4/i 48: xiv ditto Qutb 150: Kip. xii a/-ğald 'costliness' (opposite to “cheapness” uçüzli:k) kizli:k Hou. 27, 3: xiv kizlk ai-galà (also al-bikára 'virginity') İd. 71: Osm. xivff. kizhlk “costliness, rarity, scarcity'; c.i.a.p. down to xvil TT'S I 467; II 639; HI 454; IV $520: xvin kizliğ ((1) Çağ. 'virginity'); (2) in Rümi, giràáni “costliness, rarity' San. 296v. 7. E kozluğ in Uy£. vii ff. Bud. telim kozluğ ükmekleriğ seems to be an error for közlüğ, a P.N./A. fr. 2 kö:z not recorded elsewhere; “many heaps of burning embers” TM IV 253, 47 (the text is damaged at this point). Dis. V. GZLD kazil- Pass. f. of kaz-, “to be dug. S.i.a.m.l.g. Xak, xr arik kazıldı: “the canal (etc.) was dug' (hufira) Kaş. II 135 (kazilur, kazılma:k): KB 6063 (karım): Çağ. xv ff. kazil- (spelt) kanda şudan "to be dug' San. 273r. 2. D kizil- Pass. f. of kiz-; n.o.a.b.; modern NE kızıl- is a Sec. f. of kisil-. For meaning cf. kızğut, kizğur-. Xak. xı er yazuktin kızıldı: “the man was given an exemplary punishment! (mukila 'alá'i-racul) and experienced the evil consequences of his offence Kaş. II 135 (kizilur, kizilma:k)) a.o. 200, 20. D kazla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. 1 ka:z; like other Den. V.s fr. the names of animals used only in the Ger. in -u:, 'like a swan('s neck)'. Xak. xı ivrik başı: kazlayu: “the ewer (Pe. 1.-vv.) with its neck vertical (muntagib) like a swan's! Kaş. 1 100, 6; n.m.e. D kazlın- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of kazil-, and practically syn. vv. it. Xak. xı y€:r kazlındı: "the ground was broken up (inxaraqat, MS.? inhazaqat) and holes (Rufar) formed in it” Kaş. II 251 (kazlınu:r, kazlınma:k). D 1 kizlan- Refl. Den. V. fr. 1 kr:z; survives in SW Osm. for 'to be shy, modest, delicate like a girl”. Xak. xı ol anı: kizlandi: tabannöhd ay ittaxadahá bint "he adopted her” Kaş. II 251: (kizlanu:r, kizlanma:k), same phr. translated “he reckoned the girl as one of his daughters” /TT 198, r4. GZL p 2 kızlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. 2 krz. Xak. xı ol bu: atığ kızlandı: "he reckoned that this horse was expensive' (4/7) Kaş. II 251 (followed by 1 kizlan-). p kızlaş- Hap. leg.; Recip. Den. V. fr. ] ki:z, prob. used only in Ger. in -u:, Xak. xı 01 menin birle: ok attı: kizlaşu: “he had an archery competition with me, making the stake a slave girl' (vea ca'ala'l-xatar baynanö”l-cöriya) Kaş. II 221 (kizlaşu:r, kizlaşma:k). Tris. ĞZL D kızla:muk Den. N. (pejorative) fr. kızil, *measles'. "The -1- was elided at an early date. Survives as kızamık or the like in SC Uzb.; NW Kaz, Kumyk; SW Osm., Tkm.; most other languages use kızılça in this sense, but SE Türki kizil (ağrığı), and the NE languages the. Russian L-w. kor'. Uyf. vitr ff, Civ. kizamuk ünüp karını ötmeser “if a man develops measles and becomes constipated” TT VII 22, 16: Xak. xı kızla:muk a/-haşba eed butür mitluhd “measles and. similar eruptions” Kaş. 1 528: Çağ. xv ff. kızamuk 7//at-i hasba San. 296v. 4. D kızılsığ Hap. leg.; Simulative Den. N./A. fr, kizil 'reddish'. Türkü viti. Toyok 15-16 (ETY II 58; ün-). Tris. GZM S kiza:muk Sec kizla:muk. Dis. GZN s kazan See kazfa:n. S kazın See kadın. p kaznak “trensury”, the Ar. word xazina seems to have become Razrıak or the like in some Middle Iranian language, fr. which it yvats borrowed by Turkish. N.o.a.b., but 1.-w. in Pe. etc., Doerfer II 1485; the original Ar. word was also an early l.-w. in Turkish, the first occurrence being in Xak. xii(?) KBVP 13», 51. Uy&amp;. vi ff. Bud. kaznakka (transcribed Rrznakka) kirip (a thief) 'entering the treasury! U II 76, 2: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. bu "treasury, storehouse' (Giles 6,279) kaznak Ligeti 165: Xak. xi KB acti ağı kaznakı “he opened the treasury” (and distributed alms) 1034; (if a skilled Secretary watches the incomings and outgoings) kaznak tolur "the treasury fill 5913: xiri(?) Tef. kadnak(k)a (sic) kirgil 192. p kazpuk See kazğuk. Dis. V. GZNp kazin- Refl. f. of kaz-; s.i.s.m.l., usually as a Pass. Xak. xi (ol) ó:zipe kuduğ kazindi; *he made it his business to dig (/tafr) a well for hirmself”, also for "to pretend (to dig)” Kaş. II 155 (kazinu:r, kazinma:k). VU(D) kozan- (koza:n-) Hap. leg.; no obvious etymology, prob. a mere jingle with  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 729 
     
   
   
      DIS. ĞZŞbezen-. Xak. xı ura:ğut bezendi: kozandı: "the woman adorned and ornamented herself" (tabarracat . . . wa tazayyanat) Kaş. İl iss (koza:nur, kozanma:k). Tris. ĞZN D kazındı: Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. kazın-, survives with same meaning in SW Osm. Xak. xı kazındı: topra:k nabitatu' [-turáb 'soil that has been dug out and heaped up” Kaş. / 449. PUD kazipku: Hap. leg.; this word shares a separate section with karapğu: and final -Bu: might have been expected; if so, Dev. N./A. fr. kazin-, but the semantic connection is nebulous. Xak. xı yip kazıpku: boldi: “the string vvas knotted (fn"aqada) and very much tangled” (i/tawá) so that it could not be disentangled (yarışarih) Kaş. III 388. Dis. GZR D kizrak Comparative f. in -rak of 2 krz; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı KB tiriglikte kizrak bütün çın kişi “one who is the rarest of living creatures, an honest, upright man' 1724: xiti(?) At. 444 (2 krz). Dis. V. GZR D Kizar- 'to be, or become, red'; obviously connected vv, kız-, prob. Intrans. Den. V. fr. a homophonous N. *kiz different fr. 1 and 2 kız. S.i.a.m.l.g. Xak. xı kizardı: ne: “the thing was, or became, red” (ihmarra) Kaş. II 77 (kızarur, kizarma:k); “verbs ending in -r 685 fall into three classes; (1) there is a N./A. (ism) and the verb is compounded (rukiba) from it, e.g. to:n kızardı: “the garment was red” (ahmarra), the origin is k1zil erdi: şara ahmar, the làm and hamza were elided, and it became a genuine (mahd) verb' İl 163, 14: Çağ. xv ff. kızar- surx şudan “to be, or become, red” San. 295v. 15 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 149: Kom. xiv “to glow with heat' kizar- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv kizar- ihmarra İd. 71: xv ditto Kav. 5, 13; hammara kizar- Tuh. 13b. 5; 3.0.0. : D kızart- Caus. f. of Kizar-; s.i.a.m.l.g. Uyf£. vii ff. Bud. (the lords of hell beating them) kızartmış tlemirlliğ bergen 'with red hot iron rods” TT IV, p. 18, note B 7, 7: Xak. x1 ol kızarttı: ne:pni: hammara”l-şay” “he made the thing red” Kaş. II 431 (kizartur, kizartma:k): KB (when the rulers are not wicked) isiz ol elde sevinçin kızartmaz mepiz “they do not make the wicked man's face glow with pleasure in that realm' (or “the wicked man does not make his own face glow . . 4) 892; o.o. 1287, 2185, 2384: Çağ. xv ff. kizart- (spelt) surx kardan “to make red” San. 295v. 27 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 149. Dis. V. GZSD kazış- Co-op. f. of Kaz-; s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xt ol mapa: ye€:r kazışdı: “he helped me to dig (fi hafr) the ground' (or something else); also for competing Kaş. II 100 (kazışu:r, kazışma:k): Çağ. xvíff. kazış- (spelt) bà-ham kandan “to dig together" San. 273r. 2.   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 730 
     
   
   
     INITIAL POST-PALATAL PLOSIVES Preliminary note. As pointed out in Studies, bb. 131, etc. there is good evidence that, although in Türhü there tuas only one, unvotced, Postpalatal initial, and the position vvas prob. the same in Uyğ. and. Xak., in an earlier stage of the language both voiced and unvoiced Postpalatal initials existed. Where such. evidence exists regarding a particular svord, (&amp;-) is added after the heading. Mon. GE *ké: (&amp;-) “back, behind”, and the like; not noted in the unsuffixed form but see ké:din, ke:n, ké:rü:, kü: "rumour, fame, reputation', and the like. Fairly common down to xi both by itself and in Hend., but survives only in NC Kir. kü:; syn. vr. ça:v, q.v. The theəry in TT X, p. 29, note 440 that this is a l.-w. fr. Chinese hao “mark, designation; to call out” (Giles 3,884; Middle Chinese yau) is unconvincing. Türkü viri taşra: yoriyu:r téyen kü egidip 'hearing the rumour that he had marched out” 7 E ız, (because he fought so much against the Chinese and displayed toughness and manly virtues) kü: bunça: tutdı: “he acquired so great a reputation” 7x. 12; o.o. 1 E əş, II E 21 (1 a:t); 1] E 22, 36: Uyğ. ix küm soru:ğum “my fameand reputation' Suci 4: vii ff. Man.-A küsin “his reputation' M I ər, r (ii); a.o. do. 26, 27-8 (1 2:t): Bud. ol edgü kü at tört bulupda yadilti 'that good reputation was spread in all quarters of the world' PP 7, 1-2; o.o. Hüen-ts. 156 (kelig), etc.: Civ. atın küp TT I 43; 156: Xak. xı kü: al-şit bayna'l-nàs “fame among the people'; hence one says kü:lüg bilge: “a famous sage” Kaş. III 212: KB küsi çavı “his fame and reputation' 87, 102, 458, 1711, etc. Mon. V. GEVU kü:- pec. to Uyg. and used only in Hend. w. kózed-, usually in the phr. küyü kózedü tut- 'to protect and keep', but apparently the basis of 3 kü:g, q.v. Uyğ. vii ff. Man. kop ada tudadın yarın keçe küyü közedü tutmakları bolzun “may they be protected and kept from all dangers (Hend.) early and late' M İİİ 36, 4-6 (ii) (T 31 4-6 ()); a.o. TT IX 55: Bud. küyü közedü, usually vv. tutis common U IV 36, 8r-ş (açın-), o.o. Suv. 192, 20; 401, 8; 448, 5; 562, 7: USSp. 6o, 1b., 6—7; 106, 14; Öz etözin kümek kózedmek “to protect (Hend.) his own body” Tis. şoa. 1-2. Mon. GB ki:b (£-) originally 'mould, model” in a concrete sense, in Oğuz it early acquired the metaph. meaning 'likeness, resemblance', and with the Poss. Suff, -1: kibi: (ğibi:) came to be used as a Postposition meaning “like”, As a N. n.o.a.b., but the Postposition survives in SW Az. kimi, Osm. £lbi and in some other languages in altered forms like NW Kaz. kébék/ kük (?for kibi ök), Cf. sa:n. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. (later teachers must realise that you are) yap kib yalpuklarda üstünki kişi 'supreme among men who are models and examples' Hüen-ts. 2110-11: Xak. xr ki:b “a mould' (qülib) for anything; one says kerpiç ki:bi: 'a brick mould” Kaş. 7/7 119 (and see Oğuz): xır(?) Tef. kibi (Bor. 2eöi) “like” 168; biği “like” roo: Çağ. xv ff. kibi an Adv. of Comparison meaning “like, resembling' (mit! tva münand) placed after words San. 311v. i (quotn.); bigin münand do. 148r. ro (one Çağ., one Rümi quotn.): Oğuz xi kl:b “likeness, resemblance! (al-mitl toa'l-sibh); hence one says bu: er anın ki:bi: “this man is like him” Kaş. III 119 (but yağmur kibi: “like rain” I 272, 18; kuglar kibi: "like birds” 7 483, 22; at kibi: “like a dog” IJI 23, 2; korum kibi: "like boulders' 171 61, zo are all in Xak. verses): Xwar. xır kibi (?8ibi) and once bígin “like” "Ali 47: xiv kibi Qutb 97; kibin MN 167; bigin do. 345: Kom. xiv kibi “like” CCT, CCG; Gr. 142 (quotns): Kip. xiv kib (?; text heb) al-gálib ; kibi: mil İd. 78, harfu'l-taşbih “Adv. of comparison! glbl: (sc) Bul. 16, 2: Xv in a note on comparisons in Turkish it is said that there is no /tarf for this purpose but N.s like kibi:/kibik are used Kav. 28, 9; 8.0. do. 25, r, qalib keb (sic) Tuh. 29b. 3; sinf tva l-názir. sva'l-mitl "sort, kind, likeness” (tep and) kibi Tuh. 22a. 13; “the indicators of comparison ('alámatu'l-tagbih) are (oşar, Tkm. oxşar, menzer, tep and) kibi for what is near (/r/-qarib) and kibik for what is distant (al-ba'id) do. 89a. 11-13: Osm. xiv ff. biği “like”, very common down to xvt TTS I1 96; 11 138; III 90; IV 101; gibi is not listed in TTS. 1 köp originally 'abundant, luxuriant', and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SW for 'much, a great deal, many'. Although listed in Red. it became obsolete in Osm. in about xvı, and is described by Sami as Çağ. Uyğ. vitr ff. Man. (in the spring the trees become) semiz óplüg yağlığ küçlüğ köp bedük 'swelling, colourful, full of sap and vigour, luxuriant and large” Wind. 19-20: Civ. urubumuz köp bolt! anip teg ök bağlarnıp köpi kaltı “our taxes (Ar. rub" "quarter (share)') have become heavy, and like this most of the gardens have come to a standstill' (U.Sp. 22, 49 ff. as revised in) Rahmeti (Arat), Uygurca yazılar arasında, İstanbul, 1957, lines 56 ff.: Xak. xı köp ne:p 'anything luxuriant and abundant'; hence one says köp saç “thick (catal) hair”, (in a prov.) köp sögütke: kuş kona:r “the bird alights  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 731 
     
   
   
      D —.— — — ———..— 5 — vv —. “. c — 3 -x Q —  DIS. GBC 687 on the willow-tree with luxuriant branches' (al-multaffati'l-agsán) Kaş. I 319; a.o. II 328, 17 (terpek): KB (all this work) baş ağrığ köp ol “is a severe headache' 421; bu beğlik igipe taki köp kilin “make yourself abundant(ly helpful) in theaffairs of this government also” 430; köp altun kümüş “quantities of gold and silver” 1564a. (spurious verse): xın(?) At. Postscript köp €ini körürbiz “ve see many people” «11; Tef. köp màl 'abundant vvealth” 185: Çağ. xv ff. köp ('with -p') çok “much, many” Vel. 326; köp (spelt) bisyár ditto San. 302r. 21 (quotn.): Xwar. xiii köp “many” “Ali 49: xın(?) ditto, common in Of., zo, etc.: xiv ditto Qutb 100; MN 34, etc.; Nahe. 33, ır: Kip. xil al-hatir “abundant, much' köp (also üküş, Tkm. te:lim, bo:1 (MS. yo:l)): xiv köp ('with -p”) al-katir; bu: kóptür Addü hatir, also çoktur ('with ç-), üküştür and delimdür all hadd katir İd. 78: Xv hatir kóp(/sok/xayil, sic) Tuh. 3ob. 3; katura (şok bol-/)köp bol- do. 31b. 3: Osm. XIV to xvı Köp “many, much” in several texts TTS I 490; 11 658. 2 köp Reduplicating Prefix see kó:k. küp (kü:p) “an earthenware jar or jug'. There seems to be good evidence both for -ü:- and -p. Survives only(?) in SW Az. küpe, Osm. küp, Türkü vırı ff. iki: küp beğni: 'two jars of beer” Tun. IV 10 (ETY İİ 96): Uyğ. vin ff. Civ. yarım küp bor "half a jar of wine' US. 32, 11; bir küp küci bor 'one jar of Kucha wine" do. 35, s (third word uncertain, but certainly not "strong” as R. suggests): Xak. xi kü:b (or kü:p?) a/-danın 'earthenware jar' Kaş. II 119; I 154 (açıt-): İİİ 253 (a21:-); 325 (çıfı:la:-) and three o.o. all spelt küp and translated al-dann or al-hubb "large iar”: Muh.(?) (under “vine merchants! equipment") al-xöbiya "a large yar” kü:b Rif. 162 (only): Tkm. xit al-xábiya wa huwa'l-zxir (same meaning) küp (-b) Hou. 17, 5: Kip.(?) xiv küp ('with -p”) al-zir İd. 78: xv zir küp (-5) Tuh. 18a. 8. Mon. V. GBkev- (ğ-) “to chew', with some extended meanings; survives only(?) in SW Osm. fev-. Xak. xi er só:züg kevdi: “the man was indistinct (talaclaca) in his speech'; its origin is the phr. tançu:nı: kevdi: "he chewed (/dRa) the gobbet of meat in his mouth but did not swallow it” (16 yabtali") Kaş. II 16 (keve:r, kevme:k); küçi: kevdim arohanlu quwwatahu “İ weakened his strength” T 167, ro, kü:çin keve:r yuda"ifuhu “it vveakens him” III 288, 15. kóp- 'to swell, foam, boil over'. Not noted before xiv, but see köpük, survives in NE, SE, and NC Kir. Kom. xiv 'to swell' kób- CCG; Gr.: Kap. xv fara “to boil over” (taş-/) kóp(-5-) Tuh. 28b. 1: Osm. xvi köp- “to swell'; in one text T'T'S II 658. Dis. GBE kébe (gebe) See kéber-. kibe: pec. to Kaş. Oğuz. xı kibe: a/-nadra mina'l-ayyám “a short period of time, a few days”, hence one says kibe: boldı: madat burha mina'l-zamán "a (short) period of time passed” Kaş. III 217; a.o. do. (büte:). D kibi: See ki:b. küpe: originally “a small metal ring”, hence, by itself “an earring” and in the phr. küpe: yarık one of the “rings” making up chain-mail. An early l.-w. in Mong. (and thence Pe.) as khe, see Doerfer I 346. Survives in NE Sor kübe “a ring in harness'; NC Tara, Tob.; NW Kar. L. kübe “chain-mail” R 1I 1517; SW Osm. küpe “earring”. Türkü vırı ff. Miran 4.8 (ETY II 64, yarık): Xak. xı küpe: al-qurf 'earring'; küpe: yarık a/-dir" mina'l-hadid "an iron coat of mail” Kaş. IJI 217; a.o. III 15 (yarik): xiv Muh. (after al-catogan ya:tik) al-zaradiya “a coat of mail” kü:pe: (-5-) ya:rik Rif. 173 (only); against halqatı”l-udn "earring” rsiría: (not an ancient word) one MS. has küpe: in the margin Mel. 53, 9: (Çağ. xv ff. kóbe 'fringe, edging” in Sar. 302v. 6 is a Mong. l.-w.; kühe the Mong. form occurs in the Çağ. translation of the Mugaddimatu'l- Adab, see Doerfer, op. cit.): Kom. xiv “a coat of mail' kübe CCI; Gr.: Kip. xır (under “military equipment) al-zaradiya küpe: (-5-) Hou. 13, 15; (under “clothing”) al-halag wa'l-agnáf 'rings, earrings" küpe: (-5-) (fışırğa:k) do. 18, 1: xiv küpe (-b-) al-qurt fi'I-udn also used for tiyábu'l-harb "battle clothing! İd. 78: xv al-zaradiya küpe (-b-) Tuh. 18a. s: Osm. xviii küpe (^with -p-”) in Rümi gügwára 'earring” San. 302v. 8. Dis. V. GBEkebi:- “to become more or less dry, to dry partially (Intrans.); usually of clothing(?). Survives as keb-, kep-, and the like in SE "Türki, NC Kzx. and some NW languages. Xak. xi ton kebi:di: caffa a"al”l-tamb mina'l-balal wa gayrihi ba"da”l-cafaf "the surface of the garment dried from the moisture (etc.) partially Kaş, IJI 257 (kebi:r, kebi:me:k). *küve:- See küven-, küvenc, küve:z. kübi:- “to quilt, oversew', and the like. Survives only(?) in NE 'Tob. kübi- “to whip, oversew' R İl 1519. Xak. xı ol to:n kübi:di: darraba'l-tawb tadriba(n) “he quilted the garment” Kaş. III 257 (kübi:r, kübi:me:k): Kip. xiv kübi- darraba'l-tatoba' [-mubattan “to quilt a lined garment” 7d. 78. Dis. GBC küveç survives in SW Az. küvec, Osm. güvec “a flat, shallow earthenware cooking pot”. The exact meaning in Xak. is obscure; as Brockelmann points out al-nayraki is an error for al-nayzaki (Dozy II 631); the meaning is prob. “a curb bit”, The connection between the two meanings is obscure. The spelling with -w- in Kaş. is deliberate, since it is under the  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 732 
     
   
   
      688 DIS. heading fa'al mina'l-wwáte, but cf. küveclig. "The word may be foreign; cf. kuzec. Xak. xi küvveç yügü:n a/-[icamu'l-nayzaki (so read) “a curb bit(?) Kaş. II] 163: Xwar. xiv küveçnin (so spelt) ağzı açılmış erdi “the mouth of a cooking pot vvas open” (and a sparrow fell in it and died) Natc. 193, 6, o.o. 28, 17; 29, 17. VU?F küvij Hap. leg.; the -j suggests that it is a Sogdian L-w. Xak. xı küvi) (with -j') teasat küll şacara báliya “the interior of a rotten tree', for example a decaying willow; and one says küvij turma: “a rotten (al-fásid) radish' (etc.) when it has lost its taste Kaş. 7 366. ?F kevçi: Hap. leg.; prob. a foreign unit of weight, but morphologically unlike Chinese. The rit! varies widely from place to place, and its value here is unknown. Xak. xi kevçi: mükyal 1-Kaşğar ilà Uyğür "a Kággar unit of weight! used as far as the Uyğur (country); it contains ten rif/s Kaş. I 417. ?F köpçuük survives in NC Kir. köpçük *under-saddle horse-cloth'; Kzx. and NW Kk. köpşik 'pillow' Nog. ditto 'saddle-pad; nave of a wheel". The obvious semantic connection w. kópen, kópsün, inexplicable by Turkish morphology, suggests that all three are l.-w.s. Oğuz xı köpçük a/-mitara 'undersaddle horse-cloth' Kaş. I 478. Tris. GBC D küveclig Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. küveç. Xak. xi kuveçliğ küri:me:s a/-/icüm idà kána nayzaki (sic) fa-inna'l-faras là yacmah wa là yarmah “vhen the bit is a curb(?) the horse does not run away or kick” Kaş. 111 256, 4; n.m.e. Dis. GBD kebit “shop”, a 1.-vv. as kebid in xiv Mong., see N. Poppe, The Mongolian Monuments in hP'ags-pa Script, Wiesbaden, 1957, p. 125, but not later. Survives in NE 'Tob. kibit; NW Kar. kebit; Kaz. kibet R 77 1197, 1400, 1416; most modern languages use l.-w.s, generally Pe. duhkàn, for “shop”, xiv Chin.-Uyg.. Dict. p'u mien “shop” (Giles 9,493 7,886) kebit Ligeti 171: Xak. xı kebit al-hánüt "a shop” Kaş. 1 357: KB kebit ked bezedim “1 have ornamented my shop well' 5108: xır(?) Tef. kebüt “shop” 168: X war. xiv ditto Nahc. 267, 4: Kom. xiv ditto CCI; Gr. ?F kövdöp (£-) “the trunk, that is the human body without its extremities', and, in the early period, more particularly “a dead body”. Survives in NC Kir. kó:dón and in distorted form in NC Kzx. kewde; SW Uzb. gavda, NW Kk. gewde/kewde; Kaz. gevvde, Nog. kevde; SW Az. kövde, Osm. gövde and perhaps Tkm. góvre. "There is an obvious semantic connection with kóvre, inexplicable by Turkish etymology, which suggests that both are l.-w.s. The evidence for £- is unusually strong. Uyğ. viirff. Bud. Sanskrit ubaratüni kadeparáni (for kalevarani) "dead GBC bodies” ölmiş kövtönle:r erme:se:r (-t- — -d-) TT VIII D.26; ol tınliğlarnın kövdön etózi üze saçsar “if one makes a libation over the (dead) bodies of those mortals' U 17 44, 39-4o: Xwar. xii (PU) kövde “body” ' Ali 55 Kip. xtti (among 'parts of the body") al-cutta “the trunk! (VU) kewde: (unvocalized) Hou. 21, 20. Dis. V. GBDD kebit- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of kebi:-. Xak. xı ye:l to:nuf kebitti: "the wind partially dried (acaffa . . . ba"da”l-cafaf) the garment Kaş. II 298 (kebitü:r, kebitme:k). D köpe:d- Hap. leg.?; Intrans, Den. V. fr. köp. Xak. xı K.B (his realm is well organized) xazina kópedür kutadur yılı “his treasures become abundant, and his years are divinely favoured” 2262. D kübit- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of kübi:-. Xak. xı ol to:nin kübitti: "he gave orders for the quilting (bi-tadrib) of his garment! Kaş. 1I 298 (kübitu:r, kubitme:k). D kevtür- (£-) Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of kev-. Xak. xı ol anın kü:çin kevtürdi: kallafa man :cahana qwuwwatahu "he made someone wenken his strength! Kaş. 1I 195 (kevtürür, kevtürme:k). Dis. GBG kepek properly 'bran'; metaph. 'scurf, dandruff”. S.La.m.lg. with minor phonetic changes. L.-w. in Pe., etc., Doerfer 111 1615. Cf. kavik, Xak. xı kepek al-nuxála 'bran': kepek yinçü: 'secd pearls': kepek Aazázatu'l-ra's 'scurf' Kaş. I 399; 0.0. /1 310 (çilat-), III 93 (yélpir-): ror (yélpis-): xiv Muh. al-nuxála kepek Mel. 64, 7 (so spelt); Rif. 163: Kom. xiv 'bran kebek CCI; Cr. Kip. xiv kepek (-5-) al-nuxála İd. 78; Bul, 8, 8: xv ditto Kas. 63, 14; Tuh. 36b. 3. VU keviğ Hlap. leg.: not to be connected, as Atalay suggested with “Çağ”. kevek 'empty, hollow! R 7I 120r, which is the Pe. word hörah used by Babur. Xak. xr keviğ (và' unvocalized) “vith -8' gudrüfa'l-anf "the cartilage ( ?septum) of the nose” Kaş. 7 391. S? kévük See 2 küvük. köbek (&amp;-) “navel?, a purely Western (?Oğuz) word, not noted before xit! but prob. older. Survives only(?) in SW Az. kóbek; Osm. göbek, Tkm. gö:bek, Cf. kindik. xiv Mu. al-surra "naveP kóbe:k Mel. 47, 15 (mis-spelt köte:l), Rif. 141: Çağ. xv f. göbek (spelt) náf 'navel' San. 302r. 27: Tkm. xır al-surra gö:bek (Kip. kindik) Hor. zr, 2: xrv kóbek al-surra ld. 78: Osm. xvf. göbek often noted in phr. TTS I 313; İl 44o, İİİ 301; IV 345. : D kü:blg (sic, under /4"/) Hap. leg.; Dev. N. fr. kübi-, Xak. xı kü:big zağribıcİ-tareb 'quilting a garment! Kaş. 7 408. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 733 
     
   
   
      DIS. GBN D köpük Intrans. Dev. N. (Conc. N.) fr. kóp-; 'froth, foam', and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. minor phonetic changes; SW Az., Osm., "Vkm. kópük. L.-w. in Pe., etc., Doerfer 11 1656. Türkü vırı ff. (I am a camel stallion) ürün kópü:kü:mi:n saçarmen 'I scatter my white froth” IrkB zo: Uyğ. vırı ff. Civ. (scatter pepper on the liver of a black goat, plunge it in the fire and) kópikin alip 'take the froth from it" H I 35; a.o. I] iz, 103: Xak. xi köpük zabadu'l-ma' 'foam on vvater”: köpük fufáhatu'l-qtdr 'froth on a cooking pot” Kaş. I ago, 2.0. III 135 (Kó:l): Çağ. xv ff. köpük (^with -p-”) “the foam (kafi) which appears on the surface of water or oil'; in Ar. zabad San. 302v. 4: Xvvar, xiv köpük 'foam' Qutb 100: Kip. xiv köpük ('with -p-") al-ragwa 'foam' 14. 78, Bul. 8, 11 (misvocalized Aöğeh): xv ditto Tuh. 17a. 2. VU 1 küvük n.o.a.b.; (VU) mü:s is Çigil, this word is so described in I, but not IIIJ. Çigil xı küvük mü:s a/-daywan "a tom cat” Kaş. I 391; küvvük mü:ş ai/-daytwan HT 165. VU 2 küvük (?küwük) 'straw'; n.o.a.b.; except in Kaş. the first vowel is -e-; as in Kaş. this word follows 1 küvük the -ü- can hardly be an error for -e- but might be an error for -é-; cf. saman. Oğuz xi küwük al-tibn 'straw' Kaş, İİİ 165: xiv. Müh.(?) al-tibn ke:wük (waw unvocalized) Rif. 181 (only): Kip. xtrr al-tibn kewük (unvocalized, also şala:m (Russian soloma); Tkm. sa:ma:n) Hou. 9, 14: Xiv kewük al-tibn İd. 86; Bul. 7, 2. D kev£ge:k (&amp;-) Hap. leg.; Dev. N./A. (connoting Habitual Action) fr. kev-. Xak. xr kevge:k (MS. hefge:k) al-altagu'lladi yulaclic bi-kalamihi “a stammerer who is indistinct in his speech' Kaş. 77 289. D kevğin (g-) Hap. leg.; Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. kev- ; lit. *which is, or has to be, thoroughly chewed'. Xak. xr kevgin aş ra"dm ğayr nöci" "indigestible food”, opposite to çivğin, wa hadálika'l-nabt "also a plant” Kaş. I 443. Tris. GBG D kepekliğ P.N./A. fr. kepek: survives in SW Az., Osm. kepekli (of flour) “mixed with bran'. Xak. xı (after kepeklik) and with -&amp; “an owner (of bran)'. Kaş. I 508. D kepeklik Hap. leg.; A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. kepek. Xak. xr kepeklik “a place where bran (al-nuxála) is produced” Kaş. I 508. Dis. GBL kevel pec. to Xak. Xak. xı kevel at a/-farasu'l-ráyi'u'l-cawád “a well-bred fast horse' Kaş. I 395; 8.0. 11 133, 13: KB 5369 (büktel), 5803 (1 arkun). F ke:vli: Hap. leg.; no doubt a 1.-w., prob. Iranian (see Qo:vh:) Gancüki xı ke:vli: fühatu”l-nahr "the mouth of a canal” (or river) - Kaş. III 442.: 689 D kóplüg Hlap. leg.; dubious, if genuine, P.N./A, fr. köp, 'abundant'. The A.N. kóplük is well authenticated. Uyğ. viri ff. Man. TT IX 85 (2 a&amp;u:): (Xak. xi?) Tef. kóplük 'abundance' r8ş: Xwar. xiv alarnın köplükindin tépredi yer “the earth shook because they (the army) were so numerous" Qutb 100). VU(D) küvlük Hap. leg.; prima facie a Den. N. in -Iük or a Dev. N. in -ük but with no obvious etymology. Xak. xi küvlük “a lump (bunduga) of mud used as a missile' (yurmà bihi) either after being dried or before it Kaş. 1 479. Dis. V. GBLD kevil- ($-) Pass. f. of kev-, n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. küçim küsünim kevilü tüketti “my strength. (Hend.) has been completely undermined” /Z7ien-ts. 2071-2; a.o. Suv. s86, zı: Xak. xı er kü:ci: kevildi: “the man's strength was weakened' (da'ufat) Kaş. II 1357 (verse; no Aor. or İnfin.), o.o. 7 397, 8; II 13, 14 (same verse): Kip. xiv kewül- harima “to be, or become, decrepit” İd. 86. D kübül- (kübil-) Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of kübi:-, perhaps misvocalized in MS. Xak. xr ani to:nr: kübüldi: "his garment was quilted” (durriba . . . tadriba(n)) Kaş. II 120 (kübülür, kübülme:k). Tris. GBL ?F kepe:li: 'butterfly'; except in some NE, languages which use Mong. l.-w.s, the standard word for *butterfly' in all "Turkish languages, but in such a wide range of forms as to suggest that it is a l.-w. Survives as NE Alt,, Leb., "Tel. köbölök R JI 1317: SE Türki kepilek BS 523; kepile/kepi:le Jarring 170: NC Kar. köpölök, Kzx. kóbelek: SC Uzb. kapalak: NW Kk. gübelek, Kaz. kübelek; Kumyk gümelek/göbelek, Nog. küpelek: SW Az. kepenek, Osm. kelebek; "Tkm. kebelek, Xak. xı kepe:li: a/-faraşatı”llati yatir 'butterfiy” Kaş. 1 448: xiu(?) Tef. kebelek “butterfiy” 168: xıv Muh. al-faraş kele:bek Mel. 74, 8, Rif. 177 (Ar. corrupt): Çağ. xv ff. gopeleg (so spelt) kelebek Vel. 362 (verse); kópelek (so spelt) "an animal like a moth (parswàána) but bigger, with coloured wings, found in gardens" San. 3ozr. 28 (quotn.): Kom. xiv kóbelek CCG; Gr. Dis. GBN F kebin See kabın. ?F köben (?kópen) prob. a l.-w., see köpçük, survives in NE Leb. Sag. köbön “feather bed” R I7 1316; Khak. kóbe: “the lining of the skirt of a garment; SW Az. köbe “a felt rug R Il ra3:15. Oğuz xı köben “a saddle-pad (hils) for a camel; and a pack-saddle (a/-barda'a) or similar equipment for a packanimal” Kaş. 7 404. D küvenç (8-) Dev. N. fr. küven-, q.v. for the development of meaning. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. EEEE————————À—sss—u—— M B A A ii a 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 734 
     
   
   
     690 viti ff. Bud. Sanskrit rcchàá mánasca vardhante *their desires and pride increase' küsügleri küvencleri yeme: ükliyür TT VIII E.ə, (in a list of vices) küvenç 'pride' U 77 76, 14; 86, 32: Xak. xi K.B küvenç is fairly common and is a virtue rather than a vice, 'legitimate pride, self-respect', and the like, 95, 123 (avınç), 937, 1038, 1424 (udin-), etc.: Çağ. xv ff. güvenç (spelt) názi wa müfüxira “boasting, arrogance” San. 310r. 29 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv küvenc "legitimate pride, ?oy” Qutb 104; MN 65: Kip. xiv küvvenç (a small dál below the kàf perhaps indicates £-) a/-farah 'joy, cheerfulness” 1d. 86: Osm. xiv to xvr ğüvenç 'joy, pleasure'(?) TTS II 48o, IIl 328. Dis. V. GBND küven- (£-) Refl. f. of *küve:- originally, in a pejorative sense 'to be proud, arrogant', a meaning still surviving in some languages; later in a laudatory sense 'to have legitimate pride, enjoy self-respect'; thence 'to be glad, rejoice'. In the last sense survives, with a change of vowel position, in SC Uzb. kuvon- ; NW Kk, Kaz. kuwan-; Kumyk, Nog. kuvan-; SW Az. küven- means (1) 'to be proud, to boast'; (2) 'to rely on (someone Dat.) ; Osm. güven- (2), and (3) “to be confident, to dare”, TThe evolution of (2) is obscure. Uyğ. vr ff, Bud. Sanskrit darba 'pride, arrogance' küve:nmeki TT VIII D.şo, (he walks) artukrak küvenip 'very proudly' X 438: Xak. xr ol menip birle: küvendi: iftaxara bi 'he boasted (in competition) with me” Kaş. JI] 157 (küvenü:r, kuvenme:k): KB (then the world . . .) sevinip küvenip edipe bakıp “happy and proud and looking at its treasures! 81; (when chiefs are kind to the people . . . the latter) küvenür özün “feel proud of themselves” 6oş, küvenme bu kutka "do not boast of this divine favour” (it comes and goes) 694; 0.0. 1332, 4090, 5212: xın(?) Tef. muhtül 'cunning, deceitful' küvengen 187: xiv Rog. küwengü nerse “a thing on which one can rely' (sic?) R II 1522: Çağ. xv ff. kuwan- (spelt) faxr kardan wa mubáhat kardan “to be proud, to boast' San. 291v. 1 (quotns.) ; güvven- (spelt) the same as kuwanmeaning mufüxirat hardan "to be proud' do. 31or. 27: Kip. xiv kuwan-/kuvan- “to be happy, pleased”, etc. Qufb 146—7; küven- “to boast” Nağc. 373, 9; 376, 9: Kip. xiv küven(a small dal below the &amp;àf perhaps indicates É-) fariha “to be happy, to rejoice' 7d. 86: Osm. xiv to xvi £üven- (1) “to boast; (2) “to rejoice at (something Dat.)'; (3) “to rely on (something Dat.)'; in four texts TTS II 48o; IV 378. Tris. GBN D küvençliğ ($-) P.N./A. fr. küvenç, n.o.a.b. UyE. viu ff. Man. (to those blinded by the glare from) küvençliğ suv “the water of pride' TT III ss: Bud. Sanskrit drpta *proud, arrogant' küvenclig TT VIII D.27; bramanlar küvenclig bolurlar “the Brahmans become arrogant! TT X 474; biligsiz DIS. GBN küvençliğ kılinçi artuk küclüg erlp “his ignorant, proud deeds being extremely strong' TT VI 72 (the loop of the -I- was inadvertently omitted and the word is transcribed küvençey): Xak. xı KB küvenclig tirigltk kótürdi özin “happy, self-confident life has taken itself off” 1073. Dis. GBR VU ?F kóvre: (?8-) listed under -R- but obviously connected semantically with kóvdöp, which suggests that both are I.-w.s. Survives in SW 'Tkm. góvre (see kövdön). Xak. xı kövre: “the body (şabac, MS. in error jayx) of any animal when it has died and the internal organs have disappeared, and the dried flesh remains on the bones” Kaş. I 422. D kevrek ($-) Dev. N./A. fr. kevre:-; survives in NE Khak. kíbrek; SW Osm. gevrek 'friable, fragile. Xak. xr kevrek ne:p "any fragile (r:xro) sort of tree like the castor oil plant, FRrcinus communis (al-xartvea'), etc.", Kaş. 1 479: Kip. xiv kewrek (?, MS. hewrük) al-baqsimüt "biscuit İd. 86; bagsimatu'l-rukab 'ship's biscuit” kewrek Bul. 8, 16: Osm. xvi kewrek (spelt) in Rümi, furd wa şihanda *broken' Sar. 301 v. 13. VU kevrik Hap. leg.; the first hàf is unvocalized. Xak, xr kevrik a/-"arfac mina'l-şacar "a tree, the Vitex agnus castus (so Red. for Osm.) Kaş. I 479. D köprüğ “a bridge'; morphologically Dev. N. fr. kópür- but with no obvious semantic connection. S.i.a.m.l.g. with minor phonetic changes. A First Period l.-w. in Mong. as ke'ürge (Studies, p. 238); l-w. in Pe,, etc., Doerfer İl 1623. Uyğ. viit ff. Man. (to those blinded with the glare from the water of pride) köni nomluğ kóprügüg kórkittipiz (sic) *you have shown the bridge of the true doctrine” TT III 55-6: Civ. USp. ış, 2 (öpdün): xiv. Chin.-Uyg. Dict. ch'iao "bridge" (Giles 1,398) kóprüg Ligeti 175: Xak. xı köprüg al-gantara "a large arched bridge' Kaş. I 478: xın(?) Tef. köprü "bridge” 185: xiv Muh. al-qantara kó:prü: Mel. 76, 16; Rif. 180; Çağ. xv ff. köprük (so spelt) RAóprü Vel. 362 (quotn.); ditto pil 'bridge', in Ar. qanfara San. 302r. 26 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv kóprüg/ köprü “bridge” Quib roo-z: Kom. xiv *bridge' köprü CCI; Gr.: Kap. xi al-cisr “bridge” kópri: (-5-) Hou. 6, 9: xiv köprü: (*with -p-”) al-císr, in Tkm. al-gantara İd. 78, al-qantara sua”l-cisr kópri: (-b-) Bul. 4, 4: xv cisr vea. qantara küprl (-b-) Tuh. 11a. ro, qantara ditto 28b. ro. küvrüg 'drum'; n.o.a.b.; an early L-w. in Mong. as ke'ürge[hó'ürge (Haenisch 100—5)/ kórge (Studies, p. 239); this later became 2ezgerge (Kow. 2447; Haltod 181). "Vhe earlier form was reborrovved in Çağ., see below, and the later in NE Tuv. Cf. tümrüg. Türkü vri the word read küvrügsi: in IJ W 4 might contain this word misread, but this part of  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 735 
     
   
   
     DIS the inscription is fragmentary: Uyğ. vi ff. Bud. Sanskrit rafir ghoşa “a joyful noise' küvrüg ünt te:&amp; yapkuluğ 'resounding like the sound of a drum' TT VIII G.70; o.o. PP 31, 8 (tokit-); Suv. 375, 9 (ün), etc.: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. ku “drum” (Giles 6,241) kürbüg Ligeti 176: Xak. xı küvrüg al-hüs va'l-tablu'liadi yudrab “the kettle-drum and drum which are beaten' Kag. I 479: KB küvrügl birle 'together with his drum' 1036 (cf. kuya:B): xiv Muh.(?) al-küs küvrüg (-f-) Rif. 146 (only): (Çağ. xv ff. kewürge ("vvith k- -g-") küs-i şühi "a royal kettle-drum' Vel. 349 (quotn.), kewürge/küwürge kus-i buzurg San. 301v. 12 (quotn.)): Xwar. xiv (PU) küvvrü 'drum' Qutb 103 (körü): Kip. xiv al-küs wa' l-dabdaba (mis-spelt al-dabda, 'drum') küvvrü: Bul. 6, 8: Osm. xiv küslar ke:vrüğler (sic) calip “beating the drums'; in one text TTS HI 440. Dis. V. GBRD kéber- ($-) Intrans. Den. V. fr. kebe:. "The latter word is first noted in Kip. (see below) and survives in SW Osm. gebe 'pregnant'; T km. gebe 'swollen, inflated, a balloon'; it seems originally to have meant 'with a swollen stomach'. Kéber- survives in SW Az. keber- 'to exhale, die'; Osm. geber- 'to die' (of an animal or contemptuously of a human being); Tkm. geber-/güber- “to be swollen, inflated'. San. describes it as the Rumi form of kabar-; the words are syn., but it is unlikely that kebe:, kéber- are Sec. f.s of kaba:, kabar-. Uyğ. vru ff. Bud. (of a corpse) karını kéberip “ts belly swells' U III 43, 24; TT X 548: Kip. xiv kebe: muntafixu'l-batn “vitha svvollen stomach” , hence keberdi:: kebermek ai-nafxa “to be inflated! İ4. 78: Osm. xvin keber- (?ğeber-) waram hardan "to swell', in Çağ. kabar- San. 3oor. 8. D köpür- Caus. f. of köp-, but practically syn. w. it; 'to froth, foam', and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE, SE. See kótl-. Xak. xı eşiç köpürdi: “the cooking pot, etc. frothed (or foamed, zabadat); and one says sü:t köpürdi: “the milk formed cream” (tazabbadat); also used of a man when he foams (tazabbada) Kaş. II 72 (köpürür, kópürme:k): Çağ. xv ff. köpür- (^with -p-") Raf hardan üb wa dahan “of water or oil, to froth” San. 302r. 9 (quotn.): Kip. xiv köpür- (“vith -p-”) arğd "to foam, froth” İd. 78. : D kevre:- (ğ-) Den. V. fr. *kever Dev. N. fr. kev-; 'to be, or become weak'. Survives only(?) in SW Az. küvre- (sic) “to become weak, brittle! R II 1524; Osm. ğevre- “to become dry and crisp'. Xak. xı anın kü:ci: kevre:di: “his strength weakened" (tvahanat); also used of anything hard (şu/5) when its strength weakens Xaş. III 282 (kevre:r, kevre:me:k); o.o. / 103, 1; //7 41, 18: xini(?) Tef. kevre- “to become weak' 168. D köpürt- Caus. f. of kópür- ; s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xt o:t eşiçni: köpürttl: "the fire made the , GBŞ 691 cooking pot froth' (azbadat); also used when something makes the mouth or water foam Kaş. 111 430 (köpurtür, kópürtme:k): KB (when a brave man sees the enemy) kópirtir (sic) iziğ "he makes his steps froth' (i.e. raises the dust) 2382: Caf. xv ff. kópürt- (spelt) is its (i.e. kópür-'s) Caus. f. San. 302r. 20. D kevret- (£-) Hap. leg. ?, Caus. f. of kevre:-. Xak. xr ol anın kü:cin kevretti: "he weakened (atchana) his strength' Kaş. İl 334 (kevretü:r, kevretme:k, verse). Tris. GBR VU kövürge:n “vvyild onion'; both forms pec. to Kaj.; the second occurrence, where the first Raf carries a fatha, is given as an example of a word in which -ğe:n does not connote Habitual Action or the like. The Mong. syn. kómel (Kow. 2610, Haltod 231) cannot be borrowed direct from this word, but may be borrowed from an earlier form; alternatively both may be borrowed from a third language. Xak. xı kóvürge:n a/-"unşul wahuwa'l-basalu'l-cabali "the wild onion'; in Oğuz kómürge:n Kaş. I 522; a.0. 525, 24. Dis. GBS VU?F kópsü:n Hap. leg.; semantically connected with köpçük (q.v.), köpen and perhaps a Ll-w. Xak. xı köpsü:n al-hagiya məa”l-firágu'l-mawfu' "a soft bolster or mattress” Kaş. I 437. : Dis. GBŞ D kevşek (ğ-) Dev. N./A. fr. kevsge:-; “soft” and the like, both lit., “soft, limp', etc. and metaph. 'soft-hearted, mild, gentle'. Survives with some vocalic changes in NE Tel. köpşek R H 1315: NW Kaz. küpşek R İİ 1517: SW Az. kóvsek; Osm. gevsek; Tkm. $ovşak, all meaning “soft, friable, fragile". Uyğ. vri ff. Bud. kep kövşek [ki]khf 'with an openhearted, gentle character” Hüen-ts. 1901 (a.0.o. in note thereon); uu. 619, 22 (tokuluğ): Xak. xı kevşek ne:p “anything distinguished by softness and limpness' (im wa futur) like a thin (al-ragiq) garment: kevşek (MS. köcşeR) et "tender (fihi rixátwa) meat”: kevşek (MS. kövşeh) etme:k “bread the dough of which is (mixed) with superior yeast” (xamir hasan) Kaş. I 479; a.o. III 287 (kevşe:-): Osm. xvii f£evgek in Rümi, narm wa sust "soft, gentle", etc. San. 301v. 16; the word is also noted in several xv to xvir texts, the 773 transcription geyşeh is no doubt an error for ğeyşek spelt gegşek TTS I 302; İl 427; III 287; IV 332. kevşen Hap. leg.; unvocalized in the MS. and spelt kfsng, but placed under the cross-heading -8; Atalay III 386, footnote says that it survives in the same meaning in NW Bashkir as kefep. Xak. xr kevşen the word for “a gift of food' to someone who comes to stack the crop after the fields are cleared (hadara”/-Ruds ba'da'l-tangiya) Kaş. III 385. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 736 
     
   
   
     692 Dis. V. GBŞD kübüs- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of kübi:-, so spelt, perhaps in error, but cf. kübül-. Xak. xı ol mapa: to:n kübüşdi: “he helped me to quilt (fi tadrib) the garment'; also used for competing Kaş. /1 88 (kübüşü:r, kübüşme:k). D kevse:- (&amp;-) Den. V. fr. keviş, Dev. N. fr. kev- which survives in SW Osm. geviş, "Vkm. gevüş 'chewing the cud”, with two quite different meanings (1) “to chew the cud” (of a ruminant); (2) “to become limp, soft”, and the like. In the first meaning survives in (NE "Tuv. see kevsen-); SE Türki köşe-/köşiə 178: NC Kir, kepşe-, Kzx. küyse-, SC Uzb. kavşa-: NW Kk. güyse-, Kaz. küşe-, Kumyk güyse-; Nog. küyze-: SW Az. kóvse-; 'Tkm. gevüşe-, (Osm. uses the phr. geviş getir-); in the second only(?) in SW Osm. gevşe-, Tkm. ğovşa- (and köşe"to lie down, rest, be at ease"). Xak. xı tevey ot kevse:di: “the camel chewed (/ctarra) the forage”, and one says kurç ne:p kevse:di: “the hard thing became weak and soft” (fatara . ta sgüra yaxı), hence “good leavened bread well baked and made with butter' is called kevşek etme:k Kaş. 171 287 (kevse:r, kevşe:me:k): Çağ. xv ff. gevvşe- (spelt) nijxwür hardan “to chew the cud” San. 301 v. 1: Kip. xiv kewse- (of a camel, sheep, etc.) ictarra; one says dewe: kewser “the camel is chewing the cud' /d. 86: Osm. xv and xvi f£evse- “to chew the cud” and geyşe- (spelt gegşe-, mistranscribed geyyşe-) “to be soft” and the like; in several texts T T.S 7 302-7; 11 427; III 292; IV 338; xvii ğevvşe- (after Çağ.) and, in Rümi, narm wa sust sudan “to be soft, gentle”, etc, San. şor v. 1. D kevset- (£-) Caus. f. of kevşe-, s.i.s.m.l. in the first meaning of kevse:- and in the second meaning in SW Osm. gevset- ; Tkm. Bovsat-. Xak. xı ol katığ ne:pni: kevsetti: “he weakened the strength (atchana'l-quwswa) of the hard thing” (kevşetu:r, kevşetme:k), and one says ol teveysin kevsetti: “he urged his camel to chew' ('ala'l-ictirar) with the same (Aor. and) Infin. Kaş. İl 338. D kevşen- (ğ-) Refl. f. of kevge:-; s.i.s.m.l., including NE Tuv. gegien- “to chew the cud”, Xak. xı tevey kevsendi: “the camel (or other animal) chewed the cud” (ictarra) Kaş. II 252 (kevşenü:r, kevşenme:k), o.o. 255, 16, 256, 20: Kip. xv fctarra kevşen- Tuh. 6b. 10. D kevşeş- (ğ-) Co-op. f. of kevsge-; survives in SW 'Tkm. £ovsas- “to begin to grow weak', and the like, kóses- “to rest, lie down together', and the like. Xak. xi tevey ot kevsesdi: 'some of the camels chewed (the forage, ?ctarra) in the sight (5i-ru'ya) of the others" Kaş. II 351 (kevşeşü:r, kevşeşme:k). Dis. V. GBYPUS küfyen- See (küyfen-/)küymen-. DIS. V. GBŞDis. GBZ ?F kebe:z 'cotton sced'; prob. like bamuk “cotton”, q.v., a L-w, Survives in SE Türki kebez/kevez farring 168; NC Kir. kebez. Uyğ. vii ff. Civ. (as I, Bay "Femür, required) kebez tarığu yér “land to plant cotton' USp. 2, 2-3; 0.0. do. 70, 6 (bütgür-), etc.: Xak. xr kebe:z zar'u'l-qujn 'cotton seed” Kaş. 1 293 (uru&amp;la:-); 7 303 (uruğlan-), qutna 'cotton' I s10 (biliklik), n.m.e. VU keviz 'carpet, rug', and the like; survives, only(?) in NE Alt. kebis R IJ 1197; Khak. kibis; Tuv. xevis; the forms with rounded vowcls are cleatly Sec.; the original first vowel was prob. -e- and the rounded substitute -órather than -ü-. Xak. xi keviz a/-zarbiya “a large carpet" Kaş, 1 366 (the first vowel is fatha, not kasra as in the printed text); kówüz "a large carpet, or any mattress or sofa( firág azo mihdd), woven of wool' 7/7 164: Kom. xiv 'carpet' kówüz CCI; Gr.: Kip. xii al-bisát "carpet” kövvüz (mis-spelt hö:r) How. 16, 21: xiv. kewüz ditto. İd. 86: xv ditto köyüz Tuh. 8a. 2. D küve:z ($-) Dev. N./A. fr. *küve:-; 'proud, pride' (reprehensible or justified, see küven-). N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. (in a list of Bodhisattvas) vacır tumşuklığ kep küvez 'with a vacra beak, open-handed(?) and (rightly) proud” U II 6o, 2 (i); a.o. Suv. 619, 23: Xak. XI küve:z al-mutakabbir “proud” Kaş. I 411; kodğul küvez (sic) utruki'l-kibr "lay aside pride” II 140, 9; o.0. 1 252, 18; 325, 3: KB kür küvez erdi "he was brave and (rightly) proud” 409; o.o. 1706 (uluğsığ), 2381, 4725. Tris. GBZ D kebezlig Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. kebe:z. Xak. x1 (after) kebezlik), and when it is used as an Adj. (tetcsifa) one says kebezlig er "aman who owns cotton' (qutn) Kaş. 1 soy. D kebezlik Hap. leg.; A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. kebe:z. Xak. xi kebezlik a/-magtana “a cotton plantation” Kaş. I 507. küvezlik (g-) Hap. leg.; A. N. fr. küve:z. Xak. XI küvezlik 'insolence' (a/-bafar) Kaş 7 so? (verse). Tris. V. GBZD küvezlen- (8-) Refl. Den. V. fr. küve:z; pec. to K B. Xak. xi K B (if fortune smiles on you) küvezlenmegil “do not get proud' 1330; a.c. 5211. z Mon. GC k€:ç (gé:c) "late, lateness', and the like; homophonous vv. 2 ke:ç-, q.v. S.i.a.m.l.g.; SW Az. kec, Osm. geç, "Vkm. gç. Uyğ. vir ff, Bud. (months and years have passed and) ür kéc boldi 'a long time has elapsed' Hüen-ts. 25; 0.0. do. 1990 (abamuluğ), € PP 62, 1 (öğlen-), U III 82, 14: Civ. TT VII 27, 16 (umay): Xak. xı ke:ç ai-but "lateness, delay'; hence one says kö:ç keldi:  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 737 
     
   
   
     MON. V, GCabta'a fi”l-hudür "he was slow in coming” Kaş. III 121; alim ke:ç kalsa: “if a debt remains (unpaid) for a long time” (zarın fawil) I 294, 1 KB (when you go to bed at night) k€ç yat “gö late' (and get up early) 1506; o.o. 556 (uza:-), 1553 (uzu:n), r585: xin(?) Tef. keç “late" 177: Çağ. xvff. $éc (spelt) qurün axşamdan sonra gec waqt “the late evening" Vel. 3s (quotns.); Kéc dir wa dir maqt 'slow, late; a long time” San. 312r. 29; keç qurün “evening” (wagt-i şüm) and "a long time” 312v. 4 (quotns.): Kom. xiv “late” keç/keçe CCI; Gr.: Kip. xv büt” keçrek Tuh. za, 8; amsá “to be evening! keş (sic) bol- do. 67a. 10; a.o.0. 1 köç (ğ-) 'migration' and the like; homophonous vv, KÖöç-, q.v. S.i.a.m.l.g.; SW Osm., 'Tkm. göç. L.-w. in Pe., etc., Doerfer IIl 1660. (Uy£. viri ff. Civ. see 2 köç): Xak. xr köç al-za'n wa'l-irtihal 'migration, emipration'; hence (sic) one says sü: köçti: “the army marched off” (irtahala) Kaş. I 321: KB (a man who travels from one city to another) kócin öndün 1dsa éter uz işi (must mean) “manages his affairs skilfully if he sends his heavy luggage (or his baggage train) ahead' 4814: Çağ. xv ff. kóc (with -c”) zaql wa harakat *migration” San. 303v. 11: Xwar. xiv köç 'migration” Quib 100: Kip. xi (among the Proper Names) kö:çbe: amiru'l-qufl “the leader of the caravan' Hou. 29, ts (and see 1 klü:g): xiv köç ("with -ç”) migration (al-za'm) when the women are included' 7d. 79; al-rahil *migration” köç (^with -ç”) Bul. 6, 6: Osm. xiv ff. göç “migration”, etc., by itself and in phr., c.La.p. T TS H 441; HI 301; İV 345. VU 2 köç “an hour? n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vri ff. Civ. TT VIII Pır, etc. (1 karşı:): Xak. xt köç a/-sda"a “an hour”: hence one says bi:r köç küdgil “vait for an hour” Kaş. 7 321. 1 kü:ç (ğü:c) 'strength' in a physical or abstract sense, with some extended meanings; see Clauson “The Concept of "Strength" in 'Turkish' in Nemeth Armağanı, Ankara, 1962. An early l.-w. in Mong. as gügiü(») (Haenisch 51), also in Pe., Doerfer III 1662. S.i.a.m.l.g.; SW Az. küc, Osm. güç, but güc . . . before vovvels, Tkm. güyç. Türkü vii tepri küç börtük üçün "because Heaven gave him strength” 7 E ır, II E 11; el(Dig yıl işiğ küçiğ bérmis “for fifty years (the "Türkü) gave their efforts (Hend.)” (to the Chinese) I E 8, II E 7-8; a.o.0. (1 1:Ş): vini ff. tepri: kügi:pe: “by strength (given) by Heaven” IrkB 17: Man. (the Five Gods are, inter alia) küçi “the strength' (of everyone on earth) Chuas. 47: Yen. (you werte a tough archer) utsar küç ertiniz "you were strong in conquering” Mal. 28, z, the vvord also occurs as an element in P.N.s: Uyf. viri Su. E s (bö:r-): viti ff. Man.-A beş tepri kücin M 7 16, 17; a.o.o.: Man. T'T III 170 (üstel-); a.o.o.: Bud. küç is common, e.g. PP 37, 2 (alapad-), and see küsün: Civ. küçi yétmeser “if his strength is insufficient” 77 VII 25, 18; a.o.0. TT I 64-5 (artat-): Xak. xı kü:ç al-qutvtwa “strength”: kü:ç al-zulm “violence, oppression 693 (prov.); hence a/-zdlim "the violent, oppressive man” is called küçemçi:, and a/-qazuzci “strong” kü:çluğ Kaş. III 120; about 20 o.o., nearly half spelt küç, usually before Suffs.; Küç Tégin P.N. 7 413, 27: KB küç 'strength' is common, e.g. ylgitlik küci 'the strength of youth' 362; o.o. 247 (üzül-), 380, 600, 656, etc.—küç kılğan “a violent, oppressive (man)' 848: xı At. küç emgek tegürme kişike “do not inflict violence or pain on people” 331; Tef. küç 'strength; violence, oppression' rgo: xiv Muh. al-qutowa gü:ç Mel. 52, 3; Rif. 148 (kü:c): Çağ. xvff. küç (with k-) (1) zur 'strength, violence'; (2) kár wu bür wa muhimm *business, important affairs'; in this sense it cannot be used by itself, but only in the Hend. iş küç Sar. 303v. ro (quotn.); a.o. 106v. 17 (1 iş): Xwar. xiv küç 'strength; force, violence' Qutb 105; MN 39; Nahe. 196, 17; 390, 1-2: Kom. xiv 'strength; work; compulsion' küç CCI, CCG, Gr. rs? (quotns.): Kip. xim (among the P.N.s) Kü:çbi: .. amir qadi "strong lord”, it is an idiom (uda) Hou. 29, 15 (and see 1 köç): xıv küç al-qutcua, and one says küç berdi: nasarahu qitesoáhu "he helped him with his efforts! /4. 79: xv sa'b “difficult” (sarp and) küş (sic) Tuh. 22b. 2: Osm. xiv ff. güç “strength” (once in xiv); “violence, oppression'; common by itself and in phr. TTS I 335; IJ 470; III 301; IV 345. ?F 2 kü:ç 'sesame seed'; prob. a l.-w. cognate to künçit, q.v., which is Tokharian. N.o.a.b. Çigil xi kü:ç a/-simsin 'sesame seed'; hence 'sesame oil” (duhnu'l-hall) is called kü:ç ya:Ét, and (castor seed' (hamlu'I-xarwa') is called inge:k kü:gi: 'cow sesame-seed' because of its large size Kaş. 117 121: Xwar. xiv bir ağrı altun köp yaxşı durur yüz elli batman küçdin “one gold coin is better than 150 batmans of sesame seed”, Seyfi Serayi, Gülistan Tercümesi, Ankara, 1954, p. 205, 11-12; see E. N. Nadzhip, Arkhaizmy v lehsihe tyurkoyazychnogo pamyatnika XIV v., *Gulistan! Seyfa Sarai, p. 84, where the word is misunderstood. Mon. V. GC1 kec- (&amp;-) both 'to pass away, elapse' (Intrans.), including 'to pass through (something Zb/.)' and “to cross, pass over” (something 4cc., Trans.). In the early period specifically for crossing rivers; contrast 1 a:ş-. S.i.a.m.].g. w. minor phonetic changes; in SW Az. keç-, Osm., Tkm. geg-. Cf 1 öt-. Türkü vin Yinçü: ógüz keçe: “crossing the Pearl River” I S 3-4, İl N 3; a.0.0.: Uyğ. vir Selepe: keçe: 'crossing the Selenga River” $u. E 4; a.o.o.: VIII ff. Uyğ. Man. kamağ yér suv keçgülük yaraşı 'capable of crossing all lands and vvaters” Wind. 28-9: Bud. anın arasında bu sav taki kecmezken 'meanwhile and before this story had reached (the public) Suv. 623, 1-2; Sindu ógüz suvin keçer erken 'while crossing the Indus' Hiüen-ts. 2021—2: Xak. xı a:y kü:n kecti: “months and days passed' (madd), and one says er su:v keçti: “the man crossed ('abara) the watet" 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 738 
     
   
   
     694 (etc.); and one says er kecti: “the man passed away' (madd), that is died (máta) Kaş. II s (kece:r, keçme:k), 7 So (1 a:ğ), about zo 0.o., usually "to cross” (Trans.), occasionally “to pass” (Intrans.): KB özün terk keçer "you yourself quickly pass away' (from this dreamlike world) 231; yigitlik keçer “youth passes' 361; negü teg keçer bu kecigli künün 'how does this passing day of yours pass?” 1583; o.o. 693, 954: xır(?) At. keçer yél keçer teg maza muddatı “the time for enjoyment passes as the wind passes” 194; 178 (tüş-) 2.0.0.: Tef. keç- "to pass, cross", etc. (Intrans. and Trans.) 177: xiv Mu. 'abara ke:ç- Muh. 28, rs (aş- in text, keç- in margin Rif. 121); al-'ubür gösçmeğ (sic) 15, 12; 35, 1; ğeçme:k 89, 120: Çağ. xv ff. kéc- (-tl, etc.; “vith k-”) geç” in all its meanings Vel. 356; kéc- (spelt) gudajtan 100. "ubür hardan “to pass, pass away; to cross” San. 312r. 13 (quotn.; the spelling due to confusion with 2 ke:ç-): Xwar. xit keç(?geç-) “to cross” "AF 33: xim(?) ditto Og. 206: xiv kecigli “past” (year) Qutb 92; kéc“to pass; to cross” do. 95; ditto, and vv, Abl. “to renounce' MN 37, etc.; keçken tün “last night” Nahe. 426, 14: Korn. xiv “to pass, pass through” kec- CCI, CCG; Gr. 135 (quotns.): Kip. xur "abara keç- Hou. 33, 17 (mis-spelt hóp-); 37, 19 (-c-), al-sahru'l-màdi "last month” keçke:n ay do. 28, 9 (-c-): xiv keç- ('with -ç-”) 'abara wa madü wa nafada (to pass through”), also pronounced keş- id. 79; a.o. do. 14 (agnu:k1:); "abara keç- (- e- ) Bul. 62v.: xv kes- "ada swa cáza “to cross” Kas. 9, 8; cáza keş- (and aş-) Tuh. 12a. 7; "adü ditto do. 25b. 13: Osm. xiv ff. ğeç- “to pass on, pass into, pass over, surpass, pass one's life, renounce'; in a number of texts TT'S 7 295; II 419; IV 327. 2 ke:ç- (ğe:c-) "to he late' and the like; homophonous vv, ké:g, N.o.a.b., during the medieval period displaced by the Emphatic f. kecik-, which w. minor phonetic changes (SW Osm. gecik-) si.a.m.lg. except NE. Xak. xr er ké:cti: abta'a'l-racul fi'l-amr "the man was slow about the business” Kaş. III 18o (kö:çe:r, ké:gme:k): KB (the moon's brightness disappears) tuğar keçe azın yana ok tolur "by degrees it rises later and later, and then becomes full again” 734: xın(?) 4t. isiz edgü işke yanut kécmez ol "the requital for good and evil deeds is not slovv in coming” 374; a.o. 18o (1 öm): xiv Muh. abta'a ğe:çMel. 21, 15 (only); ai-but! getmek 35, 16; Rif. 121 (R€:cmeh): Kip. xit abta'a mina l-but' kéc- Hou. 37, 19; kec- do. 38, 4: xiv kec(-di:) abta'a (and kécik- (-di:) zabaffa"a “to be slow in doing something") İd. 79; abta'a kecBul. 28v.: (xv abta'a kecik- Tuh. sa. 12; Bàába “to be absent' and the like Feçik- do. 26b. 13). köç- (&amp;-) "to change one's abode, migrate'; with some extended meanings like 'to be nomadic', and metaph. 'to die' (i.e. migrate from this world to the next); homophonous w. 1 köç, S.iam.lg; SW Osm, Tkm. göç-. Xak. xr sü: köçtl: “the army (etc.) marched MON. V. GCoff” (rahila), the correct practice (al-agwab) with the unvoiced consonants (Aurüfu'l-salába) is to convert the -d- in the Perfect into -tto facilitate the pronunciation; the unvoiced letters are -p-, -Ç- and velar and post-palatal -k-; but there is this difference about these letters that the correct usage is to form the Caus. verb (ai-fi'lu'l-weácib) with -d- because this is preferable (actead) Kaş. II s (köçe:r, köçme:k, verse. It is only exceptional for this rule to be respected in the surviving MS. of Kaş., for example the Perf. of tik- is shown as tikdt:; it should be noted that -t- is not mentioned, although in this case the suffix is almost always -tt:/-tl:, and that -8- and -Ş -are not described as unvoiced): KB 4814 (ulus), 6112 (köçütçi:): xui(?) At. (this world is an inn) tüşüp köçgülük "the man who lodges there must travel on' 177: xiv. Muh. rahaía gö:ç- Mel. 26, ro, 32, 13 fT. Rif. 109, 117 (kó:c-); al-rahil ğösçmek 36, 5; 122: Çağ. xv ff. kóc- ('with -c-', sic) küç hardan “to set out, migrate” Sar. 303r. 15 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv köç- (and, metri gratia, köçe-) “to migrate' Qutb 100: Kom. xiv “to migrate', and metaph. 'to die' kóc- CCG; Gr. 149 (quotn.): Kip. xtit rahala KÖÇ- (so spelt) Hou. 37, 19: xiv köç- (*with -ç-”) za"ana "to set out, migrate! Id. 79; sáfara bi-ma'nà rála , tva aktar má yusta'mal fi rahl “to travel, go”. usually in the sense of “to migratc” (safar et-/ ket-/) köç- Bul. 47v. (the last six words follow the "Turkish translation and are followed by köçü (repeated); they prob. refer only to köç-): xv köş- (sic) rahtala Kav. 9, 8; Tuh. 17b. 4; Osm, xiv ff. göç- “to depart, migrate'; metnph. “to dic'; c.i.a.p. TTS I 315; Il 441; III 301; İV 346. Dis. GCE 1 kece: "felt; specifically Oğuz, survives only (?) in SW Az., Osm., "Tkm. keçe, cf. kidiz. Oğuz xı keçe: al-libd “fel Kaş, III 219: xiv Muh. Mel. 78, note 2 (edrim), (lababidi. 'felt maker, or merchant! keçeçi: (-c-, -c-) Rif. 157): Çağ. xv ff. kéce (so spelt) namd "felt San. 312v. 7: Tkm. al-lubbád 'saddlc-felt' keçe: (so spelt; Kip. kiyiz) Hou. 17, 4: xv ditto d. 79: Osm. xvi keçe (sic) in two Pe, dicts. TTS IV s2o. VU 2 kéce: Hap. leg.; the first vowel is unmarked and as this word follows 3 kéce: it is unlikely to be -e-, and more likely to be -éor -l-. Xak. x1 keçe: “a basket (a/-şarica) used to transport melons, cucumbers and the like" Kaş. Hİ 220. D 3 keçe: (gece:) Dev, N./A. fr. 2 ke:ç-, in the carliest period used as an Adv. "late in the evening”, but soon after as a N. for “the late evening” the period preceding tün, “the night”. S.i.a.m.l.g. with some phonetic and semantic variations; e.g. in NE kece means "evening, in the evening, yesterday”, in NVV Nog. 'evening' is keş (ke: €) and “night” kese and tün, in SW 'evening! is Az., Osm. axsam; "Tkm. afsam; “night” kece, fece,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 739 
     
   
   
      i i j H í DIS. V. GCD- — 695 fice and "yesterday" dünen, dün, düyn. Türkü vii ff. yarın k€çe: 'early in the morning and late in the evening” 7rkB 1, 2, 22: Uyğ. vin (we fought) keçe: yaruk batar erikli: 'in the evening as the light failed” Su. E 1: vij ff. Man. yarın keçe M III 36, s (iii) (I 31, 4 ()): Bud. tünle kécede "late at night” (in antithesis to tapda érte "early in the morning”) Hüen-ts. 1964-5: Civ. kayu kişi kéce edğü körmeser 'if a man does not see well when the light is failing' H 1 33; (make a liniment and) üç keçe yakzun “run it in on three (successive) evenings! do. 41; bir kece taştın salkımka teğürüp İkinti kün “put it out in the cold one evening, and the next day... .” do. 178; in TT VII 35 the times of day mentioned are tanda “at dawn', kün ortuda “at midday” and keçe "in the evening'; a.o.o.: Xak. xr keçe: al-layl, “night”, (in a verse) kéce: turup yorir erdim qumtu asri layla(n) “1 got up at night and set out” Kaş. III 219: KB keçe yattı “late in the evening he went to bed” 489; o.o. 1506, 6016; (the secretary must be at the (king's) door) keçe tanda 2731: xını(?) At. 184 (érte:): Çağ. xv ff. &amp;ece (so spelt) sab 'night' San. 312v. 8: Xvvar. xırı(?) kirk kün kirk keçe (?8-) “for forty days and nights” Oğ. 369; o.o. do. 18, 65: xiv keçe "night" Qutb 95: Kom. xiv “night” keçe CCI; kiçe CCG; Gr. 135 (quotn.) Kip. xur ("night” tün, “day” kündüz) hàda'l-layl “to-night” bu: ke:çe: (spelt fata yd”), 'yesterday night” tün ke:çe:, 'to-morrow night” kelğe:n kö:çe: Hou. 28, 19-20: xiv kece: ("with -c-") al-masá' "evening” İd. 79: xv al-masd' kece: (-c-) Kan, 36, 13; layl kece (and tün) Tuh. 32a. 3: Osm. xiv ff. gece “night” in several phr. 7 TS I 294; III 281-2; IV 325. S keci: See eckü:. F küji 'incense'; no doubt a lL-w., prob. Sogdian. L.-w. in Mong. as Aci (Kom. 2619, Haltod 237). N.o.a.b., Uyğ. vinff Chr. altun zmuran küll (so spelt) “gold, myrrh, and incense' U 7 6, 14-15: Bud. U İİ 4o, 105-6 (tütsüg): Civ. sarığ küfi 'yellow incense' H I or, yürüp küfi . . . kara küli “vhite . . . and black incense” do. 111: xiv Chin.-Uyğ. Dict. hsiang "incense” (Giles 4,256) küll R İT 1513; Ligett 179 (küst). Dis. V. GCEkiçi:- (Bici:-) “to itch'. This verb and/or the Co-op. f. kiçiş- s.i.a.m.l.g., but almost everywhere with back vowels, perhaps under the influence of Kici: “mustard”. The only modern forms with front vowels are NE Tuv. kiji-; SW Az. kiciş-, Tkm. gi:ce-; for Osm. Sam: 1222 lists Bicig- with the Dev. N. gici/gicik, Red. has the same entries with kicik as an alternative form, but in Rep. Turkish the accepted spellings are ğıcik (and ğıcıkla-). Xak. xı etim kiçi:di: “my flesh itched' (ihtakka); also used of any animal (haywán) Kaş. III 259 (kiçi:r, kiçi:me:k): Kom. xiv "to itch” kiçi- CCG, Gr. 142 (quotn.): Kip. xiv -kicidi: (-c-) akalahu cismuhu “his body itched”, and one says etl: kicidi: “his flesh itched', and elim kicir "my hand itches' d. 79: Xv ğal “to boi] over; to be expensive” is translated kayna- “to boil over”? kız bol- "to be expensive” and kici-, there is no other evidence that either vvord had a meaning matching the other Tuh. 27a. 3. D küçe:- (£üce:-) Den. V. fr. 1 kürç, “to oppress, use violence towards (someone Zcc.)'. N.o.a.b. Türkü virt ff. Man. kücedukinte ötrü “because of his violence' M I s, 7: Uy&amp;. vr ff. Bud. küçeyü kunup 'robbing with violence” U II 24, 9; o.o. PP 32, 5-6 (élet-); Suv. 219, 23-4: Civ. kücemis yolinda 'by violence! USp. 77, 13; a.o. H II zo, 2: Xak. xı ol anın tava:rın küçe:di: zalama málahu “he took his property by force”: and one says «ol» oğla:nığ küçe:di: “he copulated ( facara) with the boy or female slave by force' (zulma(n)) Kaş. II 258 (küçe:r, küçe:me:k, verse): KB küçemezmen “1 will not force (you)' 3798; küçeyü meni “using violence towards me” 3961; o.o. 4004, 6008: xır(?) At. özün küçe 'restrain yourself” 182; Tef. küçe- “to use violence (tovvards)” rgo: Kom. xıv “to compel” küçe- CCG; Gr.: Osm. xv £üce- “to compel, force (someone)'; in two texts TTS 111 321. Dis. GCD D keçüt See kecig. D köçüt (&amp;-) Active Conc. N. fr. kóc-; lit. 'something which travels or migrates', in practice (a caravan horse'. Survives in SC Uzb. kücat and see Doerfer 111 1663. Cf. köçütçi:, kölük. Xak. xi köçüt (cim unvocalized) al-faras "a horse” Kaş. I 357; ao. İl 75 (köçür-): KB köçüt teg bolur kut tübi ham tözi “the fundamental character (Hend.) of fortune is like that of a caravan horse” (i.e. it never stays long anywhere) 1704. Dis. V. GCDD 1 keçit- ($-) Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of 1 kec-, cf, keçtür- and the normal form keçür-. Xak. xı ol anar su:v keçitti: “he made him cross (a"barahu) the vvater” Kaş. JI 300 (keçitü:r, kecitme:k; largely unvocalized). D 2 keçit- ($-) Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of 2 k€:ç-, cf. kö:çür- Xak. xı ol sışığ keçitti: (misvocalized kegitti:) abta”a”l-amr "he delayed, or was slow about, the affair” Kaş. H 3o0 (keçitu:r, kécitmek; separated from 1 keçitby küçet- which confirms that the vowel was kasra). D kiçit- (&amp;-) Caus. f. of kiçi:- ; s.i.s.m.l. with back vowels. Xak. xi anın udu:zi: kiçitti “his itch irritated him” (ahakkahu) Kaş. II 300 (kiçitu:r, kiçitme:k). D küçet- Preliminary note. 44 V., which occurs several times in Uyg. and has no Caus. meaning, has hitherto been transcribed küçet-, but this is clearly not the Caus. f. noted in Xak. and should be transcribed küçed-, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 740 
     
   
   
       696 DIS. V. D küçed- ($-) Trans. Den. V. fr. 1 kü:ç, “to grip, take firm hold of (someone Ace.) N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Man. TT 4I 16, 13-14 (1 agu:); do. 17, s (aşıl-): Bud. (diseases caused by wind (or demoniacal possession?) begin in the summer scason) küzkü ödte küçedür “in the autumn they grip (the sufferer)' Suv. 591, 13-14; a.0. do. 133, 19. D küçet- (6-) Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of küçe:-. Xak. xı ol anın tava:rın küçetti: "he urged him to seize ("a/d gasb) his (a third party's) property' Kaş. II 300 (küçetü:r, küçetme:k). D keçtür- (8-) Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of 1 keç-, cf. keçit- and the normal form keçür-. Xak. xi ol ant: suvdin keçtürdi: "he ordered him to cross (bi-"ibára min) the water! Kaş. II 194 (keçtürür, kectürme:k; the 452, translated min, seems to connote 'to pass by', rather than "to pass over”, which would require an Zcc.). Tris. GCD D köçütçi: (8-) N.Ag. fr. köçüt, “the man who leads, or drives, the horses in a caravan'; pec. to KB. Xak. xı KB (take what you need for the day which is passing) köçütçi kelirke etiğgiğ kilin “make your preparations for the coming of (death) who will drive your horse (to the next world)' 3788; özün köçgü atın senin kócgün ol, köçütçi ölüm kelgü axir kün ol “you yourself vvill migrate (to the next world), your reputation (1 a:t, pun with 2 at “horse”) is transitory ; death will come to drive your horse (to the next world); that will be the Last Day” 61:2. Dis. GCG D keçiğ (&amp;-) Dev. N. fr. 1 kec-; lit. 'crossing place, ford”, metaph. “access, way round”, and the likc. S.i.a.m.l.g. with minor phonctic changes except SW. Az. keçid, Osm., "Tkm. geçit, which are survivals of a cognate Dev, N. in -üt which is first noted in the medieval period, see also Doerfer HI 1621. Uy. vii ff. Bud. müti kidiğnin keçgülek (sic?) keçügi (sic?) erür "it is the ford which must be crossed to the other bank” (i.c. Nirvana) Hüen-ts., p. 23, note 1810, 3: Xak. keçiğ al-ma"bar "a ford” Kaş. 1 390 (prov); KB kamuğ beg bedükke menipdin keçiğ 'access to all begs and great men is through me” 674; ölümdin kaçığlı kecig bulmadi “he found no way round to escape death” 4857; 0.0. 249 (ütül-), 4042 (opar-), 5208: (Çağ. xv ff. keçit ma'bar-r ab 'ford' San. 312v. SA (quotn.)): Kip. xiu. al-maxáda “ford” ke:gi: (-c-); (Tkm. ke:cü:t (-c-)) Hou. 6, 20: (xiv keçüt a/l-maxáda . . . keçit (?MS. gicit) ditto İd. 59; ditto keçüt (-c-) Bu. 4, 15). kiçiğ “small”, with some extended meanings like 'puppy'. S.i.a.m.l.g. with some phonetic changes; SW Osm. alone has the form küçük, this and the medieval forms with rounded vowels are obviously somehow connected with the syn. Pe. word 2üçaR, it is prob. that the reşemblance is purely fortuitous and that Osm.,  GCDetc. küçük is a Pe. 1.-w.; thc final -k is hard to explain in any other way. Sce Doerfer III 1620, 1664. Türkü vir kicig atlığ ?'having as a name in childhood' // E 41 (damaged); 0.0. £ S 3, etc. (teg-): vir ff. kicig dintar “the young Hearer” JrkB. Postscript: Man. (all mortals) uluğka kicigke tegi “from great to small” Chuas. 86-7; kiçiğ baçağ erti “it was the lesser fast” TT I1 8, 62; M İİİ 38, 5 (ii): Uyğ. vir ff. (Man. kicigk[iye]m “my little one” M II 8, 13 (i)): Bud. (I am a delicately brought up) kenç kiçiğ "young woman' U HI 82, 17; evindeki ulug kicigke "to the great and small in his house' PP 67, 7-8; 0.0. Kuan. 122; TT V 8, 54, etc.: Civ. (major (uluğ) undertakings . . .) kiçiğ is küdükler “minor undertakings! T'T ] 73; in the calendar texts TT VII 4 and s there is constant mention of uluğ and kiçiğ ay ("month"): a.o.o.: Xak. xi kiçiğ “small” (a/-şağir) of anything Kaş. 1 390; kiçiğde fi şığdrihi in “childhood” IJ 268, 20; III 87, 26; about 8 o.o. translated şağir or xasis, “paltry”: KB kicig oğlanığ “a small boy” 293; uluğka kiçiğke 500; o.o. 611, 707 (basit-), 1493 (öğret-), 4042 (opar-), etc.: xir1(?) Ar. uluğka kiçiğke 356; Tef. kiçiğ “small, childhood" 181: xiv. Müuh. al-sagir (opposite to “great” uluğ) gi:çi:/gi:çi:g (sic) Mel, ss, 13; Rif. 153 (0f:ci:), “small boat! kiçi: gemi: 62, 10; 161: Çağ. xv ff. kiçik (with k- -k") küçük Vel. 356; küçük (spelt) sag-i $açça “puppy” San. 303v. 175 kicik (“vith -c-”) corrupt and "Turcisized form of küçak, meaning heqir "little, small” do. 312v. 17 (quotn): Xwar. xii kiçi “small” “Alt 58: xiv kicig/kici Quib 97; MN 64: Kip. xt carroul-kalb 'puppy! (VU) kicig (-c-, unvocalized), Tkm. enük (MS. erük) Hou. 11, ro, (ai-nf! “child” k.ç oğla:n, prob, an error for kenç oğla:n but could be read kiçi do. 24, 20): xiv. kiçi: (“vith -ç-”) a/-şağir, Dim. f.s Kip. kiçgine:: Tkm..kicicük, the former also used in P.N.s . . . küçük (-c-) aí-carto . .. küçük (-c-) al-abtar *bob-tailed', used as a P.N., and one says küçük it £a/5 abtar, that is one without a tail 7d. 79: xv cart küçük (Juruk/enük) Tuh. rib, 6; ao. 3ob. 13) (şağir kücücük/kickez 22a. 2): Osm. xiv ff. kiçük “small” once in xiv; kiçi very common till xvi, rare in xvri, xviii. T TS 7 467; İT 640; III 454; İV 521. D küce:k Hap. leg.; Dev. N/A. fr. küçe:-, “strong, strongly'. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. TT VIII I.10 (bu:zluğ). i VU?F külek “a lock of hair” and the like, prob. an lranian l-w. cognate to Pe. nj “crooked, curved, a hump”, with Iranian Dim. Suff. N.o.a.b. Arğu: xı küjek a/-quz'a mtna'l-ga'r swa'l-sudg "a lock of hair; the hair on the temples! Kaş. 7 391: Xak. xi K B (when it rains let the flowers open and) kurimus yığaçtın salınsu küjek “let bunches (of leaves) burst from the desiccated trees” 118; küjek yazdı Rümi kızı “the Greek girl let loose her tresses' 4885: xiv Muh.(?) the people of 'lurkistan call al-du'ába “the forelock' küje:k, and the Turks of our country küse:k  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 741 
     
   
   
        DIS. V: GCLRif. 79 (only); al-du'ábatàn kü:je:k (MS. gü:ze:h) do. 139. PU”?D Hköçük “the [buttocks'; prob. a crasis of *kótcük Dim. f. of köt, completelv unvocalized in the MS. but between keçiğ and kiçiğ, which would be correct; survives only (?) in NE Sag.,, Sor köçük R IJ 1289. Cf. köçükle:-. Xak. xı köçük al-alyatdn aca ridfu”l-insün "a man's buttocks” (Hend.) Kaş. I 390. D kécki: (£-) N./A.S. fr. ke:ç, survives only (?) in NW Kaz. kiçki 'evening' (meal, etc.) R Il 1383. Xak. xı KB idi kécki söz ol matalda kelir 'a very old saw comes in the proverb” r10 (the proverb follows); a.o. 5133 (kovi:). D köçgün (&amp;-) Intrans. Dev. N./A. fr. köç-, *migratory, transitory', and the like. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı KB 6112 (köçütçi:): (Kip. xiv köçgen (sic) a/-naşr 'eagle'; might be this word misvocalized ld. 79). D küçgey (8-) Den. N/A. fr. 1 kü:c; *violent', difficult', etc.; n.o.a.b. Xak. xi KB özl küçgey erse “if he himself is violent (or oppressive)” 814; o.o. 2030-5, 5521: xim(?) Tef. küçey 'difficul 190: Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 105; Nahc. 214, 16; 298, 2; 304, 15. Tris. GCG D kiçiglik A.N. fr. kiçig, s.i.s.m.l. meaning *smallness, a little. Xak. xi KB (if greatness comes to you) kiçiğlik anuk tut ürüp bolğuka “retain humility until you become white-haired' (or “in order that you may live to become . . .”) 552; kiçiğlik kılıp “acting humbly' 1702. D kecigsiz (&amp;-) P.N./A. fr. kecig; n.o.a.b. Türkü vit İrtiş ógüzig keçiğsizin kecdimiz “ve crossed the River İrtiş without using a ford” T. 35: Xak. xı kayna:r ógüz kecigsi:z bolma:s “there is no rushing river without a crossing-place (manfad) somewhere' 7 390, 18; HI 191, 6 (with ma'bar 'ford' instead of manfad); n.m.e. Tris. V. GCGD kiçiğle:- Den. V. fr. kiçiğ ; survives in SE, SW. with the same meaning as in Xak. Xak. x1 ol anı: kiçiğle:di: “he considered that he was small” (şağır) Kaş. 141 341 (kiçiğle:r, kiçiğle:me:k): Çağ. xv ff. küçükle- (spelt) barça hardan sag "of a bitch, to pup' Sam. 303v. 9: Xwar. xiv kiciğle- “to consider small” Qutb 97. D köçükle:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. kócük; fully vocalized. Xak. xı ol oğlin köçükle:di: “he beat his son on the buttocks' ("a/4 alyatihi) Kaş. III 341 (köçükle:r, kócükle:me:k). Dis. GCL D kü:clüg (8-) P(N./A. fr. 1 kü:ç, “strong, powerful; violent, oppressive, and the like. S.i.s.m.l.; SW Az. küclü, Osm. güçlü, Tkm.   697 See Doerfer 111 1676. Türkü vir güycli. küclüg falp?) xalğanilmda: “from my strong, tough xagan' Öngin 12: vir ff. anta:ğ küçlü:ğ men “1 am so strong” IrRB 3, zo, 60: Uyğ. viri küclü:g boltu: “he became powerful” III C 5 (ETY İT 38): virt ff. Man. Wind. 19-20 (1 köp): Chr. uluğ küçlüğ tepri “oh great, mighty God” M III 49, 6: Bud. on küclüg translates Sanskrit dafabala “having ten (kinds of) strength' U 711 34, 1 (ii); uluğ küclüg kutluğ bodisavt “a great, mighty, blessed Bodhisattva! PP 45, 2-3; artuk küclüg óvkeci 'with a very violent temper' Kuan. 64; a.o.o.: Civ. küçlüğ yağı “a strong enemy" TT' I 122: O. Kir. ix ff. küclügin üçün "because he was strong” Mal. 49, 4: Xak. xı anıp yéli: kü:çlüğ 'its wind is strong” (qawwiya) Kaş. 111 161, 29; o.o. 1 sog (bileklig); //1 120 (1 kü:ç), n.m.e: KB (anyone who has a backer) küçlüğ bolur 'becomes powerful” 1699: xın(?) Tef. küçliğ/küçlüğ ditto 191: xiv. Muh. al-qawtwi (opposite to *weak' gü:csiz) kü:clü: Mel. 55, s, kü:clüg Rif. 152: Çağ. xv ff. güclük (spelt) qurcrcatlu Vel. 363; küçlük zürmand “strong” San. 303v. 14: Xwar. xiv küçlüğ “strong” Quib 105: Kom. Xiv “strong” küçlü CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xin al-qatwi (opposite to 'weak' küçsi:z) küclü: Hou. 32, 7: xv ditto küşli: (sic) Kan. 6o, 4; küçli gü quwtwa Tuh. 68a. 1o. D küçlük ($-) A.N. fr. I kü:g; n.o.a.b. Uy£. viri ff. Man.-A (within a man's body are many) küçlükler kópüller biligler sakınçlar 'strengths, minds, knowledges, and thoughts! M 111 9, 14-15 (ii). Dis. V. GCLD 1 keçil- (&amp;-) Pass. f. of 1 kec-; s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı su:v keçildi: “the water was crossed' Kaş. II 136 (keçlür (sic?), keçilme:k): Çağ. xv ff. kécil- (spelt) *ubtzr sudan “to be crossed' San. 312r. 27. D 2 ke:çil- ($-) Pass. f. of 2 kö:ç- ; survives in NW Kk. keşil- “to be postponed, delayed'. Xak. xı ış ké:cildi: ubti'a fi'l-amr "the matter was delayed” Kaş. III 195 (ké:gilü:r, ké:cilme:k). D küçe:l- (&amp;-) Pass. f. of küçe:- ; survives in SW Tkm. £yücel- “to be strengthened, intensifled”. Xak. xı er tava:rı: küçeldi: “the man's property (etc.) was taken by force" (zulima) Kaş. II 136 (küce:lür (sic), kuce:lme:k): Osm. xviii ğücel- “to be complicated, made difficult; in one text T 7S IV 368. D küçle:- (£-) Den. V. fr. 1 kü:c; not noted before the medieval period, but see küçlen-, s.is.m.l. in NE, NW, e.g. Tel. küçte- “to compel' R IJ 1497. Cf. küçe:-. xiv Muh. zalama wa qahara “to ill use, oppress” £ü:cle:Mel. 28, 13; Rif. riz (kü:cle:-): Kip. xv qatciya "to be strong” (kat-/katı bol-/) küçleTuh. 29b. 10: Osm. xiv güçle- “to compel'; in one text TT.S 7 335. D küçlen- ($-) Refl. f. of kücle:-. S.i.s.m.l.; in SW Osm. güclen- “to be or become,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 742 
     
   
   
     698 difficult'. Xak. xı er küçlendi: “the man (etc.) was, ot became, strong” (qarciya) Kaş. II 252 (küglenü:r, küçlenme:k): xın(?) Tef. küçlen- ditto ror: Çağ. xv ff. küclen- (sic) gühib-i zür şudan ditto San. 303v. 8: Xwar. xiv küçlen- “to gather strength” Qur) 105: Kip. xv faqateteá “to become strong” küçlen(-c-) Tuh. 10b. 1; qarciya ditto do. 30a.1. Tris. GOM D küçemçi: (ğ-) N.Ag. fr. “küçem, N.S.A. fr. küçe:-: "a violent, oppressive man”. Pec. to Xak. Xak. xı Kaş. İİ 120 (1 kü:ç): KB (my frowning brows, my ugly and unfriendly looks) küçemçi kelirke “are for the man who comes as an oppressor' 816. D keçimliğ (&amp;-) Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. "keçim N.S.A. fr. 1 keg-; lit. "that passes only once”, Xak. xi KB (Oh king” bu dunyü keçimliğ turur “this world is transitory' 3782. Dis. GCN D küçün (£-) Instr. of 1 kü:c used as an Adv., 'violently, by force'; survived as an Adv. long after the Instr. ceased to be an ordinary declensional case. Survives in SW xx Anat. gücün SDD 679; obsolete elsewhere. Xak. xi kü:gü:n bi'l-quwiwa “by force” Kaş, II 289 (küsgük); four o.o. spelt küçün, three spelt kü:cin; n.m.e.: KB (a good man repents because he is good) atıkmış isiz óknür áxir küçün “the notorious sinner repents in the end under compulsion' 928; a.o. 838: Çağ. xv ff. güçün (spelt) gücle in the sense of influencing by compulsion (5P/-dürür?) (quotn.); güclü qutetcatlu “by force! (quotn.) Vel. 363; gücün (spelt) az rüy-i sür wa "unf "by force, under compulsion” San. 303v. 18 (quotns.): Osm. xiv, xvi. gücün “by force, with difficulty'; in two texts 7TS II 469. Dis. V. GCND kecin- (ğ-) Refl. f. of 1 keç-, survives in SW Osm. geçin- “to earn one's living; to get on well (with people); to pass for (e.g. an expert). Xak. xı er su:v keçindi: “the man pretended to cross (ya'bur) the water Kaş. II 156 (keçinu:r, kecinme:k; the -Ç- carries a damma in the Perf. and is unvocalized elsewhere). D kiçin- (&amp;-) Refl. f. of kiçi:- ; s.i.s.m.l. with back vowels (cf. kiçl:-). Uyğ. vi ff. Civ. kayu tişi kartı kicinür (so read for kiçirir, see facsimile) bolsar “if a woman's ulcer becomes itchy! H 7 ga: Xak. xı ura:ğut kiçindi: “the woman was wanton' (5ağat), hence one says kicinme: /à tabgi'l-darb “don”t ask for trouble'; the origin is the phr. et kiçindi: "the flesh itched' (ihtakka) Kaş. II 1:56 (kiçinü:r, kiçinme:k). D küçen- (8-) Refl. f. of küçe:- s.i.a.m.l.g., usually meaning “to exert oneself”, but in NE “to rely on one's own strength” R II 1492, and SW Osm. gücen- “to be offended'. Uyğ. DIS. V. GCLvir ff. Man. [gap] kügenip utru keltiler meaning obscure TT. IX 86: Civ. senin borlukugn: él küçenip Inalğuçka katdi “the government has seized your vineyard and transferred it to Inalguc" US. 24, 3: Xak. xı nt küçendi: fafırat qutntoatu hfaras "the horse's strength diminished” because it carried a heavy load; and onc says ol nnıp tava:rın küçendi: zalama mülahu "he seized his property by force; the first is Intrans., the second "Trans. Kaş. HI 156 (küçe:nü:r (sic), küçenme:k): KB in the description of the physical causes of dreams in 6006 ff. kücen- seems to mean “to become dominant” of bile, gall, phlegm, etc.: Kom. xiv “to exert oneself küçen- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv kücen- (-c-) da'afa “to be weakened! by heavy burdens ld. 79. Tris. GCN D keçinçsiz (ğ-) Hap. leg.; Priv. N./A. fr. *kecinc Dev. N. fr. keçin-, “hard to cross” or the like. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud, 7T VI, p. 62, footnote, l. 2 (toğur-). Dis. GCR D köçrüm (£-) Hap. leg.; N.S.A. fr. kógür-; lit. “a single (event) causing migration'. Xak. xı köçrüm a/-fasa"a 'panic', that is the people of the country districts (al-rasátiq) are scared and come into the town! Kaş. 7 485. Dis. V. GCRD 1 keçür- ($-) Caus. f. of 1 keç-, s.i.a.m.l.g. with a wide range of meanings; physically 'to make (someone) cross (something), to pass (something) through (something)', and abstract "to pass (time), to forgive (sins)'. etc.; in SW Osm., Tkm. ğeçir-. Uyğ. vii [gap] toğurğu:ğ keçü:rü: "leading [my army ?] across the 'l'ogur&amp;u: River(?)' Su. S. 12: virt ff. Man. TT Iİ sı (taluy): Xak. xt ol meni: suvdin (MS. suvdan) keçürdi: “he made me cross (MS. a'barahu "an) the water'; and one says beg anın ya:zuktn keçürdi: “the beg pardoned (şafaha 'am) his offence' Kaş. II 75 (keçürür, kecürme:k); anıp rsgrn keçürdim amdaytu amrahu bpl-qatl 'I concluded his affair by killing him” J 47, 15; bu: be:g ol ya:zuk keçürğe:n “this beg is constantly pardoning (saf&amp;h 'an) offences'; and one says bu: er ol telim rg kegürge:n “this man is constantly altering, changing and settling affairs! (Butotal qullab faşşal xufta); one also says evürge:n tevürğe:n Kaş. 7 521 (verse): KB keçür- is common in several meanings, (my Lord, who creates, nurtures, and) keçürğen 'pardons' (mankind) 124 (also r, but out of place there); o.o. of. "to pardon" 28, irş5 (tüzünlük), 2122, etc.—(this world has made many 5egs old, but does not age itself) telim beg keçürdi kesilmez sözİ 'it has made many begs pass away, but does not stop talking” 404—(hear what the experienced man says) başında keçürmiş yetürmiş yaşı *who has passed through much and reached maturity' 426; (you have done evil) keçürmiş kününp 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 743 
     
   
   
     DIS. 'during the day which you have just lived through” 3787; 0.0. 649, 1155, 1192: xin(?) At. keçürğen idim 37; yazukin keçür 337; keçür sen me "umrun “and pass your life” (in uprightness) 154; Tef. keçir-/keçür- “to pardon” 177: Çağ. xv. ff. keçür- (spelt) gudarünidan tva 'ubür farmüdan "to cause, or order, to pass over or cross” Saz. 312r. 24 (quotns.); Xwar. xın(?) kecür- (?8-) 'tobring, to pardon” "Alı 49: Xiv keçür- “to pass(time); to bring over, to allow to exceed”, etc. Qufb 96; "to pardon” MN 426: Kom. xiv “to bring across; to forgive' kecir- CCG.; Gr. 135 (quotns.): Osm. xiv ff. ğeçir- (1) xiv “to pardon”, (2) xiv “to shoot (an arrow) through (someone)'; (3) xvt "to cause to forget” T T'S I 294; II 419. D 2 ké:cür- (ğ-) Caus. f. of 2 ke:ç- ; n.o.a.b. Cf. kécit-. Uyğ. vitt ff. Civ. one of the standard phr. in contracts is (I will repay what I have borrowed on a stated date) bérmedin keçursermen “if I delay and do not pay” (I shall incur certain penalties) U Sp. 1, 5-6; 7, 5; 8, 6—7; ro, 6-7, etc.: Xak. xı ol rs ke:çürdi: “he delayed (or was slow about, abfa'a) the business! Kaş. III 187 (ké:gürür, ké:cürme:k). E kiçir- See kiçin-. D köçür- (&amp;-) Caus. f. of Kóg-; “to cause to migrate”, with some extended meanings. S..s.m..; SW Az, köçür-, Osm., Tkm. göçür-. Türkü vırı ff. IrkB 34 (kontur-): Xak. xı ol anı: evdin köçürdi: “he made him move (hawwalahu) from his residence, and made htm migrate and leave home” (angalahu tva az'anahu) ; one also says ol bitig köçürdi: *he copied (nasaxa) the book'; also used when one conveys (nagala) something from one place to another, e.g. ol köçüt köçürdi: “he moved the caravan horse from one place to another” Kaş. IJ 75 (köçürür, köçürme:k, misvocalized Aeg-); a.o. I $22, s (1 to:y): xni (?) At. 338 (kaz-): Çağ. xvff. göçür(-$üp; spelt) göçür- Vel. 364 (quotn.); gócür(spelt) hüçdnidan "to cause to migrate' Sam. 303r. 25 (quotns.): Kom. xiv “to transfer” göçür- CCG; Gr. 150 (quotn.): Osm. xv ff. göçür- "to transfer, or move, from one place to another'; fairly common TTS I 315; II 4425 İİİ 302; IV 347. D keçürt- (8-) Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of keçürXak. xı ol apar su:v keçürtti: "he made him cross (a'barahu) the water' (etc.); also used when he entrusts a task to someone else (amdá 1i-ğayriht amr) Kaş. III 431 (keçürtür, keçürtme:k). : D keçrüş- (ğ-) Recip. f. of kecür-; pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı ola:r bir bi:rke: ya:zu:kin keçrüşdi: "they forgave (safalia) one another's offences; also used when they help one another to cross a canal ( ft'l-i'bàr 'ani'l-nahr) Kaş. II 222 (keçrüşü:r, keçrüşme:k), ol anı: suvdin keçrüşse:k erdi: "he wished to help him to cross the vvater” İİ 257, 5; a.o. II:225, 24. E GCS 699 Tris. GCR D köçürme: ($-) Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. köçür- : survives vv. different meaning in SC Uzb., Doerfer Hİ 1669. Xak. xi köçürme: ocuk “a fireplace (al-kánüm) which is transported ( yngal) from place to place”: köçürme: oyun aí-arba'a 'agara 'fourteen'; the name of a kind of game. Four lines are drawn on the ground in the shape of a castle (ai-hign); and ten gates (abwáb) are made in it; the e is played with nuts (al-banádiq) and the like Kaş. I 490. Tris. V. GCRD kecrümsin- (£-) Hap. leg.; Refl. Simulative Den. V. fr. *kecrüm N.S.A. fr. keçür-, mentioned only as a grammatical example. Xak. xı ol anıp ya:zukın keçrümsindi: “he pretended to pardon (yasfah) his offence without actually doing so” Kaş. II 261, 11; n.m.e. D keçürse:- ($£-) Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of keçür-. Xak. x1 kara: tü:nüğ kecürse:dim “1 wished to make the dark night pass" (istamsaytu) Kaş. III 247, 22; n.m.e. Dis. GCS D küçsüz (8-) Priv. N./A. fr. 1 kü:ç, “veak, feeble'. S.i.s.m.l. Uyğ. viii ff. Man. TT 111 87 (2turuk): M III 37, 17 (i) (öpsüz): Bud. U IJ 35, 22 (ingikla:-): (Xak.?) xiv Muh. al-'áciz *feeble' (opposite to 'tough' tığra:k) gü:csi:z Mel. 54, 1; Rif. 150; al-da'if *weak' (opposite to “strong” kü:clü:) gü:csiz 55, 5; 152: Kip. xun al-da'if (opposite to 'strong! küçlü:) kücsi:z (-c-), that is “vithout strength'; Hou. 26, 8: xv al-da'if (opposite to “strong” kuşli:) küssiz (sic?; MS. kügünsiz) Kav. 6o, 4. Dis. V. GCSD keçse: (8-) Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of 1 keç-. Xak. xı ertiş suvin kecse:di: (the enemy) "intended to cross (káda . . . am ta'bur) the River İrtiş” Kaş. 7 155, 18; n.m.e. D keçset- (&amp;-) Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of kecse:-. Xak. xı ol meni: suvdin keçsetti: “he inspired me with a wish to cross (marnnáni “ubür) the vvater” (etc.) Kaş. II 336 (keçsetü:r, keçsetme:k). Tris. V. GCSD küçsire:- (£-) Priv. Den. V. fr. 1 kurç, “to be weak, lack strength”. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. küçsiremiş alapadmış aç bars “the weakened and debilitated hungry tigress” Suv. 610, 22; a.0. do. 586, 21: Civ. köz küçsirep yaş aksar “if the eyes are weak and water H I 155. Dis. GCS D keçiş (&amp;-) Dev. N. fr. 1 keg-; n.o.a.b. Cf. keçiğ. Xak. xı keçiş “a ford, crossing place over a canal or river” (ma'baru'l-nahr wa'l-suddi) Kaş. I 369 (prov.; see élet-): KB tiriğke bu nepdin keçiş yok kadaş “my 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 744 
     
   
   
     7oo DIS comrade, a human being cannot get on vvithout these things" (clothes and food) 3665; (death is certain) keçiş yok ndin “there is no other (possible) outcome' 6076. Dis. V. GCSD keçiş- (8-) Co-op. f. of 1 keç-, n.o.a.b. R IH 1148 lists “Çağ.” k€çiş- “to pardon one another', but it is not traceable elsewhere, and could hardly have this meaning (cf. keçrüş-). Xak. xı ol menin birle: su:v keçişdi: "he competed with me in crossing (f? "ubür) the water' Kaş. 11 93 (keçişü:r, keçişme:k). D küçeş- (£-) Hap. lcg.; Co-op. f. of küçe:-. Xak. xı ola:r ikki: tava:r küçeşdi: “those two competed with one another in forceably seizing (fi 6aşb) property” Kaş. II 93 (küçeşü:r, kuçeşme:k). Dis. GÖY S küçey Scc küçgey. Mon. GD F ked l.-w. fr. Sogdian Á'dy, “very, extremely", sce Caf., p. 78; originally used in the same meaning to qualify both Adj.s and V.s, it soon came to mean 'extremely good” and the like. Kag.'s statement that it was also pronounced ked confirms its foreign origin since final -d, except in the cluster -nd did not exist in Xak., but final -d was not a Sogdian sound either. Now ?obsolete everywhere; the latest trace seems to be SW xix Az. gey “very, extremely" R II 1551. Uyf. vir ff. Chr. ked könül tegürüp tilepler istepler 'seck (Hend.) him applying your minds vigorously! U 7 6, 1; a.o. do. 9, 16 (arid): Bud. Ked Yegen Totok P.N. Pfahl. 23, 24; a.o. Suv. 4, 9-10 (Ölütçi:): Civ. ked tığrak “very tough' TT VII 17,8; er kişi er işine ked bolayın téser "if a man says "I wish to become very potent" (sexually)” H I 75; süt ked bolğu em “a remedy to ensure that (a mother's) milk becomes copious” do. 105: Xak. xr ked/ked with both (ma'a(n)) dül and döl, an Emphatic Particle (harf ta'kid ta mubálaga) used in describing (fi tvasf)a thing; hence one says ked at *what a good horse' (ni'ma'[-faras) and ked ne: “vhat a good thing” Kaş. I 321; the later form key may occur in a verse bıçğa:s bitig kılurlar, and key yeme: berü:rler yaktubim kitába'l-'ahd wa'l-bay'a an là yuxálifi' [-malik “they sign a treaty and (swear) an oath that they will not oppose the king” 7 459, 7; and see İ 244 (erpel-): KB ked is common in three usages; (1) qualifying Adj.s. it means “very”, e.g. ked bağırsak kadaş “a very compassionate comrade' 317; (2) qualifying V.s it strengthens the meaning, e.g. tili ked ködezğil “keep a firm control of your tongue' 176, (3) qualifying N.s it means 'very good' or the like, e.g. bodunda talus: kişinin kedi “chosen among the people, the best of men” 34: xır(?) Az. (1) w. Adj. ked berklig “very unyielding” 254; (2) w. V. ked ap-a 'understand thoroughly! 18; four o.o.: xiv Muh. al-cayyid (very) good” gey . GCŞ Mel. 18, 6 (Rif. oy edgü): Xwar. xiu key (1) “good”: (2) qualifies V. “AZ 58: xiv ditto (2) only Qutb 93: Kip. (?)xri al-cayytd (opposite to “had” yama:n/yawuz) (eygi:/) key How. 25, ro: xiv key cayyid; one says bu: key dür “this is good”: Kip. eygi /d. 86 (the inference is that key was Tkm.): Osm. xivíff. key usually qualifying Adjs. or V.s, but occasionally *good'; very common till xv, rare later TTS T 451; İİ 621; İİİ 440; IV 504. köt (&amp;-) "backside, buttocks'; s.i.a.m.l.g., but like other similar words rarely listed in modern dicts.; SW Osm. göt (Acc. götü). Sce kócük. See Doerfer III 1657. Xak. xi kót al-dubur “backside, buttocks" Kaş. ] 321; köti: kizla:k a/-hummara mina'l-tavr, that is "with a red tail'; a bird, species uncertain, hardly "the red-headed finch' which is the normal meaning 7 473, zo: Kom. xiv 'backside” köt CCG, Gr.: Kip. xui al-ist 'buttocks' köt (MS. 2/7) Hou. 21, s: xiv köt al-dubur İd. 78: Nv ditto Kas, 61, 7; Tuh. işa, 12. Mon. V. GDke:d- (&amp;-) "to put on, or wear (clothing). S.i.aam.l.g.; NE kk-; SE "Pürki key-/kiy-/ ki-; NC, SC kiy-; NW Kk., Nog. kiy-, Kumyk fily-; SW (Az. keyin-), Osm., 'Tkm. f£ey-. Türkü viii ff. Man. munça arığ ton kedmisin (sic) "his wearing so clean a garment" M 17,14; al [gap] kedip 'putting on a scarlet [robe]' TT 118,67-8: Uyğ. vr ff. Bud. yarik kedip 'putting on a breastplate' U 77 78, 30; 86, 48; TT IV ro, 12; ari&amp; ton kedip U 7 29, 12; 0.0. U I1 42, 33; T T X 312; USSp. 105, ro: Civ. ke:dmiş (MS. e:tmigj) ke:re:k “he must wear' (warm clothing) TT VIII LI.20: Xak. xı er to:nin. ketti: "the man put on (labisa) his clothes” , originally kedti: Kaş. IJ 296 (kede:r, kedme:k), er to:n ke:dti: "the man put on clothes! (etc.) /77 441 (ke:de:r, ke:dme:k): KB kök al kedip 'putting on blue and scarlet” 69; 0.0. 84, s10, 4425 (İÇ), 4774: xu1(?) At. 167 (to:n); a.o.o., with some v.ls of key-; Tef. ked- “to wear' 169; kezditto; kiy- ditto 178: (xiv Mu. al-malbüs “clothing” geymek Mel. 66, 13; PU teykü Rif. 166): Çağ. xv ff. key- (-ğülük) gev- Vel. 353, 13; Kéy- (with -é-") örşidan “to put on, wear'. San. 3orv. 16 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv ked-/kéd-/key- ditto Qutb 93-7; ked- Nahc. 267, 13: Kom. xiv ditto key-/kiy- CCI, CCG; Gr. 136 (quotns.): Kip. xır /abisa keyHou. 33,19: xiv ditto d. 86; Bul. 78v.; keymek al-libs İd. 86: xv labisa key- Kav. 10, r, 75, 4; 2.0. 63, 18; kiyedir, untranslated, example of Pres. Tuh. 74b. 4. I ket- ($ed-) 'to notch, chip, gash (something)', and the like, not noted before xiv but see ketü:, ketüt, ketme:n. More or less syn. vv. kert-, but unlikely to be a Sec. of it, since elision of -r- is unlikely at so early a date, and kert- always has initia] k-. Survives in SVV Osm. ged-, Sami 1152; Red. 1531 and Tkm. £e:t- (ğe:d ..... before vowels), same meaning. Kip. xiv (kedük a/-talma “a notch") the V. fr. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 745 
     
   
   
     DIS. GDE 701 it is ked- İd. 79: Osm. xv ff. ğed- “to chip, notch'; in two texts T'T.S 7 296; 1I 420. 2 két- (8-) "to go”, usually specifically "to go away'; more or less syn. vv. bar-. Survives in SE Tar., Türki ket-; NC két-; NW Kk., Nog. ket-; Kaz. kit-; Kumyk get-, SW Az. két-; Osm., Tkm. git- (Aor. ğider). [n some modern languages used as an Aux. V. following a Ger. in - p but this seems to be a recent usage. Uyğ. virt ff. Man. [gap] ketipen 'going away! TT IX 74: Bud. (all kinds of diseases and dangers) ketke:y “vill depart' TT VIII K.9; kétme:Se:r do. 10-12; o.0. TT X 233-4, etc. (tarik-); U 7I 49, 28; U İİİ 48, 12 etc.: Civ. ig ağrığ ketti 'disease and pain have gone avvay” TT İri, olo, do. 123; VII 23, 5; ket- of disease, pain, etc. 'to go away, disappear' is very common in 77 : O, Kir. ix ff. sizime: két(t)im "1 have departed from you” (my family) Mal. 15, 1-2: Xak, xi er yérindin ketti: "the man went away (zála) from his place and withdraw himself" (zazahhd) Kaş. 11 296 (the Aor. and Infin. are spelt kede:r, kedme:k owing to a scribal error, since most V.s in the same section end in -d-); yıpar kétse: ida dahaba'l-mish uf the musk leaves (the bladder)” 777 48, 22: KB kórümegli kózlerde ketti usı “sleep has left the eyes (of those) that cannot see him' 102; (in old age) ukuş kétti 'understanding has gone” 294; kete bardı 247: xiv Muk. ba"uda “to go away' gö:t- Mel. 24, 1; ké:tRif. 105: dahaba ket- rog (only): Çağ. xv ff. ket- (-ğüm, etc.) git- Vel. 355 (quotn.); kétraftan 'to go' San. 311v. 2 (quotns.); Kom. XIV “to go away, withdraw' ket- CCI; Gr. 141 (quotn.): Xwar. xii get- (ğ6d-) “to go” “42 32: xııı(?) két- (?g6t-) is common in Oğ. both for “to go avvay”, and more neutrally for “to go” e.g. avka kétti *went hunting” 70: XIV ditto Qutb 97; MN 95, etc.: Kip. xii ráha “to go, go avvay” (bar-/) két- Hou. 40, 12: xiv kétrüha wa dahaba İd. 78, a.o. Bul. 47v. (Kóg-): xv ráha két- Kav. 9, 3; ket- do. 11, 12; dahaba ket- Tuh. 16b. 3, and many olo. illustrating conjugational forms. kü:d (8-) (r) "to wait' (Intrans.); (2) “to wait. for (someone Acc.) ; (3) “to wait on, attend to (guests, sheep, etc.)'. S.1.a.m.l.g., but quite exceptionally in two forms, the regular form küy(which is also the modern form of küfi-) and küt- (küd-), a rare case of the evolution -d-— -d- -t-;insome languages both forms survive with the same or different meanings. "The modern forms are NE Alt., Kumd., Leb., Tel. küt- “to tend, or pasture, (animals) R IJ 1480: SE Türki küt-'to wait (for)! BŞ 556: NC Kir. küt- (1) 'to wait (for)'; (2) 'to tend, wait on (animals or guests)'; (3) “to possess'; küy- (1) only; Kzx. Küt- 'to wait on'; SC Uzb. kut- 'to wait (for); to wait on (guests, etc.) ; NW Kk. küt- ditto; küy- “to wait on, look after (someone)'; Kaz. köt- “to wait (for); Nog. küt- ditto: SW Az. küd- 'to lie in wait for (someone)'; to track down, watch; to wait on, protect (someone)”, Osm. £üt- (Aor. güder) 'to wait on, watch over, cherish, pasture (animals). Uyğ. viri eki: ay küt(t)im kelmedi: “1 waited for two months but they did not come” Su. E s (printed text kütdim but facsimile quite clearly R ü tm): vin ff. Man. küdügli ertiniz “you have been waiting! M II 6, ro, a.o.(?) Wind. 32-3 (açın-): Bud. negü küdersizler “vhat are you waiting for?” (Stab him quickly) U IV ro, 42: Xak. xı ol meni: kü:dti: intazarani “he waited for me” Kaş. III 441 (follovved by Oğuz meaning), meni: küdti: (sic) intazarani 11 87, 14; kizlep nelük kütersen (sic) “vhy are you hiding and vvaiting?” (not translated in the Ar., this could be the meaning, but the form is so odd for Xak. that this is prob. an error for kétersen) // 264, 1; yakın yağuk körmedip ne:pni: küdü:r “he shovvs no respect to his neighbours and kinsmen but concentrates his attention on property” (yard himmatahu fi'l-màl) III 23, 1; 3.0. IJ 321 (2 köç): KB ne kim işler erse tükelin küder “vhatever business there is he waits for its completion” 1050; (in 2347, "he should not send his men far (from the camp) but restrain (tıdsa) and concentrate them”, the v.l küdse in the Vienna MS. is clearly an error): xıır(?) At. (if misfortune comes endure it) farahka küdüp, farahka küdüp tur “vvaiting for happiness (to follow); go on waiting for happiness! 349-50 (v.ll. kütüp, küyüp); Tef. küz- 'to wait, wait on (someone Dat.) 187: Çağ. xv ff. küt- çardnidan “to lead (animals) out to pasture" Sar. 302v. 13 (quotns.): Oğuz xı ol ko:y kü:dti: “he tended (ra"a) the sheep” (etc.) Kaş. 111 441 (kü:der, kü:dme:k): Xvvar. xim (?) yılkılar küde-ye turur érdi "he was constantly tending the livestock” Oğ. 15-16 (the -ye is merely a line filler): xiv küy- “to await an event (/4cc.)! Qutb 100 (£öy-), küt- “to tend (sheep)! MN 14: Kom. XIV “to tend (sheep)” küt- CCG, Gr. 160 (quotn.); “to wait (for) küy- CCI, CCG; Gr. 157 (quotn.): Kip. xim zalabbata “to wait". küy- Hou. 38, 19: xiv şabara "to endure patiently' küy- Bul. 53r.: xv ra"d mina'l-ra'y güt- (with 6-” Kas. 76, ro, ra'à (kütle-; in margin in second hand) küt- Tuh. :7b. 8: Osm. xiv ff. ğüt- (Aor. güder) “to respect, pay attention to' (advice, etc.) in several texts up to xvii. TTS I 341; II 480; III 328; güdüp gözle- “to take care of” (someone) 7V 370; £üy- (TTS, in error küy-) “to wait (for); very common until xvr, occasionally later I 506; II 677; III 495; IV 561: xvin ğüd(spelt) in Rumi, çardnidan, Çağ. küt- Sam. 303V. 21. : Dis. GDE ?D ketü: Hap. leg.; perhaps a Dev. N./A. fr.1 ket-; being Kip. it might represent an early” *ketig. Kip. xı ketü: a/-aşail 'crippled, with a disabled hand” Kaş. III 219. VU kóti: unvocalized in the MS., but perhaps an earlier occurrence of SW Osm. kóti/kótü *bad', which is otherwise not noted in any early text. Xak. xı (bürt “nightmare”) also called kóti: bürt Kaş. 7 541 (bürt). VU kótü: 'the roof of a house'; pec. to Xak.? "There is no widely distributed "Purkish word 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 746 
     
   
   
       702 DIS. for 'roof'. Xak. xi kötü: a/-saj/ "the roof of a house" Kaş. III 219; v.o. I 269 (oyul-); 278 (énse:-). Dis. V. GDEE kedi- in Uyğ.vrn ff. Bud. 11$acda törümiş tüş yemişler kediyur “the fruits (Hend.) which have formed on bushes and trees grow bigger' Suv. 517, 9-10 (and U 7 27, 4, the same text) is no doubt a mis-spelling of bedü:-, q.v. E 1 küde-, read tentatively in Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. U IV 8, 36, is an error for bödu:-, the line reads oyun oynayu bödiyu yirlayu ayaların yapınıp 'playing games, dancing, singing, and clapping their hands'. 2 *küde:- Sce küde:gü:, küde:n. E kóti- it is suggested in Hüen-ts., p. 25, note 146 that this is a V. of which kótür- is the Caus. f.; prima facie it is improbable that the basic f. of a V. as common as kótür- should be Hap. leg., but the only suggested occurrence of this V. is in Uyğ. vırı ff. Bud. (even since Buddhism was brought from India, everyone respects the doctrine of the Mahayana, its method of meditation is sweet) çaxşapatlığ yıparları bura kötiyü [turur, uncertain] Hüen-ts. 146, there translated “the odours of its commandments rise fragrantly'. İt is prob. a misreading of kópürü, 'the fragrances of its commandments constantly steam and froth”. This is more probable than bödiyü “dance”. . Dis. GDC SF küdeç See küzeç. D kötiç (&amp;-) Hap. leg., but vulgar words like this are usually omitted fr. dicts.; Dim. f. fr. kót. Xak. x1 when a bov is abused he is called kötiç “you who stink like the buttocks” (yà muntin ka'l-gamáray); his ancestry is traced back to the backside (yunsağ 11a l-dubur) Kaş. I 360. Dis. GDD D kedüt (-) Active Dev. N. fr. ked-; lit. "something which you wear, wearing apparel". Pec. to Xak.; other languages use other Dev. N.s fr. ked-, esp. kedim. Xak. xi kedüt "any kind of wearing apparel” (kull mà yulbas mina"l-atmdb), but used particularly in connection with a wedding ( fi'l-'urs); that is the female relatives (qardbdt) of the bridegroom and bride put on (special) clothes in their honour (ikráma(w) lahum), hence one says kedüt berdi: “he gave him ceremonial clothing” (/)54sa”/-Rardma) Kaş. I 357: (under "words formed with suffixed fd”) “a suit of clothes (ai-kistea) is called kedüt, taken from their word kedti: /abisa'l-tawb I 12, 4. D ketüt (ğ-) Hap. leg.; Active Dev. N./A. fr. 1 ket- in the sense of 'causing wrinkles to form”. Xak. xı ketüt kişi: al-raculu'l-mutaqabbadu'l-'ulfüf 'a frovvning, churlish man” Kaş. 11 284.  GDE Dis. GDG D kedük (g-) Pass. Dev. N. fr. ked-, lit. “something put on”, in practice "a felt cap”, but see kedüklüg; pec. to Kak. Xak. xı kedük (MS. hedük) al-lubbáda "a felt cap”: kedük (ditto) “a head-covering of feathers' (ği/dra mina”l-riş,? “a bird's crest”) because it is like it Kaş. 1 390; 8.0. İH 38, 21 (opra:k): keyük al-lubbüda in the language of those (tribes) who change -d- to -y- JI] 168; KB körü barsa barça urur bu kedük ukuşluğ biliğliğ kör aşlı ked öğ “if you look carefully, everyone puts on this cap? the basis of the man of understanding and knowledge is a very good intellect'(?) 299. D ketük (gedük) Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. 1 ket-, 'notch, chip; notched, chipped', and the like. Not noted before xi1(?); syn. vv. kertük. Survives in NC Kir. ketik "gap, gappy', etc.; Kzx. ketik 'toothless' R 77 1130; Bar. kedik ditto 1137: SW Osm., Tkm. gedik “crack, breach, gap; gappy (teeth)', and the like. (Xak.) xim(?) Tef. kedük sinuk translates /i/id min furüc "cracked, gappy” 169: Kip. xiv ketik a/-afram *with gappy teeth'; ketük al-talm “gap, notch' /d. 78; kedük al-talma (and the V. fr. it is ked-) do. 79: xv mutlam 'dented, notched' ketik Tul. 33a. 12; 35a. 13; 48b. 11; (ketilis der. fr. ketik do. 84a. 2). D küdük presumably Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. küd- lit. 'something waited for, looked after”, but used only in the phr. 1$ küdük meaning, rather vaguely, 'affairs, undertakings', and the like. N.o.a.b. Türkü vrirff. Man. İşke küdügke (sc) tıltanıp “being involved in (worldly) affairs! Chas. 267: Uy. vin ff. Man. (if there are) işler küdükler 'affairs' (or 'tasks', which give pain to mankind) TT II 16, 44-5: Bud. the phr. is rather common U 7 34, 17-18 (teğme:), TT V 20, 9; 24, 50-1, etc. VI 79 (étiglig): Civ. iş küdük is common TT I si, 72-3, etc.: Xak. xı al-şuğl zoa”1-"amal "business, undertaking, task”, and the like, is called ı:ş küdük (MS. RüdüR), küdük is not used alone (/£ yufrad) but only in the Hend. Kaş. 1 391: KB ukuş birle işle kamuğ iş küdük “carry out all your undertakings with understanding! 161; (Aytoldi enquired into) kamuğ iş küdük 'everything that was going on' 1038; a.o. 2220. PU?D ketkl: (?ketgi:) Hap. leg.; perhaps der. fr. 1 ket-, but -ki:/-gi: is not a normal Dev: Suff. Xak. xı ketki: at al-a'gag mina”l-xayl “a horse with a hollow back and high hindquarters! Kaş. I 430. ! D kedgü: (8-) Conc. N. fr. ked-; 'clothing' in a broad sense. N.o.a.b., cf. kedim. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (they provide people with useful things) kedgü tonağu ulati 'clothing (Hend.) etc.” TT VI 392: Xak. xı kedgü: 'clothing (al-malbis) of any kind whatever! Kaş. I 430: KB 1264 (mupadtur-); a.o. 4773. PU kótki: "hillock” or the like; n.o.a.b.; perhaps a l.-w., there is no obvious Turkish   5 a... uu. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 747 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. GDLetymology. Uy£. viri ff. (if a man (gets lost] in the mountains, forests, snowy deserts, sanddunes, or) kótkide 'low hills! TT VI, P. 74, İ. 13: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. “high ground; plateau” kötki Ligeti 176; R 11 1281: Xak. xi kötki: al-tall mina'l-turáb "an earth hill” Kaş. 1 430: KB 21 (opri:. Dis. V. GDGPU kedŞir- n.o.a.b.; morphology and origin obscure; largely unvocalized in the MS. of Kaş. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. (the deer, pursued by hunters) yügürü kedgirerler 'run away in confusion' U 7V 32, 13 (damaged); (the rich man running away from robbers in the dark, ran into a dead tree and) yıltızıpa kedgirip 'stumbling over its roots' (put one eye out on a branch) TT 11I, p. 28, note 71, 3: Xak. xt at kedgirdi: “the horse ran away' (or was uncontrollable', camaha) Kag. II 196 (kedgire:r, kedgirme:k). S kótgür- See kórtgür-. Tris. GDG (D) küde:gü: (g-) morphologicaliy Dev.. N. fr. *kude:-, cf. küde:n; properly 'son-in-law' in the sense of “daughter”s husband”, in some NW languages 'younger sister's husband', but sometimes used, more indefinitely for “bridegroom'. A very old word; an early l.-w. in Mong. as gürege(n) (Haentsch 52, fr. an intermediate f. *küzegü); s.i.a.m.l.g. with many phonetic changes, NE Kç., Koib., Sag., Şor küze: R II 1505; Alt. küyü; Tuv. küde:: SE Türki küy: NC Kir. küyö:, Kzx. küyeu: SC “Uzb kuyov: NW Kk. küyew; Kaz. kiyaw; Kumyk giyev, Nog. kiyev: SW Az. küreken (s:c; Mong. f.); Osm. ğüvey, Tkm. giyev, kó:reken; Cuv. körü “the husband of my daughter, younger sister, or any younger female relative” Ash. VII 284. Cf. yezne:, and see Doerfer I 340. UYĞ. vit ff. Bud. (the marriage ceremony will be performed) kızlı küdegülike 'for your daughter and son-inlaw' TT VI 3441 (in a list of names) küdegümiz “our sons-in-law' (followed by several hames) Pfahl. 23, 13: Civ. küdegüm USPp. 61, 12: O, Kir. ix ff. Mal. 3, 6 (1ki:z): Xak. xı küde:gü: xatan 'son-in-law' Kaş. III ız (yövüşlüğ), III 166 (taya:k); n.m.e.: KB iki kadın erdi küdegü iki 'two (of the Prophet's Companions) were his fathers-in-law, two his sons-in-law' so: xııı(?) Tef. küdegü/ küzegü 'son-in-law' 187: xiv Muh. al-sihr 'son-in-law' ğü:ye:ğü: Mel. 49, 10; Rif. 144: Çağ. xv ff. küyew (with k-”) güyegi Vel. 376 (quotn.): küyew (spelt) damád 'sonin-law* San. 311r. 8 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv küdegü “bridegroom” Qutb 105: Kom. xiv 'son-in-law' küyegü CCI; küyöv (also “bridegroom”) CCG; Gr.: Kip. xim a/-şihr ta'l'aris (bridegroom”) kü:ye:gü (/yézne:) Hou. 32, 3; Tkm. al-za'tar 'thyme' kü:ye:gü o:ti: that is “the bridegroom”s herb”, because of its heating qualities; and potency as an aphrodisiac on the wedding night do. 9, $: 703 xiv küyevvü: (one MS. adds “also küyegü:") al-'aris İd. 84 (misplaced, under 2df-/4m): xv hami sva hutca'l-sihr (hamü is properly 'father-, or brother-, in-law") küyew; in margin in second hand, “also küyegi' Tuh. rəb. 4; ihr küyew; Tkm. küyegü do. 22a. 5; 'aris küyew do. 24b. ro: Osm. xiv ff. ğüyeğü 'sonin-law; bridegroom”, and £üyegü oti 'thyme', common down to xviii T TS 11 481; İİ 329; IV 379: xvin. güyew oti, in Rümi, sa'tar 'thyme', a mountain plant with narrow leaves ánd a sweet smell San. 311r. 9. D kedüklüg P.N./A. fr. kedük, pek: to Kaş. Xak. xı (after kedüklük) "and its owner with -8” Kaş. I şo8, kedüklüğ óli:me:s "the owner of a lubbáda who protects himself with it does not get wet' 7II 256, 4 (the implication of this prov. is that a/-/ubbüda means rather *felt waterproof clothing' than, more narrowly, “a felt cap”). D kedüklük Hap. leg.; A.N. (conc. N.) fr. kedük. Xak. xi kedüklük kidiz 'felt used for making waterproof clothing' (al-mimfar) Kaş. 1 508 (MS. kedüklük). D küdüklüg Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. küdük. Xak. xı r:şlığ küdüklüğ er "a man who is engaged in business” (dü şuğl ma 'amal); küdüklüg is not used by itself (mufrada(n)) Kaş. 1 509. D kedgülük Hap. leg.(?) A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. kedgü: Xak. xı KB yarın bolğa edgü yégü kedgülük 'to-morrow you will have good food and clothing' 232. Dis. GDL D kötlük ($-) A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. köt, survives in SW Osm. götlük 'saddlepad'. Xak. xı kötlük a term of abuse (sabb) meaning “you effeminate creature' (y6 muxannat); but it really means “one on whom sodomy is committed” Kaş. 1 478. Dis. V. GDLD kedil- (ğ-) Pass. f. of ke:d-; s.i.m.m.l. vv, the same phonetic changes. Uyf. viri ff. Man.-A M I 21, 3-5 (üze:) Man. buzağu kim arslanka kedilip “a calf which is reincarnated as a lion' M 1 18, 3 (2); waxsgegler kim apar kedilmis “the spirits (Sogdian L-vv.) which were reincarnated in him" Manm.-uig. Frag. 400, 1: Civ. ton üze ton kedilti sana "one garment after another was put on you” TT I 149: Xak. xı to:n kedildi: "the garment (etc.) was put on” (lubisa) Kaş. II 136 (kedilür, kedilme:k): Çağ. xv ff. keyilbüşida şudan “to be put on, worn' San. 3ozr. 1. D kedle:- Hap. leg., Den. V. fr. ked. Xak. xı er kedle:di: ictahada”l-racul voa fa"ala fi la'l-aqwiyá “the man exerted himself and did what strong men do” Kaş. III 299 (kedle:r, kedle:me:k). D kötle:- (6-) Den. V. fr. köt, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı (ol) oğla:nığ kötle:di: náka'l-gulám "he 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 748 
     
   
   
     704 committed sodomy with the boy” (etc.) Kaş. HI 299 (kötle:r, kötle:me:k), Kip. xiv kótle- ista'mala'l-dubur "to commit sodomy” d. 79: xv xantfa "to be effeminate' (or pathic?) (tókle-; Hap. leg. ?metathesis of)/kótleTuh. 15a. 9 (also taxannata töklen-/kötlen9b. 10). D kötlet- ($-) Caus. f. of kótle:-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı ol oğla:nığ kótletti: anaka'l-gulam *he made the boy (etc.) submit to sodomy' Kaş. II 348 (kötletü:r, kótletme:k): Kip. xiv. kótleddi: (sic) faqqa"a "to break or burst (Trans.) /d. 79 (seems to belong here; faqqa"a may have some unrecorded sexual meaning). Dis. GDM D kedim (g-) N.S.A. fr. ke:d- ; lit. “a single act of putting on', in practice 'a garment'; syn. vv, tom, S.i.m.m.l. as keylm/kiyim/ ki:m , SW Osm. geyim/giyim ;'l'km. geyim. Cf. kedüt, kedük, kedgü:, Türkü vur (his favourite charger was a grey horse,) kedim [gap] 7x. 4: Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. arığ ton kedimlerig kedip 'putting on clean clothes (Hend.) U II 42, 32-3; ao. TT VIII D.38 (to:n): Xak. xı KB yétürse içürse kedürse kedim (a general) 'should provide food, drink, and clothing! 228o; eğinke kedim 'clothes for one's back” 3664; a.o. 4773: Xi(?) Zt. 167-8 (to:n); Tef. kedim 'clothing' 169, 308 (to:n): Xwar. xiv kedim tonlar Qutb 93. D ketme:n ($-) Dev. N. (N.I.). fr. 1 ket-, “a mattock'. S.ia.m.lg. with some phonetic changes and extended meanings; in SW Osm. gedmen 'a stone-mason's pick! Sami 1152, Red. 1531. Uy&amp;. viri ff. Civ. (in a list of farm property; one horse, onc bull, one cow) bir kétmen 'one mattock' USp. 55, 10: Xak. xt ketme:n "a mattock' (a/-mi"saq) with which the ground is dug up (yu'zag) Kaş. İ 444: Çağ. xv ff. ketmen “a spade (or mattock, 8:2 with which they dig up the ground' Sam. 312r. 13. : Tris. V. GDM D kedímlig (8-) P.N./A. fr. kedim, s.i.s.m.l. with the same phonetic changes. In vir it prob. meant 'wearing protective clothing', linen armour, and the like. Türkü vır (thirdly, Kül 'Tégin mounted) Yeğensilig beğin kedimliğ torığ at 'Yegensilig Beg's armoured bay horse' / E 33: Uyğ. viu beş yüz kedimlig yadağ “soo lightly-armoured (2) infantry” Su. S 9. Dis. GDN VU?D keten Hap. leg.; so vocalized in the MS, but if it is a Dev. N. fr. 1 ket- in the sense of “being chipped, cracked”, which seems a possible etymology of the word, ketin might have been expected. Syn. w. kük. Xak. xi keten a/-miğna 'hardship, distress”, hence one says of a destitute man (al-mumtahan) keten kördi: kere:ku: yüdti: “he was so badly off that he had to carry his tent framevvork on his DIS. V. GDLown back for lack of a baggage animal” (min gilla málihi) Kaş. 1 404. D kédin (g-) Den. Adj/Adv. fr. *ké:; 'behind', usually of place, less often of time, 'afterwards' ; when used to describe one of the cardinal points in the early period 'westwards, to the west' in the array based on the rising sun (cf. ópdün), and 'northwards, to the north' in the array based on the midday sun (cf. kündün). İn the geographical usage sometimes treated as a N. and given Suffs. In the medieval period sometimes spelt ké:din, this was etymologically an error, but may have been a popular pronunciation which led to the evolution kö:din keyin — keyn, the final form may have been no more than a mis-spelling or mispronunciation of ke:n, q.v. "The NE forms, Küer., Şor kezin; Kc., Kotb., Sag. kézin; Alt, Leb., Tel. ktn 'behind; hinder part; back(wards)' R IJ. 1176, 1344 and NC Kir. kiyin “after, afterwards'; Kzx. keyin 'backwards; behind; after” suggest that this evolution did take place. Uyğ. viii Su. E 9 (1duk): vin ff. Man.-A kedin in M I 21, 2 (ii) seems to mean “aftervvards”: Chr. M IJI 48, 1 (v) (batsik; *westwards'): Bud. occasionally *behind', e.g. (letting his long hair loose) kedin arkasinta 'down his back” U II 25, 15 —usually in a directional sense kédin: (1) "westwards' TT VI 83-5, 291; Suv. 466, 5-10; PP 13, 7 (öpdün), (2) 'northwards' TT VI 94-5 (ondun); ucayan balık kédininte *to the west of the city of Ujjayini' U IV 8, 1-2: Civ. kedin “vvestvvards” TT 7 6, 142-3; USp. 109, 8-10; a.o.o. in TT VII: Xak. xı ké:din telim ökündi: "then (fumma) he was very repentant' 7 zoo, 18; n.o. İT 22$, 17 (odğar-)—ke:din “behind” (xalfa(n) İT 2s (kal-)—i:ş ké:dipe: "the consequences of the action” Z7 142 (bakin-); n.m.e.: K B (Thou art before all others) sen öndün kedin "Thou art in front and behind” 8; n.o. 18—(the Prophet was in front of all leaders and) kedin boldi tamğa kamuğ savçıka “vas after, and became the seal of all the prophets” 45: kédin keldeçike “to those that come after” r9zŞ meninde kedin “after I have died” 1217 (the Fergana MS. consistently has kédin, the Cairo MS. kédin): xır(?) A:. ökünmez kédin “and is not sorry aftervvards” 114; SİX O.0.— (first he gives you honey to taste) kédinrek 'and later' (poison) 208 (the Ar. script MSS. habitually have kedin/kédin); Tef. kédin (sic) "behind; after, afterwards! 169: xıv Röğ. kédin “after” (with 22) R II 1138 (quotns.): Caf. xv ff. keyn (with k-”) ard . . . pas ma"nasina "behind, thereafter(?)”, keyin ardindan Vel. 354 (quotns.), keyn/keyin (both spelt) 'agab “hinder part, behind” San. 302r. 6: Xwar.xiv kedin/kedin (sic) “after, aftervvards” Qutb 93-6; Nahc. 29, 17. D küde:n Dev. N. in -n fr. *küde:-; cf. küde:gü:; (r) 'entertainment, feast”, originally perhaps specifically *wedding feast'; (2) 'a guest' N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vrrff. Bud. küden *guest' PP 69, 3 (1 ür), Hüen-ts. 2060-2 (téristür-): Civ. (if you sneeze in the evening)     
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 749 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. GDRküden kelir "a guest is coming! T'T VII 35, 13: xiv Chin.-Uyğ. Dict. 'guest' küden Ligetr 177: R IH 1486: Xak. xi küden (MS. küden) al-walima 'feast, entertainment! Kaş. 7 404: KB kelin kiz sevinci küden tünleri 'the bride's delight is in the nights of the wedding feast! 2380; (there are various kinds of meals for guests) olarda birisi küdenke aş ol “one is the meal for a wedding' (another for a circumcision or the birth of a son) 4575: xiv Muh.(?) da'watu'l-'urs "a wedding invitation' kü:ye:n (MS. kiü:be:n) konu:klu:ku Rif. 164 (only). Tris. GDN D kedindi: ($-) Hap. leg.; Pass. Dev. N/A. fr. the Refl. f. of ke:d-. Xak. xı kedindi: to:n "a garment which has been worn a good deal (al-malbüs katira(n)) Kaş. I 449. D ké:dinki: ($-) N./A.S. fr. ké:din; 'situated behind (of place); subsequent (of time). N.o.a.b. Cf. kénki: Xak. xr Kaş. III 14 (yalığ): xiu(?) Tef. wa má xalfahum 'what was subsequent to (or followed(?)) them” anlarda kezinki (sic) 169. D küdenlik Hap. leg.; A.N. (conc. N.) fr. küde:n. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. in the instructions for building a house küdenlik 'a place for housing, or entertaining, guests' is mentioned between the kitchen and the great and small doors TT VI 86. : Dis. GDR D kótrüg Hap. leg.; N.Ac. fr. kötür-, abbreviated; mentioned only as an example of this type of N.Ac. Xak. xı anıp yük kótrügi: kör 'observe how he lifts the load” (raf'ahu'i-haml) Kag. II 166, ız. D kedrim Hap. leg.; N.S.A. fr. kedir-, abbreviuted. Xak. xı kedrim (MS. -d-) et al-lahmwl-maslix “meat which has been skinned' Kaş. 7 485. D küdrüm noted only in association with üdrüm and perhaps invented merely as a dingle with that word, etymologically N.S.A., abbreviated, fr. *küdür-, Caus. f. of küd-; *commanding attention or respect'. Xak. xı KB (next among the Prophet's four Companions was Farüq) kişi üdrümi tili kópli bir teg kişi küdrümi 'choicest of men; his tongue and mind were as one, the most respected of men' 55; ne üdrüm ne küdrüm ne ersig eren “vhat a choice, respected and gallant man” 279; bodun küdrümi (rhyming with üdrümi) “respected by the people” 417, 1689. D kötrüm Hap. leg.; N.S.A. fr. kötür-, abbreviated; in the sense of something which is raised above the ground. Xak. xr kótrüm al-dukkànu' lladi yuclas "alayhi “a bench on which one sits” Kaş. 7 485. Dis. V. GDRkedir- Hap. leg.; but see kedrim, kedril-, kedriş-. Xak. xr ol ko:yuğ kedirdi: 8641125 705 calafa”l-şaüt wa. qaddadahá "he skinned the sheep and cut (the meat) into strips” Kaş. 77 76 (kedire:r, kedirme:k). D kedür- (g-) Caus. f. of ke:d-, “to dress (someone Dat.) in (something Acc.). Survives in several NE languages, R JI 1177, and Khak. as kezir-, Tuv. kedir-; in other languages, in which ke:d- has become key- or the like, the Caus. Suff. -dür-, or the like, is normally used. Türkü vri ff. Man. [gap] sınından amranmak biligig üntürüp tintura [tepri] üze kedürür “from his. . . organ he produces the disposition to love, and clothes the God əf the Zephyr with it” M III 16, 1-3 (i); o.o. do. 6-11 (1): Xak. xı ol mapa: to:n kedürdi: "he dressed me (a/basani) in a garment” (etc.) Kaş. II 76 (kedürür, kedürme:k): xin(?) Tef. kéyür- ditto 179: Xwar. xiv kedür[kédür-/keddür-/keydür- ditto Qu'5 93-6; kéyür- MN 48: Osm. xiv ff. geyür-/giyürditto was the normal Caus. f. until xvi and is noted once in xvi. TTS 1 313; İl 4323; HİT 300; IV 344. D ké:ter- ($-) Caus. f. of ké:t- ; to send away, take away, remove”, and the like; -er- is a very unusual Caus. Suff., and was perhaps due to a conscious effort to avoid confusion with ketür-, a Sec. f. of keltür-, which has exactly the opposite meaning, but this word seems to be a good deal older than that Sec. f. Survives in SE Türki keter- Shaw 175 (only) NC Kir. ketir-: NW Kk., Nog. ketir-; Kaz. kiter-: SW Osm. gider-, other languages use other Caus. fs, e.g. ketkür-. In some languages there is a confusing convergence of meaning with kótür-. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. [Sanskrit lost] öni u:ğul (sic) kete:rip erse:r yeme: “even if one has removed the child” TT VIII F.3; Sanskrit apahara 'take away' öni kete:rgil do. G.:7; (the Buddha) alku korkınçlarığ kéterdeci *who drives away all fears! TT X 122; 0.0. do. 182, 279; U III 48, 19; IV 30,39 TT VII 40,93; etc.: Civ. (wrap various ingredients in paper, heat them) kegdesin kéterip “remove the paper and” H I 152; a.0.0.: Xak. xı ol ta:şığ yo:ldin (MS. yo:ldan) ke:terdi: “he removed (nahha) the stone from the road'; also used when one removes ( f? izála) anything from its place Kaş. III 187 (ké:terür, ké:terme:k): biligsizlik kéte:r (sic) “drive (adfa") ignorance out of your mind” 7 440, zo, a.o. III 164, 4 (nahhü): KB sari'at yüzindin keterdi eşük “he removed the veil from the face of the religious lav” 54; keterse tuman "he must disperse the fog” 285; kétürür tatığ “it takes away the taste' (of a meal) 4113; o.o. 285 (ajungi:), 385 (2 azuk), 6075 (osa:nuk): xui(?) At. (God makes the night dark) künün kéterip 'taking away your day (or sun)”, tünüp kéterip 'dispelling your night' (he makes the dawn bright) 15-16; Tef. kéter- “to take away, remove” 176: xiv Muh.(?) ab"ada “to send avvay” kö:ter- Rif. 102 (only); ba"ada "to drive away! ke:ter- ros (MS. ké:tür-); şarafa wa "azala “to dismiss, remove” (esp. from an office) ké:ter- (unvocalized) 111: Çağ. xv ff. kéter- (-ğey) gider- Vel. 355: Aa 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 750 
     
   
   
     706 kéter- burdan “to carry off, remove" San. 311 v. 15 (quotns.; there is much confusion in San. between kéter- and kótür-, due perhaps to the fact that burdan also means 'to carry'; San. adds here “in Rümi göter-”: Xwar. xiv. kétir- “to remove” Qut 97; MN 150: Kom. xiv “to remove” ketir- CCG; Gr. 142 (quotn., perhaps to be assigned to ketür-): Kip. xiii záha “to remove" ketür- (sic) Hou. 40, 14; nahlià min izdlati”l-şay” min makànihi ketür- (sic) do. 44, 4: xv keter- adhaba”l-şay), muta'addi “to remove something”, Caus. Kat, 9, 18; 76, 4: Osm. xivff. gider- "to remove, destroy, dismiss'; common T'T'S 7 311; I1 436; 1HI 397; IV 341. S ketür- See keltür-. kötür- (kötör- ; g-) “to lift up, raise', with various extended meanings; prima facie a Caus. f., but no convincing etymology based on this hypothesis has yet been suggested. S.i.a.m.l.g., often in such forms as kóter-, which point to an original kötör- (the form in NC Kır.), NW Kumyk göter-: SW Osm. götür-, "Tkm. göter-. See kö:ter-. Türkü vii (Heaven) yüğerü: kötü:rmiş erinç “must have raised up” (my father and mother) 7 E rr, 71 E ro, similar phr. do. 25, 21: viu ff. Man. basin (sic) yokaru kótürüp 'raising his head' M 1 6, z: Uy£. viri ff. Man.-A [gap] emgek kótürmeyin 'let me not (have to) bear the pain of (?)' M 11 6, 14 (ii): Man. arkuluğ tağığ kótürüp 'raising the mountain surrounded by valleys! TT IX 77: Chr. kótürü umadilar “they could not lift” (the stone) U 7 8, 2: Bud. kötürü alıp “lifting and taking” (the demon's daughter to his bosom) U İT 25, 17; (the wind) kötürü éltip “lifting and carrying off” TT V 10, 85; tamudaki emfgekin tükel kötürür "he endures all the pains of hell” TT VI 446; 0.0. do. 451; VII 40, 141; X 125; USp. 105b. 4 etc.: Xak. xı er yük kötürdi: “the man carried the load” (Jiamala'l-/iml) ; also used of a woman when she is pregnant (Aamilat) Kaş. II 75 (kötürür, kótürme:k; prov.); a.o.o., KB (he subdued the enemy and) kótürdi özün 'raised himself up” 101; (keep those who love him safe and) yağısın kötür “remove his enemies! 117; körüşmez yağılar kótürdi öçin 'enemies who do not see one another get rid of mutual malice' 145; bu kücgey kücini bodun kötrümez “the people cannot endure the violence of the violent man”, 2030; 2.0.0. (common in all these shades of meaning): xın(?) At. niqab kötrür ajun “this world vvears a veil” (and from time to time uncovers its face) 221; kötrür idi “God raises” (the humble) 281; o.o. 242 (uzal-), 332, 447; Tef. kótür-; “to lift, to carry' 187: xiv Muh. al-ihtimal "to carry' &amp;ótürmek Mel. 13, 12 (and 35, 14 v.L.); Rif. 89; hamala sva rafa'a (to lift”) &amp;ü:tür-, 25, 11; 108; sd/a “to lift ditto 27, 9; 110; al-raf' götürmek 36, 5; 122: Çağ. xvff. köter- (-güp, -di) görür- Vel. 363; köter- (spelt) bar dágtan "to raise, pick up, carry off”, etc. San. 302v. 27 (quotns.): Xwar. xii köter- “to raise, remove, carry off” ' Ali 7, 24: xiv köter-/kötür- ditto Qutb 104; DIS. V. GDRNalic. 106, 8 ff.: Kom. xiv “to raise; to take away; to be pregnant with' köter-/kötir-/ kötür- CCI, CCG, Gr. 156 (quotns.): Kip. xui rafa"a kötür- Hou. 36, 7; şüla kótürdo. 41,6: xiv kötür- hamala İd. 78: xv kötürhamala wa naşafa (to absorb") Kav. o, 18; 74, 8: Tuh. 13b. 6, şala teca. hamala kótür- do. 21b. r: Osm. xiv ff, götür- “to move, remove, carry, lift”, c.i.a.p. TT.S 1327; 1 457; HIE 313; IV 358. D kü:ttür- (£-) Hap. leg. ?; Caus. f. of kü:d- ; Xak., but in a meaning described hy Kaş. as Oğuz xı ol apar ko:y kü:ttürdi: “he made him tend (ar'à/m) the sheep' (etc.) Kaş, H1 187 (kü:ttürür, kü:ttürme:k). D kedril- Hap. ley. Pass. f. of kedir-; unvocalized throughout. Xak. xt ko:y kedrildi: quddati' l-gát. mina'l-qadid 'the sheep('s flesh) was cut into strips! Kaş. IJ 237 (kedrilü:r, kedrilme:k). D kedrül- Hap. leg.?; Pass. f. of kedür-. Xak. xi tom kedrüldi: "the garment (etc.) was put on” (/ubisa) Kaş. TI 237 (kedrülü:r, kedrülme:k). D kötrül- (8-) Pass. f. of kótür-; s.i.s.m.l. but usually as a Tris., SW Osm. götürül- ;. "Tkm. göteril- Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. [Sanskrit lost] a:tı: (spelt a:dhi) kötrölmiş 'whose name is exalted' (a common epithet of the Buddha) 7T VIII A.22; X 107; USp. 60 II a 10 etc.: Civ. ati) kün kótrülgey (MS. by inadvertance kótlürgey) 'your name and fame will be exalted" TT I 43: (Xak.) xii(?) At. kedin künde xayr iş me kótrülgüluk “in the Last Day good deeds shall be exalted' 390; 'T'ef. kötürül- “to be raised; to be removed” (from somewhere 4b.) 187: Xwar. xiv kótrül- “to be raised' Qutb 104: Kom. xiv "suspended, hung up” kötürülmiş CCI; Gr.: Osm. xiv to xvi gótrül-/gótürül- "to be removed, put aside'; in several texts 7 TS I1 457; III 312; IV 358. D kedriş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of kedir-; fully vocalized. Xak. xı ol mapa: et kedrişdi: *he helped me to cut the skinned ment into strips' (5/-faqdidi”l-maslüx) Kaş. İİ 222 (kedrişü:r, kedrişme:k). D kedrüş- (&amp;-) Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of kedür-. Xak. xı ola:r ikki: to:n kedruşdi: “they two dressed one another” (albasa . . . tatcb) Kaş. II zzz (kedrüşü:r, kedruşme:k). D kötruş- (8-) Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of kötür-. Xak. xı ol mana: yük kötrüşdi: “he helped me to lift (f7 rafa') the load” (etc.) Kaş, II 222 (kötrüşü:r, kótrüsme:k). Tris. GDR D ketirti: (8-) IIap. leg.; Adv. fr. *ké:; *behind, in the rear", Uyğ. viti ff. Civ. TT T 122 (tepre:-). D kótürgü: (8-) Hap. leg.; Conc. N. fr. kotür-. Xak. xı kótürgü a/-minqala "a means of transport” Kaş. 7 490.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 751 
     
   
   
       MON. GG Tris. V. GDRD kedürse:- ($-) Hap. lcg.; Desid. f. of kedür-. Xak. xı ol maya: to:n kedürse:di: "he wished to dress me” (yaksini'l-tawb) Kaş. III 332 (kedürse:r, kedürse:me:k). D kötürse:- (8-) Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of kótür-; quoted only as a grammatical example. Xak. xı er yük kötürse:di: "the man wished to carry the load” (yağmılı”l-himl) Kaş. 1 280, 19; n.m.e. Dis. V. GDSD kétig- (g-) Recip. f. of ke:t-, s.i.s.m.l.; SW Osm,, "Tkm. £idig-; but this V. in Osm. in the sense of 'to itch' is a Sec. f. of the Co-op. f. of kiçi:-. Uyğ. vrir ff. Civ. (you should quickly become associated with the welldisposed and) terk öpkeçi ketişgüçi 'and separate yourself from the quick tempered” TT VH 17, 23 (the grammar is very rugged ; translated. fr. Chinese); Xak. xı olar bi:r ekindi:di:n ketişdi: "they parted (tafarraqa) from one another” Kaş. 1] 89 (ketigü:r, ketigme:k; so vocalized). D küdüş- Tlap. leg.?; Recip. f. of kü:d-. Xak. xı ola:r bi:r bi:riğ küdüşdi: “they waited (intazara) for one another” Kaş. 11 94 (küdüşü:r, küdüşme:k, MS. everywhere -d-). . Dis. GDZ kidiz felt”, S.i.a.m.l.g. except SW (where the Oğuz word 1 kece:, q.v., is used) in a wide variety of forms ranging fr. NE Tuv. kidis to NW Kk. ki:z with kiyiz as the commonest form. Türkü vı ff. [rkB 33 (ur-): Uyğ. vini ff... Civ. (in a contract; "as I required") kidiz “a felt' U.Sp. 63, 2; a.o. do. 79, 11-12 (uyukluk): Xak. xı kidiz a/-hbd “felt” Kaş. J 366; six o.o.: KB 4442 (azar): xiv Müh. al-lubbád "felc &amp;i:ylz Mel, 67, 15; ki:yiz Rif. 168: Çağ. xv ff. kiz (*with k-”) here 'felt' Vel. 357 (quotn.); kiz 'felt' (namad), in Ar. libd San. 314r. 7 (same quotn.): Xwar. xiv klyiz “felt” Qutb 98; Nahc. 31, 7: Kom. xiv “felt” kiyiz CCI, Gr.: Kip. xui al-/ubbad kiyiz (or kizz?) Hou. 17, 4: xiv (under &amp;df zd1) ki:z ditto /d. 82; a.o. do. 79 (1 kece:): xv ditto kiz Tuh. 31b. 10. Dis. V. GDZS kódez- 'to watch over' and the like; n.o.a.b. Unquestionably a metathesis of kózed-, q.v.; the semantic similarity with küd- is purely coincidental, since morphologically the two words could not be connected. Xak. xı ol maya: ködezdi: “he looked after (the thing) for my sake' (Rhafaza'l-say' li-acli), and one says ol meni: kódezdi: intazarani "he waited for me” (or "looked for me”): this V. is constructed from (tubnàá 'an) both (concepts) a/-hifz and al-intizàár; its origin is kö:z attı: “he cast his eyes” on something to look after it; this is also in the V. közetti: Kaş. 77 86 (köde:zür (sic), kódezme:k); tenri: meni: kódezdi: hafazani'llah II 162, 6; yavlak kódez tilipni:  707 “keep a firm guard (ihfaz . . . hifz şadid) on your tongue' /// 43, 20; arslan karr:sa: sıçğa:n ütin köde:zü:r '*when a lion grows old it watches (yartaşid) the mouse's hole' III 263, s: KB ködez- is fairly common in two senses; (1) 'to watch over, protect', é.g. lláhi kódezgil menip kóplümi “O God, protect my mind” 47; o.o. 384, 1271; (2) "to keep under control” 167 (1 ti:ş), 6oo (2 yaz-), 967, 2346: xt11(?) At. til ködezmek 1:30, 157; ködez aya düst uluğlar haqqın “my friend, respect the rights of mighty ones" 345. Tris. GDZ D kidizge:k Hap. leg.; Den. N./A. fr. kidiz, “felt-like, of the consistency of felt'. Xak. xi kidizge:k ka:ğu:n “a melon that has lost its freshness (tarátwa) and become just like felt (Ra'l-libd matala(n)) Kag. II 290. D kidizlig Hap. leg.?; P.N./A. fr. kidiz. Xak. xı (after kidizlik) and with -£ (i.e. kidizlig) “one who owns (felt)! Kaş. I 507. D kidizlik Hap. leg.; A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. kidiz. Xak. xı kidizlik yun 'wool destined to be made into felt' (al-libd) Kaş. I 507. D ködezliğ Hap. leg.; abbreviated N./A.S. fr. kódezil-; such N./A.S.s fr. Tris. V.s are very rare, and the precise form of this one was prob. devised to suit the metre. Xak. xi KB sevükrek atın er kişenliğ tutar kereklig atın kör kódezlig tutar “a man keeps his favourite horse hobbled, but his ordinary working horse he (merely) keeps under observation' 315. Tris. V. GDZD kódezil- Pass. f. of ködez-, n.o.a.b.; cf. kódezlig. Xak. xi KB (keep your tongue under control and) kódezildi baş “your head is protected' 1:76; a.o. 1271: XIn(?) At. ködezilse bu til ködezlür özün 'if your tongue is kept under control, you yourself are protected' 158. Mon. GG kek practically syn. vv. 1 0:€ and in the early period generally used in Hend. w. it; originally prob. 'malice, spite, secret hatred'; thence 'a desire for revenge”, and finally 'revenge' and other extended meanings. Survives as kek in C Kir, Kzx.: SC Uzb. and several NW languages. Uy$f. vri ff. Man. TT II 17, 84-5 (1 Öç): Bud. U II 25, 13-14 (1 ö:ç): Xak. xı kek a/-hiqd 'malice'; hence one says öçlüğ keklig kişi: sahibu'l-higd wa'l-ta'r “a malicious, revengeful man” Kaş. I] 283 (the following word vocalized vv. a fatha is kük), 7 43 and 230, 4 (1 ö:ç): KB 2313 (1 6:5): Kom. xiv *hatred' kek CCG; Gr. PU ke:h Hap. leg.; an Exclamation. At the end of the section containing this and similar Mon.s Kaş. says that they are pronounced . . . keh. . . in rapid speech, but not in writing and that the -h is (silent) like the Ahàá'u'l-istiráha  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 752 
     
   
   
     708 MON. GG in Ar. of which examples are quoted; the word should therefore perhaps be transcribed ke: Xak. xi ke:h ke:h “an Exclamation (harf) used in calling a dog” Kaş. //I 118. kök, etc. Preliminary note. There is great difficulty in determining hot; many early Turkish vwords of this general form there swere and sohat tcere the qualities of their vowels and final consonants. Nawd'i had the same difficulty, see the quotn. fr. the Muhakimatu"l-luğatayn in Vel., p. 370 (top) there five alternative. meanings are given:— sky, melody, seam, cauterization (see 4 kök) and vegetation". After the correction mentioned under kek has been made Kaş. lists three scords teith a short. vowel and ten (some alternative meanings of the same svord) tcith a long one. The first three mean “bain, suffering (kük or küg?); 'root' (kök) and 'thong' (kök) respectively. There is also another. apparently early word meaning 'seam' or the lihe (Kök). If this really is the word in Uyğ. it can hardly be a l.-to. fr. Pe. kük 'basting', and in that event the Pe. word may be a Turkish l.-w., but the status of the word is a little uncertain. Of the second ten the first (and so presumably the next six) are described as ending in -&amp;, and the eighth (and so presumably the other two) as ending in -K, The first two. "metre" and “melody” are alternative translations of the same word kü:g and the third *a popular joke' is prob. an extended meaning of it. The fourth and fifth relating to animals were also certainiy kü:g. The sixth and seventh, *rust' and 'freckles', must be alternative translations of the same ttord schich does not seem to be traceable elsewhere, but was perhaps Kü:g. The eighth and ninth “sky” and "sky coloured! are alternative translations of Kö:k, The last entry is a phr. meaning “a village headman' otherwise traced only in KB, it is possible that the first element is the same word as the preceding. 1 kök “root, origin,, lit. and metaph.; described by Kaş, as Oğuz/Kıp. but occurs in KB; survives in NE Tuv.: SW Az., Osm., Tkm. Cf. tü:b, tö:z, yıltız. Türkü vır 7 E 3 İLE 4 0), oksiz): Xak. xi KB bular erdi din ham sari'at köki “these were the root of the faith and religious lav” 59; iki nen turur ash yıldız köki 'two things are its origin and root (Hend.) 2132; yemi ot köki “his food was the roots of plants! 6155; 0.0. 338 (kaz-), 821, 2015, 2183, 5907: xin(?) Ar. kóki kórklüg ernip xüyı kórklüg ol "a man of fine family has a fine disposition! 317; Tef. kök 'lineage, origin, root” 182: xiv Mu. (under “terms of relationship) aş/ı? /-nasab "lineage” £6: (sic, in error?) Mel. 49, 2; kö:k Rif. 143: Çağ. xv ff. kök rişa-i diraxt “the root of a tree' San. 307v. 18: Kip./Oğuz xi kök a[-as!; hence one says kökün kim minman asluk wa ilü man tantami mina”l-qaböyil *who is your ancestor, and to what tribe do you trace your origin?” .Kag. II 284: Kom. xiv “origin, lineage! kök CCH; Gr. işo (quotn.): Kip, xi (sky) kök, it is also “family, origin, human semen' (a/-cins toa [-agl. tva'l-nutfa) Hou. 5, 1: xiv kök al-cins, one says kö:kün ne: dür “vhat is your family?” İd. 83; al-cins kök (/tamır) Bul. s, 6: xv (sky”) kó:k also al-cins in the sense of the races of mankind like Türk, Rüm, and Habasa Kav. 58, 2; cins kök Tuh. rıb. 12. 2 kök 'thong' and the like. Survives in NC Kir.; NW Kk. kök “a leather thong used to hold together the framework of a vurt; a narrow thong used hy cobblers'. Xak. xi kök rabtu'l-sarc “he thong fastening a saddle'; prov. er só:zi: bi:r eder köki: ü:c “it is a sign of manliness to have one word and not to go back on it, just as there are three thongs on n saddle-bovv” (rabt hamvi'l-sarc); if there were one more the saddle-bow (a/-qarbüs) would break because of the excessive number of holes in it, and if there were less, the two thongs would not take the weight of a man Kaş, /7 285. 3 kók 'seam' or the like. Survives in NE Alt., "Tel, kök "seam” R H 1221; (Tuv. kókte- “to sew (together), to file (papers)” and the like): SC Uzb. kük 'basting, oversewing. Uyf. vitl ff. Civ. (if a mouse) yoğurkanığ öz kökün 1sirsar "bites a blanket or its own(?) seams! TT VII 36, 10-11; (in a document about the issue of cloth) Semiske tonka kóküpe (?so read) bir böz bértim “1 gave Semis one (roll of) cloth for a garment and its seams'(?) USp. 38, 8-9: Çağ. xv ff. kök (r) bixhá-i buzurg hi bar cáma ma amtál-i dn zadand "large seams which they make in a garment and the like" Sam. 307v. 14 (bix normally means “root”, but must here mean 'seam' or perhaps 'basting); yana kök tikerde kóklemek dür 'again there is the verb “to make scams' (or “to baste' ?) for sewing seams” Vel. 370, 4-5 (quotn. fr. Narcd”i). 4 kó:k ($-) basically “the sky”, hence 'skycoloured, blue, blue-grey', etc.; for a similar range of colours cf. yaşil, S.i.a.m.].g. in both meanings except NE, where it has only the second (various Sec. f.s of tenri: reborrowed fr. Mong. being used in the first); in SW Osm. gök (before vowels gög . . .), Tkm. gö:k (&amp;5:B . . .); these fornis and Az. köy suggest that, in spite of Kaj.'s categorical statement that the final was -k, the original form may have been gö: See Doerfer III 1677. "Türkü vir üze: kök tenri: asra: yağiz yer kilintukda: when the blue sky above and the brown earth below were created” 1 E 1, I1 E2; kök teyigin 'their grey squirrel skins” 14 N ız, S 12; kök (VU) ór name of a river T rs, G E 3, IL E 4?, sce oksiz): vii ff. kök yürüp taş "a blue white stone” Toy. s (ETY İT 57); o.o. do. 21; IrkB 64 (buymul): Man. üze on kat kök asra segiz (sic) kat yer “the ten-fold skies above and the eight-fold earth belovv” Chuas. 42-4: Uy&amp;. viir ft. Man. kög (sic) kalığ (sic) yüzinte “on the surface of the sky” TT 7/7 129; (the demons who fell) kóklerden . . . yerğerü "from the heavens to earth” M 71 7,   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 753 
     
   
   
     MON. GG 17: Chr. U £8, 135 (teği:): Bud. (my younger brother) kök teprike yoklağay “vill (metaphorically) rise as high as heaven” PP 57, 2; a.o. do. 61, 4; üstün kókdekl 'situated above in the sky' TT VII 40, 11-12; 0.0. U H 37, 53-4 etc. (kalık)—kök 7 “a blue lotus' PP 38, 1-2; Suv. 347, 8; (he drew mortals) sansarlığ kök Eur out of the grey mud of the cycle of rebirths' (Sanskrit. samsára) TT V 26, 85-8; a.o.o. mainly for "blue" and the like: Civ. TT ] 23 (ug-): xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. R II 240 (kalik): O. Kir. ix ff. (I have parted from) kök tenri:de: kün a:y “the sun and moon in the blue sky” Mal. 10, 3; 45, 5: Xak. xı kó:k (*with -k") a/-samd” “the sky” (prov); kó:k tom "a dark grey (akhab) garment'; also any colour (/azom) like the colour of the sky; and one says kend kö:ki: "the suburbs (satczd) of a town, referring to the greenness (xudra) of the trees Kaş. 117 132; the Turks say köp kó:k for agbaru'l-mugba'u'l-lawon "dark dust-coloured', and the Oğuz say köm kó:k; kó:k is al-akhab I 328, 19-20; ko:k temür 'blue (a/-azraq) iron' 1 361, 26; a.o. do. 362, 9; İ11 162 (çüvvit), 2.0.0. for 'sky': KB yaşıl kök “the blue sky” 3, 1002—(the dry trees clothe themselves in green (yaşıl), crimson, scarlet, yellow), Kök 'blue' (and red) 67; a.o.o. in both senses: xin(?) "Tef. Kök “heaven” (and earth) 182: xiv Muh. àzraqu'l-qamis “in a blue shirt' kö:k tonlu: Mel. ir, r, Rif. 84; al-azraq Kó:k; gadidu'l-zurqa $0:m gö:ğ (sic) 68, 4-8; 168 (köm Kó:k); a/-samö” &amp;ó:g (sic); al-macarra “the Milky Way' gö:g yo:lı:, gazsg quzáh 'rainbow' £6: ya:yı: 78, 16; 183: (Çağ. see Osm.): Oğuz xi köm an [ntensifying Particle (/tarf mubalığa) for al-lawnu'l-adbar, one says kó:m kö:k "dark dust-coloured' 7 338; a.o. 7 328 (Xak): Xwar. xiv kök 'green' Qutb roo; “heaven” MN. 78, etc.; Kom. xiv kök 'sky' CCG; 'blue' CCI; Gr. işo (quotns.): Kip. xıl al-samö” kök wa htwa'l-azraq Hou. 5, 1; al-azrag kök do. 31, 3; tawhid wasft'l-azraq köz kö:k (sic) do. 31, 7: xiv Kök al-azraq wa yutlaq 'alá'l-samá! İd. 83: kö:k yolu: al-macarra do. 83; Köm kök al-şadidu” l-xurqa, its origin wa köp kök do. 84; al-sama' kök Bul. 2, 11: xv they say köm Kök fi ta'kidi'l-zurqa Kav. 5, 7; al-samá' kök... wa'l-azraq mina'l-alwàün do. $8, 2; azraq kök Tuh. 4a. 2; Sab. 6; sama” Kök do. 18b. 7; lazward "lapis lazuli' kök berez do. 38b. 13: Osm. xiv ff. gök “blue”, etc.; c.i.a.p. T'TS I 316; II 444; III 304; IV 348: xvui gög (so spelt) in Rumi (r) sabza wa sang 'vcgetation, meadow'; (2) rang-t kabüd “blue” (quotn.), for 'intensely blue” gög gömek, (3) asmaán “sky” (quotns.); (4) metaph. as an expression for “cauterization” (süzündan düğ) for which they burn blue paper San. 307v. 19 (the quotns, are in Cag., the "Rümi” may refer to the spelling ÖR, not to the word itself); ğöm gög (so spelt) 'intensely blue”, also called 68 ğömek 309v. ro (not described as Rizmi, but the spelling suggests it). VU 5 kó:k in tlie phr. kö:k ayu:k; pec. to Xak, Ayu:k is otherwise unknown, and its 799 meaning obscure; it is not therefore possible to say whether kö:k in this phr. has one of its normal meanings. Xak. xi kó:k ayu:k (spelt as one word, but immediately follows 4 kö:k) “the title given to the headmen of villages and "Türkmen (tribes) (aköbrrazı"l-rasatiq wa'l-turkmán) Kaş. III 133: KB (hear the words of) bilir kók ayuk 'the wise headman' 2644; (in a passage about the appointments open to persons at the royal court; some become öğe:) kayu kök ayukluk üze at alur “some receive the title of “headman” 4067 (some 1nanc bei, çağrı beğ, kül erkin(?) or çavlı beg). VUF 1 kü:ğ "Song, melody), and the like; L-w. fr. Chinese ck'ii, Middle Chinese A'jok, 'song' (Giles 3,062). Survives in most NE languages; NC Kir, Kzx.; SC Uzb. as kü, küğ, küy, l.-w. in Pe, as Rüh in such phr. as hüh hardan “to tunc (an instrument)”. Uyğ. viii ff. Man, tükedi Afrin Cor Tegin kügi “here ends Afrin Çor Tegin”s hymn” M 77 8, 19; a.o.(?) do. 7, 1-2 (takşut): Xak. xı kü:g (with -&amp;') 'arudu'l-si'r "the metre of a poem”, one says bu: yt:r ne: kü:g üze: ol "vhat is the metre of this poem?” (Zazal): kü:ğ “the tune of a song” (al-lahn fPlğind), hence one says er kü:glendi: Paná'l-racul bi-lahn lahu "the man sang a song in its (right) tune”, (ina verse, misplaced after 3 ki:g) kü:gler kamuğ tüzüldi: :aga'ati'l-muwafaga bayn alhün”l-ğinğ” “harmony has been established between the tunes of the songs” Kaş. III 131: Çağ. xv ff. kük (^with k- -k”) saz çalmak ə a musical instrument, or a tune” Vel. (quotns.), kük (between 3 kók and 1 koi) (2) áhang-i süz "the tuning of a musical instrument' San. 307v. 14 (quotns.; the para. ends by saying that in Pe. the word means (1) “Tettuce” , (2) 'cough'; (3) 'dome'). VU 2 kü:ğ immediately follows the two entries of 1 kü:g, and is prob. merely an extended meaning of that word, since there is a similar combination of meanings in Khak. Xak. xı kü:ğ the word for any 5joke' (adlınRa) which circulates among the people of any town during some year and is passed from mouth to mouth; hence one says bu: yıl kü:ğ keldi: “this year's joke has arrived” Kaş. III 131. ?D 3 kü:$ no doubt Dev. N./A. fr. kü:-, survives only(?) in NC Kzx. küy 'the tending of livestock'; this word also means “the condition of livestock”, which may belong here, or be an attenuated meaning of 4 kü:g. Xak. xı kü:g yılkı: a/-dübbatu”l-masrüha acma" 'cattle driven out to pasture in a herd” Kaş. Ill 1:31 (followed by a verse illustrating 1 kü:g). 4 kü:ğ survives in the NC Kir. phr. kü:gö kel- (of sheep and other female animals) 'to be on heat, ready to be mated'; Kzx. küy (see 3 kü:ğ) seems to have the same meaning, cf. küylö- (of cattle, sheep and dogs) “to mate” R II 1420. Xak. xi kü:g sifádu'l-kabg vwva'l-touxaüg fi aroğnihi gátiva(m), “the mating of  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 754 
     
   
   
       710 rams and wild animals in the mating season in winter'; hence one says ko:y kü:gi: boldı: “the mating season for sheep (etc.) has arrived' Kaş. HI 132. PU 5 kü:g Hap. leg. in both senses; for 'rust the ordinary words are bas and 2 tat; therc is no generally accepted "Turkish word for “frcekle”, SW Osm. uses cl, but most languages use words derived, with some phonetic changes, fr. Mong. seögül, Xak. xı kü:g "(he rust' (al-fib'; MS. tab") which forms on the surface of a mirror; hence one says köznüke: kü:f tüştl: 'greeness (al-xudra) and rust have formed on the surface of the mirror': kü:$ "freckles” (al-kalafa) which appear on the faces of women (etc.) Kaş. FİT 132. PU kük (or 6 küg?) ssuffering, distress'; prob. n.o.a.b.; R 71 1417 notes a NC Kzx.(?) phr. küy kór- “to suffer pain, or distress”, but there is no other trace of it and there are in NC several words with a similar meaning which go back to küfi-. Scc kükmek. Uyf. vun ff. Civ. közün içinde kük yok köpülün içinde kadğu: yok “there is no pain in your eyes or anxiety in your mind” TT I 144-5: Xak. xı kük (misvocalized kek) al-mthna “distress, suffering; hence one says kük (ditto) kördi: er “the man suffered pain” (imtahana) Kaş. II 283; kük (so vocalized) kördi: kere:kü: yüdti: “he was so badly off (ra”d”/-mihna) that he had to carry his tent framevvork on his own back” 7 448, 1 (cf. keten). Mon. V. GGPU kik- Hap. leg., but see kiksür-; as this word appears among the Bilitterals with two of the same consonants the final is likely to be -k- although the Perf. Suff. is given ns -di:; syn. w. bile:-, etc. Xak. xr (er) biçe:k kikdi: "the man sharpened (asazza) the knife and whetted (amarra) onc (knife) against another” Kaş. 1I 293 (kike:r, kikme:k). Dis. GGE VUS kükü: See küküy. Dis. GGC D kö:kçi:n Den. N./A. (indicating an attenuated colour) fr. 4 kö:k, 'bluish, grevish'. "The alternative f. kó:ksi:n is prob. Secondary. Survives only(?) in NE Tel. kökşün 'greybeard' R IJ 1231. Sec Doerfer 111 1670. Xak. xı kökşi:n ne:p 'anvthing the colour of the sky” (Ra-lasoni”l-sam6”) Kaş. I 437; 1 186, 12 (eğriş-): KB başında keçürmiş bu kókcin sakal "this experienced greybeard” 1798; a.o. 376 (odun-); (not to be confused with kógsin see köğöz). Dis. V. GGCS kikçür- Sec kikşür-. Dis. GGD - F kegde (?kagda:) 'paper'; L-w. fr. some Tranian language (?Sogdian) and cognate to   MON. GG Pe. kağadihağid 'paper'. Survives in NE Koib. kegde 'thick paper' R I7 1065. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. (write the dhárani on birch bank, (palm leaves) keğdede 'paper' (linen or a wooden tablet) U 71 7o, 4 (1i); o.o. TT VI 202; Suv. 6, 8-9 (2 *ko:fi): Civ. H I işo (1 taş), 152; TT VII zs, 12 (keğede). Dis. V. GGDS kókded- Sec kóklet-. D kekteş- lccip. f. of kekte:- (which survives in NC Kir), Den. V. fr. kek. Survives in NC Kzx. Xak. xı ola:r ikki: kekteşdi: tahdqadd "those two secretly hated onc another” Kaş. 1I 222 (kekteşü:r, kektesme:k). S kóktes- Sce 1 kókles-. 'Tris. V. GGDD kókedtür- “to exalt, praise to the skies'; Caus. f. of *kóke:d- Intrans. Den. V. fr. 4 kó:k, which would presumably have meant "to go up to the sky” or the like. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. nom ermeziğ nom ol tép kókedtürdüm erser 'if I have praised false doctrine to the skies saying that it is the true doctrine! Suv. 137, 2-3; a.0. do. 135, ir (kodikartur-). Dis. GGG kekük some kind of bird of prev; the identity of the zummac is uncertain, Havas “a reddish falcon'; Steingass "a species of eagle'. N.o.a.b. "Türkü viti ff. £rk B 23 (bul-): Xak. xi kekük al-zummac, a bird the bones of which are used in coniurations and sorcery ( fi'I-nayrinciyát ta [-cuyyát $a vuquyatuha, sic) Kaş. HH 287. Tris. GGG D küke:dü:n “horse-fiy” and the like; presumably Dev. N. fr. *kóke:-, Den, V. fr. 4 kó:K, in the sense of “something which is skycoloured, blue”, S.i.s.m.l. in NE, NC, NW, usually as kökü:n/köğü:n “horse-fly, gad-fly'. Xak. xi köke:gü:n a/-'antara, teahwa dubab azraq “a blue fiy” Kaş. TI 287 (prov.); a.o. I 188 (ortu:, same prov.): Çağ. xv ff. &amp;ógeyin (spelt) "a large fly (pagas) which draws blood when it bites cattle! San. 307v. 26; Bópewün (spelt) xar-magas “gad-fiy” 310r. zo: Kip. xtv kökevvün “a flying creature (fayr) like a large fiy, which settles on horses, cattle, ctc. and bites them", when they feel it they run away from it İd. 83; al-sanbür “hornet" kökün 2i. II, 2. Dis. GGL D keklig P.N./A. fr. kek, 'spiteful, revengeful'; practically syn. vv, Öçlüğ, and in the early period usually used in Hend, vv, it. Survives only(?) in NC Kir. kektü:, Kzx. kekti, Uyğ. vut ft. Bud. TT VIII N38 (öçlüğ): Xak. xr Kaş. 1H 283 (kek). (D) keklik 'partridge'; prob, A.N. (Conc N.) fr. *kek as an onomatopoeic for the partridge”s call. S.i.a.m.lr. except NE, "There is  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 755 
     
   
   
        DIS. GGM zr another vvord for "partridge” not noted before the medieval period, see Çi:l, Acc, to Red. in Osm. keklik is “partridge” in general and “the red-legged partridge” in particular and çil is “the common grey partridge” and “the francolin. See Doerfer 111 1639. Uy£. vin ff. Civ. kekelik (sic) ótin “the bile of a partridge” H I 50-2: Xak. xı keklik a/-qabc 'partridge' Kaş. I 479 (misread as al-qayh in printed text): KB ünin ötti keklik “the partridge sings his note” 76: Çağ. xv ff. kekllk kabg 'partridge' San. 300v. 23 (and two p/r.): Kip. xiv keklik al-hacal 'partridge' İd. 83; ditto (cil/)keklik (misvocalized) Bul. 11, 12: xv ditto kekVk Tul. 13a. o, dacác 'fowl' (tawuk/) keklik do. 15b. 4. Dis. V. GGLD kókle-:, etc. Preliminary note. Kaş. /ists Den. V.s fr. 3 kök and 1 and 3 kü:g and Refl, Den. V.s fr 1 kök and 5 kü:g; the basic form of the first survives in NE. There is in KBa Den. V. fr.4 kó:k.. There isin UyB. V111 ff. Man.-A M III 29, 10 (iii) a teord kökleyür of ehich the meaning is entirely obscure. "These seem to be the only early swords of this form. San. 307r. 26 lists a Den. V. fr. 2 kök göich s.i.s.m.l. D 1 kökle:- Den. V. fr. 3 kök, "to fasten with thongs”. Survives in NC Kir. köktö- and perhaps some other languages unless these are Den. V.s fr. 2 kök, Xak.xı ol eder kökle:di: şadda rabta"l-sarc "he tightened the thong of the saddle” Kaj. III 3oo (kökle:r, kökle:me:k). D 2 kökle:- (8-) Den. V. fr. 4 kö:k, “to be blue, grey, green, etc.” Survives in NC Kir. köktö-: SC Uzb. kükla- and perhaps elsewhere, but kö:ker-, q.v., is commoner in this sense. Xak. xı KB (hear the words of) kart köklemiş "the old greyhcaded man” 1492. D 1 küğle:- Den. V. fr. 1 ki:£; “to sing' and the like. Survives in NC Kir, kü:ló:-/küyló"to tune” (a musical instrument): SW Osm. kókle- ditto (unless the latter is a Den. V. fr. Pe. kuk). Xak. xı er kügle:di: tadannat-racul bi-iğniya wa axraca lahn fil-finà “the man sang a song and brought out the melody in singing it” Kaş. III şor (küğle:r, küğle:me:k): Çağ. xv ff. kükle- (“vith k- k-”) sas çal- “to play (or tune?) a musical instrument” Vel. 369 (quotns.); kükle- saz-ra hrk hardan "to tune a musical instrument” Sar. 307r. 26 (quotns.). D 2 kügle:- Den. V. fr. 3 kü:; “to graze'. As pasture is green there was an obvious temptation to regard this V. as identical with 2 kókle-; this seems to be at the back of the entry kökle- “to graze, put cattle out to graze” in Vam. 330, reproduced in R /T 1227 as 'Cag., Bokhara”, but the Refl f. küylen- (of cattle) "to be well-nourished' in NC Kzx. preserves the earlier form. Xak, xı yılkı: küğle:di: ibtaqalati” l-damabb voa akalati'l-rabi* “the cattle grazed and eat the spring pasture” Kaş. III 3oo (kügle:r, kügle:me:k). , D köklet- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of 1 kókle:-; this V. is listed under the cross-heading -D(for the third consonant) which suggests that the original entry had kókdet- ; the alternative form is morphologically inexplicable. The -dsuggests that the original form of 3 kók was kög but the modern NC forms do not support this. See sığtat-. Xak. xı ol eder yalığın kókletti: 'he ordered that the straps of his saddle-bow should be tightened” (bi-sadd); kókdedti: (sic) alternative form (luga) Kaş. 11 327 (kökletü:r, kókletme:k). D 1 kóklen- Refl. Den. V. fr. 1 kök, survives in SW Osm. kóklen- 'to take root, be firmly established”, "The basic form survives in NE Alt., Tel. köktö- “to be related to (someone) R II 1228. Xak. xı er köklendi: /a'attala'l-racul “the man was well rooted' (i.e. of good family); also used for 'to stay in one place" (gantya) Kaş. II 253 (köklenu:r, köklenme:k). D 2 kóklen- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of 1 kókle:-. Xak. x1 eder kóklendi: 'the thongs of the saddle were tightened' (şuddat) Kaş. II 253 (no Aor. or Infin.; followed by 1 köklen-). D 1! küğlen- (kü:glen-) Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of 1 kügle:-. Xak. xı er küğlendi: “the man sang” (ğannd), originally kü:glendi: Kaş. II 253 (küglenü:r, küglenme:k); o.o. 7I 255, 9; İH 131 (1 kü:g). VUD 2 küğlen- (kü:glen-) Hap. leg.; Refl. : Den. V. fr. 5 kü:g Xak. xı yü:zzi: anı küglendi: 'freckles (a/-kuifa) appeared on his face”, originally kü:glendi: Kaş. /T 253 (no Aor. or Infin.; followed by 1 küglen-). D 1 kókles- Recip. Den. V. fr. 1 kók; cf. 1 kóklen-, Survives in SW Osm., where it is syn. vv, köklen-. Xak. xı ol anın birle: kökleşdi: tagabbata bihi ta taşabbaha "he clung to him and wrapped himself round him”, there is a dialect form kóktesdi: (2 kökleşfollows here): Bulğar xi ol anın birle: kökleşdi: za"aqqada ma'ahu "aqda"l-"aşira "he made a tribal union with him” Kaş. II 224 (kóklesü:r, kóklesme:k; one of the four Bulğar words in Kaş.). D 2 kökleş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of 1 kökle:-. Xak. xı ol apar eder kökleşdi: “he helped him to tighten (/? sadd) the thongs of the saddle-bow' Kaş. II 224 (no Aor. or Infin.; sec 1 kökleş-). Dis. GGM VU kókmek quite clearly legible in the photograph; according to Mal. (note op. cit.) it survives in SE Sarığ Yuğur as kegmek; Keri kókmek 'a kind of deer'; in Malov, Yazyk zheltykh uigurov, Alma Ata, 1957, p. 65 it appears as ke&amp;mik “A kind of stag (Chinese chi nien) the size of a female donkey'. O. Kir. Ix ff. (1 killed seven wolves, but) barsığ kókmekig ölürmedim “did not kill leopards or stags” Mal. tr, ro. i  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 756 
     
   
   
     712 PUD kükmek/kükme:n (?küğmek/küğme:n) Hap. leg.; Den. N./A.s fr. kük (6 küğ): the latter in this entry is unvocalized, and misvocalized in the main entry, these words seem to be vocalized with fatha but there is no doubt that the vowel was rounded. "The second form seems. to be the name, customarily transcribed köğmen of the Tannu Tuva mountains mentioned in Türkü viu I E 17, etc., 7 23, 28, if so the second consonant is -ğ-. Xak. xr kükmek er “a man who has been tested (harasathu) by circumstances and endured suflerings (a/-mihan) and become hardened (istadda) by them”), its origin is kük al-milina; this Adj. (sifat, sic) is irregular (cü"at şadd), the regular form (al-qiyàs) is kükme:n Kaş. 7 479. Dis. GGN PU kégen one of several words for 'illness, discase', or the like; pec. to Uy. and usually used in Hend. vv. 1 i:$; the spelling in Steo., if correctly transcribed, points to -é- rather than -i-. Uyf. vin ff, Bud. (the dhaárami will be effective) alku kégeninte yılkı kara kégeninte i$ kem 'in all cases of disease, the diseases of cattle and common people(?), illnesses (Hend.)' (discomfort, danger, pain) U II 73, 1 (iii) ff., (demons) kezik i&amp; kégen kilguci "who cause epidemic(?) diseases! TT V 8, 83; aç kin igkegen (sic, spelt as one word) adasın amırtğurdaçı 'reducing the danger of hunger, pain and disease (Hend.)” Suv. 399, 18. VUD köge:n the -6- is shown in Kom. but this may be a dialect form since the word scems to be a Dev. N. fr. kü:-, the -ü- in which is fixed by 3 kü:g, 2 küğle:-. This word has nothing to do with Kip. (PU) kó:ken 'plum, peach' in Hor., İd., Tuh. which is a L-w. connected with Ar. xatox, which is said to be an Aramaic l.-w. (see How., p. 100), perhaps through some İranian intermediarv. Xak. xı kóge:n ribaqu'[-bahm wa ribaqu' l-haláyib 'inda'l-halb "a noose to control calves, colts, etc, and milch cows, etc. at milking time”: yel kóge:n gates quzalı 'rainbow! (lit. “a noose on the wind') Kaş, 1 415: Kom. xiv kófen “a rope for tying lambs and kids” CCG'; Gr. S kökü:n Sce küke:gü:n, PUD kikinç A Dev. N., but w. no obvious connection w. kik-; “reply”, nearly always in the phr. kikinç be:r- “to give a reply. N.o.a.b. Türkü vii ff. Man. dındarlar inca kikinç berdiler “the Elect gave the following reply” TT /I 6, 2: Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-A (if anvone asks how he killed the demon) mça kikinç bérgil M 7 19, 11-12; a.o. do. 37, 19: Bud. (then his father the king hearing this petition) ner kikinç (Pellist transcribes heginç) bérü umadı “could not give any reply” PP 15, 8 (see note thercon); (after a question, the Buddha) slok taksutin inça tép kikinç yarlıkadı 'deigned to give the following reply DIS. GGM in verse" Kuan. 175; 0.0. USp. 97, 1; 102b. 14; Suv. 589, 3. Dis. V. GGNPU(D) kikne:- Hap. leg.?; morphologically could be Den. V. in -e:- fr. kégen; the meaning can only be conjectured, but is clearly pejorative. Xak. xi K B (if you make a request, state it clearly; if you are asked a question, tell the truth. Do not make pointless remarks or harry (sopdama) people) uşak söz ederme yeme kikneme “do not follow up scandal or” 4301 (be spiteful” would suit, if it could be connected with kek). Dis. GGR kekre: 'an acrid, or bitter, plant', usually onc caten by Hlivestock, Survives in SE "D'ürki kekre 'ergot! BŞ s25: SW Osm., “Vkm. kekre "a bitter plant; acrid, bitter”. No obvious etymology, perhaps a L-w. Uyf. viit ff. Civ, kekre “a bitter medicinal herb” H II 8, az: Xak. xi kekre: “a bitter plant (nabt murr) eaten by camels” Kaş. 1 422. D kökrek Dev. N. fr. kókre:-; 'thunder'. N.o.a.b. "Vhere is no connection between this word and kökrek “the chest, the upper part of the body” noted in Çağ, San. 307v. 28; Kip. Hou. 21, 22 and some modern NC, SC and NW languages; the origin of this word is obscure; it is apparently neither Mong. nor Iranian, and it is hard to see how it could be connected with kögüz, same meaning, through some L/R Turkish language, but the Quv. form of that word is kákàár, Ash. VII 107. Xak. xi Kaş. IJI 282 (kork-): Kip. xv ra'd "thunder" kökrek Tii. 16b. 5. Dis. V. GGRkekir- ($-; 2-8-) "to belch'. S.i.a.m.l.g.; SW Az. keyir-; Osm., 'T'km. geğir-. Xak. xı er kekirdi: “the man (etc.) belched” (tacaşşa”a) Kaş. 11 84 (kekire:r, kekirme:k). xiv Muh.(?) tacagga'a ketkir- Rif. 106 (only); fahiqa “to overflow' kekir- (MS. Relir-) t13; al-caşq” ke:kirmek (MS. -mak) 164: Çağ. xv ff. &amp;égir- (so spelt) arüg zadan “to belch', in Ar. £acaşşu” San. 315r. 22 (quotn.): Kom. xtv. “to belch' kekir- CCG; Gr. D kigür- abbreviated Caus. f. of kir-; "to bring in, introduce', and the like. N.o.a.b.; modern Caus. f.s of kir- are kirgiz-, girdir-, and the like. SE “Türki kigür- in R I7 1341 should be transcribed keyğür- and is a Caus. f. of ke:d-.. Türkü vir ff. Man. Chuas. 229 (é:t-): Uyğ. vri ff. Chr. U I 7, 4-5 (ur-): Bud. kóni yolka kigürür 'brings them into the right way! TT VI 255-6; o.o. do. 394 (v.L); PP 18, 1; 25, 2-3 (tapa); TT VIII D.6 (üzlünçülüğ): Xak. xı KB cerigde bir ança busuğka kiğür "put some of your troops in an ambush' z37o: xu(?) KBVP ne törlüğ bü sözler önin tildeki kiğürmiş mupar kör kamuğ eldeki “see what (different) kinds of names have been given to this poem in different languages in various 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 757 
     
   
   
     'TRIS. countries" 31 (grammar chaotic): xın(?) KBPP 25 (üsk); Tef. kivür- 'to bring to (or into)” r77: xiv. Röğ. uçmak içre kigürüp "taking him to paradise'; a.o.o. R 77 1341 (quotns.): Çağ. xv ff. givvür- (spelt) döxz/ hardan "to cause to enter” an. 316v. 23 (quotns.): Xvvar. xiv kevür-, kigür-, kivür“to bring in” Qut 95-9; kigür- Nahc. 254, 13; 255, 3; 280, 11: Kom. xiv “to bring into" küvür- CCG, Gr. 160 (quotns): Osm. xiv ff. ğivür-, occasionally ğiyür- “to bring into, let in, admit' (esp. to paradise); common till xvi, occurs in xvi1 TTS 1 313; 11 439; HII 299; İV 343. D kö:ker- (&amp;- -g-) Intrans. Den. V. fr. 4 kö:k, “to be, or become, sky-coloured, blue, grey', etc. S.i.a.m.l.g.; in most modern languages the second consonant is -8-/-v-/-y-, SW Az. kóyer- ; Osm. £óger-/góver- ; Tkm. £ó:ger- (this last also means “to take root”, as a similar Den. V. fr. 1 kök). Xak. xi kó:kerdi: ne:n “the thing was dusty' (agbara), that is was the colour of the sky Kaş. II 84 (kó:kerür, kó:kerme:k): xiv Muh.(?) izraqqa “to be blue” (kóli:-(?); in margin) kó:ker- Rif. 103: Çağ. xv ff. kóger- (-&amp;ünce, “vith k-ğ-g-”) gógerVel. 370; göğer- (sic?; not spelt) (1) sabz gudan tva rüyidan “to become green; to sprout'; (2) kabüd şudan “to become blue” San. 307r.5 (quotn.): Kip. xv (among Den. V.s) and from kök, köker- Tuh. 83b. 6: Osm.xiv ff göğer“to be blue, green”, etc.; fairly common TTS I 346; İH 443; IV 348. PU kögür- n.o.a.b.; the Türkü text is not very clear, and the Uy£. ones open to some doubt; the meaning of kigür- would suit all the passages; these may in fact be misreadings of word or in some cases mistranscriptions of kötür-. Türkü viri ff. yolta: at kógü:rmis erke: 1 yarık yarlığ boltr: “one breastplate was issued to the man who brought in(?) the horse from the road” Miran B r. 6 (ETY II 66): Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. arvislar éligin uluğ törlüğ ağır ayağ üze kögürserler (or kepürserler?) "if they bring (or, reading kepürserler, 'publish'; or, reading kötürserler, raise”)the chief of thedhàárants with great respect” U II 73, 3-4 (iii): Civ. men borlukka özğe kişi kógürmezmen (queried) “1 will not admit(?) other people into the vineyard" USp. 32, 10; in rış in a list of penalties for challenging the validity of a contract, the heaviest penalties are to be “presented” (üntürüp, 1. 18) to the central government and the tegitler, the next heaviest to be “brought” (kógürüp?, L. 19) to the 7du&amp;k Rut, and the lowest to be “given” (bérip, 1. 20) to the treasurer of the town of Koço. D kökre:- (8-) Den. V. fr. 4 kó:k; etymologically the basic meaning must be 'to thunder”, also used for “to make a loud noise, in various contexts. Survives for 'to thunder' in NE Alt. küküro- R II 1424: NW Kar. "T. kókre- do. 1224; Kaz. kükre- do. 1424; Kumyk köküre-. SW Osm. kükre- "to foam at the mouth, be sexually excited' seems to be GGR 713 a different word. Uy£. viir ff. Bud. arslan xanı kókremis teg “as if the king of the lions had roared' Suv. 646, 3: Xak. xı arsla:n kókre:di: 'the lion roared' (za'ara); and one says buğra: kókre:di: “the camel stallion bellowed' (hadara), and one says bukht kókre:di: 'the cloud thundered' (ra'ada); also used metaph. for the shouts of warriors on the battlefield Kaş. 271 282 (kökre:r, kókre:me:k prov. see kork-); o.o. / 125, 13 etc. (arslanla:-); 7 354, 23: KB 86 (bulit): Çağ. xv ff. kökre-/kökreş- “to thunder, or roar', of thunder, lions, etc. San. 307r. 7 (quotns.): Xvvar. xın ditto “AZ 39: xiv ditto Qutb ror, MN 75: Kom. xiv ditto CCI; Gr.: Kip. xi al-ra'd kökremek İd. s, ro (MS. dökremeh): xıV ditto Bul. 3, 2; ditto and the V. fr. it is kökre- 1d. 83: xv ba"ba"a “to bellow' (bozla-/) kókre- Tuh. 8b. 7. D kigrül- Hap. leg.?; Pass. f. of kigür-. Xak. xı tava:r evke: kigrüldi: “the property was brought into (udxila) the house” (etc.) Kaş. II 237 (kigrülü:r, kigrülme:k). D kekres- Hap. leg.; Recip. f£. of kekre:-, Den. V. fr. kek, which seems to be noted only in SW Osm. whcre it means “to be, or become, sour or acid'. Cf. kekre:. Uyğ. viii ff. Man.A (they quarrel with one another and exchange abuse) bu karğantukın alkantukin kekrestükin (VU) yóntüstükin (sc, with -s- for -ş-) “because of this cursing and abuse, and because they hate and quarrel with one another' M I 9, 16-18. D kókres- Co-op. f. of kókre:-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı bulıtla:r kamuğ kökreşdi: “the clouds all thundered (ra'adat) together'; and one says buğra:la:r kökreşdi: “the camel stallions bellowed (tahaddarat) together', also used metaph. for the shouts of warriors on the field of battle, one says alpla:r kökreşdi: “the warriors shouted (rahaddarat) together' Kaş. II 222 (kökreşü:r, kókresme:k; verse); a.o. İH 147, 16 (same verse): Çağ. xv ff. Sar. 307r. 7 (Kökre:-). 'Yris. GGR (D) kógürcgü:n (? gö:-) 'pigeon, dove", morphologically obscure, but prob. connected with 4 kó:k in the sense of “a grey bird”. S.i.s.m.l. in NC, NW, SW with phonetic changes; SW Az. köyerçin, Osm. güvercin; "Tkm. gö:gerçin. NE languages use quite different vvords or phr. and SE, SC forms of Pe. kabütar. Uyğ. vini ff. Bud. kógürcgen Suv. 299, 6 (ap1t); 620, zo, Civ. kógürcgen H I 40 (çokrat-): Xak. xı kógürcgü:n al-hamám 'pigeon, dove! Kaş. III 419: Çağ. xv ff. kögerçin kabztar 'pigeon, dove' Sam. 308r. r: Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb ror: Kom. XIV 'dove' kügercin CCG, Gr.: Kip. xii al-hamám kövvercin Hou. ro, 6: xiv köğercin ditto /d. 83; Bul. ız, 4: xv ditto Kav. 39, 5; hamüm öğercin (corrected below to kö:-) Tuğ, 13a. 10.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 758 
     
   
   
     714 Tris. V. GGRD köğürçğü:nleş- Hap. lcg. and prob. used only in the Ger. in -ü:; Recip. Den. V. fr. köğürçğü:n, mentioned only as a grammatical example. Xak. xr ol menin birle: oyna:di: köğürçgü:nleşü: "he gambled with me with a pigeon as the stake' Kaş. II 226, 15; n.m.e. Dis. GGS S kógüs See kógüz. Dis. GGŞ ?F ke:küş Hap. leg.; prob. a L-w. Xak. xr ke:küş derod” vutlà bi l-rcaram svahswa' I-kundus "a medicinal plant applied to swellings; hellebore' (Brockelmann, ,Saponaria or Veratrum album) Kag. I 407. D kökiş Den. N./A. fr. 4 kó:k. Survives in SE Türki kökiş: NC Kir. kógüs. Xak. xı KB kökiş turna “the blue-grey crane” 74. S kö:kşi:n See kö:kçi:n. Dis. V. GGŞD kikşür- Caus. Refl. f. of kik-, n.o.a.b. Türkü vii 7 E 6 (1 E 6) (1 éck): vit ff. Man. yeme sav élitip sav kelürüp kisig kikşürü sözledimiz erser “if we have carried remarks to and fro and incited people to mutual enmity Chuas. 104-7: (Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. this word is perhaps the right reading in PP 18, 1 where Pelliot says the scribe first wrote ekekşlür and then corrected it to ékekglüryür; (among the dangers of the sea) törtünç uluğ teğzinç k(emi]ke kigürür suv kikşürür(?) sokusur “fourth, the waters which bring great waves to the ship, quarrel(?) and strike one another): Xak. xı er biçe:k kikçürdi: "the man whetted (amarra) the knives one against the other”, and one says ol ikki: er kikçürdi: “he incited (ağrd) one of the two men against thc other” Kaş. 77 195 (kikçürür, kikçürnəe:k). Dis. GGY VU küküy Hap. leg; 'maternal aunt (mother's sister), the feminine counterpart of tağa:y. 'The word was lost at an early date, and in the lists of terms of relationship is replaced in Afuh. by 'mother's sister” and in the Kip. vocabularies by that or phr. incorporating tağa:y, q.v. Xak. xı kükü: a/-xd/a “maternal aunt'; also, and more correctly (al-asahit), kükü:y; onc says kükü:yüm keldi: “my aunt has come" Kaş. III 232. Dis. GGZ kögüz (gögöz) “chest, breast'; a neutral word used both for men and women. A very old word which survives in Cuv. as kákár, As)r. VII 107, and also in NE most languages kögüs R II 1233; Khak. kögis: SE Türki köküs: SW Az. köks, Osm. gögüs, Tkm. gövüs. Other languages mostly use tö:ş or kökrek (q.v.). "The word came to have also TRIS. V. GGRa metaph. meaning: “mind, or thought" fairly early. The final was certainly originally -z but forms with -S occur fairly early. Uyğ. vut ff. Man. kógüzi kara 'with black breasts! M I 18, s (0): Bud. usually in a physical sense, c.g. ken kórtle kógüz “a broad, beautiful breast” TT. X 444; 0.0. U IV go, 54 (emig); TT V 4, 7-11 (efin)-—somctimes represents Sanskrit mati “mind” and the like Kwan. 69, 199 (and sec kögüzlüğ), spelt gögös in "Tibetan transcription. (Studies, p. go): Civ. bars künde kógüzde bolur 'on the Leopard Day it gets in the chest' TT VII ro, 4; (fora pain) iç kógüzke “vithin the chest! H 7 r86— köpülün kögüzün ökünncki üküş “therc is ahundant repentance in your mind and thoughts” TT 7 8ı-z: Xak. xı köğüz a/-şadr "breast! Kaş, I 366; (fire blazes) köğsi ara: "in their breasts! 7 230, 6: KB (when a man finds himself in this fleeting world for a couple of days) nelük kerdi kógsin kaya teğ bolup "why docs he throw out his chest and behave like a rock?” 1535; 0.0. of köğsin (or kógüz) ker- 1:33 (mistranscribed), $2r1, 5326; a.o. 4845: xın(?) At. kerip xalqka köğsün "if you throw out your chest at people” 278; Tef. (his mother's) kógsi 183: xiv. Muh.(?) al-şadr köküz Rif. rar (only): Çağ. xv ff. köğsük (so spelt, see San.) gógüs . . . sina "breast” Vel. 368 (quotn.); Köğs sina San. 308r. 2 (same quotn, but correcting Vel.'s word to köğsüm “my breast; köğüs sima 3ofr. r4 (quotn.): Xwar. xin(?) anasının köğüzündün (or É- ...-S-?) “from his mother's breast! Og. 8-9: a.0. 13-14: xiv kógüs 'breast' Quib roo: Kom. xiv 'chest' (and “vomb”) kógüs/kóvüs/ kóks- CCG; Gr. (CCI tö:ş): Kip. (xın 'foster-brother' kó:güzde:s Hou. 32, 7): xv al-şadr kógüs Kav. 60, 18; sadru'l-insán kógüs Tuh. 22a. 3: Osm. xiv to xvt “chest” gögüz (fr. xv göğüs), before vowels göğsin several texts T TS 1316; 11444; 1 304; İV 348; gögüs ger- in //1 and IV. Tris. GGZ D kógüzlüg (g-)D.N./A. fr. kógüz; survives in several NE languages as kógüstüg/ kógüstü: 'intelligent, understanding! R I7 1234. Uyğ. vini ff. Man, (addressed to n deity) kógüzlügpüm bilğem “my thoughtful and wise one” M II 8, 14-15: Bud. alkincsiz köğüzlüğ Bodisatv translating Sanskrit ARgayamati Bodhisattva “the Bodhisattva with the inexhaustible mind' is common in Kuan.; (if anyone is wicked and) kararığ biligsiz kögüzlüğ “has a dark andlignorant mind” do. 66; a.o. USSp. 102a. 31: (xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. kögüzlük 'breastplate' Ligeti 174; R 11 1234): Xak. xı KB neçe kür kögüzlüğ küvenür erig 'how many bold, courageous, proud men” (has death destroyed) 4845. D kókü:zme:k Hap. leg; Den. N. fr. kógüz; no doubt 'breastplate'. Türkü vırr Tay O[ge:ke:] bir kókü:zme:k yarr[k yarlığ) bolti: “one piece of breast armour was issued to "Fay Öge:(?)” Miran C 6 (ETY II 68). 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 759 
     
   
   
        MON. V. GL- 715 Mon. GL kà:l (8-) any large body of water, natural or artificial, normally “pool” or “lake”, Except in Kaş., and there prob. only in one phr., never used for “sea”, or for “river”. S.i.a.m.l.g.; SW Az. köl, Osm. göl, "Vkm. kó:l. See Doerfer lI 1682-3. Türkü vir in geog. names, (VU) Türgl: Yarğu:n Köl 7 E 34; Kara: Köl / N z: vin ff. IrkB 22 (ıçğın-): Uyğ. vri in geog. names, (VU) Çığıltır Köl Şu. E 6; Kazluk Köl ('Goose lake" do. S 2; (PU) Tayğan Köl S 3; Yula: Köl S 6: viii ff. Bud. (you must imagine that) yürün köl boltu “it has become a white lake” 7TV 6, 47; a.o. do. 12, 126; bir uluğ köl “a large lake” Suv. 600, 5: Civ. (the swan has flown away and) kólipe konmaz “does not settle on its lake” 77 7 215216; uluğ köl üze “on the big lake” U.Sp. 55, zo: Xak.xı kó:l al-harıd "a pool' : közl ai-Zadir 'pond': a list of five "lakes' (buhayra) with their locations follows:- Isíg kó:l; (VU) Kürüp [kó:1]; Sidi kó:1; Yulduz kö:l, A:y közl, “the dimensions of each of these lakes is thirty or forty farsangs; there are many such lakes in the country of the Turks, but I have mentioned only the larger ones in the Moslem country': kó:l a/-bahr nafsuhu “the actual sea”, hence “sea foam” (zabadu'l-bahr) is called köl köpüki: and not tepiz köpüki: Kaş. III 135; seven 0.o. translated ai-hawd or al-ğadir: xın(?) At. vvafa köli suğlup “the lake of good faith has sunk into the ground' 387: xiv Muh. al-hawd gözl (sic) Mel. yy, 9; Rif. 181: Çağ. xv ff. köl (*with -ó-') “a place in which water collects! Sar. 308v. 19 (quotn.): Xwar. xin(?) bir köl arasında “in the middle of a lake” Oğ. 71: xiv köl "lake! Qutb ror: Kom. xiv ditto CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiri al-fadir (bu:la:k also called) kó:l Hou. 6, 19: xv btrka *pool' köl Tuh. 7a. 13. 1 kül 'ashes, cinders'; s.i.a.m.l.g. Uy£. vitr ff. Civ. kül 'ashes', sometimes spelt kAiil occurs several times in H 7 and I1 and TT VII 26,12: Xak. xı kül al-ramád "ashes” Kaş. 1 337 (prov., see 1 ür-); o.o. I 129, 4 (Órte:-); III 237, 10 (tegi:): xiv Muh. al-ramád güzl Mel. 68, 16; Rif. 169 (gü:k): Çağ. xv ff. kül (with -ü-) xákistar 'ashes' San. 308v. 19: Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 106: Ki1p. xii al-ramád kül Hou. 17, 15: XIV ditto Bul. 4, 11; ditto (with k-") İd. 83: xv ditto Tuh. 16b. 6. VU 2 kül either a P.N., or more probably a title, very common in the early period; the vowel is uncertain but as the Chinese character used to transcribe it was R”üe, Middle Chinese (Pulleyblank) k'iwát (Giles 3,252) -ü- is perhaps likelier than -ó-; Kaj.s etymology is obviously preposterous. 'The relationship between this word and Küll Cor, the name of the persons commemorated in 7x. is obscure; but the possibility that the word was originally küli, with short -i, cannot be excluded (see Studies, p. 88). "Türkü vırr the best known name is Kül Tégin commemorated in 7; Kül Cor (perhaps identical with the Küli Cor of Ix.) H S iş, Kül Todun Ix. A. (ETY II 121); (PU) Seviğ Kül İrkin // S 14; viu ff. Kül Cigsi: Miran A 17 (ETY II 65): Uyğ. vir Kül [Biljg[e:] Su. N s: vrirff. Bud. Kül Bilge Tepri Eliğ Pfahl. 6, 3: O. Kar. ix ff. Küç” Kül Totok Mal. 25, 2: Xak. xı Kaş. I 108 (1 irkin); 7 428, 19 (bilge:). Mon. V. GLkel- (&amp;-) "to come”, sometimes with thc implication of “to come back”, S.i.a.m.]l.g.; SW Az. kel-, Osm., Tkm. gel-. Türkü viri kel"to come”, very common in 7, //, T, etc.: vir ff. ditto in /rkB: Man. [gap] tarxan kelginçe “until . . . Tarxan comes! TT /7 6, 19; a.o.o.: Uyğ. vir kel- is common in $u.: viti ff. Man.-A terkleyü keltiler “came quickly M I 13, 18; ao. 15, 7: Man. [gap] kilu keltiniz “you have come to make . . .' TT III 106; utru keltiler “came to meet' LX 86; a.o.o.: Bud. kel- “to come” is very common: Civ. ditto; Xak. xı er evke: keldi: “the man came (ata) to the house” (etc.) Kaş. II 25 (keli:r kelme:k; prov.); very many o.o.; KB tapuğka kelip 'coming to take service” 100; idi kécki söz ol mafalda kelir “a very old saying comes in the proverb' 110; many o.o. 259, 273, etc.: xııı(?) At. kel- is common; Tef. ditto 170: xiv Muh. cá'a “to come” gelMel. 24, 15; Rif. 107; many o.o. more often spelt gel- than kel-: Çağ. xv fT. kél- (-ğen, etc.) gel- Vel. 358-9; kél- ámadan “to come” San. 315v. 8 (quotns.): Xwar. xır kel- “to come” "Ali 25: xii(?) ditto Oğ. 11, etc., usually spelt kél-; xiv kel-/kél- Qutb 93-6; kelMN 47, etc.; Nahc. 314, 15 etc. (common): Kom. xiv “to come” kel- CCI, CCG, Gr. 136 (quotns.): Kip. xi cá'a kel- Hou. 51, 11; a.o.o., “next” (year, month) kelge:n do. 28, 8; “next but one” (year, etc.) kelde:ci: do. 28, 8: xiv kel- cd”a, keldeçi yıl "the coming year” İd. 83; ditto gelen yıl Bul. 13, 12 (so spelt): xv cá'a kel- Kav. 9, zı a.0.0.; Tuh. 12a. 4 2.0.0. köl- (&amp;-) “to harness' (an animal to a plough, etc.) and the like. Survives only(?) in NE Koib., Sag. R II 1268; Khak. See kóltür-, kölük, kólün-. Türkü vinuff. /rkB 25 (bokursı:): Kip. xiv kól- ("to laugh' and) rabata qawá'ima'l-gát. li'l-dabh “to fasten the legs of a sheep for slaughter' /d. 83. kül- (6-) properly “to laugh; to laugh at (someone Dat.)', but in some contexts, esp. in KB, more like "to smile” (properly külümsin-). S.ia.m.lg.; in SW Az. kül-; Osm., "Tkm. gül-. Xak. xr er küldi: “the man laughed! (dahika) Kaş. IT 26 (küle:r, külme:k, verse külse: translated “if (a man) smiles at you” (vatabassam lak)), about a dozen 0.0. (translated dahika): KB küle “smiling” 70, 601, 657, 941, etc.; küler yüz “a smiling face" 2072, 2479, etc.: sapa külmesüni kédin kelgügi “so that those who come after may not laugh at you” 1227; o.o. 76 (katğur-), 707 (basıt-): xui?) 2. sana külmesün 172; Tef. kül- “to laugh at” 188: xiv tabassama gülMel. 24, 3 (Rif, 105 biskar- Hap. leg.?);   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 760 
     
   
   
     716 MON. V. dahika gül- 28, 3; rr11 (gü:l-); al-dahah külmek 34, 16; 120; a.o.o.: Çağ. xv ff. külxandidan "to laugh” San. 308r. 17 (quotns.): Xwar. xiti kül- "to laugh' '4/i 25: xii(?) kül“to smile” Og. 60 a.o.o.: xiv kül- “to laugh, smile" Qutb 106; MN 109, etc.: Kom, xiv "to laugh! kül- CCI; Gr.: Kip. dalitka 5 Hou. 36, 10: XIV ditto. 1i. 83; Bul. söv.: x ditto Kas. 75, 14 (and 61, 14); Tult. 23a. ro 8.0.0. Dis. GLE VU?F 1 küli: Hap. leg.; prob. a Chinese phr., the second syllable 4 “plum” (G//es 6,884). Xak. xiv küli: má yucaffaf mina'l-xavoxi'l-migmig ma'a nawátihá wa là yuflaq 'apricots dried with the stones inside, not split” Kaş. 111 234. 2 küli See 2 kül, Dis. V. GLED küle:- Den. V. fr. kü:, “to praise', and the like. Pec. to Uyg. Uy£. vir ff. Bud. óger küleyür erdim “1 was praising (Hend.)” Hüen-ts. 1957; edgüti yuplap açın külep köni normuğ 'expound and praise the true doctrine, making grcat efforts(?)' do. 2113-14; 8.0.0. kóli:- (8-) the basic meaning seems to be “to be shady, or shaded' (Intrans.) and also perhaps “to shade, give shade to” (Trans.), in the latter sense it survives in NE Tel. kölö- R II 1270, and Khak, kóle- ; itis the origin of kölit-, kólik, kóli:ge: (the parallel series köşi:-, köşik, kósi:ge: seems to be an example of an l/s relationship in Standard "Purkish). "The meanings of kóli:-, kólit- in Xak. perhaps represent its use as a euphemism for köm- “to bury'. Uy£. viii ff. Bud. Sanskrit (sutava “like a child” oğol te:g); paripalito'pr "and protected, guarded” kölöp (sic) yeme: TT VIII D.38 (a metaph. usage?): Xak. xi ölüğ köli:di: "he buried (dafana) the dead man” (etc.) Kaş. II 272 (köll:r, kóli:me:k). Mon. GLB PU külf (or -v?) Hap. leg.; onomatopoeic. Xak. xi ta:m külf yıkıldı: “the wall collapsed suddenly with a loud noise' ()f-şazef toa sur'a) Kaş. I 348. Dis. GLB F keleb (or -p) Hap. leg.; no doubt a l.-w.; no native Turkish Dis. ends in -b/-p (Studies, p. 173); not connected vv, SW Osm. kelep “a ball (of twine) TTS IJ 611; IV 492 which is Ar. kalb. Xak. xı keleb "a tender plant (rabt ná'im) which grows in the Turks” summer pastures and fattens livestock quickly” Kaş. 1353. Tris. GLB S kelebek See kebe:li:. Tris. V. GLBDF keleblen- (? -p-) Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr, keleb, Xak. xı ta:&amp; keleblendi: "the GLmountain was covered with the plant called heleb” Kaş. 11 269 (no Aor. or Infin.). Dis. V. GLCD külçir- (ğ-) "to smile": Inchoative f. of kül-, külsir-, q.v., is perhaps a mis-spelling of this word. N.o.a.b. Uyf. vri ff. Bud. külçire yüzin “vith smiling face; smiling', qualifying the Subject of a sentence, is common U 7/7 14, 12; 21,9; 23, 12; $o, 9; TT X 322, 489: Xak. xı KB (his face turned red and then palc); yana külçirip sakındı “then smiling he thought” 3845; a.o. 5680: xin(?) At, alun külçirer bàz alın kaş çatar “the world smiles and then wrinkles its brows (Hend.) again” 205: Xwar, xiv hamişa külçiresün gül çırayın “may your rosy (Pe. L-w.) face (Mong.) always (Pe.) smile” Qrutb 107. Tris. GLC ?F kele:çü: (8-2) “talk, conversation”, prob. one of the corrupt foreign words in Oğuz (see ören) but definitely not connected vvith Mong. hele- "to speak”, since -Çü is neither a Turkish nor a Mong. Dev. Suff. after a vowel and the word antedates the first Oğuz contacts with Mongols. Not current in literary Osm. after xvil but survives in xx Anat. as geleci SDD 604; the ğ- is further evidence against a Mong. origin. Oğuz xi kele:çü: a/-hadit wa'l-kalám “talk, conversation” Kaş. I 445: xır1(?) Tef. keleci ditto 170 (sce other refces.): Xwar. xii kele:çi "report, information” “47 53: XIV ditto Qutb 94: Kip. xii haddata “to tell, relate” kele:çi: eyt- Hou. 39, 16: Osm. xiv ff. keleci, spelt Beleci in texts which distinguish K- and -, and söz geleçi “talk, conversation'; very common until xv, rare in xvi, once in xvi. T'T'S 7 441-2; II 61i; HI 430; IV. 491. Dis. GLD D külüt (&amp;-) Hap. leg.; Caus. Dev. N. fr. kül-. Xak. xi külüt a/-dulka bayna”l-qarom 'a laughing-stock among the people” Kaş, I 357. S kültgü: Sce külgü:, Dis. V. GLDD kölit- ($-) Caus. f. of köli:- , survives in NE Bar, Kızıl kölöt- R II :272; Khak. kölet- “to shade (something), to cover (something with something). Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. kölitti turdi 'stood shading him” PP 65, 6 (iple:-): Xak. xı ol ölüğni: kólitti: “he had the corpse buried' (adfana) Kaş. 1I 31i: (kólitü:r, kólitme:k). D keltür- ($-) Caus. f. of kel-, replaced the earlier form kelür-, q.v., in about x1; normally “to bring (something)! rather than "to make (someone) come”, "The Sec. f. ketür-, and the like, appeared in the medieval period. S.i.a.m.Lg.; normally keltir- but SW Az. ketir-; Osm. fetir-; 'l'km. getir-. Xak. Xi see Oguz; eight occurrences of keldür 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 761 
     
   
   
     DIS translated atàá "to bring, adidara “to summon, bring' and once (7 251, 9) zoa/ada "to give birth to': KB (the king said) keldür 'bring (him) here” 570: xın(?) At. (this is a wise and choice book) talulap ketürdüm 'I have chosen and brought it” 478 (sic all MSS. except one which has kéltürdüm); Tef. keltür-/ketür- “to offer, present (something, /7ce,, to somcone, Dat.) 171-6; xiv. Muh. ahdara ğetür- Mel. 13, 8; Rif. 88 (keltür-); keldür- Ar, 4; keltür- 130, 131: Çağ. xv ff. kéltür- (-geli) getür- Vel. 359; kéltür- özrcardan “to bring' San. 315v. 29 (quotns.): Oğuz xr ol mapa: at keltürdi: "he brought (atd) me a horse'; this form with -t- is Oğuz, the Turks have -d(other examples of alternation in both directions follow) Kaş. I] 195 (keltürür, keltürme:k): Xwar. xii keltür-/ketür- ditto “Ali 7, ız: xın(?) kéldürgil 'summon' Og. 220 a.0.0.: XIV keltür-/ketür- “to bring' Qutb 94-5; MN 21, etc.: Kom. xiv “to bring' keltür- CCI; keltir- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xut cüba “to bring” keltür- Hou. 39, ro, atd ditto 44, 6: xiv keltür- aca”a “to order to come” İd. 83: xv atü keltir- Kav, 78, 13; cába keltir-/ ketir- Tuh. 12a. 8: Osm. xiv to xvı getür“to bring; to insert (in a book)”, in a few texts TTS I 306; IV 337. D költür- (&amp;-) Caus. f. of Kól-; survives in NE khak. köldir- “to have (a horse, etc.) harnessed (to a cart, etc.). Xak. xı ol at ada:kin kóltürdi: 'he ordered that the horse's legs should be fastened (bi-şadd) and that it should be thrown down' (bt-bathiht) Kaş. I1 195 (no Aor. or Infin.; follows kültür-). D kültür- (£-) Caus. f. of kül-; “to make (someone) laugh. S.im.m.; SW Osm., 'Tkm. güldür-. Xak. xı ol meni: kültürdi: “he made me laugh' (adltakani) Kaş. II 195 (kültürur, kültürme:k): KB (my body causes me pain) ara küldürür kór ara yığlatur 'sometimes it makes me laugh and sometimes cry” 3595, 4096; a.o. 5866: xir (?) Tef. küldur- ditto 188: X war. xin(?) ditto Og. 375: xiv ditto Quib 107: Kip. xiv küldüradhaka İd. 83. VU(D) küldre:- Hap. leg.; vocalized Rüldüre:but in a section for Dis. V.s; prob. a pure onomatopoeic; cf. külf, külre:-. Xak. xı ta:g kuduğ içre: küldre:di: şazomata”l1-hacra fi'l-bi'r sta axbara bi-bu'd qar'ihaà “the stone made a noise in the well and indicated the distance to the bottom” Xaş. 7/7 448 (küldre:r, küldre:me:k). Dis. GLG D kelig (&amp;-) N.Ac. fr. kel-; n.o.a.b. Uy£. viri ff. Bud. kelig, usually in the phr. kü kelig. is used as a Buddhist technical term for 'coming' in the sense of 'rebirth'; tepri teprisi burxannın kü kelig edremlig küçi üze “by the meritorious power of the divine Buddha (to bring about) distinguished rebirths” Hüen-ts. 156 (and see note thereon); similar phr. Suv. 69, 14; 189, 1-2; ÖDi ópl adruk adruk kü keligler üze 'by various (Hend.) . GLG 717 distinguished rebirths” do. 64, 5; linxwanin özenintin ók böğün keligin tuğmakı bolur “birth takes place from the very centre of the lotus by magic and rebirth” U 77 44, 32-3: Xak. xı ta:z kelipi: bórkerke: “the bald man's (first) visit (al-hudur) is to the hatter” 7 26, zo, 7I 41, t5; 52, 18 (with al-maci', same meaning); kü:z keligi: ya:zin belğü:re:r “the approach (maci') of autumn becomes apparent in the summer" II 172, 4; o.o. I 26, 16 (okta:-); 77 58, 17, etc. n.m.e. D kö:zlik (8-) Dev. N. fr. köli:- , practically syn. vv, köli:ğe:, q.v., but much rarer; for survivals sce that word. Cf. köşik, çoğay. Xak. xi kó:lik (so spelt, under fá'il) al-zill “shade, shadow' Kaş. 1 409: KB (by wise talk men have risen to be king, malik) üküş söz başığ yerde kildi kölik “too much talk has made men's heads something buried in the ground” 173 (see Kag.'s translation of kóli:-). D kölük (gölök) Pass. Conc. N. fr. köl-, lit. 'something harnessed”, normally "a baggage animal', more in the sense of one to which baggage is tied than one harnessed to a vehicle. Survives in NC Kır., Kzx. kölük, NW Kk., Nog. kólik; SW Osm. gölük (common in this and extended meanings in xx Anat., SDD 657). Türkü vii T 15 (ingek): Uy£. vin ff. (Man.-A (just as a wicked man's) bağı kólüki bukağusı 'bonds, fastenings, and fetters” (are either heavy or light) M III ız, 18 (i); apparently the same word, but might be the Dev. N. in -ğ, kólüg which would fit the sense better): Bud. Sanskrit idrg yánam bhaved yasya “if anyone has a vehicle like this” monda:$ osoğloğ kölöki bolsa:r kimnin TT VIII 4.37 (here “a harnessed vehicle" not animal), (he prepared everything that the prince and his companions needed) aşı suvı kölüki “their food, water and baggage animals” PP 238, 3: Xak. x1 kólük ne:p al-gay'u'l-musta'ür 'something borrowed (or hired?)'; (there is no other trace of this meaning, but it might have come from (hired) 'transport animals"): kölük a[-zahr, that is “any animal (dabba) fit to be loaded with baggage' (yuhmal "alayhd) Kaş. I 392: K B (such a man does good to all people and) yana minnat urmaz kişike kölük 'does not make his favour a restriction(?) on other people' 857; (the products of the cattle breeder include . . .) yüdürgü kölük animals which can be loaded! 4441: Çağ. xvff. kólük "baggage (tay-kaş) camels, horses, and oxen' San. 309r. 3: Xwar. xiv kölük 'baggage animal” Quib 107 (külüh), Nahc. 240, 17; 273, 15) 409, 4: "Tkm. xii cam"ı”l-hamir “a collective term for donkeys' kölü:k Hou. r2, 16: (xiv (between “dog” and “bitch”) al-carto “puppy” kölük (sic, no doubt an error for küçük, see kicig) Bul. 16, 12): Osm. xiv ft. gölük “riding, or baggage, animal”, common till xvır TTS 7 318; İT 446; İİİ 306. D kü:lüg P.N./A. fr. kü:; 'fanous'. N.o.a.b., but see Doerfer III 1686. "Türkü vir antağ külüg xağan ermiş “he was such a famous 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 762 
     
   
   
      718 DIS. xagan' I E 4, Il. E s: Uyğ. vin ff. Man. (addressed to a deity jn a hymn) külüğüm M II 8, 17 (i): Bud. Külüg occurs as a component in P.N.s Pfahl. 10, 15-16; 12, 20: O, Kir. ix ff. külüğ kadaşım “my famous kinsmen' Mal. 3, 6, Külüğ as a component in P.N.s do. 3, 3; 6, 2, etc. (eight occurrences): Xak. xı Kaş. 1I] 212 (kü): KB külüg is fairly common; occasionally with its full meaning, e.g. (whoever receives the favour of God) tilekke tegir boldı atlığ külüg 'has his wishes fultilled and becomes famous (Hend.)” 1797; a.o. 4525 (çavlığ), but more often used as a convenient rhyme without serious emphasis on its meaning, e.g. (listen) ay bilge külüg r457, ay külüg 5283. D külgü: (£-) N.Ac. fr. kül- , 'laughter', with some extended meanings. S.i.a.m.l.g. with minor phonetic changes; SW 'l'km. gülki/ gülkü, not used in Az., Osm. "There is no other trace of Kaj.'s second meaning. Xak. xı külgü: a/-dahika "laughter'; and “apoplexy” (al-sakta) is called külgü:, one says er külgü: (VU) bérdi (unvocalızed) "the man had an apoplectic stroke” , also called kültgü: Kaş. 7 430: (xiri(?) ,Tef. külütgü 'amusing, futile'; perhaps Kaş,”s Sec. f. mis-spelt 188): xiv Muh. al-dahiha gülğü: (sic) Mel. 85, 3; Rif. 191: Çağ. xv fi. külgü (spelt) gülmek Vel. 372; gülgü (spelt) (r) xarda "a laugh' (quotn.); (2) xandan "laughing! (quotn.) Sar. 309r. r. D kelgin Dev. N./A. fr. kel-; apparently “the incoming (ie. rising) tide'. Survives in SE "Pürki kelkün Jarríng 170. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. Sanskrit ndakavadham "a flood of water su:vlu:ğ kelkinig (sc; ?-8- intended) TT VIII 4.32: Xak. xı kelgin al-madd twahtwa bi-manzilati'l-sayl “a food” (the second word has this meaning and the first is described as being used instead of it) Kaş. 1 443. Dis. V. GLGD kelgir- Hap. leg.; Inchoative f. of kel-: Xak. xr ol maya: kelgirdi: tamanniá teca káda an ya'ti ilayya “he wished (to come) and was on the point of coming to me” Kaş. 77 196 (kelgire:r, kelgirme:k). Tris. GLG kele:gü: ($-) an old animal name ending in -ğü:. Survives only(?) in SW xx Anat. £elengi / gelengü / gelenki / geleni 'field mouse, Micromys minutus SDD 605, which, rather than 'gerboa' is prob. the meaning of al-yarbü" here. Xak. xi kele:gü: al-yarbü* Kaş. 1 448: xiv. Muh.(?) al-yarbi! kelepü: (unvocalized) Rif. 177 (only). D kóli:ge: (&amp;-) Dev. N. fr. koli:- ; “shadov, shade'; cf. közlik, q.v. S.i.a.m.l.g. in a wide range of forms of which one or two may represent kölik, the modern words include NE Koib., Sag. Sor kóletki R 77 1270; Khak. kölək, Tuv. xólege: SE Türki kölepğe: NC Kir. kölökö/kölönkö, Kzx.  GLG kölökö: SC Uzb. kulanka: NW Kk. kólepke; Kumyk gölentki, Nog. kóletki: SW Az. kólke; Osm. gólge; "Vkm. kólege. Cf. kósi:ge:. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. kólige belgürer "a shadow appears' Suv, sz, 20; 8.0. U II 39, 87-99 (anmın): Civ. köliğede kuritip 'drying it in the shade! 77 7 76: Xak. xi kóli:ge: al-zillu'l-zalil “deep shade' Kaş. ! 448; İH 174 (both main entries): KB (if you sce this world) kólige sanı “it is like a shadov” 3536; (this world) kólige turur 4758: xru(?) Tef. köle:ge:/kölge: 'shade' 183: Çağ. xv ff. köleğe (spelt) gólge . . . sáya ma"nösina 'shadow' Vel. 371 (verse); kólege (spelt) saya, in Ar. zill voa. fay” San. 308v. 25: X war. xiv kólige (kó:li:ge )/ kóletke (kó:le:tge:) “shadov” Qutb 101; köliğe 'shade' Nahe. 408, rs: Kom. xiv. “shade” kólege CCI, CCG, Gr.: Kip. Xi “the shade (zil/) of a tree, etc. köletk: 'Tkm. kólge:y Hou. 7, 14: xiv kólge: y al- zill soa”l-xaydl 'shade, shadow! /d. 84; Bul. 4, 5: xv al-zill kölge:y Kav. 58, 8; sil] köletke (MS. tóletke)/kólege (in margin folge) Tu. 24a. 10; zallala kóletke eyle- do. 24b. 2: Osm. xiv to xvi gölğe in various phr. meaning "to shade, protect'; in several texts. T'T'S 7/ 446; İİİ 306; IV 350. D kóliklig (8-) Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. kó:lik. Xak. xı ff. kóliklig yé:r “a shady (muzallal) place' Kag. 1 510. D kólüklüg ($-) Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. kölük. Xak. xı kólüklüg er “a man who owns baggage animals' (hamüla wa zahr) Kag. I 510. D külgü:süz (g-) Hap. leg; Priv. N./A. fr. külgü:; *without laughing, in all seriousness' Xak. xı tıpla: sö:züm külgü:süz 'listen to my words without laughing' (mi ğayr dahka) Kaş. I 96, 11; n.m.e. D köli:ğe:siz Hap. leg.(?), Priv. N./A. fr. kóli:ge:; 'casting no shadow'. Uyf. vii ff. Bud. TT VI 99 (bodsuz). Tris. V. GLGD kelginle:- Hap. leg.; prob. used only in the Ger, in -ü: Xak. xı kelginleyü: (MS. kelngizleyu , no doubt in error) aktimiz “ve rushed on them like a flood” Kaş. 1 343, 24; n.m.e. D keligse:- Desid, Den. V. fr. kelig; n.o.a.b. Xak. xi ol mapa: keligse:di: “he wished to come to me” (ya'tiyant) Kaş, II 335 (keligse:r, keligse:me:k); a.o. 7/7 285 (kelse:-): xiv Muh.(?) (in a note on the Desid. f.) aráda'l-maci' "he wished to come” keligse:di: Rif. 134 (only). Dis. GLM külmiz “the female of the roe-deer”, the counterpart of the male, 1 elik, Survives only(?) in NE Alt. külmüs: Khak. külbüs; 'Tuv. xülbüs; see Söcherbak, p. 121. Xak.xi KB 79(1 elik).   l 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 763 
     
   
   
     DIS. V/ GLRTris. V. GLMD kelimsin- (g-) Hap. leg.; Refl. Simulative Den. V. fr. *kelim, N.S.A. fr. kel-. Xak. x1 ol berü: kelimsindi: 'he pretended to come in our direction' ((ya'ti) nalmwand) Kaş. HI 259 (kelimsinü:r (MS. Relimsindi:), kelimsinme:k). D külümsin- (g-) Refl. Simulative Den. V. fr. *külüm, N.S.A. fr. kül-, “to smile”. S.i.s.m.l,, with some phonetic changes, e.g. SE Türki külümsiri-: NC Kir. külumsürö-: NW Kk. külimsiri-; Kumyk, Nog. külemsire-: SW Az külümse-/külümsün- ; Osm. gülümse- Tkm. gülümcire-/ğülümsire-, Xak.xı er külümsindi: “the man (etc.) smiled” (göhaka) Kaş. II 259 (külümsinü:r, külümsinme:k): Osm. xiv to xvr gülümsün- “to smile”, in several texts T7TS 77 474; Ill 324. Dis. GLN D kelin (&amp;-) etymologically Dev. N. fr. kel-, in the sense of 'one who comes in (to the family'; properly a term of relationship meaning 'the wife of one's younger brother or son' used only by the father or elder brother of the nusband, but more usually rather generally for *bride'; indeed it seems to be the only native ''urkish word with that meaning. S.i.a.m.l.g., normally as kelin, but NW Kumyk: SW Osm., "Tkm. gelin, See Doerfer Ill 17oo. (Türkü vr see kelipü:n): Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. TT VI 311 (ic&amp;er-): Civ. TT VII 28, sı (tapindur-): O. Kır. ix ff. Mal. 3, 6 (1 ki:z): Xak. xı kelin a/-"arüs "a bride” Kaş. 1 404; o.o. III 12 (yövüşliğ), 242 (kizlençü:): KB 494 (ağın), 238o (küde:n), 3567 (bezen-): xiv. Muh. al-'aris geli:n Mel. 49, 10; Rif. 144 (adding tva'l-kanna also "daughter-in-lav”): Çağ. xv ff. kélin "aris San. 316r. 19 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv kelin “bride” Qutb 94: Kom. xiv ditto CCG; Gr.: Kip. xin al-'aris kezli:n Hou. 32, 3: xiv kelin al-hanna tva'l-'arüs İd. 84: xv 'ariisa kelin Tuh. 24b. 10. D kölüp (&amp;-) Den. N. (perhaps Dim. f.) fr. kil; n.o.a.b. (Uyğ. viii ff. Man.-A külüp in M 1 qo, 8 is prob. an error for külünç 'smiling'; see érin): Xak. xı kölün al-ctyya, that is a pool of stagnant water (mustanqa'u'l-mà') on which birds settle! Kaş. III 372; közlü:n (sic) al-£adir “a pond” I 73, 11. D külünç (8-) Dev. N./A. fr. *külün- Refl. f. of kiil-; survives in SW Az. külünç, Osm. £ülüng 'amusing, ridiculous; laughing-stock; mockery”. (Uyğ. vii ff. Man.-A. see kölün): Xak. xr külünç a/-dihk 'laughter', etc. Kaş. III 374: KB külünc 'laughing stock” 2442 (urunç): Osm. xv gülünç “a laughing stock”, in one text 7773 III 324; (gülenç “smiling” in I 336 is prob. an error for güleç, not an old word). ı Dis. V. GLND kólün- (ğ-) Refl. f£. of köl-, n.o.a.b.ş apparently used only metaph. for 'to be weary, as if overloaded”. Uy£. vri ff. Civ. (in 719 a series of disagreeable happenings) kün tepri kólündi çeriğin üze ay tepri battı kutup üze “the sun has come to a standstill (and is pouring its heat) over your army the moon has set on your favour from heaven” TT 1 39-40: Xak. xr er eligi: ada:kı: kölündi: “the man's arms and legs became limp (fatarat) from overwork or from continuous travelling or walking as if he was tied to a weight' (mugayyad müna” Htih) Kaş, II 158 (kólünü:r, kólünme:k): K B (I have become a prisoner of the years and months) kişensiz kólündi manumaz adak “my legs are disabled, even though not hobbled, and cannot valk” 374. Tris. GLN D kölüpü: (?kólüngü; $-) Conc. N. fr. kólün-; lit. 'something harnessed'; used in Bud. texts to translate yana 'vehicle' in such words as /Mahöyüna, n.o.a.b. Cf. kanlı. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud, (you have explained) uluğ kiçiğ kólüpülerig "the Great and Small Vehicles! (Maháyana and Hinayána) Hüen-ts. 1772-3; üg kólüpü 'the Three Vehicles' do. 1922; taysıp savsın kólüpüler “the T”ayhsing (Mahöyana) and Hsiao-hsing (Hinayana) vehicles” Suv. 276, 11-12. D kelipü:n (&amp;-) Hap. leg.; Collective f. of kelin. Türkü viti (my mother the xatur, my step-mothers, my junior aunts/elder sisters) kelipü:nim “my younger brothers'/sons' wives! (and my consorts) I N o. Tris. V. GLND kelinle:- ($-) Hap. leg.?; Den. V. fr. kelin. Uyğ. vii ff. Civ. (in an adoption contract, the adopter agrees to put the adopted son on an equal footing with his natural sons and) kelinlep “provide him with a wife' USp. 98, 26. E kelpizle:- See kelginle:-. Tris. GLR keler '"lizard'; survives as keler in SE Tar. RH 1113; SW Osm. (which, with Az., also has kertenkeler, same meaning). There is no widely distributed word for “lizard” in the modern languages, see keslinçü. Xak.xi keler al-dabb 'lizard' Kaş. I 364: Kip. xi al-1earan “lizard” kele:r Hou. ır, r9 (sie; altered by Hou. to Rele:z): xiv al-dabb (PU 1:wan, Hap. leg.)/keler , al-waran keler Bul. ro, 12-13: Osm. xiv ff. keler “lizard”, in several texts TTS I 443; lI 611; III 431; IV 492: xvitt keler, in Rumi, stismár "lizard” San. 3oov. 28. Dis. V. GLR'D kelür- (&amp;-) the earliest Caus. f. of kel-; n.o.a.b.; later displaced by keltür-, q.v. "Türkü virt evi:n barkrn kalı:sız kelü:rti: "they brought all their tents and movable possessions 7 N r, I S rı (bedizçi:) a.o.o.: virt ff. buza:ğu: kelü:rml:ş “it gave birth to a cal IrkB 41: Man. beş tepri yarukın bizinerü kelürdi erser “vhen they had  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 764 
     
   
   
       720 brought us the light of the Five Gods! Chuas. 226-7; 0.0. do. 104-7 (kikşür-), M III 23, 10-11 (ii): Uyf. vin ff. Chr. (the gifts) kim kelürmiş ertiler “vhich they had brought" U I 6, 13: Bud. terkin mapa kelürüpler 'bring me quickly' U III 12, 14; téginig esen tükel kelürzünler 'let them bring back the prince safe and sound' PP 22, 6-7; o.o. do. 25, 6; 29, 2-3; Kuan. 76 (to give birth to"); TT VI 62 (VIII O.6); X 366, etc.: Civ. kelürüp bérürmen 'I will bring and hand over” (certain goods) USp. 62, 9-11; a.o. ("to give birth to) TT VII 26, 18 (1 uri:). D 1 köler- (ğ-) Intrans. Den. V. fr. kól; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı kölerdi: su:v “the water became stationary and stagnated (istaráda ... rea stanqa"a) and formed a pond” (al-£adir) Kaş. II 84 (kólerür, kólerme:k); kakla:r kamuğ kólerdi: "the dry watercourses filled with water! / 179, 19; 11 283, 2. VUD 2 kóler- n.o.a.b., prob. merely a metaphor. usage of 1 kóler-. Xak. xi at kölerdi: “the horse swelled (imbataha) owing to dilation (Zntifáx) of the stomach” and the like Kaş. II 84 (kölerür, kólerme:k; prov.); a.o. I 523, 1. VU(D) külre:- Hap. leg.; syn. w. küldre:-, q.v., and perhaps an abbreviation of it. Xak. xı ta:ş kuduğda: külre:di: "the stone made a noise of this sort (şazıtcafa . . . bi-hadih”l-şifa) in the well Kaş. III 282 (külre:r, külre:me:k). D kelürt- ($-) Hap. leg.?; Caus. of kelür-. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. (the king ordered his ministers to bring goods to present as alms) ótrü kamaf buyruklar . . . buşılığ ertiniler kelürtip 'then all the ministers had precious objects brought for (presentation as) alms' U HI 12, 14-16. Dis. V. GLSD kelse:- (6-) Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of kel- and syn. vv, keligse:-; the entry is in a section for Dis. V.s but is a complete muddle. Xak. xı men sana: keliğse:dim “1 wished to come to you (atiyak); alternative form (/uga) kelse:dim Kaş. III 28s (kelse:rmen, kelse:me:k; MS. kelise:- everywhere). D külsir- (£-) pec. to Kaj., and more or less syn. w. külcir-, q.v., which is not mentioned by Kaş., Simulative f. in -sir- (not noted elsewhere) of kül-; "to smile”. Xak. xı er külsirdi: “the man pretended to smile” (yatabassam) also used when he (actually) smiled (idd tabassama) Kaş. II 196 (külSire:r, külsirme:k), (in a grammatical Section) külsirge:n er a/-raculu'l-mibsám "a man who (constantly) smiles” I7 256, 17. Dis. GLS D keliş (&amp;-) Dev. N. (with some element of reciprocity) fr. kel- ; in the early period nearly always used in association vv. barış, q.v., for  DIS. V. GLR'coming and going”. S.i.s.m.l.g. for "cominp, arrival”, SW Az. kelis; Osm. gelis. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. Hiüen-ts. 293, 2089 (barış): Xak. xı Kaş. 1 370 (barış): K B 4421 (barış): Çağ. xv ff. kélis ümadan "coming" San. 316r. 18 (quotn.). Dis. V. GLSD keliş- (&amp;-) Recip. f. of kel-; properly "to come together'.. S.i.a.m.l.g. with a rather wide range of meanings of which the commonest is 'to come to an agreement'. Xak. xr ol mapa: kelişdi: barışdı: “he came to visit me (ixtalafa ilayya) and I went to visit him” Kaş. II 110 (kelişu:r, kelişme:k): KJ (if I associate with other people) barışğu kelisgü kerek men küle “1 shall have to exchange visits vvith them vvith a smile” 4569. D köliş- (8-) Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of kóli:-. Xak. xı ol mapa: ölüğ kölişdi: "he helped me to bury ( f dafn) the corpse” Kaş. II 110 (kölişü:r, kölişme:k). D külüş- (&amp;-) Co-op./Recip. f. of kül-, “to laugh together; to laugh at one another”, S.i.a.m.l.g. Xak. xı bodun kamuğ külüşdi: "the people all laughed together! (fadáhaka) Kaş. II 110 (külüşü:r, külüşme:k): xır:(?) "ef. külüs- ditto 188: Xwar. xiv ditto Quzb 107. Tris. GLS D külüsüg (8-) Hap. leg.; N.Ac. fr. külüş-. Uyğ. vir ff, Man. kózi karam birle külüsügin külüsügin (sic) oluralım “let us sit and laugh with my black-eyed (beauty)! M II 9, 19-20. D kelişliğ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. keliş, Xak. xı (after keliş) hence a hostelry (or guest house, baytı”l-difan) is called kelişliğ barışlığ ev, that is “a house of coming and going” Kaş. I 370. Mon. GM I kem 'illness'; like kégen normally used in Hend. w. 1 kg; acc. to Kaş. kemlen- was used specifically of horses, but this cannot apply to kem in Uyg. Survives only(?) in SW Anat. (one group of refugees) kem “a chronic, painful, cardiac disease' S DD 873; not to be confused with SW Osm. kem ]1.-w. fr. Pe. kam “deficient, bad”, etc... Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. ig kem 'illness! (Hend.) U /T 42, 7; 43, 19: Civ. TT VII 28, s (1 i:ğ): Xak. xi kem al-dà' “illness”, hence one says at kemlendi: “the horse (etc.) was ill” (dà'a) Kaş. 1 338; a.o. II 363, 20: KB (the physicians) ol ig kem ne ermis ayu berdiler 'declared what the illness (Hend.) was' 1057. 2 kém See kim. kim properly only the Interrogative Pron. “vvho ?”, parallel to ne: *what?', but, unlike ne:, never used as an Interrog. Adj. 'l'he concept of Relative Prons. was entirely foreign to Turkish, in which Participles and the like are used where Indo-European languages use Relative Prons.,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 765 
     
   
   
     DIS. GME  but when the "Turks became acquainted with such languages, and religious works in them began to be translated into 'l'urkish, usually by persons whose native language was not ''urkish, kim came to be used as a Relative Pron., and, hastened by the phonetic resemblance, in all the meanings of Pe. Ai and other cognate Iranian words, including the Conjuction 'that'. Grenbech"s Komarnisches VVörterbuch devotes five pages to the various meanings of kim in Kom. xıv, No attempt has been made here to list all the medieval non-Turkish uses of the word. S.ia.m.l.g.; in NE Alt., Küer., Leb., "el. (R. II 1202), and Khak. kem; 'T'uv. kim (sic). everywhere else kim. "The NE form, together with the "Türkü spelling R m, suggest that the word may originally have been kem. Türkü vii kemke: élig kazğanurmen “for whom am 1 gaining a realm?' 7 E 9; élpin törö:nin kem artat(t)ı: 'who destroyed your realm and custornary law?' I E 22, II E ış: vini ff. (if the tint of the stone is green) kem özi:nte: tutsar "whoever carries it on his person' (cannot be endangered by poisonous insects) Toyok 27 (ET Y II 59;a translation fr. Sogdian; in parallel passages tutsar is used without the kem): Man. yeriğ tepriğ kim yaratmış tepen biltimiz “ve know who created earth and heaven” C/Auas. 167-8; in do, 127 kim seems to be “vvho” but the text is corrupt; (thereafter the holy king's thoughts weakened a little) ol tıltağın kim inca esidti 'for the reason that he heard the following! TT 77 6, 31: Uyğ. vini ff. Man.-A ot kim ığaçda ünüp “the fire which arises from wood' M 1 7, 2; o.o, of Relative kim do. 8, 11; 15, 3; 16, 5; 17, 8 etc.: Man. kim Relative, who, which' Wind. 23, 33, etc.; Conjunction “that” do. 18, 46: Bud. kim is rather rare as an Interrog. but common as a Relative Pron. and Conjunction: Civ. kim is not common; in l it is only Relative, elsewhere usually Relative, esp. in the phr. ne kim, neğü kim 'whatever' TT VII 28, 37sz: Xak. xı kim Interrogative Pron. (harf istifhüm) meaning "vho?” (man), one says bu: kim 'who is this?” used both for the Sing. and the Plur. The Oğuz say bo:y ki:m (sic) mani'l-gabila, "vrho are your tribe?', it is a collective noun (fsər cam") Kaş. 7 338: about zo 0.0. equally divided between kim and kim, as a Nom, neatly always Interrog., but alwavs Relative as an Acc, or Gen.:: KB kim is common, usually Relative, less often Interrog.: xi(?) At. kim is common in both uses; Tef. kim 'who?; who; that”, kayu kim 'whoever'; kaçan kim 'when', etc.; kimse 'anyone' 179-80: xiv Muh. manul-istifhám “vvho?” ki:m; it also means alladi *who' Mel. 16, 16; Rif. 94; a.0.0.: Çağ. xv ff. kim (1) a word which takes the place of Ai as a Conjunction (dar rawábit), i.e. “that” (quotn.); (2) 2ar/-£ tslifhüm, that is (i kas|ki “vho?” San. 316r. zo: Oğuz xı Kaş. 1 338 (see Xak.): Xwar. xın kim '*who?'; kimerse/kimse/kimesne *somcone'; kimi . . . kimi “the one . . . the other” ' Afr 17: xın(?) kim is common in O£.; usually in such phr. as dédi kim, kórdi kim 721 "he said, or saw, that), occasionally as Relative: xiv kim *who; that'; kimi . . . kimi Quib 98; ditto and kimse MN passim: Kom. xiv kim in a wide range of meanings CCI, CCG; Gr. 143-7 (many quotns.): Kip. xiii kim is the "Turkish word for manu'l-istifhóm "vo?" Hou. 51, 9 ff. (examples given): xiv kim 'who?'; kimse 'someone', also kimerse:/kimersene: dd. 84; man kim kim also occurs in the meanings of anna “that”, fattà' (in order) that”, alladi *who' and ka'anna “as if” Bul, 15, 8: xv man kim Kav. 16, 8-16 etc.; anna kifkim do. 28, 19; harfu'l-magdar kim, this kim is also a Conditional Conjunction, an Interrogative and harf masdari meaning anra do. 72, 6; kim is common in the grammatical part of Tuh. aşa. 9 ff. as Interrogative, Relative, Conjunction, etc. köm Intensifying Prefix, see 4 kö:k, Mon. V. GM*kem- See kemür-. kóm- (ğ-) “to bury', both specifically for “to bury” (the dead) and more generally for burying something in the ground, ashes, etc. , sometimes even more generally for 'to dig, cultivate'. S..a.m..g.; in NW | Kumyk; Osm., "Tkm. ğöm-. See kóli:-. Uy£. vir ff. Civ. isi külke kómüp 'bury them in hot ashes” H 7 151; 0.0. do. 35 (1 o:t); USp. 13, 4 (er); a2, 6: Xak, xı ol ölüğni: kömdi: “he buried (dafana) the corpse” (etc.); and one says «ol» kó:zme:n kömdi: ittaxada'l-xubz. fi'l-malla "he put the loaf in the hot ashes” Kaş. 1/ 27 (köme:r, kömme:k): KB şzız (eşü:-): xiU(?) At. (the wise man says what has to be said and) kereksiz sözini kómüp kizleyür *buries and hides unnecessary remarks” 118: Tef. köm- “to bury' 183: xiv Rhg. ditto R II 1319 (quotns.); Mu. dafana $óm- Mel. 26, 3, gö:m- Rif. 109: Çağ. xv ff. göm- (^with 8-”) ba-zamin pinhàn kardan "to hide in the ground', and sometimes "to put on one side and hide, but not in the ground” San. 309r. 4 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv köm- “to bury” Quib 101: Kom. xiv. ditto CCI; Gr.: Kip. xii dafana kömHou. 33, 18: xiv ditto İd. 84; tamma za qabara “to cover up; to bury (the dead)” kóm- Bul. sgr.: Xv dafana köm- Kav. 76, 1; Tuh. 16a. 1. Dis. GME kemi: (8-) “ship, or boat'; s.i.a.m.l.g. usually as keme, but SE Türki kéme; NW Kumyk ğeme, SW Az. kemi, Osm., Tkm. gemi, "The balance of evidence is for -e- as the first vowel, but it was certainly -é- in Xak. and this occurs sporadically in Uy&amp;. In most modern languages this word means 'ship', other words like uçan and kayğuk, q.v., being used for smaller vessels. See Doerfer III 1703. Uy. viri ff, Bud. (if he goes to sea) kara y€l kelip kemisin tokıp “a black wind comes and strikes his ship” Kuan. 20; kemisi (sic) batmış “its ship has sunk” Hüen-ts. 1891— 1892; o.o. PP 17, 1-3 (udik), etc. (in PP spelt RU —s!)vystessss—— !—PQ—Y——— iii ERERHEBHEHHE E E E E 5 2-22. ıı NN, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 766 
     
   
   
     222 hmi): Xak. xi kemi: (bi-kasri'l- haf among the "Turks) a/-safina "ship" Kaş. III 235 (verse): xın(?) Tef. kemi “ship” rr: xiv Muh. al-safina gea”l-marhab (ship”) gemi:, a/-safinatu” l-şağira Gigi: gemi: Mel. 62; Rif. 161 (and see kayBuk): Çağ. xv ff, kéme ('with k-”) gemi Vel. 360 (quotn.), kéme (spelt) safina wa zawraq (boat”) San. 316r. 26 (quotn.); a.o. do. 65r. 24 (uçan): Oğuz/Kıp. xı kemi: (bi-fathi'l-káf) al-safina Kaş. III 235: Xwar. xiv kemi “ship” Quib 94: Kom. xiv “ship” keme CCG ; Gr.: Kip. xtit al-safina kemi:, also kereb which is Rümi (Greek harabos) Hou. 7, 6: xiv ((Tkm.) kemi: al-safina, keme: al-markab in. Kip. İd. 84; al-markab kemi:, (al-safina kerreb (sic)) Bul. 4, 13: Xv safina keme (in margin kemi, tva'l-şağira uçan) Tuh. 19a. 7; markab keme do. 33b. 5. Dis. GMC D kömeç (ğömmeç) abbreviated Dev. N. in -meç (for kinds of food) fr. köm-, lit. ('food) buried (in the ashes to cook it)”. Survives meaning “bread baked in the ashes', or the like, in SE Türki kómec/kó:mec: NC Kir. kómóc: SC Uzb. kümaç: NW Kk. kómes; Kaz. kümeç, but in SW Osm. gümec (sic) now means only "honeycomb” (metaph., owing toits shape). See Doerfer 111 1643, 1687. Xak. xı kömeç “a round loaf (al-qurg) which is buried (yudfan) in the hot ashes”: kömeç (mim unvocalized) al-kanz "a buried treasure'; one says ol kömeç (MS. kömüç) buldı: “he found a buried treasure” Kaş. I 360; (as an example of -Ç as a Suff) kömeç al-qurş derived fr. kömdi: dafana fi'l-ramád (ashes”) TI iz, 8: Çağ. xv ff. San. 27v. 15 (ebe:): Osm. xiv ff. ğömeç usually 'honeycomb'; less often 'Joaf baked in the ashes'; fairly common TS 1318; 11 447; IV 350; and see ebe:. D kömçü: Hap. leg.; inexplicable morphologically except as a crasis of *kómüncü:, Den. V. in -çü: fr. kómün-, since this Sutf. is attached only to Refl. V.s. 'l'he old Arab tribe of 'Ád has the same kind of legendary character in Classical Arabic as tavğaç, q.v., in Xak. Xak. xi kömçü: al-kanz "a buried treasure; one says tavğa:ç kömçüssi: kanz "Adi "a hidden treasure of (the tribe of) “Ad” (i.e. old and rare) Kaş. I 418. Tris. GMC D kemi:ci: (6-) N.Ag. fr. kemi:; properly *mariner, boatman'; later sometimes 'shipbuilder'. S.i.s.m.l.; SW Osm., "Tkm. gemici. See Doerfer 111 1704. Uy. virt ff. Bud. kim yerçi suvçı kemiçi erser 'whoever is a guide, pilot, or mariner” PP 22, 4-5: (Xak.) xiv Muh. sàni'u'l-sufun 'ship-builder' gemi:çi: Mel. 58, 1; Rif. 156; mallah “mariner, sailor" gemiçi: 58, ır, 157: Kip. xui al-nüti 'sailor' kemi:ci: Hou. 24, 5. kömi:çe: (listed under 'fa'ála, with various vowels") 'ynat'; n.o.a.b.; of an unusual form, " iüómi:ee:agl-haoo'a gnat" DIS. GME Kaş. I 445; wo. İİİ 358 (sig; mis-spelt köminçe:). Dis. GMD D kemdük Hap. leg.; Pass. Dev, N./A. fr. kemdi:- Xak. xı kemdük süpük al-'uráq mina'l-'izam “a bone which has been stripped of meat' Kaş. I 480. Dis. V. GMD kemdi:- Hap. leg.?; cf. kemdük. Xak. xı KB (do not draw a knife at table and) sünük kemdime “do not strip a bone of mcat” 4131. D kömtür- (g-) Caus. f. of kóm-; s.i.m.m.l.; SW Osm., Tkm. gómdür-, Xak. xi ol ye:rde: ne:) kömtürdi: “he had the thing buried (adfana) in the ground' Kaş, II 196 (kömtürür, kömtürme:k) Çağ. xv tf. ğömdür- Caus. f., ba-zamin pinhán farmüdan "to have (something) hidden in the ground” San, 399r. 17. Dis. GMG PU?F kemek Hap. leg.; prob., like many other names of fabrics, a l.-w.; the word has one fatha which might be over either of the first two consonants. Xak. xi kemek nasic min qutn munaqqaş mufatowaf “a woven cotton material, embroidered, with white stripes, used to make outer garments (al-dutrr); the Kıpçak make rain-coats (a/-mamdtir) from it Kag. I 392. Dis. GML D kemlig Hap. leg.?; P.N./A. fr. 1 kem; “il. Uyğ. vuriff Bud. Suv. s85, 13 (ağrığlığ). Dis. V. GMLD kömül- (g-) Pass. f. of köm-, s.i.m.m.l., SW Osm., Tkm. gómül-. Xak. x: KB kamuğ öz yazukka kómüldi bütün 'I am completely buried in all my sins” 5710: Kom. xiv. “to be buried' kömül- CCG; Cr. D kemle:- Hap. leg.; Den. V.fr. 1 kem. Xak. xt at kemle:di: “the horse vas ill” (dasotya), alternative word (luga) for kemle:ndi: (src) Kag. II şor (kemle:r, kemle:me:k). D kemlet- Hap. leg., Caus. f. of kemle:-, Xak. xı bu ot atığ kemletti: “this plant made the horse ill” (add) Kaş. TI 348 (kemletu:r, kemletme:k); a.o. 363, 15. D kemlen- Refl. f. of kemle:-; pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı at kemlendi: “the horse (etc.) was ill! (d6”a), va agluhu fi'l-faras, originally (only) of horses Kaş. 1I 253 (kemlenü:r, kemlenme:k); o.o. 7 338 (1 kem); 7/7 şor (kemle:-). Tris. GML D kömüldürük (8-) N.I. fr. *kómül, a corruption of kópül (cf. some modern forms of könlek), “the breast-strap” of a saddle. An early l.-w. in Mong. as körüldürye (Haenisch 103, Kot. 2612), and reborrowed in that form in NE "l'el P. 77 1322; otherwise survives 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 767 
     
   
   
     DIS. GMŞ | 923 only(?) in NC Kir. kómóldürük; SW Osm. £ómüldürük. Xak. xi kómüldürük a/-labab fi'l-sarc "the breast-strap of a saddle' Kaş. I $30; ditto, quoted as a word with six consonants 7 ız, ş: Kom. xiv 'breast-strap' kömüldrük CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiu al-labab kömüldürük ou. 14, 2: xiv ditto /d. 84: xv labab yómüldürük (sic, in error?) Tuh. 31b. ro: Osm. xv ff. gómüldürük 'breaststrap'; common in Ar, and Pe, dicts. TTS I 319; JI 448; III 306; IV 351: xvii gömüldürük (spelt) in Rizmi “the breast strap” (sina-band) of a horse or camel; in Ar. maşdür sua labab San. 309v. 16. Dis. GMN PU kómen Hap. leg.; the general meaning 'trickery', or the like, is certain, but other occurrences of yélvl: do not provide any close parallel; possibly mistranscribed. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. nep yelvi kömen teğmeğgey “no sorcery or trickery shall come near them” U 77 71, 2-3 (ii). Dis. V. GMND kómün- (g-) Refl. f. of kóm-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı er tava:rın kömündi: “the man pretended to bury (yadfun) his property” Kaş. II 158 (kömünür, kómünme:k). Tris. GMN E köminçe: See kóml:ce:. D kömündi: (&amp;-) Hap. leg.; Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. kömün-. Xak. xi kömündi: ne:n 'anything buried' (madfin) Kaş. 1 450. Dis. GMR kömür 'charcoal'; in some modern languages also used for '(mineral) coal'. S.i.a.m.l.g., invariably with initial K-; this fact, and the fact that it has only in recent times come to mean 'coal' excludes any possibility of deriving it fr. köm-. Uyğ. viri ff. Man. kömür bolupan *becoming charcoal' M III 28, 6 (iii) (text fragmentary, but preceded by a reference to burning wood): Xak. xı KB 3837 (türt-); 3951 (öçük-): xiv Muh. al-falim "charcoal gömür (sic) Mel. 61, ro, kó:mür Rif. 160: Çağ. xv ff. kémür (vith k-”) kömür Vel. 360 (quotn.); Kömür (spelt) zugal 'charcoal'; also called kémür Saz. 309v. 12 (quotn.); reverse entry 316r. 25 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv kömür “charcoal” Qutb ror: Kom. xiv 'coal, or charcoal'(?) kömür CCI; Gr.: Kip. xii al-falm kemür Hou. 23, 20: xıv ditto Bul. 4, 11; kömür al-fahm İd. 84: xv ditto Tuh. 28a. 3. D kemrük (ğ-) Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. kemür-, 'crack, gap; cracked, gappy'. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı Kaş. 1 478 (kertük): Kip. xiv kemrik al-afram 'with gappy, or missing, teeth” İd. 84. Dis. V. GMR(D) kemür- (g-) 'to gnaw' and the like; morphologically Caus. f. of *kem-, but hard to connect semantically w. kemis- q.v; semantically more connected w. kemdi:.. S.ia.m..g.; in NW Kumyk; SW Osm. gemir-; Tkm. gemir-. Xak. xı ol süpü:k kemürdi: “he sucked the marrow (famaşşaşa) out of the bone” Kaş. I] 85 (kemürür, kemürme:k): Çağ. xv ff. kömür-(-di , “vith k-) kemük ve ğayri nesne gemür- "to gnaw bones or other things” Vel. 372; gömür- (so spelt) cayidan "to chew. gnaw' San. 3ogr. 18 (quotns.): Kom. xiv 'to gnaw' kemir- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv kemür- majmaga'l-azm İd. 84 (maşmaşa means "to macerate,” but seems here to be a vulgarism for maşşa “to suck the marrow'): xv maşmaşa ta marmaşa (a postClassical word) kemir- 7uh. 35b. 9; a.o. 84b. rr. D kemrüs- (g-) Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of kemür-. Xak. xı ola:r ikki: süpü:k kemrüşdi: “they sucked the marrow (famaşşaşa) out of bones and competed in doing so” Kaş. II 224 (kemrüşü:r, kemrüsme:k). 'Tris. GMR 3 kömürğe:n See kóvürge:n. D kómürlüg Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. Kömür. Xak. xı (after kömürlük) “and the owner of (charcoal) with -g” Kaş. I 506. D kómürlük A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. kómür; survives in SW Osm. kömürlük “a place for storing charcoal' Xak. xi kömürlük şacaru l-fahm wa mawdi'u'l-falin' a tree for making charcoal, and a place for storing it" Kaş. 7 506. Dis. GMS F kimsen a Chinese phr., apparently chin hsien "gold thread' (Giles 2,032 4,532; Middle Chinese kim sen), the meaning does not match exactly, but alternative phr. with nearer meanings do not match phonetically. N.o.a.b. Xak. x1 kimse:n 'thin gold leaves” (rugagàtu'l-dahab) which are used on hats (a/-qalünis), etc. Kaş. I 437: Çağ. xv ff. kimsen ('with k-") kimzen, that is 'gilded (or gold-coloured ?) leather which mirror-makers put on mirrors' (quotn.); kimsend ditto (quotn.) Vel. 359; kimsen (spelt) püsti ki anrü mu'asfar-i zarrin sázand 'gilded (or gold-coloured) leather' San. 316r. 23 (quotn.): Kom. xiv kemsen 'gold leaf” or the like CCG; Gr. D kemsiz Hap. leg.; Priv. N./A. fr. 1 kem, “free from illness”", Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. Suv. zo, 19 (İŞSİZ). Dis. GMŞ kümüş (ğ-) “silver”: s.i.a.m.l.g.: NW Kk. gümis; Kumyk gümüş: SW Osm. gümüş, but Tkm. kümüş. Türkü vir / S 5, ZI N 3, etc. (altu:n): Uyğ. vrirff. Bud. Sanskrit rafatasya "of silver kümüşnüp TT VIII E 47; 0.0. PP 36, 7; az, 2-3 (egir-), Kuan. 18: Civ. kümüş is common in commercial documents in USp.; when unqualified it means 'coin' (actually copper) as opposed to notes, rather than physical silver, e.g. maya 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 768 
     
   
   
     724 Bulmiska asığka kümüş kergek bolup “since I, Bulmes, required (a loan of) cash at interest” Usp.18, 2-3; the amount of the loan was altı sıtır kümüş 'six sitir in coin” 18, 3-4 and the monthly rate of interest was birer yarım bakır kümüş “One and a half copper cash a month' (i.e. 30 per cent per annum); this is the rate on some loans in Fam. Arch. where the phr. tartma kümüş 'weighed (or minted) coin' also occurs: O. Kir. ix ff. Mal. i11, 9 (altun), (in Mal. 44 and aş kümüş is an error for the tribal name Kümül): Xak. x1 kümüs al-fidda. silver” (verse); kümüs “a dirham', because it is made of silver: kümüs one of the P.N.s used for slave girls Kaş. 7 370; a.o. 7 413 (t6ğin): KB kümüs kalsa altun menipdin sapa 'if you inherit silver and gold from me' 188; o.o. 479, 948, etc.: xın1(?) Tef. altun kümüş 188: xiv Muh. al-fidda gümiş (sic) Mel. 12, 13; 75, 6; Rif. 87, 178 (K-, unvocalized): Xwar. xın(?) altun kümüş Og. 181-2; a.o.o. xiv kümüş “silver” Qutb 107: Kom. xiv 'silver” kümüş/kümiş CCI, CCG; Gr.: Ksp. xut a/-fidda kümüg Hou. 31, 12; kümiş P.N. of a slave girl do. 3o, 11: xiv kümüş al-fidda İd. 84; Bul. 4, 8: xv ditto Kav. 58, 13; Tuh. 28a. 1. Dis V. GMŞ(?D) kemiş- “to throw away, abandon”, and the like, lit. and metaph., morphologically Co-op. f. of *kem-, but not connected semantically with kemür-, and with no obviously Recip. meaning; in Kaş. İİ 115, 4 cited as a V. which has none of the shades of meaning normally associated with the Suff. -S-. Survives only(?) in NW Kar. Krım, L., T. R IH 1210; Kor, 215; in Rog. where the early MSS. have kemiş- later ones have sal-, Türkü vırı ff. Man. M 1 75, 5 (taşğaru:), 7, 17-21 (tos): Uyğ. viu ff. Man. M I 35, 16-17 (kovğaz): Chr. (they picked up the stone and) ol kuduğ içinde kemişdiler 'threw it into that well U 18, 10; a.o. do. 9, 2: Bud. kapığların acuk kemiseyin 'I will throw open the doors' (of my seven treasures) U İT 47, 17-18; o.o. U II 77, 28 (kurğak), TT VI asa (2 uruğ), Suv. 602, 10 (2 to:ğ), TT IV 10, 9-10, etc.: Civ. TT I iro (egri): Xak. xı ol ne: kemişdi: “he threw away (faraha) the thing” Kaş. H 112 (kemişu:r, kemişme:k, prov.); ntt$ kemşip 'giving his horse its head” (i.e. letting it gallop; banal ör-farasihi) I 309, 15; 0.0. (same phr.) 441, 8; 472, 12: KB kemisti kitüb “he let the book drop” 1572; yağı at kemisse 2285, 2386; oğul kız kemisti ata hurmatı “boys and girls have given up respecting their parents! 6491; a.0. 5649: XIII (?) At. (God) kemşür kodi “casts down' (the proud man) 282; a.o. 478; Tef. kemiş- “to throw down, throw up”, etc. (several lit. and metaph. shades of meaning) 171: xiv Muh. (?) alqd wa taraha "to throw away, abandon" kemis- Rif. ro4 (only); hadafa “to cut off, throw away' keml:ş- 107 (only): Xwar. xiv kemis- 'to cast (into hell); to Jay down (a prayer mat)” Nahc. 238, 14; 268, 12-13; 250, ış: Kom. xiv “to throw away' kemiş- CCI; DIS. GMS Gr.: Kip. xiii hadafa ke:miş- Hou. 34, 10: xiv kemis- bafaha “to cast down! İd, 84: xv ramá “to throw' (birak-/) kemiş- (/sal- /y1k-) Tuh. 172. 13; laqqaha “to throw' (şal-/birak-/) kemiş- do. 32a. ro: Osm. xiv and xv kemiş“to throw away; to put (soniething on something else)”, in several texts. 77 7 443; 7/7 432; IV 493. D kómüs- (&amp;-) Co-op. f. of köm-, n.o.a.b. Xak. xt ol mapa: ne:p kömüşdi: "he helped me to bury (/i dafn) the thing below ground' Kaş. 1l 111 (kömişü:r, kömişme:k, sic): xiv. Afuh(?) daxara “to store. (something) kömüş- Rif. 109 (only). Tris. GMS D kemisge: Hap. leg.; Dev. N. fr. kemis- ; lit. something laid down on the ground' or the like. Xak. xi kemişğe: (MS. Aémigge:) libd munaqqag Köşğari “an embroidered Kaşğar felt (rug?)' Kaş, 7 490. D kümüşlüğ (g-) P.N./A. fr. kümüş, s.i.s.m.l. Uyğ. vir ffl. Bud. kümüşlüğ otruğka tağka teğdi “he reached the island and mountain of silver” PP 35, s-6. 'Tris. V. GMSD kemişil- Pass. f. of kemiş-, n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vi ff. Bud. Sanskrit apaviddha "cut off” kemişilmiş TT VII] D.25: Kom. xiv kemişil- “to be thrown out of, excluded from (somewhere)! CCG; Gr. 137 (quotn.). Mon. GN S1 ken See kend, D 2 ke:n (£-) Instr. f. of *ké:; a very old word normally used as an Adv., or Postposition, meaning 'behind (of place), after (of time)', but sometimes declined as a N., its origin having been forgotten. More or less syn. w. kédin, q.v.; it is more prob. that modern words like NE ki:n are survivals of that word than of this. Türkü vii: ff. (at first there is a little pain in this omen) kén yana: edgü: bolu:r "later it becomes good again” IrkB 57: Uyğ. vir ff. Man.-A (the 5izth year) bardukında ken “after (Mani) went (to heaven)” M I 12, rş: Man. mende kön “after me” M I 29, 16; andada kön “after that” M II 7, 15; 8.0. TT III 66—kéninte “thercafter” III 149; IX 47, 116: Bud. Sanskrit pascad 'thereafter" ken (so spelt) TT: VIII G.16; a.0. U II s, ız, anda ken PP 68, 2; sakinmista ken “after thinking! TT V 6, 16; ken keliğme ódlerde “in future” Suv. 138, 14; 139, 7 etc.—Sanskrit amte 'finally' kénénde TT VII D.25; ey kéninde IV 12, 54: Civ. kén is common in USp. in such phr. as bükünde ken “from now onwards' 45, 8; tişi kişi kén ağrığlığ bolsar “if a woman becomes ill after that” (i.e. after using certain remedies) H 1 121-2. ke:p (8-) “vide, broad'. S.i.a.m.l.g.; NVV Kumyk gep: SW Osm. gen, Tkm. gi:n.    
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 769 
     
   
   
     MON. GN Uyğ. viii ff. Man.-A M İH şo, 5-6 (i) (alkığ): Bud. ken yétiz 'broad, wide' U III 72, 27; TT X 214; U IV go, 49: képin kısğasın "the duration (of life)” Hüen-ts. 2129; kép (by itself) U 1160, 2 (1); TT V 22, 21; X 444, etc.; o.o. TT VHI C.1, etc. (alkag): Civ. USp. 45, ız (uzkiya): Xak. xi “anything wide' (wàsi') is called ker ne:p Kaş. 7/7 358 (prov.): KB bu köp dunyaA “this wide world' 3649; o.o. 43, etc. (akı:), 1328 (etmek), 2317: xın(?) At. 315 (bitil-), Tef. ken ditto 172: xiv Muh. al-wási' (opposite to “narrovv” ta:r) gen Mel. ss, 3; Rif. 152: Çağ. xv ff. gep (with 8-”) gey . ... wás ma"ndsnd Vel. 361 (quotn.); kép/képis faráx (*wide) toa wasi' San. 316v. zr (quotns.): Xwar. xiv kér 'broad, wide" Qutb 96, 98 (Riy), Nahe. 24, 4; 250, 15: Kom. ditto kep CCG; Gr.: Kip. xin al-wási* (opposite to *narrow' fa:r) ken /Ton. 27, 15: xiv ken ditto İd. 85: xv ditto Kav. 24, 11; wási' ken Tuh. 382. 13. kin 'musk', the secretion of such animals as the musk-deer and musk-rat; survives as kin in one or two NE languages t II 1344; Tuv. xin; other languages use some form of the syn. word yıpa:r, q.v. or the Ar. l.-w. misk. Uyğ. vur ff. Man. kin yıpar yıdlığım “my musk-scented (darling)” 4/77 8, 14-15 (ii): Bud. (in a list of 32 perfumes, mainly l.-w.s) kin yıpar Suv. 475, 22: (O. Kir. ix ff. error for ekin, q.v.): Xak. xı kin yıpa:r vafica misk 'musc sack” Kaş. I 340; a.o. 1 327 (KİZ): KB 71 (bu:r-), 98 (bürkür-): Xwar. xiv kin *musk' Qutb 99; a.o. or (yipa:r): Kip. xiv kin a/l-misk İd. 84. kö:n ($-) originally “ravv hide for tanning'; s.i.a.m.l.g. for “tanned leather'; NC Kumyk: SW Osm. gön, Tkm. gö:n. UYĞ. vır ff. Civ, kön işlesersen tavar kor bolur “if you work raw hide, the goods produced are useless” TT VII 28, 4: Xak. xı kó:n “the hide (cild) of a horse” in particular (xássa(n)), one says of it at kó:ni:; and the word is used for “the skin (cild) of a man,” so that one says anın kó:nl: kurı:dı: “his skin has dried” that is “he has died'; and one says tevey kó:ni: 'camel hide” by extension (musta'ara(n)); this word is used only before tanning (al-dabg) ; after that it is called koğuş Kaş. III 140; o.o. /İİ 335 (kadisla:-); 353 (sağrı:la:-), 425 (türt-): Muh. (under “cobblers” materials”) a/-na 'sole' gön Mel. 59, 14; Rif. 158: Çağ. xv ff. gön (with -ö-) “a kind of tanned leather' (büst-t madbüğ), in Pe. çarm San. 310r. 7: Xwar. xiv bu ineknin Köni “this cow's hide" Nahc. 341, 3: Kip. xiv Kön al-cild (one MS. adds bi'l-ga'r "with the hair on”) İd. 85: xv cild (tanfter/) kön Tuh. ria. ır: Osm. xvı ff. gön noted both for “ravv hide” and "leather" in several texts TTS 7 319; II 448; III 305; IV 351. 1 kün (£-) originally 'the sun'; hence, by extension, “day”. C.ia.p.a.L; in most modern languages it is used only for 'day', other words like kuya:ş, küneş being used for “sun”, in NW Kumyk: SW Osm., Tkm. gün. See 725 Doerfer 111 1688. Türkü vir kün by itself normally means 'day' as a measure of time, e.g. yégirmi: kün “for twenty days” 7 SE; with tün it means 'day' as opposed to night, e.g. tünli: künli: yéti: ódüske: 'day and night for seven periods of 24 hours” /7 SE, it means “sun” only in the phr. kün batsik 'sun-set, west' I S 1, İl N 2, etc.; kün tu£sik 'sunrise, east! / S 2, etc.; kün ortust: “vhen the sun is in the middle, south” 7 S 2: vin ff. kün ortu: “at midday' JrkB 24; kün tuğduı: do. 26; a.o. do. 52; bir kün 'one day' Tun. IV 9 (ETY HI 96): Man. el(l)ig kün “fifty days” Chuas. 245; kün tuğdı M 1 6, zo, kün künine “day by. day' M III 20, $ (i): Uyğ. virt kün tuguru: “at sunrise' Su. E 1; on kün "ten days” do. S 7: 1x (my fame reached) kün tuğsık(k)a: batsık(k)a: “the far east and west Suci 4: viri ff. Man.-A kün tenri "the sun god” (this phr. often means no more than “the sun) M zı, 4 (il), 24,25: Man. kün tenri TT III 49; kün künine do. 132: Bud. kün is common for both 'day' and 'sun'; kün ortu ödün kün ortu yipak yüzlenip 'facing south at midday” TT V ro, 88-9: Civ. kün is common for “day” and sometimes means “sun”: O. Kar. ix ff. in funerary inscriptions there is a stock phr. “1 could not remain with, or was parted from, the sun (and moon)”, tepri:deki: künke: “the sun in the heavens” Mal. 7, 3; kün ay do. ro, 3; ır, 1 etc.: Xak. xı kün a/-şams “the sun”, one says kün tuğdi: “the sun has risen' (tala'at) ; (prov.): kün al-yatwm “day”, one says bu kün barğıl “go today”, the day is called kün only because its lightness is due to the sun Kaş. 7 340; / 463 (batsık, tuğsık) and many o.o. often mis-spelt kün: KB kün is common in all meanings, e.g. (God created) kün ay birle tün 'sun, moon, and night' 3; bu kün “today” 191; tünün ham künün “by night and day” 78: xırnı(?) At. bu kün 29, etc., a.o.o., Tef. kün “sun, day” 189: xiv Muh. al-maşriq “the east” gün duğmış yé:r Mel. 79, 1; Rif. 183 (gü:n duğdi:), al-magrib "the west' gün batğı: ye:r—gğü:n batğu:nı: do.; a/-yawm gün 8o, r, gün 184; o.o. Rif. 74 (küneş), 163 (only): Çağ. xv ff. gün (spelt) (1) aftab “the sun”, (2) rüz “day”, also used as a title San. 310r. 4 (followed by several phr.): Xwar. xııı(?) kün “day” is common in Og.; kün 'sun' occurs only as the name of one of Oğuz Xagan's sons: xiv kün “day, sun” Qutb 107; MN 4, etc.: Kom. xiv ditto CCI, CCG; Gr. 158 (quotns.): Kip. xiii a/-şams kün «wa huwa'l-yawm Hou. s, 2; 28, 10 (followed by phr.): xiv kün al-sjams wa'l-yawm, the latter metaph. İd. 85; al-şams kün Bul. 2, ır: xv şams (künes/) kün Tuh. 20a. 13; yarom kün do. aga. 8; a.o.o.: Osm. xiv ff. $ün normally “day” was often used until xvı for “sun, daytime; a lucky day” 773 1 337; 11 475; İİİ 325; IV 373. E 2 kün has been read in various passages, almost certainly wrongly. In O. Kur. rx ff. the word read kün in Mal. 3, 1 etc. is in fact spelt k i n and seems to be ekin, q.v. The phr., or word, transcribed él kün in KB and several 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 770 
     
   
   
       726 MON. GN later authorities seems to be in fact élgün, i.e. 1 él, q.v., with the Collective Suff. -ğün. İt: is possible that the word transcribed küydeki and listed under 1 kuy, q.v., should in fact be transcribed kündeki, which was F. W. K. Müller's reading. If so, this kün seems to be a l.-w. fr. Chinese k'rm "the door to the women's appartments” (Giles 6,550). See Doerfer 111 1689, which is partly based on: unreliable authorities, kün 'female slave”, the feminine counterpart of kul, survives only(?) in NC Kır., Kzx.; NW Kk.; other languages use kara:baş or l.-w.s. "Türkü vin silik kiz olim küp kilti: “they made their pure (virgin) daughters slave girls” II E 3 (I E 3 bolt: in error for killti:), o.o. I E20, IE i3; E 24; I N o (tiri): Uyğ. vi kulim. küpim 'my male and female slaves! Su. E 1; S 9: viri ff. Bud. küp kül bir ikintike karışur 'female and male slaves quarrel with one another' TT VI 64 (VIII O.7); kul kün işlettimiz erser “if we have put them to work as slaves” TT IV 8, 10; o.o. do. ro, 16; U I1 87, 51: Civ. kün 'female slave' is mentioned in USp. 56, 6 (as having been sold); 73, 14 (as having married without leave, also called ebçi karabas); 110, 3 (taş kün, the name of a kiz karabaş): (O. Kir. rx ff. kün yutuz 'female slave and wife' Mal. 42, 1; very dubious text): Xak. xr kün al-ama “female slave” Kaş. III 358; İİ 428 (egirt-) and three o.o. translated al-ama or al-cüriya (same meaning): xır(?) Tef. kün ditto 190: xiv. Muh.(?) al-cüriya kü:p Rif. 147 (only); Rbj. (Sarah said, '1 am a poor) küp "slave" (of God") R H 1428: Xwar. xiv küp ditto Qutb 108: Kom. ditto CCI; Gr. Mon. V. GNkön- (&amp;-) with an embarrassingly wide range of meanings; the basic one was perhaps 'to be, or become (physically) straight', with various metaph. extensions. Survives in SE Türki: NC Kir, Kzx.: SC Uzb. (kün-): NW Kk., Nog., usually meaning “to agree (with someone, to something); to become reconciled (ditto); to become accustomed to, or put up with (something). Türkü vırı ff. otka: könmi:ş kilrç ózkke: yarlığ bolti: “a sword straightened by heat(?) was issued to Oziz Mir. A” 6-5 (ETY II 64; morphologically Ózi: must be a P.N.): Xak. xı yığa:ç köndi: “the piece of wood (etc.) was straight” (isfaqdma)ş and one says Ofrr kóndi: 'the thicf admitted (aqarra) his theft”, also used of anyone who surrenders property (cdd bií-mál) after admitting (that it is not his); and one says er: yo:lka: köndi: “the man went to the road and set out along it” (şaxaşa . . . tlá'l-tariq tea rakiba'l-tariq); (kün- (küfi-) follows here); and one says tosu:n at köndi: “the unruly horse was broken in and behaved properly' (Trtüda wa istaqdma): also used of any thing (al-amr) idá istaqüma Kaş. II 29 (kónetr, kónme:k); a.o. /7 199, r: KB (if what 1 say is so) tilin kön sözüm tut “admit it in words, and accept my statement” 3993; özün yolka  könğey "you yourself will take to the (right) road” 48ro, isizlerke berğe urup könmese “if, when you flog the wicked, they do not reform' 5281; 2.0. 1536: xin(?) Tef. kón- “to go along the (right) road' 183: Kom. xiv kün(sic) "to admit, acknowledge! CCG; Gr. 159 (quotn.). küf- (-) “to catch fire, to burn (Intrans.)', both lit. and metaph., “to burn (with anger, and the like)". S.i.a.m.l.g., -fi- following the usual course (cf. ko:fi); küy- in NE Alt., Leb., "Tel.: NC Kir, Kzx.: SC Uzb. (kuy-); NW Kk., Nog.; köy- in NE Kaç., Koib., Sag., Khak.: SE "Türki, SW 'Tkm.; güy- in NW Kumyk: göyün- in SW Osm. Uyf. viu ff. künke küyüp 'burnt by (the heat of) the sun' Suv. 603, 10-11 5 0.0. U 118,27 (tamid-); Suv. 141, 9 (tamdul-); TM IV 254, 102: Civ. küy- ditto H İİ 3o, işa: Xak. xr otun küydi: "the firewood (etc.) burnt” (rhtaraqa) Kaş. III 246 (küye:r, küyme:k), (if you say “fire)) ağız küyme:s “your mouth does not catch fire” 7 43, 12; kópll: küyüp 'with a burning heart” 77 188, 11: KB küyer erdim otka “İ should have burnt in the fire” (if he had not protected me) 384; (begs are) küyer ot; (if a man's words are crooked) küyer ol küçün "hec burns violently' 1024; a.o.o.: Arğu: otun kündi: “the firewood burnt'; with the sound change -y- 7 -n- normal in Argu: Kaş. II 29 (see kón-): xırı(?) Tef. küy- “to be burnt" 188: xiv Mu. ihtaraqa gü:yin- Mel. 21, 16; kü:yün- Rif. 102; al-harig $ü:ymef (sic) 37, 10; kü:yünmek 123: Çağ. xv ft. küy- (-di, ctc.; "with K-") yan- “to burn' (Intrans.) Vel. 375-6; küy- sixtan ditto San. 310v. 1 (quotns.): Xwar. xii küy- ditto ' Ali 3o: xiv. küy-/küyne- (sic?) ditto Qutb 106; küy- MN 227: Kip. xiv küyün- ihtaraqa İd. 86; ditto küyin- Bu. 32v.: xv /Itiriqa “to be burnt! küy-(/açı-) Tuh. 13b. 8: Osm. xiv ff. göyün-/göyn- (r) "to burn'; (2) metaph. of fruit “to ripen'; c.ia.p. TS I 329; II 459; III 316; IV 361. Dis. GNE ?F kóne: occurs only in the phr. kóne: su:v "mercury, quicksilver'; it is unlikely that the Turks had their own word for this exotic product, and this is prob. a 1.-vv., but it must be an old one since the phr. became a l.-w. in Hungarian Aénesó. Survives only(?) in NW Kaz. küne sivi; Nog. kóne suv.; other languages use Pe., Russian, ot Mong. l.-w.s (the Mong. word means “silver water). Uyğ. vürff. Civ. köne suvi is an ingredient in a remedy for difficult parturition H 7 108: (Xak.) xiv Muh. al-z”baq 'mercury' kó:ne: su: Mel. 75, 8; Rif. 178: Kom. xiv "mercury” kóne suvi CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xii al-zií'baq kö:ne:y şu: (also ciwa: Pe. l-w.) Hou. 31, 14. D köni: (£-) Dev. N/A. fr. kön-, 'straight; upright', lit. and metaph. Survives only(?) in NE Khak. kóni; "Vuv. xónü. UYğ. vin ff. Man.-A köni kértü 'upright and true” M T  LL o —“—  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 771 
     
   
   
     DIS 26, 14: Man. kóni buryuk (stc) “an upright minister” M II 12, 6; köni nomuğ “the true doctrine! TT HII sı: Bud. edgü köni yolçı yerçi "a good, trustworthy guide (Hend.)” PP 40, 8; köni savlığ üçün “because he was truthful” do. ss, 2; köni kértü nomuğ Suv. 134, 11; 0.0. do. 192, $$ U I1 39, ror, TT VI 192, etc.; X 369, etc.: Civ. köni bérürmen *] will honestly repay” is a standard formula in contracts USp. r, s, etc.: O. Kir. ix ff. Köni: Tirig P.N. Mal. 6, r: Xak. xı köni: ne: al-gay'u'l-mustawi "a thing which is straight; and al-amin 'a loyal, faithful (man)' is called köni: er Kaş. 111 237; köni: barır keylk "a gazelle that runs straight” (mustaqima(n)) II 151, 18: KB köni 'honest, upright” is very common 52, 424, 455, etc; köni törü “righteous laws' 355; kónl din “the true faith' 54; köni yol “the straight road” (to paradise) 36; 8.0. 1055 (egil-): xın(?) At. kónl söz “the truth' 155, etc.; köni düst “a loyal friend” 384; 3:0.0.; Tef. köni 'straight, truthful', etc. 184: xiv Muh.(?) al-mustaqim '(morally) straight köni: Rif. 147 (only); ai-muhigqg “truthfub (opposite to “crooked” egri:) köni: kişi: 153; al-mugawwam 'straight' (opposite to “crooked” efri) kóni: rs4 (Mel. 56, s doğrı:): Xwar. xiv. köni 'straight (arrow); honest! Qutb ror: Kom. xiv kóni 'upright; lawful', and the like CCI, CCG, Gr. ısı (quotns). küni: (&amp;-) 'jealousy; jealous; (hence? metaph.) a co-vvife”, Survives only(?) in NE Tel. kü:nii "ealousy” R 77 1441: SE Türki küne ditto BS sss: SW Osm. góni/gónü ditto; Tkm. güni 'co-wife'. Türkü vri 77 E 3o (1 öt): Uy. vi ff. Bud. (the passions of lust, anger, ignorance) küni *jealousy' (pride and scepticism) U IT 86, 32; (if we have aroused) küni sakınç 'jcalous thoughts! TT IV 8, 73; a.o. Suv. 102, 3 (KivirBak): Xak. xı küni: al-darra "co-vvife”, onc of more than one wives of the same man Kaş. 111 237 (prov., sec tegi:): Xwar. xiv küni “envy” Qufb 107; (this world and the next are like) iki küni 'awrat 'two co-vvives” (if the husband prefers one of them the other will be displeased with him) Nahc. 397, ır: Kom. xiv “concubine” küni, 'bastard” küniden tovğan CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiv küni a/-ğayra 'jealousy' İd. 86: Osm. xv ff. günü (so transcribed) 'jealousy'; in several texts Z TS 7 339; II 478; III 327; IV 375: xvir günl ('with 6-) in Rümi, 'jealousy' (zaşh wea hasad); and two women who have the same husband address one another as güni, in Pe. wasni San. 310r. 25. Dis. V. GNEkö:pe:- n.o.a.b., but k€:peş and ké:es-, q.v., are commoner. Xak. xı ol mapa: ké:ge:di: dabbara amrahu ma'i “he settled his affairs with me” Kaş. III 396 (ké:perr, ké:pe:me:k): K B (let me now go to my kinsman and) képeyin apar men bu ig 'settle this affair with him” 5654: K1p. xiv tazáwara “to visit one another” kepe- Bul, 42r. D ke:pü- (£-) Intrans. Den. V. fr. ké:p; 'to be, or become, broad or wide'. The following . GNC 727 modern forms scem rather to be survivals of *ké:ged-; SE "Türki kepey- BŞ $28: NC Kir, Kzx. kepi-/kepey-: SC Uzb. kepayNW Kk, Nog. kepey-: SW Tkm. gi:ne-/ f£igel-. Xak. xı yér ké:pü:di: "the place (etc.) was broad' (tatcassa"a) Kaş. III 396 (ké:pü:r, k6:nü:me:k): K B elin arta barğay képügey yerin “your realm will increase and your territory become wider' 5915: Osm. xv f£épl- “to become broad'; in one text TTS IV 331. Dis. GNB PUF kenbe: İlap. leg.; completely unvocalized; prob. Iranian. Gancak xı kenbe: "a plant” (abt) Kaş. I 416. Mon. GNC ke:;ne (ğ-) “the young”, of human beings or animals. As such survives only(?) in SW Osm. genc, same meaning. İt became a l.-w. in Mong. as Kkerice "small, feeble” (Kow. 2446, Haltod 182), and the Çağ. form below and SC Uzb. kenja, 'the youngest child (boy or girl) in a family', are reborrowings fr. Mong. "The phr. ke:nç liyü: (?read li:w) in Kaş. prob. has no connection vvith this vvord, it seems rather to be a compound of Pe. ganc 'treasury' and liv or liyü:, q.v. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. kenç ur1 kenç kızlar “young boys and girls” Kuan. 139, 141 (U II zo, 20); (I am a delicately brought up) kenç kigig “young (woman)! U III 82, 17; Kenç Teprim, Kenç 'Turmis Tarxan P.N.s Pfahl. 10, 13-15; 0.0. U H 60, o-1 (kun-); TT VI 250 (var. lec.): Civ. kenç oğlan TT VII 23, 2; kenc occurs several times in H I usually for 'unborn child”: Xak. xi ke-nç “a child' (a/-zif?), also “the young” (sagir) of any animal, (PU) kemç liyü: màyida yutaxxad fi'l-a'yad wa walàyimi'l-mulük li'l-nahb ka'[-manára qadr. talátin dira" su'da(n) f”l-samö” "a stand for the booty erected at the feasts and banquets of kings; it is like a minaret (or candlestick?) rising about 30 cubits towards the sky” Kaş. 17I 438; I 169 (em-) and five o.o. of kenç (sic) "infant in arms': KB ajung1 bógü beg nelük ganc urur, er at kayda bolsa anuk kenç alur *why does the wise ruler of the world heap up treasures (Pe. 1.-w.)? Wherever there are troops he has young men at hand' 2056: xui(?) Tef. kenc/kenc “child” 180 (Jang]htnc, erroneously described as Turco-Persian): Çağ. xvff. kence “a child (fifi) born to elderly parents! San. 301r. 24: Ktp. xir Hou. 24, 20 (oğul): Osm. xiv ff. ğenc ay 'new moon” 7 TS I 299: xvitt . . . and in Rümi “a child” (zif// wa baçça) is called genc San. 3o1r. 24. Dis. GNC F künçit “sesame (seed)'; l.-w. fr. Tokharian A hufcit (see TT VIII, p. 92). S.i.2.m.l.g. except NE vvith variations in the second vovvel, an early l-w. in Russian as kunzhut no doubt borrowed fr. some Turkish language, but perhaps reborrowed later by others; in SW only Tkm. künci. Uyğ. vir ff. (Bud.)/Civ. küncit 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 772 
     
   
   
       728 DIS occurs fairly often, (a) as a foodstuff offered in religious ceremonies TT VII 16, 15-16; (5) as an ingredient in medicines künçit ya:ğı: 'sesame oil” TT VIII M. 28; H I1 92, 100, etc.; (c) as an economic crop US. 7, 2; 20, 5; 27, 6 (patir): (Xak.) xiv Muh. al-sirac 'sesame oil küncüd ya:ğ Mel, 66, 7; Rif. 165 (künci:d): a/-siisim "sesame” küncüd 78, 5; künci: r81: Kip. xiv al-simsim künci: Bul. 7, 3: Xv ditto. Ti/t. 19a. 5. ?D kóngük a/-cayb originally meant “the opening in the front of a shirt! (a meaning retained by the only obvious survival, NW Kaz. künçik R 17 1446), hence more broadly "the bosom of a garment! and finally “a pocket'; it is ditficult to see any semantic connection with kö:n to justify the suggestion that it is a Dim. f. of that word, but it can hardly be a basic word. Xak. xı könçük a/-cayb; in Oğuz the cim has a fatha, and it is pronounced könçek Kaş. 1 480: xui(?) Tef. könçük “the bosom of a garment” 189 (künçük): xiv Muh.(?) al-cayb könçü:k (-c-) Rif. 166 (only): Oğuz xı see Xak.: Xwar. xiv kóncük 'brcast pocket Qutb 101: Kom. xiv “trousers” könçek CCI, CCG; Gr,: Kip. xin al-sarötcil 'drawers' kö:nçe:k (-c-; also called ism: (üm) and icton) Hou. 18, 12; al-cayb kömçü:k (misspelt körncü:k) do. 19, 1: xiv könçek (-C-) al-sardwil İd. 85; kóngük (-c-) al-cayb do. 86: Xv libas 'garment' könçek (-c-, also içton) Tuh. 31b. 11. Tris. V. GNCD kóngüklen- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. könçük, Xak. xi to:n könçüklendi: “the garment had an opening in the front” (cayó) Kaş. H 27; (könçüklenü:r, könçüklenme:k). Mon. GND F kend 'town'; Lcv, fr. Sogdian əd. S.im.m.lg. usually as kent "village, small settlement”, but generally now obsolete except as a component in geographical names like 'llashkent. Cf. 2 balık. See 2oerfer ÓII 1705. Uy£. vin ff. Bud. şravast kendke "to the city of Sravasti” U 71 34, 6 (ii); a.0. TT X 51-2 (bodun): Xak. xı kend a/-balad sa town'; hence Kásfar is called Ordu: kend “the city of the (royal) residence” (a/-iqáma) because Afrüsiyüb resided there owing to its excellent climate; it is in Lower China (a/- Sinu' l-suflá); (verse), kend a/-qarya “village” among the Oğuz and those who live in the (open) country; most of the Turks use it for al-küra “a provincial town', hence the name Ö:zkend for the chief city (a/-qaşaba) of Fergana, that is 'the town of our souls' (or selves, balad anfusind), and Semizkend “the fat (samina) city”, because of its great size, the Persians call it Samarqand Kaş. 7 343; ken any 'town' in the castern provinces, an abbreviation of kend / 339; several o.o. of kend: KB kend is fairly common 216, 488 (tüşün), roq3 (ulus), 4316 (ditto): xu(?) KBVP 26 (ulus): xır(?) Tef. kend/kent 'town! 173: xiv. Mut... al-qarya sea l-balad  . GNC kend Mel, 75, 15; kent Hif. 179: Çağ, xv ff. ként/kénd (spelt) di) «a qarya 'village' San. 316v. 16 (quotn.): Oguz xi see Xak.: Kom. xiv. “city” kent CCI; Gr.: Kip. xin al-qarya kent; (Tkm. kö:y Pe. l-w.) Hou. 6, 13: xiv. kent al/-qarya İd. 85; Bul. 4, 3: xv al-balad sca l-qarya kent Kav. 35, 1; balad kent Tuh. 8a. $: Osm. xvf. kend/kent 'town'; in several texts TS 1 447; 11616; IV 494. Dis. GND kentü: Reflexive Pron. “self”, as an Adj. 'own', sce €. G. ATG, para. 201; spelt with. -ntin "Türkü, -nd- in Xak.; the Uyğ. form is uncertain and perhaps varied, but T'T VIII has -nd-. Often used in Hend. vv. 1 ö:z. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. kendi; except in NE, where £ bo:d is used in this sense, “self” in all other languages is 1 ó:z. Türkü vi edgü: elipe: kentü: yanıltığ “you yourselves have offended against your good realm” 7 E 23, HJ. E 19; Tok(k)u:z Oğuz bodun kentü: bodunim erti: “he 'l'okkuz Oğuz people were my own people" / N 4 (in II E 29, the parallel text, menip bodunim): vrir ff. (all precious stones) ke:ntü: ke:ntü: (sic) erde:mi: belgü:si: bar “have their own virtues and distinguishing characteristics" Toy. 12-14; a.o. İrkB Postscript. (alku:): Man. kentü özümüzni emğetürbiz “ve torture ourselves! Chnas, 299; a.0. M 16, 5; kendünün (sc) kópül sınından 'from his own member of mind” M III 16, 3-4 (i); o.o. do. 6-9: Uyf. viri kentü: bodunim Şık E 2: vir ff. Man.-A kentü “(he) himself? M 7 8, rr, a.0.0.; kentü kentü süsin “their own armics” do. 22, s (); kentü seviğin 'self-lovc' do. 34, 19; a.0. do, 8, 7 (u:d): Man. kentünün [gap] 'own' lFind. 27: Bud. Sanskrit soayanı “he himself” ke:ndü özi (sic) TT VIII 4.18; kendü “hc himself? PP 10, 1; 0.0. do. 2, 5-6 (işle:-), zo, 6—7 (ötle:-), etc.: Civ. öz kendüpin bek tutğul 'kcep a firm hold on yourself” TT I qo, kendü köpülünin “your own mind” ditto; men kendü özüm “1 myself? USb. i04, 3-4: Xak. xi kendü: a/-ddt tva [-nafs “self”, one says ol kendü: aydı: “he himself said” Kaş, 7 419; (the snake does not know) kendü: eğrl:si:n "Toac nafsihd "its own crookedness” 7 127, 8; a.o. //T 29, 4 (uğra:ğ): KB (if you praise a bad (soldier), he becomes very good) kediğ öğse kendü kaçan ken kalur “if you praise a good one, how can he lag behind ?' 2400; (a man's conduct shows his ancestry) İsiz aşlıpa kendü Kilki tanuk “his own character is evidence of the evil man's ancestry” 5811; a.o. 970: xi?) Az. kendü “(him)self” ss, 406, etc.; 7ef. kendü 'own'; kendü óz/óz kendü '(my, him, etc.) self” 172: Xwar. xiii kendözüm “1 myself” Ali $4 (but öz özüm is commoncr): xiv kendü “self” Qutb 94 (ÖZ seems commoner): Kom. xiv kendim “1 myself! CCI; kensi “self” (common) CCG; Gr, 138 (quotns): Kip. xiv kendü: za”Rid H”l-nafs “an emphatic word for “self”, one says kendü: öz bardı: or kendözi bardı: dahaba haqiqata(ı) nafsuhu “he really  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 773 
     
   
   
     sie eR qra 1b duy clt uni DIS. GND | 729 went himsclf'; and one says Özüm (sic, ?read özl:) bilsün 'know for yourself! (sfc), when you entrust a task to him you say this or, in the same meaning, kendü: özl: bilsün “let him know for himself” /d. 85; (I, thou, you, ve) huwa "he" kendözi, (“they” bular) Bul. 16, 6: xv minhu “from him" (andanf)kensiden; ... “vith him" (özi: bile:/anın bile:/) kensi: bile:; . . . "in him” kensi:de: Xas. 45, 7-15; “the third Personal Pron. is kensi/kendi/ózi Tuh. 39b. 13; a.o.o.: Osm. xiv ff, kendü “self, own'; c.i.a.p.; kendü özi/kendözi (also kendözüm, etc.) common fr. xiv to xvi TT'S I1 444-7; II 613-16; İİİ 432-7; IV 494-500: xvur gğendü (so spelt here only) in umi, xtoud wa xwigtan “self” San. 301r. 25 (quotn.). VU?D köndi: Hap. leg.; morphologically Dev. N./A. in -di: fr. kön-, but this should have exactly the opposite meaning. Oğuz xı köndi: al-radl 'vile, ignoble'; one says ol köndi: kişi: ol “hc is a vile person”. And this Particle (iarf) is also used as a Conjunction (sila) when you cannot think of the right word, it is used until the right word comes to mind Kaş. 1 419 (cf. the similar use of sey in Osm.). F kendük one of the Gancak words which is unquestionably Iranian; a/-kandüc is also a similar l.-w., cf. Pe. kasdü (Middle Pe. kandtüg), “a large clay vessel for storing grain”. Gancak xı kendük a/-kandirc, that is a thing constructed (yubriá) in the shape of a large jar (al-dann) used for storing flour and the like Kaş. I 480; a.o. II 129 (tikil-): (Xak.?) xiv Müh. al-ibrig *jug' kendü:g (sic) Mel. 69, 5; Rif. i170 (Ründü:g): Çağ. xvff. kündük aftaba swa ibriq “vvater bottle; jug'; and in Pe. "a large jar for storing foodstuffs' San. 310r. 14. kindik "the navel'. S.ia.m.lg. except. SW which uses köbek, q.v. In Xwar. xiv Qutb 98 kindik seems to mean 'the musc sac, or bladder, of a musk deer”, As such it is an A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. kin, but this cannot be the etymology of the word in its ordinary meaning. Uyf. vin ff. Civ. kindik üstün mep bolsar 'if there is a mole above the navel” TT VII 37,6; kindik altın 'below the navel' do. 7-8: Çağ. xv ff. kindik (spelt) náf *navel' San. 316v. 18 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv (in their common grave, the head of Abü Bakr) payğambar . . . nup mubarak kindiki tusinda boldi “vas on a level with the blessed navel of the Prophet” Naic. 104, 12; a.o. 118, 13: Kom. xiv *navel' kindik CCI; Gr.: Kip. xut al-surra (nave kindik (MS. künd.: Tkm. kó:bek) Hou. 21, 2: xiv kindik a/-surra İd. 85: xv ditto Kav. 61, 6 (MS. kindek), Tuh. 18b. ır. D kündem (£-) Hap. leg.; Den. N./A., connoting resemblance, fr. 1 kün. Türkü viri ff. Man. kündem dindarlar 'the sun-like Elect' M HI 17, 21. D kündün ($-) Den. Adj./Adv. fr. 1 kün, lit. “in the direction of the sun”, but in practice used only for a point of the compass, 'south', i.e. in the direction of the midday sun. Uyğ. vun ff. Bud. TT VI 83, etc. (öndün, kedin): Civ. TTI 6, etc. (öpdün), kündüni (so read) “its south” US). 13, 7. ?F kendir 'hemp, Carrabis”. S.ia.m.l.g.; unlikely to have been an indigenous plant in the arca originally occupied by the Turks and prob. an Indo-European (?Tokharian) 1.-vv., v. G. in /Tücn-ts., note 1948, suggests a remote etymological connection with German Hanf (and accordingly English hemp) — Perhaps originally kéntir. See JDoerfer lll 1647. Uyf. viti ff. (some people spin 1 çağay (? wild hemp?), wool or) kéndir 'hemp! PP 2, 4; kéndir as an economic crop do. 13, 3; a.o. Hiüen-ts. 1948 (kamğak): Civ. kendir uru£i “hemp seed” TT VH 14, 49; o.o. H I 122; H II 14, 122: Kom. xiv “hemp” kendir CC/, Gr.: Kip. xii ál-hattán 'flax' kendir Hou. 19, 9: xiv kendir a/-qunnab ('hemp') ma"l-kattdn İd. 85: xv qunnab kendir (fkam(?)) Tuh. 29a. ır: Osm. xvri kendir (spelt) in Rümi, "a plant from which they spin cords”, called in Ar. zoaraqt”l-hibal(?) and in Pe. bang; and some say that it is a cord (rismán) made of bark (ist, i.e. vegetable fibre) and spun, called in Ar. quitráb and in Pe. kanab San. 301r. 26. ?C küntüz (g-) 'daytime', as opposed to tün “night”. S.i.a.m.l.g., in SW Osm. gündüz, "Tkm. gündi:z. "There is no other trace of a Den. Suff. -tüz and it is prob. a very early Compound of 1 kün and tüz. Türkü vii 7 E 27, Il E 22 (udi:-); T 12 (olursik), 22, 51-2: Uy. vii ff. Bud. Sanskrit diod ca rátrau ca “by day and night” tünle yeme: kündüz yeme: TT VIII E.38; ditto but küntüz do. E.32; o.o. Kuan. 15, 73 (U II 14, 2); Hüen-ts. 1939; küntüz yinçürü töpün yükünü teginürmen “1 venture to bend my head and bow (to you) every day” Hiüen-ts. 2030: Civ. kündüz iki yérmé ödle:rte:ki: onunc ódünde: bir ya:nı bolor “there is a new moon in the roth hour of the twelve daylight hours” TT V/lI L.ı (so transcribe and translate; MS. :,:-lls é:d rif); a.o. ZI II 8, 32: Xak. xt kündüz dato'v'I-nahár "daylight" Kaş. I 458; tünle: yorip kündüz sevnür "a man who travels by night is happy during the day" (nahàára(u)) ITİ 87, 25; ajun tüni: kündü:zi: (sic) yélgin keçe:r “the nights and days of this world pass by like a traveller" 7/7 288, 14: KB (Thou didst create) kara tün . . . yaruk kündüzün 'the dark night . . . and the light day' 22; (he lay on his bed at night and) kündüz örü 'stood bv day” 952; a.o. 127: xi?) At. (God created) tünün kündüzün “your night and day” 13; Tef. kündüz 'day(time) 189: xiv Rbg. (he prayed) tün kündüzün R II 1446: Çağ. xv ff. künduz r/z “day” San. 310r. 14: Xwar. xiv kündüz “by day” Qutb roy: Kip. xiv kündü:z al-nahár İd. 85; (al-layl dünle:); al-nahdr kündüz Bul. 13, 12; tühcl-nahör "all day” küntüzün (sic; tiilu'l-Iay! dándülbi:) do. 14, 9: xv al-nahár kündüz Kav. 36, 13; Tuh. 36a. 4.   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 774 
     
   
   
     730 Dis. V. GNDD ké:püt- (8-) Caus. f. of k€:pü:- ; s.i.s.m.l. as kepet-, kepit-, kepeyt-; cf. kö:pnür-. Xak. xı er evin képütti: (MS. kepitti:) "the man enlarged (arrsa"a) his house” (or something else) Kaş. 11 326 (képütü:r, kenütme:k), er evin ké:pütti: same translation II] 396 (kepütü:r, ke:pütme:k, vocalized Re:piteverywhere): xın(?) Tef. képüt- "to hroaden' (metaph. of the mind) 173: Osm. xv and xvi £épit- "to broaden, widen'; in several texts TTS I şor, 11 426; IV 331. D könit- (£-) Caus. f. of kön-, pec. to Xak.?; cf. kóndger-, köndür-. Xak. xr er yığa:ç könitti: "the man straightencd (qazercama) the piece of wood' (etc.) Kaş. 41 313 (könitü:r, kónitme:k): KP sen öz kılkın étgil kilinçın könit "put your own character in order and make your conduct upright! 5204; (admonition is advantageous if a man . . .) konitse ózüg “makes himself upright 5434. D küped- Hap. leg.; Intrans. Den. V. fr. kün, "to become a maid servant'. Türkü viii 7 E 13 (kulad-). D kóndger- (£-) “to straighten” and the like; morphologically this seems to bc a Ttans. Den. V. fr. *kónt Dev. N/A. fr. kón-; semantically in the early period it was syn. w. kónit- and kóndür-, but it later developed extended meanings. Survives only(?) in NW Kar. könder- “to guide, lead out, drive” R II 1247; Kore, 221 and SW Az. kónder- ; Osm., 'Tkm. gönder- which hardly means more than “to send, send off”. "These forms must be carefully distinguished fr. modern forms of köndür-. Kaş.”s Sec. f. kónger- (sie, in a Chap. for quadrilitterals, not &amp;óper-) is otherwise known only in Tef. Xak. xı ol yığa:ç kóndgerdi: “he straightened (qazewama) the piece of wood' (etc.); and one says ofrrnt: köndgerdi: “he fought with (márasa ma") the thief until he made him confess' (agarra); and one says ol anı: yolka: kóndgerdi: (anı: is altered either to or from meni: in the MS.) "he guided me (Aadáni, sic) to the (right) road”, (etc.) Kaş. III 423 (kóndgerür, kóndgerme:k, both spelt -gür- in the MS.): ol ok könğerdi: "he straightened (qazercama) the arrovv” (ctc.); and one says ol yo:l kóngerdi: “he guided to (Fadd 2/a) the road”, and one says beğ oğrını: könğerdi: "the beg compelled (a/zama) the thief to confess” /7 196 (könğerür, kóngerme:k): xiu(?) Tef. könger- “to erect” (a wall, house, and the like) 184: Kom. xiv “to straighten” könder- CCI, CCG, “to lead in (the right way) kónderCCG, Gr. 151 (quotns.): Kip. xiv kónderşayya"a “to sce off (a guest)! İd, 85; wadda'a ditto (uzat-, q.v./)könder- Bul. 87v.: xv toadda"a (uzat-) Tkm. könder- Tuh. 38b. 8: Osm. xiv ff. both gónder- in xv to xvil and góndür- in xiv to xix are noted for 'to see off, to direct, to send (someone somewhere)" TTS I 320; II 449; III 307; IV 352. DIS. V. GNDD köndgert- (6-) Hap. lcg.; mentioned only as an example of the Caus. f. of words of the form of kóndger-. Xak. xı ol yığa:ç köndğertti: "he ordered that the piece of wood (etc.) should be straightened' (bi-taqwimi'l-xagab) Kaş. III 424, 5; n.m.e. D köntül- (&amp;-) Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of kónit- ; “to be straightened” and the like. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. T/üen-ts. 1949 (kamğak). D köndür- (8-) Caus. f. of kön- , “to straighten", with some extended meanings. S.i.a.m.l.gr. except NE, S8W with minor phonctic changes. Not to be confused with. kónder- (köndger-); cf. kónit-. Xak. xı KI? kóndüreyin tapuğka yolum '[ will direct my course towards (royal) service” 474; kóndrü bilmez yörik “hc does not know how to rcform his conduct' 2077; (do not be a slave to passion) köndür kópül 'rcform your mind" 3994: xın(?) Tcf. köndür- “to direct (someone Zcc., to the right road Dat.); to show (the right road /cc., to someone Dat.) 183: Xwar. kóndür- “to correct; direct, guide! Quib ror, Nahc. 6,7; 282,15: Osm. xiv ff. see kóndger-. D *küfidür- ($-) Caus. f. of küfi-; “to burn (Trans.), and the like. S.ia.m.]g.; NE kóydir-/küydir-; SE kóydür-; NC Kir. küydür-; Kzx. küydir-; SC Uzb. kuydir- ; NW Kaz. köyder-: Kl., Nog. küydir-; Kumyk güydür-, SW Osm. góyündür-. Cf. örte:-, künur-, 3 yak-. Uyğ. vrır ff. Man.-A M 1 18, 1—2 (Örte:-): Civ. 1t tişin küydürüp "burn a dog's tooth, and . . ^ TT VII 23, 3: Xak. xı ol anıp to:nin küytürdi “he ordered the burning (5r-i)raq) of his garment” (etc.), “an incorrect word' (/uga Şayr faşiha) Kaş. TIT 193 (küytürür, küytürmek, Kaş. perhaps regarded küyür- as the correct one): xin(?) Tef. küydur- “to burn' 188: Çağ. xv fi. küydür- suzáündan ditto San. 310v. 17 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv kündür- (sc) ditto Qutb 107; küydür- ditto do. 106; Nahc. 389,9: Kom. xiv “to burn” (kóydür-, later corrected to) küydür- CCI; Gr.: Kip. xir haraqa “to burn' küyündür-(/örte:-) Hou. 35, 4: XIV küyündür- harraqa İd. 1:86: Osm. xiv göydür- in one text, xivíff, góyündürc.L.a.p. TTTS I 329; II 429; III 316; IV 360. 'Tris. GND PU kóndegü: the Sanskrit original shows that this means 'necklace'; prob. an old word ending in -£ü:; there is no semantic connection between this word and kön-, kónd$er-, etc. There is no widely distributed word for 'necklace' in Turkish; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. kendünüş tükel törlüg satığsız ertinilig kóndegüsin “his own necklace of all kinds of priceless jewels' Kuan. 156-7; a.o. do. 167. D kindiklig P.N./A. fr. kindik, s.i.s.m.l. UyE. vir ff, Bud. (Sanskrit lost) birle: kindikliğle:r “those who have onc(?) navel” TT VIII G.şy.  o EN CE w-wvwv-v»2»2——————— «PERENNE T 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 775 
     
   
   
       DIS.GNL D küntemek 'daily'; Dev. N./A. or Adv. fr. *kunte:- Den. V. fr. 1 kün. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vini ff. Man. TT III 96 (üçün): Bud. TT 1, p. 26, note 160, $ (aşan-). Dis. GNG ?D kónek (?$-) 'pail, bucket'; prob. Dim. f. of kó:n, and so lit. 'a small leather object'. Survives in NE kónek/kónók: NC Kir. kónók; Kzx. kónek: SC Uzb. künak, usually in the specialized meaning of 'a milking pail”. Türkü viri ff. 7rkH s? (kanığ): Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. TT 7 11 (başğar-): Xak. xı kónek al-rakia “a container made of leather! Kaş, 1 392: KB in the list of signs of the Zodiac, i41, kónek translates Ar. al-daltw *Aquarius' (lit. “a bucket"): xiv MuA.(?) ol-dalw “Aquarius” kó:ne:k Rif. 183 (only). D *küfiük (g-) 'burnt'; Pass. Dev. NA. fr. küf-. S.iamm.lg. in forms comparable to those of küridür-; NW Kumyk güyük; SW Osm. göynük, Tkm. kóyük, Xak. xı küyük ne:p “a burnt' (al-muhtaraq) thing” Kaş. III 168: Çağ. xv ff. küyük (with k-k”) yanmış "burnt” Vel, 376; küyük (1) süziş "burning” (N.; quotn.), (2) süxta "burnt (quotn.) San. 311r. 13: Xwar. xiv küyük/ küynük “fire, ardour; passion' Qutib 106: Kip. xiv. küynük a/-muhtaraq İd. 86: xv mahrüq 'burnt' (küyülmis; between the lines) küyük 7uh. 34b. ız, ditto küyük do. 48b. 10: Osm. xiv ff. &amp;óynük occasionally 'burning, burnt”, more usually “pain, distress”, c.i.a.p. TS 7 328; I1 458; 111 316; IV 359. D kenki: (&amp;-) N./A.S. fr. 2 kén; “subsequent, last”, Cf. kédinki:; SE Türki kéyinki 'subsequent" BS şzr is prob. a survival of the latter and not this word. Uy£. vin ff. Bud. (of ten definitions; aşnukı sekizi “the first eight . . .) könki ék(k)isi "the last two' TT V 28, 127; 0.0. Suv. 134, 1-2 (Ortünki:), TT VIH A.48 (éltin-). Dis. V. GNGVUD kénik- (g-) in a note on V.s ending in -k- Kaş. says that these fall into two classes; (a) basic V.s like aşuk- and cülük-; (b) V.s in which the Suff. indicates that the Subject of the V. is unable to achieve his desires, like basık- der. fr. bas-, usuk- der. fr. us-, kirik- and this V. The first two are Emphatic/ Pass. forms, but kirik- is a Den. V. fr. ki:r, and it is likely that this V. too, which has a damma over the df is a Den. V., since there is obviously no semantic connection with kón-, and the obvious explanation is that it is a Den. V. fr. 2 kém. The only other known occurrence is in KB 4389 where the Fergana MS. has Zinilse, the Cairo MS. &amp;i[gap]se and the Vienna MS. has a word which might be hénikse but looks more like kóntkse Xak. xı er kénikti: (MS. kónikti) ğalaba "ala Lraculi”l-da'f hatta ta'axxara "an aşhabihi"the man was overcome by weakness, so that he fell behind his companions! Kaş. JI 165, 15: KB (in all   731 tasks knowledge is most beneficial) kénikse bilig işke yetmez elig “if knowledge falls behind the hand cannot achieve the task' 4389. S könğer- See kóndger-. Dis. GNL köpül (ğ8-) otiginally an abstract word with rather varying connotations, 'the mind', as a thinking organization; 'thought' as the product of the mind, and the like. Later, when the heart was taken to be the thinking organization it was also used in a physical sense for “the heart”, in addition to, or substitution for, yürek, S.i.a.m.l.g. with a wide range of shades of meaning (the entry in R 11 1236-7 covers a column and a half); in SW Az. könül, Osm., Tkm. gópül. Türkü vin (if tears come to your eyes and) ttlda: (so read) köpülte: sığıt kelser “lamentation to your tongue and mind” 7 N ır, kópülteki: savımın “the words in my mind” 7 S 12; o.o. T 15 (uduz-), 32: vi ff. Man. Chuas.107-8(artat-); 177-8 (tam£a:la:-), etc.; TT II 6, 32; 8, 41, etc.: Uyğ. viri ff. Man. TT III 2 (ayançan), etc. (common): Chr. (search) ked köpül tegürüp 'applying your minds firmly (to the task)' U I 6, 1: Bud. kópül is very common; e.£* köpülçe berdi “he gave as he thought fit” PP 7, 1; a.0. do. 8, 5 (bert-); yavlak sakınç kópülinde yasuru 'hiding evil thoughts in his mind” U 7I 23, 12-13; o.o. Hüen-ts. 1806 (ayançan), etc.: Civ. könül is common; e.g. könlünde negü iş kilayin téser "whatever you say in your mind that you will do' TT VII 28, 3; iki kişi könüli bir ol "the two men's minds are as one” do. 30, 11: Xak. xı köpül al-qalb wa'l-fu'ád wa'l-fitna “the heart, the mind, intelligence'; hence “an intelligent (a/-fatin) man” is called kópüllüg er Kaş. III 366 (prov.); over 30 0.0., occasionally spelt kó:gül with similar translations; KB kópül is common; e.g. kózümde yirak sen kópTümke yakın "Thou art far from my eyes but near to my mind” rr, kişi kópli “a man's mind” (is like a bottomless sea) zır? (read this "Turkish proverb and) köpül öğke al “take it to your mind and understanding” 319: xın(?) At. kópül is common; e.g. anın wuddi birle kópüller tolup 'filling all minds with love of him” 73; nelük mAlka munça könül bamakın “vhy have you set your mind so much on wealth?' 183; Tef. köpül “mind, thought”, etc. 184: xiv. Mu. al-qaib. gönül Mel. 47, 16 (Rif. 141 yü:re:k q.v.): Caf. xv ff. köpül di] “heart” San. 24r. 13; könül kalış dil mündagi wa giriftagi-yi xàtir “veariness of heart, anxiety! 310r. 22: XWar. xn köpül “cart” “AZ 35: xiu(?) ditto Og. 163, 333: XIV ditto Qutb 102; MN 19, etc.: Kom. xiv köpül is common, meaning “heart, mind, disposition', etc. CCI, CCG., Gr. 152 (many quotns.): Kip. xi a/-qa/b $gayru'l-mahsüs wa'l-fu'àd "the intangible heart, the mind” kö:nü:1 Hou. zı, 14 (cf. yürek): xiv könül (-9- marked) a/-qalb, and in the Kitab Beylik könül a/-nafs "the spirit" /4. 85.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 776 
     
   
   
     DIS 732 . GNL  D képlik ($-) A.N. fr. ké:; "brcadth, extent", and the like S.i.a.m.l.g. except. NE(?), vv. minor phonetic changes; in NW Kumyk £eplik; SW Osm. genlik, Tkm. fi:plik. Uy£. vin ff. Bud. (hang bells) kac kenlik (so read) yemiş sögüt üze “over the full extent of the fruit trees! PP 79, 4-5: (Xak.) xın(?) Tef. keplik 'abundance' (of good things) 173: xiv. Rog. dünya gépliki Axirat tarlığı turur "broadness in this world is narrovvness in the next" (and vice versa) R II 1072: Xvvar, xin képlik 'abundance, well-being! "A// 53: Kom. xiv. 'breadth' keplik CCI; Gr.: Osm. xiv to xvii. &amp;éplik/&amp;eplik “(physical) breadth; (psychological) breadth, i.e. peace of mind”, common T'TS I 301; 1/ 426; İTİ 287; IV 332. D kinliğ Hap. lcg.; P.N./A. fr. Kin; 'scented with musk'. Hitherto read E ekinliğ, q.v., and mistranslated. Türkü vir kinliğ esfüti:si:n “their musk-scented brocade' 77 N 11-12. D kóplek (g-) Dev. N. fr. kóple:-, but the semantic connection is directly with kópül in its physical sense; 'shirt', i.e. the garment over the heart. S.i.a.m.L.g. in a wide range of forms including NE Khak. kógenek; Tuv. xóylep: SE Türki kóplek: NC Kir. kóynók; Kzx. kóylek: SC Uzb. küylak/küynak: NW-Kk., Nog. köylek, Kumyk gölek: SW Az., Tkm. köynek: Osm. $ómlek, Cf. kömüldürük. See Doerfer 111 1652. Xak. xı könlek a/-qamiş “shirt” Kaş. HI 383; a.o. III 350 (boğmakla:-): xiv Muh. al-qamiş kópleg Mel. 66, 15; kómlek Rif. 166: Çağ. xv ff. körlek (spelt) piráhan 'shirt' San. 310r. 21: Xwar, xın ditto Ali 37: xiv ditto Qutb 104; Nahc. 132, 16; Kom. xiv 'shirt' kówlek (sic) CCI; Gr.: Kip. xii al-qamiş kömle:k Hou. 18, rz: xiv könlek ditto /d. 85: xv ditto kómlek Kav. 63, 17; Tuh. 29b. 1 (in margin, alternative form könlek): Osm. xiv ff. göplek 'shirt' was the standard form until xvi and is noted once in xvii; date of emergence of gömlek unknown TTS I 321; II 450; III 308, IV 353. D künlük (£-) A.N. fr. 1 kün, “a period of a day” and the like. S.is.m.l.; in SW Osm., "Vkm. günlük. Uyğ. vr: (I put up my memorial there to last for) bin yillik tümen künlük 'a thousand years and ten thousand days! Su. E 9: vir ff. Civ. üç künlük “a period of three days” USp. ss, 21; 118, 14; bir yarım künlük “one and a half days" do. şs, 22: Xak. xı künlük a/-muydtama “daily business"(?), künlük yem a/-ríizg (several meanings; here?) “soldiers” daily rations”, but the phr. is seldom used Xaş. 7 480: KB kim erse bu künlük tilese sevinç “vvhoever desires the pleasures of the day” 913: Kip. xiv künlük nazar ta agunnuhu haşa lubdn translation unvocalized, other vocalizations possible; Caf. omits the word in his index; it might mean *. . . and I think it means “grains of incense” ' /d. 85 (cf. Osm.): Osm. xiv ff. günlük is noted in several texts as meaning 'sunshade, parasol' and in one xviI text “a day's pay" TTS 7 338; II 477; III 326; IV 375: xvitr. günlük (spelt) in Rézmi, (1). &amp;undur frankincense”, in Ar. gamgu' l-butm; (2) tazifa wa yammiya 'soldier's pay; daily pay" San. 310r. 24 (there is no obvious reason for the meaning "incense' which is still current). D küplig Hap. leg. ; P.N./A fr. kün. Türkü vin: ol ödte kül kulli$ küp küplig bolmis erti: "at that timc the slaves had become slaveowners and the maid servants owners of maidservants! /£ E 18 (in 7. E 21 küp küpllg is omitted). Dis. V. GNLE kinil- Sce kénik-. DF kinle- 'to crush, mince', or the like; Den. V. fr. *kin, not the one listed above, but no doubt a Chinese l.-w., cf. simle:- with which it is used in Hend. in TT 1 rs? (çüvvit). N.o.a.b. Uyf. xiurff, Civ. suvta kinlep “crush (castoreum) in. water H 1 125; 143 (bağır), rş? (çüvvit), yumsak kinlep 'crush until it is soft” 179. D kóple:- (6-) Den. V. fr. könül. Survives only(?) in NC Kzx. kópüló- 'to be sunk in thought! R: 7/7 1:238 (not in MM). Uyğ. virt ff. Civ. bu savka kópleme “do not brood on(?) this statement! TT I ısı: (Kip. xın '*aciba mina'l-'acab "to wonder at (something) kó:nle:n- Hou. 37, 15; may be the Refl. f. of this word; there is no other obvious explanation). D kinlen- Hap. leg.; possibly Refl. f. of kinle:- ; “to be crushed', but the whole passage is obscure. Uyf. vırı ff. Man. TT İT 17, 77-9 (öpül-). Tris. GNL D könüldeş (86-) N/A. of Association fr. könül, 'like-minded, intimate', and the like. Survives only in NC Kir. köpüldöş, Kzx könildes “friend, intimate, sympathetic. Must be carefully distinguished fr. Çağ. xv ff. kükelteş 'foster-brother' San. 309r. 9 which is a N.JA. of Association from the Mong. l-w. (properly Aügül, Kom. 2632) “fostermother”. "The two are confused in R II 1238. Xak. xi kópüldes muşdğibi”l-qalb 'likeminded Kaş. I 407, 16: X war. xiv köpüldeş 'sympathetic! Qutb 102. D kónilik (&amp;-) A.N. fr. kónl:; 'straightness, uprightness', and the like. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı KB kónilik is very common as one of the standard virtues of rulers, officials, etc.; e.g. kónilik yanılma yolın “do not miss the road of uprightness” 360; kilinçim: kónilik “my conduct is upright” 59o, etc.—könilik küni “the day of judgement! 3o, 808: xın(?) At. 167 (to:n); a.o.o.: Xwar. xiv cumlasinip işlerini könilik üze kılğıl “make all their actions upright" Nahe. 316, ro: Kom. xiv 'justice, equity', and the like kónülük CCI, CCG; Gr. D köpüllüg (g-) P.N./A. fr. kópül; normally qualified by a preceding Adj. 'having a... ENNNRuuununununnuKə,rəox-—n xx——xxxxxç?"?BəaB10((K.-—.2(—0---2o020 0, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 777 
     
   
   
        DIS. V. mind", but s.i.m.m.l.g. meaning 'well-disposed, willing, kindly, cheerful', and the like; SW Osm. gópüllü. Uyg. vui ff. Man. TT III yı, 89 (karar-): Bud. yarlikanguci köpüllüğ 'with a merciful mind” TT X 275-6; kertğünç kópüllüg 'with a believing mind” Suv. 137, 16; 2.0.0.: xi?) 7Tef. kopüllüg/ köpüllü 'having a . . . mind” 185: Xwar. xiv köpüllüğ ditto Quib 102. D köpülsüz (g-) Priv. N./A. fr. köpül, originally 'without the ability to think'. S.i.s.m.l. as the opposite to kópüllüg meaning “unvilling, unhappy, modest', and the like. Türkü vr ff. Man. Chuas. 1 13-14 (2 öğsüz): Uyğ. viti ff. Man. TT 111 30 (ditto): (Xwar. xiv kópülsüzlük 'hardness of heart, cruelty" Qutb 102). Tris. V GNLD künlle:- (6-) Den. V. fr. küni:; "to be jealous', hence also “to envy'.. S.i.m.m.l.g. vv. phonetic changes, NE künne-, Tuv. xünne-: SE Türki künle-: NC Kir. künülö-, Kzx. künde-: NW Kk. Nog. künle-, Kumyk gülle- : SW Osm. günlle-/günüle- (obsolete). Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. özümde yéglerig körüp küniledim erser “if I have been envious when I have seen people better than myself' Suv. 136, 12-13; 2.0. do. 220, 4 (2 a:zlan-): Xwar. xiv künile- 'to be jealous, to envy' Qutb 108; Nahc. 65, 6; 288, 13: Kom. xiv “envy” künilemek CCG; Gr,: Kip. xui ğöra mina'l-fayra "to be jealous' künle:- (sic) Hou. 42, iş: xiv künile- haşada “to envy'; and, in the Kitab Beylik, gára İd. 86: xv ğayra künilemek Tuh. 26b. ro, Zara mina”l-ğayra künile- 27a. 7: Osm. xiv fi. günüle- “to be jealous, to envy'; c.i.a.p. TTS 7 339; H1 478; III 327; IV 376. D kópülger- ($-) Den. V. fr. könül, “to reflect, think deeply'. Pec. to Uyğ. Uy&amp;. viri ff. Bud, in a repetitive passage Öğeli (see ö:-) kópülgerip 'thinking deeply', U 17 8, 22, alternates with ógeli kópülde sakınıp do. 9, 1-2; Ógeli bógüs urup do. 9, 11—12; (all good doctrines . . .) kópülgermektin tuğdaçı 'arise from deep reflection! TT V 24, 65-6; o.o, do. 7o (odğur-), Su. 596, 23 ff. (edgü:ti:) 615, 9; Tis. sob. 2 etc. D kópleklen- (8-) Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. kóplek, Xak. xı er kópleklendi: “the man (etc.) wore a shirt' (faqammaşa) Kaş. 11] 411 (könleklenü:r, köpleklenme:k). D kópüllen- (ğ-) Refl. Den. V. fr. kópül; survives only(?) in NE Bar. R IJI 1238, but the basic and Caus. f.s survive in other modern languages. Xak. xı er i:şka: kópüllendl: “the man set his mind ('azama) on doing something”, also used of a boy “to be intelligent ('aqila wa fatina) Kaş. III qo8 (köpüllenü:r, köpüllenme:k). WV Dis. V. GNRD ké:pür- (&amp;-) Caus. f. of kö:pü:- , “to widen, broaden', with some extended meanings.  GNR- 733 N.o.a.b. Cf. ké:püt-. UÜyğ. vr ff, Bud. képür-, with 'doctrine, scripture', and the like as Object, means 'to publicize, make widely known'; it is usually in the Ger. in -ü: followed by another V.; e.g. Vişikluan şastırda kepürü sözlemişke “because they are made known and published in the Wei-shih-lun' TT V 22, 22; similar phr. USf. 102b. 11-13 (ençsire:-), (I have come with a desire to find scriptures and) tinliglarka kepürü asığ tusu krlgalt sakınçın “the idea of making them knovvn to people and so benefitting them” Hüen-fs. 204-6; o.o. do. 2008; Suv. 2, 4-5 (ula:l-); 3, 12; U II 73, 3-4 (iii) (?, see kögğür-)—(be pleased to declare) kepürüsinçe 'publicly' U 77 ar, 22: Xak. xt er evin ke:pürdi: “the man enlarged (arcsa"a) his house” (etc.) Kaş. 1I] 392 (ké:pürür, k€:pürme:k): KB (in the chapter on igdigciler “cattle-breeders”, they are a good and guileless class of people, but) bularda tileme törü ya biliğ yorıkları képrii bolur ay siliğ "do not ask them about the customary law or intellectual matters, their movements are far-ranging (or their character is unconventional?) oh pure man" 4446: xır1(?) At. 412 (yolsuz): (Kip. xv see ke:pürt-). D küfür- (ğ-) Caus. f. of kün-, “to burn (Trans.). N.o.a.b.; cf. *küfdür-. Türkü viri ff. Man. künürügli (sic) isiğ yel yéltirmez 'the burning hot wind does not blow' M II 45, 6 ()): Uy&amp;. vin ff. Man.-A M I 18, 2 (örte:-): Man. Wind. 35-7 (ur-); M 111 28,5 (iii): Bud. tütsük küyürüp 'burning incense' TT V 8, 72; o.o. do. ız, 130; U III 37, 4-5 (örte:-), U.Sp. to2b. zr, Suv. 595, 22 etc.: Civ. otka küyürüp 'burn it with fire' H I 2627; o.o. TT I 7o (adirtla:-); VII26, 12 etc.: Xak. xı er otup küyürdi: (MS., in error, küytürdi:) the man burnt (ahraqa) firewood' Kaş. III 187 (küyrür (sic), küyürme:k); a.o. II 133, 15: K B (do not go near a fire, if you do) küyürmek anuk 'it is ready to burn you' 653; 2.0. 249 (ütül-): Xwar. xiv küyür- 'to burn” Qutb 106; MN 151, etc. D ké:pürt- ($-) Caus. f. of ke:pür- , n.o.a.b. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. (in an account of the history of the biography of Hsüan-tsang, it is said that Huei-li composed it and that Yen-tsung fa-shih) kepürtmiş “had it published” Hüen-ts. 2153: (Kip. xv in a list of Caus. f.s ending in -rt-, roassa"a “to broaden, widen' képirtTuh. s4b. 12). VU képren- 'to grumble, mutter'; prob. a quasi-onomatopoeic; the first vowel is uncertain and perhaps varied. Survives only (?) in NE Sor kipiren- R I/ 1342; Tuv. ximiren-; NC küpkül 'grumble, mutter', and its Den. V.s Kir. küpküldo-; Kzx. küpkilde seem to be distantly related. Cf. çıpra:-, yapra:-. Türkü vı ff. (a woman dropped her mirror into a lake; in the morning it jingles) k€çe: kenre:nü:r "and in the evening it makes a grumbling sound” IrkB 22: Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. (he recovered for a month and then fell ill again) képrenü aş bérür  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 778 
     
   
   
     734 boldilar "they grumbled but gave (or began to give?) him food” PP 68, 3: Xak. xı er rgka: (VU) küprendi Jaruna'l-insán. (1-iqdüm “ala”l-amr wa takallama ma" nafsihi bi-kalàm xafi "the man was reluctant to begin the task and muttered to himself under his breath' Kaş. IJ] 399 (küprenü:r, küprenme:k): Çağ. xv ff. (VU) küpren- (spelt) xtcud ba-xteud. az gays harf zadan sa lund lund hardan “to talk angrily to oneself and grumble' San. 309v. 19 (quotn.). D ké:prün- (&amp;-) Hap. leg.(?); Refl f. of kö:pür-. Xak. xı ol ke:pründi: fartassa"a”l-racul zamán fi nüma “the man spent his time in great comfort! Kaş, 117. 400 (körenü:r, kö:prenme:k). Tris. V. GNRD kepirsi:- Hap. leg.; morphologically a Simulative Den. V. fr. *kepir, but there is no trace of such a N. Xak. xi eşiç kepirsi:di: ihtaraqa"l-şay” fi asfal nahiwi'l-gidr. hattà irtafa'a rihuhu 'something burnt at the bottom, for example, of a cooking pot, so that a smell rose from it” Kaş. III 409 (kepirsi:r, kepirsi:me:k). Dis. GNS ?D kenes (kepez) the spelling in” Xaş, is deliberate, the word following the crossheading -S and preceding the cross-heading -S, but it is prob. a Sec. f. of kepez, cf. the habitual spelling of the Negative Verbal Suff. -ma:z/-me:z as -ma:s/-me:s in Kaş., If so irregular Dev. N. fr. k€:pü:-. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı kepes su:v 'shallow (ai-daltdàA) water! ; also “an easy. task (amr sahl) Kaş. ITİ 364: Xwar. xin kepes/kepez “easy, convenient! “42 58: Kip. xit a/-hayyin 'easy' (opposite to “difficult” şarp) kepe:z (spelt Reğc:z) How. 25, 10: XV hayvin (yavaş/)kepez fuh. 37b. 9; hàána kepez bol- 38a. 4. Dis. GNS D képes Dev. N. fr. k€:ne:- ; 'advice' and the like; s.i.m.m.l.g. See Doerfer III 1651. Uyğ. vini ff. Civ. (if one sneezes at midday) kepes bulur “one gets advice” (or, reading bolur 'advice comes to one” ) TT VII 35, 5-6: Xak. xı kepeş al-magwara tca'l-tadbir. fi'l-umir *advice; the settlement of affairs” Kaş. 7/7 365: KB keneş br “give me your advice' 3482-3; 0.0. 3484, 3493, 5650 fl.: Çağ. xv ff. képes (^with k-) magrearat. Vel. 361 (quotn.); £épes (so spelt) ditto San. 316v. 19 (quotn.): Kip. xiv. kepeske: (sic) al-magteara, also called kengeş (kepes)/kengec (keneç) İd. 85 (the -ke: must be an error; a small düf is written under all the others Aàfs, which seems to indicate ğ- and -ng- (-p-)). D künes (£-) Den. N. fr. 1 kün, originally 'sunshine'. Survives in INE Tel. küneş “the sunny side of a mountain”, R II 1440, and SW Az. küneş, Osm. güneş, both the ordinary word for 'sun', and "Tkm. güneş 'sunshine; a sunny place", Türkü viri ff. /7kB 57 (olur-): DIS. V. GNR (Xak.) xiu(?) "Vef, küneş 'sunshine; a sunny place! 189: xiv Muh. al-şams “the sun" güne:ş Mel. 4, v7 (Rif. ?a gün), gabati'l-gjams. “the sun set” güne:ş batti: 29, 7 (115, but gün): Çağ. xv If. künes (sic) göüveş 'sun'; also “a very hot day' (quotns.), with a note saying the final -S is required hy the rhyme Fel. 374; künes/ küns (spelt) afrab 'sun'; note on spelling (quotns.), also metaph. aftdb-r? 'sunny-faced' (quotn.); also called küneş Sar. 310r. 15: Xwar. xir künes “sun ' Ali 56: Tkm. xin al-şu"a “sunshinc” küne:s (sic: Kip. kuya:g) Hon. s, 2: Xiv künes metaph. o/-sapis, but properly al-5u'à (which in Kip. is kuya:S also used mctaph. for "sun”) /d. 85: xv (?Kip.) al-şams küne:ş Kar, 21, 17; S8, 8, Tüh. 232. 13 (also kün). Dis. V. GNŞD ké:peg- Receip. f. of ke:pe:- ; in the Sing. “to consult (someone Dat.); to discuss' (with someone birle:); in the Plur. 'to take counsel with one another, have a discussion'. S..m.m.l.g. Uyğ. vir ff, Chr. U 1 8, 4 (anın): Civ. bodun képesip “the people taking counsel together! USp. 77, 8; a.o. do, 88, 28 (2 art-); Xak. xı ol mapa: ké:pesdi: jdwara ma'i “he took counsel with me” Kaş. III 394 (Ke:ye:şü:r, kö:pe:şme:k, sic); menin birle: (MS. bi/e:) kö:neşdi: sawaràáni “he consulted me” //7 393, 13: KB negü teg keneşürsen emdi mana "vhat advice do you give me?” 3488; ey aşnu bu işke képesgü kerek “ve must first discuss this matter' 5649; 0.0. 3688-9, 5650-2, 5657, etc.: xin(?) Tef. keneş- “to take counsel together' 173: xiv. Rbg. ditto R 1I 1069 (quotn.): Çağ. xv ff. képes- (-ti) “to consult Vel. 361: (quotn.); £éges- (spelt, with -9-") magwarat hardan "to consult! San. 316r. 28 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv kepes- “to take counsel together Qutb. 94; képes- ditto do. 96: Kip. xiv keneş- tagüwara İd. 85: xv gátcara ((anış-/) keniş- (sic, in margin in second hand képes-) Tuh. 21a. 13. E kipgür- See kikgür-. Tris. GNS D képesci: N. Ag. fr. képes; pec. to KB? Xak. xı KB képesci bular erdi "these (Companions) were (the Prophet's) advisers! 49; 0.0. 2256, 5209 (yolçı:). D képeslig P.N./A. fr. képes; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı kene:şliğ bili: üdreşü:r kene:şsiz bili:g opraşu:r "experience (al-tadbir) when it is fertilized by advice (orulaqqah bi'l-süra) gains in goodness day by day; but if it is without advice (gayru'I-sira) it deteriorates day by day” Kaş. 1 232, 3; a.o. III 358, 15; n.m.e. D keneşsiz Hap. leg.; Priv. N./A. fr. keneş, *without advice. Xak, xı Kaş. ! 232, 3 (kepeslig). : Dis. GNZ kenez See kepes.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 779 
     
   
   
          ni MON. V. GR- 73s (?D) köpüz Hap. leg.?; "a dung heap. Perhaps connected with kön 'dung', which exists in NC Kir., Kzx: Sc Uzb. (ğüngğ): NW Kk. Xak. xı köpüz a/-dimn twa'l-kirs fi'l-atlàl roa hiya ab'àr wa abwál talabbada ba"duha "ala ba'd “a dung heap' (Iend.) in a ruined building, that is an accumulated mass of dung and urine Kaş. III 363. F kenzi: Hap. leg.; no doubt a Chinese l.-w. Prof. Simon suggests that the origin is chüantzü (Middle Chinese Afroen-fsiş Giles 3,139 12,317) 'thin silk”, and more specifically “a silk handkerchief'. Xak. xı kenzi: “a Chinese woven fabric (zasic) of mixed colours (fi altoan gattà), red, yellow, and greem Kaş. 1 422. Mon. GR ?F ker “a moment'; sec note on passage quoted below. Perhaps survives in NE Alt., "Tel, kere “a period of time, a moment in time”, R II 1085. 'l'he suggestion there that this is a Chinese l.-w. may well be correct, but it can hardly be chieh (Giles 1,477) since this was tset in Middle Chinese, not Kiet as there stated. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. Sanskrit möhurtam api "and only for a moment' bir ker yeme: TT VIII D.14-15. kir 'dirt, filth, defilement', and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. For some unknown reason often spelt ARir as well as Air in UyB.; a l.-w. in Mong. in both spellings (Kozo. 2545, Haltod 197). Uyğ. viti ff. Bud. kir normally means not physical 'dirt' but 'the defilement or stain caused by sin”, Sanskrit Alefa; Sanskrit cetaso upakleía "a small stain on the mind” köplómnóp kiri TT VIII C.13; malam 'impurity' nızvanılığ kirig “the impurity of the passions! do. E.47: a.o. Hüen-ts. 103-4: Civ. H I 66-7 (arı:-): Xak. xr Kaş. II 211 (toğrag-); do. 230 (toğral-), n.m.e.: KB 876 (arı:-): xin(?) At. akilik kamuğ 'ayb kirini yuyur 'generosity washes away all the defilement of vice" 230; Tef. kir (physical) 'dirt' 180: Caf. xv ff. kir çirk wa rim “dirt, filth' San. 313v. 1 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv ditto Quib gg: Kom. xiv ditto CCG; Gr.: Kip. xut al-wasax 'dirt' (opposite to “clean” arı:) kir Hou. 27, 17: XIV ditto 7d. 83 (under kilikçe: (for kirlikce:) 'pillow case"): xv ditto Kav. 64, 17; Tuh. 38a. ız. 1 kür (?£-) originally 'stout-hearted, courageous, bold', and the like; this meaning only as noted below, but it seems to survive in NE kür, Bar. 'self-willed'; Koib. 'swiftly flowing' (water); Tel, “fat, stout” R IJ 1447; Khak. *bold, uncontrollable'; Tuv. (xür) “vvell-fed, (of winter) starting with ample supplies of food': SW Az. Kür 'an uncontrollable, fidgety (child)'; Osm., Tkm. gür 'thick, dense, abundant'. See Doerfer III 1672. Xak. xı kür er al-raculu'l-rábitu' l-ca'si'l-qaswiyu'l-gqalbi' l-gámix b?'l-anf "a man with a courageous soul, a stout heart, and his nose in the air' (prov., verse kürmet anın yüre:ki: “(the tribe's) heart is strong (qare?) for me)” Kaş. 1 324: KB kür is common; e.g. ('Ali was the last of the Companions) kür ersiğ yürekliğ 'courageous, manly, stout-hearted' 57; o.o. 409 (küvez), 2298, 2337, 4845 (kógüzlug): Xwar. xiv kür “stout-hearted” Qutb 108: Osm. xiv ff. gür once (xIv) 'couragceous'; in several xiv to xvt texts (of a tree) “luxuriant” and the like T T'S 7 340; /1 479; III 328; IV 376. VU 2 kür noted only in the Hend. tev kür 'trick, device'; n.o.a.b. ; not to be confused vv. küri:, q.v. Uy&amp;. viii ff. Man.-A M IJ 9, 11— 12 (ii) (2 a:r-): Man. M IJ s, 8-ro (antağ): Bud. U 71 23, 12 (tev). Mon. V. GRker- (ğ-) “to stretch, spread out (something Ace.). S.i.a.m.l.g., esp. in the phr. kógüz (or synonym) ker- 'to throw out one's chest; be proud, confident; in SW Osm. £ger-; Tkm. ger-. Xak. xr er yip kerdi: “the man stretched (madda) the cord” (etc.), and one says beg yo:l kerdi: “the beg stretched out (madda) the road”, that is he posted (yuclis) men in military posts (al-marásid) so that those whom he did not knovv could not pass, this is done in fear of the enemy Kaş. II 8 (kere:r, kerme:k); a.o. III 39, 13: KB 133, 1535, etc. (kógüz): xııı(?) At. kerip xalqka köğsüD 'throwing out your chest tovvards the (common) people” 278; Tef. boyun ker- “to be stiff-necked” 173: Karluk xı it kerdi: “the dog barked” (nabaha) Kaş. II 8: Xvvar. xır ker- “to raise (the eyebrows)' "Al 49: Kom. xiv ker- “to crucify” CCG, Gr. 139 (quotns.): Kip. xii şalaba "to crucify” kere: koy-/ker- (MS. Zör-) Hou. 34, 16: Xıv ker- zayyara (a rare word meaning "to hold a horse's lip in a twitch'; ?read zayyada “to increase, expand' (Trans.)), marima "to be svvollen” (sis-; and also) ker- Bul. 88r.: xv şalaba (and in the margin madda) ker- Tuh. 22b. 8: Osm. xvin ger- (following ğerne-, an error for £erin- which is described as Rümi) Trans. £., ağüş huşüdan "to throw out one's chest” San. şoor. 21: XIV to XVI see kögüz, kir- ($-) “to enter”, with some extended meanings. C.iap.al; NW Kumyk; SW Osm. fgir-; Tkm. gi:r-. Türkü vir yana: kirip 'entering (the battle) again” 7 E 38; Oğuz tezip tavğaçka: kirti: “the Oğuz fled and entered China” IJ E 38, a.o. İİ N 14: viri ff. (above it reaches heaven) asra: yerke: kirü:r 'below it enters the earth” IrkB 20; 2.0. do. 63: Suğçu: balıkda: kirmi:ş yari:kda: “out of the breastplates which arrived from the city of Suchou” Mir. A 14 (ETY II 65): Man. içğerü: kirip “going in” M I 5, 3: Yen. Mal, 25, 1 (yağız): Üyğ. vır (the Karluk) On Ok(k)a: kirti: “entered the country of the On Ok (western Türkü)” Şu. N rr: vrri ff. Man.-A etözke kirür 'enters the body” M 1 16, 7: Man. kireyin teser “if (I) say “let me come in"' M II 8, 13 (ii): Chr. yakın barıp kirdiler “they approached and entered" U I 6, 11: Bud. kir- is very common; e.g. balıkka kirdi “he entered the city” PP 4, 1;  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 780 
     
   
   
     736 0.0. do. 39, 8 (içğerü:), U 11 26, 3 (kisil): Civ. kir- is common, c.g. iki otuzka aram ay küni kirür 'on the 22nd day (of the schematic month) the (first) day of the first (calendar) month comes in” TT VII 6, 4; (if you sneeze at midday) tavar kirür "wealth comes into (your possession)' do. 35, 23; a.0. USp. 27. s (u:d-): Xak. xı ol evke: kirdi: "he entered 20007 house” Kaş. I1 8(kirür, kirme:k), nearly 3o o.o,, same translation: KB kir- is very common, usually. physicalle. 'to go in, enter”, but sometimes in an abstract sense, e.g. 26 (neteglik); in some contexts itis an Inchoative Aux. V., e.g. okip kirdi “he decided to summon! 620; aytu kirdi “he began to question' 626; (the full moon) irlü kirdi 'began to wane' 1052: xin(?) Ar, (when a man dies) toprak icipe kirip “and enters the ground" 308; Tef. kir- 'to enter; to penetrate; to begin” 180: xiv Mut. daxala $i:t- Mel, 26, 3; Rif. 108; al-duxiil gi:rmeg 34, 12; 54,9; 119 (only): Çağ. xv ff. kir- (with k-”, ; “geli, etc.) gir- Vel. 356-7; kir- dàxi şudan "to enter” San. 312v. 17 (quotns.): Xwar. xır kir- “to enter” Ali 30: xin(?) ditto Og. 139: xiv ditto Qutb 98; MN yö: Kom. xiv ditto CCG; Gr. 148 (quotns.) Kip. xti daxala kir- (MS. hör-) Hou. 33, 15 (and 27, 18); cáza mina'l-'ubür sca l-duxiül “to cross; to enter” kir- 39, 8: xiv. kir- daxala ld. 80; al-şahrı” Uaösül “the coming month" ki:rem ay Bul. 13, 11: xv daxala kir- Kav. 9, 18; 74, 17; Tuh. 16a. 4; 2.0.0. kör- (&amp;-) basically “to see (something ec.) with several extended meanings like 'to experience (something /cc.); to look to, i.e. obey (someone Dat.); to see to it that (you do something, Ger. in -u:if-ü:y, Cia p.al.; NW Kumyk: SW Osm., Tl:zn. Bór-. “There is obviously a very old ety:nological connection with 1 kó:z 'eye', cf. semiz and semri:-. "Türkü viri kórü:r közim kórmez teg ... bolt: *my seeing eye became sightless” 7 N ro — I E ış, II E 16 (1 emgek)—kop mapa: kórti: 'everyone looked to, i.e. obeyed, me” I E 3o, I1 E 24 (and sec kórgü:)—(the Xagan said) yelü: kör “see to it that you ride fast” T 26—several o.o.: viri ff. tağ üze: yul suv körü:pen yış üze: yaş ot kórü:pen 'seeing springs and vvater on the mountains and fresh vegetation in the mountain forests” Jr&amp;B 17; eşi:dmi:şte: kórü: körmi:ş yég “it is better to see with your own eyes than to hear” Tun. Ill a. 3-4 (ETY II 94): Man. körti (mistranscribed Airti) “sav” M 16, 2; kózin kórüp Chuas. 312—(if 1 have accepted the advice of evil companions and) könülin körüp 'looked to, i.e, followed, their thoughts' do. 199; a.o.o.: Uyğ. viri kör tédim 'I said "see" (or “obey me'?)' Su. E 11; a.o0. (S 3; Suci 8 (ati): vii ff. Man.-A kórelim “let us see' (your perfect being) M I 11, 17; 0.0. do. 9, 6; 9, 7: Man. TT LX 14, etc. (tuéil); a.o.o.: Bud. kór“to see' is very common, e.g. körür erdi *he saw' (the farmers outside the city) PP 1, 3: Civ. kór- occurs for 'to see', e.g. kayu kisi keçe edgü körmeser “if a man cannot see MON. V. GRwell at night // 7 33, but in the omen texts normally means “to consult the omens'; there are various idioms, ig ağrığ uğrunda körsersen “if you consult the omens about an illness! 77 1 16; i$ tapa körsersen same meaning do. 77, yağmur yağıtğuka körser "if a man consults the omens about (the possibility of) making it rain TT VII 29, r, tavar teğere (?read teğre) körser “if a man consults the omens about property” do. 16: Xak. xt ol meni: kördi: yadə “he saw me'; ina prov. yüzke: körme: "do not look at (/à tanzur) a man's face” Kaş. J] 8 (köre:r, körme:k), about 60 0.0.; two occurrences of Aor. körür, occasional spellings of kó:r- esp. in the Imperat.; translated. ra'à, basura ("to see”), nazara—-as an Aux. V. kura: kórdüm qcattartu “V strung! (my strong bow) 777 219, 16: KB kör- “to sec' is common 248, etc.; the [mperat. Kör is constantly used, almost meaninglessly, to supply a syllable in a verse which would otherwise lack one 38, etc.—as an Aux. V. ózüpke baka kör "look at yourself" 239 a.o.o.: XIII(?) Zt. ditto; Tef. kör- “to see”, ayru turmakğa şavvüb körmedi “he did not think it correct to stand apart” 185: xiv Muh. basura gözr- Mel. 5, s, Rif. 75; abşara "to see” gözr- 21, 13; 102; al-nazar $ó:rmeg 13, 13; 35, 9; 89, 121: Çağ. xv ff. kör- ('with k-” -£en, etc.) gör- Vel. 364-6; kör- didan "to sce" San. 303v. 22 (quotns.): Xwar. xri ditto ' Ali 28, 30: xitt(?) kör- "to see' is common in Oğ. esp. in the (non-"Purkish) phr. kórdi kim “he saw that” 32, 36, 41, etc.—(Oğuz Xağan) yaxşı kördi 'approved of" (the young man's statement) 198; a.o. 329: xiv Kór- “to sec' (common) Qutb 102; MN 41, ctc.: Kom. xiv 'to see (common); to experience' kór- CCI, CCG; Gr. 153 (quotns.): Kip. xin basura kör- Hou. 33, 14: xiv kör- abgara İd. 80; kören al-mubsir, originally kórgen do. 79; abgara sca ar d (?read re”a) kör- Bul. 25r.: xv nazara a ra'à kör- Kav. o, 19; Tuh. 43b. r, etc. (not translated). Dis. GRE D ke:rü (&amp;-) Adv. fr. *ké:; 'backwards, behind”, and the like; an early l.-w. in Mong. as gerü (Iaenisch so), s.i.s.m.l. in NC, NW, Sw Az. kéri; Osm. geri. Türkü viri körü: “vestwards" (as far as the Iron Gate) 7 E 2; .. kerü: barıp “going back from there” Ix. kerü: barığıma: bardı: "those who wished x go back went' Ongrn rr: Uyğ. ix kérü: kün batsik(k)a: 'westwards towards the sunset' III B.9 (ETY II 38): vur ff. Man.-A M I 26, 26—7 (il&amp;erü:): Bud. tinin kerü: kaytı tartap 'drawing back (Hend.) his reins' USp. 97, 20-1 (kayti uncertain, but see 2 kadit-): Civ. kerü barir 'goes back” TT 7 174: Xak. xr kó:k temür kérü: (kaf unvocalized) turma:s “blue iron does not rest (yastaqrrr) without work' Kaş, 1 361, 26 (Kaş. explains this as meaning that when a sword is used, it is not left in the wound but withdrawn for further usc); (the man who enters the grave) kérü: yanma:s 'does not come back” III 65, 2; kö:rü: körüp 'looking behind you” (Jialfak)  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 781 
     
   
   
        " . , DIS. III 245, 16; a.o. do. 246, 1: n.m.e.: xiv Muh. halfa görü: Mel. 14, 11; Rif. 90 (misspelt gé:rter); tanahhd "to cease, be stopped, be removed' kérü: er-(?) 24, 11 (vocalized kerewar-) ; 106 (unvocalized, R€:rü: er-): Xvvar. xur körü “then, again” "EZ 55: xiv ditto Qutb 99: Kom. xiv keri (of space) 'backwards'; (of time) "before! CCI; Gr. 139 (quotns.): Kip. xin hal/a (opposite to “in front” ilğerü) kerü: Hou. 26, 19: xiv fumma "then” ke:rü: Bul. iş, iz: Osm. xiv ff. gerü, sometimes spelt ğö:ru: 'afterwards; back”, etc.; c.i.a.p. T'T'S I 305-6; II 429-30; İİİ 290-1; İV 336. ?F küri “a measure of capacity, or weight, for dry goods like grain'. Chinese tou (Giles 11,427) is usually translated 'peck' (23 bushels) and contains ten shéng (Giles 9,879) or 'pints'. Survives in SE Türki küre “a weight of 22:4 kilograms', Menges, | Volhskundliche — Texte aus Ost.- Türkistan, SPAW, 1933, XXXII, p. rın. No doubt a 1l.-w., but not Chinese, perhaps Tokharian. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. (if I have committed fraud with scales, inch and foot measures) Sépin kavin kürin kürilikin 'pints, tenth-pints, pecks, and peck measures (?)” U TI 77,26; 86,43; TT IV 10,5; Suv. 135, 9: Civ. küri (sometimes mistranscribed Aóni) is common in U Sf. as a measure of grain, millet, etc. 7, 20, 37, 69, 70, etc. : xıv Chin.-Uy£g. Dict. tou “peck” küri R 7I 1454; Ligeti 178. Dis. V. GREküre:-/kürl:- Preliminary note. Kaş. distinguishes between an Intrans. V. “to run away, desert), VU küre:-, and a Trans. V. “to dig up, shovel', and the like, kürk:-. Only the latter survives, and the modern forms of it are fairly consistently küre-; similarly even in Xah. its der. f.s have -e-, not -1-; its final vowel is therefore open to some question. VU küre:- “to run away, desert", and the like. .N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viii ff. Man.-A (the chief of the demons) tezdi küredi 'fled and ran away' Man.-uig. Frag. 400, 3: Xak. x1 kul küre:di: “the slave (etc.) ran away' (abaqa) Kaş. 1I1 263 (küre:r, küre:me:k): KB küremiş küreg erdi oş bu özüm “1 myself vvas a runavvay fugitive” r118; a.o. 316. küri:- “to dig up (the ground); to shovel (snow)', and the like. Küre- (sıc) usually "to shovel (snow)' survives in NE Koib., Sag., T'el. RII 1448; Khak.: SE Türki: NC Kir. (küró-); Kzx.: SC Uzb. (kura-); NW Kaz. (kóre-), Kumyk, Nog.: SW Az., Osm. (Tkm. kürekle-). Xak. xi at küri:di: “the horse pawed (or dug up, hafara) the ground with its hooves'; and one says ol ka:rığ küri:di: kasiha'l- talc wa carafahu 'he swept up the snow and shovelled it away' Kaş. 71] 263 (kürl:r, kürl:me:k); a.o. JI] 256 (küveclig): Osm. xv kürü- “to dig up (the ground)': xvı küre- (of a mare) “to be on heat; each in one text TT'S II 676. GRB 737 Dis. GRB kirpi: 'hedgehog'. S.i.a.m.l.g.: in some languages 'porcupine' is okluğ (or the like) kirpi. Uyğ- viii ff. Bud. Suv. 299, 6 (agit): Civ. kirpi terisin “the skin of a hedgehog' H 7 129: Xak. xr kirpi: a/-qunfud 'hedgehog'; and al-duldul “porcupine” is called okluğ kirpi: Kaş. 7 415: xiv Muh.(?) al-qunfud kirpi: Rif. 177 (only): Çağ. xv ff. kipri (sic, spelt) xàárpujt 'hedgehog”, in Ar. qunfud . . . kipri tiken "a kind of large hedgehog”, in Ar. duldul San. 311r. 29: Kom. xiv 'hedgchog' kirpi CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv kirpi: (with -p-”) a/-qunfud İd. 8o; Bul. IO, 9: XV ditto Tuh. 29a. 7. körpe: basically (of an animal or crop) 'produced late in the season'. It retains this meaning of lambs in NC Kır., Kzx., see Shcherbak, p. 114, and SW 'Tkm. and of crops like lucerne in NW Kaz. (kurpi); Kk. SW Az., Osm. kórpe 'very young, fresh, tender' retains this meaning in a more generalized form. From this it came to mean 'the skin of a (very young) lamb” in NC Kir.; NW Nog., Kumyk and from this more generally “quilt, coverlet, soft mattress', and the like in several SE, NC, SC, NW languages and SW "Tkm. See Doerfer I11 1673. Xak. x1 kórpe: o:t al-xalfa mina'l-nabt 'a late (or second) crop'; similarly one says körpe: y€:miş 'late (or second) fruit', that is fruit which appears after the first crop; similarly “a child born in the summer” (a/-waladu'l-gayfi) is called körpe: oğul, similarly lambs, camel colts, and calves born after the usual season (awárnthá) are called körpe: Kaş. I 415: Çağ. xv ff. körpe (spelt) (r) libáf *quilt' ; (2) yünca-i nim-ras 'half-grown lucerne' San. 3oşr. 23: Kom. xiv 'lamb skin” körpe CCG, Gr.: Kip. xiv körpe: ("with -p-") al-xarüfu” l-radi" 'a sucking lamb, calf”, etc. ld. 81. ?F kerpiç 'brick', esp. “sun-dried brick”. S.i.m.m.l. in the same form, but does not exist in SE, SC which use Persian xigt; l-w. in Russian as kirpich. It is prob. that both bricks and the word for them were borrowed by the Turks fr. some other people. Xak. x1 kerpiç al-labin "sun-dried brick'; and a baked brick (al-dcurr) is called bışığ kerpiç 7 455; o.o. İ 372 (bigs1B); III iig (kib): xm?) Tef. kerpiç (sic?) 'brick r8o: xiv Muh. al-àcurr kerpi:ç, al-labin ğayr mufaxxar (unbaked”) yl:6 kerpi:ç Mel. 59, 7 (yi:l in error); Rif. 158: Çağ. xv ff. kerpiç (with -p-') xışt “brick” San. 313v. 4 (quotn.): Kom. xiv 'baked brick” bişmiş kerpiç CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiu al-tüb *baked brick' kürpüç (sic?; -5-c) Hou. 24, 13: xiv kerpüç (sic; -b-c) al-acurra; and in Kip. used for al-bunyán “building, wall' Jd. 80; al-bunyün kirpiç (-b-c) Bul. 4, 3: xv tüb kirpiç (-b-; later revocalized kerpüç) Tuh. 23b. 11. D kirpik 'eyelash'; Dim. f. of kirpi: S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. a few phonetic changes, e.g. SC Uzb. kiprik. UYĞ. vı ff. Bud. kaşı kirpiki kök arjawrt óplüg “his eyebrows and eyelashes the colour of blue lapis lazuli* 8641125 Bb 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 782 
     
   
   
     738 (Sogdian L-w.) U IV 3o, 49: Civ. H II zı, 32: Xak.xı kirpik a/-hudb fi cafnı”l-ayn “the İashes on the eyelids” Kaş. 7 478: Çağ. xv ff. kirpik (spelt) muyagdn "eyelashes” San. 313v. 5 (quotn.): a.o. 3sr. 24 (artil-): Xwar. xiv ditto MN 276: Kom. xiv ditto CCI; Gr.: Kip. xur al-cafn. kerfik (sic?, MS. kerkiki:); al-hudb kerpik (MS. keri:k) Hou. 20, 3: XIV kirpik (-5-) al-hudb İd. 8o: xv al-cafn kirfik (sic) Kav. 6o, 13; ja'r “hair” (şaş/) kirpik/ (yun) Tuh. zob. 5. Dis. V. GRBVUD kórple:- Hap. leg.; in a section for Dis. V.s containing three consecutive consonants; the third consonant in the word, ya in the MS., must be b? since it precedes the cross-heading -T- (followed by sartla:-). Perhaps an abbreviated Den. V. fr. körpe: in the sense of “young animal”, Xak. xr ol kuzr: körple:di: hanada'l-hamal wa şamdhu fi haddi'l-ard "he roasted (Hend.) a lamb in a hole in the ground! Kaş. III 444 (körple:r, kórple:me:k; MS. körf:/e:-). Tris. V. GRBD kirpiklen- Hap. leg., Refl. Den. V. fr. kirpik. Xak. xr anıp kó:zi: kirpiklendi: nabata'l-ga'ru'l-ndxis fi 'aynihi 'pointed hairs grew round his eyes” Kaş. I] 277 (kirpikİenü:r, kirpiklenme:k; MS. kirpüklen-). D kórpe:le:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. kórpe:. Xak. x1 at kórpe:le:di: "the horse ate the late crop of grass! (al-xalfa mina”l-nabt) Kaş. HI 351 (körpe:le:r, körpe:le:me:k). D kirpi:len- Hap. leg.: Refl. Den. V. fr. kirpi:. Xak. xı kişi: kirpi:lendi: “the man looked disagreeable (fa'abbasa) and bristled (kalaha) like a hedgehog showing its prickles” (fr xuşünatihi) Kaş. 11] zoo (kirpi:lenü:r, kirpi:lenme:k). D körpe:len- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of kórpe:le:-. Xak. xı ot kórpe:lendi: “the vegetation produced a late (or second) crop' (xilfa) Kaş, 111 zoo (kórpe:lenü:r, kórpe:lenme:k). Dis. GRC F ke:rjü: Hap. leg.; no doubt a l.-w., ?Iranian. Xak. xi ke:rlü:( with -j-") al-culahiq "a slingstone” Kaş. I7I 441. Mon. GRD VU kürt a kind of tree; Red. 2070 translates nab" in Osm. as “the mountain bitch, Betula alba; or whitebeam tree, Pyrus aria; or mountain ash, Pyrus aucubaria”, Havas translates it Chadara tenax; it may have been applied to more than one species, but the Ar. dicts. agree that it was used for making bows. | N.o.a.b. Xak. x1 kürt a/-nab", that is one of the mountain trees used for making bows, whips, and walking sticks Kaş. I 343: Kip. xiv kürt in Kip. al-safarcal ha”annahu qala tuffáhu'l-ahrdd "the quince! as they call “the Kurdish DIS. GRB apple" ş and in Tk, aywa: İd. 81 (sic, clumsily expressed). 2 kürt onomatopoeic; survives in INC Kir. kürt kürt, the onomatopoeic of a horse crunching straw. Xak.xr at arpa:nı: kürt kürt yé:di: 'the horse ate the barley with a crunching sound' (bi-xadd); also used of anyone who eats something like a cucumber and crunches it Kaş. / 343. Mon. V. GRDkert- 'to gash, cut a notch in (something Acc.y. S.i.a.m.l.g. in this and some extended meanings. See İ ket-. Xak. xı ol yığa:ç kertti: “he notched (hazza) the piece of wood" (etc.), and one says ol kulin (sic) boyni: kertti: “he notched his slave's neck'; this is an idiomatic expression for 'humiliating' (kinaya 'ani'l-idlàl) Kaş. III 427 (kerte:r, kertme:k): xiv. Muh.(?) nahata "to hew' kört- Rif. i15 (only): Kom. xiv 'to notch' kert- CCG, Gr.: Kip. xır sahaba "to penetrate' (in copulation) kert- (MS. hórt-) wa huwa'l-hazz Hou. 34, 9; hazza kert- (unvocalized) wa huwa'l-sahb fl-cimöf do. 39, 12: xiv kert- hazza İd. 81: xv ditto Tr. 14a. r. Dis. GRD F kirit Hap. leg.; “a key”, L-w. fr. IndoEuropean, the immediate source prob. Sogdian (-r- “€ -l-), cognate to Greek leis (Gen. Aleidos), which is the origin of the Ar. word. 'The more ordinary form in Turkish is kilit noted in Tey. 171; Muh. Mel. 76, 7 (margin); Qutb 99, etc. .Xak. xı kirit al-miftàh 'key'. This word is near (qariba) to the Ar. because (“key”) is iglid in Ar. and the -q- was changed to -k-, the -/- to -r-, and the -d to -t after the i- had been elided Kaş. I 357. VU?F kórüd (for practical purposes) Hap. leg.; the word used for 'the planet Mars' in Xak. xı KB 133 and, like some other names of planets used in this passage, otherwise noted only ina passage in Rb, directly copied fr. KB. Unlike sevit "Venus”, q.v., which has a possible Turkish etymology, but was prob. invented by the author, this word with its final -d looks un- Turkish and may be a l.-w. kértü: (?kértó:) true; truthful; loynl; truth', and the like. Survives only(?) in NW Kar. kerti “true, truth! R II 1103; Kom, 216. "Türkü vır ff. Man. kertü tenri “the true God” Chuas. 18; a.o.o.: Uyğ. vir ff. Man.-A M I 26, 14 (anlağ): Man. kértü tenri M II s, iş: Bud. kértü is commonest in the phr. çın kértü TT VIII 4.16 (kértó) etc. (çın), köni kértü nom “the upright true doctrine' TT X 369, 557; mapa kértü sakinip 'thinking me reliable! U TİT 68, 27; a.o.o.: Xak. xt kértü: al-yamin "an oath'; kértü: matwdi'u'l-şidq "the place of truth'; hence one says of a dead man ol kertü: yé:rde: ol “he is in the place of truth where it is not permissible to lie'; hence one says ol tenri:ke: kertündi: (sic) "he believed in (mana) God, and held his  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 783 
     
   
   
     DIS. V.“GRDProphet to be truthful' (şaddaqa rastilahu) Kaş. 1416: KB kereklig kereksizni kértü sorup 'asking for the truth about what is necessary and unnecessary” 368: xırı(?) 4t. kerekmü kereksizmü kértü bilip 368, Tef. kertü “true, certain' 174: Xvvar, xii kertü “true, honest” ' Ali ş3: xiv kertü/kerti "true, truthful” Qutb 96: Kom. xiv “true” kerti/kirti CCI, CCG; Gr. 140 (quotns.): Kip. a/-şidq “truth” (opposite to 'lie' ótrü:k/yala:n) kérti: Hou. 27, 4; şadaqa “to speak the truth' kérti: &amp;ayit-: do. 36, 5; 2.0. do. 18, 3 (eplik): xiv kértu: şadıq: no V. is formed from this; if you wish to say şadaqa you say kértü: sózleİd. 8o; kértu söz şüdiq do. 81: xv şidq kerti (gic, and other words) Tuh. 22a. 12; şadaqa kerti ayit- 22b. 6: Osm. xiv to xvi kértü “true, loyal”: in several texts T TS I 472; II 645; IV 525. kirtüç 'envious' and the like; pec. to Xak. Xak. xı kirtüç kişi: "a man who is envious and ill-natured' (Aasud garisu'l-xulq) Kaş. 1 455: KB kişi kilki kirtüc *man's character is (naturally) envious” 194. D kertük Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. kert- ; 'notch, notched', and the like; often used for the notch inatally. S.i.a.m.l.g. See ketük, Xak. xr kertük “a notch (a/-azz) in wood'; one says kertük kemrük 'notches and furrows' (huzüz toa axádid); kertük (MS. kertik) “the notch" which is cut in a wooden (tally) for counting loaves of bread and the like Kaş. 7 478: Kap. xiv kertük “the position of a notch' (mawdt'u'l-hazz) İd. 81: xv muhazzaz 'notched' kertik Tuh. 34b. 11; 48b. 11. VU kürtük 'snowdrift, deep snow', and the like. First vowel uncertain; survives as NE "Tel, kórtük R [I 1265; Khak. kórtik; Tuv. xörtük, but NC Kir. kürtük/kürtkü: NW Nog. kürtik. There seems also to be a shorter form kürt in NE Küer., Sor: SE Tar.: NW Kaz. R Il 1461 and Kumyk. UYyğ. vir ff. Bud. only in the phr. öp kürtük U TT 29, 35 etc. (3 öp). D kertgünç Dev. N./A. fr. kértgün- ; 'belief, faith; believing. Pec. to Uyğ. Uyğ. virff. Man. (we worship you) yüz yüzegütin berü kértgüncin *with faith in all our limbs! TT III 5: Bud. kertğünç on törlüğ yórüglüg bolur 'there are ten interpretations of faith' TT V zo, 1; o.o. do. 22, 3o (uğur), 26, 105-6 (1 tep); kértgünc kértgünser “if he believes' (in false rules) TT VI 56-7 (and VIIJ O.2) — kértgünc köpülin “vith a believing mind” TT VII 40, 28; o.o. do. 40, 8 and 117; U 1 31, 16; Sus. 137, 16 (köpüllüğ), Kuan. 51. ?S kórtle: “beautiful”, perhaps a Sec. f. of the syn. word kórkle:, q.v. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viit ff. Man.-A kórtle kórk “beautiful form”, sometimes with additional epithets M I 10, 6; rt, 4; 24, 4; körtle tatığlığ nomi "his beautiful sweet doctrine! Man.-uig. Frag. 4oo, title: Man. kórtle tüzün teprim “my beautiful, good God'. M 77 8; 16-17 (i); a.o. 739 “do. 8, 7 (1 ka:g): Bud. kórtle öp körk "beautiful colours and forms” TT VI 151; körtle uri “a beautiful boy” Usp. 97, 11-12; ,9.0. TT X şşo (2 tap) etc.; a component in feminine P.N.s Pfahl. ro, ız, etc.: O. Kir. 1X ff. Mal. ro, 5 (urugu:). VUD kirdeş Hap. leg.; N. of Assn. fr. *kér or *kir which can hardly be ki:r above. "The resemblance to Mong. ger "house" (Haenisch 49) is prob. a mere coincidence. Xak. xr kirdeş “a neighbour (cür) who lives with you in the same house” (fi dör todhida) "Kaş. I 461. Dis. V. GRDD kerit- ($-) Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of ker- in its peculiar Karluk meaning. Karluk xi ol 1tin. keritti: anbaha kalbahu *he made his dog bark” Kaş. II 305 (keritü:r, keritme:k). D küret- Caus. f. of küre:-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xi ol anın kulin küretti: “he incited his (someone else's) slave to run away' ('alà'l-ibàq) Kaş. II 305 (küretü:r, küretme:k): KB 6536 (1 arkun; this verse occurs only in the Cairo MS., where the -e- is quite clear, but the Object of the V. is a horse, and this might belong to kürlt-). VUD kürit- Caus. f. of küri:-, survives as küret- in most of the same languages as küri:-, the MS. of Kag. has küret- everywhere, which raises a doubt about the original form. Xak. xrol apar ka:r küritti: “he urged him to shovel ("a/2 Rash) snow' (etc.) Kaş. II 30s (küritü:r, küritme:k, see above): KB 6536 (?, sce küret-). D kertgün- “to believe (something Zcc.); to believe in (something Dat.). Morphologically obscure; clearly cognate to kértu:. N.o.a.b. Türkü vur ff. Man. kertü erklig -küçlüg tepri tépen kértkünmedimiz erser 'if we have not believed that he is a true, powerful, strong God” Chuas. 18-20; kértkünmedin “through unbelief” do. 1 34; (of the four "seals”) ekinti kértkünmek “the second is faith" do. 180; 0.0. do. 71; TT II yo, 85: Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. üç ertinike çaxşapatka kértgünür “he believes in the three jewels and the commandments” TT V 22, 37-8; kértgünzün bu savağ "let him believe these words' TT .X 467; 0.0. do. 478; VI 57 (kertgünç), USp. 162b. 27 (jnan-); Kuan. 8o: Xak. xi kul tepri:ke: kertgündi: “the servant acknowledged (qarra) the oneness of God and held His prophets to be truthful” (saddaqa ruslahu) ; also used when he acknowledged what he had said or done (qarra bi-mà qdla avı fa"ala) Kaş. III 423 (kértgünü:r, kért&amp;ünme:k); teprike: kértgün “believe (mim) in God” do. 423, 24; 8.0. İ 416 (kértü:; kertündi: here is prob. a later alteration and not the author's original text): xir(?) Tef. kértün- “to believe; to believe in (w. Dat.)' 174 (the text also contains kérti:kn-, perhaps a muddle of kertgin-, and once kértü-, prob. an error for kértün-): Xwar. xii kertün- “to believe! ' Ali 53: Osm. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 784 
     
   
   
      740 xiv and xv kértin- “to believe, rely on” in four texts TTS 1 471; III 460; IV 524. D körtgür- (ğ-) “to show'; Caus. f. of kórw. euphonic -t- inserted. [t and the shortened form körgür- are n.o.a.b. A new word körğgüz-, which can be regarded as a Sec. f. of this word, appeared in the medieval period; the early occurrences are listed below. Another new word górset-, which is morphologically, but hardly semantically, a Caus. f. of körse:-, is first noted in Osm. xiv and xv, three texts TTS II 456; III 312; IV 357. "Vhe other early Caus. f: of kör- are körtür- and körgit-, q.v. "There is a remarkable variety of modern forms, some languages having two or three. Usually these are completely syn., but, for example, in SE Türki kórgüz- means “to help to see” (e.g. with the help of glasses) and körset- “to show', and in SW Az. kördürmeans “to order (someone) to see to, i.e. do (something)! and kóster- (a metathesis of kórset-?) “to show, demonstrate'. The modern forms, nearly all meaning “to show', are as follows: NE Alt., Leb., Sag., Şor, Tel, kórgüs-; Küer. körkös- R IJ 1262; Kaç., Koib., Sag. kórtüs-; Sor kórtós- 1265; Khak. kórdür-/kórgis-; 'Tuv. kórgüz-: SE Tar. kórket- 1260; kórgüz- 1262; kórset- 1265; "Türki kórgüz-/kórset-: NC Kir. kördür-/körgğöz-/körsöt-, Kzx. körgiz-/ korset-: SC Uzb. kürğaz-/kürsat-: NVV Kar, T. kórgüz- R I] 1262; Kaz. kürset-; Kk, Nog. kórset-; Kumyk görset-: SW Az. kördür-/köster-, Osm. górgüz- (Red.; obsolete)/góster-; "Tkm. górdür-/gürkez-. Uy£. vir ff. Man. M III 26, 11 (i) (odğuratr); 39, 1-3 (ii) (adınçığ): Bud. körtğüroccurs nearly 50 times in Kuan. esp. in such phr. as (Kuan-si-im Pusar) burxanlar kórkin kórtgürür 'shows the forms of the Buddhas” (to those mortals) 103-4; in four places it is mis-spelt kótgür- and in U II 19, 11 (which is Kuan. 128) kórgür-; a.o. TT VI 237: (Xak.?) xiv Muh.(?) aráni'l-say' "he showed me the thing” gó:rgüzdi: Rif. 103 (only): X war. xııı(?) men sana baslap yolni körğürürmen "1 will lead you and show you the way' Og. 221-2: xiv kórgez-/kórgüz- “to show' Quib 101; MN 429: Kom. xiv 'to show' kórgüz- CCI, CCG; Gr. 154 (quotns.): Kip. xiv kórgüz- ard ğayrahu "to show someone (something); one also says kórdür-, this is the original form (a/-asl); one also says köstermeaning ard İd. 81; arà köster- Bul. 27v.: xv ard körset-/körğez- (in margin kórgüz-) Tuh. 6b. z. D kertil- Pass. f. of kert-, “to be notched, gashed", etc. S.i.m.m.l.g. Xak. xı yığa:ç kertildi: “the piece of wood (etc.) was notched' (huzza), and one says kul boyni: kertildi: “the slave was humiliated' (dullila); derived fr. al-hazz but an expression for a/-tadlil Kaş. 1I 236 (kertilü:r, kertilme:k); a.o. 7 160, 6: (Kip. xv inqasafa 'to be broken, split' kertin(sic) Tuh. 6a. 8). S kértün- See kertgün-.   DIS. V. GRDD kertür- (8-) Caus. f. of ker-; n.o.a.b.? Xak. xı ol anın to:nin künke: kertürdi: “he ordered that his (someone else”s) garment Should be spread out (bi-madd) in the sun”, similarly one says ol yt:p kertürdi: “he had the cord stretched out” (aımadda) Kaş. 11 194 (kertürür, kertürme:k): Kom. xiv Jesus Christus bitik tilince tatarca kutkardaci ol kertirer barça elni kutkardaçı ' “Vesus Christ” in the language of the scriptures is "saviour”” in Tatar, it means (or comprises, or covers?) “the saviour of all people" ' CCG ; Gr. (presumably the same word ; there is no obvious alternative). D kirtür- (g-) Caus. f. of kir-; survives in SW Az. kirdir-; Osm. girdir-; "Fkm. gi:rdür- (and &amp;l:riz-). Some other languages have kirgiz-/kirgüz- R J/ 1361, etc. Xak. xı ol anı: evke: kirtürdi: "he ordered that he should be admitted (or brought in, bi-idxálihi) to the house” (etc.) Kaş. JI 195 (kirtürür, kirtürme:k): (xui(?) Tef. kir&amp;üz- “to be brought in” 180). D körtür- (g-) Caus. f. of kór-; sce körtgür-. Xak. xı ol apar ne:p körtürdi: “he urged him to see ("a/ğ ru'ya) the thing” Kaş. II 194 (körtürür, kórtürme:k): xiu(?) Tef. körter- (sic, perhaps a mistranscription) "to show' 186 (a second körter- “to erect” (ya'nt bind kil-) is either an error or mistranscription of kótür- ( ?&amp;ó:tür-) which also occurs in Tef.): Kap. xiv İd. 81 (kórtgür-). D kertiş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of kert-. Xak. xı ol mapa: yığa:ç kertişdi: “he helped me to notch( i /razz) the piece of vvood” (etc.) ; also used for competing Kaş. /7 222 (kertişü:r, kertişme:k). Tris. GRD D kertgünçlüğ P.N./A. fr. kértgüng; n.o.a.b, Uy£. viri ff. Man. iki yaruk orduka kertgünçlüğ 'believing in the two palaces of light” M 1 29, 9-11; a.o. do. şo, 2-3 (bek): Bud. Sanskrit sraddhá "by faith! kért&amp;ónglóg (sic) TT VIII A.33; kértgünglüg élig “the hand of faith” V 24, 53; 0.0. do. 55-7. D kértgüncsüz Priv. N./A. fr. kértgünc; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. viit ff, Bud, kértgüncsüz töz üze bulğanmış 'troubled by the root of unbelief' TT V 26, ror. DF kiritlig Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. kirit, Xak. xı kiritliğ kapuğ “a locked (muglag) door' Kaş. I 506. DF kiritlik A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. kirit; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı kiritlik a/-ğa/aq "a lock' Kaş. 1 506; 0.o. J yz (enük), 7 306 (ösüğle:-). Tris. V. GRDD ké:rtgünse:- Hap. leg. in a para. on the Desid. f.; Desid. f. of ke:rtğün-. Xak. xı ol tepri:ke: ké:rtgünse:di: (misvocalized -gin-) “he resolved to acknowledge (qaşada an yuqirr) the oneness of God” Kaş. / 280, 25; n.m.e.   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 785 
     
   
   
     DIS. GRG DF kiritle:- Den. V. fr. kirit, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı ol kapuğ kiritle:di: “he locked (ağlaqa) the door” Kaş. 111 330 (kiritle:r, kiritle:me:k), 0.0. 345, 1; 348, 22 (grammatical examples). D kertü:le:- Den. V. fr. kértü:; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı ol anı: kertü:le:di: şaddaqahu fi mà qdla "he believed what he said” Kaş. III 352 (kértü:le:r, kertü:le:me:k): Kom. xiv 'truly, sincerely! kertilep CCI; kertlep CCG; Gr. 140 (quotn.): Kip. xiv (after kértu: q.v. where it says that no V. comes from it, and that “to speak thc truth' is kértü sózle-) rca'l-mujtaq minhu körtüledi: ay cadda fi'l-amr. ?'the V. compounded fr. it is kértüle- meaning ''to be serious (or truthful?) about matters" ' /d. 8o. Mon. GRG D kórk (£-) Dev. N. fr. kür- ; basically 'something visible; shape, form', and the like; but by x1 'something worth seeing', hence 'beauty' in an abstract sense. Survives only(?) in NE Tel. körkö R JI 1261: SC Uzb. kürk, NW Kk. körik, Nog. kórk; SW Tkm. görk. Uyğ. vr ff. Man.-A kórk, generally qualified by *Jovely, light', etc. is used for 'the form, shape' of God which the worshipper longs to see M 7 10, 7; 11, 5; 24, 24; 8.0. do. 25, 29-30 (bepiz): Man. TT Hİ 81 (kaningsiz); a.o.o.: Bud. körk is common, esp. in Kuan., and usually represents Sanskrit riba “form”, e.g. Sanskrit rüpa körk mepiz TT VIII D.27; vabuşd “by beauty” körk meniz üze: do. 37; o.o. Kuan. 103-4 (körtğür-), öp körk has much the same meaning TT VI 151 (kórtle:); Suv. 164, zo (2 öp): Xak. xı kórk al-Iusn wa'l-camál "beauty, loveliness' Kaş. 1 353; ya:y körkine: inanma: “do not rely on the beauty (al-zahra) of spring” //I 161, r: KB kÓrk, specifically “the: beauty” of a person or thing, is fairly common; kaçan kürki kelgey begi térgisi *how will his master's table look nice?' 2861; körk mepiz 97, 733, 1116; o.o. 64 (é:t-), or, 272, etc.: xur(?) At. eren körki 'agl ol 'intellect is the beauty of man” gr: xiv Rbg. uçmakdakı hürlar körkin “the beauty of the houris in paradise! R II 1259; Muh. al-husn :a'l-camál görü, (so spelt) Mel. 46, 9; Rif. 140: Çağ. xv ff. görğ (with &amp;- -&amp;') husn Vel. m. görk (spelt) husm ta camàl wa numüd ('appearance') Sar. 3osr. 28 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv körk “beauty” Qutb 103: MN 56, etc.; Nahe. 319, 8: Kom. xiv ditto CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xii (and) körk al-huşn zoa l-camal Hou. 19, 12 (after kürk): xiv körk al-husn İd. 8o. kürk 'fur'; survives only(?) in SW Osm. kürk. See Doerfer III 1628. Xak. xi kürk a/-farw "fur” Kaş, I 353: xiv Muh.(?) al-farwa (içmek: in the margin of one MS.) kü:rk Mel. 67, s: Çağ. xv ff. kürk (spelt) (1) "the warm wool ( pagm-i narmi) which grows at the base of long hair”: also called teftik; (2) püsfin "a fur coat' San. şoşr. 26: Kip. xrrr al-farwa kürk Hou. ış, 12: xiv kürk (VU) al-kibágiya “ram”s skin(?); kürk al-farw İd. 8o: xv farwa hibüşiya kürk Tuh. 27b. ız. 74ı Dis. GRG S kerek See kerğek. D kerük (ğ-) Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. ker-; lit. 'stretched out”, hence 'broad, long”. Survives only in NC xix Kzx. kérik (of journey) 'long' R IH 1096 (not in the xx dicts.). In Kaş. the word, although vocalized Aé:rik, rhymes with sevük, nelük, be:dük and must originally have been kerük which is morphologically correct. Xak. xı in a verse containing several corruptions translated 'my friend, how did you get to us and cross the long deserts (al-mafáwiza'l-madida) and” ya:zı: kerük (MS. balzı: ké:rik) "high mountains', Kaş. I 94, 3; n.m.e. D küreg Hap. leg.; Dev. N./A. fr. küre:-; “fugitive, runaway (slave, etc.)'. Xak. xi KB 1118 (küre:-). S kürek See kürğek. D körüğ (ğ-) Dev, N. fr. kór-; "observer, spy”. Pec. to Türkü?. Türkü virt Oğuzdantan körüğ kelti: “a spy came from the Oğuz” T 8; o.o. T 9, 29, 33; in each case a phr. like “their report (Sav) was so-and-so' follows. ?D körük 'bellows'; this might be a Dev. N. (N.L), but the only authority for kórü- 'to blow with the bellows' is Red. 1589 and this may be merely a back-formation. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SC; SW Tkm. kó:rük (prob. a false long vowel). The only meaning of körük in Vel. and the second meaning in Sazı. is “a hen which has stopped laying'; this meaning survives in SW 'Tkm. kürk, in San. 305r. 26 it is said that the word, prob. kürk/kürük, is described as Persian in the Burhdn-t Qatı", this is prob. correct; it does not seem to be Turkish. Xak. xı körük al-himlüc wa minfaxu” l-haddàd "a blacksmith's bellows' (Hend.) Kaş. 1 391: xın(?) Tef. ditto 186: xiv Muh. minfax görük Mel. 61, 10; kö:rük Rif. 160: Çağ. xv ff. körük (spelt) (1) dam-i haddadi “a blacksmith's bellows' San. 305v. 21: Kom. xıv 'bellows! körük CCI; Gr. kerki: "an adze'. Survives with this meaning in SE Türki: NC Kır., a/-qaddüm has other meanings ('axe, hatchet?), but the word prob. always meant 'adze'. No obvious Turkish etymology, perhaps a l.-w. Xak. xi kerki: al-qaddüm Kaş. I 430: xiv Muh. (under 'carpenters” tools") al-fa's “adze” kerki: Mel. 62, 2; Rif. 160: Kom. xiv 'adze' kerki CCI; Gr.: Kip. xni (after “carpenter”) a/-qüdüm (sic) kerki: Hou. 23, ış: xiv kerki: al-qaddüm İd. 8o: Osm. xvii Kerki, in Rémi, "a mattock (tişa) with which builders break up tiles and do other work' Sam. 300v. 7 (Sami 1158 “a large axe'; not in Red.). PU?F kórge: almost the only Gancak word which is not Hap. leg.: prob. a L-w., but not, like kendük, demonstrably Iranian. Survives(?) in NW Krım köreğe “cup” R II 1251. Gancak xı kórge: “a dish (al-fabag) made of 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 786 
     
   
   
      742 wood' Kaş. 1 43o: Çağ. xv ff. kórge (?or köreğe, 'with k- and -ğ-”) “a table (sandali) on which decanters, jugs, and cups are put at a feast'; also "a wine decanter or jug' (şardb zarft . . . belbele ma'nàásina) Vel. 367 (quotns.); köreğe (spelt) “a table (kurs?) on which jugs and wine decanters are placed' (same quotns.); the Rümi author made a mistake in translating it 'jug, decanter” San. 305v. 4. D kórgü: ($-) Dev. N. fr. kór- ; lit. “the act of seeing' or the like. A rare word which seems to survive only in SW Osm. görgü “experience, breeding, good manners' (fr. kór- in the sense of “to experience something"); "Tkm. görgi/ f£órgü “pain, suffering' (cf. the Türkü phr. 1 emğe:k kör- 'to experience suffering"). Türkü vir (you vourselves have offended against your wise xağan .. .) kórgü:pin üçü:n iğid miş “vho nourished you because you looked to (i.e. obeyed) him” 7 E 23, II E 19: Xak. xi K B (I have ornamented my shop well) kişi kórgüsi “for people to look at” 5108: xın(?) Tef. (he gave the greatest of them) 'Isà yalavvaçnın körgüni "the appearance of the prophet Jesus' 185. D körkdeş Hap. leg.?, N. of Assocn. fr. kórk; “of the same shape, a replica'. In a note on this passage, Hüen-ts., p. 25, note 156, v.G. suggests that the word actually means mirmánakaya, the first of the Buddha's three bodies, the 'shadow body” which he can assume for certain purposes; this seems to be a mistake; the replicas were no doubt rirmánakayas, but the Turkish for that word was belgürtme (q.v.) etóz. Uyğ. virrff. Bud. (just as the Buddhas, when they have entered nirvdna, by exercising their authority to ask for divine favour, in accordance with the wishes of mankind, by various distinguished rebirths) yarukluğ körkdeşlerin orun orun sayu kodu yarlıkap “deign to place their shining replicas in all places, Suv. 64, 6 ff. D kergek (kerge:k; &amp;-) N./A.S. in -k fr. kerfe:-; necessity, necessary'. Became kerek by elision of the -ğ- at an unusually early date. C.ia.p.a.l.; NW Kumyk; SW Osm., Tkm. gerek, Apart fr. its ordinary meanings, it is used in various idioms including (1) as a sort of Aux. V. meaning 'must' after (a) the Infin.; (b) Participles in -mış/-miş and -ğu:/-ğü:, and later (c) the Conditional; (2) kerek . . . kerek “eithcr . . . or', in which the original meaning has completely evaporated; (3) for 'stint', cf. kerge:-, kergeksiz. Türkü vii occurs only in the phr. kerğek bul- “to meet one's fate, die” 7 E 4, 30; I N ro, Ix. 23 (uvul-): vir ff. Man. tutmak kergek erti “it was necessary to keep” (the commandments) Chuas. 195; a.0.0.—(if we have committed various sins and not prayed properly) nece eğsüğ kergek boltr erser “if various deficiencies and stintings have arisen' do. 289-90: Uyğ. vrir ff. Man.-A turmiş kergek erür "ve must stand” M I 24, 3: Man. munt bilmiş kergek "one must know this” TT II 16, 24-5: Bud. ince: bilmiş ke:rge:k (sc) TT VIII  DIS.  GRG O.9 (VI 66, in Uyg. script usually spelt Argek) ; common in this usage and such usages as küc kergek 'strength js necessary' TT V zz, 26; ne kergekin barça bérgeybiz “ve will give everything that is necessary' PP 22, 3-4: Civ. yemiş ke:re:k “one must cat" TT VIII I.19, 3.0.0. with kere:k/ke:re:k; -mış/-miş kergek is common in 77T VII and kerek occurs once; in USp. kergek is common, usually in such phr. as mapa . . . bor kergek bolup "since 1 needed. wine! r, 2: Xak. xı kerek a Particle (arf) meaning “it is necessary' (vanbagi); it is the answer to anyone who says kerekmü: “is it necessary ?'; one says kerek “yes” (bali) Kaş. I 391; ta:şığ 1sru:masa: öpmiş kere:k (sic) “if a man cannot bite a stonc he must kiss it” (/a/-yuqabbiluhu) I 163, 19; 3.0.0. in both spellings: KB kerek sózni sözler kişi “a man who says what is neccssary' 185; ajun tutğuka er ukuşluğ kerek “a man who controls the world needs intelligent men (to serve him)” 217; a.o.o.—kerek erdi sen me muni uksa sen 'you too had to understand this” 658—kerek . . . kerek “cither ... or” 212, 235, etc.; kerek . . . yà ditto 3609: xiti(?) Az, kerek “is necessary! is common— kerek . . . kerek 474; 7ef. nerse kerekini 'everything necessary; berğü kerek "one must give” 173: Çağ. xv ff. kerek bayad 'it is necessary” San. 313v. 3: Xwar. xin kerekmez “it is not necessary! “AF 27: xiti(?) bolsam kerek turur 'I must becomc” Oğ. 108; balukni (sic) katağlağu (sic?) kerek turur “you must hold the town firmly' do. 177: xiv kerek common; kerekmez kim 'it is not necessary that” Quthb 94: MN 118, 220; kerekmez iş “something you should not do” Na/ic. 16, 2: Kom. xiv “necessary” kerek CCI, CCG; Gr. 139 (quotns.): Kip. xiv kerek “need” (al-/táca) or the like; one says ne kerek “vhat is your nced?', that is “vhat do you want?'", it is equivalent to má dà turid İd. So: xv háca kerek Tuh. rab, 2; mühtac 'needed' kerek do. gob. 3: Osm. xiv ff, gerek “must, with Future or Conditional; gerek 'necessary", gerek . . . gerek “either . . . or": gerekmez “must not” (entered under a V. gerehmek, but this is an error, the word is a crasis of gerek imez) TT S I 304; IJ 428; 1H 289; IV 334. D kergük (g-) Hap. leg.; Dev. N. fr. ker-; lit. something stretched out", Xak. xı kergük şay” fi hirş”l-şüt ma"a”l-faht ka'l-faht "a thing like the paunch in the belly of a sheep beside the paunch” Kaş. IJ 289. D kürge:k abbreviated Dev. N. (N.I.) fr. küri:-. S.ia.m.lg. as kürek or the like for 'spade, shovel'; the second meaning *'oar' survives only in SW Az., Osm., Tkm. In other languages 'oar' is (2) eşğek or, occasionally, kalak, neither of them old words. Xak. xi kürge:k sicrafu'l-sufun toa. mishüt hull şay) "a boat oar; a shovel of any sort” Kaş. II 289: xiv Rbj. (God created Adam) yağız yer kürekidin “from a shovelful of brown earth” 1 R II 1449: Çağ. xv ff. kürek (spelt) (1) pürü  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 787 
     
   
   
      , DIS.V. GRG'shovel; oar'; (2) ustuxtwün-i şüna "shoulderblade'; (3) 2uza-i panba 'a cotton pod' San. d zs: Kom. xiv “shovel” kürek CC, Gr.: 1p. xıır (after “boat”) al-micdáf 'oar' kürek (unvocalized) Hou. 7, 7; al-lawhu'lladi yudarru'l-Ralla “he scoop with which seed is scattered' kürek (ditto) do. 9, 12: xiv kürek al-micrafa İd. 8o: xv lawh kürek (etc.) Tul. 31b. 8; miqdáf 'scoop' (ésgik; in margin) kürek do. 33b. 6 ?D körkle: 'beautiful'; prima facie a Den. N./A. fr. körk, but there is no other trace of a Den. Suff, -le:, and the existence of a syn. word körtle: suggests that both may be representations of some foreign word and the semantic connection w. kórk a coincidence. Pec. to Uy&amp;. Uyf. vin ff. Man. TT III 81 (kanınçsız): Bud. tórt körkle kirkin 'four beautiful maidens” PP 42, 2; a.o. do. 8 (2 tap); o.o. TT V ız, 123 (of a place); do. 127 (of a boy); Kuan. 76, 77; Suv. 92, 19; 349, 2; 646, 2 (of a sound). D kórklüg ($-) P.N./A. fr. kórk; basically "having the shape of”, a meaning still current in Uyğ., but normally "having a beautiful shape, beautiful”. Survives in this sense in NE Tel. körkölö R IJ 1261: NW Kar. L. körklü do.; Kk. kórikli: SW 'Tkm. görkli/ görklü. Distinct fr. kórüklüg. Uy$. vırı ff. Bud. TT VI 410-11 (étiglig); U III 57, 6 (i) (osuğluğ): Civ. bir kórklüg mepizlig ur: oğul kelürgey “she will bear a beautiful handsome boy” TT VII 26, 17-18: Xak. xr kö:rklü:ğ tonu:ğ “a beautiful (hasan) garment” Kaş. 1 45, 19; kórklü:g kisi:ke: (?read kisi:ke:) 1a I- gabihati L-malihia “for a handsome beautiful woman' 7 319, 18; ; (after kórk) hence one says kórklüg al-camil “beautiful” I 353, 20; 0.0. I 461, 1 (hasan), HI 43, 19 (talq "an open” (face); n.m.e.: KB yüzi körklüğ erdi “his face was beautiful” 464; 0.0. 675, 1079 (of a day), 2468 (kuba:): xii(?) At. kórmekke kórklüg taşı “(the world's) exterior is beautiful to see” 217; o.o. 317-18; Tef. körklüğ/körklü 'beautiful' 186: xiv Muh. al-camil $ó:rglüg Mel.46, 9; Rif. 140; almalih (opposite to “ugly” görksi:z) górüklüg 54, 45 153; al-hasan görğlüğ isr, Röğ. körklüg saraylar “the beautiful palaces” R II 1261: Caf. xv ff. kórklüg Ausndàár 'beautiful Vel. 366 (quotn.); &amp;órklüg (spelt) camil wea sáhib-i hüsn San. 305v. 11 (same quotn.): Xwar. xir körklürek “the most beautiful' "AF 19; körklü do. 35: xıı(?) yaxşı kórüklüg 7 kız “a very, beautiful girl” Oğ. 56—7; do. 6o, 77: XIV körklüg/körklü)körklü Qutb 102; körklüğ MN sr, etc.; Nahc. 439, 10: Kom. xiv "beautiful körklü CCI; kórkli CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv körklü: dü hus İd. 80: xv körükli (sic) ahsan Tuh. sob. 13; hasan do. 79a. 8; 84b. rz: Osm. xiv to xvr görklü "beautiful; common T TS 7 326, İT 455; III 3113; İV 357... 7 F kürküm 'saffron', supposedly a corruption of Sanskrit kurikuma, but found also in Pe. and Ar., and perhaps the Iranian form of that word.   743 In SW Osm. prob. a direct borrowing fr. Pe. Uyğ. vri ff. Civ. kürküm in several prescriptions H 7 67, 94; II 6, 15: Xak. xi kürküm ai-za'farün 'saffron'; this word agrees with Ar. because the Arabs, too, m it kurkum Kaş. I1 486. D kirgin (g-) Hap. leg.; Dev. N. fr. kir-. Xak. xı kirgin gatmu'l-fahl “the rutting of a stallion'; and one says buğra: kirgini: kirdi: daxala qatmı”l-fahl "the rutting (season) of carnel stallions came in” Kaş. 7 443. D körksüz ($-) Priv. N./A. fr. kórk; “ugly”. Survives in SC Uzb. kürksiz: NW Kk. köriksiz: SW Tkm. görksüz. Uyğ. virff. Bud. TT VI 443 (anığ), 46o (belğü:süz): U HI 43, 25 ('ugliness): Xak. xi KB körksüz söğüş 'ugly curses' 260; kerek erse kórklüg yà kórksüz 'whether she is pretty or ugly! 3609: xı(?) Az. buxul kórksüzü *meanness is an ugliness' (of character) 250; Tef. körksüz 'ugly' (deed) 186: xiv Muğ. al-roahş 'savage' (opposite to 'pretty' ğö:rğlüğ) gö:rksi:z Mel. 46, 11; Rif. 140, 153; al-qabih *ugly' (ditto) górksi:z 54, s, 151: Kom. xiv *ugly, ugliness” kórksüz/kórküsüz CCI, Gr. Dis. V. GRGD kirik- Intrans. Den. V. fr. ki:xr.. Survives only(?) in NC Kzx. R 11 1357. Xak. xı ton kirikti: “the garment (etc.) was soiled' (darina) Kaş. II 117 (kirike:r, kirikme:k); o.o. do. II9, 5; 165, 12. kerğe:- the base of kerğek, which is so common, but n.o.a.b, "There is no trace of a Sec. f. kere:-. Türkü virt ff. Man. (if we have committed various sins . . . and) nece eğsütümüz kergetimiz erser “if we have been deficient or stinted(?)” Chuas. 202-3; 332-3 (it is possible that this should be read kerget(t)imiz): Xak. xı (whoever accumulates wealth) beglik apar kergeyü:r fa-huta awlà bi'l-imára min ğayrihi "he is more worthy of the chieftainship than the others” Kaş. 7 362, 24; n.m.e. D kórke:d- (&amp;-) Intrans. Den. V. fr. kórk; “to be beautiful”. N.o.a.b.; not to be confused with körğit-. Xak. xı kı:z körketti: “the girl had a pretty face and complexion' (hasura scachu'l-cáriya wa lawnuha); originally kórke:dti: but assimilated ( fa-udgima) Kaş. II 340 (körketü:r, körketme:k, here mis-spelt Aörküt-, but an error for körke:dü:r, körke:dme:k): Çağ. xv ff. görke- (-di, “vith $- -k-"/ görket-(-ip)/ğörkey-(-ip) güzel ol- ve güzel eyle- “to be, or make, beautiful' Vel. 366 (quotn.), kórkey- (spelt) camil şa sáhtb-i hüsn şudan “to be beautiful” San. 305r. 2 (quotns., pointing out that V/el.'s spelling ğörket- is an error): Xwar. xiv körket- (spelt kó:rke:t-) meaning rather obscure; Zaj. translates “to make beautiful”, but it might belong to körgit- Qurb 103. D körgit- (-8-) "to show'; Caus. f. of kör-, but there does not seem to be any other example of a Caus. Suff. -git-. The sporadic  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 788 
     
   
   
     744 DIS. V. spellings -ğüt- in Xak. prob. represent a Sec. . N.oa.b., see kórtgür-. Uyğ. viii ff. Man. TT III 56 (kóprüg), 58 (1 a:ğ-, both spelt kórkit-, ? in error): Bud. bu darnını körgitdeci 'displaying this dharam' U II 38, 69; kórüm körgitmek “to demonstrate (the meaning of) omens” Hien-ts. 7; 0.0, Suv. 136, s (1 erig); Pfah. 23, 25; USp. s9, 11; one MS. of Kuan. consistently reads kórgitwhere the others read kórtgür-: Xak. xi ol mana: ne: kórgütti: “he showed me (ardr?) the tbing” Kaş, /7 340 (kórgütü:r, kórgütme:k): K.B körgit olarnın yüzin 'show their faces” 32; 0.0. 48, 659, 661—3, 716, 3540, 3567 (the MS. spellings vary between kórgüt- and kórgit-): xın(?) Tef. kórgüt- (once körget- ?) “to show' 185. D kórkle:- (&amp;-) Hap. lcg. ?; Den. V. fr. kórk. Uyğ. vi ff. Civ. yağız yer yüzi yaşardı körkledi “the surface of the brown earth became green and beautiful” T'T 7 4. S kórgür- See kórtgür-. S kórgüz- See kórtgür-. Tris. GRG kere:kü: “the lattice-work wooden frame”, which supports the felt covering ofe«a yurt. Survives as kereğe in NE Alt., Tel. R TT 1290: NC Kır., Kzx.: NW Kk. Sce Doerfer III 1629. "Türkü vrr ff. kere:kü: içi: ne:teg “hovv is the inside of the tent framework?' IrkB 18: Uyğ. virt ff. Man. (a man who sweeps out, cleans, arranges, and puts in order) eviğ barkığ kereküğ “a dwelling, the furniture, and thc tent framework! Wind. aq: Xak. xr kere:kü: "a tent” (x754”) among the Türkmen, it is the winter residence of the town dwellers (aAlu'l-madar) Kag. I 447 (prov., see kük); similar prov. / 404 (keten). D kergeklig (g-) P.N./A. fr. kergek; 'necessary'.. S.i.m.m.l.g. usually as kereklig or the like; NW Kumyk; SW Osm., Tkm. gerekli. Uy. vir ff. Bud. ertipü kergekliğ ótüg ötündün “you have tendered very necessary advice” U 128, 3; kergeklig nom “a necessary doctrine” TT VI z4o: Xak. xi bu: ne:p ol bizke: kereklig “this thing is necessary (Gnimma vanbafi) to us” Kaş. I şog: KB kerekligni sözler kişi kizlemez "when a man says what is necessary he does not hide it” 977; 0.0. 315 (kódezlig), 328 (kertü:), 1060, 1445 (tt:d-), 4400 (1 bu:t): xin(?) At. biliglig kereklig sözüğ sózleyür “the wise man says what is necessary' 117: Çağ. xv ff. kéreklig bavistáni “necessary” San. 313v. 3: Xwar. xiv kerekliğ 'necessary' Qut 94: Kom. xiv “necessary” kerekli CCG, Gr.: Kip. xv mulitác 'necessary' kerekli Tuh. 32b. rz: Osm. xiv ff. gerekli/fgereklü 'necessary'; c..a.p. TTS I 304; II 429; IV 334. D kergeksiz Priv. N./A. fr. kergek; normally 'unnecessary' but in some contexts “that ought not to be, improper”. S.i.s.m.]. but in some languages replaced by other phr., e.g. GRGSW Osm. ğerekmez, "Vkm. gerek del (for te&amp;ül). Türkü vir (the Chinese envoy brought treasures, gold and silver) kergeksiz "without stint JN t2; a.0. // S ir: Uyf. vit ff. Man. -A M 1:9, 12 (isl:z): Bud. kamağ kişinin emğenip kolunmakı kergeksiz "all men's sufferings and prayers are unneccssary' Híen-ts. 231-2; a.o. TT VI 229 (ölüğ): Civ. kerge:ksiz 'without stint(?) TT VIII L.18: Xak. xi KH 368 (kértü:), 1445 (tt:d-), 3767: xin(?) At. 118 (kóm-), 368 (kérti:). D kórüklüg (8-) P.N./A. fr. (2) "körük Dev. N. fr. kór-; n.o.a.b.; to bc distinguished fr. körklüğ. Türkü virt ff. (among questions about parts of the tent, “vhat is the window like?”) körüklü:ğ ol “it can be secn through" IrkB 18; (Vam a falcon) körüklü:g kaya:ka: konu:pan közleyü:rmen “1 sit on a rock with a wide view (or 'conspicuous' ?) and look around' do. 64: Xwar. xiv (bring to completion) bu körüklüğ işke “this conspicuous(?) task' (which you have begun); but körüğgli in such phr. as körüğli köz “a sharp eyc” is more likely to be a Dev. N./A. in -gli: than a Sec. f. of this word Qutb 102. D kórklüglük (g-) Hap. leg.?; A.N. fr. kürklüg. Xak., xiu(? KBPP körklüğTükindin "because of its beauty” 17. D körksüzlük ($-) Hap. leg.?; A.N. fr. kórksüz. Xak. xı A? bu kaşım tügüki bu kórksüzlüküm 'this frown of minc and my ugly looks' 816. Tris. V. GRGD kerğekle:- ($-) Den. V. fr. kerğek, n.o.n.b.? Uyğ. vur ff, Bud. kergeklemis tont aşı “the clothing and food which he needed” U I 26, 9: Xak. xi ol anı: kerekle:di: tafaqqadaliu ava talabahu “he missed (i.e. felt the nced for) him and looked for him' Kag. IH 341 (kerkle:r (sic?), kerekle:me:k): KB kişiğ kim okisa kereklep tilep “onc who summons a man, nissing him and longing for him' 961. D kórükle:- Den. V. fr. körük, s.i.s.m.l., including SW Osm. Xak. xı ol o:tuğ kórükle:di: "he blew on (nafaxa) the fire with bellows' (b”l-minfax) Kaş. HI 341 (körükle:r, körükle:me:k); a.o. do. 348, 21. D kere:kü:len- Hap. lcg.; ltcfl. Den. V. fr. kere:kü:; quoted only as a grammatical example. Xak. xr and like the phr. er kere:külendi: “the man put up a tent (iffaxada ... xiba”) for himself and entered it” Kaş. III 205, 20; n.m.e. D kirigse:- ($-) Desid. Den. V. fr. *kirig N.Ac. fr. kir-; n.o.a.b. Uyf. vir ff. Bud. taluyka kiriğseyürmen 'I wish to go to sca” PP 21, 6-7: Xak. xı ol evke: kiriése:di: “he wished to enter (vadxul) his dwelling (etc.) Kaş. III 334 (kirigse:r, kiriğse:me:k). D kórügse:- Desid. Den. V. fr. kórüg; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A kórügseyürbiz 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 789 
     
   
   
       , TRIS. *we long to see' (your lovely face) M I 10, ro: Bud. kórügsep 'wishing to see' (the place where their son had died) Suv. 625, 4: Xak. xı ol meni: körüğse:di: "he wished to meet me” (yaílgàni) Kaş. III 334 (kórügse:r, kórügse:me:k); o.o. / 28:, 8; III 285 (kórse:-): Kom. xiv kórüvse- 'to wish to see” CCG, Gr. 155 (quotn.). Dis. GRL D kirlig P.N./A. fr. kir, 'dirty, soiled'. S.i.s.m.l. in NE, NC, SW; others tend to use kir itself in this sense. Uyğ. vır ff. Man. kirliğ ayığ külmç 'dirty sins” TT 771 136: Bud. TT VIII E.48 (arit-); Sus. 135, 13 (arta:k). VUD kürlig P.N./A. fr. 2 kür, 'deceitful, tricky'; used only in the Hend. tevliğ kürliğ. Türkü vır 7: E 6, I1 E 6: Üyğ. viri ff. Bud. U HI 85, 16 etc.: Civ. TT I 63-4, 182 (sce tevlig). Dis. V. GRLD keril- (8-) Pass. f. KD “to be stretched', etc. S.i.m.m.l.g.ş W Kumyk: SW Osm. £eril-; Tkm. geril-. Uyğ. viri ff. Civ. H II 8, 39 etc. (ürül-): Xak. xı er kerildi: “the man yawned and stretched himself” (tatá'aba (MS. tatdmaba) wa imtadda), similarly one says uruk kerlldi: 'the cord (and other things like skin and hide) was stretched out” (fritadda) Kaş. II 136 (kerilür, kerilme:k); (of brocade) kerildi: *was spread out” (busifa) 1 119, 55; 3.0. / 523, ir: xiv Muh.(?) (in a list of illnesses, after “fever”) a/-ra"da 'ague, shivering fit kérllme:k Rif. 163 (only): Kom. xiv keril- 'to stretch oneself; to be crucified' CCG; Gr. 139 (quotn.): Kip. xv al-tamattut "to stretch oneself! kérilmek Kar. 61, ış. D kiril- ($-) Hap. leg.?; Pass. f. of kir-; used only impersonally. Xak. xr evke: kirildi: "the house (etc.) was entered' (duxila ila) Kaş. II 136 (kirilür, kirilme:k). D körül- ($-) Pass. f. of kör-, “to be seen', etc. S.i.m.m.l.; SW Osm., ""km. görül-. Uyğ. vit ff. drsfo 'seen, looked after" körölöp TT VIII D.2o: Xak. xı kórüldi: ne: "the thing was seen' (nuzira tla) Kaş. II 136 (kórülür, kórülme:k). VUD kürle:- Hap. leg.?; Den. V. fr. 2 kür; "to be deceitful, tricky'. Türkü vri ff. Man. Chuas. x11 (tevle:-). D kirlen- Refl. Den. V. fr. ki:r , “to be dirty" and the like. S.is.m.l. Xak. xr to:n kirlendi: “the garment (etc.) was dirty' (or soiled, darana); and one says kö:z kirlendi: “the eye was bleary” (gamadat) pu Il 252 (kirlenü:r, kirlenme:k). D kürlen- (g-) Refl. f. of kürle:-, which survives in NE kürle- Koib. 'to splutter'; Tob. “to babble” R I/ 1:460 (Khak. kürlen- “to shout at, abuse”): SW Osm., Tkm. gürle“to chatter; (of lions, etc.) to roar'; (with gök) GRM |. 745  "to thunder. Some languages use kürülde-/ gürülde- in the same sense. The vvord seems originally to have meant simply 'to make a loud noise', and may be a Den. V. fr. 1 kür in the sense of 'to shout like a warrior in battle'. Xak. xı kó:k kürlendi: axadati'|l-samá' calab 'it thundered' Kaş, 11 252 (no Aor. or İnfin.). Tris. GRL DF kürilik Hap. leg.; A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. küri: “a peck measure'. Uyf. viri ff, Bud. U II yy, 26 etc. (küri:). : Tris. V. GRLE kürile:- in Atalay's Index to Kaş. is an error for kórple:-. Dis. GRM F kerem Hap. leg. (Xak.) xı al-sarab “an underground water channel” in “the language of Upper and Lower China' (China proper and Chinese Turkistan) Kaş. 7 398; no doubt foreign, perhaps Tokharian. D kerim ($-) Hap. leg.?; N.S.A. fr. ker- ; lit. “a single act of spreading out. Cf. yadim. Xak. xı kerim a/-qırdın (glossed munaqqaj in a second hand) “an embroidered curtain'; hence one says ta:m kerimi: sitru'l-cidár “a wall covering! Kaş. 7 398. D körüm ($-) N.S.A. fr. kör-, lit. “a single act of seeing'; in the early period apparently “examining the omens', or simply “omer”. Survives in NE Sag. kórüm R II 1258; Khak. kórim 'a view (e.g. a sea view); an opinion': NW Kar. L., T. körüm “a vision! (in the night) R II 1258: SW $órüm Osm. 'a look, sight'; Tkm. 'appearance; experience, education”. Uyğ. viir ff. Bud. körüm körü yarhkazun “let him deign to examine the omens' Hüen-ts. 32; a.o. do. 7 (kórgit-); ters körüm “false omens” U II 56, 8-9 etc. (ters); TT IV 8, 74 etc. (tétrü): Civ. kórüm kórser 'if one examines the omens” TT VII 39, 1 Tris. GRM D körümçi: ($-) N.Ag. fr. kórüm; 'soothsaycr'. Pec. to Uyğ. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. bu niğranti [gap] körümçi ol “this Nirgrantha is a [?truthful] soothsayer” Hüen-ts. 18-19; körümçi yultuzçı “soothsayers and astrologers” TT VI 133; o.o. do. 264 (betkeçi), 331 (tórüci:). D kórümlüg P.N./A. fr. kórüm; n.o.a.b. In the second quotn. below it means simply *belonging to omens'; in the first the meaning seems to be 'obedient, subject', or the like. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (I have ventured to treat, and free from their grievous afflictions all) sizipe körümlüğ bodununuznı karapizni (in your realm and country) Suv. 603, 2, prob. 'your people and common people subject to you'; a.o. Hüen-ts. 1911—12 (çal-). uuunuuuunuuuuuuxuou“uuuuu,xo—ıərməs əcxcscəsxvxtk.t——”—.—————---— —---—Ö—ÖÜÖ LL ıı Çə, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 790 
     
   
   
      746 Tris. V. GRMD kirimsin- ($-) Hap. leg.; Refl. Simulative Den. V. fr. *klrim N.S.A. fr. kir-; quoted only as a grammatical example. Xak. xı ol evke: kirimsindi: "he pretended to enter the house” Kaş, II 260, 29. Dis. GRN VU kürin Hap. leg.; prob. a l.-w. Xak. xı kürin "a baskct' (al-sarica) in which watermclons, cucumbers, etc, are transported Kaş. I 404. D körünç (g&amp;-) Dev. N. fr. kórün- ; n.o.a.b. Etymologically it should mean 'appearance' or the like, but in Xak. seems to have a more active meaning. UYyğ. viri ff. Bud. (when I, the monk Prajüádeva, had composed a poem about the divine Buddha's) ritivéd körünç kilu yarlıkamışın “deigning to bring about the appearance (or revelation?) of the Rgveda' Hüen-ts. 1831-2: Xak. xı körünç al-qawmu'l-nazzára ilà şay” "a crowd of spectators at something” Kaş. HII 373 (MS. hözünç, but the entry follows the cross-heading -R- and precedes -Z-); a.o. 1 167 (a:v-). Dis. V. GRND kirin- ($-) Refl. f. of Kir-; n.o.a.b. Xak.xı er suvda: (sic) kirindi: 'the man waded (xada) in the water and washed himself in it”, and one says er evke: kirindi: 'the man pretended to enter (vadxul) the house” Kag. HI 156 (kirinü:r, kirinme:k); suvka: (sic) kirin *wash yourself” IJ 160, 9. D kórün- (g-) Refl. f. of kör-, “to be visible, to appear, to let oneself be secn”. S.i.a.m.l.g.; NW Kumyk, SW Osm., Tkm. görün-. Cf. kózün-. Xak. xi ol begke: kóründi: 'he met (lagiya) the beg and saw him" (ra'àhu); and one says ta:ğ köründi: “the mountain (etc.) appeared and became visible” (badà rea şahara), also used for anything which appears in the dark from a distance Kaş. Il 157 (kórünü:r, kórünme:k); four o.o.: KB (I will tell the king) kayu kün körüngü “on what date he will appear! sro: xırı(?) At. körünmez bodi “his shape is not visible' 418; Tef. körin-/fkörün- “to appear' 185-6: xiv Muh. zahara gö:rün- Mel. 28, 13 (Rif. 112 belgür-): Çağ. xv ff. körün- (spelt) mar”? vva namtüdár şudan "to be seen, appear' San. 304v. 11 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv kórün- “to be visible, to appear” Quib 103; MN zo, etc.: Kom. xiv ditto CCI, CCG, Gr. 155 (quotns.): Kip. xiv kórün - tabayyana "to appear! İd. 80; Bul. 37v.; làha wa bána ta rawá ditto körün- do. 79v. (and see közün-). Tris. GRN D körünçlük (g-) A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. körünç. Hap. leg.; the passage is discussed in TT I, p. 23, note 124 and the conclusion reached that the word means 'an instrument for making appearances', that is 'a state chariot" or the like. Uy£. viii ff. Bud, Brlahmaldatı  TRIS. V. GRM élignip körünçlüki kayu erki *which do you suppose is King Brahmadatta's state chariot?" U İl 22, 3-4; and see ona:. E kerinçsiz See tüzgerincsiz. Tris. V. GRND körünçle:- (&amp;-) Den. V. fr. körünç, "to display, make a show of (somcthing)'; cf. körünçlük. N.o.a.b. Uy$£. viri ff. Bud. (the princely suitors) öz öz kórünclegülük [gap] "in order to display themselves! U IT 22, 25: Civ. olurup körünçlegil incge yüğürük atlarığ “sit down and display the slim swift horses” 7T I 124-5. D köründür- (g-) Caus. f. of körün-, “to cause to appear. Survives in NE Tel, R II 1256. Xak. xi KI (go and summon him to me) tapuğka kóründür "make him appear for service (to me)” 573. Mon. V. GRSVU kürs- Hap. leg.; listed as a Mon. V. ending in two consonants. "The reference to Sa:- is incomprehensible unless it is intended to be to the Desid. V. Suff. -sa:-/-se:-, with the implication that the word is der. fr. 1 kür. 'This is of course impossible; the mis-spelling of the Infin. may be consequential from it. Xak. xı yiğit ka:ya: (?error for ka:nka:) kürsdi: “the young man was full (imtala'a) of blood and fat”, so that he radiated gaiety (abdà mün nafsihr”l-mücün). "Vhe origin is that a vesscl is filled with something, then after a short time (the contents) expand (fntafaxa) until they exceed the limit of fullness (zada “an haddrl-imtild”), for example dough, when it is mixed with a lot of yeast and put in a dish and almost fills it, and is then left for a short time, expands till it overflows the rim of the dish (kürse:r, kürsme:k— MS. /rfrse:me:k). "Yhe origin is their remark of (or to?) a gay, cheerful (a/-batiru'l-agir) man 88:d1:; wc have explained (Payyannd) the meàning of it Kaş. IJ] 420 (kürse:r, kürsme:k—MS. kürse:me:k, repeated). . Dis. GRS D kirsiz Priv. N./A. fr. kir; 'stainless, undefiled'. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viir ff. Bud, Sanskrit virajasatravacane "in the doctrine of stainless virtue” kirsiznin nomonta: TT VIII 4.20; kirsiz (spelt kkirsiz) arığ kök kalık “the undefiled pure sky” U 71 37, 53; 0.0. do. 37, 60-3 (tapçasız), TT V 8, sa. Dis. V. GRSD kórse:- (8-) Desid. f. of kör- n.o.a.b. Cf. körüğse:-. Xak. xi men anı: kórse:dim “TI wished to meet him” (liqa'ahw); originally kórügse:dim; this is the rule in the case of the lateral letters. (Jrvrüfu'l-dallága) that for the Desid. f. you add -gse:- to the root of the V. Kaş. III 285 (körse:r, kórse:me:k): Kip. xiv körse- talaba sahwata'l-cimá' "to seek the pleasure of sexual intercourse! İd. 81: (it is possible that this is a mis-spelling of kürs-). I-—————— ———M—— À————!Ü———sÜ à UMEMEMLCLLLILLLILELLLILLLDUbDLSSIISSLAU) |ibSÓ!nts enr eee III LI Hl|||nnnLLLL 0] 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 791 
     
   
   
         DIS. V. GRŞ- 0347 Dis. GRS D keriş (g-) Dev. N. (connoting mutual action) fr. ker-; lit. “pulling one another". Survives, meaning 'quarrel' as keriş in NE Tel. R77 1096; NC Kir., and keris in NC Kzx.; NW Kk. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. U II 58, 5 (i) (tütüş): Civ. TT 1 48, etc. (tütüg): Xak. xı keriş hahilu"l-faras “the withers of a horse" (prov.): keriş a/-muqduama fol-mucadala "resistance in a quarrel”: (Körüş and kiriş follow here): keriş a/-mucddala, one says ne:lük keristir “vhy did you quarrel?” Kaş. I 370 (the last entry, misplaced and with an irrelevant quotn., looks like a later addition to the text): K.B (few people love a man who does not love many) kerişi telimrek ereji az ol 'a man who has many quarrels has little happiness! 2150: Oğuz xı keriş ra's kull cabal yuj'ad 'alayhi "the summit of any mountain that is climbed' Xaş. 7 370: Kom. xiv "quarrel” keriş CCG; Gr.; Kip. xiv keriş al-rábiya "a hill” /d. 81. kiriş Preliminary note. There is a clear phonetic and semantic difference between the two words of this form; 1 kiriş “entry” is giriş in SW Osm., Tkm.; 2 kiriş 'bowstring is kiriş in those languages. D 1 kiriş (8-) Dev. N. fr. kir-; “entry, way in; incomings, revenuc'. Contrast çıkış "expenditure”. S.i.m.m.l.g. Xak. xi kiriş a/-daxl “entry” ş and it is “vhat comes in (daxala) from a man's property” (or trade, day'a) Kaş. I 370: KB kirişke körü sen çıkış kil nepin *regulate your expenditure by looking at your revenue' 1325; (it is the account books that regulate all the affairs of the realm) bitigin tutar él kirişin tetik “the shrewd man controls the revenue of the realm by the books' 2707; 8.0. S913 (çıkiş): xiv Muh. al-daxl ki:rl:ş Rif. işı (only): Çağ. xvff. giriş (spelt; *with 8-”) madxal 'entrance, way in” (quotn.); duxul "the act of entering' (quotn.) San. 313v. 10. 2 kiriş 'bowstring' ; with some extended meanings like “cord the joist (of a roof)”. S.i.a.m.l.g.; Cuv. xirlü Ash, XVI 133. UYyğ. viri ff. Man. ya kirişlerin “their bowstrings! TT IX 79: Civ. kirişke bir bakir bértim “1 gave one Copper coin for a bowstring' USp. so, 3: Xak. xı kİTİŞ wataru'l-qatws 'bowstring' Kaş. I 370; three o.o.: xiv Muh. al-watar kiriş Mel. 71, 6; Rif. 173 (MS. kirtşti): Çağ. xv ff. kiriş (spelt) “a piece of gut (rda) which they dry and spin like a cord'; and, metaph., 'bowstring” (gilla-£ kamàni) San. 313v. 9 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv kiriş “bovvstring” Qutb 98: Kip. xıl al-watar kiriş Hou. ış, 16: xiv. kiriş al-watar; and kiriş is also a member of a person's team (higb) in a competition for shooting, racing, polo, or the like; one says bu kirişim dur “this is my partner” (rafigi) İd. 81 (in the second sense this looks more like a metaph. use of 1 kiriş). D körüş (ğ-) Dev. N. fr. kór-. S.i.m.m.l.g. with .a rather wide range of meanings, "look, glance; sight, eyesight; appearance; someone one often sees'; SW Osm. görüş. Xak. xı körüş a/-mundzara bpl-ilhüz là bi'l-alfás “a meeting face to face, but not a conversation" Kaş. I 370: Xwar. xii körüş “look, glance' "Ali 18, 56. : VU kürşe:k Hap. leg.; prob. a l.-w. Xak. xi kürşe:k the name of a foodstuff (fa'ám) made as follows: millet flour (ubàbu'I-duxn) is boiled in water or milk, then butter (a/-samn) is put on it and it is eaten Kaş. 1 478. kirge:n 'white lead' used as a cosmetic; syn. vv. 0po0:; survives only(?) in NW Kaz. kerşen. Xak. xı kirse:n al-ísfidác 'white lead” Kaş. I 437: 2.0. II 353 (yalrat-): xiv Muh. (under “perfumery”) isfidác kirşe:n Mel. 63, 15; Rif. 162: Çağ. xv ff. kirsen "liquid white! (saftd db) which women smear on their faces San. 313v. 7: Kip. xil (under “vomen”s adornments") a/-isfidac which they put on their faces before the rouge kerşe:n (sic) Hou. 18, s: xv isfidác kirşen (fopa) Tuh. 4b. 15. Dis. V. GRŞD keris- (ğ-) Recip. f. of ker-; usually “to pull one another; to quarrel”. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SE; SW Tkm. göriş- “to help to spread out” (e.g. a carpet). Uy£. viri ff. Bud. U HI 81, x (tutuş-/tütüş-): Xak. xı ol mapa: yip kerişdi: “he helped me to stretch (fi madd) the cord' (etc.); also used for competing (kerişü:r, kerişme:k), and one says ol anın birle: kerişdi: náza'ahu fi şay” "he contended vvith him about something”, and one says ol anın birle: kerişdi: sácarahu wa náza'ahu "he quarrelled and contended with him” Kaş. II 98 (kerişü:r, kerlgme:k); o.o. I 37o (keriş), I/ 115, 5: Kip. xiv keriş'anadahu fa-ta'ànadahu "to thwart (someone); ı. contend stubbornly with one another" d. 81. D kiriş- (8-) Co-op. f. of kir-; s.i.m.m.l.g. with meanings like 'to penetrate; to intervene; to meddle, interfere; to undertake, set about (a task)" which have very little Co-op. connotation; SW Osm. giriş-, Tkm. gi:riş-. Xak. xı ol menin birle rska: kirişdi: “he competed vvith me in going into the matter” (fr l-duxisl fi'l-amr, etc.) Kaş. II og (kirişü:r, kirişme:k): Çağ. xvff. giriş- (-di, “vith 8-, etc.) bir birine giriş-, berhem ol- "to be mixed together'; but it is usually used with a preceding V., e.g. kila giriş- eylemeye başla- "to begin to do”, meaning ibtidà "to begin” Vel: 357 (in a second entry vv. quotn. it is given the second meaning and spelt “vith k-”), kirişdüxil şudan "to enter”, and, metaph., in combination vv. a V. dğdüz kardan “to begin” Sar. 313r. 9 (quotns.): Kip. xiv kiriş- düxala "to enter upon” 7d. 81. D küres- Co-op. f. of küri:- (sic, q.v.); "to shovel together'. In this sense, noted only in Kaş., it must, like kürk:-, always have had an initial k-. But in the sense of “to wrestle', in which it s.i.a.m.l.g., there are NW and SW  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 792 
     
   
   
     748 forms with initial &amp;-, NW Kk. güres-: SW Osm. güreş-, "Tkm. göreş-. In this sense, therefore, it seems to be the Recip. f. of (2) *küre:- (6-). Xak. xı ol mapa: ka:r küreşdi: “he helped me to shovel (fi carf) the snow' (ctc.); also used for "to compete” Kaş. II 99 (küregü:r, küreşme:k), o.o., kı:z birle: küreşme: “do not wrestle with a virgin' (là tuşüri"”l-adra, she will be stronger than you and will beat you) İT 474, 6; çeriğ tutup küreşti: hayyaca hull wáhid minhumá harb rea taqdtalğ "they both. stirred. up war and fought one another” 77 97, 15: K B (if you rebel against fortune) kadğun küres '(prepare to) wrestle with adversity” 681; 0.0. 2249, 2360: Çağ. xv ff. güreş- (spelt, "with 8-") eşi? giriftan "to wrestle' San. 3oqv. zo: Xwar. xiv küres- ditto Qutb 108: Kip. xi şara"a küreş- Hou. 41, 13: xv ditto 7d. 8o; Bul. şşv.: XV ditto Tuh. 22b. 12. D körüş- ($-) Recip. f. of kür-; “to see onc another; to mect', and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g.; NW Kumyk: SW Osm., Tkm. görüş-. Türkü viri ff. kop esen tüke:l körü:şmiş "they all met one another (again) safe and sound” JrkB 1s: Uyf. vri ff. Bud. kaçan Kumarı élig xan birle körüşsersiz *when you meet King Kumara” /Tüen-ts. 78-9; a.o. PP 76, 3 (ékki:le:-): Civ. künli aylı körüşdi "the sun and moon met” (or looked at one another) TT I 93; mir banca 1rak barmış kişiler birle kórüsgeysiz “you will meet people who have gone enormous distances' VII 30, 7-8: Xak. xr ol menin birle: körüşdi: xazaranı”bi "ayn “he mct me face to face”, also used of any things when they see onc another (fard”a) Kaş. I1 go (körüşü:r, körüşme:k): KB körüşmez yağılar 'enemies that do not see one another” r45s: xiv Muh.(?) al-alqà^ "to meet” körüşmek Rif. 121 (only, MS. höşmek, unvocalized): Çağ. xv ff. körüş(spelt) “to see (didar) one another; to meet" (muláqát hardan) San. 304v. 16 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv ditto MN 19: Kip. xiv körüşşafahahu "to shake hands with someone'; the -Ş- forms a Recip., and the word was taken to mean “to shake hands with' instead of "to see one another” (názarahu; MS. in error nágaralu) 81. Tris. GRS D .... Qu Ew Dev. N./A. fr. *kerse:-, Den. fr. keriş, q.v., in the sense of “a horse's 7 Xak. xı kerşeğü: at “a horse which has a sore on its withers' (dabar bi-minsacihi) Kaş. I 491. Tris. V. GRSD kirgenlen- Refl. Den. V. fr. kirge:n; survives in NW Kaz. kérsenlen-, Xak. xr ura:ğut kirşenlendi: “the woman anointed (talat) her face with white İcad” (al-isfidac) Kaş. II 278 (kirşenlenü:r, kirşenlenme:k). Dis. GRY ?F kere:y 'razor'; prob. an Indo-European l.-w., cf. Greek Rerrö “to shave'.. N.o.a.b.; cf. DIS. V. GRSyüli:gü:. All modern languages seem to use l-w.s for “razor”. Oğuz xr (after yüll:ğu:, q.v.) the Oğuz do not know this word and cali 'razor' (al-müsda) kere:y Kaş. İİİ 174; n.m.e.: xiv. Muh.(9) al-müsd gere:y (6- marked) Rif. 160 (only): Xwar. xiv kerey 'razor' Nate. 383, 1-7: Tkm. xv misá kerey (Kip. yülüvvüç) Tuh. 34a. 12. Mon. GS kes pec. to Kaş.ş homophonous vv kes-, q.v Cf. kesek, Xak. xı kes “a picce * (af- git a) of anything; one says bl:r kes etme:k “a piece of bread': kes al-nubla, that is “a small stone (al-madara) with which one cleans oneself" (i.e. after passing water) Kaş. 7 329. kis Hap. leg.; sce kisi:. Xak. xı kls 'wife' (al-zawca); hence one says anın kisi: (MS. hissi:) "his wife'; and some of them use it ma'a'l-idáfa (i.c. kisi:), one says ol kisi: (?MS. kissf:) aldı: “he married (xafaba) a wife' Kaş. 1 329. Mon. V. GSkes- “to cut, cut off”, and the like, S.i.a.m.l.g.; NW Kumyk alone has ges-. "Vhe resemblance to '"'okharian B Aás- "to cut” is a coincidence? Cf. kes, "Türkü viri ff. IrkB 8 (kilig): Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. kiliç üze kesermen “1 cut with a sword' U 77 61, 17; olo, do. 76, r (tel-); Hüen-ts. 316: Civ. edğü kişiler yoltn kese katığlanur “they strive to cut the good men's road” TT I 238; in TT VII 36 about omens to be drawn from mice "biting" various things the word normally used is 1str-, but in lines 2 and ız kes-, in USp. 22, a long petition, thc phr. kalan kes- 'to collect (or deduct?) a particular kind of tax” constantly occurs; a.o. H I 122 (ópl;): Xak. xı ol yığa:ç kesdi: “he cut (gata'a) the piece of wood' (etc.) Kaş. H II (kese:r, kesme:k; prov); four o.o0.: KB basim kesmesüni keseyin tılım “1 will cut off my tongue, so that thev may not cut off my head” 166; o.o. 144 (0:8), 363, 810 (biç-), 4426: xın1(?) At. anın cawábin kese 'cutting short his answer' 290; a.o. 324 (Órte:-); Tef. kes- 'to cut, cut off', etc. 174 (common): xtv Muh. qata"a kes- Mel. o, 4-8; 30, s: Rif. 81, 114; a.o.o.: Çağ. xv ff. kés- (etc.) hes- Vel. 358: kés- buridan "to cut” Sam. 314r. 24 (quotns.): Xwar. xim kes- “to cut, cut off' “Ali 31: xin(?) ditto Oğ. 40, etc.: xIv ditto Qutb 95; kés- MN 343: Kom. xiv ditto CCG, Gr.: Kip. xn qafa"a kes- Hou. 35, 14: xiv ditto İd. 82; qata'a wa zabara ("to prune") kes- Bul. 72r.: xv qafa"a kes- Kav. 9, 6; 74, 10; (and üz-) Tuh. 30a. 10; cabba “to cut off” do. 12a. 12. *kós- See kösgük, kösül-, kósün, kösür-. küs- "to be angry, offended; to sulk', and the like. Survives only(?) in SW Az., Osm. küs-. Oğuz xı ol andın küsdi: 'a;aba 'alayhi tva a"rada "anhu “he was angry with him and avoided him” Kaş. 77 12 (küse:r, kusme:k): (KB küsermen yigitlikke 363 might mean  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 793 
     
   
   
         DIS “Lam angry with youth'( now that [ am getting old), but, as this V. is Oğuz, it is more likely to mean 'I long for youth' (i.e. to be young again), see küse:-): xiv Muh. ğadaba “to be angry' (with someone) küs- Mel. 9, 8; 29, 9; Rif. 81, (112 ópkele-); a/-ğadab küsmek 120 (only): Çağ. xv ff. küs- qalır hardan "to conquer' San. 306v. 12 (this translation seems to be no more than a guess at the meaning of the V. in a verse by Sultán Husayn Mirza): Kap. xil harida “to be angry (with someone)' küsHou. 35, 14: XIV ditto İd. 82: xv igtáza ditto küs- Kav. 9, 6; £adaba küs- do. 76, ız, harida küs- Tuh. 13b. s. Dis. GSE kisi: “vife”, cf. kis, kisi: is the older and prob. the original form. Owing to the ambiguity of the Runic and Uyg. scripts and the nearness of meaning of the two words kisi: has frequently been transcribed (being much the commoner word) where KİSİ: was really intended. "The latter should almost certainly be written at any rate in the passages below. 'There is strong evidence that later the word actually became kişi:, see that word. N.o.a.b. Türkü vir 7x. s (bulun), zz: vin ff. (a gambler) oğlanı:n kisi:si:n tutu:ğ urupan 'putting up his children and wife as a stake” IrkB 29: Uyf. viui ff. Bud. ol yeme Seni ernip Rağağayını atlığ kisisi "that man Séna's wife called Ragagayini” U II] 81, 2-3; kisi oğul “vife and child” Suv. 554, 14; a.o. TT X 499 (teplig): Civ. oğlun kisin "your children and vvives” TT I 154; a word consistently read kişi is very common in USp., in most cases this is correct, but in the following passages Kisi is likelier, Kutluğ atlığ xatın kisi “a lady wife named Kutluğ” 16, 4; (if I die before I repay the debt) kisim “my wife' (will repay it) 18, 7; a.o. 78, 4 (bitig): O. Kar. ix ff. kuyda: kisime: (instead of the usual kuncu:yumna:) “to my wife in the women's apartments! Mal. 18, 3: Xak. xı Kaş. I 329 (kis); 332 (3 tok); n.m.e.: KB Chap. 72 (4475 f.) gives advice on choosing “a wife', evliğ in the title and 4475, KİSİ in 4479 ff. Dis. V. GSEküse:- 'to wish, desire, long for', and the like. Survives in NC Kir. küsó- : SC Uzb. kusa-: NW Kk., Nog. küse-; the usual transcription höse- is clearly erroneous. Cf. tile:-. Uyf. viri ff. Man.-A küseyürbiz 'we long for” M I 10, 10: Man. küseserler TT II] 151; a.o. do. 96 (üçün): Bud. Sanskrit pràárthayano *wishing' küse:yü TT VIII A.1; yathatvecchet "as he wishes' ne:teğ ók küse:se:r do. E.45; kut kolurmen küsüş küseyürmen “1 request and long for divine favour' U 7 31, 4-5; bolğalı küseser “if they wish to become" TT VII 40, 52; o.o. Hüen-ts. 309-10, 1972 (anıt-), etc.: Civ. uri oğul küseser “if he wishes for a son” TT l ro, VII 26, 3530, 13: Xak.xr olanı: körme:kin küse:di: "he wished (famannd) to meet him”, also used for anything that “you wish for Kaş.  . GSG 749 III 265 (küse:r, küse:me:k): KB iki öz körüşmek tilese küsep “if vve tvvo vvish to see one another” 3698; o.o. 363 (ökün- ; küs-), 838, 6301; Küsemiş P.N. soz: xm(?) Ar. eren xayrı şarrı küsep keçmez ol “a man's good and bad qualities do not pass away because he vvishes them to” 373: Xvvar. xıv küse- “to wish' Qutb 108: Kom. xiv “a vvish” küsemek CCI; Gr.: Kip. xır iştüqa mina'l-$awq "to long for” kü:se:- Hou. 37, 20: xiv küse- aráda mumdütiflatahu fi ffl”l-xayr "to wish to resemble someone in doing good' fd. 82: Osm. xv küse- “to desire (something Dat.) in one text 7TS II 66o. Dis. GSB *kesbe: See E çatı:ba:, Dis. GSD ?F kestem Hap. leg.; prob. a l-w., cf. "Tokharian B Adstwer “night”. Cf. sanbu:y. Xak. xı kestem “an entertainment with drinks (döyafa . . . li-şurb) which a man gives to visitors at night (/ayla(n)) other than a formal banquet' (min ğayr ma'daba) Kaş. 1 485. F kester Hap. leg.; no doubt a 1.-vv., Iranian or Tokharian? Ug (the language of) xi kester al-xazaf "earthenvvare” Kaş. 1 457. Dis. V. GSDD kestür- Caus. f. of kes-; s.i.a.m.l.g. Xak. xı ol anar yığa:ç kestürdi: “he gave him the task of cutting (ka/lafahu "ala qaf) the piece of wood' Kaş. II 195 (kestürür, kestürme:k): Çağ. xv ff. késtür- Caus. f., buránidan (MS., in error, buridánidan) “to order to cüt” San. 314v. 9. Dis. GSG D kesek (kese:k) Dev. N. fr. kes-, “a piece (cut off from something); s.i.a.m.l.g., usuallv for “a lump; a clod of earth”, and even “müd brick. To be distinguished fr. kesük Pass. Dev. N./A. 'cut, cut off', and the like, not noted in the earliest period, but see kesüksüz; for convenience early occurrences of this word are also noted below. See Doerfer III 1634. Cf. kes, Xak. xı kesek a/-qit'a “a piece' of something; one says bir kesek ótme:k “a piece of bread” Kaş. I 391; (as an example of suffixed -k) the word for a/-gif"a mina'l-say' kese:k ne:D taken fr. kesdi: gata'a 1 14, 15: xın(?) Tef. kesek “a piece! 175—abtar 'bob-tailed' kuyrukı kesük 1:76: xiv Muh.(?) al-madar “clod” kese:k Rif. 1:78 (only)—bilà walad “childless” kesü:k (either 'eunuch', or an abbreviation of kuyrukı kesük ( Tef.) which had this metaph. meaning) 143 (only): Çağ. xv ff. kések ('with k- -k”) kirpig “mud brick Vel. 358; kések kuliix *clod, mud brick San. 314v. 23 (quotn.)—késük burida "cut, cut off” 314V. 29 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv kesek “a clod' Qutb 95: Kom. xiv 'a piece (of bread)' kese CCG; Gr. (perhaps belongs to kes): Kip. xii al-git'a mina l-lahm “a piece of meat! kesek et Hou. 15, 16—xiv kesük al-xàádimu' l-muhagsá  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 794 
     
   
   
       750 "a castrated servant, eunuch' /d. 82: Osm. xiv ff. kesek (1) xiv and xv 'a piece'; (2) "a clod”, c.i.a.p. TTS 1 448; II 618; İİİ 438; IV sor—xvir kesik para “clipped money” II 618. küskü: “rat, mouse”. Survives in NE Kaç., Koib., Küer., Sag. küske; "Tob., Tölös küskü R II 1501; Khak., Tuv. küske, R translates it 'rat', but in the last two languages it means “mouse” and “rat” is uluğ küske, See Doerfer III 1636. Cf. sıçğa:n, Uyğ. vii ff Civ. küskü is the first name in the 12-year animal cycle in USb. and TT VII, but sıçğan is used in one or two texts in TT VII and VIII and almost all later authorities. D kesgük Hap. leg.; Dev. N. (N.1.), lit. “a cutting object'; as a dog-collar, prob. one fitted with spikes. Xak. xr kesğük al-sacür "an iron dog-collar' Kaş. 1I 289. VU(D) kósgük prima facie a Dev. N. in -ğük, not connected semantically vv. küs- or küse:- but perhaps vv, *kós- ; a/-xaydl means both “mirage” and 'scarecrow'. Cf. oyuk. Xak. xı kósgük "a scarecrow' (a/l-xaydl) which is set up in vegetable gardens and vineyards to guard against the evil eye; also in the prov. (you can catch a lion by a trick) kü:çü:n kösğül tutma:s "but you cannot catch a mirage (al-xaydl) by force” Kaş, 11 289. Tris. GSG D küse:gçi: Hap. leg.; N.Ag. fr. *küse:g N./A.S. fr. küse:-. Xak. xremiglig ura:ğut küse:gci: bolu:r "a nursing mother comes to long for food (mugtahiya h”l-ta"üm) and they give her what suits her” Kaş. 7 153, 14; n.m.e. D kesüksüz Priv. N./A. fr. kesük (see kesek); 'uninterrupted' and the like. N.o.a.b. Xak. xi KB 31 (ula:m): Xwar. xiv kesiksiz ulaşu 'uninterrupted and continuous' Qutb 95. Dis. V. GSLD kesil- Pass. f. of kes-, "to be cut, cut off, severed”, and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. Uyğ. vun ff. Bud. (all the nerves of the elephant's tusks were) üzülüp kesilip 'torn apart and severed' U HI 60, 5; same Hend. Suv. 61, ro and 1718: Xnk. xı kesildi: ne:p “the thing was cut” (ingata'a) Kaş. II 136 (kesilür, kesilme:k), a.o. İ 339 (tun), 523: K B kesildi sözüm “my speech has been cut off” (i.e. is ended) 33; o.o. 227, 404, etc.; xııı(?) Tef. kesil-/kesül- "to be cut off” etc. 175: xiv Muğ. inqafa"a kesi:lMel. 23, 9; Rif. 104: Çağ. xv ff. késil- (spelt) burida şudan "to be cut” San. 314v. 7 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv kesil- 'to be cut (off)” Qutb 95: Kip. xiv. inqafa"a kesil- Bul. 33v.: xv ditto Kav. 77, 5; Tuh. 60a. 3: Osm. xv ff. kesil“to be cut off, separated”, etc.; c.i.a.p. TT'S T 449; İl 618; İT 438; IV 502. (D) kósül- Pass. f. of Ykös-, nlthough the word is treated as a "Trans. V. in Xak., Xwar., and Kom,., it seems likely that it was originally DIS.  GSG a Pass., meaning '(of the legs) to be stretched out". NC Kzx. kösöl-/kösül- R 7J 1294-5; kósil-, MM 227, is an Intrans. meaning “to stretch oneself out” (hence, R , “to die"). Cf. kösür-. Xak. xı er adak kösüldi: “the man stretched out (basata) his legs! Kaş. II 137 (kösülür, kösülme:k: prov., yoğurkanda: artuk adak kösülse: üşiyü:r “if the legs are stretched (muddat) beyond the blanket, they get cold”): Xwar. xiv kilimüpge köre kösül ayaknı “stretch your legs ns far as your blanket allows' Qutb 103: Kom. xiv &amp;yak kösülgil CCG; Gr.: Osm. xiv and xv kösül- “to stretch oneself, be stretched out”, in several texts TS 7 492; II 661; III 483 (a Caus. f. kósült- 'to stretch out' is also noted). D kesle:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. kes. Xak. xı ol itiğ kesle:di: laga'a'l-kalb bi-madara "he pelted the dog with clods of earth” Kaş. 7/7 300 (kesle:r, kesle:me:k). D keslin- Refl. f. of kesil- and syn. w. it. N.o.a.b. Xak. xi keslindi: ne:p “the thing was cut” (ingata'a) Kaş. İT 253 (keslinür, keslinme:k); a.o. İ 352, 13: xın(?) Tef. kesilin- 'to be cut off' 176. D kesliş- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of kesil- with a specialized connotation. Xak. xı keslişdi: ne:p feqata"a árábu'l-gay' wa'nfagala aczàhuu *the thing was cut into pieces and the parts of it were separated” Kaş, I7 224 (keslişü:r, keslişme:k). Tris. GSL ?F keslinçü: “lizard” , cf. keler, Although this word is morphologically a Dev. N. in -çü: fr. keslin-, it is fairly certain that this is illusory and that the word is an attempt to give a "Turkish form to some foreign word. Apart fr. the medieval words listed below, the following modern words for “lizard” seem to be other forms of such a foreign word: NE Alt., Leb., Şor kelesken; Koib., Sag. kélesken; Tel. keleski R 77 1114; Khak. kileski/kilesken; Tuv. xeleske: SE Türki keslencik/keslençük: NC Kir. keskeldirik; Kzx. kesertki: SC Uzb. kaltakesek: NW Kk. kesirtke/ keskeldek; Kumyk gesertki, Nog. kesertki. Xak. xı keslinçü: a/-wazafa “a large lizard, gecko” Kaş. 111 242: Xvvar. xiv keslen ditto Qutb 95: Kip. xim a/-hirdarın toa'l-sihliya “lizard” (Hend.?) kelte: Hou. 11, 18: xiv. keseltki: al-sihliya ma”l-mazağ İd. 82; Bul. 11, 4: xv sihliya keseltüki Tuh. 19b. 1 (there seems to be a good deal of confusion about the Ar. terminology of these animals and different dicts. translate the same word by different words including 'chameleon, salamander, Stellion"). Dis. GSM D kesme: Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. kes- ; originally “cut, cut up, cut off”, with various extended meanings. Survives in SW Osm. as a normal N.Ac., also 'shears; 'Turkish delight; a broad  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 795 
     
   
   
       (TRIS. arrow-head'. See Doerfer 111 1637. Uyğ. viti ff. Bud, kesme ag 'a dish of cut up (meat)' U HI 65, 1 (ii): Xak. xı kesme: al-nışqaş müna"l-nişül "a broad iron arrow-head'; kesme: a/-nüşiya “forelock” Kaş. 1 434 (verse); o.o. I 11, 24; 233 (otruş-): KB (the firmament) kodi 1dt1 kesme "let down its forelock' (over “its face) $824: Çağ. xv ff. kesme (1) "a horse of which either the sire or the dam is wellbred'; (2) “a small round İoaf” (nàn-i guliga); (3) “a lock of hair which they cut, curl, and let fall on the cheek' (verse); . . . (s) 'a kind of large broad saddie-cloth (digdigi) which reaches from a horse's back to the ground" San. 3oov. 18; késme (1) as 2 above; (2) as 3 above (verse); also spelt kesme 314v. 26: Osm. xv ff. kesme “a broad arrow-head', with other meanings later; in several texts TTS I 4so; II 615; İL 438; IV 502: xvi kesme ...(4) in Rümi “a kind of large arrow-head' (paykàn) San. şoov, 21. Tris. GSM D kesmeliğ P.N./A. fr. kesme:; survives in SW Osm. with various meanings derived fr. those of kesme:. Uyğ. vırr ff. Bud. kesmeliğ et *meat for cutting up” U 7/7 65, ro (i). Tris. V. GSMD kesmelen- Hap. leg.?; Refl. Den. V. fr. kesme:. Xak. xı kı:z kesmelendi: “the girl provided herself with a forelock and side curls” Kaş. III 203 (kesmelenü:r, kesmelenme:k).: Dis. GSN VU kósün used only in the Hend. küc kösün and so presumably more or less syn. vv, kü:ç, (strength, power', or the like. Not connected semantically w. küs- or küse:-, but possibly an Intrans. Dev. N. fr. *kóswith some such meaning as stretching or exerting oneself”, Pec. to Uyğ., where it is fairly common. UYyğ. vi ff. Bud. bu daranının küçi kösüni üze “by the power (Hend.) of this dhárant' U II 36, 39-40, (who gave you) bu balıkka kirgülük küç kösün 'authority (Hend.) to enter this city?” U IV 8, 28; Çaştanı €liğnin küçin kösünin “the might of King Castana' do. 10, 51; o.o. TT VII 4o, 14-15; X 127, 202, 247; Hüen-ts. 317; 2071-2. D küsenç Dev. N. fr. küsen- Refl. f. of küse:- not noted before xiv; “desire, wish; something desired”. Survives in NW Kar. L. R II 1soo. Uyf. vin ff. Man. (my lovely, good God! my famous onel) küsüncim (?so read) “my heart”s desire” M 1I 8, 17: Chr. üç törlüğ küsünç (?so read) “three kinds of desirable things' (gold, myrrh, and frankincense) U 7 6, ıq: Kom. xiv 'desire, longing" küsenç CCG; Gr. "77 Dis. V. GSND kesin- Refl. f. of kes-; survives at any rate in SW Osm. kesin- “to cut out (clothes) for oneself'. Xak. xı ol ó:zipe: et kesindi: “he GSR 751 cut off (igtata'a) a piece of meat (etc.) for himself” Kaş. II ış? (kesinü:r, kesinme:k): Kıp. xv inqafa'a "to be cut” (üzün-/) kesin Tuh. 6b. 6. : Tris. GSN D küsençiğ Dev. N./A. fr. küsen-; 'desirable”, and the like. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vin ff. Man. küsençiğ mepiler [gap] 'desirable joys TT HI 123; (His Majesty, our lovely) küsençiğ adınçığ “desirable, exceptional" (brilliant king) M 111 35, 22: Bud. küsençiğ iduk Tusittaki ordusipa “to his desirable holy palace in the Tuşita (heaven)! US. 43, 8; küsençiğ is a component in a royal title in Pfahl. 6, ə. VUD kósünsüz Hap. leg.; Priv. N./A. fr. kösün, in the Hend. küçsüz kösünsüz “povverless”, Uyf. vrir ff. Man. M III 37, 16-17 (i) (öÖpsüz). Dis. GSR D késre: 'behind; after, afterwards; in the west'; der. fr. *ké with the Loc. Suff. -re:, cf. kérü: which has the Directive Suff. -rü:, the -8-, however, is inexplicable. Obviously a very old word; discussed by Bang in Vom Köhtürhischen zum | Osmanischen, AKPAW, Berlin, 1907, I, p. 7, note 3 which mentions the only known survival NE Abakan kézre "behind! (a mountain). Türkü vir yağaru: kontukda: késre: 'after they have settled “hearby” I.S ş, II N 4; késre: “in the west' (the "Tarduş begs . . . in the east (Ópre:) the Tölis begs) II S 13; ol xan yok boltukda: késre: "after that xar died” Ongin 1; o,o. do. 2; 1 E s, etc. (anta:): viii ff. Man. antada késre thereafter! Chuas. 172: Uyğ. vim anta: késre: “thereafter” Su. N 10-12. PU?F küsri: Hap. leg.; it might be expected that a normal anatomical term would be commoner, perhaps a l.-w. "The ordinary word for “rib” is eye:ğü:, Xak. xr küsri: catvánihu'l-şadr “the sides of the chest” (i.e. the ribs?) Kaş. İ 422. D kösrük Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. kósür-; Hap. leg., but there is a Kom. xiv V. kösürükle“to hobble' (a horse) CCG; Gr.; perhaps connected etymologically w. the syn. words SW Osm. kóstek; Tkm. kössek, but a Dev. Suff. -tek is not well attested. Xak. xr kösrük tuşa:ğ ş?kal yadayrl-faras "a hobble for (fastening) two of a horse's legs” Kaş. I 479. Dis. V. GSRD kósür- Hap. leg., but cf. kósrük; syn. w. .kige:-; prima facie Caus. f. of *kós-. Xak. xi ol atığ kösürdi: "he hobbled (agkala) two of the horse's legs” Kaş. 11 78 (kösürür, kósürme:k). Tris. GSR : VUD kösürgü: “a leather bag”, occurs four “times in Kag.; in the main entry spelt kesürgii:; elsewhere the first syllable is unvocalized, and in I 358 it is mis-spelt A.sirlii:; but it can be EE — M A i SE ——ÀÓÀ o 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 796 
     
   
   
       752 explained etymologically as a Den. V. fr. kösür- in the sense of something of which the neck is tied with a string. Xak. xı kósürgü: al-ciráb "a leather bag” Kaş. I 490; 0.0. 7 358 (sanaç), 777 48 (yıparlığ). VU kösürğe:/kösürğe:n “a mole”, both Hap. leg.; an old animal name ending in -ge:/- gen. “Fhere is no widely distributed word for “mole” in "Purkish, see Söcöeröak, p. 151; the phonetic resemblance of SW Az., Osm. kóstebek is prob. fortuitous. | Cf. kózsüz. Xak. xi kósürge: “a kind of field-mouse' (al-cirdàn— MS. al-cirdán) Kaş. 1 490; kósürge:n “a kind of mole" (al-xuld) 1 $22. Dis. GSS D küsüş “vish, desire'; Dev. N./A. fr. küse:-. N.o.a.b. Uy£. vitt ff. Man.-A. M I 28, 21-2 (ağır): Man. TT IX 116 (ka:n-): Bud. küsüş is common; Sanskrit icchiá *wishes' küsüsleri TT VIII E.ə, (1 have written this) Utret Mama küsüşine “in accordance with the wishes of Ütret Mama” U 7 ış, 2; 0.0. do. 31, 4-5 (küse:-); PP 14, 5 etc.; Kuan. 223; TT V 24, 54 (ka:n-); do. 68 (umung); VII 40, 70 etc.; VIII F.11; X 385, etc.: Civ. TT I 115 (ka:n-); VII 27, iq etc.: Xak. xi KB küsüş is common; sometimes meaning “vish, desire", e.g. (if a man has wisdom) bulur er küsüş “he achieves his desires' 160; o.o. 44, €tc.-—but in most cases it seems rather to mean 'desirable, precious, rare', and the like, e.g. (men without understanding are numerous) ukuşluğ küsüş “those with understanding rare' 199; 0.0. 207, 361, 1030, 1105, 1155 (tüzünlük), r725, 5161. Dis. V. GSŞD kesiş- Co-op. f. of kes-, s.i.a.m.l.g. except SE(?) usually for “to help to cut”, or as a Recip. 'to intersect', but w. some extended meanings, esp. in SW Osm. where it also means 'to conclude (an agreement), to settle (an account), to draw (a game)”, etc. Uyğ. viri ff. Civ. kesişoccurs in several comumercial docts. in such phr. as yüz yastukka kesiştimiz *we have settled for a price of roo yastuks' USb. 62, 5-6; 0.0. 107, 5; 108, 6; 109, 5; r16, 5; 116, 11 (üzüş-): Xak. xı ol mana: yığa:ç kesişdi: “he helped me to cut (fi qaf") the pieces of wood' (etc.); also used for competing Kaş. II 101 (kesişü:r, kesişme:k): Çağ. xv ff. kösiş- (spelt) Co-op. f.; bà-ham buridan ta qifa qit'a kardan "to cut, or cut in pieces, together” San. 314v. 5 (quotn.). D küseş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of küse:-. Xak. xı eren kamuğ tava:r küseşdi: “the men all wished (famanná) for wealth'; also used swhen they boast to one another about their wealth (tafáxarsz bi'l-mal) Kaş. II 101 (küseşü:r, küseşme:k). Tris. GSŞ D küsüşlüğ P.N./A. fr. küsüş, n.o.a.b. Uy. vun ff. Man. bu kutluğ künüğ küsüslüg teğinür ertimiz “ve ventured to desire this  TRIS. GSR auspicious day" M İİİ 34, 13-14: Bud. nom küsüşlüğ tinliBlar 'mortals who desire the (true) doctrine' TT V, p. 33, note B go, 4; in some contexts it is the P.N./A. of küsüg as a translation of Sanskrit kháma 'desire', e.g. küsüşlüğ önplüğ tenri yérl kaàmarüpadevaloha "the heavenly land of desire and form” U III 46, 6-7, küsüşlüğ önlüğ yertinçü hümarübadhatu TT X 141. D küsüşsüz Hlap. leg.?; Priv. N./A. fr. küsüg. Uyf. vir(f. Bud. Sanskrit anicchá *without desire" küsüşsüz 77 VIII 4.35. Mon. GS kö:ş “a quiver'; the closed -6:- is well established by the O. Kir. and other spellings. Survives only(?) in NW Kar. L., "TT, R Il 1180; L-w. in Pe., Doerfer III 1697. Other modern languages use either phr. like 'arrow case” or forms of Mong. sağadahlsa”adak. O. Kir. ix ff. altu:nlig (sic) kégig bélimte: bantım '[ have bound the golden quiver round my waist' Mal. 3, 2; ditto (with minor changes) do. ro, s; altu:n keş adrildim (sic?) “1 have parted from my golden quiver" do. 25, 3: Xak. xı ke:ş bi'l-imála 'with -é-' (i.e. in contrast to kl:ş which precedes it) a/-kinána 'quiver'; the Oğuz and their Kip. kinsmen do not know this word Kaş. 111 126; 8 o.o.: xiv Muh. al-ca'ba 'quiver' kö:ş Mel. 5, 15; Rif. 76 (quoted as a word in which yd” represents -6:- in contrast with Kl:ş in which it represents -E:-): Xwar. xiv keş 'quiver' Qutb 97: Kom. xiv 'quiver' keş CCG; Gr.: Kap. xv. Ainána k€ş Tuh. 31a. 2. ki:ş 'sable', both the animal and its skin; s.i.m.m.l.g.; l.-w. in Pe., but not an Uralian or Indo-European l.-w., sce Doerfer Iİ1 1698. Türkü vr: 7/7 N 11-12; S r2 (teyip): Xak. xı ki:ş al-sanmür “sable”, and its tail: is called kl:ş kudruki: Kaş, II] 126 KB 3836 (örle:-), 4425 (İÇ), 5367 etc. (teyin): xiv Muh. al-sammür kl: Met. 5, 14; Rif. 76 (see ké:s), 174 (only): Çağ. xv ff. kiş sammür; in Mong. övlğan (buluğan in Haenisch 22) San. 315r. 11 (quotn.): Xwar. xui(?) kiş 'sable' Oğ. 13: xIV ditto Qutb. gg: Kom. xiv ditto CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiv ki:ş a/-sammür İd. 83: xv ditto Tu. 19a. 11. Dis. GSE kişi: “man, person, human being”, without distinction of sex, often in contrast to animals and supernatural beings. In Runic and Uy&amp;. script indistinguishable fr. kisi:, q.v. S..a.m.l.g. as kişi or the like; NW Kumyk alone gişi, Türkü vı kişi: is fairly common, e.g. edgü: bilge: kişig edgü: alp kişiğ "good wise people, good tough people" 7 S 6, 11 N 4; bir kişi: yanılsar “if one individual misbehaves” do.: vin ff. kişi: is common in İrhB, e.g. eki: aylığ kişi: oğla:n "a human child of two months” 2; (heaven heard it above) asra: kişi: bilti: “mankind knew of it below' 54: Man. eki adaklığ kişike “to twolegged human beings' (as opposed to animals)  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 797 
     
   
   
     DM. TRIS. G$G 753 Chuas. 80; igid kişi tanukı “a false witness for a man" do. 101-2; a.o.o.: Uy£. viii ff. Man.-A. (just as a louse) kişinin terisinde ünüp 'that emerges from a man's skin' (sucks his blood) M 1 8, 14-15: Man. ayığ kişiler *wicked men” TT II 16, 21-2; a.0.0.: Bud. kişi is very commoh, e.g. kayu kişi "any man who' PP rı, s; kişili kişi ermezli "human and non-human” T'T VI 432-3: Civ. Kişi is very common, e.g. TT 7 26 (alta:-), 56 (kora:-): O. Kir. ix ff. (I was left an orphan at the age of three, my elder brother) kişi: kildi: “made a man of me” Mal. 6, 2; a.0.0.: Xak. xi kişi: al-insán "a man, mankind'; used for an individual or as a collective (yaqa" 'alà'I-toğhid twa'[-cam') and for males and females: kişi: al-zawca "a wife'; I heard this word in Yağma:, they say ol kişi: aldı:mu: "has he married?” (tazatewaca) Kaş. 111 224 (in the second meaning clearly a Sec. f. of kisi:); nearly zoo o.o.: KB kişi is very common; e.g. bodunda talusı kişide kedi 'chosen among the people, the best of men” 34: xiu(?) At. kişi is very common, e.g. kişi kutluğı “most blessed of men” 23: Tef. kişi “man”, also *wife' (error or Sec. f. of kisi:) 181: xiv Muh. al-insan gig; al-nas gişiler Mel. 8, 15; 45, 3; Rif. 81, 138 (kişi:, kisi:ler); a.o.o.: Çağ. xv ff. kişi (spelt) (1) “a person” (şaxs) in general, either male or female; (2) »ard wa üwdz-i mufrad (sic, ?corrupt) “a man”, in the Singular(?) San. 315r. 14 (quotns): Xwar. xur(?) bir kart kişi “an old man” Og. 313; two o.o.: xıv kişi 'a man” Qutb gg: Kom. xiv kişi “man, men”, common CCI, CCG, Gr. 149 (quotns.): Kip. xır al-ınsan kişi: Hou. 19, 16: xiv kişi: al-insán, used of males and females; also used metaph. for al-zatca; they .say kişim evvdedür “my person (iusári) is at home”, meaning “my wife! Jd. 82; nas kişiler Bul. 16, 9: xv racul "man" kişi: Kav. 29, 2; 52, 16; insán kiçi (sfc) Tuh. 3b. 11 and about 30 o.o. of kiçi: Osm. xiv ff. kişi “man, men'; c.i.a.p.; in a few xiv and xv texts specifically *male' as opposed to 'female' TTS I 472; II 645; İH 460; IV 525. Dis. V. GŞEkişe:- "to hobble (a horse)” and the like; syn. vv, kósür-; ?a First Period 1.-vv. in Mong. as küli- (Kon. 2602, Haltod 235); n.o.a.b.; in some modern languages displaced by kişenle(not an old word). Türkü vir ff. IrkB 39 (tétrü:): Xak. xı ol atığ kişe:di: “he hobbled (sakkala) the horse'; and one says er ku:lin kişe:di: the man bound (or shackled, qayyada) his slave” Kaş. III 268 (kişe:r, kişe:me:k): KB (the merciful God chose His servant and) kişedi ukuş birle kilkin tilin 'bound his character and tongue with understanding' 1838. kógi:- Hap. leg., but the -ö- is fixed by köşl:gğe:, q.v.; cf. köli:-, q.y. Modern V.s of similar form in, e.g., SE "Türki: NC Kir. are not related. Xak. xr ta:m kü:nüg köşi:di: *the wall hid (aodrd) the, sun and obstructed it(s light)” (satarahd), also “used of anything which obstructs the light (satara'l-adwá') Kaş. III 267 (köşi:r, köşi:me:k). Dis. V. GŞDD köşit- Caus. f. of köşi:-, but practically syn. w. it. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. kün tepri öz küçin órtgeli kósitgeli [gap] “in order to cover the sun and obstruct (its light) by his own strength” TT X 305-6: Xak. xı bulit kó:küg kógitti: 'the cloud covered (or blocked out, satara) the sky”, also used of anything that covers (or blocks out) anything Kaş. II 307 (köşitü:r, köşitme:k). Dis. GŞG köşek “a young animal”, the kind varying in different languages; not noted in “Turkish before xitt but obviously current before the separation of Standard and L/R Turkish, see Studies, p. 52, since it was a First Period İ.-vv. in Mong. as gólige (Kom. 2602)/gólóge (Haltod 264) "a puppy, and occurs in Hungarian as hölyöh “a kid or other young animal”, no doubt borrowed from Old Bulgar, or some related language. Survives as köşek “camel colt' in SC Uzb.: NW Kk.: SW Az., Osm., Tkm. (kö:şek), see Shcherbak, p. 106. Çağ. xvff. köşek/köşelek (both spelt) “a one-year-old camel colt; a "tvvo-year-old” is called torum, and a 'three-year-old' taylak San. 306v. 18; 2.0. 173r. 9 (torum): Kip. xit: a/-faşil 'camel colt' kö:şek Hou. 14, 13: xiv ditto Bul. 7, 6; köşek ditto İd. 82: xv ditto Tuh. 27b. 10 (taylak in margin); Osm. xiv ff. köşek 'camel colt'; c.i.a.p. T TS J 492; I] 661; III 483; IV 548. D kó:gik (sic, under fa'il) (Conc. N.) fr. kógi-; cf. köşi:ğe:, kü:lik. Pec. to Xak. Xak. xı kö:şik al-xamar swa'l-satra "a screen, covering' Kaş. 1 409: KB kayu sığnu keldi tiledi köşik (rhyming vv. €şik) “some came to take refuge (with him) and asked for a screen (from their enemies)' 451. Tris. GŞG D köşi:ğe: Dev. N. fr. köşi:-, acc. to Kaş. light shadow', as opposed to Kóli:ge: "deep shade'. Mong. hógige “curtain , the side wall of a tent” (Kot. 2587, Haltod 229) looks more like a 1.-w. fr. kó:gik with suffixed -e than fr. this word. 'The modern words with this meaning, köşiğe/köşögö and the like, in several NE languages: SE Tar.: NC Kir. seem to be reborrowings fr. the Mong. Uy&amp;. viri ff. Bud. (climbing a big tree, breaking off the branches and leaves, taking them, and) balık üze örtüp köşiğe kilip: “covering the fish and giving them shade” Suv. 602, 2: (XIV Chin.Uyğ. Dict. 'curtain' köşiğe (?Mong. l-w.) Ligeti 176; R 11 1307): Xak. x1 kósi:ge: *slight shade” (al-zillul-sagir) Kaş. I 448; Hİ 174 (both main entries): (Kom. xiv *curtain' köşeğen (?Mong. 1.-v.) CCI; Gr.). D köşikliğ Hap. leg.: P.N./A. fr. köşik. Xak. xı köşikliğ y€:r “a shady (muszallal) place" Kaş. 7 509. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 798 
     
   
   
     754 Dis. V. GSLD kişel- Pass. f. of kige:-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı KB biliglig kişeldi turup yüğrümez “the wise man has been hobbled, he stands still and cannot run” 6614; o.o. 6615. Tris. GSL D kişilik A.N. fr. kisi:; originally 'humanity, kindliness”, and the like. S.ia.m.Lg.; the original meaning survives in one or two languages like NC Kir.: NW Kk,, but elsewhere it usually means 'mankind' or, with a preceding numeral, “a group of (so many) persons". Xak. xi KB kişilikke hummat muruwwat kerek mankind must have energy and humanity' (and a man's (kişi) humanity must be as great as his energy) 414; (if a man is to rise to fortune he must have uprightness) könilik atı ol kişilik bütün “the name of uprightness is complete humanity'. (Men are not rare) kişilik kız ol 'it is humanity that is rare' 865-6; a.o. 1690 (anut-): xi(?) Ar. bu kün bu ajunda kisilik isiz 'today in this world humanity is (regarded as) a sin” 385: Xwar. xiv kigilik 'humanity, kindliness' Qutb 99: Osm. xiv ff. kişilik “humanity” is noted in one or two xIv to XVI texts; the word also occurs in phr. like kişilik kaftan “formal dress” fr. xiv onwards TT. 1 473; 11 646; III 461; IV 526. Dis. GŞN D kişen Dev. N. (Conc. N.) fr. kişe:-: “a horse's hobble; fetters, leg-irons', and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SW; cf, buka:ğu:, tuşa:ğ, kósrük. See Doerfer III 1699. Uyğ. vin ff. Civ. TT VII 36, 15 (üm): Xak. xı kişen sihál “hobble” Kaş. I1 13 (seş-), n.m.e.: KB kişen ol kişike biliğ ham ukuş “knovledge and understanding are (like) fetters on a man” 314; (the King said, *what is this fastening (berk) of yours?”) negü teg kişen ol seni berkleyü “vhat kind of fetters are they that hold you fast?” 701; 0.0. 702, 1837, 6615 (bür-): Çağ. xv ff. kisen (spelt) zincir “chain” Sam. 315r. 13: Kom. xiv “horse”s hobble' kişen CCI; Gr.: Kip. xii al-şikal kişe:n Hou. 14, 6: xiv ditto 7d. 82: xv şihdl ... Tkm. kisen Tu. zob. 12 (see tuşa:8). Dis. V. GŞND köşin- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of köşl:-. Xak. xı er künke: köşindi: (MS. kójiindi:) "the man shaded himself (taza/lala) from the sun”, also used when a man hides himself (tawarà) from somebody Kaş. II 157 (köşinü:r, köşinme:k). D kisne:- "to neigh” of a horse and the like; as opposed to okra:- “to whinny'. S.i.a.m.l.g. with initial k-; morphologically a Den. V. in -e:- fr. kişen but with no obvious semantic connection. Xak. xr at kigne:di: “the horse neighed' (şahala), and one says katır kişne:di: “the mule brayed' (sağaca) Kaş. III 302 (kişne:r, kişne:me:k), a.o. / 236, 3: xn1(?) Tef. kişne- “to neigh' r8r: xiv Muh.(?) DIS.V. GŞL(among 'sounds') sahilu'" əvi kişnemek Mel. 73, 11 (in one MS. only): Çağ. xv ff. kişne(spelt) of a horse, “to neigh' (şika kardan) San. 315r. $ (quotn.): Xwar. xii ditto "AH 36: Kom. xiv “to neigh' kişine-/kişne- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xi ;ahala'l-faras at kişnedi: (MS. Feşnedi:) Hou. ız, zo: xiv ditto /d. 83; Bul. ssr.: xv ditto Tuh. 23a. 3. Tris. GŞN D kişenliğ P.N./A. fr. kigen; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı KB kişenliğ yarağsızka barmaz üküş “a man in fetters cannot get into much mischief' 314; a.o.o. 315-16 (kódezlig). D kişensiz Hap. leg.?; Priv. N./A. fr. kişen, *unhobbled' and the like. Xak. xı KB 374 (kólün-). Dis. GSR F geşür 'carrot'; l.-w. fr. Pe. cazar. Survives in NW Kar. T. geşür R II 1576; Kk. geşir, Kaz. kiger: SW Tkm. keşir, Oğuz xı Kaş. I 431 (2 turma:): xiv Muh. al-cazar geşür Mel. 78, 3; Rif. 182 (unvocalized). Dis. V. GSRVU köşe:r- “to be full to overflowing'. Pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı kö:l köşerdi: “the lake was very full (imtala'a . . . cidda(n)) so that it almost overflowed' (tafid) Kaş. 1İ 79 (köşe:rür, köşe:rme:k: verse); kó:lü:) taki: köşe:rü:r “and the pond is full to overflowing' (yamtali min faydihi) I 73, 11. Tris. GSR VUD köşerğe:k Hap. leg.; the hüf is unvocalized, and there are a fatha above and a hasra below the sin, but the translation suggests that this is a Dev. N./A. (connoting habitual action) fr. kóge:r-. Xak. xı köşerge:k er "a man who feels cramped for space (yatadayyaq 'alayhi makánuhu) when he sees people in his house” Kaş. I1 290. Mon, GY S key Sec ked. Mon. V. GYS key- See ked-. S 1 küy- See kü:d-. S 2 küy- See küfi-. Dis. GYE küye: (8-) “a (clothes-)moth”, S.i.a.m.l.g. with some phonetic changes; NW Kumyk: SW Tkm. güye, Osm. güve. See Doerfer III 1692. Xak.xı küye: “the worm (al-siis) which eats felt, etc.” Kaş. III iyo: Kip. xim al-sis küye: (MS. in error kíübe:) Hou. 11, 20: XV düd 'worm' (kurt/sülük/ (PU) sovvulşan/) küye Tuh. rsb. 3; 'att “moth” küye 25a. rz. Dis. V. GYB?E küyfen- Hap. leg.; this word is spelt quite clearly in the MS. but can hardly be right;  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 799 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. GYM- 455 f is not a Xak. sound (sce Studies, p. 167) and, even if it is taken as a scription of v, the consonantal cluster -yv- is otherwise known only in ayva: which is prob. a l.-w. On the other hand, f is known to occur as an error for m, -ym- is a consonantal cluster which occurs in other words, e.g. eymen-, and küymenexists with the same meaning in some medieval and modern languages. Moreover, it can be explained as a Refl. Den. V. of küyürn which seems to be a genuine word although it is an unvocalized Hap. leg. This vvord has therefore been entered as küymen-. Dis. GYD VU?F küyde: Hap. leg.; prob. a l.-w.; there is some semantic connection w. 2 küy(Küfi-) but -de: is not a known Dev. Suff. Xak. xr küyde: “a furnace' (a/-afün) in which gold and silver ores are melted and refined Kas. III 173. E küydün misreading of kövdön. Dis. V. GYDS küydür- See kündür-. Dis. GYG keyik (?8-) originally a generic term for any “vvild four-legged game animal”, hence used as a N. for specific wild animals, deer, wild goat, etc., and as an Adj. for ^wild, untamed”, and the like. It is therefore often difficult to determine the exact meaning in some contexts. S.i.a.m.L.g.; in NW Kumyk giyik: SW Osm. geyik, but 'Tkm. keyik. The alternation between -e- and -1- in the first syllable in modern languages confirms original -é-, which is the spelling in O. Kir. Türkü vırı (we settled down) keyik yéyü (sic) tavışğan yeyü: (sic) "living on wild game and hares” T 8: viu ff. keyi:k (sic) occurs seven times in İrRB and seems to mean 'wild game”, e.g. in ış keyi:k oğlı: “young wild animals”, parallel with kişi: oğlı: "young human beings'; in 31 and 49 bars kéykk “a leopard and a wild game animal” vvent out to look for food together, and in 63 the king's army went hunting and eli:k keyl:k *roe deer and (other) wild game” were caught in the ring of beaters: Uyğ. vırt ff. Bud. yılkı ajuninda barmış kuşlar keyikler '(persons who) have been reborn as animals and are birds or wild game” U 17 43, 12-14; 8.0. U IV. 18 215 (tegrikle:-): Civ, kilen keyik müyüzi teg “like the horn of a wild unicorn' * (Chinese c't [ín— Giles 1,044 7,186) TT I 42; 2.0. H II 14, 122: O. Kir. 1x ff. kéyik Mal. 44, 2 (teziğ): Xak. xi keyik al-mahşi min kull şay" fi'l-ag! basically *wild' of anything; and when this word is used specifically (utligat) it refers to 'antelopes, wild boars, and wild goats” (al-zibaà' wa'l-'ufr wa'l-wu'il) and any other animals of this kind which are eaten: keyik kişi: “a wild man” (ai-nasnás): keyik söğüt “a wild (al-wahgi) willow tree” ; similarly the wild variety of any domesticated species (sinf ahli) is called keyik Kaş. III 168; over 20 o.o. usually translated *wild game”, in 171 353, 9 al-zibà': KB (this wicked world . . . does not love those that love it but) keyik teg kaçar 'runs away like a wild thing” 401; keyik teğ turur kılkı “(my own) character is like a wild thing" 698; a.o. 712 (tezig): xm(?) Tef. keyik 'wild animal; wild goat' 178 (Riyih): xiv Muh. al-wah;i 'wild animals' geyik Mel. s4, 8; keyi:k Rif. 138; al-ğazdl 'gazelle' (1wu:k; in margin) geylg 175 (only): Çağ. xv ff. keyik (*with k- -k') ahi “gazelle” Vel. 368; San. 317r. 13 (quotn.): Xwar. xır(?) keyik, apparently spelt Ark, occurs several times in Oğ., e.g. kik av avlaya turur erdi "he was constantly hunting wild game” 16-17: xiv kedik (sic) *wild game” Qutb 93; Nahc. 338, 4: Kom. xiv *wild' keyik CCI; Gr. 136 (quotn.): Kip. xim al-wuhüg mutlaqa(n) *wild animals! in general keylk ou. 11, 2: XIV al-gazál keyik (fıvuğ) Bul. 10, 7; baqarı”l-nahşi *wild cattle" sawan keyik/ keyik şığır do. 8-9: xv al-gazàl kéylk Kav. öz, 6; talis keyik Tuk. 38b. 3: Osm. xiv and xv geyik 'wild four-legged animals' in several texts TT I 307; III 293. S keyüg See kedüg. S küyük See *küfiük. Tris. GYG D keyikçi: (&amp;-) N.Ag. fr. kéyik “vild game hunter'; pec. to Uyg.? Uyf. vir ff. Bud. kus[cg1] keyik[ci] balıkçı *wildfowlers, wild game hunters, and fishermen! PP r, 7-8; o.o. U II 84, 9; III 54, 5 (i); 57, 3 (ii); 58, 8-9 (tokin-); ör, 3; TT IV 8, 56. : . S Dis. GYL D keyliğ (&amp;-) Hap. leg.; presumably a crasis of kéyiklig. Xak. xr keyliğ “a wild man” (a/-nasnás); used metaph. for a man who looks suspiciously in every direction as he walks (yamşi mutalaffita(n)) like someone stupefied or a wild animal (ka'l-madhüg awi'l-wahgi) ; he is called keylig kişi: Kaş. 7JI 175. Dis. V. GYLD küye:le:- (£-) Den. V. fr. küye:; survives with the same meaning in SW Osm. güvele-. Xak. xı er kidiz küye:le:di: “the man cleared the worms (naza'a'i-siis) out of the felt (etc.) when he shook it and drove them out of it” Kaş. III 329 (küye:le:r, küye:le:me:k). Dis. GYM VU küyüm Hap. leg. and unvocalized, but with a clear semantic connection vv, küymen-. Xak. xi ol küyüm küyüm (sc) kü:n keçürdi: amda'l-nahàr fi ğafla là gata'a şuğl vea la kana fárifa(n) “he spent the day indolently without actually stopping work or being unemployed” Kaş. /TI 169. Dis. V. GYMD küymen- Refl. Den. V. fr. küyüm: “to be indolent, to potter'! Mis-spelt in Kaş., see E 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 800 
     
   
   
       756 DIS. V. küyfen-. Survives in SC Uzb. kuyman-/ kuymalan- “to potter, fuss, feel bothered'. "Vhere is a cognate form in NE 'l'el. küymel“to dawdle, dither” R II 1422; SW Tkm. küylen- has much the same meaning. Xak. xı er r:gka: küymendi: agfala'l-racul fi'l-amr 1a. lam yubrimhu "the man dawdled over the matter and did not settle it properly'; kümyendi: a metathesized alternative pronunciation Kaş. H1 196 (küymenü:r, küymenme:k, MS. küyfen- and küfyen-): Çağ. xv ff. küymen- (-di etc.) fa"allul «a bahdna eyle- "to make excuses, davvdle” Vel. 375 (quotns.); küymen- (spelt) bahána sca ta"allul hardan San. 310v. 26 (quotns.). Dis. V. GYNS küyün- See küü-. Dis. V. GYRS küyür- See künür-. Mon. GZ 1 kez (8-) “the notch of an arrow'; survives only(?) in SW Osm. gez. Xak. xı kez füqu”/-sahm “the notch of an arrow'; one says ok kezi: Kaş. I 326, a.o. İİİ 318, 16: xiv Müh.(?) (among “veapons, etc.”) a/-farcdq (?error for al-füq) o:k kezi: Rif. 173 (only): (Çağ. xv ff. f£ez ('with £-") “an arrow without feathers'; and if someone cuts a stick in a garden or wood and ties a string to it and makes a bow, and cuts another stick suitable for shooting and fastens some kind of feather to it and shoots it they call such an arrow £ez; and also any straight branch like an arrow on a tree Vel. 353 (quotn.); gez “an arrow without feathers or head; a kind of arrow with a thick middle and slender ends” San. 300v. 7 (quotn.); Steingass lists a Pe. word gaz with some of these meanings; it is no doubt a Pe. l.-vv.): Kip. xiv. kez (MS., in error, küz) hayta yaga'u'l-füq müina”?l-scatar “(the place) where the notch for the bowstring is” Id. 81: Osm. xiv ff. £ez “the notch in an arrow'; in several texts TTS I 309; HI 432; IV 339. 2 kez IIap. leg.; there does not seem to be any widely distributed word with this meaning. Xak. xı kez al-qurára 'sediment', that is the remains of milk, flour, etc., which stick to the bottom of a cooking pot and are scraped off it; one says eşiç kezi: (MS., in error, Rizz:) Kaş. I 327. F 3 kez Hap. leg.; no doubt a l.-w., but not Chinese; perhaps cognate to Pe. kaz[kaj/ hac '*raw silk”. Cf. barçın. Xak. xı kez “the name of a kind of Chinese brocade' (dibdcı”l-Sin) Kaş. I 327. 1 kiz (8-) Hap. leg.; but cf. kizle:-, Xak. xı kiz al-'atida tca'l-taxt. $a. 'aybatwu'l-tiyab "a perfume box; wardrobe; clothes bag' and also any kind of 'cupboard'; hence one says kizde:ki: kin (MS., in error, kiz) yıpar "the scent of müsl: stored in a cupboard'; this is said GYM only as a simile for the fragrance of girls” breath (tib fami'l-cawári) Kuş. I 327. S 2 kiz See kidiz. 1 kö:z (ğ-) "eye", c.i.a.p.a.l.ş göz in NW Kumyk: SW Osm,, 'TTkm.; with extended meanings like "a small aperture', e.g. “the eye (of a needle), and used in many idiomatic expressions. 'lhe meaning “a spring” (of water) is prob. not native 'l'urkish. but. due to an overliteral translation of Ar. al-'ayn, which means both “eye” and 'spring'. "lhere is obviously a very old etymological connection with kör-, q.v. Türkü vii 7 N ro (kór-); I N ir (1 kaiş), etc.: vitr ff. Man. kózin körüp 'secing with the eyes” Chuas. 312; közümte “in my view' (worthless) TT 77 8, 44: UyÉ. viui ff. Man.-A (wealth) kózipe nep ilinmegey 'will not catch his eye at all' (i.e. will not attract him) M 7 15, s, köz adakka Sevük 'the eye is dear to the leg' do. 23, 5-6: Man. kózi karam 'my black-eyed (beauty)' M 119,19; a.0. TT I1I 152(yum-): Bud. köz "eye” is common, e.g. köz ağrığ igig “an eye disease" U I1 68, 2 (iii), közin açıp 'opening hiseyes' U 1/1 35,29; 3.0. PP 57, s- 6 (tegler-): Civ. Köz “eye” is common, e.g. 77 7 65s (yaruksuz): Xak. xı kó:z, almost always so spelt, occurs over seventy times, usually translated a/-'ayn “eye”, less often al-tarf or al-basar "sight” and the like; there is n.m.e. of this or 2 kó:z in our MS. of Kaş. prob. owing to a scribal error, but the vowel was almost certainly long since there is no comparable confusion in the text at kez, küz, kiz: KB (let your words be) közsüz karağuka köz “an eye for the blind” 178; körürmen közin “1 see with my eyes” 926; a.o, 770 (açıt-): xıır(?) Az. kózi suk baxil “the miser with greedy eyes” 255; a.o.o.: Tef. köz “eye, the bezel of a ring”, and in idioms 181: xiv Muh. al-"ayn &amp;ó:z (sic) Mel. 46, 13; Rif. 140; (under “dress”) a/-faşş “the bezel (of a ring)” gö:z ka:ş 53, 8; 150; "aymel-má' "a spring of water' su: gö:zl: 77, 1; 180: Çağ. xv ff. göz ("with 8-”) (1) gagm 'eye'; (2) qarha “a sore' which breaks out on the body (quotn.), ((3) güz), (4) çaşma “a spring” San. 306r. 29 (quotn.): Xwar. xit köz "eye" ' Ali 21: xil?) ditto Og. 6, ctc.: xiv ditto, also “spring” Qutb 104; MN oo, etc.: Kom. xiv “eye” köz CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiii (under *waters') al "ayn, 'aymu'i-má' (sic) köz Hou. 6, 19; (under 'parts of the body”) ai-'ayn köz do. 20, 3: xıv köz al-'ayn . . . also al-ma'wl-ma'in "spring water İd. 81; 'ayni közüm... 'aynuk közün Bul. 16, 10-12: xv al-'ayn köz Kav. 60, 11-12; 'aynu'l-si' "evil eye” şakır köz, "ayn köz Bul. zab. 6: a.o.o.: Osm. xiv ff. göz 'eye' noted in several idiomatic expressions TTS 1 33off., I1 461 ft, I11 317 f. ; IV 362 ff. 2 kó:z 'burning embers'; survives only(?) m0 SW Az., Osm. köz, Tkm. kö:z, there are traces of a syn. vvord vv. back vovvels in some modern languages, e.g. NE Alt,, Leb., Sor, "Tel. kos R II 621: SE Türki koz Shatv 156 (only), but their status is dubious. X&amp;ak. xı kö:z al-camr 'burning embers” / 337, 12   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 801 
     
   
   
      TRIS. GZC (1 ür-); n.m.e. (see 1 kó:z): xiv Muh. al-camr gö:z Mel. 68, 16; kó:z Rif. 169: Çağ. xv ff. köz (with k-) axgár-i afrüxta 'burning embers' Sar. 306r. 28 (prov.): Xwar. xiv ditto Qut) 104: Kip. xiv köz .. . also bayna'l-camr toa' l-aykar; the last word does not exist in normal Ar. and is prob. a corruption of Pe. axgár (sce Çağ.) İd. 81; al-camr köz Bul. 4, I2: XV ditto Tuh. 11b. 3: Osm. xiv ff. köz “burning enibers'; c.i.a.p., esp. in Ar. and Pe. dicts. TS 7 492; II 662; III 484; IV 549. küz (8-) "autumn", s.i.a.m.l.g.; güz in NW Kk., Kumyk: SW Osm,, Tkm. (ğüyz), Cuv. kör Ash. VII 271. Türkü vir(?) küzte: “in the autumn” Hoyto Tamir X 3 (ETY II v71): Uy£. vii ol yil küzin “in the autumn of that year” Su. E 8: vii ff. Civ. küz is fairly common in USp. in such phr. as küz yanıda “at the beginning of autumn” r, 4: Xak. xr küz al-xarif “autumn” Kaş. 1 327; a.o. II 172, 4 (kelig); JI/ 160, 19: xın(?) At. kelür küz kecer yaz 'autumn comes, summer passes' 471; 4.0. 472 (tüket-): xiv Muh. al-xarif gü:z Mel, 79, 17; kü:z Rif. 184: Çağ. xv ft. güz (with 8-) (3) “the three months of the season of autumn” (xarif) San. 306v. 2: Xwar. XIV. küz “autumn” Qutb 108: Kom. xiv ditto CCI, CCG, Gr. 160 (quotns.): Kip. xiv küz faşlu"l-xarif İd. 81; al-xarif küz Bul. ış, 16: xv ditto Kav. 36, rs (MS., in error, biz). Mon. V. GZkez- (&amp;-) “to travel, walk about, traverse', usually with the connotation of walking about to view the scenery or the like rather than travelling to a specific destination. "The V. is "Trans, and places traversed are in the Acc. S..a.m.lg., ğez- in NW Kk, Kumyk: SW Osm,, Tkm. Uyf. vii (VU) Çığıltır kólte: ak suv (?so read) kezü: süpüşdim 'I walked along the Ak Suv (river) from the (VU) Cuiiltir lake and fought a battle' $u. E 6: vini ff. Man. TT III 60-1 (1 6:1): Bud. ol kutluğ orunlarığ kezser tegzinser “if one travels through those holy places and circulates (round them)” Hüen-ts. 93-4; U III zo, s (i) (1 a:r-): Xak. xi ol yérig kezdi: "he traversed (naqqaba) the place and walked about in it” (tafa fiha) Kaş. 1I ro (keze:r, kezme:k): KB alunuğ kezermen mana yok orun "TI traverse the world and have no (fixed) place of my own' 747; a.0. 79: XiIi(?) Tef. kez- "to traverse! 169: xiv Muh.(?) saha wa tafarrada (9) “to travel by oneself, alone(?) kez- (MS. ker-) Rif. 110 (only): Çağ. xv ff. köz- (-dik, *with k-”) gez- ve sayr eyle- “to travel” Vel. 358 (quotn.), kéz- gajtan wa sayr hardan “to ramble, travel” San. 313v. 12 (quotns.); kézgardidan "to ramble” is pronounced with -é(not -1-) do. 25v. 26: X war. xın kez- “to walk about or through” 'Ali 47: xiv ditto Qutb oz: Kom. xiv ditto CCG; Gr.: Kip. xır dara mina'l-dawrün "to traverse' kez- Hou. 40, 6: xiv kez- táfa İd. 82; al-dawrán kezmek Bul. $, 13: XV düra mina Hdaurön kez- Kav. 77, 16.   757 Dis. GZE D keze: ($-) Gerund of kez- used as an Adv.; “in succession, in due course”, and the like. N.o.a.b. Uyf. vin ff. Bud. (the sun and moon .. . .) tórt bulunuğ keze yaruti tınlığTarığ igidür “illuminate the four quarters (of the world) in succession and nourish living creatures” TT VI 244-5: Civ. iki üç kata munt teg kılsar keze uz açılur “if one acts like this two or three times, in due course it is completely cured' / / 153-4. Dis. V. GZED 1 köze:- (£-) Den. V. fr. 1 kó:z; survives in SW "km. göze- “to tie up the mouth of a sack or the like, to prevent the contents from coming out”, this and the Osm. meaning seem to derive fr. Kó:z in the meaning of 'hole, aperture', and the like; in Xak. it seems rather to mean “to pick the eyes out”. Xak. xı ol üzümni: kóze:di: matafa wa'ltaqata habbàta'l-'inab mina'l-"unqüd “he plucked (Hend.) individual grapes from the bunch' Kaş. III 265 (no Aor. or Infin.; follows 2 köze:-): Osm. xv ff. göze- is used in several Pe. dicts. for “to mend holes in a garment! and once for "to sieve (grain)! T TS 17 463; I11 318; IV 363: xvii göze- (with $-") in Rümi, rüfü kardan cüma "to mend (holes in) a garment” San. 306r. 28. D 2 kóze:- Den. V. fr. 2 kó:z; 'to poke a fire, stir up the burning embers'; survives with the same meaning in NE Koib. R 7/ r300; and SW Tkm. kó:ze- “(of a fire) to burn up” (Intrans.). Xak. xı ol ot kóze:di: harata”l-nar bi'l-mihrát "he poked the fire with a poker” Kaş. III 265 (kóze:r, köze:me:k). D küze:- (8-) Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. küz. Xak. xı ol yayla:ğda: küze:di: "he spent the autumn (aqdma”l-xarif in the summer pasture” (etc.) Kaş. III 265 (küze:r, küze:me:k). Dis. GZC F küzeç “a jug' or other vessel; it appears fr. TT I 197-9 (see Si:-) that it could be a vessel standing on legs. Unquestionably a 1.-vv. fr. some [Iranian language, cf. Sogdian Akwzt'yk (küzatik?) "a jug' and Pe, kzza (also a 1.-vv, in Ar.), but it is not clear whether it is an actual Iranian word or a Turkish Dim. f. in -€ fr. such a foreign word. Cf. küvec. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. TT VIII C.10 (batiBlik): Civ. TT I 189 (idis); 194-7 (sı:-): Xak. xı küzeç al-küza (MS., in error, al-lawza) sca'l-bastüga “a jug, an earthenware water vessel; this word agrees with the Ar. except that the (final) Ad” is changed to cim Kaş. 1 360: Arğu: xı küdec (with dal) also al-kiza; there is a similar interchange between döl and söy in Ar., e.g. dabara and zabara “to write! and mö” du'áq and zu'áq "brackish water' Kaş. I 360. Tris. GZC DF küzeçliğ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. küzeç. Xak. xı (after küzeçlik) and the owner (of an earthenware water vessel) with -&amp; Kaş. I so6.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 802 
     
   
   
     758 TRIS. DF küzeçlik Hap. leg.; A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. küzec. Xak. xı küzeçlik titi 'clay suitable for making an earthenware water vessel' (al-bastüqa) Kaş. I 506. Dis. GZD D kózet (&amp;-) Hap. leg., but see közetçi:, kózetlig; morphologically a Dev. N. in -t fr. köze:-, but semantically connected. with közed-. Uyf. viii ff. Bud, üç közet ödün "at the time of the third night watch (of two hours)” TT V ro, go (ungrammatical translation of a Chinese phr.). Dis. V. GZDD kezit- (-) Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of kez-; in other languages the Caus. f. is kezdür- or the like, not noted in the early period. Xak. xt ol meni: yé:r kezitti: 'he made me traverse (tawtwafani) the place” Kaş. 11 306 (kezitü:r, kezitme:k). D kóze:d- (ğ-) Trans. Den. V. fr. 1 kö:z, "to guard, protect, watch', and the like. Kag.'s etymology is absurd; he was misled by the fact that the -d- was assimilated to the -t- in the Perf. In Üyğ,, usually in the Hend. küközed-, same meaning. Survives only(?) in NE Şor, Tel. küzet- “to tend or watch (sheep)'. See közet and ködez-. Türkü vir inim Kül Téginig közedü: 'protecting (or watching over) my younger brother Kül "Tegin” £ W 1 (a much damaged passage): Uyğ. vit ff. Man. usually in the phr. kü- közed- M /// 36, 4-6 (iii) (also 7 31, 4-6 (i); kü:-); TT IX ss— (after a gap) közedip TT IJI 116; siz yarİrkamış yarlığığ sımtağsız kópülün kózetdi (sic?) “they respected the commands which you had given with a mind free from carelessness' do. 131; 2.0. 137: Bud. usually in the phr. kü- közed- and esp. küyü közedü tut- U IV 36, 81-3 (agin-); o.o. (kü:-)—bu kapağ kózedü tururlar “they stand guarding this gate' PP 42, 3-4; etöz kózedgü tamğa "a mudràá for protecting the body” TT V 8, 53; [gap] küze:tgülük (sic) TT VIII A.1; o.o. PP 73, 3 (borluk); U //T 82, 25 and sec yüze:gü:: Civ. etózüpin kózedsersen 'if vou protect vour body' TT I 42; 0.0. do. 173 (2 érgür-); VII zy, 2 and 9; 28, 27 and 48: Xak. xı ol meni: kózetti: intazarani 'he watched (or watched for) me'; its origin is kö:z attı: rama bi-basarthi ilayya intizdra(n) "he threw a watchful glance at me? Kaş. II 306 (közetü:r, közetme:k), a.o. II 86 (kódez-); közetmiş ne: al/-şay”ı”I-mahfüz "a thing which is protected' /7 170, 6; it is used, translated hafaza, to illustrate conjugational forms in 77 318-21: (KB in 26 and 168 the Vienna MS. has kózet- where the Fergana MS. has kódez-): xin(?) Tef. közetbefore -di; kózez- before other Suffs.; once (?error) kózer- “to protect' 187-8 (Kiüzet-, etc.): Çağ. xv ff. kózet-/kózle- (both spelt) ba-nazar cust-cü hardan “to look diligently for (something)' Sar. 305v. 23 (quotns.): Xwar. xv ff. kózed-.'to be on one's guard! Qutb 108 GZC (Rüzed-): Kip. xv rdqaba "to watch over” közet- Tuh. 17a. 12: Osm. xiv to xvii gözet“to watch, watch for, expect'; in three texts TTS H 464. Tris. GZD D közetçi: N.Ag. fr. kózet; survives in NE "Tel, küzetçi (:»c) 'shepherd' R 77 1507. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. biz ordu kapağ közetçi biz "ve are the guardians of the palace gate” PP 43, 5-6; a.o. Suv. 401, 9-10 (teğin-): (Xak.) xui(?) Tef. közezçi (sic) 'guardian, protector' 188: (xiv. Mut, nüfir tva cásiis 'watchman, spy” f£ózde:ci: Mel. so, 12; közde:mçi: Rif. 145: Xwar. xiv kózetgisiz 'unprotected' Quib 104). D kózediglig P.N./A. fr. a N.Ac. fr. közed-. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. Sanskrit. rakgità vanagande "protected in a forest clump' küze:tiglig a:rığta: TT VIII C.4; a.o. do. 4.34 (kanlı:çış). D közetliğ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. közet, syn. vv, kózediglig. Xak.xı közetliğ ne:n 'a thing which is protected” (a/-mahfüz) Kaş. 1 506. Tris. V. GZD?C kózetkil- ($-) occurs only in one late and badly written Uyğ. text, possibly mistranscribed; -kil- is not a known Den. or Dev. Suff.; perhaps a crasis of közet kil-. Uyğ. vur ff. Bud, kapım tepri burxan yarlikamisin tünli künli közetkilür sekiz tümen burxan şravakığ közetkilü alu teginürmen “1 keep the commandments of my father the divine Buddha by night and day, and venture to keep and receive the cighty thousand Buddha srávakas' USp. 100, 12-14. D közetiş- (&amp;-; közediş-), Co-op. f. of küzed-; mentioned only as a grammatical example. Xak. xı ol mana: at közetişdi: “he helped me to protect (fi /irfz) the horse'; also used for competing Kaş. JI 322, 16; n.m.e. Dis. GZG D kezig (&amp;-) Dev, N. fr. kez-; with n rather wide range of meanings, none very closcly related to those of kez-, of which the basic connotation seems to be intermittence, 'a turn (which comes from time to time); an intermittent illness'. "The word is spelt kezig in TT VIII and rhymes with isig in K.B which seems to confirm thc -ğ, but some modern forms point to an alternative final -k, perhaps going back to a parallel form kezek, a Dev. N. in -ek, but it is impossible to associate particular meanings with these alternatives. Survives in SE Türki kézik 'typhus' .BŞ 524: NC Kir, Kzx. kezek/kezü: “turn”, kezik 'fever': SC Uzb. (provincial) kezak “turn”: NW Kk. gezek “tum”, ğezik “a cold in the head”, Kumyk gezik “turn”, Nog. gezüv “turn”: SW Osm. gezek “patrol, gezik “a rodent ulcet'; Tkm. gğezek “a turn”. Uyğ. viir ff. Bud. isimekliğ kezig ipi “a recur 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 803 
     
   
   
      TRIS. rent fever' (occurring every, every other, every third or fourth day) U 77 68, 1-5 (i); kezig ig kéfen recurrent diseases (Hend.)” TT V 8, 83—tüzünler kezigipe kirü tükeser "f one succeeds in entering the ranks of the good men” TT V əz, 34—Sanskrit kálakramena "in the course of time" ölömlög kezig birle: a:zu üze: 'with, or upon, the turn of death” TT VIII D.28; o.o. do. B.ıı, etc. (éyln); TT V zo, 6 (2 kur), 24, 57 (tizig); 26, 107-8 (1dala:-): Civ. [gap] kezigi “the succession" (of the nine thresholds) TT VII 15, 2; (let all the workers of the domain go) kezigde 'in turn” USf. 25, 6; onunc kezigke tutzun “let him take it for the tenth round' 65, 7-8, a.o. 8o, 5: Xak. xı kezig al-hummd 'fever', which takes a man with shivering fits (bi-ra'da); sarığ keziğ 'jaundice' (al-yaragám); keziğ al-natoba fUl"amal, “a turn', in relation to work; hence one says senin kezl:gi:n (sic) keldi: “your turn has come”, keziğ a/-cur”a 'daring'; one says bu: ışta: sapa: kezig kere:k "you need daring in this business” sva ma'nàhu'l-avwal its meaning is (the same as) the previous one (the significance of this is obscure) Kaş. 1 391: KB (a high position has come to you) keziğçe “in your tum” 236; similar phr. 1476, 4760; dawlat keziği “your turn for good fortune' 4761; (fortune is elusive . . if it runs away) teğmez yana terk keziğ “your turn does not quickly come again” 713; similar phr. 2382, 3628: Çağ. xv ff. kezek (with K- -k”) “a rodent ulcer' (Gkila marad) (quotn.); and they also use it for a game played with a wooden drinking cup (?; süngar) Vel. 352 (ğezek (with &amp;-") “a sweetmeat' is the Pe, word gazak); gezek (spelt) sayr tva gardiş "travel, wandering about”, and metaph. (1) bds wa hirdsat "the (night) watch' (quotn.); (2) büsbün wa háris 'sentry, guard” (quotn.); (3) nawbat “turn” San. 314r. 18: Kom, xiv *pestilence' keziv CCG; Gr.: Osm. xiv ff. kezik “turn” in one xiv text 778S 7 453; £ezek (sic?) “turn” in one xvı text III 293 (keşiğ in the same sense in 7 453; JV so3 is à reborrowing fr. Mong., where, by -z- — -$-; -si- 2» -gi-, the word became hestg; there was some confusion between this word and kesek, see ITaerisch gg, and it is not easy to identify in Mong. but the P.N./A. Reşiktü 'sentry, bodypuard” is noted in xrır, Haenisch 100. See also Doerfer I 331-2). D kezük ($-) Pass. Dev. N. fr. kez-; lit. 'something which is moved to and fro'; “a vveaver s shuttle'. "The word carries one damma in the MS. which has been falsely attributed to the Raf by previous editors, but it precedes kezig, which precedes külek, so rust have had a fatha on the first syllable and the damma on the second. Survives only(?) in SE Türki küzük 'shuttle' BS 557. Xak. xı kezük the translation is corrupt; ?read huwa (MS. fi) àlatw'l-hà' ik. bi'l- (MS. al) -xuyüfi'l-mun'agida ba"duha “ala ba"d biha yufarraqu'l-sadà'l-a'là mina'l-asfal “a weaver's instrument with thread wrapped over and over round it with which the upper and lower GZG 759 warp threads are parted'; also used by tlie vveaver (nástc) of brocade, etc. Kaş. I 391. D küzki: (£-) N./A.S. fr. küz; “autumnal”, S.i.a.m.l.g.; NW Kk. güzği, Kumyk güzgü: SW Tkm. güzkü. UYĞ. vii ff. Civ. küzki üç aylarda “in the three autumn months” TT VH 38, s-6, a.o. TT I 134 (uığaç): Xak. xı KB üçi küzki yulduz “three of (the signs of the zodiac) are autumn stars” 142. Dis. V. GZGD küzük- (&amp;-) Intrans. Den. V. fr. küz; "to turn to autumn, become autumnal'. Survives in NE Alt., Tel. R TI 1509; cf. küzger-. Xak. xı yıl küzükti: "the year turned to autumn” (şöra xarif) Kaş. II 118 (küzüke:r, küzükme:k). D kezger- (86-) Trans. Den. V. fr. kez, pec. to Xak. Xak. xi er ok kezgerdi: “the man cut a notch ( fateteaga) in an arrow' Kaş. JI 196 (kezgerür, kezgerme:k); a.o. //T 106, 14. D közger- (g-) Hap. leg.; Trans. Den. V. fr. 1 kó:z. Xak. xı ol atamnr mapa: közgerdi: "he brought about an interview (a/-mu'üyana) between me and my father', that is a meeting (al-mulàágát) Kaş. II 196 (közgerür, kózgerme:k). D küzğer- ($-) Den. V. fr. küz. Both forms below are Hap. leg.; cf. küzük-. Xak. xı ödlek küzgerdi: tawaccaha'l-zamán an yaşir xarif 'the season turned in the direction of autumn” Kaş. II 196 (küzgerür, küzgerme:k): ö:d küzerdi: same translation, but al-maqt "time” for al-zamán II 77 (küzerür, küzerme:k). D közkiş- (8-) Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of közük-, Den. V. fr. 1 kö:z, which s.i.m.m.l.g.; ğözükin SW Osm., Tkm. Uyf£. vii ff. Bud. (he is ready to go to King Siladitya and) savvşıp baxşılar birle közkişğeli "have an interview with the Hinayàána teachers! Hüen-ts. 255-6. Tris. GZG D kóze:gü: Dev. N. (N.L) fr. 2 kóze:-; “a poker (for stirring the fire)”. S.i.s.m.l. vv. substantial phonetic changes, SE Türki kösey: NC. Kir. kösö:/közö:, Kzx. köseü: NW Kk. kósew; Nog. kósev: SW Osm. küskü; Tkm. kesevi, Xak. xr köze:ğü: al-mihdàt "a poker” Kaş. 1 448 (prov.): Kom. xiv "poker" kösöv CCG; Gr. D kezigliğ (6-) P.N./A. fr. kezig; with various potential meanings; in KB it is more likely to mean “sentry” (cf. the Mong. l.-w. keşiktü “sentry”) than 'feverish'. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vu ff. Civ. in a brief damaged document, USp. 68 one Baş kara(?) is apparently required to act as herdsman kez[ig]lig 'because it is his turn”: Xak. xr K.B (he lay down but could not sleep) keziglig kişi teg közin yummadt *like a sentry(?) he did not close his eyes” 4890. m — n — Psá—À—MÓn— d eo LiLALL£L]CcELULEIXEEEREEIQEED!XEEG)IAII SS) | 1l o 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 804 
     
   
   
     760 TRIS. PU?F közkeni: Hap. leg.; the vowel marks, though faint, seem to indicate this pronunciation; prob. a l.-w. Xak. xr kózkeni: a/-qufrub, that s “a kind of beetle (mina'l-ci'làn) that flies about at night with a buzzing sound' (ma* tanin) Kaş. 1 493. PU?F közkenek Tlap. lcg.; the dicts. translate al-'azáva Ca large lizard', but as "aşd means 'to injure' and the like it presumably also means some kind of bird of prey. Prob. a Ll-w. Xak. xi közkenek “a bird which resembles the saker falcon (a/-şaqr) and al-'agzáva, and makes violent attacks in the air” (25 yataballağ bi'l-ril) Kaş. I 528. Dis. GZL D kezlik (ğ-) A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. 1 kez, lit. “an instrument for making notches'; a l.-w. in Pe. as gazlak[gizlik; survives in SW Osm., Tkm. gezlik “a small knife, pocket knife', and the like. Xak. xr kezlik 'a small knife (sikhin) which a woman has with her fastened to her dress" Kaş. 7 478: Çağ. xv ff. f£ezlik (spelt) “a small knife” (kárd); also current in Pe. as gizlik San. 300v. 15: Kip. xiv kezlik “a knife (siklin) used for making arrow notches' (li'I-füq) Jd. 81. D küzlüg (g-) P.N./A. fr. küz; syn. vv. küzki, survivesin SW Osm. £üzlü 'autumnal'. Uyğ. vini ff. Civ. üç künlük yaz (PU) kuvrağlık bir yarım kün küzlüg [kuvragltk] "three days communal labour(?) in the spring and onc and a half in the autumn” USp. ss, 21-2; yazlığ küzlügi [gap] do. 66, 4. D kózlük (&amp;-) A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. 1 kó:z; survives meaning 'eye-plasses; (a horse”s) blinkers or eye shields” in several NVV languages and SW Az. közlük (ğ-), Osm., "Tkm. gözlük. Xak. xı közlük “an object woven from horsehair, put over the eyes when they are suffering. from ophthalmia or excessive glare” (ramadat at qamirat) Kaş. 1 478: Çağ. xv ff. (közlük (with k- -k”) göz/7 "having . ... eyes” Vel. 368 (quotn.)); gözlük ('with g-") (1) they talk of nargis gözlük in the sense of nargis-i cagm "pheasant-eye narcissus” (same quotn.); (2) (see Osm.); (3) “a black oily secd used in eye-salves”, in Pe. çaşmağ, in Ar. adrası”l-halb Polybodium San. 306v. 7: Osm. xvrr gözlük (2) in Rirmi, 'eve-glasses" (aynah) which. they put over the eyes to strengthen the sight San. 306v. 8. Dis. V. GZLD 1 kezle:- (&amp;-) Den. V. fr. 1 kez, survives, with the same and extended meanings, in Osm. éezle-. Xak. xı ol okin kezle:di: "he cut a notch (füq) in his arrow' Kaş. III 300 (kezle:r, kezle:me:k): xin(?) Ar. (praise the gencrous man and) baxilka katığ ya okun kezlegil “cut a notch in an arrow for a strong bow (to shoot) the miser' 228: Osm. xiv and xvi ğezle- “to put the arrow notch on the bowstring'(?) in two texts T7S II 434; III 293. GZG D 2 kezle:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. 2 kez. Xak. xi kezle:di: (after 1 kezle:-) also used for 'scraping the sediment off a pot' (ida axraca'l-qurara mina”l-qidr Kaş. İİİ 300. D kizle:- (8-) Den. V. fr. 1 kiz, lit. "to put (something) in a box or bag”, i.e. “to hide", Survives only(?) in SW Az. Kizle- ($-); Osm., "Fkm. gizle-, elsewhere “to hide” is yaşur-. Türkü vir ff. Man. M İTİT 21, 3 (i) (ağı): Uyf. vur ff. Man.-A kizlep “hidel” do. i1, ro (ii), yémegil begrü (sic?) kizle yasurgil “do not eat it, hide (Hend.) it safely" 29, 1 (ii): Bud. PP $56, r (bekrü:); /7üen-fs. 130-1 (bediz); Sn, 138, 1-2 (yaşur-): r40, 20 (egim); 446, 15: Xak. xı ol kizle:di: ne:pni: “he hid (ARatama) the thing” Kaş, Zİ 300 (kizle:r, kizlezme:k); er tava:r kizle:di: *the man hid the merchandise' (etc.); its origin is the noun Kiz II/ 318, 17; kizlep tutar sevüklük a/-hubbu” l-mahtüm 'concealed affection” // 172, 10; a.o. IH] 71, zo: KB kerek sözni sözler kişi kizlemez 'a man says what is necessary and does not hide it” 185; 0.0. 3t 1-12, 665, 970, 977-8 (kergeklig), etc.: xu(?) KBVP 13 (ur-): xin(?) Ar. 118 (kóm-), 169 (katığ), a.o.o.; Tef. kizle- “to hide" 178: xiv Muh. al-cannd “to hide” gizlemek (MS. -mak) Mel. 39, 8, Rif. 125 (corrupt 7? for c, -r- for -z-): Çağ. xv ff. kizle-/kizlet- (spelt) "Trans, V., “to hide'( pinhán kardan) San. 313v. 27 (quotn.): Xwar. xiu ditto “A/ 58: xiv ditto Quib. 99: Kip. xir xabbá 'to hide” kizle:- Hou. 39, 20: xiv kizle- xaba'a ditto; and in the Kitàb Beylik amara "to hide in the ground' 82: xv xabbà kizle- Kav. 77, 13; Tuh. 14b. 9 (also (VU) tomala-, yaşır-, şakla-, şakın-). D kózle:- (8-) Den. V. fr. 1 kö:z, s.i.a.m.l.g. with some phonetic changes and a wide range of meanings of which the commonest is "to keep under observation'; gözle- in NW Kk., Kumyk; SW Osm., Tkm.; közle- (&amp;-) in Az. "Türkü vin ft. 723 64 (körüklüğ): Xak. xt ol anı: közle:di: "he hit him in the eye” (a/-"ayn) Kaş. ITI 3co (közle:r, kózle:me:k; but sec közleş-): Çağ. xv ff. közle- (-II) gózleVel. 368; San. 305v. 23 (közed-): Xvvar. xır közle- “to watch, watch for" "AF. 58: xiv ditto Qutb 105: Kip. xit sazara “to eyc, look at” kózle:- Hou. 35, 3; kó:zle:- do. 36, 17: xiv. közle- "Ayana qta rüqaba “to view; to watch over” İd, 82: xv. Thi. 17a. iz (közed-): Osm. xiv ff. gözle- “to watch over, observe, look for”, in several texts 7775 I 333; 11 466; IV 365. D kezlet- (8-) Caus. f. of kezle:- , survives in SW Osm. gezlet-. Xak. xr ol ok kezletti: “he ordered that a notch ( fi7q) should be made in the arrov” Kaş. 11 348 (kezletü:r, kezletme:k). D kizlet- (8-) Caus. f. of kizle:- , s.i.s.m.l.; SW Az. kizlet- (8-), Osm. gizlet-. Xak. xi ol mana: só:z kizletti: “he urged me to conceal ("ald hitman) the statement? Kaş. 11 348 (kizletü:r, kizletme:k): Çağ. xvíf. Sar, 313v. 27 (kizle:-).  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 805 
     
   
   
     DIS. D 1 kezlen- (8-) Refl. f. of 1 kezle:- ; survives in SW Osm. gezlen-. Xak. xı ok kezlendi: "the arrow was notched'( fuwtetqa) Kaş. İİ 252 (followed by 2 kezlen-). D 2 kezlen- IIap. leg.; Refl. f. of 2 kezle:-. Xak. xı eşiç kezlendi: "the sediment stuck (iltagaqati'l-qurara) to the bottom of the cooking pot' Kaş. II 252 (kezlenü:r, kezlenme:k). D kizlen- (g-) Refl, f. of kizle:-, often used as a Pass. ; survives only(?) in 5W Az. kizlen(8-), Osm., 'Tkm. gizlen-. Xak. xı ol tava:rın kizlendi: “he pretended to hide (yahtum) his property', also for “he applied himself to hiding (istabadda bi-hitmán) his property' Kaş. IJ] 2353 (kizlenü:r, kizlenme:k): Çağ. xvff. kizlen- "to be hidden' (binhün şudan) Sam. 314r. 1:5: Xwar. xiv kizlen- “to hide oneself” Qutb 99; MN 219: Kom. xiv “hidden” kizlenmiş CCG, Gr. D kezleş- ($-) Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of kezle:-. Xak. xi ol apar ok kezlesdi: (translated) “he competed with him in cutting notches (fi tafwiq) in arrows'; also used for helping Kaş. Tİ 224 (kezleşü:r, kezlesme:k; “competing” should have anın birle:, anar is appropriate only for “helping”. D kizleş- (&amp;-) Recip. f. of kizle:-, n.o.a.b. Xak. xr ola:r ikki: tava:r kizleşdi: "those two hid (katama) their property (etc.) from one another” Kaş. I1 224 (kizleşü:r, kizlesme:k): Çağ. xv ff. kizles- Co-op. f. “to be hidden together” (ba-ham pinhán şudan) San. 314r. 14. D közleş- ($-) Recip. f. of kózle:- ; s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı ol menir birle: közleşdi: “he competed with me in looking” (or staring, fz'l-ru'ya), that is he eyed me ('áyanari) and I eyed him Kaş. II 224 (közleşü:r, közleşme:k). * Tris. GZL D kózüldürük (8-) N.I. ultimately der. fr. * 1 Kó:z; the -ül- is irregular, perhaps inserted by false analogy vv, tizildürük der. fr. tiziland kómüldürük der. fr. kömül (könül, but the Kip. form is a regular Dev. N. fr. közün-. N.o.a.b.; cf. közlük. Xak.xı közüldürük “an object woven from horsehair, put over the eyes when they are suffering from ophthalmia or excessive glare”, alternative form közlük Kaş. 7 529: (Kip. xiv közündürük “a shade (a/-şa"riya) put over the eyes” İd. 81). D kizleglig ($-) Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. a Dev. N. fr: kizle:-; “hidden”. ”Uyğ. vil ff. Bud, USp. 101, 20-1 (órtüglüg). D kizlençü: (8-) Dev. N./A. fr. kizlen-; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. virff. Man.-A kentü kiz1ençüpün . . . kizlep “hide your own hidden treasure” (without being miserly regarding the pure doctrine, believing with a generous mind and not doubting) M III rr, 7-10: Xak. xı kizlençü: “a hidden treasure” (al-xabiya), and in the prov. kizlençü: kelinde: “a hidden GZN 761 treasure is found in the bride", because she keeps her charms hidden for her husband Kaş. İİİ 242: xin(?) Tef. kizlençü ganclar 'secret treasures! (Pe. l.-w.) 178: Xwar. xiv kizlençi 'hidden' Qutb 99. Dis. GZM D kó:zme:n Den. N. fr. 2 kó:z; pec. to Kaş. Xak, xı kó:zme:n xubzu'l-malla "bread (baked) in the hot ashes' Kaş, 1 444; a.o. 11 27, 11 (köm-). Dis. GZN küzen 'polecat'; a very old word, a First Period 1.-vv, in Mong. as kürene (Kot. 2636, Haltod 237) and Hungarian as górény; the suggestion, see Doerfer I 328, that this word is connected vv, Mong. küren|küreg 'brown' which later became a l.-w. in some Turkish languages is improbable on phonetic grounds, but not impossible. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SE, see Shcherbak, P. 146. Xak. x1 küzen (zày unvocalized) “an animal of the rat (al-curdán) family used to hunt sparrows and also (ayda()) yerboas” Kaş. I 404: Xvvar. xiv küzen Zay. suggests 'weasel, marten? but the context would equally admit of *polecat" Qutb 108 (note refces. to old Osm.): Kom. xiv “polecat" kara küzen CCT, Gr.: Kip. xii al-"arşa "vveasel" kü:ze:n (MS. hü:nen) Hou. 11, 14: xiv küzen al-nims *"weasel, ferret'! and in the Kiftáb Beylik al-dalaq 'marten' İd. 82; al-nims küzen Bul. 10, 9: xv ditto Tuh. 36a. 12. D kózpü: ($-) contracted Dev. N. (N.I.) fr. kózün-, listed as a Dis. under fa'ià in Kaş., "mirror. Survives in NC Kir. küzgü: SC Uzb. küzğu: NW Kar. küzgü; Kumyk güzğü: SW Az. küzgü ($-); Tkm. gözğgi, but elsewhere displaced by 1.-vr.s like Ar. “ayna. See Doerfer H1 1674. Türkü vri ff. words transcribed küzkü:si: and küzküm (no doubt misreadings of közpü:si:, kózpüm) appear on two metal mirrors of unknown provenance ETY II 171; IrkB 22 (içğın-): Yen. [sek]iz bafur (sic) kóznü:si: on kara: közpü:si: “his eight copper mirrors and ten black mirrors! Mal. 26, rr: Uy£. vii ff. Man (spirits) közüpüçe közünüpen 'appearing like (shapes jm a mirror M H 12, 6-7: Bud. kózüpüde “in a mirror” USp. roza. 10; a.o. TT VI 410-11 (étiglig): Civ. (he should rub in the salve and) közünüde körzün “look in a mirror // I 125: Xak. xı kózpü: al-mir'àt “a mirror' Kaş. 111 379; o.o. III 4s (yüzlüğ), 132 (5 kü:g): xiv Müuh. al-mir'at. gö:zğü: Mal. 68, 12; Rif. 169 (k-): Çağ. xv ff. közğü (with k- -&amp;-") "ayna “mirror” Vel. 368; $ózgü (with -”) ayına 'mirror' San. 306v. 5: X war. XIV közgü 'mirror' Qutb 109; MN 248: Kom. XIV “mirror” küzgü CCI; Gr.: Kip. xır al-mirüàt kö:zü:gü: Hou. 18, 6: xiv kóznü: ALƏ intended) ditto İd. 81: xv ditto kózgi: Kav. 64, 10: Osm. xiv ff. gözgü (gözigü, gözüğü), once (xiv) gözüpü 'mirror”, c.ia.p. TTS I 331; İİ 464; III 319; IV 364.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 806 
     
   
   
     762 E közünç seems to be a mistranscription of küsünç (küsenç), q.v., in M 72 8, 17; U 1 6, 14 and is a scribal error for körünç, q.v., in Kaş. İİİ 373, 12. D kóznek (g-) Hap. leg.(?); contracted Dev. N. fr. kózün-; occurs in a passage about throwing out a bridge to people who have trodden on 'a reflection' on the surface of the water thinking it to be a solid object. Sce közünük. Uyğ. viii ff. Man. TT 111 55 (suklun-). Dis. V. GZND kózün- (&amp;-) Refl. f. of *kóz-, presumably a very old alternative pronunciation of kór-, which is obviously connected etyrnologically with 1 kó:z; syn. vv. körün-, “to be visible, to appear. In phr. like közünür ajun “the visible world', the Aor. Participle practically means 'present', as opposed to 'past' and "future", Türkü vur tf. Man. beş kózünür tavğird (Iranian l-w.?) etöz sınları “the five component parts of the visible . . . body” M İH 18, 12-13 (ii), beş közünmez tutulmaz yavlak biligler “the five invisible, impalpable evil mental states” do. 19, 14-15 (i): Uyğ. vini ff. Man. M IH 12, 6—7 (köznü:), TT Hl 16, 28 (a: ju:n); 711 148; IX 46, 116 (ka:n-): Bud. kózün- is common, c.g. (there is a mountain over there) közünürmü “is it visible? PP 37, 6; kózünürsiz 'you appear to be” (a very strong man) do. 66, s, közünür ajun “the visible (present) world! do. Tr, 3; Suv. 474, 20 etc.—(you will go into the city and) lu xanipa kózüngeysiz “let yourself be seen by (i.e. present yourself to) the king of the dragons! PP 40, 1; a.o. 44, 5: Civ. TT I 21 (0:z-), 61; (all the signs of thirst) közönür (sic) “appear” VIII I.9; in the astronomical texts közün- is the standard word for “(of a star) to become, or be, visible! TT VII 1, 20-2 (inir) etc.: Arğu: xı (immediately after kórün-) and in Arfu: one says kózündi ne:p “the thing was seen' (ru'iya); toa fihi Ho qiyas "there is a certain rule concerning ş it is taken fr. their word kö:z “an eye”, but (hə make a difference ( yuxálifrmn) between the Perf. and the Imperat. and sav kór, that is "sec” (abşir) vv. rö", and the Perf. w. say Kaş. II 157 (kózünür, kózünme:k): Kip. xiu làha "to appear”, in the sense of appearing to someone so that he can see you kó:zin- Hor. 43, 17 (the other Kip. authorities have kórünin this sense; this may be a scribal error). Tris. GZN S közüpü See kózpü:. D közünük (ğ-) Dev. N. (Conc. N.) fr. közün-, "a window'. "TVhere is a morphological and semantic difference between this and kóznek, q.v., -ük being properly a Pass. DIS. GZN (or, for Intrans. V.s, an İntrans.) Suff.; this word must therefore lit. mean 'something which is seen', perhaps with the application of 'something which is seen from within the building' rather than 'something you see out of”, the later meaning 'aperture' and the like is obviously a metaph. extension. Survives in most NE languages as köznek/köznök/ közönök/közünök 'window' R II 1302-3; Khak., luv. kózenek: NC Kir. közönök 'aperture; button-hole': SC Uzb. küzanak “a hole; a cell (in a honey-comb)', most of which look more like modern forms of kóznek. Türkü vin ff. (in the para. enumeratinir parts of a tent) közünüki: ne: teg “vhat is its window like?” IrkB 18: Çağ. xv ff. gózünek (^vith &amp;- -k”) xirkah asbábi “(part of) the equipment of a tent” Vel. 368 (quotn.); gözünek (spelt) ditto (az d/2t-r xayma) San. 306v. 10 (quotn.). Dis. V. GZRS küzer- See küzger-. Dis. GZS D kó:zsüz (g-) Priv. N./A. fr. 1 kó:; “vithout eyes, blind”. S.i.3.m.].; in SW Az. kózsüz (6-), Osm. gözsüz. Sec teglük, Uyf. vin ff. Man. M I 18, 6 (i) (teglük): Bud. ol kózsüz kişi “that blind man” PP 74, s: Xak. xı KB 178 (kara:ğu:), 27:1: xm(?) Tef. kózsüz 'blind' 182; a.o. 200 (kara:ğu:): Kom. xiv 'blind' közsüz, “mole” közsüz (PU) opea (sic) CCI; Gr.: Kip. xii al-a'má. 'blind' közsi:z (MS. kizsi:zz) How. 26, 8: xiv Tkm. közsüz al-a'má ay bild "ayn (that is without eyes”) İq. 81; ?Kip. közsiz (PU) sebek "a mole” (a/-xuld) do. 82; al-xuld kössüz temek (?MS. etmek) Bul, 10, 15: xv al-a'mà közsiz kişi: dir Kav. 6o, o: Osm. xiv ff. gözsüz “blind”, in several texts; gğözsüz sepet (xiv)/&amp;ózsüz tebek (xvir) "a mole" 77S I7 467; 11I 320; IV 3685-6 (the second words in the Kom., Kip., and Osm. phr. for “mole” are all very obscure, but the xvir phr. is clearly the origin of the modern word köstebek). Dis. V. GZSD keziş- ($-) Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of kez-. Xak. xı ol mana: yé:r kezişdi: “he competed with me in traversing (f? fafeedf) the place" Kaş. II 100 (kezişü:r, kezigme:k; the translation is wrong; mana: implies “he helped me”, “he competed with me" should be menir birle:). D kózes- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of 2 kóze:-, Xak. xı ol mana: o:t küzesti: (sic) "he helped me to poke (fi tahrit) the fire”, also used for competing Xaş. II roo (közeşü:r, közeşme:k)  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 807 
     
   
   
      It is generally believed, and is no doubt true, that no native Turkish word begins with 1-; all the words listed below are either dcmonstrably l.-w.s or of a kind which might reasonably be supposed to be ].-w.s. Tt is also possible that there are some l.-w.s listed above in which the initial I- is preceded by a prosthetic vowel. If so, these would be parallel to the l.-w.s with initial r- preceded by a prosthetic vowel, see R. Some Chinese and Indian l.-w.s with initial |- which occur only in Uyg. texts have not been included below since they never became fully naturalized in Turkish. Mon. LA F lu: 'dragon' lw. fr. Chinese lung (Giles 7,479), which was pronounced without the final -ng in some NW Chinese dialects of the first millennium; often spelt /uu (representing 1u:?) in Uyg.; prob. originally introduced into Turkish as one of the animals of the twelve-year cycle. In this context it still survives in some modern languages, sce O. Pritsak, Die bulgarische Fürstenliste, Wiesbaden, 1955, p. 8o. Cf. na:g. (Türkü vir VHüy in Pes edition of Ongin 12 is a misreadin of koi): Uy. vrir ff. Bud. alku ağulu Iuular^ yilanlar “all kinds of poisonous dragons and snakes! PP 39, 6; a.o. do. qo, 1 (közün-), (in a list of supernatural beings) lu Sanskrit nága, a mythical “snake” U II zo, 23; Kuan, 142: (in a list of disreputable professions) luu üntürgüci yatçı 'snake charmer and magician” U I1 84, rz, TT IV 8, 60: Civ. luu yıl "the dragon year” USp. ro, 1; 125, 1; common in the same context in 77 VII and VIII P.: Çağ. xv ff. luy means nahang 'crocodile" in Mong.; also “the constellation of the Whale! (/tit); also the name of one of the 'Turkish years San. 318r. 6 (no doubt reached Mong. through "Turkish /uu, Kow. 1965, Haltod 486). Mon. LB F la:v Hap. leg.; l.-w. fr. Chinese la “vax” (Giles 6,668; Pulleyblank, Middle Chinese 14p). Xak. xı la:v al-mümu"İladi yuxtam bihi 'sealing vvax” Kaş. HI 155. F liv some kind of food, or a dish of food; no doubt a l.-w., prob. fr. Chinese /! "a grain', e.g. of rice (Giles 6,958; Pulleyblank, Middle Chinese /j;p). UyB. vrir ff. Bud. in TT VII ıq a list of stars, the appropriate offering (hulled millet, rice, etc.) to them is described as livi ast, e.g. 28 (tuturkan), 39 (buğday): in USp. 88, a charter of rights to a holy man, it is said that various officials liv yemezünler “must not eat (his holy?) food (or offerings ?)' 88, 3o: Xak. xı li:yü: (or li:w ?) Kaş, 117 438 (kenç), n.m.e.: KB (the chamberlain) liv aş terği kirse “vhen the table of food is brought in” (must scrutinize it) 2549; (two things increase the reputation of begs) elinde tuğu kör törinde livi 'their banners in the forecourt, the food (which they lay) before the scat of honour' 2553. Dis. LCN ?F la:cin. “falcon”, the actual variety differing in different languages, in SE Türki “the Barbary falcon”, in SW Osm. “the peregrine”. The most durable of all words beginning with 1-; s.ia.m.lg. as lacm/lastn. Almost certainly a L-w., prob. Tokharian. Cf. çavlı:, cari, toğan, turumtay, sipkur, etc. Türkü vırı ff. La:çlın1 Baylu:k P.N. Mir. B v. 4 (ETY II 66): Uyğ. vitrff. Bud. (three doves encountered) laçınka “a falcon' Suv. 620, 20: Xak. xı la:cgin. al-sáhin "a gerfalcon'; one of the predatory birds; hence men are called La:çın because of their bravery Kaş. I 410: KB 2381 (kov-): xiv Muh. al-şühin la:orn Mel. 72, 13; Rif. 175: Çağ. xv fi. laçın şühin in Ar. şaqr, also the name of a tribe of "Turks San. 317r. 27: Xwar. xiv laçın “falcon” Qutb 109: Kip. xın al-sáhin Vazçı:n (-c-) Hou. 10, 2; as a P.N. do. 29, s: xtv ditto İd. 87; Bul. 11, 10: xv ditto Tul. zob. 11; as a P.N. do. 41b. 12: Osm. xvur laçın , . . and, in Rümi, küh-i saxt "a precipitous mountain'; Taçın kaya “a precipitous mountain' in general, and the name of a particular mountain San. 317r. 28 (no doubt a geog. name misunderstood). VUF luçn.t Hap. leg.; second syllable unvocalized. No doubt like other Gancak words al-w. Gancak xı lucn.t “help in cleaning the grain (etc.)'; that is among the villagers (/7 ahli'l-qurà), they help one another by sending a slave or an animal to thresh the corn Kaş. I 451. Dis. LDA VUF létu: Map. leg.; perhaps l.-w. fr. Chinese /éng-t'ao "to wash in a sieve with cold water' (Giles 6,869 10,824). Xak. xr lJé:tu: *noodles' (atriya) chilled with water, snow, and ice and mixed with seasonings (al-abàzir); it is eaten to cool one (Ii'I-tabrid) Kaş. III 237. Dis. LĞD F loxta:y Hap. leg.; no doubt a Chinese phr.; Brockelmann, on the authority of B. Schindler, plausibly suggests /o “ravv silk” (Giles 7,323; Pulleyblank, Middle Chinese /48), za? 'girdle' (Giles 10,554; Pulleyblank, Middle Chinese tái). Cf. bargin, etc. Xak. xı loxta:y “red Chinese brocade (dibác) with small gold coins (or spangles, ftis sufr) attached" Kaş. III 240. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 808 
     
   
   
     764 DIS Dis. LGN F la:ğu:n Hap. leg.; an old widely distributed culture word, the immediate source for "Turkish uncertain ; Brockelmann quotes Syriac ləfind, Greek ldgoinos, Assyrian Higinnu, the last prob. the original word. Xak. xı la:ğum "a hollow (zanqiir) object like a grain measure (al-sà') used for drinking milk or water' Kaş. I 410. Dis. LGZ F 1ağzı:n “pir, swine; the earliest name for this animal in the twelve-year cycle; later displaced by tonuz, q.v. Prob. a "Fokharian l.-w. N.o.a.b. Türkü vii lağzı:n yi “in the Pig Year” IJ. S ro: lakzin (sic) yil /h. A. b.2 (ETY II 122): Uyğ. virt lağzı:n yılka: $u. N ir: vin ff. Man.-A ditto M 7: 12, 16: Bud. (some people . . .) koy lağzın ulatı tinliglarığ ölürür “kill living creatures like sheep, pigs, etc,” PP 3, 1-3. Dis. V. LLADF lala:- Den. V. fr. Chinese la “to cut, slash” (Giles 6,653); this word was /át in Middle Chinese, but this V. occurs only ín a fairly late Ulyğ, text, and by this time the Chinese word had no doubt lost its final consonant. Uy£. vir ff. Civ. (take the beads in a snake's head (?, sec bonçuk), burn them) yumsak sokup lalap 'crush them and cut them up finely H. I 131; 0.0. dö, 166, 171-2, 183. . LÓN Dis. LMG F limken llap. leg.; l.-w. fr. Chinese /in-ch'in, Middle Chinese /[mm-Ajim "a species of Pyrus! (Giles 7,157 2,101). Xak. xi limken al-iccágu'l-asfar 'ycllow plum” Kaş. 1 444. DİS. LNG S? Jlengec Sce yengec. Mon. LSB F l6şp the "Fokharian A word /esp. *imucus, phlegm" found its way into "Purkish, prob. through translations of medical texts, and survived in an abraded form until xr. Uy£. vir ff. Bud. (demons) lésip aşlığlar who cat mucus” U II 61, ro, o.o. Suv. 588, 14; 591, 8; 592, 19 (kuzit-): Civ. l6şp “mucus” TT VIH Ts, 7 and rz: Gigil xı lés al-Hu"ab “mucus”, 1é:s also a/-balğam 'phlegm'; onc says lé:g aktı: “the mucus and phlegm flowed' Kaş. 777 127. Dis. LYA PUF liyü: Hap. leg.; in the same para. as 16:tu:, between ka:nı: and üshi:, the first vowel ought therefore to be long, and the word may be corrupt, but it may represent some Chinese L.-w. like //ao or /in. Xak. rx liyü: “mud” (a/-fin) which turns into hard clay (şaişal) when it dries Kaş. HI 238. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 809 
     
   
   
     M No native Turkish word eXcept a few onomatopoeics, particles, etc., originally began with m-, but in most Turkish languages initial b-, when followed by a nasal within the body of the word (but not in Suffs.), is changed to mby assimilation. In a few languages, like Xwar. xır1(2), this change has taken place even when there is no nasal in the vvord. VVords vvith initial m-, of which the original form has not survived, are listed here as main entries, the remainder are entered here only vv. crossreferences. Mon. MA 1 ma:/1 me: perhaps an abbreviation of yéme:; an Enclitic with several functions. (1) in some cases it is best translated 'and' or 'too', and indeed has been treated by some authorities as an independent word, although there is no real doubt that it is an enclitic. (2) in others it hardly seems to do more than give some emphasis to the preceding word. (3) attached to the Interrogatives, kim, ne:, etc. it turns them into indefinite relatives, c.g. ne:çe: "how much?', ne:ce:me: “hovvever much”, ft disappeared in the medieval period except in a few words like ne:me:, q.v., in which it has become fused with the preceding word to form a new word. İt is discussed at length in v. G. ATG, paras. 291, 352; Brockelmann, para. 144b. Uy. vit ff. Man.-A kaltifinca kaltı . . . ançulayu ma “yst as . . so also” M I 13, 10; 14, 13; 17, 16: Bud. (the Bodhisattva said) biz me “vee too” (when we grow old will deteriorate) US). 97, 16: Civ. ma/me is fairly common in USp. (1) for 'too, also', e.g. on bés batman mén me berzün “let him also give 15 batman of flour" 76, 8; (2) attached to Interrogatives, e.g. kim kim me cam çarım kilmazunlar “do not let anyone object' 13, 12-13; negüke me kaltirmayin without delaying for any reason” 6, 4-s: Xak. xı neçe: me: obrak kedük erse: "a garment, hovvever shabby it may be” (tva in hana xalaq) Kaş. III 38, 20; (and see ne:me:); n.m.e.: KB ata orni kaldı atı ma bile, adın ma takı bolsu mip mip ula "your father's place remains (for you) and also his name, may there be another too, add thousands more” 11r (of an ageing sage; 'his understanding has gone) ham qalam ma tinar 'and his pen too comes to rest' 294; yana ma ayıttı “and again he asked' 525; o.o. 735, etc.: xn(?) KBVP yétürür kamuğnı ma yemez özi “He feeds all and does not eat Himself” 4; neteğ kim tiledi me boldı kamuğ 'just as whoever he wished came into existence' 6 (in this sentence me belongs to kim though separated from it): xiti(?) Az. (keep away from liars) keçür sen me "umrun kónilik üze 'and live your life uprightly' 154; neçeme 'however much” 174; a.0.0.; Tef. neceme 220: Xwar. xııı(?) (become the chief of the 5egs here) me “and” (let your name for ever be Karluk) Oğ. 246: xıv tün me kün “night and day”, ma/me Enclitic “also” Qutb 109. 2 ma:/2 me: an Exclamation, “here you arel, take this ”, and the like; s.i.a.m.l.g. sometimes as ma, sometimes me, Xak. xi the word is entered twice, once as mim alif hö”, sometimes abbreviated to mim há', and once as mim alif; both might represent me: but ma: is more probable, at any rate for the first; ma:(h) an Exclamation (harf) meaning hunáka wa xud "here you are; take it”, one says this when handing something over ('imda munàwalati'l-jay) . . . to save time one sometimes says ma(h) Kaş. JI] ::18; ma: (or me:?) an Exclamation meaning “take it”, hence one says ma: xud wa haha “take it, here you are”) it is said both with hd” and with alf ma(h); examples of alternative spellings vvith initial hà' and alif in Ar. follow 777 213. VU 3 me: onomatopoeic for bleating; survives in SW Osm. me, Red. 2039, which rather than ma: is presumably the sound intended. "The Den. V. “to bleat' is first noted as VU mele- in Kip. xtv, İd. 88, and exists as merein SE Türki and mele- in SW Az., Osm., 'Ü'km. Xak. xi me: “an onomatopoeic for the sound made by lambs, kids, and the like; this agrees with Ar. as is said in DiI-rumma bi'smi [-má' mabğüm ('bleated') Kaş. 111 214. Dis. MCA F maçı: the standard word for “cat” in NW, but unknown elsewhere in this form; obviously a L.-w. See çetük, mü:ş. Survives in NW Kar. T. maçı R IV 2050; Kow. 232; Kaz. meçe/ meci R IV 2106; there are also cognate forms NE Tel. mijik R IV 2148: SE Türki möşük BS 713; müşük Şarring 203: NC Kir. mişik, Kzx. misik: NW Kk. pisgrk; Kumyk mişik, Nog. mısık: SW Az., Tkm. pişik. Kom. xiv. “cat” maçı CCI; Gr.: Kip. xit al-qitt maççı: (also called çe:tük) Hou. rr, r1: xiv ma:çı: (-c-) af-sinnür “cat” İd. 87. Dis. MCG S mejek See “bahak. Dis. MDG F midik 1ayman”, l.-w. fr. Sogdian myd'k, which is syn. w. Sanskrit prthagjana; both words, sometimes in Hend., occur in Uyg. Bud. texts, Uyğ. vir ff. Bud, midik pirtigcan . . . men 'I am a layman' (attached to the pleasures of this world, see bodul-) Hüen-ts. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 810 
     
   
   
     766 DIS. MDG 289; o.o. TT IV 4, ro (toyin), s, 21 (uğur), p. 15, note A zr, 9; Suv. 41, 10. Tris. MGZ (D) muğuzğa:k Hap. leg.; prob. a Dev. N./A. (connoting habitual action) fr. an onomatopoeic V. *mufuz- “to buzz. Arğu: xi muğuzğak “an insect (dubáb) like a bee" Kaş. I 504. Mon. MG ?S mük Hlap. leg.; obviously cognate to bük-, and perhaps Sec. f. of a homophonous N./A. *bük, Xak. xı one says ol mük turdi: qana qiyáma'l-ráki' "he stood in a bent posture” Kaş. I 335. Dis. MGE F mekke “black ink”, l.-w. fr. Chinese mo *black; ink' (Giles 8,022; Pulleyblank, Middle Chinese mA; in some dialects mək), which is also a Chinese l.-w. in Mong. as beke (Kot. 1124, Haltod 281). Cf. sütük. Uyf. xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. mo “nk” meke Lzgeti 182: Xak. xi mekke(h) 'the name of a writing material (mags, so to be translated here?) imported from China, in which "Turkish writings. (kutubu'l-turkiya) are. written'; the -k- in it is doubled, and the hd" was originally alif Kaş. III 424, 23. Dis. MGM/MGN S mükim/mükin See bükürn. Dis. MLD PUF meldeg (or meldek?) Hap. leg.; looks like a Middle Pe. Past Pass. Participle in -dag (Modern Pe. -da), perhaps cognate to Pe. málidan "to rub, polish, smooth” and the like. Neither "arda nor ma''afa are ordinary Ar. words; Brockelmann disregards them and merely translates the word 'felted'; Atalay translates the phrase erkek avadanhi gibi keçeleşen sólpüyen, a very improbable sensus obscenus; the most probable meaning etymologically is 'anything felted, like a hard substance worn smooth'. Xak. xr meldeg ne:p küll şay” mutalabbad | nalica'l-'ardati'l-muma"ata Kaş. I 480. Dis. MMA VU mama: Hap. leg. in this sense, but see mamu:; obviously a quasi-onomatopoeic; syn. vv, 1 op. Xak. xi mama: al-rákis that is "the ox in the middle of the oxen when they tread out the corn'; the others revolve round it Kaş. 1HI 235. VU mamu: obviously a quasi-onomatopoeic; s.i.m.m.l.g. as mama (Tkm. ma:ma) for 'grandmother; mother; a respectful term for older women; midwife', and the like; in some Janguages there is a homophonous word (NE Tel. mama; SC Uzb. mamma; SW Az., Osm., Tkm. meme, etc.) meaning 'nipple, the female breast'. Xak. xı mamu: “the word for any woman sent with the bride on her wedding night": not a genuine word (/uğa ğayr asliya) Kas. 111 235: Kip. xiv ma:ma: a word used to address an older woman (al-kabira mina'l-nisd') or to refer to her 7d. 88. Dis. MMG SF mamuk Sce pamuk. Mon. MN (S) ma:n (b-) survives, in the same meaning, as map in NE Sor: NC Kex. (dialect): SW "Vkm., see Shcherbah, p. 116. Xak. x1 man ya:şlığ ko:y fa sheep which has passed the age of four'; used only of sheep Kaş. 171 157 (ma:n in the two preceding entries ma:n kışla:ğ “the name of an Oğuz country” (bilád, i.e. the Mangkishlak peninsula in the Caspian) and ma:n Kend “a ruined town near Kaşğar” is not likely to be the same word): Çağ. xv ff. mar (rhyming with £dng) "a three-year-old shcep” (gisfand) San. 319r. 19. (S) may (b-) “gait”, homophonous vv. map- ; survives as man “the gait of a horse; a fast gait” in NE Alt., Leb., Şor, Tel, R IV 2006, and "Vuv., may in other meanings (e.g. see ma:n) in various modern languages is not connected vv. this word. Uyğ. vri ff. Bud. (go on your way, merchants) maplamis map sayu 'in every step that you take' (may you be tranquil and safe) maplamis manışızlar *and may the steps you take' (be free from danger) Tis. 4sb. 4-7; o.o. U II 24, 2 etc. (akru:); U II 72, 17 (yoriş-). S 1 men Scc ben. VUF 2 mn (or min?) 'flour'; L-w. fr. Chinese mien 'flour' (Giles 7,892 or 7,895; Pulleyblank, Middle Chinese nen). Survives only(?) in Sari Yuğur mén, S. Ye. Malov, Yazyh xheltyhh uigurov, Alma Ata, 1957, p. 76. Uyğ. vrır ff. Civ. on bés batman men "fifteen batmans of flour' USp. 76, 8; o.o. do. 91, 4 etc.; H 1 4o (çokrat-), 67 (1 konak), 119 (yasimuk). S 1 mer (b-) *bird-seed, small grain”, and the like; n.o.a.b.; this may be merely another, perhaps the original, meaning of bep, q.v. "Türkü vii ff. bars keyik epke: mepke: barmi:ş enl:n menpi:n bulml:ş “a leopard and a deer vvent to look for gəme and grain and found their game and grain” IrkB 3r: Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A M I 36, 6 (1 a:ş): Xak. xi mep “alafı”l-tö”ir “poultry food”, that is a word for the grains (al-/ubub) which they pick up .Kag. //İ 358 (prov.); o.o. / 425, 19; II 18 (sok-): KB kugka men egsümez “the bird does not lack grain' 1193, 2054; 0.0. 3564—7; 4417. S 2 mep See bep. S mip/mip See bip. S mup See bup. S 1 mün See 1 büm. S 2 mün See 2 bün.  ə ə 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 811 
     
   
   
     DIS. MND 767 Mon. V. MNS 1 man- See 1 ba:n-. S 2 man- See 2 ban-. S man- (b-) “to walk' and the like, homophonous vr, ma,” survives only(?) in SE "Türki map- “to go, walk, travel, ride”. See manığ, mapım. Xak. xı KB tilek birle mapsa kişi arzulap “if a man longs for something and vvalks vvith his desire” (he does not tire or lag on the road till he reaches it) 3702; a.o. 374 (kölün-): Çağ. xv ff. map(spelt) qadam gudüştan “to walk' San. 318v. 27 (quotn.). S min-/mün- See bin-. S mun- See bun-. möp- (b-) survives in SE Tar. móp- “(of a horse) to rear, kick” R IV 213o. Xak.xıat mópdi: cama'a'l-faras carámizahu wa ramaha “the horse gathered its legs together and galloped' Kaş. III 391 (mópe:r, mópme:k). Dis. MNA manu: (?b-) “a wild cat”, survives in NE Tuv. mani; see Shcherbah, p. 130. Shcherbak suggests that this became a l.-w. in Mong. as maniil; the only meanings given for this word in Kom. 1973 are 'sentry; bird-scarer'; it is not listed in Haltod, which gives malur (also in Kom. 1995) for *wild cat", SE Türki molun/ mo:lun 'wild cat”, and acc. to Shcherbak *domestic cat” might be a metathesis of manül, perhaps affected by malur which seems to be native Mong. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. manu in lists of predatory animals Suv. 599, 15; 610, 14. S mepe/1 meyi: See béni:. S 2 meşi: See bepi:, SD munu: (b-) Acc. of bu: used as a sort of Excl, generally in antithesis to 0:nu:, q.v. Xak. xı Kaş. İTİ 238: KB 1161, etc. (0o:nu:). Dis. V. MNASD müne:- (b-) Den. V. fr. 1 mün (1 bü:n) in the sense of “to find fault' or “to correct a fault”. Survives only(?) in NC Kzx. minesame meaning. Uy£. vr ff. Bud. (because he " held these views) uzatı yérer müneyür ertipiz “you criticized and found fault vvith him at great length' Hüen-ts. 1798: Xak. xt ol to:nuğ müne:di: “he cut the sides of the garment to rectify unevenness, etc.” (li-yuslihahu mina'l-inhiráf (MS. in error inhtráq) sea gayrihi) Kaş. III 274 (müne:r, müne:me:k). Dis. MNC VU?F mancu: pec. to Kaş., morphologically this could be a Dev. N. fr. 1 or 2 man- but there is no obvious semantic connection and it is more likely to be a L-w., perhaps a Chinese phr.; cf. mandu:, Xak. xi mançu: ucratu'l-muhtarif faqatt 'wages, only of a craftsman's wages! Kaş. I 418; a.o. 419 (tuzğu:). S munça: See bunça:. SD mançuk (b-) Hap. leg., Dev. N. (Conc. N.) fr. 1 man- (1 ba:n-) in the sense of sornething tied on. Cf. SC xix Sart banca “a bundle” R IV 1472. Xak. xi manguk 'anything suspended ( yu'allaq) from the saddle like a saddlebag or nose-bag” (a/-haqiba wa'l-mixlát) Kaş. 1 476. S monçuk See bonçuk. PU(S) müngig (b-) Hap. leg.; the equivalent word in the Chinese original is “uterus”, but the word has no obvious etymology. Cf. oğulçuk. Uyğ. vim ff. Bud. (in a list of demons) müncig aşlığlar 'eaters of uteri” U II 6o, 1 (iii). Tris. MNC SC mungulayu: (b-) prob. a crasis of munça: and ulayu:, “in this way' or the like. N.o.a.b. Cf. angulayu:. Uy£. vii ff. Bud. munçulayu tetrü sakınıp 'thinking deeply in this vvay” U II s, 3-4; künine ayına munçulayu berip “giving in this vvay (or so much?) day by day and month by month” PP 7, 4-5; 0-0. do. 33, 1; 48,7, TT V 8, 71; 26, 1I2 etc. Tris. V. MNCSD mançuklan- (b-) Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. mançuk. Xak. xr er to:nın mançuklandı: “the man put his garment in a box (şizodn, MS. siwán) and hung it ('allagahu) on the saddle behind him” Kaş. 1J 276 (mançuklanus, mancuklanma:k; MS. mon- in error). SD meonçuklan- (b-) Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. monçuk (bonçuk). Xak. xı kt:z monçuklandı: “the girl owned beads and ornaments” (xarazát xa hulli) Kaş. II 276 (monçuklanu:r, moncuklanma:k). Dis. MND F mandu: Hap. leg.; “vinegar”. The ordinary Turkish word for 'vinegar' is sirke:, q.v.; this word, which has no obvious Turkish etymology, is therefore likely to beal.-w., perhaps a Chinese phr. Xak. xi mandu: the word for "Turkish vinegar! (xall Turki), fresh grape juice is put in an earthenware jar (bustuqa) and fermented; then pure wine is poured into it and left for a night to mature. It is the best kind of vinegar Kaş. I 420. S muntağ See buntağ. ?SF manda:r (b-) Hap. leg.; prob. an Iranian l.-w. cognate to Pe. band 'cord, tie, fastening, etc... See mandarlan-. Oğuz xı manda:r a plant which wraps itself (yaltawi) round trees and often causes their death (al-yubs); it is 'ivy' (al-'agaqa) Kaş. I 457. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 812 
     
   
   
      768 SD munduz (b-) N./A.S. fr. mun- (bun-); 'senile, feeble-minded', and the like with some extended meanings. 'l'here does not seem to be any other trace of such a Dev. Suff.; it can hardly be identical with the Den. Suff. in küntüz, q.v. Xak. x: munduz a/-ablah mina'l-nás "a feeble-minded, stupid person” (prov.): munduz akin a/-ar? mina'l-sayl 'a stream in flood”: munduz yorrfga: at al-farasu'lladi là. ya'rifu'l-sayr. illá'l-hamlaca 'a horse that knows no form of progression except an amble' Kaş. 7 458; o.o. 1 77 (akin); 96 (erğüz): KB ay biliğsiz kişi munduz: "oh: ignorant, stupid man” 643; 0.0. 963 (télve:), 2099, 2655, 6394: xın(?) Tef. munduz is associated with "İiar” and seems to mean *malicious' rather than 'stupid' 226: Kom. xiv “simple-minded” munduz CCG; Gr. Dis. V. MNDSD mapit- (b-) Caus. f. of map- ; n.o.a.b.? Xak. xi KB (a dying man) yetilse ódi kór manıtmaz butuğ 'when his timc comes, cannot make his legs walk! 1211. SD mepde:- (b-) Hap. leg. but sce mepdet-, meplet- ; Den. V. fr. 1 mer (ben), originally “to pick up grain” and the like. Xak. xı ol anm saçın mepde:di: “he plucked out (zatafa) his hair” Kaş. /II qor (mepde:r, mende:me:k; verse, see kir-). SD mepdet- (b-) Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of mepde:-. 'lhe text in the MS. is corrupt, the spellings being »peddetti:, minde:r, müyde:me:h. Xak.xı ol anip saçın mepdetti: antafa şa"rahu "he had his hair plucked out” Kaş, 27 358 (mepdetü:r, mendetme:k). SD 1 mandur- (b-) Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of 1 man-. Xak. xı ol mana: kilic mandurdi: "he urged me to gird myself ('ala l-tanattuq) with a sword' Kaş, II 197 (followed by 2 mandur-). S 2 mandur- See 1 bandur-. S mindür-/mündür- See bintür-, SD muntur- (b-) Hap. leg.(?); Caus. f. of mun- (bun-). Uyğ. viii ff. Man.-A yekler erüş kişiğ munturur '(various) demons make many men mad” Man. III 29, 9 (ii). SD mepdes- (b-) Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of megde:-. Xak. xr ikki: ura:ğut mepdesdi: 'the two women plucked at one another (tanátafat) and each of them took hold of the other one's hair” Kaş. 77I 399 (mepdesü:r, meygdesme:k). Tris. MND PUF mındatu: Hap. leg.; this word which is indexed under fa'lali, mandırı:, also Hap. leg., indexed under fu'lal;i, and mundaru:, also Hap. leg., indexed under fa"/aldl and included in a sub-para. with sanduvva:ç, and so prob. mis-spelt, all seem cognate both in form and meaning. They are obviously l.-w.s DIS. MND and have an Indian look; perhaps connected vv, Sanskrit mazgdita "ornamented, adorned', but some other origin is possible; a/-qazzina is not an ordinary Ar. word; it is der. fr. qazz, a Pe, L-w. in Ar. meaning “silk”, and may mean “a silken garment! or the like. Xak. xi mindatu: a/-quzzina Kag. ! 491: Cigll xi (VU) mandirt: "the word for the gathering which assembles in the presence of the bridegroom and bride (al-macltsu'lladi yucma 'bayna'l -xatan wa'[-'aris) at night, when ceremonial gifts (al-nrtàr) are presented” / 492: Xak. xi (PU) mundaru: a/-hacala müne"l-harir "a bridal canopy of silk” 7 529. SD munadınçığ (b-) Dev. N./A. fr. *mupadin- Reil, f. of mupad- (bunad-): etymologically it should mean 'confused, perplexed', or the like, but it seems rather to be laudatory in character and to mean “marvellous” or the like. Pec. to Uyg., and usually used in association vv. adınçığ or tanlançığ. Uyğ. viri ff. Man, AM III 39, 2-3 (ii) (adınçığ): Bud. munpadınçığ uluğ ış küdüğ “a marvellous great undertaking” Suv. 613, 19; 0.0. TT V zo, 9 (adırıçığ), U IV 28, 31-2 etc. (taplançığ). PUF mandırı: and mundaru: See mindatu:, Tris. V. MNDSD muyadtur- (b-) Hap. leg.?; Caus. f. of mupad- (bupad-). Xak. x: KB mupadturmağıl sen yeğü kedgüke “do not let yourself he worried about food or clothing' 1264. SDF mandarlan- (b-) Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. manda:r, but not, like it, described as Oğuz. Xak. xi yığa:ç mandarlandı: £//azed”l-lablab “ala” H-şacar “the tree was wrapped in bindweed, Dolíchos lablab' Kaş. II 271 (mandarlanu:r, mandarlanma:k). Dis. MNG SD mapiğ (b-) Hap. leg.; N.Ac. fr. map-. Xak. xı mapi£ a/-xafıca "step, gait'; hence one says anın manığı: kö:r "look at his gait Kaş. III 365. SD munuk (b-) Hap. lcg.; Pass. Dev, NA. fr. mun- (bun-); “mentally confused' and the like. Xak. xı Kaş. 7 66 (2 azuk). S munğak See muyğak, SD munğul (b-) n.o.a.b., in TT III, where -É- is often represented by -A-, the spelling is munkul, in the Suv. MS., which is xvii, mugiul; the meaning, which can only be deduced fr. the context, might well be 'mentally confused, troubled', and the like, so it is best explained as a Dev. N/A. fr. mun- (bun-). 'l'he resemblance to the tribal name AMong£ol is purely fortuitous. Uyğ. viii ff. Man. (they were liberated from an animal existence) umuğsuz irinc munğul kal ağulug (spelt ekuluğ) “hopeless, miserable, men   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 813 
     
   
   
      DIS. V. tally disturbed, savage, and poisonous' TT III 25-6; o.o. do. 27, 89: Bud. (tell me quickly, Minister, where my son is. My body is distressed and annoyed, as if it was being burnt with fire) ógümin könülümin ıçğınıp munğul (muşğul) bolup bilinmezmen 'I am losing my understanding and mind, becoming mentally confused, and do not know (what has happened)' Suv. 624, 17-18. SD munğa:n (b-) N/A. of Habitual Action fr. mun- (bun-); lit. 'mentally disturbed" and the like. Pec. to Kag. where it is entered twice, in 7 440 under fa'lán, and in 1 476 under fa'làl. In the latter case the section contains no other words ending in -a:n and this word comes between mancuk (the last word ending in qdf) and bürçek (the first ending in haf), it is therefore almost certainly an error for munğa:k a parallel N./A. in -ğa:k which would have the same meaning. Xak. xı munğa:n kişi a/-rartár “a garrulous person, chatterbox” Kaş. 7 440. F mınğuy Hap. leg.; l.-vv. fr. the Chinese phr. möen 'flour' (see mön) and Au “paste” (Giles 4,936; Pulleyblank, Middle Chinese you) Xak. xı minguy the name of the “paste” ('aci) used to stick papers together; the dough ('acin) for it is mixed with water and then boiled until it becomes very viscid Kaş. III 241. Dis. V. MNGSD munpuk- (b-) Pass. Den. V. fr. mup(bup); “to be distressed” and the like. Pec. to Xak. Xak. xı er mupuktr umtuhina'l-racul. wa'dfurra "the man was distressed and subjected to pressure' Kaş. IJI 395: KB mupuksa yağı yüz ölümke urur “if the enemy is hard pressed he turns his face to death” 2391. SD manğır- (b-) Hap. leg.: Inchoative f. of 2 man- (2 ban-) Xak. xı ol etme:kiğ ya:ğka: manğırdı: “he began to dip (yaşbağ) the bread in oil and plunge (yagmis) it into it” Kaş. 11 197 (manğıra:r, mangirma:k), SD mupkar- (b-) Trans. Den. V. fr. mug (bup); 'to cause distress' and the like. Pec. to Xak. Xak. xı ol ant: mupkardt: :dtarrahu roa”mtahana "he applied pressure to him and distressed hin' Kaş. JI] 397 (mupkarur, mupkarma:k): KB ayı mupkarursen bu kün sen méni “ohl you are distressing mc today' 4024. Dis. MNG S mengü:/mepgü: See bepgü:. Dis. V. MNGSD münük- (b-) Hap. leg.; Intrans. Den. V. fr. 1 mün (1 bü:n); “to be faulty, defective, and the like. Uyğ. vii ff. Civ. the 28th hexagram uo "to commit a fault' (Giles 6,622) is translated uluğ münükmek TT 1 224. MNL- 769 S.i.a.m.l.g. except SW with various phonetic changes. Türkü vir ff. (of an omen) muplu:ğ ol anığ yavlak ol “it is distressing and very bad” İrkB 22: Uyğ. vniff. Man.-A M II 30, 3 (ii) (éndür-): Xak. xı mupluğ er “a melancholy (a/-mumtahin) man” Kaş. 111 382: KH munluğ is common as a stock epithet for 'suffering' mankind, e.g. kamuğ barça mupluğ törütülmişi “all His created beings suffer' ş, o.o. 24, 28, 1056 (1 ulr:-), 1673 (çırğuy), 4403: (xiv Muh. ma'yub “vicious, defective' mu:nlu:ğ Mel. s2, 7; Rif. 148; prob. an error for mü:nlü:g): Çağ. xv ff. munluğ mu'im «wa muta'allim. 'distressing, distressed'; both meanings occur (har dü ámada) San. 320v. 25 (quotns. for each meaning): Xwar. xiii munlu (one MS. bunla) 'distressed' “A/f 49: xiv müupli/ muplig/muplug ditto Qut 112; münluğ Nahc. 286, 6: Kip. xiv muplu: (-n- marked) al-muhtüc ma ma"nühu di'l-háca 'distressed, in need” İd. 89. Dis. V. MNLSD manıl- (b-) Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of 2 man(2 ban-). Xak. xietme:k sirke:ke: manildi: “the bread was dipped (subiga) in vinegar' (etc.) Kaş. 11 138 (manilur, manilma:k). SD münel- (b-) Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of müne:-. Xak. xı ton müneldi: “the sides of the garment and the superfluous (material in the) hole for the neck (gawüratuhu'[-zá'ída) were trimmed” (quti'a) Kaş. II 1:38 (münelür, münelme:k). S münül- See binil-. SD mayla:- (b-) Den. V. fr. map; “to step, stride'. Survives with this meaning as mandain SE Tar. R II 2010 and for “to gallop” in several NE languages as mapta- ditto; Khak. mapna-. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. kşatrik begler manın maylap “striding with the gait of the kşatriya chiefs! U TV 8, 16 (and 7 41, r, both mistranscribed and mistranslated), a.o. Tiş, 45b. 4 (map). SD meple:- (b-) Hap. leg. but see menlet-, meplen-; cf. mende:-, Den. V. fr. 1 mer, q.v., for a similar phr.; 'to look for, or pick up, grain. Türkü vii ff. /rkB 49 (eple:-). SD münle:- (b-) Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. 2 mün (2 bün). Xak.xı er münle:di: “the man sipped the soup” (assa . . . al-maraqa) Kaş. 1I1 301 (münle:r, münle:me:k). SD meplet- (b-) Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of menle:-. Xak. xı ol ka:zığ mepletti: a/qata”l-batta”l1-habb "he gave the goose (Kaş., as usual, “duck”) grain (etc.) to pick up" Kaş. II 359 (mepletü:r, mepletme:k). SD meşglen- (b-) Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of meple:-; “to pick up grain for oneself”, "The simürgük is described as 'a bird like a Dis. MNL nightingale' in the language of Balasağün, but SD munluğ (b-) P.N./A. fr. mur (bun): the quotn. seeıms to be ordinary Xak. Xak.xı 'sorrowful, melancholy, distressed”, etc. Kaş. IJ 290 (simürgük); n.m.e. 8641125 cc |  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 814 
     
   
   
       770 Tris. MNL SD mepi:lig (b-) P.N./A. fr. 2 meyi: (benl:), 'joyful, happy”, and the like. N.o.a.b. Türkü vut ff. mepi:li:g beg er erml:ş “he was a happy beg! IrkB 5; a.o. do. 62: Uyğ. vii ff. Man.-A M IH ir, 3 (ii) (barımlık): Bud. alku mepilig boldilar “they all became joyful” PP 72, 3-4; ençğülüğ mepülüg (sic) 'peaceful and happy” T'T IV ız, 59-60; o.o. U II 45, 56; Suv. 192, s etc. (it has sometimes been mistranslated 'eternal' owing to confusion with mepğü (bepgü:) “eternal”): Xak. xı KB meniliğ bodun kim bu yanlığ begi; menili$ beg ol kolsa bodnı yegi "happy are the people who have a beg like this; happy is the beg if his people seek what is good for him” 1789 (the MSS. have some v.l.s, but this was the original text); o.o. 1975, 5398, 6370. SD mepi:lik (b-) A.N. fr. 2 mepi: (beni:), 'joyfulness, happiness. Uyğ. vir ff. Man. ti turkaru mepiligin (sic) “in complete and lasting happiness! TT III] 110: Bud. U 7I 34, 6-7 (asığlık), Suv. 354, 7 (étigsiz): (Xak. xiu(?) Tef. mepülük 'eternity' is a parallel A.N. fr. mepgü (bepgü:)). Tris. V. MNLSD 1 meni:le:- (b-) Den. V. fr. 2 mepi:(bepi:); “to rejoice; to be happy”. N.o.a.b. Itis possible that Xaş.”s translation of 2 mepl:le:- is purely imaginary and based on a false etymology; the verse quoted certainly contains 1 meni:le:-. Türkü vii ff. (seated on a golden throne) mepi:leyü:rmen “1 am happy” IrkB 1; o.o. do. 4, 28, 51, 56: Bud. (that man) meni menileyür "is happy” 77 VI 198. SD 2 mepi:le:- (b-) Den. V. fr. 1 menpi:(befi:), n.o.a.b. Xak. xi er mepi:le:di: “the man ate the brain” (a/-dimağ), this is the original (meaning); then this was used in speech (fi'/-kalüm) in the same contexts as the Ar. phr. fübà lah (you have been invited"), that is that a man must slaughter a sheep to get the brain which is the best part of the animal; and whoever is honoured (ukrima) by the slaughter of a sheep for the sake of the brain and has it placed before him is greatly complimented (mulitaram); then this word is used for anyone who receives special food, it is addressed to him; (in a verse) eren ta:pup (?so read) mepi:le:di: (MS. müyi:le:di:) yan'amu'l-ricàl mina' l-amwáli'llati nahabühàá "the men rejoice at the spoils which they have captured” Kaş. III 405 (no Aor. or Infin.). Dis. MNM SD mayim (b-) N.S.A. fr. man-: “a single stride'. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı KB (a man is born and mounts the horse of time) küni bir mapim ol tünl bir mapim “(each of) .his days is one stride and (each of) his nights one stride' 1589. Dis. MNR S mipa:r. See btpa:r. TRIS.  MNL Dis. V. MNRmapra:-/müpre:- Introductory note. Both these V.s, which seem to have an onomatopoeic origin and to represent earlier forms *bayra:-[ *bünpre:-, mean "to make a noise! of some hind. Kaş. uses the first only of human beings and the second only of animals, and this distinction survives in most early languages, although reversed in Çağ. İn modern times the first s.i.a.m.l.g. except SW svith some phonetic changes, e.g. NC Kir, ma:ra-, and means only "to bleat” or "to low', and the second survives only(?) in. NW Nog. münire- “ro bellow'. S mapra:- (b-) “to shout". Türkü vri ff. Man. M I 6, ro (ün): Uyğ. virt ff. Man. M III 9, 12-13 (i) (ünde:-): Bud. inisin okiyu mapradi “he shouted calling his younger brother' PP 58, 3-4; Xak. xi er mapra:dı: "the man (etc.) shouted” (sáha) Kaş. 111 402 (mapra:r, mapra:ma:k): Çağ. xv ff. manra:- (spelt) of a cow, sheep, and the like “to low, bleat' (nàla kardan), and of a man (insán) they say mupra- (sic) San. 319r. 8: (Xwar. xiv mapla- '(of a cock) to crow? Qutb 110): Kom. xiv “to bleat” mapraCCG, Gr. 163 (quotn.): (Kip. xiv adana "to call to prayer” banla-/banğla- Bul. 32v.: xv adana mina'l-àdán l'l-salát mağin- (sic, for mapla-) Kav. 75, 7; adana mayla- Tuh. sb. 13; a.o.o.: Osm. xiv ff. bapla- “to shout, call to prayer; to crow; to thunder'; in several texts T TS 1 74; II 103; IV 73). S müpre:- (b-) 'to bellow, low, bleat', etc. Türkü viri ff. (I am a maral deer) müpre:yü:rmen “İ bellow' JrkB 6o: Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. Suv. 12, 21-2 (ağrın-): Xak. xı u:d müpre:di: "the bull bellowed' (xára) Kaş. III 403 (münre:r, müpre:me:k): xiv Muh. (among animal noises) fuğd”u"l-baqar twa'l-ganam 'lowing, bleating” mupra:mak (?sic; -mak is a common error for -mek in Mwuh.) Mel. 73, 11; Rif. 176: Çağ. xv ff. mupra-/ munraş-/munray-/munurğa- (all spelt) nala hardan insán of a man "to shout and of animals they say manra- San. 320r. 7 (quotns.): Kom. xiv “to lov” mupra- CCG; Gr. 166 (quotn.). SD maprat- (b-) Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of mapra:-. Xak. xı ol anı: maprattı: aşdfalın zea şayyahahu “he made him call out and shout* Kaş. II 358 (mapratu:r, mapratma:k). SD müpret- (b-) Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of müpre:-. Xak. xı ol u:dnı: müpretti: "he made the bull bellow' (axára'l- tar); and one says o:t eşiçni: müprettl: “the fire made the pot boil violently and noisily” (ağlat . . , bi-fawaràn wa gawt); and one says ol erni: uru:p müpretti: "he beat the man till he made him howl and bellow like an ox” (a "odlu tea. axdrahu xurvdri”l-baqar) Kaş. İl 358 (müpretü:r, münretme:k). SD mapras- (b-) Co-op. f. of mapra:-; s.i.s.m.l. following the modern meanings of   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 815 
     
   
   
      MON, mapra:-. Xak. xı (the cloud rose noisily) aktı: akin müpresü: "the strcam flowed with a babbling sound” (Hend., ör-ranin wa xarir), (the people vvere astonished by it) kökrer takı mapraşu:r Kaş. translates ta iya tar"ad wa taşih ta tabriq "and it (the cloud) thunders and crashes and flashes vvith lightning”, but it seems likelier to mean “it (the cloud) thunders, and they (the people) all shout (in alarm)” Kaş. TI 398, 25-7; n.m.e. SD mühnreş- (b-) Co-op. f. of müpre:-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı (in the spring) sığır buka: müpreşü:r “the bulls and cattle bellow joyfully' (xàra . . . faraha(n)) Kaş. II 79, 21; a.o. /İI 398, 25-7; n.m.e.: Çağ. xv ff. San. 320r. 7 (münre:-). Dis. MNS F or S mansız or mensiz See bensiz. SD mü:nsiz (b-) Hap. leg.; Priv. N./A. fr. mü:n (1 bü:n), 'without defects, soundhearted'. Xak. xı Kaş. III 140 (1 bü:n). Dis. MNŞ ?S münuş “a corner'; first appears in the medieval period and survives in NE/NC Bar., Tob. müyüş A IV 2221: SC Uzb. muyiş, it seems to be an unusual Sec. f. of büfiüz, q.v. (Xak.) xiv 256. bir müpüşde 'in a corner! (in hell) R IV 2220 (quotn.): Çağ. xv ff. müpüş güga-: xána wa sarà “the corner of a house or mansion' San. 321r. 4 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv müpüs 'corner, secluded nook” Qutb 113; Nahc. 268, 13; 321, 4: Kom. xiv 'corner' müpüş CCG; Gr. Dis. V. MNSPUSD mipes- (b-) “to ride behind someone else on the same horse'; the wotd, which carries a damma as well as a hasra on the mim, appears in Kaş. under the heading wa nat" minhu "and another sort of it” in a section containing V.s with four consonants, the second being -1)-, after mendeş- and before küpren(képren-), which perhaps implies a spelling mipğeş- or even minğeş-. İt survives with the same meaning in SE "Far. mipğeş- R IV 2150; "Fürki minges- BŞ 707: NC Kzx. minğeş-: SC Sart mipis- R IV 2150; Uzb. mingag-: NW Kk. mingeş-, and in SW Osm. bingiş- (of teeth) “to overlap! Sami 335. Morphologically it seems to be the Co-op. f. of a Den. V. fr. *binig, a N.Ac. fr. bin-. Xak. xi ol menin birle: mipesdi: irtadafa ma'i'l-faras wea. nahmahu "he rode behind me on a horse or the like” Kaş. 7II 399 (minegü:r, mipgesme:k). : Dis. MNZ S mepiz See bepiz. S müpüz See *bünüz, SD mepzeg (b-) Dev. N. fr. menze:(bepze:-); 'likeness, resemblance; something MRC 771 resembling”. N.o.a.b. Xak. xr KB amp oxşağı yok azu merzeğl “there is nothing like or resembling Him” 16; a.o. 17 (1 bo:d): xim?) Tef. menzeğ "example, (physical) shape” 222: xiv Muh. al-miti 'similarity, resemblance" mepzeg Mel. 85, 3, Rif. ror. Dis. V. MNZS megze:- See begze:-. S menzet- See begzet-. Tris. MNZ SD miüpüzge:k (b-) Hap. leg.; Den. N. fr. müpüz (*büfiüz) in the sense of 'something horny”. Xak. xi müpüzğe:k "hard skin on the hand (macalu'l-yad wahswoa'l-filaz) which results from manual labour! Kaş. 111 388. SD mepjizlig (b-) P.N./A. fr. mepiz (bepiz); *beautiful' and the like. N.o.a.b. Üyğ. vri ff. Bud. U IH 57, 6 (i) (osuğluğ): Civ. TT VII 26, 17-18 (körklüğ). SD mepizsiz (b-) Hap. leg.?; Priv. N./A. fr. mepiz (bepiz); “unbeautiful”. Uyf. vin ff. Man. M Hİ 37, 16 (i) (öpsüz). Tris. V. MNZSD menizlen- (b-) Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. mepiz (bepiz). Xak. xı kişi: mepizlendi: hasuna wachu'l-insán "the man's face was beautiful” Kaş. III 407 (mepizlenü:r, mepizlenme:k). SD müpüzlen- (b-) Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. müpüz (*büüüz). Xak. xi kuzi: müpüzlendi: taía'a qarmı”l-hamal “the lamb (etc.) grew horns Kaş. IİI 408 (müpüzlenü:r, müpüzlenme:k). : i Mon. MR F mir 'honey'; l-w. fr. Chinese mi (Giles 7,834; Pulleyblank, Middle Chinese mit, in some rst millennium NW dialects mir); the Chinese word is itself a l.-w. fr. Tokharian B mit, which seems to exclude the possibility that ba:l, q.v., was taken fr. Tokharian. Pec. to Uyg. Uy£. viu ff. Bud. mir in a list of drugs, etc. Suv. 596, r: Civ. mir is included in several prescriptions in H 7 114, 128; Dat. mırka do. 143. Mon. MRC F mırç/murç 'pepper'; ultimately der. fr. Sanskrit maricalmarica, same meaning, prob. through some İranian(?) intermediary. “The alternative. medieval form burg shows the same sound-change m ? b that seems to have occurred in ba:l, q.v. S.i.a.m.l.g. with some phonetic changes and initial m- in NE, SE, NC Kır., and SC and initia] b- in NC Kzx., NW, and SW (Tkm. only). Cf. bitmül. Uyğ. viri ff. Civ. kara murs “black pepper' H I 134; mure do. 7, 49; TT VII 22, 3: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. hu chiao "black (lit. foreign) pepper! (Giles 4,930 1,350) mure R IV 2195; BU ss !á aei md ERE VU UÇ, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 816 
     
   
   
       772 Ligeti 183: Xak. xi murg al-fulful “pepper" Kaş. 1 343: a.o. HI 186 (soktur-): Çağ. xv ff. burc fulful; burg ditto, also isti ot and in Rümi büber San. 132v. 13: Kom. xiv 'pepper' burç CCI; Gr.: Kip. xii (among cooking materials) a/-fulful (MS., in error, al-qufl) burg Hou. 17, 18: xiv burg (-c) al-fulful d. 29; Bul. y, 1: Osm. xiv to xvi burg “pepper” in several texts T'T.S 1 126; I1 178; IV 134. Dis. MRD F merdex Hap. leg.; presumably l.-w. fr. Pe. mardah “a little man”, Dim. f. of mard. Xak. xı merdek “the young of a bear" (waladu'l-dubb); it is called adığ merdeki: "bear-cub” (al-daysam); and some "Turks call “the sucking pig' (a/-xinateş) tonuz merdeki: Kaş. 1 480. Dis. MRM F marım Hap. leg.?; l-w. fr. Sanskrit marmá “a joint, or other external part of the body", "This is not the word in Uyg. 1x Suct 7 and 9 marıma:, mariminea: which is the Syriac l.-w. mör “teacher” with the rst Pers. Poss. Suff., “to my teacher, like my teacher”. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. TT 111, p. 26, note 5, 11 (yüze:gü:). Dis. MRZ F mara:z Hap. leg.; in the meaning 'paid labourer' it is a l.-w. fr. Sogdian maraz, see Benveniste in Journal asiatique, vol. 236, pt. 2, 1948, p. 184; xiyür in the longer phr. is a synonymous Sogdian L.-w. Xak. xi mara:z al-'islim 'indigo': mara:z “a paid labourer” (al-'acir); one says xıya:r mara:z Kaş. 1 411. Mon. MS VUF mig one of several words for “cat”, see çetük, and no doubt a l.-w., but not Pe., where niş means “mouse, rat". As such Hap. leg., but some of the modern words listed as cognate to maçı: may be more cognate to Mis word. Cigil xı mü:g al/-hirra “female cat”, Oğuz çetük Kaş. /II 127; o.o. I 391 (küvük) and, with Xak. words and provs., in / 438, 14; H 14, 18; 105, 24; HHI 165 (küvük); 267, 19. Dis. MSC VUF maşıç Hap. leg.; no doubt a l.-w. Xak. xr al-"inabu”l-ğirbib “high quality black grapes' are called maşıç üzüm Kaş. 7 360. Dis. MŞĞ VUF mışkıç Hap. leg., l-w. fr. Sogdian mwikyit wild cat”, cf. manu:, UÜYyğ. viri ff. Civ. H I 57-8 (ergüz-). Dis. MYA S meyi See *béüi:. Dis. MYB PU muya:w- Hap. leg.; “to mew'; an obvious onomatopoeic. "The pronunciation is quite un MON. MRC certain; the only form is apparently a Ger. in -u: spelt muya:wu or muya'u:, but as neither can be der. fr. any ordinarily shaped Turkish V. the word may be a mere onomatopoeic. Xak. xı mü:ş oğlı: muya:wu tuğdi: "a kitten is born mevving” (Kaş. rcaladu”l-hirra va'mü umö” umnmihi "the kitten mews like its mother") Kaş. JI 14, 18; n.mie. Dis. MYG S mayak See Tbafak, VUS muy£a: (b-) Hap. leg.; a pejorative Adj. perhaps meaning “hcadstrong” or the like. Morphologically it might be a Dev, N./A. fr. *muy- (*bufi-) parallel to muyğak, if that can be taken as a Dev. N./A. fr. the same V. Uy£. virt ff. Bud. TT VI 254-5 (iy-). S?D muyğak (buüğak) “the female maral deer", It is twice spelt »nungak in the Vienna MS. of KB, and although this may be merely an error of a kind common in that MS. it may be a reminiscence of the original form of the word, which is morphologically a Dev. N./A. (connoting habitual action), cf. muyğa:. Survives in NE Tel. muyğak R IV 2170; Khak. muyğax, other languages use the Mong. L-w. maral. Uyü. viri ff. Man. M I 35, 5 (éder-): Bud. muyğak USp. 102c. 5; müyğakkiya Dim. f. do. 3: Xak. xi muyğak (MS. maygak) al-ahnaf mina ”l-nüs sca'l-acrad. min dawáti'l-hawáfir "a man with bow legs and a short-haired hoofed animal” Kaş. III 175 (no doubt the same word, with a suggestion of its character as a Dev. N./A.): KB sığun muyğak “the male and female maral deer” 7g (ağna:-), 5374. Tris. V. MYĞSD mayaka:- (banaka:-) Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. mayak (*baüak); “to defecate', Uyğ. vini ff. Civ. TT VII 42, s (art). Dis. MYL SD mayıl (bafi) Hap. leg.; 'over-ripe'; apparently Intrans. Dev. N./A. fr. may(*baü-); cf. mayil-. Xak. xr mayıl (yà' unvocalized) yemiş “the word for any fruit when it has hecome soft (làna) after it has ripened (radica) and passed its prime” (cáwaza haddahu), for example a peach or soft large melon Kaş. III 168. Dis. V. MYLSD mayıl- (bafil-) Pass. f. of may- (*bafi-); “to be over-ripe”, cf. mayıl, mayış-. "There are traces of may- and its der. f.s in several modern languages; NE Kaç,, Kiz., Koib., Sag. mayık-/mayıl- “to be exhausted, weak' R IV 2014; Khak. mayix-: NC Kir. mayi“to be damaged” do.; maytar- “to bend” (Trans.), mayrı-/mayış- " to bend (Intrans.), to be bent; Kzx. may- “to be exhausted, weak' R IV 1986; mayir- “to bend” (Trans.): mayıs- “to bend” (Intrans.): NW Krım mayış- “to be bent, to collapse” R IV 2015.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 817 
     
   
   
       MON. MZ "The same general connotation runs through the whole group. Xak. xi ka:ğu:n mayıldı: 'the fresh. water-melon went bad (imfasaxa), that is when it is kept overnight and becomes over-ripe', also used of any fruit Kaş. İİİ 190 (mayılu:r, mayilma:k). Dis. MYM VUSD moyum (b-) Hap. leg.; N.S.A. fr. *moy- (*bofi-); 'confused' and the like, cf. moymal-, boymaş-. Uyğ. viiff. Bud. Chinese Aun 'confused' (Giles 5,239) is translated moyum adırtsız Hüen-ts., Briefe, P. 34, note 1929. Dis. V. MYMVUSD moymal- (b-) Hap. leg.; Pass. Den. V. fr. moyum; cf. boymaş-. Uy£. vir ff. Bud. üjikde moymalmışlarka aça yada sözleyür erdi “he spoke and expounded (Hend., the true doctrine) to those confused by the letter (of the scriptures)' Hüen-ts. 1929-30. Dis. MYN S muya:n See buyan. Tris. MYN SDF muyançılık (b-) Hap. leg.; A.N. fr. 773 a N.Ag. fr. muya:n (buyan) Xak. xı müuyançılık al-tamassut ga”l-şülh: bayna'l-raculayn "mediation and reconciliation be- tween two people”, one says sen muyançılık kil “mediate between us”) its origin is muya:n al-tawàb 'recompense for good deeds' Kaş. III 179. SDF muyanlik (b-) Hap. leg.; A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. muya:n (buyan); “a charitable institution”. Xak. xı KB 489 (bupad-). Dis. MYSSD mayış- (bafiig-); Co-op. f. of may(bafi-); “to collapse' and the like. S.i.s.m.l., see mayıl-. Xak. xı er y€:rke: mayışdı: “the man stuck (/aziqa) to the ground', because of obstinacy or laziness (rir hirdnihi wa kasalihi), that is when he is ordered to do something and refuses to accept the order (mayışu:r, mayışma:k, the yd” carrying. both kasra and damma): yamaşdı:, metathesized form of mayışdı: (yama:şu:r, yamaşma:k, so vocalized owing to confusion with 1 yamaş-?) Kaş. III 189. Mon. MZ S moz See bo:z. S muz See bu  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 818 
     
   
   
       N "Vhe only basic "l'urkish words beginning with n- are ne: and ne:p, and even ne: may be ultimately der. fr. ne:, "The other words listed below are either der. f.s, Sec. f.s, or İ.-vv.s. Several other l.-w.s occur in Uy£., some frequently, but are not listed below since they never occur except in Man. or Bud. religious works and so never really became part of the language. These include Sanskrit 1.-w.s like namo “homage” and nirvan 'nirváma', and Iranian (mostly Sogdian) l.-w.s like nığoşak “Hearer” (a Man. technical term), nos “elixir?, and nizvani 'emotion, passion'. In the latest Uy£. texts and in later languages there arc also a few Mong. l.-w.s like nókór 'personal servant, friend' and in the Islamic period many Ar. and Pe. l.-w.s; the only one likely to cause confusion is Pe. nà 'not', which occurs as early as KB 17, 18, etc., usually with a Neg. V. Mon. NA 2n ne: originally an Interrog. Pron. “vhat?” used in speaking of inanimate objects in the same way that kim is used of animate beings, and like that word also used as a Pron. Adj. and later, under the influence of Indo-European grammar, as a Relative and occasionally in an exclamatory sense. In all these meanings it is sometimes also used of animate beings. As well as the derivatives below some oblique cases are almost used as Advs. "The word and its der. f.s are discussed at length in v. G. ATG, sce Index, p. 212. C.ia.p.a.l. Türkü vri ne: xağanka: isig küçiğ bérü:rmen “to which xağan shall I offer my services?' 1 E 9, ITE 9; (we are an army of two or three thousand) kelteçimiz bar mu: ne: “vould it be (a good thing) for us to come?' T 14; ben sapa: ne: ayaytn 'what shall I say to you?' T 32; neke: tezer biz . . . neke: korku:r biz... ne basınalım tegelim 'Why are we running away? ... VVhy are we afraid? ... Why should we be downcast? Let us attack.” T 38-9; a.o. T s?: vin ff. aficrá Kkilincl:$. simnu: ne: yavlak çulvu: sakt:ntı: “vhat evil blasphemy did that wicked demon think of?” Toyok III v. 2-7; (ETY II 178): Man. ne bar ermiş tépen biltimiz “ve knew what existed” (before there was a heaven and earth) Chuas. 163, (if our prayers have not reached God) ne yerde tıdıntı tutunti erser “but have been obstructed or detained somevvhere” do. 217-18; (we knew) tenrili yekli nede ötrü süpüşmiş *why heaven and the demon fought" 164—5; 0.0. do. 169, 172, etc.; ne üçün téser üf one says "“vhy?”” M III 6, 7 (i): Uyğ. viii ff. Man.-A ne üçün téser M 7 əş, 29; ne er sen “vhat man are you?” do. 33, 19: Bud. ne üçün 'why?' PP 4, s etc.; neke  “vhy?” do. ş, 2 ctc.; tusus1 ne bar “vhat advantage has it?” PP 21, 1; Sanskrit yavacca "and as much as” ne: yaplığ yeme: TT VIII 4.2; ne: yörüğ 'what interpretation?' do. H.6; ne ayıtmış kergek “vhat ought one to ask?” TT X 16; 0.0. do. 55, 197, etc.: ne yeme followed by Conditional *whatever' (may . . .) TT IV 10, 8 etc.; ne erser asığka tusuka kirmedi “did not enter into any kind of advantage (Hend.) Su. 612, 2-3: Civ. ne busuş ol 'what gricf is there?” TT I 187; ne ada bolğay 'what danger will come?” do. VII 3o, 2—ne kim is kilsa 'whatever he does” do. 28, 37 (in these texts neğü: is much commoner than ne:); Xak. xi ne: a Particle (harf) meaning md dd 'what?'; hence one says ne: t€:rsen '*what do you say ?': ne: a l'article expressing surprise (a/-ta"accub), hence one says ne: me: edgü: kişi: ol “vhat a good man (etc.) he is" or ne: me: yavuz ne:r ol bu: “vhat a bad thing this isl” Kaş. 7II 214; and about 20 o.o. as either an Interrog. Pron. or Adj., e.g. ne: uğurda: keldi:p “at what time did you come?” 7 53, 14: KB ne “vhat?” is common in conversation, e.g. tileki ne ermiş "what was his wish?' 503; 0.0. 507, etc.—ne erse 'anyone' or 'anything', declined as a N., is common, e.g. ne ersedin ermez senip birlikip ne erseleriğ sen törüttün senin "Thou has no onencss with anyone; any that 'Thou hast created are Thine” r3: xi(?) At. ne *what?' as a Pron. or Adi. is common, e.g. tavar asğı ne ol “vhat is the advantage of wealth ?' 287; ne nen bar “vhat thing is there?” (as good as knowledge) 100— biligsiz ne aysa "whatever the ignorant man says” 11g—ne kim kelse erke 'whatever comes to a man' 145; Tef. ne *what?'; ne kim(... erse) “vhatever'; nerse 'some, something! 227-8: xiv Mwuh. ayş “vhat?” ne: Mel. s, 7; Rif. 75: (Interrog.) mà “vhat?” né: (sic) 16, 15; 94 (followed by examples); ne: has an Interrog. meaning and corresponds to ayy şey” 'whnt?', e.g. "vhat are. you doing?' ne: kilu:rsen; “vhat do you want?' ne: tizle:rsen 17, 19; 96: Çağ. xv ff. the entries in lel. are confused; né is translated by re, and oblique cases, etc., of né by corresponding oblique cases of me, e.g. née yeye that is ne igün why ?', also ne nesneye "to what thing?', but the Acc. Suff. -ni/ni is also entered as a separate word and so translated flan 'so-and-so', and the Gen. Suff. -nip/-nip translated fulamug 391 ff.; né is a word which when placed at the beginning of a sentence means çih “vhat?”, the Pe. Interrog. Pron. (and at the end of a word -niyJ-ni is the Acc. Suff.) San. 322r. 3 (various der. f.s and phr. like né üçün “vhy?” follow): Xwar. xiv né “vhat?”, nerse “thing” Qwutb 113; MN 250, ctc.: Kom. xiv ne (also neğe, neden) occurs as an Interrog., İndefinite, and  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 819 
     
   
   
      DIS Relative Pron./Pron. Adj. CCI, CCG; Gr. 168-9 (quotns.): Kip. xiii ay; ne: Hou. 56, 15 ff.: xiv ne: ayy şay” İd. 89; ay; net, 'alá ayş neçün (-c-) Bul. ış, 6; fil li-ta"accub ne:; 1H-acal ay; ne:nünp wücün (sic) do. 16, 2-3: xv ne: (8i-imdla, i.e, ne: not na?) ayş, also ne: Kav. 16, 8 (various der, f.s and phr. follow): Osm. xiv ff. ne with various idiomatic meanings and in phr.; c.La.p. 77S 7 s25fF.; II 302 ff.; III 517 ff.; IV 584 ff. D nü: Hap. leg.; no doubt, as Kaş. says, a crasis of ne:ğü:, Xak. xı nü: a Particle (Rarf) used instead of ne: and meaning mö dá; hence one says nü: té:rsen “vhat do you say?'; originally ne:ğü: but abbreviated Kaş. III 215. Tris. NBS F nevaşiği "a good spirit'; ultimately der. f. Middle Pe. séw sedxşig, prob. through the Tokharian A form naivástk (see TT X, p. 57). "The word is discussed in Sir Harold Bailey, Indoiranica, BSOAS XVIII, 1957. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vri ff. Bud. nayvasigi teprilerke "to the good spirits and gods” U 77 8o, 64 (and see note, p. 83); a.o. TT X 271: xiv Chin. Uyğ. Dict. shén 'supernatural being” (Giles 9,819) nayvaşigi U II, p. 83, note 64; Ligeti 184: Xwar. xin(?) yaxşı nevşigğilerdin (so read?) körüklüğrek erdi "he was more beautiful than the good spirits' Oğ. 7-8. Dis. NCA D ne:ge: Equative f. of ne:; properly an Interrog. Pron. 'how many?, but with Indefinite and Relative connotations in some contexts, see v. G. AT'G, paras. 195 etc.; sometimes declined as a N. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE(?); but note that "how many?” is neçe in SW Az., nice in Osm., and that in both languages nece means 'in what language?' Neşe 'why? how?' etc. which occurs in some medieval and modern languages seems to be not a Sec. f. of this word but a crasis of ne işe fr. 2 s. Türkü vir ff. Man. neçe yüğürür erti ança "the more he ran, the more” (he vomited) M 1 7, 12-13; phr. like böş teprig . neçe sıdımız bertdimiz erser 'inasmuch as (or to the extent that) we have injured and hurt the five gods' Chas. 51-2 are common in this text: Uyğ. vırı ff. Man.-A nece otaçı otin birle kelser 'however many physicians come with their remedies' M I 15, 6—7; neçeke tegi "to the extent that” (men and women fail to partake of the strength of the five gods) do. 16, 16: Man. neçe . . . işler küdügler erser 'however many . . . undertakings there may be' TT II 16, 41-5: Bud. nece...bar erser "however many . . there ” may be” TT IV 16, 62; VIII H.1o (neçe): Suv. 530, 2 etc.—Sanskrit (let a man strive) tüvat yüvad arthasya nişbati “so much as wili achieve his purpose! anca:ka tegi ne:ce:ke: teği asığnıp bütmeki bolsar(p- . . . 6-) TT VIII E.44; 2.0. do. 45—neçe teplig “like what? (Interrog.) U 111 73, 2; 'how!' (exclamatory TT X 345—neçede ken temin  :NCG 775 óglenip “after some time he completely recovered consciousness” Sut. 61:9, 18-19; necede ölser "as soon as he dies” U İl 43, 19; a.0. do. 8o, 3: Civ. bu yérke neçe uruğ batsar 'whatever quantity of seed is planted in this land' USp. 28, 5: Xak. xi nece: a Particle (harf) meaning Ram" fi'l-'adad 'how many?'; hence one says neçe: yarma:k berdin 'how many dizhams did you give?” , tca yakün ayda(m) istifhüma(n) "and it is also Interrogative' (sic) Kaş. İTİ 220; similar o.o. 1 49 (1 €n); III 157 (sa:n)—avçı: nece: al bilse: adığ ança: yo:l bili:r 'however many tricks the hunter knows the bear knows as many ways out” ] 63, 13; a.o. I 332, 12— nece: yitiğ biçe:k erse: 'however sharp a knife is” 1 384, 24; 0.0. I1 458, 13; İİİ 38, 20 (nece: me:): KB nece 'however much, or many”, usually vr. Conditional, is common 23, 114, 347, 736, etc.; nece me same meaning 918, etc.; sometimes almost 'whenever', e.g. 247: xiri(?) At. neçe is common, usually vv. Conditional *however much”, 'how much?” 180; 'why?' 181; neçe me 'however much” 38, 174; Tef. neçe 'how many?; however much”: neçe me 'however much”, neçe kim bardı erse 'whoever (or however many?) went'; bir néce “a few' 229; (nése 'why?' 230): xiv Muh. kam istifhümiya neçe: Mel. 17,6; Rif. 95; (li-ma *why ?' neşet 43, 7 (only)): Çağ. xv ff. (neşe nice in the sense of “because” (zira) Vel. 393); néce (spelt) ch qadr ta har fand 'how much?; however much” (quotn.); neçe (spelt) çand tü 'how many times?” (quotn.) San. 322v. rş: Xwar. xur neçe (neşe “hovr?”) ' Ali 17; bir neçe 'some' do. 54: xın(?) bir neçe “some” Oğ. 153: xiv néce 'how many ?; however many” Qutb 114; MN 44, etc.; néce me kim muhimm 'however important” Nakc. 241, 2; (neşe *why?' do. 237, 3-8; 238, 6 etc.): Kom. xiv 'how much? nece CCT; nece me 'however much”, ança . . . neçe “so much . . . as” CCG, Gr. 169 (quotns.): Kap. xri Ram nece: (-c-) Hou. so, rs) ss, 8 fi, bi-ham Hor how much?” nece:ye: do. 55, 13 fi.: xiv neçe: (*with -ç-)) kam İd. 89; (Tkm. nése: /i-ma do. go), kam nece: (-c-) Bul. 15, $: xv kam neşe: (-5- is the usual scription for -ç- in Kav.) Kav. 16, zı fl.; if you ask a question about a number you say nece (-c-) Tuh. 57a. 13 ff.; kullamá "whenever, whatever' neşe ki do. 89b. 9: Osm. xiv ff. nice/ nice 'how?; what?; several; often' and in several idioms including nice me; c.i.a.p. TTS I 526 ft., II 705 ff., III 521; IV 588 ff. Dis. NCD F nılda:ğ Hap. leg.; obviously an lranian (?Sogdian) l.-w. Cf. bile:ğü:, Xak. xr ni)da:ğ, "with -j-', al-mişhad (MS. maşhad) *whetstone' Kaş. I 465. ' Dis. NCG D neçük unusual der. f. of ne: with Suff. -çük (very rare; function obscure); properly "hovv ?”, occasionally *why?' or as a Relative or Indefinite Adv. Prob. a very old word, The 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 820 
     
   
   
     776 DIS Instr. necükin and an odd Den. V. form necukledi:, both rare, are included here for convenience. Survives only(?) in SE Türki: SC Uzb.: NW Kar. L., T. Türkü viri ff. (I am a young gazelle) otsu:z suvsu:z kalti: uyrn necü:k yorriyrn 'how can [ get on without grazing or water? How am I to walk?" IB 45: UyfB. vinff. Man.-A (the god Normuzda had a merciful hcart) şımnuğ neçükledi ölürdi “hovv did he (come to) kill the demon?” M 7 19, 10: Chr. (go and seek him) neçükin bulsarsizler (so rcad) “hovvever you find him” (come back and tell me) U 1 6, 2; a.o. do. 6, s (ün-): Bud. él törü neçük tutarbiz 'how shall we maintain the realm and customary law?' PP 9, 6; o.o. do. sa, 4; U HI 48, iz, U IV o, 76—kaltı neçük "ust as” Suv. 139, 7 and 19—necükin *how?' PP iz, 6; Kuan. 98; Hüen-ts. 71, etc.— neçükledi (?sic, transcribed veçehledi) odgğurak tegingülük bolur 'how must onc definitely attain? U 777 4, 8-9; neçükledi . . . 1g toğa kétmez 'how is it that the discases (Hend.) . . . do not disappear?' U IV ro, 62-3: Yapa:ku: xı neçük a Particle (/rarf) meaning li-ma *why?'; hence one says neçük bardın 'why did you go?” Kaş, 7 392; a.0. do. (nelük); (in a Xak. verse) körüp necük kaçmadın "why did you not fly when you saw me?” I 79, 20: xi(?) Tef. neçük 'how?; how' 228: Caf. xv ff. nécük (^with -k”) mice ve niciin "how? why?' Vel, 393 (quotn. containing necükles-); nécük çı) guna ta (ih malhw *how? in what way ?” (quotn.); (nécukles- çih nalw kardan "to do in what vvay?” (quotn.)) San. 322v. 8-13: Xwar. xir neçük “Aİ 17: xiv nécük 'how?' Qutb 113; MN 284, etc.: Kom. xiv 'how?; as; like”, ctc. neçik CCI, CCG; Gr. 169-71 (quotns.): Kip. xiu kayf *'how?' neçük Hou. ss, 16 ff. (quotns.): xiv ditto İd. 89; Bul. is, 6: xv kayf neşük Kav. 17, 6 ff. (quotns.); kayf neçik Tw. sób. 2; 2.0.0. Dis. NDG C ne:te:ğ a combination of ne: with the Postposition te:g, q.v.; properly Interrogative “like what?' but often used as a Relative Adv. “as, just as”, Survives only(?) in SW Osm. nete/ nite “even”, netekim/nitekim/niteki “ust as, even as; for example; thus". Türkü vr ff. kere:kü: içi: ne:teg ol “vhat is the inside of the tent frame like” Zr&amp;B 18; a.o.o.: Uyğ. vini ff. Man.-A neteg "just as” M I 23, 6 (ağız): Bud. Sanskrit kathiam 'how?' ne:te:g TT VII A.23; yathd “as” neteg do. B.12; ne:teg do. E.45; (I am ready to do) neteg yarlıkasar “as he commands! U IV 16, 155; kaltı neteğ . . . ançulayu 'just as . , . so” TT IV 12, 37; V 24, sı etc.; a.o. U III s7, 6 (i) (osuğluğ): Xak. xı neteğ “an İnterrogative Particle (harf ;stifhám) meaning kayf 'how?'; hence one says neteg sen “hovv are you?” Kaş. 1 392; 10 0.0.: KB munip şukrı emdi neteg öteyin “hov am I now to proffer thanks for this?” 390; emdi könlün neteg 'how are vou feeling now?' 523; a.o. 839: xNu(2) KBVP neteg kim tiledi me boldi . NCG kamuğ “and everything came into existence as he wished' 6; a.o. 22: xiii(?) Tef. neteg 'how?; just as, as" 228: xiv. Muh. kayf néte: Mel. iy, 6; Rif. 95: Çağ. xv tf. nétek (*with -K”) mce nesne (sic?) 'how?; how' (quotn.); netük ice (quotn.) Vel. 392-3; netek/ nétük (spelt) çı nale tea. (tt. güna "in what way? how?' San. 322r. 26 (quotns.): Xwar. xir nete '/1/i 17: xiv néteg "how?! Qutb 114; MN 227. Tris. NDG D neteglik A.N. fr. ne:te:ğ, survives in SW Osm. netelik/nitelik 'essence, essential naturc”, Xak. xı KB (hine existencc is manifest; ""hou art as bright as the sun and moon) neteglikke yetgü kópül ógde yok "in the (human) understanding therc is no thought which can reach (Thy) nature” 12; 0.0. 16, neteglikke kirme "do not try to investigate the nature (of God)” 26: xm(?) Tef. neteglik "nature, character” 229: Xvvar, xır netelik ditto “47 18. Mon. NG F na:ğ L-w. fr. Sanskrit »ága, properly *snake', but also used for various mythological beings, serpent gods and the like; as one of the animals in the twelve-year cycle it replaced the earlier word lu: in Xak., the only language in which it occurs, and prob. reached that language through Sogdian. Xak. xı na:g al-timsáh “crocodile”, na:ğ yila:n al-fu'bàn “a serpent'; na:ğ yılı: “the name of one of the twelve years in Turkish”, the year A.H. 469, in which I wrote this book, was this year Kaş. III 155; a.o. (year) 7 346, 6. Dis. NGE D negü: Den. N./A. fr. net, and for practical purposes syn. vv. it. N.o.a.b. See negülük. "Türkü viti ff. (a blind. coit looked for an udder on a stallion; if he is lost(?) in broad daylight) tün ortu: kanta: negü:de: bolğay ol *where (Hend.) will he get to at midnight?" IrkB 24: Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. oğrı tép tédüküpüz negü ol “vhat is it that you called a thief? PP 59, 4-5; ne negü is işlegeli uğrasar “if he starts to do any work' U I7 23, 26; negü erser temedin “vithout saying anything! do. 31, 50; a.o. do. s, 14 (ötğürü:): neğü üçün 'whv?' U III 35, 26; bu etöz yeme negüke kergeklig ol 'and what is this body needed for?” do. 43, 27-8; o.o. U IV ro, 42 etc.; (the form negül before a gap in Hiüen-ts. 108 is prob. the beginning of negülük, but in TT VI 31 s. it seems to be a crasis of negü: ol): Civ. (if one burns a dog's tooth and) negüke türtser 'rubs it on any (part of the body) TT VII 23, 3; negü sakınç sakınsar “vhatever thought he has” . 28, 4; anğl similar o.o. w. Conditional; negü kim, neg. me “any, anything! are common in USp.: Xak. xı “Kaş. III 215 (nü:); n.m.e.: KB negü ter “vhat (someone) says” is very common 156, 16s, etc., neğü bar ajunda əm. zə ————— ——$£--- 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 821 
     
   
   
     DIS.  biligde küsüş 'what is there in (this) world more desirable than wisdom?' 260; neğüke 'why?' 467, 583, etc. (if the water is dirty) negün yup arir *what can a man wash with to be clean?' 2108; o.o. 583, 663 (yum-), 1069 (udik), 1:394 (ek-), 3488 (ké:pes-): xın(?) At, (hear) biliglig negü tép ayur “vhat the wise man says” 129; (tell me) bu negüke kerek 'what is this necessary for?” 314: Tef. negü “vhat?”, neg/negü also occurs at the beginning of questions with no specific meaning 228: (Çağ, xv ff. nağu (sic) ne üçün "why?' Vel. 390 (quotns.): nağu çird “vhy?” San. 321v. 14 (same quotns.), seems to be a corruption of this word). Tris. NGL D negülük A.N. fr. negü: used as an Interrogativc only, usually as an Adv.; “vhy?”. N.o.a.b. Uyf. viii ff. Chr. (this is a Jump of stone) negülük ol 'why is it?' (that our animals cannot carry it) U T 8, 6: Bud. Sanskrit kim *why?' neğülük 7T'T VIII D.8; ditto ne:gülük D.şo, negülük tuğdum men 'why was I born?' PP 4, 8; o.o. do. 30, 1; 66, 6; 68, 8 (barığsa:-), negülük ol *why?' (when you have come so far, give up and turn back?) Hiüen-ts. 96; o.o. U III 41, 3-4 (tiriğ), IV 8, 27: Xak. xı KB negülük tésesen “if you ask "why?" ” 196, 296; negülük '*why' (do you put aside these good things?) nelük *why' (do you not accept this advice?) 3984. Dis. NLG (S)D nelük *why?'; exactly syn. vv. neğülük and almost certainly a crasis of it, since there is no other reasonable explanation of the -ü-, cf. nü: o negü:. Survives in nelikten "vhy?” in NC Kir, Kzx.: NW Kk. Türkü viri ff. IrRB sy (kan): Uyğ. Man.-A nelük keltip bizipe *why have you come to us?” M I 33, 20: Xak. xi nelük a Particle (7ar/) syn. w, necük (q.v.) and used by the other 'T'urks instead of it; it means /i-ma "why? Kaş, I 392; five o.o., mostly ne:lük, but in 1 94, 2 mis-spelt ne: elük: K B nelük why ?' is fairly common 241, 369, 775, 3984 (negülük), 6440-1, etc.: xııı(?) At. nelük *why?' (occurs four times); Tef. ditto 228: xiv Muh. li-ma ne:li:k/nelük/ne:re:k/ne:k Mel. 17, 17; Rif. 96 (with kam for /i-ma): Xwar. xii nelük “vvhy?” “AH 17: xiv ditto Qutb 113; MN 255: Kip. xiv nelük /i-ma in Kip. (i.c. as opposed to Tkm. neşe:) /4. go; li-ayy şay" “vhy? nelük Bul. ış, 11: XV another İnterrogative is nelik meaning /i-ma Tuh. 57b. 7 (quotn.). Mon. NM F no:m the Greek word nomos properly “lav” was a l.-w. in Syriac and was adopted by the Manichaeans as a technical term with a rather wider meaning 'law, doctrine, etc.; from this it passed to Sogdian as mro: and was used in Buddhist texts to translate Sanskrit dharma, which, has an even wider range of meanings. NMA 777 In Turkish it is used in both Man. and Bud. texts with a similarly wide range of meanings. It is not connected with Tokharian A om mentioned in TT X 58 note; this is a pure 'Tokharian word meaning (and cognate to the English word) “name”, It became an early l.-w in Mong. where it came to mean 'law; scripture; religion; book”, etc. NE Tel. nom “lav” R III 695; Tuv. nom “book: are reborrowings fr. Mong. and not survivals. The original word is n.o.a.b. Türkü viri ff. [gap] nomi ol Toyok IV r. heading (ETY II 180): Man. nom is fairly common in Chuas.; it is generally best translated 'doctrine', e.g. arığ nom “the pure doctrine! as opposed to igid nom “false doctrine', but in 72 tepri nomın sözleser seems to mean “vvhen (we) recite the holy scriptures' and in 228-9 (6:t-) the exact meaning is obscure; nom tórü 'doctrine and rules' do. 74 (tud-), 128 (tut-); TT II 10, gr (ur-): Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A (of a Man. dignitary) nom uluğıu 'chief exponent of the doctrine'(?) M I 12, 17; nom bitig 'scripture' do. 25, 10; a.0.0.: Man. nom ratnike “to the jewel (Sanskrit 1.-w.) of doctrine! TT LX 32; (the pure) nomm dının “doctrine and religion” 88; o.o. in TT III: Chr. M III 49, 9-12 (ii) (ornaş-): Bud. nom is used to translate dharma in the Buddhist triad Buddha dharma sarigha “Buddha, law, and community" TT JV 14, 63, and is common in all the meanings of dharma “(religious) law, doctrine', etc., e.g. burxan nom nomlamaklığ preaching the Buddhist doctrine! TT V 26, 86-7: Civ. bu nom bitigke tapınıp udunup 'respecting and worshipping this scripture! TT VII 14, 10; a.o.0. in semi-Buddhist texts: Xak. xı no:m aí-milla wwa'l-gari'a "religion, religious law; hence one says tepri: no:mi: 'God's religious law and faith' (din). Similarly all religions (a/-milal) are called no:m. This is a word of the Chinese (/ugatu'l-Sinin) Kaş. II 135. Dis. NMA C ne:me: a combination of ne: with the Enclitic 1 me:; originally an Indefinite Pron. *something, anything', or the like; rare in the early period, the list of early occurrences below being fairly complete. In some modern languages, esp. in NE, it has completely replaced ne: in all its meanings; survives in NE most dialects neme/néme R III 690-1; Khak. nime: SE Türki neme/nime BS 736; Jarring 208: NC Kir. nemefeme: SC. Uzb. nima: NW Kk. néme: SW Tkm. nemé. Uyğ. vit ff. Bud. (now I wish to return home) nemen ötğeymü men “shall I (be able to) get through somehow ?' (or ?how shall E. . .?) Hüen-ts. 27; (1 do not know) nemen taki nece yaşağunuz [gap] 'how and how long your life [?will lastİ” do. $4: Civ. (if he has a loss) neme tapmaz “he does not recover anything' TT VII 28, 4o: Xak. xi neme: a Particle (harf) meaning 'I do not know' (là adri); hence one says neme: ne: kildi: 'I do not know what he has done” Kaş. III 236; a.o. III 214 (ne): xın(?) Tef. néme a Particle, mMMEEE————p——X un —À—— eee HH ER gdRóE. S 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 822 
     
   
   
     778 *however, nevertheless', etc. 230: xiv Muh. (in a para. on Exclamations of Surprise) such a word is neme:;, e.g. “vhat a brave man he is!" neme: alp er turur Mel. 18, 1; Rif. 96: Çağ. xv ff. néme vesne “thing” Vel. 391 (quotns.), néme/némerse (both spelt) çiz “thing”, in Ar. şay” San. 323r. 3 (quotns.): Xwar. xın(?) (he captured) sanağuluksuz nemeler yılkılar 'innumerable things and livestock! Og. 308: xiv neme “thing” Qutb 113; neme yaxşı kul turur bu Ayyüb “vhat a good servant this Ayyüb isl” Nahe. 333, 8; a.o. 376, 4: Kip. xiv neme “thing, anything', esp. w. a Neg. V. CCI, CCG; Gr. 171 (quotns.): Kip. xiv neme: şay” '(any)thing'; one says neme: yédin mü 'have you eaten anything?' /d. go, şay” (nesne:, also) neme: Bul. 16, r: xv şay” neme (nesne) Tu. 21a. 11; 2.0. S8b. 7. Dis. NMC DF nomçı: N.Ag. fr. no:m, 'preacher', and the like. N.o.a.b. Türkü vii ff. Man. Chuas. 135-6 (artiz-), 324-5 (teprici:): UyB. viu ff. Bud. bu nomuğ arvışığ nomlağlı nomçı "a preacher who preaches this doctrine and dhárani!' TT VI 373-4; a.o. Kuan. 126-7 (égil). Tris. NMC F nami:ja: Hap. leg.; no doubt an Iranian (?Sogdian) L-w. Çiğil xr nami:ja: al-silf teahtoa zawc uxti'l-mar'a 'one's wife's sister's husband' Kaş. I 446. Dis. NML DF nomluğ P.N./A. fr. no:m, 'possessing a3... doctrine! and other meanings taken fr. the meanings of no:m. N.o.a.b. Uy£. vri ff. Man. edğü tétyük nomluğ ratniğ “the jewel (Sanskrit Ll-w.) of the doctrine called "good"' TT III 108; azağ nomluğlarda *with those who have false doctrines' L.X 89: Bud. nomluf etöz translating Sanskrit dharmahaya, one of the three bodies or natures of the Buddha (cf. belgürtme and 1 tüs) which are discussed at length in Suv. 38, 14 ff. ; (the hand with which one eats) nomluğ tatığığ “the sweet food of the (true) doctrine' TT V 22, 45; a.o.o. in TT V and Hüen-ts. Dis. V. NMLDF nomla:- Den. V. fr. no:m; 'to preach' (with or without an Obj.). N.o.a.b. Türkü vurff. Man. burxanlar arığ dintarlar nomlasar kirtkünmedin 'not believing when the prophets and pure Elect preach' Chuas. 133-4: Uyğ. vir ff. Man. ewanglyon nom ratniğ nomlap 'preaching the precious doctrine of the gospel' T'T III 62-3; a.o.o.: Bud. Sanskrit fagdda "he has preached' nomladı (MS. -n) TT VIII D.6, (the Buddha) bu (MS. 2o) su:darığ nomla:yu: ya:rlıka:dı *deigned to preach this sutra' do. H.3; o.o. TT V 26, 86-7 (no:m); VI 373-4 (nomg1); DIS. NMA PP 46, 4-7; 49, 6 etc., often in the phr. nom nomla:-. Mon. NN ?D ne:p has two meanings: (1) Adverbial, with Neg. V.s “any, at all”, and the like, pec. to "Türkü and Uyjg.; (2) as a N., “thing, property”, also found in Xak. As both these meanings are also found among the various meanings of der. f.s of ne: it seems reasonable to suppose that it is a Den. N. fr. ne: Türkü nen bunuğ yok 'you have no trouble" 7 S 8, II N 6; a.o. I E26 (yılışığ)—nenp net savim erser bepgü: taşka: urtim '[ have put on the memorial stone all that I had to say" 1 S 11, 11 N 8, nen yerdeki: xağanlığ bodunka “for peoples having a xağan in every(?) country” T ş6: vii ff. Man. (the Mojak will hear and) nep taplamağay 'will not approve at al” TT II 6, 26; a.o. do. 8, ar: Uy£. virt ff. Man.-A ner) with Neg. V. is common, e.g. ağı baram közine ner ilinmegey "wealth and property will not catch his eye at all M I 15, 4-5; 0.0. do. 15, 9; 16, TT etc.: Man. nep . . . yok: 'there is no (trick) at all (that he cannot play)” M 1J s, 8-ro: Bud. nen, in 77 VIII spelt both ney and me, with Neg. V. is common, e.g. Sanskrit na prayatasi "you do not exert yourself' nen katığla:ma:z sen TT VII D.9; nep adınsığ kilmazun “et him not do anything different” Hüen-ts. 284-5: Xak. xı ner al-say' “a thing”: hence one says bu: ne: ne:r) (sic) ol “vhat is this thing?'; ner a/-md/ 'property, wealth' (verse) Kaş. III 360; over 300 o.o. almost all spelt ne:p and translated “thing”, there does not seem to be any case of ne:p with Neg. V.: KB nen is common, both for “thing”, e.g. bu tórt nep “these four things” 306, and 'property', e.g. evi nen tolur “his house is full of property” 759: xın(?) At, neg is common both for “thing” and 'property'; Tef. nen “thing” (both abstract and concrete) 228: Xvvar. xiv ditto Quib 113. Dis. NRA S naru: See aparu:. Tris. NRG (S)D narukr N./A.S. fr. naru: (aparu:); "situated beyond, on the other side”, and the like. Pec. to Xak.? Xak. xı KB munipda narukı neçe eğri yol 'however winding the road may be from here onwards' 4876. . Dis. NRG ?C nerek Kaş. is prob. right in saying that this is a crasis of ne: kergek (cf. nelük), since it has exactly the same meaning. Survives in NE Alt, Tel. ne:rek R 7IJ 679. XaR. xı nerek a Particle (harf) meaning /i-mà dü yanbagi "what is it necessary for?'; one says bu: saga: nerek 'why do you need this?'; its origin is ne: kere:k and it was abbreviated Kaş. 1 392: KB yanı nen bolurda bu eşki 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 823 
     
   
   
       DIS. NRG nerek talu nep bolurda yavuz ne kerek 'when a new thing comes into existence, what need is there for the old? When a good thing comes into existence, what need is there for the bad ?' 688, biligsiz bolur kul nerek kul sözi "the slave is ignorant, what is the need 779 for a slave's statement?' 1906: xın(?) At. aya hirş idisi harişlik nerek, ayu ber mapa bu negüke kerek “O miserl vvhat is the need ' for miserliness, tell me what this is needed for 313-14: xiv Müh. Mel. 17, 17; Rif, 96 (nelük).  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 824 
     
   
   
      R Initial r-, like initia] 1-, q.v., was a sound entirely foreign to the "Turkish language and any L-w. with initial r- which became established in the early language assumed a prosthetic V eg. ertini, ere). "There is a sprinkting of Indian and Iranian l.-w.s in some Man. and Bud. texts without the prosthetic vowel, e.g. ratni, the Tokharian form of Sanskrit rafna, which later became ertini, but these are not listed here since they never became at home in Turkish. In the Moslem period a number of Arabic and Persian l.-w.s entered the language unchanged, but those used in popular speech usually assumed a   prosthetic vowel, e.g, SW Osm, uruc 'fasting, a canonical fast”, a corruption of Pe, rzza. 'Uhe only word with initial r- in Kaş, is that listed below. VUF rabçat (fully vocalized) Hap. leg.; origin uncertain, but no doubt an Indo- European l.-w. cognate to Russian rab 'slave' ; rabota '"work', etc. Gancak xı rahçat a/-suxriya *unpaid forced labour'; as when for example a chief (al-amir) takes animals belonging to the peasantry (a/-ra"iya) and carries his goods on them without payment Kaş. 7 451.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 825 
     
   
   
       Mon. SA S(D) sa: crasis of saga:, Dat. of sen; an unusually early case of a crasis common later, Xak. xı Sa: a Particle (harf) meaning arta *you'; hence one says 8a: ayurmen 'I say to you” (lak). "The alif is changed from nün in the word sen or abbreviated fr. the word sapa:; (irrelevant Ar. parallels follow) Kaş. IJI 208 (following a para. on (the Suff) -sa:f-se: meaning /atw “f?. F so: no doubt, as Müller suggested, “chain, lock', 1-vv, fr. Chinese so "lock, chain! (Giles 10,204). N.o.a.b. but see sola:-. Uyğ. vri ff. Bud. (plundering, robbing, breaking in, opening doors and) sosin sóküp pulling their locks apart! U II 76, r, yeti temir son kemi solap turğurdı “he tied up the ship, fastening it with seven iron chains” PP 31, 5—6; a.0. do. 33, 2-3 (1 aç-). S su: See suv. VU sö: noted onİy in the phr. söde/södin berü “for a long time past”, but cf. sökİ:, In Chuas. v.l.C. transcribed it suy and confused it with suy (tsuy) 'sin', a Chinese l.-w., N.o.a.b. Türkü vr ff. Man, söde berü ... yazıntımız erser “if for a long time past vve have sinned” (against the sun and moon gods, etc.) Chuas. 13; o.o. do. 49, 85, etc.: Uyğ. viiI ff. Bud. öğüm kapim sónde (sic, acc. to Pelliot) berü meni sevmez erti “for a long time past my mother and father have not loved me' PP 56, 7-8; (because their attachments (Hend.) have not been broken (Hend.)) só(text in error suv) -din berü 'for a long time past! Suv. 61, 17; o.o. spelt soo, do. 280, 7; 695, 23. VU 1 sü: “army”. The theory put forward in TT X, p. 19, note 206 that this should be transcribed şö: and taken as a l.-w. fr. Chinese shou 'to hunt' (Giles 10,013) is quite untenable since the spelling with 8- is universal in texts in Ar. script. "Vhe word itself cannot be traced later than about xv, but the phr. sü: başı: “army commander' lived on and, when sü: itself had been forgotten, was taken to be su: başı: and used for 'water (i.e. irrigation) superintendent', an official of great importance in the Middle East, see e.g. SW Osm. su başı Sami 835, Red. 1188. "This misunderstanding suggests that the vowel was -ü: but this is not certain. Türkü vri sü: “army” is common, esp. in the phr. sü: süle:- “to make an expedition”, sü başı: İnel (sic) Xağan Tardu:ş Şad barzu:n “let İnel Xağan, the Tarduş Şad, go as army commander' T 3r: vir ff. Sü: occurs several times in JrkD, e.g. xan süke: barmi:ş yağı:ğ sançmi:ş "the xan went to the army (i.e. on a campaign) and routed the enemy” 34: Yen, sü: has been read in several inscriptions, but the only clear case is Mal. 26, 8 (1 tep): Uy£. vii sü: occurs 8 times in S$u., usually in such phr. as sü: yorı:di: "the army set out” N 6; [sü:] başı: ben “1 was the [army] commander” has been restored in the Szde line: vin ff, Man.-A kentü kentü süsin [gap] 'their own armies' M I 22, 5 (1); Bud. SÜ, usually spelt suu (cf. Söz in Suv.), is fairly common, e.g. alku törlüg sü: ceriglerde [gap] “in all kinds of armies and troops! U 77 74, 4 (i); a.o. do. 69, s (ii): Civ. süke barğu iş bolur “it becomes an affair of going to the army” TT VII 36, 15-16; a.o, 7 67 (sançıt-): Xak. xı sü: al-cund “the “army” Kaş. /II 208 (prov., verse); about 40 o.o. translated a/-cund or less often a/-cayş “army” or al-'askar “the soldiers”, in 7 478, 8 the full title of Selcük (sic, not Salcuk) “the ancestor of those Sultans” is given as Selcük sü: bagt:: KB in 2266 the King asks what qualities sü başlar kişi “an army commander" requires; the answer is in Chap. X XX, 2269 ff.: xm(?) Tef. sü “army”, süsi birle ya'ni laşkarı birle 278: (xiv Muh. rafiqu'l-'askar *fellow-soldier' sü:de:s Mel. 5o, r, Rif. 145): Xvvar. xır sü “army” ' Ali 52: xtv ditto Qutb 162: Kip. xir Hou. 14, io (çeriğ): Osm. XIV to XVI Sü 'army' in several texts TT'S 7 652; II 853; sü başı, here spelt su 5aşı, with su in some texts fr. xv (perhaps a later MS.) onwards, occurs in all periods; in the earliest period the title was clearly military and this continued till xvur, but the transition to civil duties is hinted in dicts. fr. xvi onwards 1 646; II 844; III 640; IV 707. F 2 sü 'preface'; l.-w. fr. Chinese Asü (Giles 4,771). Pec. to Uyğ. Uy£. vii ff. Bud. Suv. 2, 5 (ula:1-). Mon. V. SASa:- "to count'; in its original form obsolete everywhere; it has become say- in NW Krım, Nog.: SW Az., Osm., "Tkm. (sa:y-), but it has been displaced, in all other languages completely, and in these partially, by sana:(Tkm. sa:na-), q.v. (Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. this word was read by Pelliot in PP 68, 8, but the correct reading is barığsadınız): Xak. xı er ko:nığ (sic) sa:dı: “the man counted ("adda) the sheep” (etc.) Kaş. 711 247 (sa:r, sa:ma:k; verse); o.o. 7 281r, 22 (where it is described as the origin of the Desid. V. Suff. -sa:-/-se:-), İH 25o, 4: KB sayu berdi bilgin ukuşı tepin “he reckoned up his knowledge and the extent of his understanding' 569; ikigüni bir tép isizke sama 'do not reckon them both to be as bad as one another” 875; (the King) kamuğ edgülükni atamış sayu “has named and counted up all the advantages” 34745 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 826 
     
   
   
     782 MON başına tegi bağna sadım neçe “I have counted how many rungs there arc up to the top (of the ladder)' 6034: xın(?) Tef. samak “number, calculation' 261: Çağ. xv ff. sayşay- Vel. 283; say- (spelt) gumurdan "to count San. 236v. 25: Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 151: Kip./'Tkm. xiv (Kip. şana-) "adda, Tkm. şa- İd. 60: xv al-'adad şaymak, the Imperat. is şay Kav. 64, 18; “adda (şana-/) say- Tuh. 25b. r3: Osm. xiv ff. say- “to count', but more often 'to reckon (something) to be (something)'; in several texts T'T'S I 606; 1V 669. Sr:- “to break” (Trans.), both lit. and metaph. ; survives in NE Kaç., Sag. R IV 602 (phr.) and SW Osm,, but elsewhere displaced by sındır-, first apparently noted in Xwar, XIV, Qutb 164, or other words. “Türkü vı (I brought a decorator from the Chinese Emperor and decorated the tomb) menip savimin simadi: "he (i.e. the Chinese Emperor?) did not break (ie. reject) my statement'. (The Emperor's chamberlain sent a decorator) I S ır, İİN 14; üç otuz balik sidi: “they broke (i.e. captured) twenty-three towns' T 19; 0.0. 7 E 36 (udluk); Ix. zr: vir ff. Man. Chuas. 51 (bert-), 256 (baça:k): Uyğ. vırı ff. Man.-A üç yeğ savin sımağlı 'not.breaking the three good vvords” M III 29, 3 (ii): Man. (eat the lamb's flesh, but) süpükin simaplar “do not break its bones' M III 39, 3 (iii): Bud. yinçge sip “breaking (gold-bearing ore) into small pieces! Suv. 71, 14; odğurak terin muni sidipiz 'you fundamentally confuted him” Hüen-ts. 1801; sıdaçı siz . . . yatlarığ “you rout the strangers (to the true doctrine)” do. 2063-4; o.o. TT IV 8, 67 and 75: Civ. küzecié közedip sımasar “if a man looks after a cooking pot and does not break it” (it is a vessel for serving food), apam bir adakın sısar “but if he breaks one of its feet” (it spills the contents) TT I 197-9; 1.0. do. 17 (bert-): Xak. xı ol otun si:di: “he broke up (Fasara) the fire-vvood” (etc.); and one says ol sü:ni: sı:dı: "he routed (Arazama) the army” Kaş. III 249 (Str, suma:k), sıyu:ma:s, crasis of sryu: uma:s "he cannot break” / 123, 21; 128, 135 0.0. 1 282, 14; 382 (kapak), 473, r: KB yağını sımak “to rout the enemy” 2272; sıma köplini “do not break his heart” 4264; boynı sımağınça 'unless you break their necks' 4807; sığıl burxanın “break his idols” 5486: xin(?) At. (if your tongue gets out of control) tişipni sıyur 'it breaks your teeth' 132; Tef. Si- "to destroy! (abstract) 270: xiv Muh. kasara sı:- Mel. 30, 11; 40, 17: Rif. 114, 130 (both mis-spelt sım-), al-kasr 5$1Y:mak 35, 8; ızı: Xwar. xiv Si- “to break” Qutb 163: Tkm. xiv sı- kasara İd. sı: Osm. xiv ff. sı- “to break (lit. or metaph.); to conquer'; c.i.a.p. TTS I 619; I1 814; III 618; IV 683. VU su:- Hap. leg.; basic meaning obscure. Xak. xı ol apar boyu:n su:di: ingáda lahu tea. xada"a “he obeyed him and submitted'; and one says ol mapa: yu:p su:di: "he sent   . V. SA (arsala) me hanks of wool to spin” (I'l-fatl) Kaş. 111 248 (su:r, su:ma:k). Mon. SB sa:b “a turn (to do something)”: n.o.a.b. Uyğ. viii ff, Bud. (of the last in a series of named teachers) sabında nom işin işleğüke yarağlif “fit to do the work of (teaching) the doctrine in his turn” Hiüen-ts. 1983-4; a.o. Suv. 590, 13: Xak. xr Sa:b ali-natwba fi'l-cawváb | [i-halàm sca fi'l-talin swa'l-saqy “a turn to reply to a speech, to use a mill, or to irrigate (one's land)”, hence one says ol sö:z(le)ğe:li: sa:b bé:rme:s “he does not give (others) a turn to speak”, and in regard to using a mill, etc. senin sa:b keldi: “your turn has come” Kaş. III 145. sa:p (sap) “the handle (of a sword, knife, etc.)”, s.i.a.m.l.g. with this and extended meanings. The long -a:- in Kaş. seems to be an error (cf. 1 bas, 1 tas); the SW "Vkm. form is sap (Sa:p “pure” etc. is the Ar. L.-w. şaf) and the cc. in Osm. is sapı, not Sabi, which implies a final -p and so a short vowcl. Xak. xı Sa:p nisábu'[-sayf :wa'l-sihkin “the handle of a sword or knife” Kaş. Tİİ 145 (prov.), a.o. I 384, 25 (yon-): Xwar. xiv sap 'handle' Qutb 150: Kip. xiii (halter” yu:la:r); al-micarr “the leading-rope of a halter' yu:la:r ga:pi: Hou. 14, 5: Xiv Sap al-nisáb İd. 56: xv ditto Tuh. 36b. 6: Osm. xviii sap ("vith -p”) in Rümi, “the handle (dasta) of a sword, knife, arrow', and the like San. 228v. 17. Sa:v “a speech', etc.; the difference between this word and só:z, if it is not simply one of chronology or dialect (SÓ:z is rather rare in the early period), seems to be one of quantity; Sa:V seems to mean “a (full-length) spcech; a narrative or story, a message”, while sö:z seems to mean basically "a single word, or short utterance”, Very common in the earlier period, but not noted after xiv except in the Hend. söz sav. Türkü vırı sav is common, esp. in 7; it is used (1) of Bilge: Xağan”s address to his people, e.g. bu savimin edgü:ti: eşid "listen carefully to this speech of mine” 7 S 2; a.o.0.; (2) of speeches or representations, e.g. Tavğaç bodun savı: sücig “the Chinese people's words are honeyed' I.S ş, II. N 4; (3) of a report or narrative, e.g. körüğ savı: antağ “the spy's report was as follows! T' 9; (4) of a message, e.g. Sav anca: ıdmış “they sent the following message” T 9: viii ff. edgü: söz sav elti: keli:r “he comes bringing good news' IrkB 7, 11; kul savı: *the slave's speech' (is addressed to his master), kuzğu:n savı: “the raven's words! (are a prayer to heaven) do. 54; savlar “a statement' (of the qualities of the seven planets and five kinds of jewels) Toyok 4 (ET Y II 57); Tun. IIIa. 2 (ETY 1I 94; tanukluğ), a.o.o.: Man. sav élitip sav kelürüp 'carrying messages to and fro' Chuas. 104-5; anın savın alıp “accepting his preachings” do. 137; yumşağ savı sözi “their mild vvords” M Z/T 20, 7 (i): o.o. do. 33-4 (çulvu:), 199; TT 1l 10, 77-8: Uyğ. vtir ff. Man.-A M T 15, 2 (6gek):  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 827 
     
   
   
     S “3 MON. SB 783 18, 3 (i) (adir-); 19, 14 (tanukla:-): Bud. Sanskrit katham "statement” sa:vığ TT VIII A.21; vádam ditto do. G.17; a.o. do. E.49: bu sav égidip 'hearing this statement” PP ör, 2; ötüğ sav 'petition' do. 15, 7; a.o. do. 76, 2; savığ sózüg (the second later deleted) 'statement! TT X 26; a.o. Hüen-ts. 2040 (1 öt-), and many o.0.: Civ. in T'T I the standard formula is (if such-and-such an omen is received) savin inca ayur “it gives the following message” 14, 32, 44, etc.; türk savinda 'among Turkish proverbs' VII 42, heading: Xak. xı sa:v al-matal "a proverb, hence one says sa:vda: mundağ kelir "there is a proverb which says”, sa:v al-qissa "a story, narrative; sa:v al-hihdya ditto; Sa:v al-risála "a message” ; Sa:v al-kalàm “a statement”, sa:v al-anbü" wa'l-ahddit 'news, reports'; hence the Prophet (al-nabi) is called sa:vçı: because he gives news, tells stories, delivers messages, and quotes proverbs Kaş. III 154 (verse); about 12 o.o.: KB (1 have heard of his fame, wisdom, and understanding and) sili savini "his pure utterances” 527; a.o. 973 (e&amp;sik-); öt sav/ót sav erig 'advice' is common, see 1 öt: xu?) Tef. hadit 'tíaditional story” sav 257: Kip. xiv saw al-da"uğ 'claim, petition' Jd. 61: Osm. xiv ff. söz Sav see SÖ:Z, XIV SaV “story, news'; in two texts 7 TS I 603. sep 'dowry'; survives, sometimes with extended meanings, in NE several dialects R IV 493: SE Türki: NC Kir. (in Kzx. only for 'use, benefi): SC Uzb.: NW Kumyk: SW Tkm. Cf. kabin. Xak. xi sep ciház kull 'arüs tvalwa máluhàá “the dowry of a bride”, that is her property Kaş. 1 319: Kom. xiv "a bride's dowry! iseb CCG; Gr. sip “a one-year-old colt'; n.o.a.b., but survives as sıpa “a donkey colt from six months to a year” in SW Az., Osm. (in the latter also for other young animals) see R IV 668; Shcherbak, p. 124. (Uy&amp;. viri in a geog. name see 1 baş): Xak. xı sip “a colt (a/-muhr) when it has reached its second year” Kaş. I 319; te&amp;ür menin sa:vımnı: bilge:lerke: (MS. bilgeeke) ay, timnar kalı: atatsa: kısrak sipt: (MS. sim) ta:y 'convey my message and say to the wise “the mare rests when her colt grows up to be a horse”” I 207, 11; İH 158, 9 (adding “because it is then ridden on instead of her”): a.o. J 487 (sıpa:kur): (Kip. xır al-calış ibn sana “a one-year-old donkey colt” sıpa: (-p-) Hou. 12, 16: xiv. Srpa: (“back vowels and -p-”) al-cahs İd. sı). su:v “vater”, c.a.p.al; in SW Tkm. still suv, in NE Koib. Sag, Şor suğ, Cuv. şıv/şu (sic) Ash. XVİL 171, 205; elsewhere su, occasionally su:; sometimes with extended meanings, 'stream, river”, etc. Türkü vir yér suv occurs several times; it has been suggested that it has a mystical or religious connotation, but the context in this and other languages shows that it merely meant *territory, ie. an area containing both land and streams, lakes, etc.; eçü:miz apa:mız tutmis yé:r suv idisiz bolmazu:n “let not the territory which our ancestors (Hend.) held become ovvnerless” J E 19; ditto but kalmazu:n “let not... remain” // E 16; similar phr. / E zo, H E 17; (the Tokkuz Oğuz) yerin suvrn 1d1p “abandoned their territory' (and went to China) 71 E 35; [long gap] yerinerü: suvi:paru: kondt: "settled down in their territory" İl E 40; üze: Türkü tepri:si: Türkü ıduk yeri: suvi: ança etmiş “the god of the Türkü thus organized the sacred territory of the "Türkü” 7 E 11, 41. E 10; 1duk yer suv also occurs in a damaged passage in I] E 35— Anı: suv(ipa] bard[umiz] ol suv kodr bardımız “ve went to the river Anı, and went down it” T 27; o.o. / E 24 (1 kan), do. 27, 22 (1 o:t): vur ff. (a horse) tağ üze: yul suv körü:pen 'seeing a spring and water on the mountain” JrkB 17; ao. do. 33; in the Toyok document about precious stones (ETY I] 57 ff.) suv (perhaps an over-literal translation of the İranian original) means something like *colour', e.g. ol ok tagr: suvi: ya:şı:l bolsar “if the colour of that stone is green” 26-7: Man. suv tepri "the water god” Chuas. 36; Suv İçreki tınlığka "to aquatic creatures! do. 86; (I do not wish to live) yertinçü yer suvda ev bark içinde “in a dwelling in the territory of this world' TT II 8, 41-2: Uyğ. viu suvi: Selepe: ermiş “their water (river) was the Selenga” ju. N 2: vir ff. Man.-A suv tepri M 1 21, 2 (i); ol suv bulğakı “that disturbed vvater” M IJI 10, 11 (i): Man. TT III ss (küvençliğ): Bud. suvda suv önlüğ tağlar “mountains in the water (i.e. waves) the colour of water' PP 17, 4; many o.o.——Cembüdvip yér suvdakı “in the territory of Jambudvipa' PP 44, 1; (there was a holy rşi) ol yer suv “of that territory” do. 59, 1: Civ. Suv 'water' is common in all texts; in TT VII r, 19 the planet Mercury is called suv yultuzu "the water star", the Chinese name: O. Kar. ix ff. yerime: ayıta: suvima: adrıldım “1 have said farewell to my land and parted from my water? Mal. 11, 4; (1 was parted) yerim suvum sizime: do. 45, 6: Xak. xı su:v a/-mö” *water' Kaş. III 129 (prov.; following an entry tu:f (sic) "a belt (mintaga) woven by hand from woollen (al-şüf ) threads'; as such it must be an error, perhaps for şüf as a 1.-vv,), over 100 0.0.: xin(?) At. halimlİik suvin sag 'sprinkle it with the water of mildness! 340; Tef. su/suv 'water; liquid' 275: xiv Mu. al-nahr 'river' ulu: su: Mel. 4, zo, Rif. 75; al-mà' Su: iş, 14; 76, 16; 92, 18o (in margin suf): Çağ. xv ff. suw (so to be spelt, under sin-i madmüm with trdre) üb 'water', as is well known, also rawáj, raro-naq, cüh, 'ízzat, and db-i rü 'current, brilliance, distinction, honour (Hend.) San. 248r. 28 (the later translations assume that it is used with the same metaph. meanings as db): Xwar. (xit şudağı “in the water! "Ali 18): xıl(?) su *water' Og. 166, 205: XIV suv/metri gratia Su "water! Qutb 161-2; MN s, etc.: Kom. xiv 'water' su (before vocalic Suff.s suv-) CCI, CCG, Gr. 224 (phr.): Kip. xii 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 828 
     
   
   
       784 al-mà' şu: Hou. 6, 18: xiv. ditto İd, 55 (and two phr.): xv ditto Kas. 31, 5; 58, r4 (and two phr.); Tül, 35a. 5; mirhád '"lavatory' su öy (for ev) do. 35a. 7: Osm. xiv ff. su/su (in one xiv text before vocalic Suff.s suv-) C.ia.p. in various phr. TTS 7 646ff.; II 844 fl; 850; 111 641 1; /V 709 fT. Mon. V. SBsap-, sep- Preliminary note. Tere is great confusion about V.s of these two forms. The only certain form in Türkii is sep- “fo repair (something broken) , and the only certain form in Uyg. sap- “zo instil, graft', and the like, although “to equip, fit out” was almost certainly sep-. Kaş. lists only sap- and translates it (1) "to thread (a needle); (2) "to repair (something broken), but distinguishes between. saptur- "to order to repair' and septür- “fo order to provide a dotwry', obviously a Caus. f. of sep- which is homophonous de, Sep “a” dowry'.. On this basis therefore it looks as if the Türhü scord sas misspelt and Kag.'s two meanings go back to some common origin. Sap- “to thread (a needle), to inoculate, graft! survives in SE Türki: perhaps NW Kaz. R IV qor: and SW Tkm.; sep- "to equip! is not noted again. In the médi?val period two apparently neto. V.s appeared, sap- "to go astray, deviate', and the like, «which is noted tn xix NC Kzx. and NW Kaz. in R IV 402 and survives in SW Osm., and Sep- “to scatter (solid matter, e.g. seed), to sow; to sprinhle (liquids), to irrigate', which is practically syn. w. sacand s.i.a.m.l.g. (in SW serp-). sap- “to thread (a needle), to graft, inoculate (lit. or metaph.); to repair (something broken)'. See above. Türkü vrir ff. sınukr:pin sepermen (sic) “I repair your broken things” Irk B 48 (and see ula:-): Uyğ. vrir tf. Bud. (How are you worthy to be called) kalincu burxan şasının uritaçı?) saptaçı “one who grafts in(?) the surviving discipline (Sanskrit $asana) of the Buddha?” Hiüen-ts. 306-7; antağ yok erdi kógüzinte sukmayuk kópülinte sapmayuk “thus he was not one who refused to take (the teaching) to his bosom or graft it(?) into his mind” do. 1927-8: Xak. xı yi:çi: yiğne: sapdı: “the tailor threaded (daxxala . . al-silh fi) the needle; and one says ol kus kanatın sapdı: “he joined up (i.e. mended, roaşala) the bird”s wing'; also used of anything defective(?) when one pulls it together and joins it up (fagásara “an cinsihi fa-carrahu wa wasalahu) Kaş. H 3 (sapa:r, sapma:k): KB 1858 (buzuk): xiv awsala sa:ptı: Mel. 20, r, Rif. 99 (sap-): (Kom. xiv 'to stand aside (for someone)” sap- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv şaptı: (-b-) nakaba 'ani'l-tariq “to go astray from the road" 7d. 56). sav- See savil-. sep- “to equip, fit out”, and the like. See above, and septür-. (Türkü vir ff. see sap-):  MON. SB Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. (the old man. agreed. and became the Prince's guide. ""hen) kanı xan teğinke septi “his father the King equipped the Prince” (and gave him the food, water, transport animals, and everything else required by the soo men) PP 28, 1-2: (xiv Muh. ragga'I-má' “to sprinkle water! su: sep- Me. 26, rr, ditto :ea. nafada'l- tah “to shake the dust off a garment! sep- Ff. 109: Çağ. xv if, Sép- (-ti) sep- “to sprinkle”, that is to sprinkle water or something else Ve/, 284; sép- ("with -p-' afşurdan “to sprinkle” San. 249v. 4 (quotns.): Kip. xiv sep- (with -p-”) raşşa qalila(n) ("lightly") Jd. sr: xv raşşa sep- TuA. 178. 11: Osm. xiv ff, sep- “to sprinkle'; c.i.a.p. TT'S 1614; H 810; 111 613; IV 677). Sev- 'to love; to like', with a wide range of shades of meaning. S.i.a.m.l.g, w. several phonetic changes NE Alt., "Tel, sü- (no other languages); SE Tar. söy-, "lürki sóy-/ süy- ("to kiss”): NC süy-: SC sev-: NW Kaz. SÓy-; others süy-: SW Az., Osm. sev- ; 'l'kin. söy-.$ Türkü vru ff. sevdükimi:n yéyü:rmen “1 eat what I like” İrkB 3: Man. idi sevmezmen '] do not at all like” (to live a worldly life) T T I7 8, 42: UyB. viri ff. Man. TT 111 98-9 (ana:): Bud. sever taplar 'loves and likes” U IJI 25, 4; o.o. TT V 10, 112 (ağırla:-), X 256 (amran-); a.o.0.: Civ. buyanığ sevgil “love virtue! TT I i11: Xak. xı ol meni: sevdi: a/iabbani “he loved (or lked) me” Kaş. II 15 (Sever, sevme:k, prov.); three o.o.: KB sev- with various shades of meaning is common, e.g. sevip sözi tuttum “1 have İoved him (the Prophet) and accepted his vvords” 46; a.o. 135 (SeVİÜ): xın(?) At. anı nà xalàyiq sever nà xüliq 'neither the creatures nor the creator love him" 272; Tef. sev- “to love” 264: xiv Muh. ahabba sew- Mel. 22, 1; Rif. 102 (in error sevin-); 'agiqa "to love passionately' sew- 29, 3; 112; al-hibb sewmek (MS. -mah) 36, 5; ızı (se:w-): Çağ. xv iL séw- (-er, etc.) sev-, muhabbat et- ma"ndsına Vel. 290-1; Séw- dist daştan “to like, love” San. 258r. 23 (quotns.): Xwar. xıl sev- (with triply dotted ream) “to love” Ali 37; (with simple zeáz) 41: xiv sevditto MN 173, etc.: Kom. xiv “to love, like" sövv- CCI; sev-, sóv-, söy- CCG; Gr. 218 (quotn.): Kip. xii a/rabba sew- Hou. 34, 8; habba sew- do. 39, 16: xiv sew- afiabba; also used in P.N.s (yusammá bihi) İd. sa, (al-habib sevtüküm Bul. 9, 6): xv habba sewKav. 12, 6; muhabbata(m) “in friendliness” sewmek üşün (sic) do. 33, 6; ahabba sóyTuh. 6b. 5; sövv- do. 79b. 11. Dis. SBA PU subt: 'conical, tapering”, and the like; homophonous vv, subi:-, which proves that it had back vowels. This is confirmed in Kip.; but it survives only(?) in SW Osm. where it is transcribed söbü in Sami 740 and sübü in R İV 850(with cross-refces. to söbö/söbü which are not listed) and Red. 1086. SW Osm, sopa “a cudgel' (i.e. a tapering stick) may, however, also be descended fr. this word. Xak. xi  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 829 
     
   
   
      DIS. V. SBDanything. long. with a tapering end (/azoil muhaddadu'l-ra's) is called subr:;; hence a man's head, when it is not round (mudawwar) is called subi: ba:ş Kaş. 171 217: Kip. xiv şubu:/şubı: asi! "long and tapering” İd. 56; haibá subi Tuh. 12b. 12 (/ialbá means 'milch camel'; there is presumably an omission between the two words, prob. sağlık or the like for halbá, but there is no obvious Ar. word beginning vv. A- with a meaning appropriate to Subi:): Osm. xiv ff. words meaning, of the face “oval”, of the eyes 'almond shaped” are listed as folows şobica xiv; sobek xvi; söbe/söbü xvi fT., söbek xvi ff. TTS 7 639; II 838, 111 637, IV 703. Dis. V. SBAsabı:- (or sapı:-?) Hap. leg., but cf. sabit-. Xak, xı at kudrukr sabı:dı: “the horse”s tail (etc.) vvaved” (taharraka “vvas in motion") Kaş. III 256 (sabı:r, sabr:ma:k). D suva:- Den. V. fr. su:v; originally “to irrigate (land); to water (animals)', and the like; in modern languages later forms of suvğarare used in this sense. In the medieval period it was used for “to plaster' and this must also be an early meaning, see suval-, suvaş-. İn this sense s.is.m.l. as Siba-/suba-/siva-/ suva-. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. PP r, 3 (ó:l): Xak. xı kanip emdi: yé:r suva:r “your blood now waters (yasqi) the ground” Kaş. I 498, 21; n.m.e.: Xiri(?) Zef. suva- 'to plaster up” (the entrance to a cave) 276: Çağ. xv ff. suwa(spelt) andüd hardan “to plaster' San. 247v. 9 (quotns.): Tkm. xv /ayyasa “to plaster” suva(in margin “also pronounced şıva-”), Kip. şızaHap. leg., ?corruption of $1va-) Tuh. 32a. 11. PU subr:- Hap. leg., but see subit-; homophonous vv. subr. Xak. xi subrdi ne:p tála'l-say' wea. ta'allala tarfuhu “the thing was long and its sides tapered otf' Kaş. IJI 257 (subı:r, subi:ma:k), Dis. SBC D sa:cvçı: N.Ag. fr. sa:v; normally “messenger”, and so a less distinguished term than yala:vaç (a l.-w., q.v.); but as in this meaning it corresponded to Ar. rasi// it was used by early Moslem Turks for 'the Prophet'; in this sense it was soon displaced by the Pe. 1.-vv. bayğümbar and now survives only(?) in NE 'Tob. savvçı 'go-between' R IV 431. Türkü vir ff. a saver: on a yellow horse and a yalavaç on a bay horse bring good news IrkB ır, a.o, do. ss: Uyğ. viri ff, Bud. (if we have gone from one town, country, or realm to another as a) (VU) tipci savçı “messenger” (i.e. making mischief) TT IV ro, zı (tipçi is Hap. leg., prob. a N.Ag. fr. a Chinese l.-w.): Xak. xr sa:vçı: "a prophet' (al-rasiil) from among the prophets of God; its base is Sa:v meaning *news, a statement, a proverb', and the prophet communicates these things Kaj. 77] 441 (and see Oğuz), a.o. 111 154 (sa:v): KB savçı 'the Prophet" (Muhammad) 3o, 388: xinu(?)   785 Tef. savçı “prophet”, once in the Hend. yalavaç payğambar savçı 257: xiv Muh.(?) (in a list of occupations) rasül “messenger, envoy” Sawct Rif. 156 (mis-spelt su:r(i:; Mel. sz, iz élgi:)): Oğuz xı sa:vçı: a/-rasil twahwa'l-safir “messenger, envoy”, who travels between the families of an intended bridegroom and bride with messages Kaş. I11 441; a.o. II] 154 (after Sa:v) same translation, adding 'because he reports the statements of one to the other and vice versa, as I have explained'; not here described as Oğuz: Xvvar. xir Saver (with triply dotted sudu) *prophet' “A/ 48: Kip. xiv şavvçı: (-c-) "one concerned with disputes (mansüb ilà'l-da'wwà), in the sense of differences between two adversaries; such a person must be a gádi; and şavvçı: is used for 'prophet' (ai-nabi); they say Sawcimuz “our prophet' meaning “the Prophet', God bless him /4. 61. D suvçı: N.Ag. fr. Su:v; s.i.s.m.l. for *water-seller, water-carrier, mariner, svvimmer”, etc. UyÉ. vii ff. Bud. kim yerçi suvci kemiçi bar erser 'if there are any guides, pilots, or boatmen' PP 22, 4-5; a.o. do. 23, 8; Civ. (in a charter of immunities) borlukipa öğen kesgüçiler suvçı kirmedin “the people who cut the streams and the water superintendent must not enter his vineyard” Up, 88, 45-6 (as the V. is kes- 'to cut', not kaz- 'to dig', the first were presumably labourers who cut the banks to release irrigation water): Caf. xv ff. suci (spelt) sági tva ábdàr 'cup-bearer; butler” San. 239r. 9 (quotns.). Dis. SBD D sevit Caus. Dev. N. fr. sev-, lit. 'one who causes love”, rather than “one who loves'; “the planet Venus'. For practical purposes Hap. leg., the only other occurrence being in the passage in Abg. quoted fr. KB, R IV so1, and prob. a word invented by the author of KB. Cf. colpan. Xak. xi KB sevük yüz urundi beşinçi Sevit, seve baktı erse sen özni avit 'fifth, Venus put her lovely face (in the sky); when she looks lovingly at you, enjoy yourself" 135. PUF sibüt Hap. leg.; no doubt a l.-w., presumably, in Kaşğar, Indo-Iranian; cf. Pe. sibitt "dill, Anethum graveolens . Kaşğar xi sibüt al-kuzbara "coriander” Kaş. 1 356. D savdiç prima facie a Den. N. in -dig, cf. tardıç, sağdıç, but there is no semantic connection vr. Sa:v and it may be, like other names of artefacts, a l.-w. Cf. savdiclan-, which fixes the vowels. N.o.a.b. Xak. xi savdıç al-qaf'atu'llati turmal | mina'l-adsán “a basket plaited from twigs', used for carrying fruit, etc. Kaş. 7 455. Dis. V. SBDD sabit- (or sapit- ?) Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of sabt-, Xak. xı at kudruk sabitti: “the horse waved (harraka) its tail”, and one says 1t  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 830 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. 786 SBD kudruk sabittı: 'the dog wagged (5aşbaşa) its tail' Kaş. II 298 (sabitur, sabitma:k); bu: at ol kudruk sabitja:n “this horse is constantly waving its tail'; also of a dog when it wagss its tail, when it asks for food or sees its people (aAla/tu) and fawns on them 7 513. D sevit- Caus. f. of sev-; 'to make (other people) love (oneself). | N.o.a.b., but "fairly common in KB. Cf. sevtür-. Uy. vri ff. Bud. (Queen Bhadr3 every day made gracious affectionate speeches to the king) etózin sevitgelir üçün “in order to make him love her body” U 1I] s4, 16-17; o.o. TT V 28, 119 etc. (ayat-): Xak. xi KB (this wicked world) sevitür sunup tutsa bérmez elig 'ingratiates itself to you, but if you reach out to grasp it, does not give you its hand” 400; (hear the words of) sevitmiş kişi sevitse kişi kör mün erdem başı “the man who has made himself loved; if a man makes himselt loved his faults are (regarded as) the height of virtue” 533; 0.0. 582, 594, 3704. D suvat- Caus. f. of suva:-; as such n.o.a.b., but other later forms of this V. and suvğarform parallel Caus. f.s subat-, suvart-, etc. vv. similar and extended meanings. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. U 7 29, 6-7 (u:d): Çağ. xv ft. suwat- Caus. f.; andid hardan "to order to plaster! Sar. 247v. 23. PUD subat- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of subt:-; cf. subı:la:-, Xak. xi ol ne:pni: subitti: “he tapered (a//ala) the thing, that is constricted its sides and lengthened it” (yuhaddid tarfahu rea yutatototlahu), as, for example, a nail Kaş. II 298 (subitu:r, subitma:k). D saptur- Caus. f. of Sap-; n.o.a.b. in its original meaning but s.i.s.m.l. as the Caus. f. of sap- in its later meanings. Xak..xi ol mana: kuş kanatin sapturdr “he ordered me to join up (i.e. mend, 5i-wasl) the falcon's (al-bas?) wing! (ctc.); also used for mending (rafa) anything Kaş. IJ 183 (sapturur, sapturma:k): (Kip. xiv saptur- ankaba ğayrahu “to lead someone astray” İd. 56). D septür- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of sep-; precedes Saptur- in Kaş. Xak. xı ol ani kızın septürdi: amara bi-tachiz bintihi wa zaffahá :a'l-xatan “he ordered that his daughter should be given a trousseau and conducted her to the bridegroom” Kaş. II 182 (wa'l-atwal masdaruha bi'l-háf, ie. Septürür, septürme:k). D sevtür- Caus. f. of sev-, s.i.a.m.l.g. vv, the same phonetic changes and shades of meaning as Sev-. Xak. xı ol (sic, superfluous) tepri: seni: mapa: sevtürdi: 'God put love for you (mahabbatak) in my heart” Kaş. II 185 (sevtürür, sevtürme:k): xın(?) Ar, akı bol akilik seni sevdürür “be generous, generosity makes you loved' 260; Tef, sevdür- "to make (someone) love (something)” 265: Çağ. xv ff. sevvdür- Caus. f.; xteudrà mahbüb kardan "to make oneself loved' San. 258v. 12. "ris. V. SBDD savdiglan- Hap. leg.; Hefl. Den, V. fr. savdıç. Xak. xı er savdıçlandı: “the man owned a basket” (qaf'a) Kaş. II 271 (savdiclanu:r, savdıçlanmn:k). Dis. SBĞ D sapığ Dev. N. fr. sap-; 'something joined to something else' and the like. In Uyg. only in the phr. ulağ sapığ, (endless) succession'. N.o.a.b. Uy£. virr ff, Man.-A M 1H 13, 19 (ii) (1 ula:ğ): Bud. TT VI ois, etc, (1 ula:g): Xak. xi sapığ Aisru'[-xiba “the lowest flap of a tent” Kaş. I 374 (lit. something joined on to the rest of the fabric). D suwuk (suvuk) Intrans. Dev. N./A. fr. suva:-; 'fluid, liquid', and the like,. with extended meanings. Survives vv, the same meanings in SW Osm, sivik (also civik); 'Tkm. suvuk. Cf. suvlag, Kip. xi suwuk (sic) “anything liquid and runny' (máyi' ragiq) like clotted cream and thick fruit juice when it has become runny (raqqa); hence one says suwuk yuğrut “runny your; suwuk kudruk “a long tail with very little hair on it” (galilu'l-sa'r), like the tail of a camel; also a tree (i.e. with few leaves), etc. Kaş. IJI 164 (the -ww- with both dama and kasra everywhere): Tkm. xin al-xaxt wahtwa'l-nàá'im “soft” (opposite to “hard” katı:) suwt:k (MS. şatn:h), Kip. yumşak Hou. 28, 1: Osm. xiv ff. sivik. liquid, runny'; c.ia.p. 77S 7 626; 11 823; 111 626; IV 69o. D sapğa:k Hap. leg.; this word occurs, in a list of words with four consonants which are arranged in strict alphabetical order, between çamğuk and saplik but is spelt 5aşğağ£ in the MS.; there is no doubt that it is mispointed and should be spelt sapgak; Dev. N. fr. sap-, lit. (the part of the body) 'which joins' (the upper to the lower part). Xak. xı sapğa:k mà fatcqa' L-«arikayn “(the part of the body) above the hips! Aag. 7 470. Dis. V. SBĞ(S) sivBa:- Hap. leg.; the word is quite clear in the photograph; prima facie a Den. V. fr. *sivi; there does not seem to be any cognate word, but the meaning is clear. Uy£. viii ff. Man.-A (then the magicians in the city of Babylon took a bow and arrow; they strung the bow and shot at Zruşç Burxan (the Prophet Zoroaster)) ok1 yana sıvğar öz tamıripa teğdi “their arrow turned to one side and penetrated his own vein' (the demon then died) Man.-uig. frag. 401, 8. D suvğar- Trans. Den. V. fr. su:v; "to water (livestock); to irrigate or water (land). S.i.a.m.l.g. in SW Az., Osm., Tkm. suvar-: NC Kzx. suar-: NW Kk., Nog. suvğar-, Kir. Kumyk, and all other language groups sufar-, Xak. xı ol atsuvğardı: “he watered (saqiya) the horse' (etc.) Kaş. II 188 (suvğarur, suvğarma:k), o.o. in grammatical examples 71 44, 18 etc.: xnn(?) Tef. suvar— -.-—-— ..” ”...67072.-50"..--  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 831 
     
   
   
      ə DIS. "to irrigate! 276: xiv. Muh.. asqá'l-má' “to irrigate” suwa:r- Mel. 22, 9 (fstaqd”l-nd” su: tart- Rif. 103): Çağ. xvíf. suwarşuvar- "to moisten', that is to moisten mud, etc, Vel. 301; suğar- (spelt) “to give water" (db düdan) to the thirsty; "to moisten' (sirab hardan), also pronounced suwar- San. 243v. 26 (quotn.); reverse entry do. 247v. 28: Xwar. xiv suğar- “to irrigate' Qutb 161; suvar- "to water' (sheep) Nahe. 113, ız: Osm. xiv ff. suvar-, sometimes sıvar-, “to water', etc.; c.i.a.p. T TS 1649; I1 850; İH 645; IV 714. D suvğart- Caus. f. of suvğar-, s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xr if it is desired to form a Caus. of a V. ending in -r-, -t- is added to it, and (in the Perf.) the -d- (of the Suff.) is merged with it, the result is -tt-, the -d- being assimilated, e.g. ol atın suvğarttı: “he directed someone to water (saqtya) his horse” Kaş. 1] 256, 2; n.m.e. Tris. SBĞ D suvuklik Hap. leg.?; A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. suvuk, “a liquid”, Uyğ. viu ff. Bud. TT V 26, 100-2 (2 qu£). C sipa:kur Hap. leg.; Kaj.'s etymology is possible, but surprising, since akur, q.v., a Pe. L-w., properly means “a stable or stall”, although used in the medieval period for “manger”, İt is perhaps a l-w., and this a false etymology. Xak. xı sıpa:kur al/-mixlüt “a nose-bag'; originally sip aku:rı: mülafa”l-tani mina'l-xayl “a manger for a colt that has cut its first teeth” Kaş. 7 487. Tris. V. SBĞD sa:vikla:- Hap. leg.; the word is certainly so spelt, but there is no other trace of sa:vık, fr. which it is a Den. V. This might conceivably be a Dim. f. fr. Sa:v, in which case the V. might mean “to talk incoherently'. Uyğ. viti ff. Civ. [gap] ağzıntın ta:şğa:ru: üntürü:r koğşa:r sa:vıkla:r kópli: a:da:r “he brings up (his food), grows weak, and talks incoherently; his mind wanders' (assuming an unusual scription of a:za:r) TT VIII I.3. VUD suvi£lan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. *suvif Dev. N. fr. suva:-. Cf. suvuk, Xak. xı ol ba:lığ suvığlandı: "he reckoned that the honey (etc.) was runny” (raqiq) Kaş. 1I 267 (suvığlanu:r, suvığlanma:k). D suvğarımsın- Refl. Simulative Den. V. fr. a N.S.A. fr. suvğar-, noted only in grammatical sections, Xak. xı the most correct way (of expressing the idea that a man pretends to do something but does not actually do it), and the commonest, is to add (to the Refl. f. of the V.) before the nümn a mim and a sin (MS. şin), making three consonants in all, e.g. ol at suvğarımsındı: “he pretended to water (yusqi) the horse” Kaş. II 202, 12; a.o. II 261, 22; n.m.e. D suvğarın- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of suvğar-, used as a Simulative; in a grammatical section   SBG 787 immediately before suvğarimsın-, the MS. actually has suuğardı: but the context shows this to be an error. Xak. xri if it is desired to express the idea that a man pretends to do something but does not actually do it, one way is to add nüz (to the basic V.) before the dd/ (of the Perf.), e.g. ol at suvğarındı: (so read) “he pretended to water (yusqi) the horse” Kaş. II 202, 3; n.m.e. D suvğarış- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of suvğar-, noted only in a grammatical section. Xak. xı if you wish to modify a V. in this section to express help (7"4va) in doing something or competition, you add. sim (to the basic V.) before the dàl (of the Perf.), e.g. ol mapa: at suvğarışdı: “he helped me to water (f? saqy) the horse” Kaş. İT zor, 21; n.m.e. Dis. SBG D sepük Hap. leg.; Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. sep-, etymologically this should mean 'equipped, fitted out”, its exact meaning in its context is discussed under silkim, q.v. Xak. xi KB 4599 (silkim). D seviğ, sevük Preliminary note. These two words, the first a N. Ac. in -iğ fr. sev-, “love, loving, liking', and the second a N.[A. in -ük (Passive), “İihed, beloved', must be carefully distinguished. This is not easy in der. and later forms, since Ssevig became sevüğ by labial attraction at a fairly early date. Cf. saçığ, sacuk. D sevig see above. N.o.a.b., displaced in the medieval period by words like sevgü:, N.Ac. in -£ü:, or l.-w.s. Türkü viu ff. Man. (if we have sinned) etóz seviğinçe yorıp 'acting in accordance with the desires of the flesh” Cösas. 196—7: Uy£. virt ff. Man.-A etöz sevigin uvutsuz işin "bodily love and shameless behaviour” (i.e. sexual intercourse) M 7 16, 18-19; seveğ ózütlüg nığoşaklar “the Hearers with loving spirits! do. 28, 24; kentü Ssevigin “because of self-love” do. 34, rg: Man. seviğ kópülin 'with loving thoughts' M III 34, 17: Bud. PP 58, 5-6 (amrak): Civ. Seviğ Buyruk P.N. US. 112, 2: (xiv Muh. al-şadiq "close friend” sewgü: Mel. ss, 1; Rif. 152: Kip. xiu (after sew-) al-mahbüb “beloved' sewgü: Hou. 39, 16: xiv ditto İd. 54): Çağ. xvff. see sevük: Osm. xiv and xv sevi/sevü/sevüğ 'love'; in several te.,4 77S I 6i5; II 811; III 616; IV 678 (xiv sevğü *beloved', once 7). D sevük see above. Uy£f. vii ff. Man.-AM T 23, 6 (Ağız), o.o. do. 7 and 28: Xak. xı sevük ne: "a thing which is loved' (a/-mahbüb) Kaş. I ago, aydım aşar se:vük (sic) 'I said to him "beloved!" ' 7 94, 2: KB sevük savçı birle “vith the beloved Prophet' 3o; sevükrek atın “his favourite horse' 315; 0.0. 135 (sevit): xııı(?) Tef. sevükrek “most loved" 265: Çağ. xv ff. séwük (with -k”) mahabbat "love! Vel. 291 (but quotn. contains Séwük Séwfen “one who loves a beloved"); (séwgüm  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 832 
     
   
   
     788 DİS. (sic) mühr geca mahabbat "love! San. 258v. 29; it is not clear whether this is an error for séwgü or a mistranslation of “my beloved"): Xwar. xiv sevük “beloved, dear” Qutb 157. Sibek the basic meaning underlying both translations. seems. to be “a long object in a central position”, survives only(?) in SW Osm. sübek 'an infant's urinal in a cradle'; XX Anat. Sibek (r) ditto; (2) “the iron pivot of a hand-mill”, (3) “the tap-root of a tree' SDD 1225; söbek (2) only, inter alia, do. 1247. Xak, xı sibek “the pivot of a hand-mill” (quibu l-raha), that is the iron (rod, a/-ğadida) round which the upper millstone revolves; sibek “the hollow reed (a/-qaşab) which is fixed in an infant's cradle for him to urinate in" Kaş, 1 389. "Tris. SBG D seviğliğ P.N./A. fr. sevig; “lovely” and the like, esp. of the face. N.o.a.b. Uyf. viii ff. Man.-A seviglig . yüzüpüzen “your lovely face” M I 1o, 8-9: Man. Wind. 42-3 (iciglig): Bud. sevigli&amp; y[üzin] U 7/7 17,9; 0.0. do. 34, 2-3 (ii) (ün), U II 37, 60-3 (tapçasız), TT X 123, 346, sso, etc.: (Xak.) xut(?) Tef. seviğli “dear” 265: Xwar. xiv sevüglüg “lovely” Qwtb 1:57; (an action) sevüglügrek “more agreeable' (to Göd) Nahc. 265, 16. D seviğlik A.N. fr. sevig; “love”, Although the second vowel is almost consistently -üthis seems to be an A.N. fr. sevig not sevük. N.o.a.b. Xak. xr kizlep tutar sevüglik a/-hubbu'l-maktum *concealed love” Kaş. II 172, 10; n.m.e.:: Çağ. xv ff. séwüklük ("vvith -k-k”) sevmeklik "love! Vel. 290 (quotn.); séwüglük/séwiglik (both spelt) mağağğat “love” (quotn.), also mahbüb ca düst daşta “beloved, friend”: (quotn.) Sam. 258v. 29: Xwar. xiv sevüglük "loveliness! Qutb 157. D sevügsüz (sevigsiz) Priv. N./A. fr. sevig; "loveless; unloved'.. N.o.a.b, Xak. xi sevüğsüz a[-bagid (MS. bagiz) 'odious' Kag. İT 250, z (yodkt:), n.m.e.: Xwar. xiv sevügsüz erdi könlüm “my heart had no love in it” Qufö 157. Dis. SBL D saplık A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. sa:p, apparently Map. leg.; similar modern forms are P.N./A.s representing saplığ. Xak. xr saplık 'anything which serves as the hilt (magbad) of a knife or sword or the handle (nisáb) of anything” Kaş. İ 470. D savlığ P.N./A. fr. sa:v, used w. preceding Attributive, 'speaking' (the truth, etc.). Pec. to Uyğ. Uy£f. viu ff. Bud, PP ss, 2 (kóni:); TT VI 119 (utu:n). D suvla:ğ Dev. N. (Conc. N.) fr. suvla:- ; sj.smil as sulaw/sulak “a: watering-place for livestock' or, more generally, 'a place with abundant water'. Xak. xı suvla:g »nagra'atu'l-má' "a place where water can be drawn'; suvla:i ism mascd?i' "a place-name” Kaş. 7 464: SBG Xwar. xiv suvlağ (MS. in error savlag) “a watering-place for livestock! Quib 156. D suvluğ P.N./A. fr. su:v; properly “vatery, possessing water', with various extended meanings including some derived fr. idiomatic uses of db in Pe. (sec Su:v Çag,). S.ia.m.l.g. w. phonetic changes similar to those of su:v, q.v. Xak. xi K H yüzün tutçi suvluğ tutayin tése "if you resolve constantly to retain respect' (Pe. idiom) 4297; neçe kızğu eplig yüzi suvluğ er 'how many rosy-cheeked, respected (Pe. idiom) men” (have been ruined by women) 4524: Xwar. xiv yüzi suvluğ Qutb 156 (mis-spelt sav/uğ), 162: Kom. xiv 'spelt' (grain) (PU) suwlu CCI; Gr.: Kip. suuw al-marida *watcring trough! İd. ss: al-kalak "a raft of inflated skins' suwluw Bul. 4, rs. D suvluk A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. su:v; with a wide range of meanings connected w. water, the oddest being “a horse's bit” perhaps because it makes the horse dribble. Survives in NE Koib,, Küer., Sag. su&amp;luk “a horse's bit” R IV 760; Khak, uv. ditto: NC Kir. su:luk “bit, trough; rain-coat'; Kzx. sulik ditto; SC Uzb. suvluk “bit”: NW Kk., Nog. suwlik “bit”: SW Az. suluğ “blister”, Osm. suluk “bir, water bowl; blister”, "Vkm. suvluk "bit, a place with abundant water'. Uyğ. virt ff. suvluk “vvater-trough” U IIIJ 38, 28: Xak. xı suvluk al-mindil 'towel, turban”, and the like Kaş, 7 471; in 7 zor (urun-), 77J 323 (saçu:1a:-), and 6 o.o., a/-Tprdma 'turban'— su:luk ai-imáma III 262 (Saru:-; perhaps a scribal error): xiv Muh.(?) al-safiha *water-trough' su:luk Rif. 169 (only): Çağ. xv ff. Suluk a generic term for "water vessel' (su yarfı) or 'pool' (birka) for collecting and storing water; also “vatery, full of water' (sulu ve dbdar) Vel. 298 (quotn.); suluk (spelt) (r) dahana-i asb "a horse's bit”, (2) (i-i abdar 'aà water-container' Sam. 246r. 23 (same quotn.): Osm. xiv ff. suluk “vater-vessel, pool', and, fr. xvr, “the cheek-piece of a bit” TTS 1 646; IIl 642; IV 709. D suvla:n Hap. leg.; Dev. N./A. fr. suvla:-; the semantic connection is obscure, but cf. suwik. Xak. xi suvla:) yifa:c "a smooth (al-mardá) tree which has no branches (£ugn) on its stem' (sdq/)4), suvla:r sac 'straight (or lank, a/-sabat) hair” Kaş. HI 386. S süvli:n See süğli:n. Dis. V. SBLD sapıl- Pass. f. of sap-, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı yip yiğne:ke: sapıldı: “the thread was threaded (insalaka) through the ncedle”, and one says oğul ata:sına: sapıldı: “the boy kept close (i/ta/taqa) to his father while going to the place” Kaş. JI 120 (sapilur, sapilma:k), a.o. 7 158 (étil-). D savil- Pass. f. of sav-, which is not noted before the medieval period. "Ihe carliest occurrence is prob. in xın(?) Tef. (VU) sav 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 833 
     
   
   
         TRIS. V. SBL . 789 "to spray (perfume)! 264 (sev-); it also occurs in Kip. xiv şavv- Aa:wwala which has several meanings, here perhaps "to turn away' İd. 6o, and Osm. xiv ff. sav- Trans. “to drive away, rcpulse; avoid, escape from; bring to an end; let loose'; Intrans. “to go away, come to an end” TTS I 605; II 8oo; III 60s. "The Pass. f. survives only(?) in SW Osm. savul- 'to stand aside, get outof the way', and thelike. In some other languages Savil- is a Sec. f. of sağıl-. Cf. savur-. Xak. xi kü:n savıldı: “the sun turned downwards and declined' (málat . . . a zálat); and one says könlüm ana:r savıldı: (MS. savuldi:) “my heart inclined towards him” ş also used of anything which has withdrawn from stability and turned downwards (zá/a min qarörihi wa mála) Kaş. II 125 (savilur, savilma:k; MS. savul-); kadğu: yeme: savılsu:n “let sorrow depart” (yarhal) I 106, rr, (I said) apar savılma: (MS. savulma:) là tamil ila Qolbaq "do not incline towards him (Kolpak)' 777 8o, 19; a.o. II 163, 3: KB tópüdin savilmis bakir sokun-a “Mars had declined from the zenith' 4888; 0.0. 4889, 6216 (ülker): Xwar. xii sawa:l(sic) “to disappear ' Ali şo: Kom. xiv “to step aside, make way' suwul- (sic) CCG; Gr.: Kip. xul hadü mina”İxurüc 'ani'l-tariq. "to turn away from the (right) road' sawul- Hou. 39, 17: XIV sawul- tanahhd “to be diverted” /4. 61: Osm. xiv ff. savul- “to be avoided; to be put on one side; to make way for (someone); (e.g. of summer) to pass, elapse'; c.i.a.p. 77TS I 606; II 801; İTİ 606; IV 668. D sevil- Pass. f. of sev-; “to be loved, liked”, etc. S.i.m.m.l.g. with the same phonetic changes. (Xak.) xin(?) At. sevilmek tilesesen kisiler ara 'if you wish to be popular with people” 259: Xwar. xiv sevül- “to be liked' Qutb. 157: Kap. xv mahbüb 'loved' sewülmis (or sövvülmiş?) TuA. 32b. o. D suva:l- Pass. f. of suva:-; originally “to be vvatered, irrigated' ; s.i.s.m.l. as sual-, subal-, etc. “to be plastered'. Xak. xi tarif suvaldı: “the crop was irrigated' (sugiya), also used of anything sprinkled with water (idà ruşşa 'alayhi'l-máà') Kaş. II 125 (suvalur, suvalma:k); (sokul- follows here); ev suvaldı: “the house (etc.) was plastered' (tuyyina, MS. in error fayyana) I1 125 (suva:lur, suva:lma:k, sic); o.o. suvaldı: 77 162, 13; suva:lur Il 240, 8. D sapla:- Den. V. fr. sa:p, s.is.m.l. as sapla- (1) “to fit a handle, etc.'; (2) “to plunge (a sword) in up to the hilt'. Uyğ. vri ff. Bud. keyikçi er ağuluğ oki saplap toşğuru tartıp presumably “a hunter fitting his poisoned arrovv (to the bovv) and dravving it fully back” (shot the elephant in the heart) U İT s7, 3 (i): Xak. xı er kiliç sapla:dı: “the man fastened (rakkaba) the sword in its hilt' (gabi'atihi); also used when he fastened the handle (sigáb) of anything Kaş. III] 296 (sapla:r, sapla:ma:k). D savla:- Den. V. fr. sa:v; n.o.a.b. Xak. xr ol telim savla:dı: “the man talked a great deal EMEN (takallama bi-kalam katir), also used when a man quoted proverbs (daraba . . . al-amtdl) Kaş. III 297 (savla:r, savla:ma:k); kis ya:yğaru: savlayu:r (MS. savlanur, but rhymes w. tavrayu:r, savrayu:r) 'winter argues with summer” /77 278, rr: xiu(?) Tef. sawla- 'to make a speech' 257. D suvla:- Den. V. fr. su:v; s.i.m.m.l.g. usually as sula- “to irrigate', less often “to water (livestock); vv, extended meanings in SW Osm. Xak. xı at suvla:dı: “the horse drank (gariba) water (etc.)'; and one says er titiğ suvla:dı: “the man moistened (amá(fta)) the mud (etc.)” Kaş. HII 297 (suvla:r, suvla:ma:k); yuvğa: suvin suvlama: (unvocalized, but so read) là tasqi bt-mö” là asl lahu “do not drink water flowing from an unknown(?) source” III 8o, 21: KB 449 (bóri:): xiv Muh. (after şariba ic-) şariha "to drink copiously' su:vla:- (-(-) Mel. 27, ır, Rif. 110: Çağ. xv ff. sula- (-p) sula-, sirdb et- "to drink to satiety' Vel. 299; sula- agámidan ab "to drink water' San. 246r. 15. D saplat- Caus. f. of sapla:-: “to order to fit a handle';s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xi ol kiliç saplattı: *he ordered someone to fasten the tang (rakkaba”l-silan) in the hilt (al-gabi'a) of the sword'; also for to fasten the handle (zisáb) of anything like a knife or dagger Kaş. I1 344 (saplatu:r, saplatma:k). D suvlat- Caus. f. of suvla:-; s.i.s.m.l. as sulat-. Xak. xi ol cóbni: suvlattt: 'he ordered someone to sprinkle water on the dregs of something” (ragga'I-mà' bi-tacir şay”) Kaş. II 346 (suvlatu:r, suvlatma:k). D savlan- Refl. f. of savla:- used as Pass.; “to be spoken of”. N.o.a.b. Xak. xi Kaş. 111 199, 28 (çavlan-), n.m.e.: K B (the King said, a good man is always praised, but) müni bu isizler ara savlanur “his faults are always quoted among these wicked men” gop. D suvlan- Refl. f. of suvla:-; s.i.s.m.İ. as sulan-, generally used as Pass. Xak. xı suvlandı: ne: “the thing was moist and full of vvater” (ratuba wa katura mö”uhu) like fruit when it is soft (/4za) and full of juice or a boil when yellow liquid appears in it and it is swollen (farahhala), and one says anın kö:zi: suvlandı: “his eyes watered' Kaş. 1I 247 (Suvlanu:r, suvlanma:k): KB (man uses his tongue to speak, if he speaks vvell) yüzi suvlanur “he is honoured” 275 (cf. suvluğ). D savlaş- Recip. f. of savla:-, n.o.a.b. Türkü vii ff. Man. TT 118, 55-6 (öğrünç1en-): Xak. xı ol meniy birle: savlaşdı: “he quoted proverbs to me and 1 to him”) also used of messages, speeches, and anecdotes Kaş. II 215 (savlaşu:r, savlaşma:k). Tris. V. SBL VUD subiı:la:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. subi:; cf. sufbıt-. Xak. xr subi:la:dı: ne:nni: “he  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 834 
     
   
   
       790 TRIS lengthened (fawwala) the broad thing, and constricted its sides' (/raddada tarfahu) Kaş. III 323 (subı:la:r, subi:la:ma:k). Dis. SBN saban 'plough', but whether a gencric term, or originally the name of some particular kind of plough is uncertain. Survives only sporadically as sapan “vooden plough' in SE "Türki and saban in NC Kzx. ("obsolete”): SC Uzb. (ditto); NW Kumyk, Nog. (only): SW Osm. (only), which suggests an original specific meaning. Cf. bokursr. Xak. xı saban a/-faddün bi-cami" dlatihi "a plough with all its accessories”, saban also 'cultivating the land" ( falafiatu'l-ard) Kaş. I 402 (prov., see Oórtgün); o.o. JJ 214, 4; İİİ 416, 23 (same prov.): xiv. AMuh. al-milirát “plough” sa:ba:n Mel. 60, 2; Rif. 158: Çağ. xvff. saban “a wooden object on which they fasten a piece of iron and use it to till the ground', in Ar. faddán; (and sapan “a sling) San. 228v. 20: Kom. xiv 'plough, ploughed field” saban CCI, CCG, Gr. 210 (quotns.): Kip. xiii a/-mihrdi şaban Hom. 9, 9: xiV ditto şaban Bul. 4, 1: xv ditto TuAt. 33b. 9: Osm. xvi ff. saban noted in several phr. TTS Il 775; III 583; IV 647. mm D sevinç N.Ac. fr. sevin-, 'joy, pleasure, delight'; in one or two early passages perhaps rather “affection, love”. S.ia.m.l.g. except NE(?) with some phonetic changes. Türkü viii ff. Man. (then all the people . . .) bizipe dindarlarka yüküntiler sevinç ötüntiler “did obeisance to us, the Elect, and expressed their pleasure (or affection ?)” TT II ro, 82-3: Uyğ. vir ff. Man.-A (this scripture was recited) uluğ ógrüncün 'with great joy' (and written) ağır sevinçin *with intense delight? M I 25, 375; 0l sevinç “that joy' M III 13, 13 (ii): Man. sevinç ótünü AM III 34, 18; o.o. Wind. 44, etc, (erdem); TT 1HI 17: Bud. TT VHI G.40, etc. (öğrünç), U 7V 46, 38 etc. (utli:): Civ. (make your mind joyful) yérke teprike sevinç tut 'bring(?) joy to earth and heaven” TT I 12-13; olo. do. sz, 131; VII 27, 13, etc. (öğrünç): Xak. xi sevinc a/-surür “oy, delight! Kaş. İİİ 373 (prov., see oxsin-; verse): KB sevinç is common; normally “oy”, e.g. sevinçin tolu tut “make his joy full” 117; o.o. 123 (avinç), 340 (arkuk), 359, 913, etc.; a different shade of meaning in (praise the Prophet and) sevinçin tile 'seek to do what will please him" 39; a.o. 52: Xiri(?) At. sevinç erse kedin “if joy comes later" 3715 a.o. 413; Tef. sevinç 'jay; joyful news' 26s: xiv Muh. al-farah 'joy' sevinç (-f-) in "Turkistan, sevvinç in our country Mel. 8, 1; Rif. 79; a.0. 52, r, 148: Çağ. xv ff. séwinci müğdağanı “his reward. (for bringing good news) Vel. 291 (quotn.), sevvinç (spelt) mujda wea nuteid 'good news; reward' Sam. 259r. 4 (same quotn.): Xwar. xırı(?) sevinç “oy” Og. 2: xiv ditto Qufb 157; sevünç ditto do. 4; 'a reward! Nahc. zo, 6: Kom. xiv 5joy' sóvünc CCI, CCG; Gr. 223 (quotns.).   . V. SBL Dis. V. SBND sapın- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of sap-. Xak. xı işle:r yiğne: sapındı: “the woman undertook to thread the needle, but did not actually do it” Kaş. II ıso (sapinu:r, sapınma:k). D sevin- Refl. f. of sev- , “to rejoice, bc joyful, glad', etc. S.i.a.m.l.g. w. the same phonctic changes as sev-. Türkü vit 77 E 2 (ögir-): vut ff. IrkB. (öğir-): Man. TT 11 8, 6o (ögir-): Uyğ. vin ff Man.-A M I 28, 13 (ógir-): Bud. (the king of the dragons) ertipü sevindi “vas very glad” PP 46, 8; 0.0. do. 53, 2 ctc. (Ogir-); öğmişke sevinmedin "without taking pleasure at being praised” U III 73, 21: Civ. sevinmek as the name of a hexagram TT 1 87; a.o. do. 128-9 (örüki:): Xak. xı er sevindi: “the man rejoiced and was merry” (srra . . . tea” btahaca) Kaş. II 153 (sevinü:r, sevinme:k, everywhere spelt sevün-; verse); o.o. II 286, zo (ulğa:d-) etc. ro in all, spelt sevin- and translated surra or fariha "to be glad': KB 81 (küven-): xııı(?) At. okığlı kişinin sevinsün cüniı “so that the soul of the man who reads it may be glad” 44; T«f. sevin-/sevün- “to rcjoice, be glad” 265: xiv Muh. fariha sewinMel. 29, 14; sevin- (-f-) Rif. 113: Çağ. xv ff. Séwin- (spelt) sddi kardan “to rejoice, be glad' San. 258v. 15 (quotns.): Xwar. xırı(?) (Oğuz Xağan . . .) sevindi küldi “vvas pleased and smiled” Og. 198; a.o.o,: xiv sevün- “to rejoice" Qutb 157; Nahc. 369, 2: Kom. xiv “to rejoice, be joyful sevin-/sövin-/sövün-/söyünCCI, CCG; Gr. 219 (quotns): Kip. xiu fariha séwin- Hou. 35, 13: xtv ditto İd. 54; Bul. 68v.: xv ditto sówün- Kav. 74, 6; al-farah sewinmek do. 61, 16; surra sea farila söyün- 7uh. 20a, 11; a.o. do. 28b. 4. "ris. SBN D sevinclig P.N./A. fr. sevinç, '"joyful, happy”, ctc. Siis.m.l. Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A M I 11, 19 (öğrünçlüğ): Bud. Suv. 15, 8 ctc. (öğrünçlüğ): Civ. taşdın ünser sevinçliğ bolur “if he goes out (of his house) he is happy” TT VII 28, 44; o.o. do. 14, 12 etc. (öğrünçlüğ), 7 ışş (eke): Xak. xı KB sevinçliğ is fairly common, e.g. sevinçlig bolur anda yazlur kaşı “he becomes happy there and his brows relax"” 813; o.o. 951, 1250, 1561: xı1(?) Tef. sevinclig “happy” 265: xiv Muh. al-farhan 'joyful, cheerful” sevincli:g (-f-) Mel. 55, 13; Rif. 153: X war. xiv sevinçliğ/sevinçlüğ ditto Qutb. 157: Kom. xiv ditto sóvünclü CCG; Gr. D sevinçsiz Priv. N./A, fr. sevinç, 'unhappy', etc. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud, kayu tinliğlarnın utlisilz) sevinçsiz kılmiışları “vhat deeds of human beings bring neither revvard nor pleasure?” U IV 40, 184-5: Xak. xt Kaş. IIl 377, 2 (tapığsa:k), n.m.e. Tris. V. SBND sevinclen- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of sevincle:(see below); 'to be pleased, delighted', etc.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 835 
     
   
   
      DIS. V. Uyğ. vurff. Bud. Hüen-ts. 215 (üdlen-): (Kom. xiv sövünçle- “to bring joy to (someone Dat.) CCG; Gr.). D sevintür- Caus. f. of sevin-; 'to make (someone cc.) happy”, etc. S.i.s.m.l. Uy£. vi ff. Bud. [gap] sevintürğelir üçün “in order to make ... happy” TT X 554: Xak. xi KB olarnı menipdin sevindür tuci “make them (the Prophet”s four Companions) constantly pleased with me” 62; begin ked sevindürse tapnur kuli “f his servant by his service greatly pleases his master' (the road to honour is opened to him) 845; bodunuğ sevindürgil elgin tılın “make the people happy with your hand and tongue' 1367: XIV Muh.(?) (after farihd sevin-) farraha "to make yöyful” sevindir- (-f-; unvocalized) Rif. 113 (only): Çağ. xv ff. sevindür- Caus. f.; şad? hardan “to make glad, foyful” San. 258v. 27: Kom. xiv 'to make happy' sóvündür- CCG; Gr. 224 (quotn,): Kip. xv sewindir- also means farralia (Caus.) av. 74, 3 (see sön-). D sabanla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. saban. Xak. xı ol y€:riğ sabanla:dı: “he ploughed and tilled( falalia . . . eta karaba) the land” Kaş. III 342 (sabanla:r, sabanla:ma:k). Dis. SBR süvri: “vith a tapering end, sharp, pointed'; . syn. vr, Subi: but not connected etymologically . unless they have a common foreign origin. Survives only(?) in SW Az. Osm. sivri *pointed', etc.; sivri sinek * mosquito". Uy£. vir ff. Bud. süvri süpün sançıp 'piercing with a sharp lance! U 77 86, 48; süvri sışlar 'sharp spikes” TM IV 253, 56; a.o. do. 255, 138 (uçluğ): Xak. xı süvri: 'anything with a tapering end” (mifaddadiu'l-ra's), like teeth, spear- or arrow-heads, lamp-stands (a/-mandra), spits, and other small (şiğdr) things Kaş. I 422: xiv. Muh.(?) (after al-baqq 'gnat 2700 medicval word) sevvri: sinek Mel. 63, 8 n one MS.): Kom. xiv 'sharp' sürü CCG, 'gnat'(?) sürü çıbın CCI; Gr,: Kıp. xiv süvvrü: çıbın al-ba'id “mosquito”, compounded of süvvrü: raqiqu'l-farf mahdud “slim, tapered” and çıbın a/-dabab “fiy” İd. s4; al-ba'üd siwri çıbın, and in another dialect Cuğa, ?Tkm.) siwri sipe:k Bul. ro, 15: xv ba"üd süvvri şıbın Tuh. 7b. o: Osm. xvrri siwrl (spelt) in Rümf, “a sting (viş), the sharp (fizi) point of anything”, siwri sipek in Rümi, "a gnat' (başşa), in Ar. baqq San. 258r. 28. Esüprük See süprül-. PU subra:n Hap. leg.; spelt suyra:n in the MS. but between Sabra:n, a place-name, and tüğsi:n, cognate to subr:. Oğuz xı subra:n 'anything long (fawil) in the shape of a lamp-stand (a/-manara) or the like” Kaş. I 436. Dis. V. SBRD savur- Caus. f. of sav- (see Savil-) although the semantic connection is not very SBR- | 701 close; “to scatter; to winnow', and the like. S.i.3.m.l.g. except NE; SE “Türki sovur-/ so:r-/so:ra-: NC Kir. sapır-, Kzx. surr-: SC Uzb. sovur-: NW Kk,, Kaz. suwir-; Kumyk suvur-, Nog. suvir-: SW Az., Tkm. sovur-, Osm. savur-. Xak. xı er tarığ savurdı: “the man turned over the wheat with a pitch-fork (darrd (sic) al-ta"üm) and cleaned it in the heap' (nagqáhu fi'l-kuds) ; also used of anything when you winnowed it and cleaned it in the wind (nasaftahu tva naqqaytahu fi'l-rih) Kaş. H 82(savura:r, savurma:k); (God created (the sky like) a blue turquoise) savurdı: ürün kaş “and scattered (satara) on it (the stars like) iade” (yaşm)ş this is a white stone of which seals (a/-xarıdtim) are made I 330, 25: xır(?) Tef. savur- 'to winnow; to $catter' 257: Çağ. xvİT. sawur- (spelt) "to scatter (afgándan) earth, threshed corn, and the like and toss them in the wind' (ba-bàd daàdan) San. 236r. 22 (quotns.): Kip. xv darrà (sic) şovvur- (sawur- added below the line) Tit. 16a. 8; salla "to pull (something) out gently' şovvur- do. 20a. 4. sipir- 'to sweep'; with some metaph. meanings like “to drive out, send away' in some modern languages. An early l.-w. in Mong. as gi ür- (Studies, p. 227); s.i.a.m.l.g. with various phonetic changes (-i-/-ü-, -p-/-b-). Uyğ. vır ff. Man. (like the servants of kings and begs who) sipirür arıtır 'sweep and clean' (the house and furniture) Wind. 33-4: Xak. xı ol ev süpürdi: “he swept (kanasa) the house” Kaş. II 85 (süpürür, süpürme:k): xiv Mu. sahaqa “to rub clean” süpür- (-5-, unvocalized) Rif. 110 (Mel. 27, 3 sü:rt-), kanasa süpür30, 13; 114: Çağ. xv ff. süpür- (spelt) carüb kardan 'to sweep' San. 238v. 2 (quotns.): Kap. xni kanasa min kansi'l-bayt süpür- (-b-) Hou. 37, 1: XIV Süpür- ('with -p-”) kanasa İd. sı, Bul. 78v.: xv ditto av. 74, 11; kanasa süpirTuh. 31b. 1. S suvar- See suvğar-. savra:- pec. to Kaş., see savrat-. Xak. xı ış savra:dı: “the action was discontinued” (istafrağa), also used of anyone doing something when he stopped doing it (farağa 'anhu); and one says sökel i:édin savra:dı: “the invalid recovered from his disease' (imdamala'l-marid swa'nsalla minhu) Kaş. III 281 (savra:r, savra:ma:k), iğler yeme: savrayu:r al-amrüd taqill 'illnesses also abate” (in the summer) 7/I 278, 13; o.o. 1 103, 2; III 41, zo (the same verse, translated qalla and farağa). D savurt- Caus. f. of savur-; s.i.s.m.]. Xak. xı ol anar tarığ savurtti: adrahu'l-hínta “he ordered him to winnow the wheat' (etc.) Kaş. III 431 (savurtur, savurtma:k; the V. here used is similar to, but different fr., darrd translating savur-). D savrat- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of savra:-; the Infin. is given as -me:k, but this is no doubt an error; the second half of the entry was inadvertently omitted in the MS. and inserted 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 836 
     
   
   
     792 DIS. V. SBR İater, the error may be due to the fact that the entry immediately followed süvrit-, and so was in any case misplaced. Xak. xı ol evin savrattı: farrağa baytahu mina'l-qumág wa'l-mütd" "he emptied his house of furniture and goods'; and one says ol t:ştin savratti: atama amrahtc rca farağa minhu “he finished what he was doing and stopped doing it" Kaş, II 332 (savratu:r, savratma:k; sce above). D süvrit- (süvri:d-) Trans. Den. V. fr. süvri: with the -d- changed to -t- by false analogy fr. süvritti:, “to sharpen”. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. sivrit-. Sami 759 enters three words in succession, sivir- “to be sharp', sivri 'sharp', sivrit- “to sharpen'; Red. 1105 adds sivril- "to be sharp', Sivrilt- “to sharpen', but omits Sivrit-; there is no other trace of sivir- and it was prob. invented to explain the other words. Xak. xı ol yığa:çığ süvritti: “he sharpened the end (a//ala tarf) of the piece of wood (etc,), that is when he tapered it off” (haddadahu) Kaş. II 332 (süvritü:r, süvritme:k). D savruk- Hap. leg.; Intrans. f. of savur-. Xak. xı kö:zdin (MS. -den) ya:ş savrukti: 'tears dripped (faraşşaşa) from his eyes”, also used of water when it formed waves; and the waves broke into spray (mdca söa”dtarabat amteücuhu bi-faterán) in the rivers Kaş. 11 228 (savruka:r, savrukma:K, verse). D savrul- Pass. f. of savur-, s.i.s.m.l. with some phonetic changes. Xak. xi su:v savruldi: “the river formed waves with spray and bubbles! (záca . . . bi-famarön tea £alyàán); also used of a cooking pot when the broth in it was scooped up (rufi'a) ina ladie and put back in it (rudda fiha) to stop it from boiling over; and one says tarif savruldi: “the wheat was winnowced' (durriya) and ya:s kó:zdin savruldi: "tears. dripped from the eyes” Kaş. 11 232 (savrulu:r, savrulma:k; verse): Çağ. xv ff. sawrul- (spelt) “to be scattered (afsurda) and tossed in the wind' Say. 236v. 7 (quotns.). D süprül- (sipril-) Pass. f. of Sipir-; s.1.8.m.l, vv, the same phonetic changes. Xak. xiev süprüldi: "the house was svvept” (kurisa); and when one is angry with a man one says süprül (so read, apparentlv later altered to sübrük) that is “go away' (adhab) as sweepings (al-kanása) go away without anyone minding Kaş. HI 231 (süprülür, süprülme:k): Çağ. xv ff. süpürül- cörüb şudan “to be swept San. 238v. 16: Kip. xiv süprül- “to be swept; also used by them in the sense of fnsa/la “to slip avvay” İd. s. D savrus- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of savur-. Xnk. xı ol mapa: tarığ savrugdi: “he helped me to winnow (/7/-radriya) the wheat (etc.)' ; also used when he helped to stir( f?'l-tadriya, sic) the broth with a ladle to prevent it from boiling over Kaş. II 212 (savruşu:r, savruşma:k, if the text is right both darrà and darrd are used here). Tris. SBR PUF suburğa:n (or supurğa:n?) "a tomb'. "Vhis word was discussed at length by W. B. Henning in Transactions of the Philological Society (of London) 1945, pp. 157 f. After discussing other cognate Íranian words for “tomb” he reached the conclusion. that: this was a l.-w. fr. Sogdian *zrry'n. 'he second consonant was prob. -b- not -p-. N.o.a.b, but a 1.-vv, still surviving in Mong. as suiburfan (Kow. 1392, Haltod 348). Cf. 2 sin, Türkü vini ff. supur£an (sic) içre “vithin the tomb' M I 6, 2: Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. sin suburgan arasınta 'among the tombs” U 7 53, s (iii); fsın?) suburğan yérke yakın “near thc place of the tombs' 771 19, 9 (ii); $1tavan [su]burğanka “to the funereal grove (Sanskrit sitavana) and the tombs" do. 21, 3 (i); sın suburğan orun TT VI 29o (vl. to sın orun): Xak. xi suburğa:n a/-nö”üs toa muqábirwl-kafara “a funeral vault, a pagan cemetery! Kaş, 7 516 (prov. ; mis-spelt subuzağa:n). D süpürgü: (sipirgü:) N.I. fr. sipir-; *broom, brush'. An early l.-w. in Mong. as şPürgc (Studies, p. 240); s.i.a.m.Lg. vv. some phonetic changes. Xak. xr süpürğu: a/-miknasa “brush, broom' Kaş. 1 490: xiv Mu. al-miknasa süpürgü: Mel. 69, 9; Rif. 170: Çağ. xv ff. süpürgü (spelt) cárüb ditto San. 239r. 1 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv sipürtke (si:pü:rtke) ditto Qutb. 158: Kom. xiv ditto sibürtke (sic) CCI; Gr.: Kip. xin al-miknasa sepürge: (-5-) Hou. 17, 1: xiv süpürğe: (-5-) ditto Id. sr: xv ditto süpürgen (sic) Kav. 74, II; ditto sipirgi (-5-; in margin sipirge) Tuh. 34a. 7. D süpründi: Pass, Dev. N. fr. *süprün(siprin-) Rcfi. f. of sipir- , 'swecpings, rubbish", Survives in SW Az. süpürüntü , Osm. süprüntü. Xak. xı süpründi: a/-qumdáma 'sweepings, rubhish” Kaş, I 493. Dis. SBS D suvsuş Dev. N. fr. suvsı:- ; 'a potable liquid derived from a process of steeping prain and the like; a decoction” , esp. "a weak decoction”. N.o.a.b. Uyf. viri ff. Bud, Hüen-ts. 1941-2 (tuturka:n): Civ. a:lku su:vsusla:rta: yég üstünki xan sodak teğme: bolu:rla:r “they are called the royal beverage (Sanskrit sodaka), the best of all decoctions” T7 VIIT L.16; a.o. H IIL8, şı: Xak. xı suvsus dxir ma't i-hinta ba'd mà dahaba quwiwa garábihi "the final decoction of wheat after the strength of its beverage has gonc” ; also a name for "pure milk (al-mahid) diluted with water! Kaş, I 460. D suvsiz Priv. N./A. fr. Su:v; “vaterless, without water'. S.i.m.m.l., usually as Susuz. Türkü vir (day and night for seven days) suvsız keçdim “1 made my way without vvater” JI SE: vin ff. IrkB 45 (otsuz): (Xwar. xiv susuzluk 'lack of water! Qutb 162): Kip. xın bià mö” "without water' Su:stz. ITou. 52, 6. II——ásá—ssTÀáG—— — e SSEEEAEHEHESN eerie ERR o . 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 837 
     
   
   
      TRIS. Dis. V. SBSD 1 suvsa:- Desid. Den. V. fr. su:v; “to be thirsty” and the like. S.i.m.m.l., usually as susa-. Türkü vin ff. Man. TT /1 8, 37 (2 a:ç-): Uyf. vim ff. Bud. Hüen-ts. 2040-1 (1 us-): Xak. xı er suvsa:dı: “the man (etc.) was thirsty' ('afiga); in this case too (i.c. as in other Desid. V.s) the connotation is onc of longing for something Kaş. 717 284 (suvsa:r, suvsa:ma:k), a.o. I 281, 26: xın(?) Tef. suvsa:- (-f-) “to be thirsty” 276: xiv Muh. “atişa su:sa- Mel. 29, 5; Su:vsa:- (corrupted to su:knsa:-) Rif. 113; al-'atgán 'thirsty' (opposite to 'satiated') su:sa:mış 53, 13; 151: Çağ, xv ff. susa-(-p) susa- Vel. 295; susa- faşna şudan “to be thirsty' Sar. 243r. 22 (quotn.): Xvvar. xırı suvsa- (with triply dotted swa) ditto "AZ 25, 39: xiv suvsağlı (MS. savsagli) “thirsty” Qutb 156; susa- do. 161: Kom. xiv “tö be thirsty” suvsa- CCT, susa- CCG, Gr. 226 (quotns.): Kip. xiv su:sa- “afişa İd. 58; Bul. 62v.: xv ditto Tuh. 26a. s. S 2 suvsa:- Sce suvga:D suvst:- Simulative Den. V. fr. Su:v; pec. to Kaj.; cf. suvsuş. Xak. x1 sirke: suvsı:dı: “the vinegar came to taste like water' (axada . . . ta"ma”l-mö?), the wateriness (al-má'iya) destroyed the acidity Kaş. JJ] 284 (suvstr, suvsi:ma:k); a.o. 7 282, 7. D suvsat- Caus. f. of suvsa:-; s.i.s.m.l., usually as susat-. Xak. xı ol anı: suvsattı: 'attagahu "he made him thirsty” Kaş. II 336 (suvsatu:r, suvsatma:k): Caf. xv ff. susatCaus. f.; tajna hardan “to make thirsty” San. 243v. 5: Osm. xv korkut- susat- “to frighten and cause distress to (someone)'; in one text TTS IV 713. PU?E sivsin- llap. leg.; this reading can hardly be correct; no word with such a form could, as far as is known, have this meaning; it would be appropriate for *sidrin-, Refl. f. of sidir-. UYyğ. vur ff. Bud. Sanskrit viraktacittd *with minds freed from worldly attachments' sivsinmiş könöllögle:r TT VIII 4.28. Tris. SBS D suvsazlık “thirst”, A.N.-fr. suvsa:-. N.o.a.b.; modern languages normally use susuzluk or ordinary Dev. N.s fr. suvsa:for 'thirst' Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. su:vsa:lık TT VIII I.9 (alku:), iz (1 özr-), etc.; H 11 22, 30: Xwar. xiv susalık Qutb 161; suvsalik Nahc. 265, 16: Osm. xiv ff. susalık (r) *thirst'; (2) 'insatiable thirst, as a morbid conditlon in camels'; in several texts 77S 7 649; İTİ 644; IV 712. Dis. V. SBSD savas- Recip. f. of *sava:- Den. V. fr. sa:v; properly 'to argue with one another, to quarrcel', but later, in a physical sense, "to come to blows, to fight'. Survives only(?) in SC Uzb, savaş-: SVV Az., Osm, savas-; Tkm, SBŞ . 793 söveş-. A parallel N. savaş “a fight", Dev. N. (connoting reciprocity) fr. *sava:-, occurs in these and some NW languages. Oğuz xi ola:r ikki: savaşdı: “those two quarrelled' (tacadala) Kaş. II 102 (Savaşu:r, savaşma:k): (Xak.) xiu(?) Tef. savaş- “to fight” (with someone birle) 257 (also savaş “a fight”): xiv. Muh. háraba "to fight once another” savva:ş- Mel. 25, r, gawa:g- Rif. roy, al-harb sawa:gmak 37, ro, sawa:smak 123: Kom. xiv “to fight one another” sovag- (sic) CCI; Gr.: Kip. xii dáraba mrna'l-mudáraba “to come to blows' şazvvaş- Hou. 41, 19: (xiv xágama “to quarrel' şavva:ş et- Bul. 43v.): xv xdşama şavvaş- (/talaş-) Tuh. 15a. 2: Osm. xiv ff. savaş- “to fight one another”, and savaş “a fight”, c.i.a.p. 77TS I1 8oo; III 604; IV 667. D seviş- Recip. f. of sev-; “to like, or love, one another”. $.i.m.m.l. sv, the same phonetic changes as sev-. Xak.xı ola:r ikki sevişdi: 'those two liked, or loved, one another” (tahábbà) Kaş. 11 102 (sevişü:r, sevisme:k): Çağ. xvíff. séwis- (spelt) Recip. f., “to like (or love, dist düştan) one another” San. 258v. 14. D suvas- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of suva:-. Xak. xı ol mana: ev suvaşdı: “he helped me to plaster ("a/2 tafyin) the house” (etc.); also for competing Kaş. // 102 (suvaşu:r, suvaşma:k). D suvis- Hap. leg.; ultimately der. fr. su:v, but there does not sdem to be any other example of a Den. V. Suff. -1g-. Xak. xi yuğurmış u:n suvışdı: “the dough was flabby (istarxü) owing to the excess of water in it'; also used of any liquid (máy?) that is thin (raqqa) owing to an excess of water Kaş. 77 102 (suvigu:r, suvisma:k). PU suvşa:- lap. leg.; “to whisper; prob. Den. V. in -a:- fr. *suvis an onomatopoeic for "a whisper. "There are several words for “a whisper' in modern languages, the commonest Sibir/sibir; the nearest to this is NW Kumyk şıbış, Xak. xr ol kula:kka: suvga:di: takallama fi'l-udun bi-halam hafi “he whispered in his ear'; (Suvşa:r, suvşa:ma:k, with -f- everywhere); and one says (ob sökelke: suvşa:dı: raqqd”/-"alil “he whispered spells to the sick man'; sca br'l-sin luğa fihi "another form is suvsa:-” Kaş. I1] 286. *suvSat- See suvsat-. *suvsag- See şuvşaş-. Tris. SBŞ ?D suvuşğa:n Hap. leg.; apparently Dev. N./A. (connoting habitual action) fr. suvuş(suvış-): 'tapeworm'. "The only common word for "tapevvorm” is NW Kumyk suvalçan: SVV Az. soxulcan, Osm., Tkm. soğulcan, which goes back to Kip. xiv. su:luncan al-'alaq "leech'; one MS. adding zca düdt”l-batn “and tapeworm' İd, 56, 59; al-"alaq suwlaca:n 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 838 
     
   
   
     794 TRIS. Bul. ş, 2 and is also ultimately der. f. su:v. Xak. xı suvuşğa:n a/-şafar tea hiya hayya fil-batn. "tapeworm; intestinal worm' Aa. I $19. Dis. SBZ PU sı:bız Hap. leg.; no obvious etymology, perhaps a quasi-onomatopoeic. "Phe Turkish languages are rich in words for 'fool, simpleton'; e.g. for SW xx Anat. SDD V 9 (s.v. ahmak) lists over 150, some here also with no obvious etymology and a quasi-onomatopoeic look. Xak. xı sısbız kişi: al-axraqu'l-gafil "a foolish, obtuse, careless person” Kaş. 4 406. Tris. SBZ (D) sibizğu : “reed-pipe, flute, or other similar wind instrument, morphologically Den. N. fr. St;biz but with no semantic connection, unless it too has a quasi-onomatopocic basis. Survives in NE Alt., Şor, "Vel, sibiski, R 7 671:; NW Kk., Raz., Nog. sıbızğı, Xak. xi stbtzBu: a/-mizmar 'flute, pipe! Kaş. / 489; o.o. I 176 and zi? (3 ótür-); 246 (ötrül-): xiv Muh.(?) al-şababa 'rced-pipe! sıbızğu: Rif. 161 (only): Kip. xit sababatu'l-turk sibizğu: (MS. sibirfu:) Hou. 24, 11: xiv Stptz£t: ("with -p-)) al-zamr 'flute, pipe” İd. sr, şıbizğı: al-şababa , “already mentioned under sz” dö, 56: XV zamr tamil "a long pipe” sıbızğı ('a short one” zurnay, Pe, l.-w.) Tuğ. 18a. 10. Mon. SC 1 saç “hair”, apparently only the hair of the human head. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. phonetic changes (s-/şŞ-/ç- i -S/-S/-c); cf. tü, Türkü vu IIS 12 (biç-): vir ff. Yen. (his . . . and copper were as limitless) kara: saçı:n tef “as his black hair" Mal. 26, 7: Uyğ. viu ff. Bud. uzun saçın . . . 1dip "letting down his long hair? U İT əş, 15; olo. U IV 8, 38; TT V 4, 10-11 (egin) etc.: Civ. TT VII 32, 20 (sokun-); a.o.o.: Xak. xı saç a/-şa"r “the hair” Kaş. I 321 over 20 0.0.: K.B ürün bold: erse kara saç sakal "when the black hair and beard havc become white! 1103: xiti(?) Tef. saç “hair” (of the head) 264: xiv Mu, al-sa'r sa:€ Mel. 46,2; saç Rif. 139; 2.0.0.: Çağ. xvff. sac (sic) müy-i sar "the hair of the head” San. 229v. 18 (quotns.); saç (sic) also müy-i sar and gisü 'curls! do. 21: X war. xim saç “hair” ' Ali 14: xın(?) ditto Og. 76: xiv ditto Qutb 150; MN 6, etc.: Kom. xiv "hair of the head” saç CCI; Gr.: Kip. xir al-sa'r sa:g Hou. 19, 19: XIV sac ("with -ç)) al-sa'r İd. 56: xv al-sa'r sag (sic) Kav. 60, 11; ditto Tuh. zab. 5. 2 sa:ç (sa:c) "an iron plate for baking; a fryingpan”, and the like; also occurs in the phr. Sa:ç ada:kı: 'tripod, trivet”. Survives in SW Az. sac, sacayağ: Osm. sac, sacayak; Tkm. sa:ç, saçak, Xak. xı sa:ç a/-miqlat 'fryingpan” Kaş. 11I 147: xiv Muh. ai-migla sa:c Mel. 69, 1; Rif. 169 (mis-spelt sa:rix); al-dikdán “trivet” Sa:c aya:kı: 68, 15; şa:ç ada:kt: (sic) 169: Çağ. xvíf. sac “a round iron plate" (altani mudawicar) in the shape of a shield on which they bake bread Sam. 229v. 17: Kip. SBŞ xır al-şöcu"l-hadid ma"rüf "an iron baking tray, known' (also in Kip.); al-mingabu'[-hadid "an iron trivct' Şa:c ayn:ğı: “the legs of a baking dish" Hou. 17, 15: xiv Sac "on which thin Ioaves (ruqdq) are baked' İd. 56: (xv al-hünün “a stove' (ocak, in margin) also sacak Tu. 318. 15): Osm. xvir sac ayağ in Rümi, sih paya 'tripod', in Ar. miünşab,in Pe. dig-páya; sac ayak yürümek an expression for "to walk three abreast” San. 229v. 25 (quotn.). suc in Kag.s first meaning İTap. leg.; his second, metaph., meaning suggests that it may be the origin of SW Az., Osm. sug (sic, not stc) “a fault of action or omission, offencc, sin”. Xak. xi suc onomatopoeic (hikdya) for (the sound of) glancing off something (nubiwi'l-şay”), hence one says kiliç sug kildi: "the sword zlanced off” (ad): and one says er suç Kildi: "the man avoided accepting the thing” (sab . . . qabila l-amr) Kaş. I 321: Kip. xiv suc (with -ç) a/-danh "a fault” Id. 56; (al-danb yazuk which is also a/-xati'a 'sin') and al-danb suç (-c) Bul. s, iz: xv danb $us (sic) Tuh. 16b. r: Osm. xiv ff. suc. “offence” (in phr.); in several texts. T7TS 7 646; I1 845; IV 5709. Mon. V. SCsaç- “to scatter, sprinkle', and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv, the same phonetic changes as 1 saç. Türkü vir ff. Irh B zo (köpük): Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-A kim özütin üçün edgü ulrulğ saçsar 'whoever scatters good grain for the sake of his soul” M 1I 11, 14—15 (ii): Bud. (one must worship the Buddhas holding flowers and) saçmış kerğek "must scatter them (before them)” TT V ro, 106; trk saçtı "he cast lots! Hiien-ts. 37; 0.0. U İİİ 12, 5; 46, 11; Suv. 183, 15; 485, 3; T T' X 155; Civ. saçığ saçsar “if onc scatters offerings! TT VII 39, 3; pitpitinl saçıp 'sprinkling loni peppers (lL-w.)! /7 1 35; also. H İİ 22, 27 (2 öğsüz): Xak. xr men yipa:r sactim “1 sprinkled (nafartu) musk (etc.)”: and one says ol evke: su:v saçdı: “he sprinkled (raşşa) water on the house” (etc.) Kaş. 77 4 (saçner, sacma:k); tava:rinnr: saçmadın '(why) did you not throw away (faralita) your property ?' I 79, 22; yağmur kibi: ka:n saça:r “(my eyes) drip blood like rain” 7 272, 18: K B kózi yaş saçar “his eyes drop tears” 8o; burnu yaşın saça “sprinkling his nose with tears' 1500; 0.0. 719 (tér-), 4827 (yom£1): xur(?) At. 340 (su:v); Tef. saç- “to scatter (seed), to drop (tears)! 264: xiv Afuh.(?) al-raşş şa:şmak Rif. 120 (only): Çağ. xv ff. saç- (with -ç-”) başidan wa afgándan “to scatter, sprinkle” San. 229r. 25 (quotns.): Xvvar. xin ditto “Ali 34: xiv. ditto Qutb 150; MN 265, etc.: Kom. xıv “to sow' sac- CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xi şa:ç ('hair', also Imperative of) raşşa, natara Hou. 19, 19; raşşa şa:ç-, also ai-nitür do. qo, 13: xiv Sac- (with -ç-”) raşşa hatira(n), şaç- darra "to sprinkle” İd. 56; badara "to sov” and xafara şaç- Bül, 35, 4. Sec- “to choose, select, pick out”, and the like. Survives only(?)) in SW Az, "Vkm. séc-;  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 839 
     
   
   
     DIS! SCÓ ' 3795 Osm. sec-; cf. üdür-. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. tek muni kamağ kuvrağ ara seçip 'choosing only this man among the whole community” Hien-ts. 253-4: Xak. xi KB törütti üdürdi sece yalpukuğ '(God) created and picked out (Hend.) man” 148; sakışın seçer er yıl ay kün ödüğ “by calculation a man picks out an (auspicious) year, month, day, and time” 2220; 0.0. IO, 329 (adir-), 797: xiv Muh.(?) mayyaza ta xáyara “to distinguish, select” seç- (-c-) Rif. 115 (only): Kip. xiv sec- (with -ç-”) "azala şay” mina'l-say' “to distinguish between one thing and another” İd. şı: xv laqata, cama"a, qaşşaşa "to glean, pick up, collect' (şöple-/ter-/) şeş- (stc) Tuh. 32a. 9. SIÇ- “to defecate, empty the bowels'. "The kind of word often deliberately omitted in dicts. but noted as NC Kir. çıç-: NW Kk. sıç- /şış (see Bul. Index): SW Osm. S16- and, prob. s.i.a.m.l.g. Xak. xı er sıçdı: “the man defecated' (tagatewafa); also used of others besides men Kaş. II 4 (s1ga:r, sıçma:k), a.o. I 343, 27 (burxa:n): xiv Muh. tagawwata sı:ç- (-c-) Mel. 24, 7; Rif. 106; al-tajawtwut sıçmak (sic) 34, 8; 119: Kip. xii xari”a “to defecate” sıç- Hou. 36, rr: xiv Sig- ('with -ç-”) ditto /d. 56; tafawwafa wa qadara (to defile") sıç- Bul. 42v.: xv ŞIŞ- (sc) tafatwata Kav. 9, 9; Tuh. 10a. 10. *suc- See suçul-. Dis. SCA D sacu: Hap. leg., but cf. sagu:la:- ; Dev. N. fr. saç-. Cf. sacba:k. Xak. xı saçu: “the fringe” (/t«db) of a garment, towel and the like, Kaş. III 219. s D seçe: “a sparrow'; prob. a Dev. N. fr. secin the sense of (an animal) *which picks out (secds, ctc., on the ground)'. As such İlap. leg., but survives as SW Az., Osm. serce; Tkm. Sérce, in which the -r- is intrusive, as in serp- for sep-. Oğuz xı sece: al-'usgfür 'sparrow' Kaş. III 219: xiv Muh.(?) al'usfür serçe: Rif. 175 (only): Tkm. xmi ditto Serge: (Kip. çıpçık) Hou. ro, 7: XIV ditto Serce: (-c-) (and çıpça:k) Bul. rr, rz: Osm. xvin Sérce, in Rümi, metaph. “quick, impetuous' (tand u tiz), sérce parmak, in Rümi, "little finger', in Ar. xumnsur San. 251 v. 8. F sıçı: the Chinese phr. ssi chih (Giles 10,211 1,817) 'four boundaries; the vowels are fixed by sıçılığ. Pec. to Uyg. Civ. Uyğ. vii ff. Civ. bu borlukniy sıçısı “the boundaries of this vine- yard are” (east . . . south ... . north ... West...) USb. 13, 6-7; 109, 7; bu yernin sıçısı "the boundaries of this piece of ground do. 107, 19; 108, 17. Dis. V. SCAD suçı:- Den. V. fr. suc in the sense of “to move to one side, shy away from something". Xak. xı at suçudi: “the horse (etc.) reared (za taba) and jumped about” (gafaza) Kaş. III 258 (suçır, sucimma:k); a.o. 771 279 (bukra:-): Xwar. xiv Sugu- “to shy' (on hearing a drum) Qutb 161 (sug-): Osm. xiv to xvi Suci- (r) of a horse or ox, “to rear, kick”, and the like; translates Pe. sigízidan ditto; (2) translates Pe. dlidan "to commit a crime' T T.S 1 653; IV 708. Sück- (?sü:cl:-, see sü:çiğ) “to be sweet'; n.o.a.b., but see sü:çiğ. Xak. xi sügi:di: ne:p ihlawla'l-say' wa taba “the thing was sweet and pleasant' Kaş. III 258 (süçl:r, süçi:me:k): KB şakar teg süçiyü barir ol kişi: “that man goes about as sweet as sugar” 813. : Dis. V. SCDD saçıt- (aus. f. of saç-. Survives only(?) in NE Alt., Tel. çaçıt- R ZII 1908; cf. sactur-, Xak. xı ol apar su:v saçıttı: “he ordered him to sprinkle (araşşahu) water' (etc.); and one says ol anın mépi:sin saçıttı: "he beat him until he scattered( farata) his brain'; also used of ordering to scatter (bi'ntitàr) anything Kaş. İT 299 (saçıtu:r, saçıtma:k): KB yağığ bir saçıtsa yana terlümez “if you once scatter the enemy, they cannot reassemble” 2396; (how many gallant men's breasts has death crushed. and) saçıttı közin 'scattered their eyes” 4845. ..D sıçıt- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of siç-, cf. sıçtur-. Xak. xı ol anı: sıçıttı: “he made him defecate” (axra”ahu) Kaş. II 3oo (sıçıtu:r, sıçıtma:k). “ D suçıt- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of sugi:-. Xak. xı ol atığ sucitt: “he made the horse (etc.) rear' (azvtaba) Kaş. II 3oo (suçitu:r, suçitma:k). D süçit- Caus. f. of süçi:-, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı ol açığ ne:pni: suçitti: “he sweetened (ah/3) the sour, bitter thing”, and one says ol yé:rig süçitti: “he made the saline ground (al-sabxa) cultivable and fertile! (gardh ta haqla) Kaş. II 299 (süçitü:r, süçitme:k), KB (truth 1s bitter but) yarın asğı kelgey sücitgey seni “its benefits will come tomorrow and sweeten you' 5777. D saçtur- Caus. f. of sag-; sis.m.l. vv. phonetic changes. Cf. sagit-. Xak. xı ol mana: yarma:k saçturdı: antara'l-daráahim “alaya “he had me showered with money” Kaş. II 183 (saçturur, saçturma:k): Xwar. xiv saçtur- “to order to sprinkle” (perfume) Qutb 150. D sıçtur- Hap. leg., Caus. f. of sıç-, cf. Sicit-. Xak. xi ol anı: sıçturdi: axra”ahu mün ixrö” "he made him defecate” Kaş. IJ 184 (sıçturur, sicturma:k). D sactaş- Hap. leg.: Recip. Den. V. fr. 1 saç, syn. vv. Saclas-. Xak. x1 ola:r ikki: saçtaşdı: "those two took hold of one another's hair” (axada . . . şa"r) Kaş. Iİ 211 (saçtaşu:r, saçtaşma:k). Dis. SCĞ D saçiğ, saçuk. Preliminary note. These two toords, the first a N. Ac. 'scattering! and the like, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 840 
     
   
   
     796 DIS fr. saç-, and the second a Pass. N.İA 'scattered? and the like, must he carefully. distinguished, since the later forms tend to converge. The later word saçak is a. Sec. f. of saçğa:k, q.v. Cf. seviğ, sevük. D saçığ N.Ac. fr. saç- , “the act of scattering", esp. solid objects as opposed to liquids, e.g. 'offerings to the gods; offerings so scattered”, Survives in NC Kzx.: şaşu Kk. şaşuvv “a wedding present”. Uyğ. vrit ff. TT VI 265-6 (tökük): Civ. saçığ saçsar “if one scatters offerings" TT VII 39, 3; a.0. do. 25, 7 (tökük): Çağ. xv ff. saçığ/saçık/saçuk dügüne edilen sap "a wedding present" Ve/ 272 (quotn.), saçığ/saçık ("vith -ç-”) (1) mitár sa şabaş "money scattered. among the guests at a wedding" (quotn.); (2) “money and goods sent from the bridegroom's house to the bride's house on the occasion of a wedding (quotn.) San. 225v. 28: Xwar. xiv saçığ 'offerings' (metaph. for tears) Qufb 150: Osm. xiv to xviit Saçı/saçu "jewels, money, and food distributed on festive occasions'; in several texts TTS I «85; H 775; 111 583; IV 647. D saguk Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. saç- ; “scattered” and the like. Survives in SW Osm. saçık “scattered, disordered'. Uyg. viri ff. Bud. saçuk köpüllüğ yanluk sakınçlığ tinhglar “scatter-brained people — with erroneous thoughts! TT VT 023: Xak. xı sagu:k ne: “something scattered' (al-mantür) Kaş. I 381. D saçğa:k Dev. N/A. connoting habitual action fr. Sac- ; lit. *constantly scattering”, vr. various extended meanings. Survives in NC Kir. saçak "a handtowel'; Kzx. şaşak 'brush; tassel; fringe' SC Uzb. saçok “ a fringe; the hair on a horse's hocks”: SW Osm. saçak "the eaves of a house; a fringe (of hair, or on a garment); disordered, scattered” (the last a confusion vv. saguk). Cf. sacu:. Xak. “a man who throws about his money! (man yubağdir nmidlahu) is called saçğa:k kişi: Kaş. 7 470: Caf. xv ff. saçak ("vith -ç-”) (1) “a fringe (riga) woven of thread and silk" (quotn.), in Ar. hudb, (2) “a table cloth' (sufra), in Ar. sammát; (3) 'the eaves (turra) on the front of a house', that is an expression for the boarding which they place on the front of a mansion San. 229v. 22; Kom. xiv “fringe” saçak CCI; Gr.: Kap. xiv şaçak ('with -ç-”) af-sarrába wa'l-uthül 'tuft, tassel; fringed hangings! (a/-'utkül also means 'a branch full of dates, grapes, etc.") İd. «6. D sıçğa:k Hap. leg.; Dev. N./A, in -ğa:k (see saçğa:k) fr. sıç-. Not connected vv. SW Osm. sıcak 'hot', which is an abbreviation of isicak, Dim. f. of isiğ (isig) Xak. xı sıçğa:k alladi ya' tarihi l-gà' it. katira(n) *with loose bowels'; this word is irregular; because the rule is that there should be an -n instead of k; Adis. connoting the continuance (al-datcám) of something arc formed in this way (examples follow) Kaş. 7 470. sıçğa:n a generic word for both “rat” and “mouse”, the first sometimes specified as uluğ , . SCĞ sıçğa:n ; an old animal name ending in -ğa:n. S.1.a.m.l.g, vv. unusual phonetic changes (8-/ ç-/t-, -c-/s-; -ğa:n/-kan/-an). Cf. küskü. Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. karağu sıçğan ötin “the gall of a black rat (or mouse?)' H 7 56; sıçğan is one of the animals of the twelvc-ycar cycle in TT VII (common) and VIII P.33: Xak. xı sıçğa:m al-fa'ra. "mouse! (prov); sıçğa:n yilt: "the name of one of the twelve years among the Turks” Kaş. / 438; 0.0. 7 7s, 18 and 409. 9 (alımçı:) and 6 others mainly in provs.: xiv. Muh. al-fa'r SiicBa:n Mel. 73, 3; Rif. 177; sı:çğa:n yılı: So, 17; 185: Çağ. xv ff. sıçğan müş, *mouse' (quotn.); also the name of onc of the Turkish ycars San. 2s0r. az: X war. xiv sıçkan/sıçan "mouse! Quth. 163: Kom. xiv “rat” sickan. CCI; Gr.:. Ksp.. xi. at-fa'r sigka:m; "Tkm. siçan J7ou. i:1, 12: XIV sıçğan ("with -ç-”) al-fa'r; Tkm. şıçan and sictan (sic, 2error for Sickan); also one of the "Turkish months; one says Siçkan a:ty; aty is both “moon” and 'month' İd, s6; al-fa'r şıçkan (-c-) Bul, ro, 13: XV. göf is somctimes omitted, e.g. şışkan, a/-fa'r, somctimes pronounced şişan Kar, $, 17; a.o. do. 62, 10; “they omit the. qaf (in second hand, “from şışkan”) and say sıçan (-c-)' Tuh. 83a. 6-7: Osm. xvi siçan oti in Rürri, a medicinal herb, in Ar. turábu'[-hálik and. sanmmu't-fa'r “rat”s banc” San. 250r. 25. Dis. V. SCGD saçğur- Hap. leg.; Inchoative f. of sag-. Xak. xr er su:v saçğurdi: “the man was on the point of sprinkling (yaruşş) the vvater” Kaş. II 187 (saçğura:r, saçğurma:k). D suçğur- llap. leg.; abbreviated Inchoative f. of sucgii-; Xak. xi at suçğurdi: “the horse was on the point of rcaring' (yazib) Kaş, 1] 187 (suçğura:r, suçğurma:k). Tris. SCG D sıçğanak Dim. f. of sıçğa:n, *imuscle' lit. "little: mouse'; the same metaphor occuts in Indo-European languages, e.g. Latin mus *mouse', musculus. 'muscle'. Cf. baka:çuk, N.o.a.b.; there is no standard word for *muscle' in the Turkish languages, all others using phr. or l-w.s. Uyğ. virff. Bud. sıçğanakların tutunup 'clasping their own muscles! U IV 8, 37 (and I 435, 1); a.o. 22, 299. Dis. SCG D sü:çiğ (? sü:cig) N./A.S. fr. sügk-; *sweet; a sweet substance', e.g. “vine”, Survives for 'sweet' in SE "Türki süçük/çüçük: SC Uzb. suçuk/çüçük: SW 'l'km. süyci, and for “vine” in Osm. sücü, 'Türkü viri (the Chinese people's) savı: süçiğ "words arc swect' 1.5 s, II. N.4; a.o. do. (2 a:r-): Uy. vin ff. Civ. in USf. 1 a man acknowledges the receipt of yarım kab bor “half a vessel of wine' in the third month and undertakes to return bir kab süçüğ “one vessel of wine' in the autumn; o.o. of süçüğ “vine” do. 6, 6; ro, s: Xak. xr sü:çiğ “svvcet” (a/-huho) of anything; sü:cig  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 841 
     
   
   
       TRIS. V. SCLal-xamr bi-"aynihi more specifically *wine'; this is one of the words with two opposite meanings (al-addád; perhaps because to a Moslem wine is not sweet); and the people of the Ila: valley, that is the Yağma:, Tuxsı:, Çigil call “vvine” kizil sücig, that is “red wine" (al-şarüb) Kaş. I 408; o.o. of süçiğ, usually 'wine', sometimes “a sweet thing” 7 rs4 (açıt-), 157; 282, 7; 373 (bişiğ), HI 166 (koyug); 397 (sipdür-); 427 (esürt-): KB süçiğ tutğu til söz “he must keep his tongue and words sweet' 547; süçiğ bu tiriğlik “this life is sweet' (and death bitter) 1170; 0.0. 706, 2072 (1 ö:z), 2092 (süçin-) (wine! in KB is always bor): xinu(?) At. 209 (ac1$); Tf. suçuğ (sic) /süçüğ 'sweet!' 278-9: xiv Muh. al-hulw sücüg Rif. 96 (only); sücü: Mel. 54,7 (tatığlığ) , 56, 7; 66, 1; 151, 154 sü:cü:g 66, r, 165: Çağ. xv ff. sücük, same as cücük 'sweet, tasty” (şirin wa ladid) San. 239r. 9; cücü k (spelt) şirin 212r. 12 (quotn.): Oğuz xı süm sücig ne: "a very sweet thing” Kay. 7 338: Xwar. xıv süçüğ 'sweet; wine' Qutb 162; sücüg Nahe. $7, 7; 402, s: Kip. xtti al-xamr (bor . . .) also sücü:, which is anythihg 'sweet' (al-hulw) Hou. 16,3f1. ; a/- hulso Sücü:, which isalso'grape wine' (and fa:tlu:) do. 27, 8: xiv (Tkm.) süct: al-ladidu'l-hulw; also used for al-xamr; Kip. sücü: İz. 51: xv al-xamr (şa:ğır , that which is made from wheat is called bu:za ; and they have a sort made of raisins called) şüşüş (sic) Kav. 63, 5: Osm. xiv ff. süci, occasionally sücü, *wine'; c..a.p. TT. 1652; 11853; 111 646; IV 715: xvi Sücl in Rümi, *wine' (şarab) San. 239r. 12. Dis. SCL D saçlığ P.N./A. fr. 1 saç, 'hairy' and the like. S.i.s.m.l. w. some phonetic changes. Uyğ. viii ff. Man. M İT 11, 16 (tetrü:) Xak. xi saçlığ er “n hairy (a/-şa"rüni) man” Kaş. I 464: xiv Muh. dü şa"r 'possessing hair” sa:çlığ (MS. sa:clii:g) Rif. 83 (only); 'blackhaired” kara: sa:çlı: Mel. ro, 17 (only); sára bi-şa"r “to become hairy' sa:çlu: bo:l- 27, 15; (Rif. 111 sa:ç.ldı.). Dis. V. SCLD saçıl- Pass. f. of saç-, “to be scattered, sprinkled', etc. S.i.s.m.l. w. the same phonetic changes as sac-. Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-A tökülmek sacalmak “to be poured out and scattered” M İH ış, 18 (ii): Man. M İİİ qo, 3 (iii) (arpa:): Bud. (they saw the Budhisattva”s bones) 1mnaru berü anta munta saçılıp yatmisin 'lying scattered this way and that, here and there' Suv. 625, 10-11; o.o. TT X 436; TM IV 255, 38: Civ. ed tavar saçılur *property and possessions are dissipated' TT 1 74-5: Xak. xı yarma:k saçıldı: “the silver coins (etc.) were scattered' (nutrrat) Kaş. II 122 (saçılu:r, saçılma:k), yağmur yağıp saçıldı (translated) "the rain drops scattered” (fatatarat) 11 122, 21; a.0. T 258, 4: KB yana saçlur andın terilmiş nepi “the property which had been collected is dissipated again” 738: Çağ. xv ff. sacil- (spelt) afsjánda şudan  797 “to be scattered', etc. San. 229v. 9 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 151; MN 155. D seçil- Pass. f. of seç-, survives only(?) in SW Az., Tkm. sécil-; Osm. secil- 'to be chosen, selected”. Uyğ. vırır ff. Man.-A M TH 25, 11 (iii) (aparu:; this might be sacil-): Civ. Ígap] éste tuşta secildip “you have been picked out from among your comrades (Hend.)” TT I 48: Xak. xı KB biliğdin şeçildi kişi yılkıdın “man was distinguished from the animals by his knowledge' r843. VU(D) suçul- morphologically Pass. f. of *suc- (there is no semantic connection w. Suçı:-), but almost consistently used as an Active Trans. V. The first vowel is prob. -u-, which is the prevailing form in Kom. N.o.a.b. but cf. suclun-, suclus-. Cf. soyul-. Xak. xı er to:nn suçüldi: “the man took off (naza'a) his garment'; also used when a sheep is flayed (sultxa cildu'l-sát); (in a verse) törlüğ çeçe:k suçuldi: “the flowers have emerged from the ground' (uxricat . . . mina'l-ard) Kaş. II 122 (suçulu:r (or suçlu:r?), suculma:k): KB suculma menipdin bu imàn toni “do not strip this garment of faith off me' 393; 2.0. 84 (tu:D): xırr(?) Tef. suçul- “to strip off' 278: Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 161; Nahc. 39, 9; 132, 16; 133, 1: Kom. xiv “to strip off (one's clothes) soçul-/suçul- CCI; çuçül- CCG; Gr.: Kap. xiv sucul- (-c-) ta'arrá “to be undressed” Jd. 57. D saçlan- Refl. Den. V. fr. 1 sac; s.i.s.m.l. Cf. saçlaş- Xak. xi er saçlandı: nabata ga'ru'l-racul “the man's hair grew' Kaş. II 246 (saclanu:r, saclanma:k). D suclun- Refl. f. of suçul-, n.o.a.b. Türkü vill ff. Zrk B 44 (titin-): Xak. xi kiliç kiindin suçlundu: “the sword was drawn (insa//a) from the scabbard'; also used of anything that is withdrawn from its place Kaş. /7 246 (suçlunu:r, suçlunma:k). D saçlaş- Hap. leg., Recip. Den. V. fr. 1 saç, syn. vv. saçtaş-. Cf. saclan-, Xak. xı ol ikki: bile: (sic) saçlaşdı: "those two took hold of one another's hair” (axada . . . şa"r) Kaş. II 215 (saçlaşu:r, saçlaşma:k). D suçluş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of suçul-. Xak. xr ol menir ada:ktin tike:n suçluşdıu: “he helped me to extract (fi farqiş) a thorn from my foot'; also used for competing, and for helping to draw (fi sall) a sword from the scabbard, etc. Kaş. JI 215 (suçluşu:r, suçluşma:k). Tris. SCL DF sıçılığ P.N./A. fr. sıçı:, n.o.a.b. Uyğ. viii ff. Civ. bu tört sıçılığ borluk “the vineyard delimited by these four boundaries' USb. 13, 9; 109, 11. Tris. V. SCLD saçu:la:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. sagu:. Xak. xı ol suvluk saçu:la:dı: “he made a  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 842 
     
   
   
     798 fringe. (/rdh) for the towel (aJ-mnindil, etc.) Kaş. III 323 (sagu:la:r, saçuslasmıa:k). Dis. V. SCND saçın- Refl. f. of saç- , s.i.s.m.l. w. phonetic changes. Xak. x1 er ó:zipe: su:v saçındı: “the man occupied him with sprinkling (5:-raşs) water over himself” Kaş. // 150 (saçınu:r, saçınma:k): xın(?) Tef. saçın- “to burst, disintegrate” 264: Osm. xvi saçın- “to sprinkle (perfume) over oneself”, in one text TTS IV 647. D süçin- Refl. f. of sügi:-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı er só:zke: süçindi: “the man took pleasure (tweacada . . . haláwa) in talking, and spent his time on it instead of getting on with his work' Kaş. II işo (süçinü:r, süçinme:k, prov.): KB (Aytoldi) tapuğka süçindi “took pleasure in serving' (the king) 618; süçiğke suçinse ajun begleri “if the lords of the world take pleasure in sweet things' (the ills of the common people are bitter) 2092. Tris. SCN D saçındı: Pass, Dev. N/A. fr. saçın- , survives vv. same meaning in SW Osm. sacinti, Xak. xı saçındı: ne: 'anything thrown away or scattered' (a/l-mafrühu”l-mantür) Kaş. I 449. Dis. V. SCRD süçir- Hap. leg.; unusual Inchoative f. of süci:-. Xak. xr açığ ne: sücirdi: “the bitter thing became agreeable and sweet! (tàba . . . sva”hlasela) Kaş. HH 75 (süçire:r, sücirme:k). D saçra:- Den. V. fr. saga:r Aor, Participle of saç- ; "to spirt, (of sparks) to fly, to jump', and the like. Survives in SE “Türki çaçra-/ çaçri- “to spirt": NC Kzx. şaşra-/şaşıra"to splash, spatter, crumble, straggle'; SC Uzb, Sacra- 'to spirt, spark', etc.: 5W Az., Osm., "Tkm. S1gra- “to spirt, jump, jump up”. Xak. xr (the blood horse galloped; red sparks were struck (by its hooves); they set fire to the dry grass) saçrap anın örteyü:r “they fly and thereupon burn it” Kag. 11 133, 16; n.m.e.: Çağ. xv ff. saçra-(-p) sitra- Vel. 272; Saçracastan 'to jump, spring (of sparks), to fly', etc. San. 229v. 15 (quotn.; when the arrow of fate sacradi “has sprung forward' from the bow of destiny): Xwar. xiv saçra- “to jump' Qutb 150: Kip. xiv şaçra- (-c-) fartaşa “to spirt, (of a pen) to splutter” İd. 56; faşfaşa ditto sıçraBul. s8r.: xv tartaşa şaşra- Tuh. 242. 8; fazza rea nafta “to be startled, to jump' (PU tirpilda[sekir-[) şışra- (in margin, “also sışra-”) do. 2 D saçrat- Caus. f. of saçra:-, survives in SE "Türki çaçrat-, etc., as saçra:-. Xak. xı ol mapa: su:v saçrattı: “he accidentally splashed (antara . . . min ğayr qaşd) water on me”, as e.g. when one pours water, oil or any other liquid from one vessel to another, and drops of it are scattered and fall on a garment or something; also used when a man has broken a piece of wood and a bit of it flies off TRIS. V. SCL(va tib, MS. yatuhh) (saçratğu: follows) Kaş. İH 331 Sagratu:r, sacratma:k).  Tris. SCR D saçratğu: Hap. leg.; N.I. fr. sagrat-. Xak. xı (after saçrat-) hence “a kind of trap” (naro" mina'l-fuxüx) is called saçratğu:, it is made as follows, two twigs are joined together (at an angle), and a cord with nooses in it is fastened between them. 'Then it is covered with dust and grain is sprinkled on it; then a bird settles to pick up the grain and a noose entangles its neck or foot and it is caught Kaş. JJ 331 (prov.). Dis. V. SCSD saçış- Co-op. f. of sag-; the Caus. f. saçıştur- s.i.s.m.l, with phonetic changes. Xak. xı ol mana: yarma:k saçışdı: “he helped me to scatter ( f? za?r) the silver coins', (etc.); also used for competing Kaş. I1 92 (saçışu:r, sacigma:k; MS., in error, -me:k). D suçış- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of suçi:-, the MS. shows a double vocalization sugig-[sugug-. Xak. xı atla:r kamuğ suçışdı: “the horses (etc.) all reared together' (istattabat, for istawtabat) Kaş. I1 gz (sugigu:r, suçişma:k). D sü:çiş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of sügi:-. Xak. xı Sü:cisdi: ne: tába'l-say' tea” hlawlà ba'duhu fi ba'd 'some of the things were agreeable and sweet! Kaş. I] 92 (süçişü:r, süçişme:k, sic). Mon. SD sü:t (-d) *milk'. C.i.a.p.a.l.,; in SW Osm. süt, before vowels süd- ; Tkm. süyt, süyd-. Uyğ. viii ff. Man. [gap] sütden yeme [gap] Wind. 2: Bud. süt 'inilk' is one of the prescribed food (aş) offerings in 77” FII 16, 8 etc.: Civ. süt is a common ingredient in remedies in H 1, e.g. it sütin içğül (sic) 'drink dog's milk' 21; o.o. H H şo, 144; TT VII several, VIII M.34 (spelt südh): Xak. xr sü:t al-laban “milk" Kaş. İH 120; 30 0.0, all spelt sü:t: KB (if good qualities enter a child) ürür süt bile *with (its mother's) white milk', 881; o.o. 4442, 5881: xiu(?) Tef. süt “milk” 279: xiv Muh. al-laban sü:t Mel. 66, 7; Rif. 165; al-radi' "an infant at the breast' sü:t emge:n 48, 15; 143: Çağ, xv ff. süt süd . . . şir ma'násina *milk' Vel. 291 (quotn.): Xwar. xin(?) ditto Oğ. 79: Kom. xiv ditto CCI; Gr.: Kip. xur al-halib "fresh milk! süt Hou. 16, 12: xiv süt al-laban İd. şı, al-halib süt(d) Bul. 8, 2: xv al-labanu' l-halib süt Kav. 63, 4; halib süt Tuh. 13a. rr: /aban Süt do. 31b. 12: Osm. xiv to Xv1 Süd so spelt, in phr. TT'S IV 720 (and see Vcl. above). Mon. V. SD?D sat- “to sell”, prob. Caus. f. of sa:-, in the sense of making the customer count out the price. The converse “to buy” seems originally to have been simply al- “to take”, but the phr. satğın (q.v.) al- appeared at an early date. C.i.a.p.a.l. Uy. vir ff. Bud. (the butchers) etin kanin satar 'sell their meat and blood' EENMEEEE———— uÀ—!—psÜ—— '———— eS 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 843 
     
   
   
       DIS PP 3, 4-5; satayın “1 will sell” (my life to buy your life) U IV 36, 100: Civ. the phr. toğuru (or toğru) tumlitu sat- “to sell outright, irrevocably' is common on contracts, see toğuru:: Xak. xı ol tava:r sattı: “he sold (bà'a) the goods” (etc.) Kaş. Tİ 295 (sata:r, Satma:k); a.o.o. in .grammatical examples: KB bilig satsa bilge biliglig alır “if the sage sells wisdom, the wise man buys it” 470; a.o. 2641: xın(?) At. anın sattı malın "he has sold his property for its (wisdom's) sake' 238; Tef. sat- “to sell” 263: xiv Muh. bà'a sa:t-/ Sa:t- Mel. 19, 21; 23, 11; 33, 6; Rif. 99, 105, 117; al-bay' şa:tmak 35, 16; 121: Çağ. xv ff. sat- furüxtan “to sell” San. 228v. 27 (quotn.): Xwar. xin ditto ' Ali 26: xiv ditto Qutb 155: Kom. xiv ditto CCI; Gr.: Kip. xui bàá'a mina'l-bay' sa:t- Hou. 38, 12: xiv şatbà'a ld. $8; sak- Bul. 34, s: xv bá'a sa:tKas, 68, 15; Sat- Tuh. 8a. 7; 2.0.0. *sid- See sıdiğ, sıdır-. Si:d- “to urinate”, S.i.a.m.l.g., usually as siy- , SW Tkm. si:-, cf. kaşan-. Uy£. vii fr. Civ. yérke sidip 'urinating on the ground' H I 74: Xak. xı er sitti: “the man (etc.) urinated” (bala), originally si:dti: but assimilated (uqadğima) Kaş. II 295 (side:r, sidme:k), er si:dti: ditto 7I 440 (si:de:r, si:dme:k) xiv MuR. bala siy- (or? si:-) Mel. 23, 13; Rif. 105; al-bawl siymeğ (?si:meğg) 34, 8; 119; latowata “to defile', and the like siy- (?Si:-) 31, 3; (ris, PU si:be:-): Kom. xiv “to urinate' siyCCI, CCG, Gr.: Kip. xii bála mina'l-bawl Siy- (?or si:-) Hou. 38, ır: xiv si- (sic) bála İd. sı, bála siy- (sic) Bul. 34r.: xv bdla mina'l-bawl (MS. mibwal) siy- (or si:- ?) Kav. 77, 6; bála Si- Tuh. 8a. 12; a.o. 83b. ro. VU so:d- “to spit'; the long vowel suggests -0:- rather than -u:- but n.o.a.b.; now displaced everywhere by tükür- which is first noted in Muh, and the Kip. authorities. Cf. yarla:-. Uyğ. vı ff. Man. sodmis yarça “like spittle which has been ejected' TT 7/7 1I2: Civ. H II 12, 111; 14, 134. Xak. xi ol kişi: yü:zi:pe: sotti: "he spat (5azaqa) in the man's face”, originally So:dti: but assimilated Kaş. II 295 (soda:r, sodma:k), er so:dti: “the man (etc.) spat” I1I 439 (so:da:r, so:dma:k; prov.); 0.0. 7 341 (çırt), 77 8o (sağur-), III 132, 19 (same prov.). Dis. SDA F sata: pec. to Xak., and discussed in Clauson, “Eariy Turkish Astronomical "Terms, UJ, XXX D, 1963, p. 365, where it is suggested that it is a l.-w. from Ar. sati" “the dawn'. If so, the meaning 'coral' is a metaph, arising fr. its pink colour. Uyğ. Bud. viri ff. sita (sic) occurs with gold, silver, crystal, jade, pearls, etc. in a list of jewels Suv. 515, 17: Xak. xi sata: al-başşad (lw. from Pe. bassad) “coral” Kaş. III 218: KB 77 (same meaning, see çomğuk) ; (the air was dark . . . then) sata kopti yerdin yadildi butik “the dawn rose from the ground and its branches spread out'   . SDĞ 799 4892; kıza baktı yerdin sata kalkanı “the shield of dawn (i.e. its spreading light) looked redly from the ground' 4895; o.o. 3840 (Sata kalkani); 5679. Dis. V. SDDD sidit- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of sid; cf. si:dtür-. Xak. xı ura:ğut oğlın siditti: “the woman made her child urinate” (abálat); also used of a horseman when he makes his horse urinate Kaş. 7I 302 (siditü:r, siditme:k). D si:dtüt- Caus. f. of sl:d- ; s.i.s.m.l., usually as Siydir- or the like. Cf. sidit-. Xak. xı ol oğlın sittürdi: “he made his child urinate' (abdala), also used of horses; originally si:dtürdi: but assimilated Kaş. 77 183 (sittürür, sittürme:k). VUD so:dtur- İlap. leg.; Caus. f. of 8o;d-. Xak. xi ol anın yü:zipe: sotturdı: abzaqa bi-wachihi “he made (people) spit in his face”, originally so:dturdi:, so:dturur,sotturma:k assimilated (sic) Kaş. 11 183. Dis. SDĞ D satığ N.Ac. fr. sat-; lit. 'selling', but usually more specifically 'trade, commerce', and sometimes “sale price”, S.is.m.. as satığ/satı/satu. See satfin. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. Sanskrit dharmena na vanik caret "a man must not trade in the (true) doctrine' nom üze: ne:) satığ yulu:ğ kılğuluk ermez TT VIII E.9; o.o. of satığ yuluğ PP 13, 7 ff. (öptün), U 77 77,25; 86, 42, TT VI 104; VII 40, 68; (your brother has gone to another country) satığka “to trade” U 777 82, 14: Civ. satığ kilsa üf one trades” TT VII 28, 10; 0.0. do. 15 and 40; in the commercial documents in U Sp. sati, which is common, nearly always means “sale price”, e.g. bu tavarnın satığı “the sale price of these goods” 8, 4-5: Xak. xı satığ aí-mubáya'a “trade, commerce' Kaş. 1 374: KB (you must wage stern war against the infidels) yuluğla bu işke etóz kil satığ “take risks in this affair making your body the price” 4227; (the merchant) satığ birle tınmaz “never rests from trading” 4419; a,o, 5108: xiri(?) Tef. sati “trade” 263: Çağ. xv fI. satığ furuxt "selling” , satığ alığ xarid u furüxt wa dád u sitad “buying and selling, commerce” San. 229r. 22 (quotn.): Xwar. xim satu “selling” “AZ 54: Kom. xiv “trade” satığ/satık CCT, satov CCG; Gr.: Osm. XIV to xvit Satu (1) “trade”, (2) “things sold'; (3) “market” (also satu bazar 'buying and selling"); common 7'T'S 7 603; 1I 798; III 602; IV 666. D sıdığ/sidiğ prima facie a Dev. N. fr. *sid- and cognate to sidir-, it would suit both words if *std- meant "to come away in layers, peel off” (Intrans.); there is obviously no connection vv. Sİ:d- so Kaj.'s preference for sidiğ seems misplaced. Pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı sıdığ ahad daylayi"l-qaba ila”l-talbib. mina'l-cünibayn “one of the two skirts of a robe up to the collar from the two sides'; hence one says  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 844 
     
   
   
     Soo sıdığ yapı:p olturdr "he: drew together (damma) to himself the two sides of the robe and sat down'; this is a sign of refinement (mina'l-na' ma); SYd1B. furacu'l-asnán. bayna'l-littát 'the gaps in the teeth between the gums'; hence one says to someone who is told to keep a secret bu: sö:zni: sığığdın sızıtma: 'do not let this statement pass (/£ tudib) the gaps in your teeth', that is "do not disclose it” Kaş. 1 374: sidiğ "one of the two skirts (cánibayn) of a robe'; it is more correct (ahsan) than sıdığ Kaş. I 389. VUD soduk Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. so:d-: pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı soduk a/-buzaq “spittle” Kaş. I1 381; o.o. III 102 (yuğruş-, translated a/-riq “spittle”), 7/7 321, 4. D satğa:ğ Dev. N./A. fr. satğa:- ; 'ill-treated, oppressed ; ill-treatment, oppression'. Pec. to KB. Xak. xı KB bu satğağ basınçak üçün “because of this oppression and scorn” 911; a.o. gız, neçe satğağ erse bu edgü kişi “hovvever much the good man may be oppressed' 919; a.o. 924; (there are many wicked men in the realm) yavaş boldı satğağ kótürmez başı “the men of peace get oppressed and do not raise their heads” 6453. D satğın Pass, Dev. N./A. fr. satr, 'sold'; used only in the phr. satğın al- “to receive something sold', i.e. “to buy”. Survives only (?)in SW Az., Osm, Tkm. satin al-; the commoner phr. for “to buy” in other modern languages is satıp al-. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (I will sell my life and) sizlernin isiğ ózüpüzlerni satğın alayın “buy your lives U IV 36, 100-1: Civ. ud satğın alsar “if one buys an ox” TT VH 39, 2: (Xak.) xın(?) Tef. satin al- "to buy' 264: xiv Muh. iştard “to buy” sa:tun al- Mel. 22, 11; Rif. 103; al-sird sa:tkun almak 126 (oaly): Çağ. xv ff. satkun al-(-1p) satur al- Vel, 272; satkun alxaridan "to buy' San. 229r. 9 (quotn.): Xwar. xni satun al- “to buy” "Ali 56: Kom. xiv ditto CC/; Gr.: Kip. xui işfard sa:tun alHou. 37, 7: xiv Şatna al- (sic) ditto İd, 58: xv ditto Sa:ttin al- Kas. ız, 17; satin aldo. 31, 7; satın al- Tul. 87a. 5. Dis. V. SDGsatğa:- basically "to tread, or trample, on (something 4cc.)' with some extended meanings. Etymology obscure; with no semantic connection vv. satığ. N.o.a.b., but see sat&amp;£as-. Uy£. vir ff. Bud. tümen bere tağlarda arğular sat$ap bulti$ tumanığ “for 10,000 (Chinese) Ji the valleys in the mountains pass through clouds and mist” TT 1X, p. 22, note 77, s (a Hüen-ts. fragment): Xak. xı ol anın boynin satğa:dı: “he trod (faxattd) on his neck'; and one says bi:r yo:l bi:rig satğa:dı: (translated) "the southerly road crossed (cdza) the westerly road" and one says alım be:rimni: satğa:dı: “the debt due to him cancelled (?qradda) the debt due from him'; (in a verse; the days and nights of this world pass like travellers) kimnl: kalı: DIS. SDG satğasa: kü:çin keve:r “if they come on anyone and trample on him fa-man atd "alayhi ta xabbataliu), they sap his strength” , the phr. relating to roads and debts are Oğuz Kaş. 111 288 (satğa:r, satğa:ma:k): KB (when you take your seat, know your proper place and) kisig satğamağıl “do not tread on people” 4112; o.o. 707 (basit-), 5709, 6441: Oğuz sce Xak.: Kom. xiv satka- to injure'(?) CCG; Gr. 215 (in an obscure pAr.). sıtğa:- as such Hap. leg., but survives vv, the same meaning in SW Osm. sığa-. Xak. xı ol ko:lin sıtğa:di: sammara yadahu "he rolled up his sleeves! Kaş, 177 288 (sıtğa:r, sıtğa:ma:k); a.o. 1 325, 9. D satğal- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of satğın:-, the second meaning is presumably Oğuz, Xak, xi er boyni: satğaldı: "the man's neck (etc.) was trodden on” (xuffiyat); also used of a debt when it has been cancelled (uqtugga) by something which balances it (yreredernuhu) Kaş. 1I 233 (satğalu:r, satğalma:k). D sıtğal- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of sıtğa:-. Xak. xı yöp sıtğaldı: şunmira”İ-humman “the two sleeves were rolled up” Kaş. 71 233 (sıtğalur, sıtğalma:k). D sıtğan- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of sıtğa:-. Xak. xı er sıtğandı: "the man tucked himself up” (or “prepared himself'; tagammara); also used when he has tucked up his clothing (sammara iawbahu); Intrans. and "Trans. Kag. 1I] 245 (sıtğanu:r, sit$anma:k). D satğaş- Recip. f. of satğa:-, survives as sataş- with a wide range of meanings in NW Kaz. 'to losc one's way; to lose one's senses" RV 378; Nog. “to lose one's way; to beat a loss'; SW Az. “to tease, pester, provoke, mock (someone JDat.); Osm. ditto and “to be aggressive, seck a quarrel'; ""km. “to be exposed to (e.g. pain Dat.); to meet (someone); to see one another; to do business (with someone Dat.) Xak. xi ola:r bi:r ikindi: bile: satğaşdı: “they trod (faxaftd) on one another"s necks'; also used when people outdo one another in arrogance (yu"abbar bihi 'ani'l-tatà'ul); and one says ol mapa: yo:lda: satğaşdı: “he met me face to face (/aqiyanf . muiwácahata(n)) on the road”, Kaş, 11 214 (satğaşu:r, satğaşma:k): xin(?) Tef. satÉasg-/satxas- "to meet (someone Dat.) to come together' 263; sataş- do. 272 (see sıtğaş-): Oğuz xı (after Xak.) and in Oğuz one says ola:r alim bérim bile: satğaşdı: “they cancelled (gaşşa) their mutual debts' Kaş. H 214: Xwar. xii sataş- “to meet! “Al 57: xıv satğaş- "to meet (someone Dat.) Nahe. 83, 9; 252, 12-13) 432, 2: Osm. xiv ff. sataş- (r) "to encounter, or experience (something disagreeable Dat.)'; (2) "to meet (someone)”, c.i.a.p.: xvii] sataş-, in Rim?, mubtalà rea dücür şudan "to be distressed; to experience" San. 229v. 20 (quotn.). D sıtğaş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of sıtğa:-. Xak, xı ola:r kamuğ bile:k sıtğaşdı: “the  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 845 
     
   
   
      DIS. SDM 8oí men all rolled up their sleeves" (tagammarat . . . 'ani'l-kummayn) ; also used for helping and competing Kaş. İl 214 (sıtğaşu:r, sıtğaşma:k): (xi(?) Tef. 272 sıtaş-, the transcription of a V. w. the sin unvocalized, translated 'to come together; to encounter”, is clearly an error for sataş-). Tris. SDG D satığçı: N.Ag. fr. satığ , “merchant, salesman", and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. some phonetic changes. Cf. satfu:gr. "Türkü vui ff. satiığçı: er Toyok IV r. 3 (ET Y I1 180): Uy£. vin ff. Bud. PP 22, 8 ff. (eren); satığçı “merchant” is common in Kuan. 43, etc.: Civ. Kisak satığçıka “to Kisak, the merchant" USp. 72, 67: Xak. xi KD Chap. 58 (4419 ff.) lays down rules for dealing with satığçı “merchants': xiv Mu. al-bayt' “merchant” şa:tıçı: Mel. $6, 14; sa:tığçı: Rif. 154: Çağ. xv ff. satığçı dalàl wa dast-furüg 'auctioneer, retailer', who keeps goods on hand and sells them San. 229v. 23 (quotn.): Kom. xiv “merchant” satuğçı CCI; Gr: Kip. xi al-bayyd" sa:tıçı: Hou. 24, 1. D satğu:ç:ı Dev. N./Ag. fr. sat-; "a seller', a rather more limited term than satığçı:, n.o.a.b.; all modern words go back to satığçır. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (if we have been hunters, butchers or) 1t etin satğuçı 'sellers of dog meat! TT IV 8, 58-9; U II 84, 11: Çağ. xv ff. satBuci 'umüm furüşanda "a general term for seller' San. 229v. 25. D satığlığ P.N./A. fr. satığ, apparently “having a (high) price (set on it)”. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. burxanlarnın ağır satığlığ nomın nomlayurmen “1 preach the highly priced (i.e. precious) doctrine of the Buddhas” U III 47, 26. D satığlık A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. satığ: survives in SW Osm. satılık 'something for sale” (horse, house, etc.). Xak. xı satığlık ne: şay” mu'add l”?l-bay" 'something destined for sale” Kaş. 1 503: Kip. xv mabi' “for sale” satılık Tuh. 35b. 3. D satığsız Priv. N./A. fr. satığ, 'priceless', in the sense of “beyond price”, N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. (persons who search for gold, silver, pearls, and) satığsız ertiniler 'priceless jewels' Kuar. 19; a.o. do. 157 (köndegü:). Tris. V. SDGD satığla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. satığ. Xak. xı ol ana birle: satığla:dı: bàya'a ma'ahu mina'l-bay' "he traded with him”, the more correct form (al-agahii) is satığlaşdı: but both words are used” Kaş. 111 336 (satığla:r, satiğla:ma:k). D satığlaş- See satığla:-. D satığsa:- Hap. leg.; Desid. Den. V. fr. satığ. Xak. xı er atın satığsa:dı: “the man was on the point of selling (yabi*) his horse, and wished to do so" Kaş. III 333 (satığsa:r, satığsa:ma:k, verse). Dis. SDG D sidük Pass. Dev. N. fr. si:d-, 'urine'. S.i.a.m.l.g., usually as sidik, but in NC Kır.: SC Uzb. SW Tkm. siydik. These forms are irregular, since sidük should become siyük/siyik and suggest that besides sidük there was another form *sidtük, with the Suff. -tük, which is of the nature of a Past Pass. Participle. Uyğ. vırır ff. Civ. teve südükin alıp “take camel's urine and . . .' H 1 sa, böri mayakı ud si(dü)ki birle “vvolf”s dung and ox's urine' do. 102: Xak. xt sidük (MS. sidük) al-bawl acma' 'urine', in general Kaş. 1 389; (in a grammatical section) one says sidti: bála and thence al-batil is called sidük (si) III] 321, s: xiv Muh. aljbatel si:dük Mel. 48, r, si:tük Rif. 142: Kom. xiv *urine' sidik/siy CCI; Gr.: Kip. xim al-batl si:dik (or siydik?) Hou. 21, 19: xiv Sitük al-banl, sidük al-bawl, also sitük /4. şı: xv al-basıl sidik Tuh. 7a. 7; a.o. 83b. 9: Osm. xiv sidük/sidik both noted TTS Il 824; IV 692. Dis. V. SDGD sü:tger- Hap. leg.; Intrans. Den. V. fr. Sü:t. Xak. xr yuğrut sü:tğerdi: “the yogurt oozed (yagtur) until it became like milk in liquidity” (7 rzqqatihi) Kaş. II 189 (sütgire:r, sütgirme:k, sc). Dis. V. SDLD satıl- Pass. f. of sat-: s.i.a.m.l.g. Xak. xı tava:r satıldı: bi'ati'l-sil'a 'the commodity was sold' Kaş. 11 ızı (satilur, satilma:k:) Çağ. xv ff. satıl- furüxta şudan “to be sold' San. 229r. 7: Xwar. xui satil- ditto ' Ali 33: Kap. xiii (in a list of names for slaves) satılmış mabyü' *sold' Hou. 30, 4: xiv şatılmış (MS. şatalmış) a Proper Name ('alam) derived fr. the Pass. Participle meaning al-mabi* İd. 58. ?E satlan- See satlan-. Tris. V. SDLD satu:la:- Den. V. fr. *satu:; there is no trace of any cognate word, but its form is reasonably well established. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı ol telim satu:la:dı: takallama bi-halüm hafir la manfa'a fihi "he said a great many things of no value” Kaş. I1] 323 (satu:la:r, satu:la:ma:k); sa:tu:layu: (sic) sayraşıp tatlığ ü:nin kuş üne:r “a bird rises singing volubly with a sweet note' 777 194, 16. Dis. SDM PU?E satma: Hap. leg.; a Pass. Dev. N.; there is obviously no connection vv. sat-, but a Dev. N. fr. sap-, in the sense of 'something grafted or fastened on' would suit the meaning. Xak. xı satma: al- 'irzàl, that is “a small platform (raff) which a night-watchman (al-nátüir) fastens in a tree to sit on at night” Kaş. 1 433. : : 8641125 pd 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 846 
     
   
   
       Soz Dis. SDN ?F satun 'garlic'; perhaps a l.-w.; n.o.a.b. Cf. sarumsak. Uyf. vinff. Civ. (for a chronic catarrh) soğun sakalı satun sakalı birle sokup “pound onion rootlets (lit. *beard') and garlic rootlets together and . . .' H I 144-5; o.o. do. 176 (yanç-), II 12, ror: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. suan 'garlic' (Giles 10,381) satun R IV 38o, 388 (sadun); Ligeti 193. Dis. V. SDND satın- Refl. f. of sat-; s.i.s.m.l. usually for “to sell for oneself”, Xak. xı er atın satındı: “the man pretended to sell (vabi*) his horse' Kaş. 11 işo (satınu:r, satınma:k). Dis. SDR sa:tır Hap. leg. Xak. xı sa:tir a term of abuse (sabb) meaning “you without a pedigree' (man là asl lahu) Kaş. I 4o6. F sıtır l.-w. fr. Sogdian st'yr, which is itself a l.-w. fr. Greek stater "a silver coin”. Common in USp. and Fam. Arch. as a unit of currency, occasionally as a unit of weight. The Dat. sıtırka gives the quality of the vowels. Study of the documents shows that there were three units of currency, the bakir ' Copper? representing the Chinese ch'ien “copper cash” (Giles 1,736) of which ten were equal to a sitir, the sitir, and the yastuk equal to fifty sitir. As units of weight the bakir was a Chinese “mace” or one-tenth of an ounce, and the sitir the Chinese //ang “ounce” (Giles 7,010). 'These words are discussed in F. W. K, Müller, *"Uigurische Glossen', p. 319, Festschrift für Friedrich Hirth, Berlin, 1920. L.-w. in Mong. as şicir 'refined gold, gold leaf' (Kot. 1508). Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. USp. 18, 3 (bakir), etc.— üç sıtır tamğa kümüş do. 64, 18 seems to mean “three sıfır in (minted) coin'—1 sitir it sütin “one ounce of dog's milk” H I 62: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. liang "ounce” sitır R IV 720 (sidir, mistranslated), Ligeti 195. D sedrek N./A.S. fr. sedre:-. Survives in NC Kir. seyrek (r) 'rare, scarce'; (2) (of forests, crops, etc.) 'sparse'; Kzx. sirek 'rare': NW Kk., Kumyk, Nog. siyrek, Kaz. si:rek 'rare; sparse; loosely woven': SW Az. Osm., 'Tkm. seyrek ditto. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. Sanskrit chidribhüta "having become gappy or perforated! se:dre:k (-:-) bolmiışla:r TT VII A.ao: Xak. xi sedrek bö:z 'loosely woven (al-muhalhalu'l-nasc) cotton fabric”, sedrek kapu$f a/-sancüra, that is “a lattice work (mmgabbak) door' Kaş. I 477; konak başı: sedreki yég “a head of millet is best when it has few seeds' (kana qalila'l-habb) I 384, 12: Çağ. xv ff. seyrek müutaxalxil wa kam mucimm tva raqiq 'dispersed, nn filled, thin” , in Pe. tanuk San. 238r. 23: Kom XIV "scattered, scanty' seyrek CCI; Gr, *sedrem See seyrem. D sıdrım N.S.A. fr. sidir- ; lit. "a single strip”. Survives in SW Osm. sirim “strap”. Cf. kadış,  DIS.  SDN yarindak. Oğuz xı sidrim (MS. sidrim) "a strap' (al-qidd); and one says sidrim (ditto) işliğ er “a man who performs a task(ya'malu'l-'amal) and leaves no part of it for anyone else” Kaş. 1 485; a.o. 1 517 (Sıidir-, not described as Oğuz): Kip. xiv sırım al/-sayr mina "I-culüd 'a leather strap” ld. s2: şırım ^a white (abyad) strap'; see sırım do. 57. Dis. V. SDRD sa:tur- Caus. f. of sn:-: n.o.a.b. Xak. xt ol apar ko:y sa:turdi: a'addaliu'l-£anam "he ordered him to count the sheep' (etc.) Kaş. 111 186 (sa:turur, sa:turma:k); a.o. 711 192, rr. D sattur- Caus. f. of sat-, s.i.m.m.l.g. as sattur-/sattır-. Xak. xı ol menin tava:rığ satturdı: abd"a matàá'i “he ordered that my goods should be sold” Kaş. 71 183 (satturur, satturma:k): Çağ. xv ff. sattur-. Caus. f.; furüşandan “to order to sell' San. 229r. 8: Kip. XV the Caus. f. of şa:t-, bá'a, is şa:tfır-, it should be Sa:fdir- but the -d- has been assimilated Kav. 68, 15. ?D sidir- “to strip, peel, scrape', and the like; perhaps Caus. f. of *s1d-, see Sıdığ. S.).a.m.l.g. except SE(?), usually as sıyır-, but Sizir- in some NE languages, sidir- in SC Uzb. and SW Tkm. st:r-. Cf. soy-. Xak. xı bu er ol Sidrim sıdırğa:n “this man is constantly making straps” (a/-qidd) and cutting them in strips (yaqudduhu) from a hide and stripping (yaqşur) the hair from them; also used of anyone whose nature it is to strip (or pecl) things (man kàna fi tab'ihi qaşrıcl-şay)) 1 517; n.m.e.: (xiv Muh. see sidril-). D sr:tur- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of sı:-, Xak. xr ol otup sı:turdi: asara'l-]atab. “he had the firewood (etc.) broken up” Kaş. III 187 (sıturur, si:turma:k). S sittür- See si:dtür-. S sottur- See so:dtur-, Sedre:- survives only(?) in NC xix (? not xx) Kzx. sire- 'to be planted at wide intervals'. Xak. xı kişi: sedre:di: (MS. sedredi , but in all other V.s in the section the second vowel is long) xaffat zahmatu'l-nàs "the crowd of people dispersed' (or was scattered); and one says to:n sedre:di: (ditto) “the garment was Josely woven and worn thin' (tahalhala tea'ncarana, MS. "ncara”ana) Kaş. III 277 (sedre:r, sedre:me:k), a.o. //7 167 (olğun). D sedret- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of sedre:-. Xak. xı ol to:nu£ sedretti: "he wove the garment loosely' (halhala); and one says ol kişı:ni: sedretti: "he dispersed (gallala) the crowd of people'; also used for dispersing and scattering (axaffa) a crowd of anything Kaş. II 332 (sedretü:r, sedretme:k; MS. twice sedret-). D sıdrıl- Pass, f. of sidir- ; s.i.s.m.l, with the same phonetic changes; in some, e.g. SW Osm., as well as having its usually Pass.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 847 
     
   
   
       MON. SG 8o3 meaning “to be stripped, seraped”, etc., it is used as an İntrans. V. meaning “to slip, slip away', and the like, Xak. xı balık eliğdin sıdrıldı: “the fish slipped (tazallaqa) out of the hand”, also used of anything slippery (za//dq) that escapes (tamallaga) from the hand (etc.), and one says yozl: sıdrıldı: "the road was scrutinized (nuzira fi'l-tariq) at every corner” and one says er ta:mdın sıdrıldı: "the man slipped off the vvall” (etc.) Kaş. II 231 (sıdrılu:r, s1idrilma:k): xiv. Muh. zaliqa “to slip' şırıl- Mel. 26, 15; Rif. 110 (MS. şir- in error), al-zalaq şırılmak 36, 7; 122: Kip. xiv siril- mzala"a (zala'a has no relevant meaning, and irzala'a is not noted in the dicts.; no doubt an error for inzalaqa “to slip away'); one says sırıldı: ara: yerden “he slipped away from the place” /d. 52. D sedreş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of sedre:-, Xak. xı to:n sedreşdi: “the garment lost its roughness (faxdna) and became less thick' (galla katafatuhu), one also says bodu:n sedregdi: 'the crowd of people dispersed' (galla); also used of anything when it disperses (xaffa wa qalla) and scatters (taxalxala) after being closely packed Kaş. II zır (Sedresü:r, sedregme:k). : D sidrig- Hap. leg. ; Co-op. f. of sidir-, Xak. xı ol apar ka:r sıdrışdı: "he helped him to sweep off the snow and shovel it up” (fi kashi'l-talc wa carfihi); also of other things. Kaş. Il 211 (s1idrigu:ir, sidrigma:k; MS. sidrig-). Tris. SDRD sıdırğa:k Hap. leg.; Dev. N. connoting habitual action fr. sidir-; lit. 'constantly scraping (the ground). Xak. xı sıdırğa:k (MS. stdirga:k) al-zilf "a cloven hoof' Kaş. I soz. Dis. V. SDSD satsa:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of sat-. Xak, xı ol atın satsa:dı: “he wished to sell (bay) his horse” (etc.) Kaş. 11] 284 (satsa:r, satsa:ma:k, MS. in error safısa:-). Dis. V. SDŞD satış- Recip. f. of sat-, s.i.s.m.l., usually Yor “to sell to one another, to trade”, Xak. xr ol mapa: tava:r satışdı: “he helped me to sell (fi bay") goods'; also used for competing Xaş. II 89 (satışu:r, satigma:k); a.o. 7 518 (alış-): Çağ. xv ff. satış- Recip. f.; “to sell (furüxtan) to one another” San. 229r. 7: K1p. xv tabáya'a "to sell to one another” satış- Tuh. 10b. 8. Mon. SG 1 sa:ğ (?sağ) in the earliest period only in the phr. sa:ğ ya:ğ “pure (i.e. clarified) butter'; thence more generally 'sound, healthy' and, by a curious metaph., “right” (not "left) in the Oğuz group only; cf. 09. S.i.a.m.l.g. with some phonetic changes Sağ, sax, sav, saw, So:, Su:, The Tkm. form, sağ, suggests that this is See Doerfer 111 1047. Uyğ. vil ff. Bud. sağ yağ TM IV 252, 22: Civ. sağ yağ H I sas: Xak. xı sa:ğ ya:ğ al-samn 'clarified butter'; sa:$ köpül al-qalbu'l-maxmimu'l-naqgi “a cleansed, pure mind” Kaş. 111 154; a.o. III 159 (ya:ğ): xin(?) At. (if a man thinks before he speaks) sözi söz sağı “his words are sound words'; Tef. sağ (r) “healthy” , (2) “right (not left)” 258: xiv Muh. (in Adv.'s of Place) yamin *right' şa:ğ Mel. 14, 10; 8a:ğ el Rif. go, “the . right hand” şa:ğ €:lin 47, 9; (sa:ğa:) 125; mö” tayyib "good water' sa:ğ su: 76, 16; 180: Çağ. xv ff. sağ (1) huşyar “sober” , (2) şahih wa tandurust “healthy” , (3) 'sobriety, good health”, (4) taraf-i rast “the right side” San. 232r. 24: Oğuz xı sa:ğ al-şıhha wa'l-saláma “good health”, hence one says yl:nip sa:ğ mu: “is your body healthy?'; sa:ğ su:v ai-má'u'l-garühu'l-adb “pure, palatable water'; sa:ğ eli$ “the right hand”, all these phrases dre Oğuz, the Turks do not know them Kaş. I1I 154: Xwar. xiv sa:ğ “right” Qutb 151; sağ yağ Nahc. 25, 1: Kom. xiv “to be well' sav bol-; “on the right side” sa kolunda CCG; Gr.: Kip. xii al-samn sa: ya:ğ Hou. 16, 8; müuta"üfi “cured” tva. hussa'l-sahih (opposite to "ll" sSókel) şa:ğ do. 26, 6: xiv (Tkm.) şağ al-sahih; one says Sancar şağ dur 'Sancar is well and in good health”, sag el “the right hand”, one says şağ elin bile: ye: 'eat with the right hand”, and in Kip. op elin bile: ye:; şağ yağ al-samn İd. 58; al-samn şayağ Bul. 8, 6; (in Advs. of Place) yamin şa:ğdaz do. 14, 5: xv al-mu"afd mina'l-marad 'cured of a disease' şa:ğdır Kav. 60, 5; fába “to be well", etc. Saw bol- Tuh. 24a. 3: Osm. xiv sağ “healthy, sound; honest, upright; and once, XV, “pure”: c.lap.; sayağı/sayyağı (for sa:ğ ya:ğ) noted down to xvii. TTS I $586, 606; İl 776, 8o1; III 584, 506; IV 648, 669. 2 sa:ğ Hap. leg.; perhaps a 1.-vv. Xak. xi sa:ğ the word for “the sticks with which wool is processed” (qudbàn yunfag bihd”l-şüf) Kaş. III 154. D 3 sa:ğ Dev. N. fr. sa:-, n.o.a.b., but see sa:ğlığ. Oğuz xı sa:ğ al-'agl “the intellect'; sa:ğ al-fitna wa'l-dakà "intelligence, sagacity' ; hence one says sende: sa:ğ yo:k “you have no intelligence! Kaş. 111 153. sak 'awake, alert”, and the like. S.i.s.m.İ, in NE, NC, NW. Cf. sakçı: Xak. xı sak sak an Exclamation (ftarf) used by a sentry (a/-höris) in the army when he tells people to keep awake (al-tayaqquz) to protect castles, forts, or horses from the enemy; one says sak sak 'be wakeful' (ayqdz): hence “an intelligent, wide awake man” (al-fatinu'l-mutayyagíz) is called sak er Kaş. 1 333: KB sak başınnı yéyür "look out or it will bite your head off” 164; bu beglik işipe takı sak kerek "a man must be alert in the position of beg” 439 (prob. spurious); a.o. 1452 (oduğ). : sığ/sık Preliminary note. There is no clear evidence of the existence of any early word | one, of Kag.'s false long vowels, cf. 1 bag: — pronounced Sif, but some medieval and modern 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 848 
     
   
   
      8o4 forms of 'shallow, scanty” suggest that this may have been the original, or an alternative, form of 1 st:k. In addition to the seords listed below there 1s a presumably old scord sik, 'tight, dense", and the like, homophonous w. Sik-, tohich is first noted in Kom. and survives in NW Nog.: SW Az. (sıx), Osm.; Tam. 1 stk (?si:ğ) 'shallow, scanty”, and the like. Survives in SW Osm. sığ 'shallow'. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud, uluğ suvka kirser ólimegey sıkka tegip üngey 'if he enters great waters (i.e. goes to sea?) he will not get wet, but will reach shallow (water) and get out” Kuan. 17; odğurak kılğalı sikig teripiğ “he must confidently expound the shallow and the deep” Hüen-ts. 2084: Oğuz xi sı:k al-qalil 'few, scanty'; hence one says ola:rda: ko:y si:k ol “they have (only) a few sheep” Kaş. Zİ 130: Kip. xın (al-"amiq “deep” terin) and the opposite (dadd) of “deep” is sı:, Tkm, sik Hou. 7, r. ?F 2 sık (?sığ) Hap. leg.; the likeliest meaning is 'stalk' or the like; prob. a Chinese l.-w. Uyğ. vir fT. Civ. (if a woman suffers from painful and swollen breasts, she should rub on a mixture which is described; if the woman subsequently(?) suffers in this way) kentir sıknı üç ópi keslp “cut a stalk(?) of hemp into three pieces” (boil them in wine and viter, mix the decoction with cow's butter and rub it on) H I 122. ?E 3 sik See şik, 1 su:k 'greed, greedy; envy, envious, covetous'. Kag.s explanation of su:k in Su:k erpe:k as the same word used metaph. is possible but improbable; it is more likely to mean “poking, thrusting”, and the like, homophonous vv. suk-. For “index finger” it survives only(?) in NC Kzx. suk kol, in the other meanings it survives in SE Türki Shaw I25 (only), NC Kir.: SC Uzb.: NW Kk, Nog. Türkü vii ff. Man. todunçsuz uvutsuz suk yek üçün 'because of the insatiable, shameless demon of greed' Chuas, 252-3, 302-3, 310-11: Üyğ. vr ff. Man.-A. az uvutsuz suk yek “the demon of lust and shameless greed” M 111 29, 8 (ii); a.o. do. 11 (ii): Bud. suk ernek U /T 46, 71-2 (e£-): Xak. xı su:k er “a greedy, covetous (al-tami'u'l-cagi*) man”, su:k erge:k a/-muhallila mina l-agábi! "the index finger'; it means “the greedy” (a/-hariş) because it appears first in taking food Kaş. T/T 130: KB (I do not like a man) Suk erse kilinçi “if he behaves greedily 849; kózi suk (a man) “vith a greedy eye” 1143, 3568; o.o. 1379, 2611 (erksiz), 5384 (2 a:ç-): xi(?) At, (the miser) kózi suk 255; 2.0.0.: XIV Muh. al-sabbüba “the index finger Su:k barmak Rif. 141 (inadvertently omitted in Mel): Kip. xi al-şahhada "index finger? suk barmak Hou. 20, 15: XIV ditto a/-sabbüba İd. $9: xv al-sabbaba suk (MS. şuh) barmak Kav. 61, 3. VU 2 suk a Particle which although not alliterative seems to have the same functions   MON. SC as an alliterative [ntensifying Particle (sce 1 ap). N.o.a.b. Xak. xi suk yalpuz er “a lonely, isolated (al-waliidu'l-munfarad) man who has no friends or helpers” Kaş. 1 333: Xwar. xiv suk yalğuz ditto Qut) 159. Mon. V. SGsağ- “to milk' (an animal). An early 1.-vr, in Mong. as safa-/sa'a- (Haenisch 130, Kow. 1294). S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. some phonetic changes (sağ-, sav-, saw-, sa:-). Uyğ. viii ff. Civ. sağ- “to milk! H IJ 40, 144: Xak. xı er ko:y sağdı: “the man milked (Aalaba) sheep” (etc.) Kaş. II 15 (sağa:r, sağma:k), about ro o.o., and see suğ-: xiv Muh. halaba sa:$- Mel. 25, 9; Rif. 108: Çağ. xv ff. sağ- düşidan "to milk" San. 231r. is: Xwar. xiv sağ- ditto Qutb 151: Kip. xiv. Saf- /ralaba İd. 58: xv ditto şağ-/şavv- Tuh. 13b. 8. D sa:k- prob. an Emphat. f. in -k- fr. sa:-; n.o.a.b., replaced at an early date by sakin-; see Sakis. Uyf. vır ff, Bud. [gap] yeme: ince: sa:ksa:r 'and if he thinks as follows' TT VIII K.2.: Xak. xi bardı: eren konuk körüp (384, s bulup) kutka: saka:r “gone are the men who, when they see (find) a guest, reckon it ('addahu) a favour from heaven” 7 85, 5; 384, 5; n.m.e.: KB saka barsa munda£g bu yaplığ telim “if (1) had many thoughts of this kind” 4428. D sığ- lit. “to fit (Intrans.) into (something Dat.), with various metaph. meanings. S.i.a.m.l.g. as Siy- in NE, NC, NW and sığin SE, SC, SW. Uyğ. vir ff, Civ. kılmış kilinc sığmaz “vhat you have done does not fit” (i.e. is inappropriate or unsuccessful?) T'T I 76: Xak. xi bu: sö:z kópülke: sığdı: naca'a hádà'l-kalam fi'l-qalb “this statement acted on the mind'; and one says u:n ka:bka: sığdı: “the flour filled (zvasa"a) the sack'; also used of other things Kaş. // ış (sığa:r, sığma:k), kilic kinka: kücün sığdı: translated 'the swords almost failed to fit into (yasa') the scabbards because they were covered with blood' 7 183, 8; 359, 18; 397, 9; 3.0. 359, 4: KB €liğ kóplipe sığdı erse tapuğ 'when his service had commended itself to the king's mind” 1607: Çağ. xv ff. sığ- (spelt) guncidan 'to fill exactly'; sığışhas the same meaning; Tali'-i Harawi thought that sık- had this meaning, but it means “to squceze” San. 253r. 5 (quotns.): Xvvar. xiv sığ- Qutb 164: Kip. xiv. rcasa"a sığ- Bul. 87v.: xv wasa'/a Sty- Tuh. 38b. ro: Osm. xiv to XVI SIÉ- “to fit, suit”, in several texts TS 11 813; IV 681. S1K- lit. "to squeeze, press, compress'; metaph. “to distress, depress (someone)'. S.i.a.m.l.g. Uyğ. vii (1 fought them and. pierced their ranks) Selepe:ke: sıka: sançdım “1 pressed them against the Selenga and pierced them” Su. E 4: vii ff. Bud. TT V. ro, 95 (yudruk): Civ. H II ro, yə: Xak. xı ol üzüm sikdi: “he pressed ("aşara) the grapes' (etc.) Kaş, II 18 (sıka:r (MS. sızdı), sikma:k): xiv. Müh.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 849 
     
   
   
       DIS. V. SĞA 8o5 "aşara 81ğ-, v.l. s1k- Mel. 29, 3; Sik- Rif. 112 (in MS. sikrti:); Çağ. xv ff. sik- afşurdan "to sqeeze, press” San. 254r. ro (quotns.): Xwar. xın sik- (and siğ-) “to squeeze' ' Ali 13: Kip. xiv. şık- "aşara İd. 59: xv ditto Kav. 76, 8; Tuh. 26a. 4 (Sik-); a.o. do. 53a. 1: Tkm. "abasa “to frown' (burtar-/buruş-/) sıx- do. 26a. 1. suğ- Hap. leg.; quite distinct from sağ-, but liable to be confused with it; the -u- is fixed by suğur-, q.v. Basically “to draw out, or drain off (something JAcc., from something Abl") Xak. xı «ol ko:ydiın kurut suğdı: "he procured (ittaxada, milk for) dried curd cheese from the cwe'; its origin is sufurdi: (sic) Kaş. II iş (suğa:r, su&amp;ma:k). sok-, suk- Preliminary note. Aost modern NE, NC, SC, and NW languages distinguish between sok- “to beat, crush, reduce to powder, forge (irony , and the like with a Direct Object in the Acc., and suk- “to insert, thrust (something into something else), with some connotation of force; to invite to enter, admit', and the like, seit a Direct Object in the Acc. and an Indirect one in in the Dat. In SE Türki Shaw, BS and Jarring all list sok- but only Shaw 125 Suk-. In SW only sok- (Az. sox-) exists; almost all its meanings belong to suk-, but some like '(of a snake) to bite; to injure, calumniate! in Osm. seem 10 belong to sok-. Kaş, treats both V.s in the same para.; in this and other early texts it is simply a matter of judgement which V. is involved. sok- “to” beat, crush', etc.; see aböve. Cf. tó:$-. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. (he saw farmers irrigating and cultivating the land) kuş kuzğun sokar yoriyur 'birds and ravens walk about crushing (the clods)” (and kill innumerable creatures) PP 1, 4-5; (among the fittings of a house) sokğu tegirmen “a mill for crushing (grain" TT VI 86; sokup *digging into' (the entrails of a corpse) .X 552 Civ. (take various seeds, etc. and) bu otlar yumşak sokup 'crush these vegetables to a pulp” TT VII əz, ız, sok- “to grind, crush', etc. is common in H I: Xak. xı (after suk-) and one says er tu:z sokdi: “the man crushed (daqqa) salt” (etc.), and kuş mep sokdi: laqata'l-tà'iru'l-habb “the bird picked up seed' Kaş. II 18 (soka:r, sokma:k); (the crow) bu:z soka:r 'pierces (yanqur) the ice” 7 425, 18: xin(?) Tef. sok- "to crush” 272: Çağ. xv ff. sok- ur- ... darb eyle- ma"ndsina "to strike! Vel. 297; sok- ((1) suk-), (2) of a poisonous animal “to bite' (gazidan), in Ar. lasa"alladağa San. 244v. 26: Oğuz xı (after Xak.) anı: yıla:n sokdi: “the snake bit him” (ladağathu) Kaş. II 18: Kom. xiv sox- "to strike; to card (wool); (of the heart) to beat; to forge (iron) CCG; Gr. 221 (quotns.) Suk- 'to insert, thrust in', etc.; see above. Türkü vin ff. ZrkB 33 (ur-): Uyğ. viri Bud. (of doomed souls) kod1 sukarlar “they thrust them down' (into the cauldrons) TM IV 25$, 139;a.0. Hüen-ts. 1927-8 (sap-): Xak. xi men anı: evke: sukdum “Iİ made him enter (adxaltuhu) the house”, also used of anything when you have inserted it into something by force (adxaltahu . . . şiddata(n)), for example an axe-head on to the handle Kaş. 77 18 (sokfollows); a.o. III 142 (2 *koi:): KB yavalik bile borka bas sukmasa 'you must not in your folly thrust your head into wine' 708: xin(?) Tef. suk- “to thrust' (one's hand into one's bosom) 277: xiv Muh. haşd “to fill up, stuff” su:k- Mel. 25, s, suk- Rif. 107; al-hagw sukmak 24, ro (mis-spelt sakmak); 119: Çağ. xv ff. suk- (r) furi kardan "to bow (the head, etc.) San. 244v. 26 (quotn. vv. Indirect Object in Dat.; (2) sok- follows): Xwar. xiv suk- (vv. Dat.) "to thrust into” Qutb 159: Kom. XIV “to insert (something into something) sox(sic) CCG, Gr. 221 (quotn.): Kip. xin dassa min dassi'l-5ay' fi'l-gay! “to hide something in something! suk- Hou. 40, 5: xiv Suk- adxala İd. $9: xv suk- adxala aw hagà ato dassa Kav. o, 12; 77, 15; haşd Suk- Tuh. 3b. 2; 13b. 10. Dis. SGA saka: survives only(?) in NC Kzx. sağa (1) "an estuary'; (2) "the foot of a mountain'; (3) *the junction of the blade and hilt (of a knife, etc.)'. Xak. xr saka: saf/u'l-cabal “the foot of a mountain' Kaş. III 226. D safu: (sa:ğu:) if the basic meaning is “corn measure” a Dev. N.I. fr. sa:-, lit. “an instrument for counting'; if “a (milk) pail', a Dev. N. in -u: fr. sağ-, but the first is the likelier. Survives in SE Türki sağu 'a wooden pail” Shaw 118 (only). SW Osm. sa£u in the phr. sağu sağ- “to sing a dirge', noted as early as xiv, T TS I 590; 1I 780, is a different word of unknown origin. Uyğ. vii (then the lynx) [gap] sağuda yuğrut birle kelürüp 'brought (the... . of a dead lizard) mixed with yogurt in a pai U IV so, 122: Xak. xı sağu: al-mikyál “a corn measure! Kaş. III 225; a.o. sa:ğu: III 418 (kirklim): xiv. Rbj. sağu 'a corn measure; a drinking vessel; the pan of a pair of scales! R III 275 (quotns.). D soku: (sokğu:) Dev. N.I. fr. sok-, abbreviated. Survives as sokkı/sokku in some NE and NC languages in its original meaning and such extended meanings as 'a heavy blow; the sound of horses' hooves'. Xak. xı soku: al-. -minhüz “a mortar”, originally with -kk(bi'l-tagdid) but abbreviated like baku: and yaku: (q.v.; an Ar. parallel is added) R IJI 226: Çağ. xv ff. sokku: (spelt) “a large wooden mortar! (hàáwan) San. 245r. 16. Dis. V. SGA*saka:- See sakak, saka:l. sakı:- n.o.a.b.; there is no connection vv, NE Alt., Sag., Tel. sakt- “to wait for, watch', etc. R III 247, which seems to be a Den. V. fr: sak. (Uyğ. vii ff. Civ. sakığuluk TT 7 19 is an error for sakınğuluk): Xak. xi ol 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 850 
     
   
   
     806 DIS. V. menip kö:züme: sakr:dı: "he appeared faintly (taxayvala) before my eyes”: similarly one says sa:kığ sakı:dı: taxayyala”l-sarab (ha-Xannahu mü” "the mirage appeared faintly like water' Kaş, T// 268 (sakt:t, saki:ma:k). ?D sika:- perhaps a Den. V. fr. 81k the N./A. homophonous vv, S1K-, sec sığ/sık Preliminary note; 'to stroke, fondle'. Survives in SW Osm. sığa-/sıva- “to rub with the hands, smooth, massage' (for the meaning 'to roll up the sleeves! see sıtğa:-). Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. (if he thinks, 'let the Buddhas of the ten cardinal points come, let the divine favour of the Buddhas [gap] me”) töğömin sika:zunla:r anı üçün tógóden ükün be:lgörmiş * “let them touch my husked millet”. "Thereupon a heap of husked millet appeared” TT VIII K. 3: Xak. xı ol anın başın sika:dı: amarra yadahu "ala rá'sihi ta'attufa(n) “he passed his hand affectionately over his head” , also used when one has felt (ahassa) anything by passing the hand over it Kaş. 11] 269 (s1ka:r, s1ka:ma:k): xın(?) Tef. sığa-/fsıka- “to stroke' 270-1: Xwar. xiv sığa- “to caress, show kindness to (someone Acc.) Qutb 164: Osm. xiv ff, sığa- “to fondle, stroke'; in several texts T'T'S II 812; III 616. Sofr- “to be cold”, s.i.s.m.l. sv, ephonetic changes (80:-, Su:-, SOvU-, etc.); in others displaced by der. f.s. Uy. vri ff. Civ. soğı"to be cold” H II 24, 47: Xak. xi su:v sofirdi: “the water (etc.) was cold” (barada) Kaş. III 268 (soBrr, sofima:k): xiv Mu, barada (Mel., in error, 5arrada) sowt:- Mel. 25, 16; Rif. 10$: Xwar. xiv sovu- “to get cold” Qutb 156 (savu-): Kip. xiv sowu- barada İd. 60: xv barida (sic) mina”l-şita “to be cold in winter' (üşü-/) sowu- Tuh. 8a. ro: Osm. xvi Sovu- “to be cold” T'T'S I7 836. D sukr:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. 1 su:k in the sense of “index finger' Xak. xı ol anı: suki:di: nadağahu bi-işbi"ihi “he prodded him with his finger' Kaş. III 269 (sukrr, sukt:ma:k). Dis. SĞC D sakçı: N.Ag. fr. sak, 'guard, guardian'. S..a.m..g. Xak. xı KB kilic baldu boldi bu él sakçısı “the sword and spear have become the guardians of this realm' 2140; a.o. 2143: xıu(?) Tef. raqib *watchman, guardian" sake: 26:1: Çağ. xvff. sağçı mustahfiz “guard, etc.” San. 232r. 29; sakçı “vatchman (nigahbàn), guard' do. v. 20: Xvvar. xiv sakçı '*guard, sentry' Qutb 153. Mon. SÓD F sa:xt l.-w. fr. Pe. sáxt 'stirrup leather, horse armour, saddle and bridle ornaments', and other artifacts like “vessel, pot'. Survives in NC NKzx. sawit 'vessel, container; coat of mail, armour': NW Kar. 'T. sawut “vessel” R IV 430; Kaz. saut, sawit ditto R IV 237, 428. Oğuz xı (after üstem, q.v.) this. is what is called sa:xt in Oğuz Kaş. I 107: Çağ. xv ff. sawut zirih “coat of mail” San. 236v. 19: SGA (Xwar. xiv sağıtlığ 'armoured' Qutb ısı): Kom. xiv sağıt “tool, instrument, horsetrappings” CCG; Gr. 212. Dis. SĞD sığıt “veeping, lamentation'; prob. a quasionomatopocic. Survives only(?) in NE Koib., Sag. Tel, sığıt/sı:t R IV 6, 19, 655; Khak. srt. Türkü vii (if tears come to the eyes) tilda: (?so read) kópülte: sigit kelser 'and lamentation comes to (or from?) the tongue and the mind" 7 N ıı: Xak. xı sığıt al-buká' “a weeping, lamentation” Kaş, I 356; a.o. HI 275 (s1Bta:-): KB (wake up, greybeard, and prepare for death) bu kecmig künüpke Sifit kil ünün “cry out lamentations for your days that are past” 376; o.o. 932, 1233 (ağıt-), 1516: xiv. Müh. al-niyüha 'wailing for the dead" sığı:t Mel. 8, 7; Rif. 80: Kom. xiv *mourning' sığıt CCG; Gr. D suğut. Preliminary note. These ttco words are obviously different; 1 suğut is a Dev. N. fr. suğ-, q.v.; 2 suğut which lies between 1 suut and sığıt can hardly be a similar Dev. N. fr. suk-, though. semantically connected, since the sound change -K- xə -ğ- is unknown in Xak., but might be a similar Dev. N. fr. Sığ- misvocalized. D 1 suğut Hap. ley. sce above. Karluk xt suğut a/-aqif 'dricd curd cheese! Kaş, I 356. VUD 2 suğut Hap. leg.; syn. w. suktu:. Xak. xı suğut 'guts (al-am'd), which are stuffed (yrlişd) with spices (afáti/t), rice and meat, cooked and eaten' Kaş. 7 356. D suktu: Dev. N. in -tu: (phonetic variant of -drf-di:) fr. suk-. Survives only(?) in NW Kaz. sokta Budagou I 709 (Kaz. -0- corresponds to standard -u-). Xak. xi suktu: 'guts stuffed with liver (kabid), meat, and spices, cooked and eaten” Kaş. 7 416. D sağdıç Den. N. fr. 1 sa:ğ. Survives only (?) in 5W Az. sağdış, Osm. sağdıç “a bridegroom's best man; a bride's attendant”, "Türkü ix(?) the word occurs in 3 (or 4?) Talas inscriptions, E T'Y 11 134 ff. There are better transcriptions in Novye epigraficheskie nakhodki o Kirgizii, Frunze, 1962; otu:z oğlan sağdı:çları: "the thirty young men, the comrades(?)” Talas II 1 (pp. 23 f£); otu:z oğlan sağdıçı:ğ VIII 3 (p. 16); X 3 (p. 18), and prob. ZV (ET Y II 136), but there is no satisfactory text of this: Xak. xı sağdıç al-sadiq “a true friend”, sağdıç (síc?; the first vowel looks more like damma) ism diyáfa tadür bayna'l- qatım fi'l-sità' "ala”l-tartib “the name of an entertainment given by (each) member of a clan in turn during the winter! Kaş. I 455; 2.0. ITI 374, 7 (al-şadiq): Kip. xiv şağtuc “the comrade (rafig) of the bridegroom who waits on the people at a wedding feast” İd. 59. Dis. V. SGDD soğıt- Caus. f. of sofir:-; “to make cold, to chill'. S.i.m.m.l. vv, the same phonetic changes. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 851 
     
   
   
     DIS: SĞĞ 807 Uyğ. vri ff. Man. (just as cold water mixed with hot water) sogitir 'chills it” Wind. 49: Bud. kógüzlerin soğıtdaçı “cooling the breasts' (of pregnant women) USp. 102a. 33-4: Civ [gap]tam(?) mün birle soğıtıp icürser “if one cools , . . with broth and gives it to him to drink' H 7 r: (Xak.?) xiv Muh. barrada 'to cool, chill sawut- Mel. 64, 12; sowrt- Rif. 105; (a/-bdrida "a cold fever, ague' şa:vvutti: 163 only): Kip. xim öarrada'(-má' :a ğayrahu Sawut- (sic) Hou. 38, ıq: xv barrada şavvut- (sic) Kav. 77, 6; - (bürida üşümek,) burüda "being or becoming cold; chilling(?)” sovvutmak Tuh. 7a. 9-10). D sığta:- Den. V. fr. sığıt. Survives in most NE languages and SE Tar. as sıkta-, Khak. Sixta-. Türkü vii bunça: bodun kelipen sığta:mış yoğla:mış “all these people came, mourned, and celebrated the funeral feast” 7 E 4, H E s: Uyğ. viu ff. Man. siktayu(?) TT İT 16, 13: Bud. (then the king and the people) ığlayu sığtayu 'weeping and lamenting” PP go, 8; o.o. do. 61, 4, etc. (1 ulit-); U III 15, 5 (0) (açı6): 17, 3 adla:-); 17, 21; 42, 26, etc.: Xak. xı oğla:n sığta:dı: "the boy (etc.) wept' (sığta:r, siğta:ma:k), alternatively pronounced with -X- (wa bi'l-xà' luğa fihi), asi Ar. gumár[xumár and ğaddürlxattür, this (change) is permissible only in V.s and not in N.s; you may not say SIXIt for al-buka' instead of sığıt Kaş. I1] 275; a.o. III 355 (1 bap): xiv Muh. náha “to wail, lament” sıkta:- in Turkistan, sığta-/sıxta- in "our country” Mel. 8, 8, Rif. 8o; naha sıkta:- 31, 9; tea nadaba (same meaning) sıxta- rış: Caf. xvff. sıkta- (and also sıktal-) ba-mubálafa wa ifrüt (girya) kardan az rü-yi tangdili “to lament to an excessive extent because of grief” Sar. 254r. 23: Kip. xiv şıkda- (sic) nadaba 'alà'l-mayt “to bewail the dead” İd. 59; naha şikta- (vocalized sokuja-) Bul. 85r. D sığtat- Caus. f. of sığta:-, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı (under the cross-heading -D-, cf. köklet-) ol anı: sıxtattı: (sic) abkdhu "he made him weep'; sığdadtı: (sic) alternative form (luga) Kaş. H 327 (sıxtatu:r, sıxtatma:k), (in a grammatical para.) anı: sığtat abkihu II 360, ız: Çağ. xv ff. sığtat-(-tı) siydda ağlat- "to make (someone) vveep to excess” Vel, 287 (quotn.); sığtat- Caus. f.; ba-ifrát giryanidan ditto San. 254v. 6 (quotns.). D sağtur- Caus. f. of sai$-; s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı ol ko:y sagturdi: aA/aba'l-labina (MS. labin) “he had the milch-ewe milked' Kaş. II 185 (sağturur, sağturma:k). D sığtur- Caus. f. of sığ-, “to insert or fit (something into something else)”. S.i.s.m.l. as sığdır- or sıydır-. Cf. sığur-. Xak. xi ol bi:r ne:pni: bi:rke: sığturdi: “he inserted (adxala) one thing into another, and made it fit in it” (awsa'ahu fihi) Kaş. II 185 (sığturur, . sığturma:k).  D sıktur- Caus. f. of sık- , "to have something pressed, squeezed, etc.”. S.i.m.m.l.g. Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. in USp. 53 (3), 3-4 the right reading is prob. bor sıkturğalı kelip *who came to organize the wine-pressing': Xak. xı ol üzüm sıkturdı: "he gave orders for pressing (bi-"aşr) the grapes, and they were pressed' Kaş. 7I 186 (sıkturur, sıkturma:k): Kip. xv (another Suff. of the Caus. f. is -ür-, e.g... .) ista"şara sıktır- Tuh. ssa. 3. D soktur- Caus. f. of sok-, “to order to crush, grind', etc. Unlike sok- and suk-, soktur- and suktur- are separated in Kaş. S..m.m.lg. Xak. xı ol murc sokturdi: adaqqa'l-fulful “he had the pepper ground'; and also other things Kaş. II 187 (kadálika, “the same Aor. and Infin.' (as suktur- which precedes it)). D suktur- Caus. f. of suk-; 'to order to insert, thrust in”, etc. S.i.m.m.l.g., in SW Osm. soktur-; Tkm. sokdur-. Xak. xi ol bi:r ne:mni: bi: ke: sukturdi: “he ordered the insertion (bi-idxál) of one thing into another, and it was inserted” Kaş. II 186 (sukturur, sukturma:k): Kip. xv (another Suff. of the Caus. f. is -tur-, e.g. . . .) istalışd "to have (something) filled or stuffed” suktur- Tu. 552. 4. D sığtaş- Co-op. f. of sığta:- , “to lament, or wail, together'. S.i.s. NE 1 as stktag- /sıktas-. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (the two brothers) ığlaştı ötrü sığtaştılar “vept and lamented together' PP 53, r, Xak. xı kişi: kamuğ sıxtaşdı: “the people all vvept (5akd) together" (sıxtaşu:r, sıxtaşma:K), another form (luğa) with -£- sığtaşdı: Kaş. II 211. i Tris. SGD D sığıtçı: N.Ag. fr. sığıt *mourner'. N.o.a.b. "Türkü vir yoğçı: sığıtçı: "participants in the funeral feast and mourners” £ E 4, II Es; IN ır: (xiv. Muh.(?) nöyih ma nadib 'mourner, wailer' sığta:çı: Rif. 158 (only) seems to be an abbreviated N.Ag. fr. “sığta:ğ). D sağdıçlığ Hap. leg.?; P.N./A. fr. sağdıç. Uyğ. virff. Bud. kalti varxar sanlığ sağdıçlığ tavarın altımız yupladimiz erser “if vve have taken and used property belonging to a monastery (Sanskrit vihdra) or our freends" TT IV 6, 44. D sığıtsız Hap. leg.; Priv. N./A. fr. sığıt. Uyğ. viri ff. Man. (because he has established the doctrine of the Prophet) (gap s]uz əə boltimiz “ve have become free from ... and İamentation” M III 36, 6 (i). Dis. SGG ?D sakak (saka:k) obviously cognate to Saka:l, and prob. a Dev. N. fr. *saka:- in the sense of something hanging down, pendulous'; of human being, "double chin'; of a bovine, *dewlap', and the like. Survives in the same and some extended meanings in NE Kır.,. Kzx. sağak: NW Kk., Nog. (for “fish”s gills”) 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 852 
     
   
   
     808 sağak: SW Osm., Tkm. sakak. Xak. xr sakak a/-daqan "a double chin' Kaş. I7 286 (prov. misquoted, verbs following sakak and saka:l inverted); a.o. 7 282, 26 (same proverb correctly quoted, with saka:k): Çağ. xv ff. sakak zanaxdünla gardan möbaynı "thc part between the chin and the chest! Vel 276 (quotn.); sakağ gabgab, same mecaning San. 232v. 17 (same quotn.): Xwar. xiv sakak alması 'Adam's apple” Qu” 153; Kom. xiv “chin” sağak CC/; Gr.: Kip. xi (among 'parts of the body”) a/-ğababa "double chin' sağak Hou. 20, 7: Osm. xv fF. ğabğab sakak in several Ar. dicts. T'T'S 7 591; JI 781; /11 589; IV 653. D sakığ Dev. N. fr. sakı:- ; *mirage'; n.o.a.b. Sakim, q.v., and SW xx Anat. sağın “mirage” SDD 1178 are. cognate forms. Xak. xi usukmigka: sa:kığ (si) kamuğ su:v körünü:r “to the thirsty man every mirage (saráb) seems to be water' Kaş. 1 191,7; a.0. TII 268 (sakr-); n.m.e.: KB sakij ol körü barsa dunya işi “the affairs of this world, if you go to look at them, are a mirage” 1410; a.o. 3627. D sıkığ theoretically, as in the case of seviğ and sevük, there should be two Dev. N./A.s fr. sik-, a N. Ac. in -iğ, sıkığ 'pressure, constriction', and the like, and a Pass, N./À. in -uk “squcezed, constricted', and the like, the latter becoming S1Kik by: vocalic assimilation in some modern languages. "The early forms all seem to be Sikiğ, of modern forms NE Tel. sikik. 'narrow, compressed! R IV 608: and SC Uzb. sikik 'pressure; compressed, narrow, narrowed" represent Sikuk and SW Osm. Siki 'tight, severe; pressing necessity, trouble, straits', etc. sikif. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. erüs üküş alp sıkığ emğgekleriğ “many (Hend.) grievous constrictions and sufferings' Suv. 109, 4; a:o, U II 11, 7 (taniğ): (Xak.?) xiv. Muh.(?) al-garáb “vine(?)" sıkı:ğ Rif. 190 (only). VU?D sukak the male of the 1vik, q.v., which was almost certainly "female gazclle', so presumably male gazelle; etymologically explicable as Dev. N. fr. suk-, lit. 'thrusting (with its horns)'. N.o.a.b.; unconnected w. Osm. sokak “street” which is a corruption of Ar. zuqáq. Uyğ. vii Su. S 11 (yul): Xak. xt sukak a/-ravm mina l-zibi! "a male. white gazelle” Kaş, H1 287; arka:r sukak yomutti: ictama'a'l-urteá wa'l-'afr 'the female mountain sheep and gazelles have assembled” 7 214, 17: KB 5374 (11K): Caf. xv ff. sukağ (1) “a kind of gazelle (aAi?), but bigger than an (ordinary) gazelle, its horns are used to make knife handles and are smooth and without corrugations' ((2) 'a narrow street'; see above) San. 245r. 16: Oğuz xt sukak Afnàya 'ant'l-fárísi “a slang term for a Persian”, one says bu sukak ne: t€:r “vhat does this Persian say?” Kaş. II 287: Xwar. xiv sukak 'gazelle' Qutb 161. D sofik N./A.S. fr. soğı:- ; “cold”, S.i.a.m.l.g. Uyğ. vir fi. Civ, soğik suv “cold water' TT DIS. s VII I.5; sofik yelte: “in a cold wind' do. 14 —sovuk yaş “cold tears! H 1 85; 0.0. do. 135, 186: Xak. xi KB kayusi soğik étti "some of them prepared a cold (drink) 1060; a.o. 4623 (isit-): xin(?) Tef. sovuk(?) “cold” 257 (savuk, but unvocalized): xiv. Mu. al-bárid 'cold' sowui Mel. $3, 11; (tumuluğ, in margin) sa:vu:k Rif. 150; o.o. (Venter) 77, 10; 181; (day) 8o, 7; 185: Çağ. xvíff. sawug/ sawuk sard :a bürid “cold” San. 236v. 21: Xwar. sri sowuk “cold” Mii 57: xin(?) soğuk Og. 242: xivsavuk/sovuk Quth 156-9; savuk Nai. 3o, 16: Kom. xiv. “cold? the cold” sawok, suwuk CC/; Gr.: Kip. xin al-bard “the cold” sawuk (sic) Hou. 5, 9; al-bürid sawuk do. 27, 12: xiv Sowuk al-bard İd. sı, Bul. 3, 4: xv bard wa bürid sowuk Tuh. 7a. 10: Osm. xiv ff. sovuk (normal)/ savuk (less common) “cold”, c..a.p. TTS I 606, 637; 11 836; I11 605, 636; IV 668, 702. D sokğu: See soku:. Tris. SGG VUD sukaklığ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. sukak. Xak. xı sukaklığ ta:ğ “a mountain full of male gazelles” ("ifr snina'l-zibà') Kaş. I 498. D sogiklik A.N. (sometimes Conc. N.) fr. Sofi1k; s.i.s.m.İ, w. phonctic changes, Xak. xi soğiklik ne:) 'anvthing intended for (use in) the cold weather! (pmin'add li I-burnda) Kag. I sos: Çağ, xv ff. savuğluk sardr “the cold" San. 236v. 21 (quotn,): Xwar. xiv sovukluk "the cold” Quib. 159: Kip. xiv (in a list of discases, after 'cold fever, ague' ditretmek) al-bard “a cold'(?) sowukluk Bul, 9, 16: Osm. xiv ff. sovukluk “the herb purslane! in one xiv, and “the cold” in one xvi text T T'S 11 836; IV 703. Tris. V. SĞĞ D sogiklan- Re(l. Den. V. fr. sofik; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı çol? bu: yérig soğuklandı: (sic in MS.; -u-? error for -i-) "he reckoned that this place was cold” (börid) Kaş. II 266 (soğuklanu:r, soğuklanma:k): Osm. xvi sovuklan- (of a man) “to be cold, feel the cold'; in one text T T'S II 836. Dis. SGL D saka:l obviously cognate to saka:k, and prob. a Dev. N. fr. *saka:- in the sense of 'something hanging down'; “beard”. S.i.a.m.l.g. UyÉ£. viri ff. Bud. sakalı ertipü köp erti “his beard was very thick' U HI 30, 30; a.o. USp. 105b. 3 (yülit-): Civ. H / 144-5 (satun): Xak. XI (they fight) sakal tutup “grasping one another by the beard” (Il-lihà) Kaş. I 230, 5; saka:l oxsa:r “he fondles his beard' (and cuts his throat) 7 282, 26; 4 0.0. of saka:l; n.m.e.: KB bu kökçin sakal “this greybeard” 667; 1798; o.o. 1098 (bütür-); rroş (1 saç): xın(?) Tef. sakal 'beard' 259: xiv Muh. al-lihya saka:l Mel. 47, s, Rif. 140: Çağ. xv ff. sakal /ilya, in Pe. rig San. 232v. 17 (quotn.): Kom. xiv *beard' sakal CCI; Gr.: Kip. xii al-lihya sakal Hou. zo, 7: xiv şakal ditto 7d. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 853 
     
   
   
     DIS. v./SGL59: XV ditto Tul. 31b. 5; (şakallı: 'bearded' Kat. 59, 19-20). D sa:ğlığ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. 3 sa:ğ in its etymological meaning. Sağlığ in later texts is a Sec. f. of sağlık, Xak. xı sağlığ 'anything counted” (a/-ma"düd), originally sa:ğlığ Kaş. I 464. D sağlık Dev. A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. sağ-, “a milch animal”. Survives only(?) in SE Türki Shato 118, Jarring 263 (evvc”). In other modern languages the words for 'milch animal' are generally other Dev. N.s fr. sağ-, usually sağın, q.v., but in SW Az., Osm. the hybrid word sağmal vv. the Mong. Suff. -mal (Studies, p. 203) which can be traced back to XIII or xiv in Kip. (see below). Sağlık in other modern languages is an A.N. fr. 1 sa:f, *health, sobriety, and the like, first noted in Xwar. xiv Qutb 151 and Osm. xiv TT'S 11 779, etc. Uyğ. viu ff. Civ. iki sağlık koyn 'two milch evves” USp. 36, 2: Xak. xr sağlık a/-na'ca (MS. in error nac'a) al-halüb fi'l-asl 'an ewe, originally a milch animal” Kaş. I 471; 3 0.0. translated a/-na"ca I 520 and İİİ 102 (kosul-); 7 22 (tel-): xiv Rhg. sağlık ditto R IV 279 (quotn.); Muhk. al-haliiba sağlığ Mel. vo, 17; sağlık Rif. 172: Çağ. xv ff. sağlığ sagilur “milch” (goat) Vel. 276 (quotn.); sağlığ (1) düşidani wa sir dihanda ditto (same quotn.); ((2) “good health”, (3) 'sobriety") San. 232v. 2: Kip. xın a/-halüb müa”lğanam wa'l-ma"az "a milch ewe or goat” (şamğa:zlı:, ?muddle of sa&amp;mal; and) şa:ğlı:k Hou. 15, 10: xiv Saglik al-na'ca İd. 59 (also şağmal *milch ewe'; şağlık "good health” 58); ai-na'ca sağlık (MS. soflak) Bul. 7, 11: XV ma'ca sawluk Th. 36b. 1 (and 'afiya “good health” sawluk; Tkm. sağlık do. 24b. 4). D saklık A.N. fr. sak, “vakefulness, watchfulness; caution'; s.i.s.m.l, in NW. Xak. xı saklık ai-yagaza fi'l-umtir *watchfulness in affairs" Kaş, 1 471: KB (he presided over his kingdom) sakbk bile “vith watchfulness' 438; 0.0. 442 (oduğlukK), 1960, 2015, 2221, 2353. D sukluk A.N. fr. 1 su:k; “grced, envy, covetousness'. S.i.s.m.l. Uy. vin ff. Bud. yana iki közi sukluk [gap] "and his two eyes . ... greed” U III şo, 28: Xak. xi sukluk *greed (a/-hirş) for food and other things, and. covetousness” (a/-caşd"a) Kaş. I 471: KB (I collected the wealth of this world) suklukun *greedily' 1119; bu sukluk 1g ol “this greed is a disease! 2002; 2.0. 6092 (karağur-): xin(?) At. (put out of your mind) tavar suklukin *greed for wealth' 185: Kom. xiv 'covetousness, lust suklik/sukluk CCG.; Gr.: Kip. xı (under “diseases”) ai-tam' 'covetousness', the most grievous of diseases Su:kluk (MS. su:káluk) Hou. 33, 7. ş Dis. V. SĞLD sağıl- Pass. f. of sağ-, “to be milked'. S.i.s.m,l, w. phonetic changes, e.g. NC Kir, sa:l-. Xak, xı şü:t sağıldı: “the milk was , 809 milked" (liba) Kaş. II 124 (sağılu:r, sağılma:k), (for 17 163, 3 see suğul-): Çağ. xv ff. sağıl- (spelt) düşida sudan “to be milked' San. 231r. 25: Xwar. xiv sağıl- ditto Qutb 154 (sic in MS. not sakil- as in Index). D sikil- Pass. f. of sık-: "to be squeezed, compressed', etc., lit. or metaph. S.i.m.m.l., sometimes as sığıl-. Uyğ. viri ff: Bud. (if the common people are) sıkılmış tapılmış “constricted and bound' (by the agony of illness) Suv. $86, 14; sikildim “1 was depressed' (and felt ill and weak) Hüen-ts. 2071: Civ. beg er sikilur €ş bulmadin “the beg is depressed because he cannot find friends” TT I 24 (so read, not iş 'work'); yürek sıkılmak tin buzmak “heart disease and respiratory trouble H I 3-s: Xak. xı üzüm sikildi: “the grapes were pressed' ('wsira); also used of anything that has been compressed and squeezed ('usira ato duğita) Kaş. İl 125 (sıkılur, sıkılma:k): Çağ. xvff. sikil(spelt) afşurda şudan "to be squeezed, compressed' San. 254r. 21 (quotn.). D suğul- Pass. f. of suğ-, the meanings as given are more İntrans. than Pass., but the basic meaning seems to be “to be drained off”. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. kördi bir uluğ köl suvi suğulup alkınğalı uğramışın "he saw the water of a great lake sinking into the ground and beginning to disappear” Suv. 600, 5; a.o. 603, 9: Civ. (if you take the meat of two bones of goat and boil them in one cup of wine and one cup of water and drink the water) suğulmişta H 1 18; Arat translated "when it gets cold”, but soğı:- being Intrans. cannot form a Pass.; the meaning seems to be *when it has been drained off (the meat)'; a.o. H 1I ız, 82: Xak. xı su:v suğuldi: “the water sank” (or became scanty, nadaba), also used of milk when it has become scanty (baku'a) Kaş. II 124 (suğulu:r, suğulma:k), sü:t suğuldı: baku"a”l-laban HH 139, 145 163, 3 (MS. sağıldı:), suğulmış su:v “vater which has disappeared” (al-ğöbir) II 170, 12; bu: su:v ol tavra:k. suğulğa:n “this water always quickly sinks into the ground' (yağür), also used of a spring when it dries up (yağür) quickly 7 520: xın(?) At. 387 (közl), Tef. suğul- ditto 276: Kip. xv dabala "to dry up” (MS. dabala) şuvulTuh. 16a. 8. : D sokul- Pass. f. of sok-, “to be crushed', etc. S.i.s.m.l, Xak. tu:z sokuldi: “the salt was, crushed' (duqqa) Kaş. II 125 (inserted (later?) in the middle of the entry of suval-; no Aor. or Infin); oo. IJ 135, etc. (kakil-): Çağ. xvff. sokul- ((1) see sukul-); (2) gazida şudan "to be bitten” (by a poisonous animal). San. 245r. 12. p . : D sukul: Pass. f. of suk-; “to be thrust into” (something Dat.), etc. S.i.s.m.].; in SW Az. soxul-; Osm. sokul-. Xak. xr tava:r evke:” sukuldr “the 'goods were brought into” (udxila . . . fi) the house and hidden' (Zubina) , Kas. 1I 125(sukulur, sukulma:k): Gag. xv ff. Sukul- (r) fur raftan “to go down, descend”,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 854 
     
   
   
     So and the like Sar. 245r. 12 (quotn.; (2) sokulfollows). D sakla:- Den. V. fr. sak; 'to watch over guard, protect'. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. some extended meanings like SW Osm. “to conceal”, Xak. xı KB sakış birle saklar kişi iş küdüg “a man watches over his affairs with (careful) calculation' 2220: xiv Mil. harasa “to guard' sakla- Mel. 25, 7; Rif. 107 (mis-spelt sak-), al-harása saklamak 36, 3; Rif. 121; hafiza “to protect', in margin sakla- Rif. roy (and sce Sakin-): Çağ. xv ff. saxla- (sic) nigah düştan “to watch! Sam. 230r. 3 (quotn.): Xwar. xırt sakla- “to protect” "AF 28: xin(?) sakla- ditto, and “to comply with (an order)” Oğ. 128, 18o: xiv sakla- "to protect; to keep (an oath)' Qutb 153; MN 425; Nahc. 237, 12: Kom. xiv “to guard” sakla- CCI; Gr.: Kip. xın harasa toa hafiza sakla:- Hou. 35, 3: XIV şakla- ditto; another word for hafiza is aşra- (N.B. Mong. l.-w.] Jd. so: xv harasa mina'l-harása bi-ma'nà'l-hifz sakla-; you can also use it in the sense of “to beware of” (a/-ihtirax), that is to beware of someone or something to avoid being dirtied by them; and you can use it in the sense of 'to conceal” (al-ixfá'), when you use it to tell someone to conceal an object from the sight of others, ora statement from the ears of others; there is another, more usual, word for “to conceal, yaşır- Kav. 74, 12; harasa sakla- Tuh. 13b. 7; &amp;.0. do. 14b. 9 (kizle:-): Osm. xiv ff. Sakla- (occasionally, xiv, saxla-) (r) “to guard, protect'; (2) “to comply with' (laws, etc.); c.La.p. TTS II 782; III 590; IV 654. VU suflt- Hap. leg, but cf. sujflt-; semantically close to suk- but morphologically incompatible. Xak. xı er €?elig) koyna: sugli:di: “the man thrust his hand (adxala . . . yadahu) into his bosom to search for something” Kaş. III 297 (suğlur, suğlima:k). VUD suğlit- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of suğli:-. Xak. xı ol apar koypa: elig suğlitti: “he ordered him to thrust (adxala) his hand into his bosom to search for something! Kaş. II 346 (suğlitu:r, su£litma:k). D saklan- Refl. f. of sakla:-; s.i.s.m.l. vv. Refl. or Pass. meaning, 'to protect oneself; to be protected'. Türkü vin ff. Man. özlerin saklanu 'protecting themselves' M 271 38, 5 (): UyB. vurff. Man.-A M III o, 7-8 (udik): Bud. [gap] saklanu körgil “see that you protect yourself' TT X 426; a.o. PP 17, 1-2 (udik): Civ. saklanğu “you must beware' TT VII 17, 2 etc.; o.o. TT I 195-6 (turus), 214: Xak. xı ol mendin saklandt hagiza "anni tva tawaqqá “he bewared of me and protected himself? Kaş. 21 247 (saklanu:r, saklanma:k): KB (oh king!) hacıblarka saklanğu ol “you must keep watch on your ministers! 2503; 0.0. 443, etc. (osa:l), 1457: xır()) Tef. saklan- “to protect oneself! Tef. 261: Xiv Muh. salima tea nacd "to be safe, to be saved' sakla:n- Mel. 27, 7; saklan- Rif. ılo: Xwar, xiv saklan- “to protect oneself? DIS. V. SGLQutb 153: Kom. xiv “to beware! saklanCCI; Gr.: Kip. xv taharrasa “to guard oneself' (sakin-/) saklan- Tuh. 10a. 13. D su:klan- Rcefl. Den. V. fr. 1 su:k “to be greedy; to covet (something Dat.)', and thc like. Survives as suktan- in NC Kir., Kzx., and suklan- in SC Uzb. and NW. Uyf. vin ff. Bud. Sanskrit nányegám sprhako bhavet "you must not covet the property of others” nem adınlarnın buluncipa: su:klanda:çı bolBuluk ermez TT VIII E.10; o.o. do, E.io, USp. 94, 2: Xak. xi KB közi tok kerek nepke suklanmasa 'you must be satisficd and not covet things” 2200; özün suklanursen ajun térgeli “you yourself are greedy to collect (the goods of) this world' (but death is greedy to collect you) 3619: Kom. xiv “to covet' suxlan- CCG; Gr. 225 (quotn.): Ktp. xv iştaha ditto suklan- Tu. sb. 3. D suklun- Refi. f. of sukul-, with an Intrans. meaning, 'to fall, or plunge (into something Dat.)'. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Man. (you have shown the bridge of true doctrine) küvençliğ suv köznekine suklunmışlarka “to those who have plunged into the reflection on (the surface of) the water of pride! 77777 ss: Xak. xt anip ada:kı: ü:tke: suklundi: "his foot went into (daxala fi) a hole" , also used of anything that goes into something and gets stuck in it (fstalıRama fihi) Kaş. I1 247 (suklunu:r, suklunma:k): Osm. xv, xvi soklun- (sic in Osm.) “to push one's way into (something)', with the implication that it is not one's business to; in two texts TTS II 831; III 698. D saklas- Recip. f. of sakla:-; s.is.m.l. Xak. xi bodu:n kamuğ saklaşdı: "the people all protected themselves from (taháfaza . min) one another” Kaş. 7] 216 (saklaşu:r, saklaşma:k): Xvvar. xıv saklaş- “to take precautions against onc another” Qutb 153. D siklis- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of sıktl-, Xak. xı bodu:n barça: siklisdi: “he people (etc.) crowded together (izdahama) until the place was congested' (dáqa); also used of grapes when they are pressed (in'agarat) Kaş. İl 216 (sıklışu:r, sikligma:k). D sukluş- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of sukul-. Xak. xı suklusdi: ne: idramacca'l-say' “the thing was jammed in”? that is when one thing enters (daxala) another and is fixed in it (yustahkim fihi), as for example when the tang of a sword blade enters the handle and is fastened in it Kaş. I] 216 (sukluşu:r, sukluşma:k). Tris. SĞL D sakalduruk N.I. fr. sakal; survives in SE xix Türki Saro 119 (only) for “the throat strap of a headstall'. Xak. xı sakalduruk “a strap (xayt) covered svith brocade and fixed to a hat (qalánsuwa), so that the hat may be fastened below the chin and does not fall off” Kaş. I 530: Çağ. xv ff. sakalduruk (sic?; MS. sakaldurluk) "a string ('aqd) of pearls that  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 855 
     
   
   
     DIS women put over their heads so that it hangs below the chin like a beard' Sar. 232v. t9. Tris. V. SGLD sağu:la:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. sau: Xak. xi er buğdaiy sağu:la:dı: “the man measured (kd/a) the wheat! (etc.) Kaş. İİİ 325 (sağu:la:r, sa&amp;u:la:ma:k). D sakalduruklan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. sakalduruk ; quoted only as a grammatical example. Xak. xı er sakalduruklandı: "the . man fastened the strap (xayf) of his hat” Kaş. III 205, 14; n.m.e. D sağlıklan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. sağlık. Xak. xı er sağlıklandı: “the man owned (milch) ewes' (ni'ac) Kaş. İl 275 (sağlıklanu:r, sağlıklanma:k). D saklantur- Caus. f. of saklan- , “to order (someone) to protect himself, be watchful', and the like. S.i.s.m.l. in NW. Uyğ. vii ff. Man.-A M I ış, 4-5 (odğur-). Dis. SM D sağım N.S.A. fr. sağ-, lit. “a single act of milking', hence “the yield of one milking'. S.i.m.m.l.g. in this sense vv. some phonetic changes, e.g. NC Kir. sa:m, Kzx. sawim: NW Kumyk savum; Nog. savim: SW Az., Osm., Tkm. sağım. See sakım. Xak. xi bi:r sağım sü:t qadr halba min laban the quantity of milk at one milking” Kaş. I 397: Xwar. xiv sağım “a draught of milk” Qut 151. D sakim N.S.A. fr. sakt:- ; “a (single) mirage". Survives in NC Kir. sakim/zakim; Kzx.sağım: NW Kk., Kaz sağım (Kumyk, Nog. sağın, Tkm. salfim) Xak. xi KB (this world) sakim ol 'is a mirage! (if you go to see it, it continues to be visible, but if you try to grasp it it goes away and vanishes) 4759: Kip. xır al-sarüb 'mirage' sa:ğım Tou. $, 20: xv ditto Tu. 8şb. 11. . D sokim, sukim. Preliminary note. 77e N.S.A. of sok- is first noted in Çağ. XV ff. sokum 'slaughter cattle! San. 245r. 24, and survives in this meaning in SE Türki sokum: NC Kr. soğum, Kzx. sofum: NW Kk. soğum, Nog. soğım. It is noted in Kip. Hou. 15, 19; Bul. 7, 14; Tuh. 315.8. The N.S.A. of suk- is noted in Kaş. but survives only(?) in SW Osm. ı D sukim N.S.A. fr. suk- ; lit. "a single act of insertion; in the phr. in Kaş. apparently “(the whistle) in which (the arrow shaft) is inserted". Survives in SW Osm. sokum 'the act of insertion; the point of insertion' (e.g. the point at which a horse's tail joins the body). Xak. xı sukim the word for a piece of wood (xagaba) of which the interior is hollowed out; it is shaped in the form of a cone (al- sganibara) and pierced on three sides, and mounted on an arrow shaft; it is a whistle' (al-sufári); “the -SĞN:  811 planet Mars' is called bakir sukim ('copper whistle") after it Kaş. 7 397; o.o. of bakir sukim I 360 (bakir; MS. sukum); IJI 4o (yultuz): (KB tópüdin savilmís bakır sukın-a (sic) “Mars had descended from the zenith” 4888: Kip. xiv see sağın). D sıkma:n Dev. N. fr. sık-, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı Sikma:n “the season of pressing (atodrr "işir) the grapes in the autumn” Kaş. I 444: xiv. Muh. (9) (under 'vintners' implements") al-mi şara ^wine-press' Sikma:n Rif, 162 (only). Dis. SĞN D sağın Intrans./Pass. Dev. N. fr. SaÉ-; syn. vr, sağlık. Survives in NC Kir. san, Kzx. sawin: SC Uzb. soğın: NW Kk. sawin; Kaz. savın. Xak. (xı see sağınlığ) xiv Muh. (under “camels”) a/-halüba 'milch — camel sa:ğın Mel. yo, 11; Rif. 172 (MS. sa:ğır): Çağ. xv ff. sağın südi sağılur hoyun "a milch ewe' Vel. 276 (quotns.), sağın güsfand-i şirdür ditto Sas. 232v. 8: (Kip. xi see sı:ğun: xiv şağan a/-naşl 'arrow'; may be a muddle of sukim /d. 59). sağun n.o.a.b., perhaps a title, possibly foreign, rather than a N. Xak. xı sağun /aqağ ahabira Qarluq “a title of Karluk chiefs”, and a Turkish physician (a/-fabib) is called ata: sağun Kaş. I 403: KB (if a melon (kağun) has no flavour, you should throvv it out) ay sağun şrır (this, rhyming w. kağun, is obviously right, two MSS. have sığun). sığan Hap. leg. Xak. xı sığan saç al-şa"ru”l-sabit "straight lank hair” Kaş. I 403. sı:ğun "the male maral deer”, clearly identified as such by the phr. sığun muyğak “male and female maral deer”. There are some odd occurrences vv. a rounded vowel in the first syllable. Survives in NE Alt., Leb. Tel. sığın, Koib., Sag., Şor, Khak., 'Tuv. sın “maral deer” and in SW, where there are no maral deer, Az., Osm. sığın “elk” , "Tkm. su:ğun 'stag'. Türkü viri tağda: sığu:n [gap] “the maral deer in the mountains .. . "İT W ş: vir ff. toku:z arl(?) sığun keyi:k men 'I am a male maral deer with nine?' (corrupt?) IrkB 6o: Uyğ- vii ff. Man.-A M I 35, 5-7 (éder-); Bud. the Hinayana and Mahayana ('Small and 'Grest Vehicle') sects are metaph. described as koyn tartar sığun tartar kanlı “the vehicle drawn by a sheep or a maral deer", and yürüp ud tartar uluğ kanlı “the great vehicle drawn by a white ox” Hüen-ts. 2119-21: Civ. suğun (sic) 1t kulkakipa kelser “if (the lot) falls on the maral deer or dog's ear” T T VII 29, 4; 0.0. H I ss (ögk-): II 22, 24: Xak. x1 sr fun al-ayyil “deer” (a non-specific word for several species): sr:ğun oti: “a cultivated plant (nabt); its root is in the shape of a human being; it is used to treat sexual impotence'; its Pe..name is isCarang (“mandragora”): there are male and female (plants), the male (used to treat) males, and the female females; Sı:ğun (VU) samur the name of the place after which Buğra: Xa:n RU MM — s—— e ia 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 856 
     
   
   
      812 was named Kaş. 7 409: KB sığun muyğak "the maral stag and doe” (frolic in the spring) 79) &amp;.0. 5374; biliğsiz sığun sen ağınap yor-a "you are an ignorant maral deer, go and roll on your back' 6613 (a dubious verse, prob. spurious): xiv Muh.(?) al-ayyil sı:ğın Mel. 72, 11 (in one MS): Çağ. xv ff. suğun (sic) 'a kind of wild bovine' (gáte-i. khi), called in Pe. gatcazn 'elk'(?; a non-specific term like al-ayyil) San. 244v. 25; suyğun gatoazn, usually the male, but also the female; the male is also called buğu and the female maral (Mong. l.-w.s for 'stag' and 'doe') do. 249v. 1: Xwar. xiv sığun 'stag'(?) Qutb 164: Kip. xri (among 'wild animals") a/-aril (error for al-ayyıl?) şığın (vocalized şağ.n, baqaru'l-wahg "wild bovine' ... keyik) Hou. 11, 7: xiv şığın 5aqaru”l-vahş İd. $8; şuvvun al-ayyil; suwun keyik baqgaru'l-wahs 61; a.o. do. 33 (bakir); bagaru'l-wahsg şavvan (sic, in error) keyik Bul. ro, 8; al-ayyil şığın do. 10, 14: xv baqaru'l-svahg S1y1n (in margin şığın) Tu. 7b. 6 (there is obvious confusion between sı:ğun and şığır here, but all these entries prob. belong here): Osm. xivff. sığın in several texts, mostly Pe. and Ar. dicts. translating garcazn, gáw-i wahgi, and the like TTS I 618; H 813; İTİ 616; İV 680. so:ğun (so:ğon) 'onion'. An early l-w. in Monyg., vv. Mong. Suff. -£ita as so”oyğina (xiv, Studies, P- 231) / soggina (Kow. 1386, Haltod 341). S.i.a.m.l.g. except SE, NC, usually as soğan, NE Alt., Tel. soğono, in SE, NC and some other languages displaced by Pe. biydz. Cf. osğun, kuckundr. Uy. vim ff. Civ. soğunnı bışurup “boil an onion and . H 1 128; 0.0.: do. 144— 5 (satun); II 16, 11: Xak. xi "so:ğun al-başal “onion”, with either fatha or damma on the ğayr, so:ğun yılan al-huffat mina”l-hayyüt "a large harmless snake" Kaş. I 409: xtv Mut. al-başal soğam Mel. 78, 3; Rif. i8r: Çağ. xv ff. soğan piyás, in Ar. başal San, 244v. 24: Kom. xiv 'onion' soğan CCI; Gr.: Kap. xii al-bagal (ya:wa: and more commonly) şo:ğan How. S, r5: xiv. şoğan ditto İd. 59; Bul. 8, 7: xv ditto Ke, 63, 14 (S0:ğa:n), Tu, 7b. rz. S suğun See sı:ğun, D sukin. See sukim, D sakınç (sa:kınç) N.Ac. fr. sakin-; originally 'thought', hence “deep, anxious thought; anxiety', and the like, survives in SC Uzb. soğinç: NW Kk., Nog. sağınış, Kumyk sağınç “anxiety”: SW Tkm. sa:ğınç 'uncertainty; hesitation'; concepts expressed in some other languages by other der. f.'s of sakın-. Türkü vr ff. Man. Chas. I 18-19 (2 0:8); neçe yavlak sakınç sakinürbiz 'whatever evil thoughts we think' Chuas. 293-4; Uyğ. virr ff. Man.-À (within a man's body there are many) küclükler kópüller biligler Sakinclar 'strengths, mental activities, knowledges, and thoughts! M TE 9, 14—15 (ii); in do. 12, 2 (i) ff. is an enumeration of the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th sakınç: Man. TT II 17, 68-9  D1S.  SGN (bensiz): Bud. sakınç is common; (r) normallv, “thought”, e.g. Sanskrit cittakalpa “vay of thinking' sa:kınç TT VIII C.19; samkalpá "thoughts” sa:kınçlar do. E.ə? a.o. do. H.3; mça tép sakınç sakıntı “he thought as follows! PP 45, 1-2; 56, 6, yek sakinci “a diabolical thought” do. 56, s, 0.0. U III 14, 13 (i) (sakınç sakinu); 7T X passim, etc.; (2) *meditation TT V ro, 87 (alanadtur-), (3) sakınç translating the Bud. technical term samjfià 'awareness, consciousness” TT VI 160 (see p. 66, note 157); (4) küsüş sakinc seems to mean 'wishes and aspirations! TT X şor, U IV 14,135: Civ. negü sakınç sakinsarsen bütmez 'whatever ideas you have fail to come to fruition) TT VII 28, 4; ooo. TT I 110 (tétrü), etc.: Xak. xi sakinc al-hamm 'anxiety, concern' Kaş, İİİ 374; four o.o. translated. al-hamm or al-huzn “grief”: KB Éariblik sakinci sarığ kildi ep “the worry of being a stranger made his cheeks yellow' 498; sakınç usually occurs in antithesis to sevinc “plcasurc”, e.g. 117 (1 kutur-); o.o. 913, 1087, 3549: xın(?) At. (do not spend too much time on hope (amal), what I call "hope" is uzun sanmak 'meditating for a long time") uzun sanma saking üküs kil "amal "do not spend a long time in meditation, concentrate on action” 296; a.o. 426 (kadöu:): Tef. sakınç “thought, thoughts” 259: Çağ. xv ff. (sakinma ayma şanma 'remembering, thinking"); sağınç (sc) also occurs with this meaning Vel. 275 (quotn.); sağınç (spelt) taşazıtonr tva. andiga 1a xayál meditation, anxiety, reflection' Sar. 232v. 9 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv sakınç “thought” Qutb 154: Kom. xiv "thought" sağınç CCI, CCG; Gr.: Osm. xiv and xv sağınç (src) (1) “thought”, (2) 'anxiety'; (3) perhaps “hope, aspiration! in five texts T T.S 1 587; 71 778; III 585; IV 650. Dis. V. SGND sağın- Preliminary note. 77e -k- of sakinwas votced at an unusually early. period, cf. sakınç. Tus may have been due to the fact that the first vorvel svas originally long, cf. the spellings of saking in 'I'T VIII. Thus fr. XI there were two V.s sağın-. In Kaş, 1 sağınis listed correctly between süsün- and soğun-, 2 sağın- is listed immediately before sakin-, three. other V.s intervening between the two. Kaş.”s note shows that he was aware of the unusual status of 2 sağın-. D 1 sağın- Refl. f. of sağ-, survives only(?) in SW Osm. sağın- “to yield milk, or, metaph., moisture" R IV 265 (but few other authorities) ; "Tkm. sağın- “to milk for oneself'. Xak. xt er koyun sağındı: “the man pretended to milk his sheep' Kaş. // ısz (sağınu:r, sağınma:k). D 2 sağın- See sakın-. D sakın- (sa:kın-) Refl. f. of sa:k- ; originally simply “to think”, this meaning s.i.s.m.l., but in most it has come to mean “to think longingİy” about (something); to desire”, or “to think  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 857 
     
   
   
                   | | : ! | |    anxiously about something, to be.worried', and the like. In SW Osm. sakin- means 'to take care of oneself, be cautious, be on one's guard against" and (Trans.) “to protect'. These are meanings appropriate to sakla-, saklan- and seem to be due to a folk etymology, in Tkm. sü:ğın- (sic) means:“to stop and think”. Other modern forms are NE sağın-: SE Türki sağın-, segin-: NC sağın- SC Uzb. soğin-: NW safin-. More or less syn. vv ö:-, q.v. Türkü vri sakın- “to think”, about a dozen occurrences, e.g. sakıntım “1 thought” (if you try to distinguish between a lean and a fat ox from a distance, you cannot tell which is which) ınça sakıntım “that is what I thought” T 5-6: vr ff. (a woman put down her cup and bowl and went away) yana: edfü:ti: sakı:nmi:ş “then she stopped and thought thoroughly! (what am I doing?) IrkB 42; o.o. do. 58; Toy. III 1v. 1 (ETY II 158), etc.: Man. Chuas. 293-4 (sakınç): Uyğ. viii üç karluk yavlak sakınıp teze: bardı: “the "Three Harluk (tribes) had evil thoughts and deserted me” Su. N ır: viri ff. Man.-A M T 16, ig (oyun): 1/1 12, 7-9 (iii) (6:-): Man. TT HI 137 (etóz): Bud. sakin- “to think” is common in such phr. as ınça tép sakıntı “he thought as follovvs” PP ro, 7-8: sakınç sakindo. 45, 1-2; 56, 6; U III 14, 13 (i) (sakinc) is syn., vv. the Ger. -ğalı/- eli it means rather “to plan, intend”, e.g. ölürgğeli . . . sakınsar “if thev plan to kill” Kuan. 27; Sanskrit na cimtayatı "he does not think" ner sa:kınma:sar TT VIII D.16; sa:kında:çı “thinker” do. C.16; o.o. U II 9, 1 and 8o, 61 (6:-); TT V 22, zı (adırt), USp. 97, 25 (amru:); Hüen-ts. 1896 (kolu:1a:-): Civ. ayığ sakinBugilar "those who think, or plan, evil” TT I 141; a.o. do. 19 (see Ssakr:-); sakınmış kergek “one must think about, form a mental picture of' (something) do. VII 15, 3 ff.; o.o. of sakin-, sakınç sakin- (28, 4 sakınç), and -ğalı sakın- in VII: Xak. xı ol mapa: edgü: sağındı: (sic) zanna bi xayr wa admarra (sic) daliha fi nafsihi “he thought well of me but concealed the fact” (sağınu:r, sağınma:k), and one says er mendin sakındı: hağara "anni "he was wary of me”, wa'l-gàf fi hadü aşlab mina'l-awwal “the velar sound in this is harder (more plosive) than in the first” Kaş. I1 153 (sakınu:r, sakinma:k); sakinma:sa: utsuka:r “if one does not think ( yatafakkar, at the beginning of something) one is defeated” 7 242, 17, barmış ne:niğ sakınma: “do not worry (£ahtamm) about wealth that is lost” 777 361, 3; three o.o. translated zanna or tafakkara: KB kutadmış kişi kör sakınmış kerek “a fortunate man must be thoughtful” 726; (speak your words well and) idi saknu “after deep thought” roo8; o.o. 517, 1112, 4334 (6:-): xin(?) Az, sakin “think carefully” 173, etc.; a.o. 367 (ét-); Tef. sakın- “to think; to think carefully, be cautious' 259: xiv Muh. admara sa:ğın- Mel. 23, 1; (sa:xlaRif. 103); fahhara “to think, ponder' sa:ğın3o, 1 (PU bü:kşür- 113); zanna sa:ğın- 28, 11; II2; al-zann Sa:jinmak 37, 14; 124 (mis-spelt £a/ğınmak): Çağ. xv ff. sağınDIS. V. SGN 813 (spelt) (1) yád kardan 'to remember, have in mind”, (2) tasawwur hardan “to meditate, imagine” , (3) hadar kardan “to be vvary” San. 231v. 16 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv sağın- “to deem (to be)” "A/ 48: xiv sakın- “to think; to deem; to be vvary” Qutb 154: Kom. xiv “to think (of); to meditate', etc. sağın- CCI, CCG; Gr. 211 (quotns.): Kip. xit. hadara sakın- Hou. 34, 19: xiv Şağın- (vocalized şağan-) hasaba “to count, reckon' İd. 58: xv in 'a para. on the Turkish equivalents of zanna as an İntrans. V., fakara voa tafakkara şağın(MS. şağan-) . . . zanna tea hasaba wa xüla (to imagine, conceive") şa:ğın- (MS. şa:ğanva tap-) all other meanings of zanna şa:ğın(sic) Kav. 29, $ ff; taharrasa "to be wary' sakin-Tuh. 10a. 13; a.o. 14b. 9 (kizle:- cf. sakla:-): Osm. xv sakın- “to protect' in one text 7 7 IV 654: xv1 “to keep one's distance'; in one text / 592: sağın- “to think” TT 778: xvirI sakın- in Rümi hadar hardan San. 232v. 14. (quotn.) D sığın- Refl. f. of sığ-, usually “to take refuge in or with (some place, someone, Dat.); to trust, rely on (someone Dat.)'. Survives in NC Kır., Kzx. sıyın-: SC Uzb. siğin-: NW Kk, Kumyk sıyın-: SW Az., Osm., Tkm. sığın-. NE Alt., Tel. sığın- “to shrink' is a Sec. f. of sıkın-, Refl. f. of sık-. Uyğ. vini ff. Bud. (the hero Arjuna . . .) bilekin sığanıp 'interlacing his forearms' U 7/7 25, 15-16 (this should prob. be read sikanip (s1ikinip) 'pressing together"); (the maral deer . . .) yérke yapşınu sığındılar 'sought safety pressing themselves against the ground” IV 34, 69: Xak. xı keyik turuğka: (MS. turağha:) sığındı: iltacá'l-wahg ilà'l -ma'qil the wild animal took refuge in the place of shelter'; also used of anything that has taken shelter (lada) in something else; hence one says men teprí:ke: sığınu:rmen a'üd bi'làh 'I ask God for protection" Kaş. II 152 (sığınu:r, Sifinma:k); a.o. 7] 160, 26: KB sapar ok sığındım “I have asked "Thee for protection" 29; 0.0. 451 (Kö:şik), 2158, 3799, 5125: xir(?) Tef. sığın- "to ask (God) for protection; to take shelter' 258 (sağın-), 270: xiv Muh. ihtanna “to hide oneself? şığın- Mel. 23, 5; Rif. 104; al-iktinán sığınmak 35, 16; ızı: Çağ. xv ff. sığın- (1) guncida şudan “to be contained in (something); (2) dáxil tva multaci sudan.'to surrender, take refuge' San. 253v. 7À (quotns.): Xwar. xii sığın- “to rely on” “AZ 28 (and sığındır- “to cause to seek refuge” 57): xıv ditto Qutb 151: Kom. xiv. sigin/ sıyın- “to take refuge with" CCG; Gr.: Kip. xır i/tacà mina'l-ilticà şığın- Hou. 37, 8; lada mina'l-malád vwa'l-ilticà sığın- do. 43, 16: xv iltacá sıyın- (in margin sığın-) Tuh. $a. 12; ittasa"a “to be expanded, filled” (yayın-/) “şıyın- do. sb. 3; ta”assafa "to regret, be sorry” Siyin- do. 9b. 9 (sic, dubious); rakana ("to rely on”), za iltacá wa istanada (to have recourse to”) sıyın- (in margin sığın-) do. 17b. 8; láda tva iltacd sıyın- do. 39a. 3. VUD so£un- (soğın-)/suğun- Hap. leg.; in its first meaning Refl. f, of soğı:- ; the meaning     
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 858 
     
   
   
     814 of the Ar. translation of the second phr. is disputed, but a Refl. f. of suğ- in the sense of “to drain oneself off” would suit it. Xak. xı er soğundı: “the man became cold” (tabarrada); and one says er suğundiı: istatába'l-racul mina'l-batrel "the man relieved himself of his urine' (etc.) Kaş. II 152 (soBunu:r, soğunma:k). VUD sokun.- this V. is vocalized both sıkınand sokun- in Kaş. but the Uyg. phr. points clearly to the latter; in the absence of an Indirect Obj. it can be taken as sokunrather than sukun- with the basic meaning of 'to rub oneself hard' or the like, but this is not wholly satisfactory. SW Osm. xv to xvii sokun- “to put (an ornament) on (one's head); to plant (e.g. rose trees) in (the ground) represents an earlier *sukun-. UYyğ. viri ff. Civ. tıprak bıçğu saç sokunğu künler “days for cutting the nails and washing the hair” TT VII 32, 19-20; küskü künde sokunsar bay bolur 'if a man washes it on a Mouse Day, he becomes rich” do. 33, 2-3; a.o.o.: Üç xı ura:ğut başın sokundi: igtasalati'l-mara'a “the woman washed herself” (should be “her head”), this is a word (luğa, used) in Uc Kaş. II 153 (sokunu:r, sokunma:k). Tris. SĞN PUD soğançığ pec. to Uyğ. Bud. where it is normally an epithet of nom “doctrine” and translates Chinese miao 'excellent, wonderful, lovely! (Giles 7,857), see PP, p. 249, note 2. Prima facie a Dev. (rather than a Den.) N./A. in -çığ, but as it has no plausible etymology it may be a l-w. Kom. xiv “heel” sowuncak CCI, Gr., which survives in NW Kar. T. soğançıx R IV 529, is obviously a different word. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. soğançığ bar atlığ ertini teg “like the lovely jewel called bara (Sanskrit) TT V 22, 31; soğançığ ön körk "lovely form” (Sanskrit riba) Suv. 164, 20; a.o. Kuan. 172; soğançığ ünlüg “vith a lovely voice" do. 203; with nom PP 46, 4 (tatığlığ), TT VI 25; Hüen-ts. 160, etc. D sakınçlığ (sa:kınçlığ) P.N./A. fr. sakınç, “having . . . thoughts'. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. Sanskrit pdpiyam “vicked” a:yığ sa:kinchà TT VIII G.34; alku tinliBlarka edğü sakınçlığ *with kindly thoughts for all creatures! USp. 43, 12-13; sakinçliğ “anxious” U II zo, 4 (ata): Xwar. xiv sakınçlığ “thoughtful” Quib 154. D sakınçsız (sa:kincsiz) Priv. N./A. fr. sakınç: n.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Man. sakincsiz süzük köpüllüğ “vith a pure mind, free from (anxious) thoughts” TT LX 9s: Xak. xı KB (associate freely with the farmers and) boğuzdın sipar sen sakınçsız tiril “and so far as your throat (i.e. food needs) is concerned live free from care” 440r. D sakinuk (sa:kınuk) Intrans. Dev. N./A. fr. sakın-, 'thoughtful; a profound thinker; cautious', and the like. N.o.a.b. Xak. x1 KB sakinuk is fairly common as an epithet of DIS. V. SGNcommendation; (listen to the words of) sakinuk kisi 'the thoughtful man' (the thoughtful man is a lcader of men) 1063; o.o. 58 (té:tik), 1266, 1442, 2186 (2 uruğluğ): xır(?) Tef. taqi 'God-fearing' sakinuk 259: (X war. xiv saknukluk caution; thoughtfulness” Qutb 153): Osm. xiv (God accepts the sacrifices of) sakiniklardan ve eyülerden 'the pious and good” TT'S I soz. ?D sağnağu: Hap. leg.; al-qar' means both 'a gourd' and 'a pustule'; either might be meant here. Prima facie a Dev. N. of the same form as karnağu:, q.v., which it follows, but with no obvious ctymological connections. Xak. xi sağnağu: a/-qar"u”l-yabis ('dry') Kaş. 1 491. D sağınlığ Hap. leg.: P.N./A. fr. sağın. Xak. xı sağınlığ er “a man who owns milch animals' (zale”ib) Kaş. I 499. D soğunluğ P.N./A. fr. so:Bun; survives in SW Osm. soğanlı, Xak. xı soğunluğ ta:ğ 'a mountain full of wild onions” (a/-'ungul) Kas. I 499. Dis. SCR 1 sağır “a game battue'; n.o.a.b, Several Kip. authorities use this spelling for sığır, but that is prob. a mere error. Not connected vvith sağır “deaf”, a vvord of unknovvn origin first noted in xiv Muh. Mel. 46, 7; Rif. 139 and Kap. xiv. 1d. 58 (şağır), 60 (şanğır) and surviving in SW Osm. “Türkü virt ff. IrkB 63 (içre:): Xak. xi sağır (first syllable unvocalized) “a kind of hunt (sayd) by the king and common people; the king scatters (yabı) the people in thickets and open spaces (al-acàm sea”l-fayafi) to collect the wild animals (al-tvuhüş) and drive them towards him, and he stands and shoots at his own convenience (bayn yadayhi) without tiring himself out looking for them” Kaş. 7 364. F 2 sa:ğır no doubt l.-w. fr. Pe. sağar "cup, goblet'; Kag.s translation suggests that it was a sort of rhyton. Cf. sağrak, Xak. xi sa:ğır maxrüt ha-hay”at”l-minhaz yuc"al fihi'l-garáb *a conical vessel in the shape of a mortar in which wine is put” Kaş. I 406: xiv Muh.(?) laysa fi'l-küz mö” "there is no water in the jug' sa:ğarda: su: yo:k Rif. 92 (prob. the Pe. word itself). sığır "a large bovine', perhaps a generic term; the exact meaning is discussed, not quite completely or accurately, in Shcherbak, p. 96. It can hardly originally have meant.'cow' since that was inge:k, q.v. Survives in SE Türki siğir/siyir 'cow': NC. Kir., Kzx. Styir 'cow': SC Uzb. sigir 'cow': NW Kar. sığır 'ox'; sıyır 'cow' (Shcherbak); Kk., Kumyk, Nog. sıyır 'cow'; Kaz. S1yer 'cow': SW Az. sığır "large bovine'; Osm. sığır 'bull, cow, ox, buffalo'; Tkm. sığır 'cow' Xak. xi sığır al-baqar 'bovine'; su:v sığırı: a/-cümüs '(water) buffalo', that is *water bovine” Kaş. I 364; 0.0., same translation /7 79, 21 (müpreş-), i89 (süsgir-): xiv Muh. al-baqar 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 859 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. SÓRsığır/lşığır Mel. 5, 14; 71, 1; Rif. 72, 172 “the ox year” sığır yızlı: So, 18; 185 (cf. u:d): Çağ. xv ff. sığır (spelt) gdw-i nar "a male bovine” San. 254r. 3 (and several phr.): Xvvar. xiv sığır *bovine' Quib 151 (sağır), 164: Kom. xıv “ox” sığır, “buffalo” su sığır CCI; Gr.: Kip. xii bagaru'l-wahg şığır (MS. şağır) keyik Hou. rı, 7; al-bagar muflaqd "a generic term for bovines” Şığır (şağır) do. 14, 8; al-cümüs şu: sığırı: (unvocalized) do. 14, 20: xiv. şığır al-baqar İd. 58; Bul. 7, 7; al-cámüs şu: şığırı: (/ğAmus) do, 7, ro, bagaru'l-wah; sawan keyik/keyik şığır do. 10, 8: xv şır/şığır al-bagar Kav. 5, 19; al-baqara 'cow' şığır (şağır) do. 62, 2; baqara (inek/) sığır Tuh. b. 6 (and see sr: Gun). VU suka:r Hap. leg.; Aor. Participle, used as a N., prob. of suk- in the sense of “one who pushes (with his forehead) (but has no horns to pierce with). Xak. xı suka:r “any animal that has no horns, or any man that has no hair on his head” (so that it is) like his temples (naısa”/-şudğayn) like the 'T'urks (fa t- Turhiya); hence one says suka:r ko:y “a hornless (cammá') sheep” Kaş. I 411. VU ?F suğur 'marmot'; Benveniste suggested in Journal asiatique, vol. 236, Pt. 2, p. 184 that this is a l.-w. fr. Pe. sugur, but that means 'porcupine'; al-wabr is a small fur-bearing animal which hibernates (Red. “the Syrian coney, Hyrax syriacus in Osm.) Xak. xı suğur aí-wabr, wahwa duwaybba sibhu' maral 'the marmot, a small animal like (?the size of) a large poisonous lizard” (Red. “the whitethroated regenia or varan, Regenia albogularis”), its skin is used to make rain-coats (a/-minar) Kaş. I 363; a.o. I1 227 (tonçuk-): Kip. xit (among “vild animals', al-samür 'sable' şavvşar (corruption of Pe. susmàr) . . .) al-nims 'weascl, ferrct, etc.” şu:ğır (sic) şavvşa:r Hou. 11, 14. sağrı: originally 'raw hide”, thence “leather from the hindquarters of a horse', and thence 'the hindquarters of a horse'; in this sense s.i.a.m.l.g. w. large phonetic changes, e.g. NE Tuv. sa:r: NC Kir. so:ru, Kzx, sawir: NW savri/sawri/savir; the origin of English 'shagreen'. Xak. xi sağrı: 'raw hide” (al-zarğab), and "the surface” (adim) is called sağrı:, hence one says yö:r sağrı:sı: “the surface and face (wa soachuhu) of the ground', and kişi: sağrı:sı: yü:z “a man's hide is his face”, because it is the hardest and thickest part of his skin and endures heat and cold Kaş. 7 42150.o.1152 (etüklüğ), İTİ 350 (kırtişla:-): xiv Muh. (under “cobblers” vvares”) Rimuxt (Pe.) “thick leather” sağrı: Mel. 59, 14; Rif. 158: Çağ. xv ff. sağrı: (spelt) kafal “the hindquarters', and metaph. “the hide (üst) on the hindquarters of a horse or ass, which is tanned', in Pe. kimuxt San. 232r. r: Kom. xiv. "leather sağrı CCI; savr1 CCG; Gr. sığra: Hap. leg.; being Oğuz perhaps a l.-w. Atalay plausibly suggests 8 connection vv. Kip. xiv $ığrak md bayna'l-agbu'ayn “the space between two fingers” İd, 58; a L.-w. might well 815 occur in two forms. Oğuz xı s8ığra: al-facc Side S db: ; wa'l-wádi 'ravine, valley" Kaş. 1 422. D sukru: Hap. leg.; Ger. of *sukur-, Caus. f. of suk-, used as an Adv. Xak. xi one says evke: sukru: kirdim "1 entered the house intruding without permission” (dàmira(n) min ğayr idn, i.e. 'pushing my way in” Kaş. İ 422. DF sağra:k “cup, goblet” prima facie a Dim. f. of 2 sa:ğır, but Steingass lists this as a Pe. word and both may be Pe. Survives in SW Osm. (Red. 1060). Xak. xı sağra:k “a cup or goblet (a/-qa"b twa'l-kás) out of which one drinks! Kaş. 1 471 (prov. y 9.0. I 100, 7; 468, 8: xin(?) Tef: sağrak “cup”, xiv Muh.al-küz 'jug sakra:k Mel. 69, 7, sağra:k Rif. 170; al-qihf “cranium” ba:ş sağra:kı: 46, 2) 139: Çağ. xv ff. sağrak küza-ı lüladár “a jug with a spout'; also pronounced sığrak San. 232v. 2; reverse entry 253v. 28: Xwar. xiv sağrak *goblet' Qutb 151: Kom. xiv 'cranium' savrak CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv safrak al-hunàáb “a wooden bowl' /d. 58: Osm. xiv ff. sağrak (occasionally in xiv soğrak) “cup, goblet', etc.; c.i.a.p. TT'S I 589; Iİ 779; İİİ 581; IV 651. Dis. V. SGR?E sağur- See suğur-. sıkır- "tə vvhistle”, survives only(?) in NE Küer. sikir-[sikkir- R IV 609-12; Khak., 'Tuv. sığır-, there does not seem to be any widely distributed word for “to whistle. Xak. xı kuş sikirdi: “the bird whistled' (saffara) ; and one says kişi: sıkırdı: “the man whistled' Kas. 11 83 (sıkra:r, sıkırma:k): xiv Muh.(?) şaffara şukır- Rif. ııı (only) al-safir sıkı:rmak 176 (Mel. 73, 11 ça:ğırmak). D sığur- Caus. f. of sığ-, “to insert, or fit (something Aec., into something Dat.). N.o.a.b. Cf. sığtur- and see sikur-. Xak. xı ol u:nuğ ka:bka: sığurdı: "he inserted (adxala wa anca'a) a large quantity of flour into a small container' (ai-zarf); also used of other things when he fitted. them (atesa'ahu) into something by force and pressure (5i-şidda va rakl) Kaş. II 81 (sığurur, sığurma:k): K B (I have heard what you said and) köpülke sığurdım anı “have driven it into my mind” 386o: Çağ. xv ff. sığur- (-dı, -Bay) şığıurVel. 287 (quotn.); sığur- (spelt) Caus. f. of S1É-, guncánidan "to cause to be contained; to fit (something into something)' San. 253r. 19 (quotns.): Osm. xiv and xv sığur- ditto; in a few texts TTS 11 815; III 617; IV 681. PUD sikur- the V. in the Uyğ. texts below does not obviously have the same meaning as sığur- and may be a Caus. f. of sik-, lit. “to cause to squeeze' or the like. Uy£. viu ff. Màn. uluğ yarlıkançuçı köpülüp üze olarnı barça sikurup 'pressing them all with your great compassionate mind” TT Ill 9o-1co; 118-19: Bud. (we have sent a modest gift) küsüsümüz ol sıkurup alı yarlıkazun “ our wish is that he may deign to take it to himself (?) and accept it” Hüeri-ts. 2026—7  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 860 
     
   
   
     816 VUD suğur- Caus. f. of suğ-, “to have (something cc.) drained off (something 45/.)” and the like. Consistently spelt sagur- in the main entry in Kaş., but this is clearly an error. Survives in NC Kir. su:r-, Kzx. suir- “to draw (a sword), pull out (tceth), winnow (grain: SC Uzb. suğur- ditto: NW Kk. suwir-; Kaz. suir-; Kumyk suvur-; Nog. suvir- ditto. Xak. xı er su:v suğurdi: “the man gulped down ('abba) the water'; and one says kum su:v suğurdi: “the sand absorbed (raşşafa) the water': Karluk xr ol kurut suğurdı: “he drained off (angafa) the liquid from the dried curd cheese (a/-aqif) so that it became cheese”: Barsğa:n xı ol yoka:ru: ya:rın suğurduı: "he spat (5azaqa) towards the sky”, the other (Turks) say sodti: Kaş. 17 8o (suğurur, suğurma:k (see above); prov.); n.o. suğurdı: // rış (suğ-): Çağ. xvff. suğur- (-di, etc.) eikar- “to draw out, pull out” Vel. 296 (quotns.); suğur- (spelt) "to pull or bring (birün haşidan wa dar-áwardan) something out of something else', e.g. a sword from the scabbard, an arrow from a wound, a hair from milk San. 244v. 6 (quotns.). i D suğrut- Hap. leg., Caus. f. of suğur-, lit. to have (things) pulled out, pulled about”, etc. Xak, xı ol anip evin sugrutti: (MS. sufratti:) "he searched (baltata) his house, and saw everything that was in it” Kaş, 1] 332 (suğrutu:r, suğrutma:k). VUD sığrış- Hap. leg.; second syllable unvocalized; Caus. f. of sığur- with a meaning parallel to that of sığın-, “to provide shelter for one another” or the like. Xak. xı ola:r bi;r bi:rke: sığrışdı: “they strengthened (or supported, mahhana) one another” Kaş. İT 212 (sığrışu:r, sığrışma:k). D sıkrış- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of sıkır-. Xak. xi ula:r barça: sikrisdi: “the partridges all vvhistled (saffarat) together'; also used of snakes, etc., when they whistle (or hiss) Kag. II 213 (sıkrışu:r, sıkrışma:k). D suğruş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of sugurwith a connotation of totality. Xak. xr kumla:r su:vuğ suğruşdi: (MS. suğraşdı:) “the sand (completely) absorbed (tamaggafat) the water' (etc.) Kaş. II 212 (suğruşu:r, suğruşma:k: rd” unvocalized). Tris. SĞR ?D sigirquk the form, Dim. f. fr. sığır, is deceptive, and perhaps cloaks a l.-w.; a kind of stnall bird, original meaning obscure; survives, meaning 'starling', in SC Uzb. çuğurçik: NW Kumyk sıyırtğış: SW (Az. sığırçın), Osm. sifircik. NE Tel, sığırçık “grasshopper' like other NE words sığırtkı/ sığırtkıç is prob. der. fr. sıkır- and not connected. Xak. xı sığırçuk (MS. sigrrpik) ai-tayhüc (1.-w. fr. Pe. tihi) "partridge”, or 'quail'? Kaş. [ sor, sığırçuk (sic) ditto 7 sos, 24: xiv. Muh. zurzür 'starling' sığırçuk Mel. 73, 3: Rif. 176: (Çağ. xv fT. sığırçın "a black bird with. white spots', in Pe. sár.'starling' “San, DIS. V. SGR254r. 4): Kom. xiv 'dove'(?) sığırçık CCT; Gr.: Kip. xir al-zurzür şığırcuk 77ou. 10, 10: xiv ditto Bul. 11, 14: XV aurzür Siy1rgik (sic) Tuh. 18a. 11: Osm. xvritt sifircik/ sığırcuk the same as (Cag.) sığırcın, sár; also called sığır kuşı Sar. 254r. 5. sakırku: “a tick'; perhaps a l.-w. Survives in SW Osm. sakirfa; km. sakırtğa and. prob. NE Tuv. sarğı, NW Kumyk kasırtğa, Nog. kasartkı, most other languages use Pc. hana. Xak. xı sakirku: (qaf carries both fatha and kasra) al-qurad "a tick” Kaş. 1 489: Kip. xiv şakurğa: a/-qurdd İd. 59: xv qurád (VU köne, Tkm. kışıltıkı, in margin) şakırğa Tul. 29a. ız. sıkırka:n “a kind of large rat”, perhaps a l.-w. Pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı sıkırka:n “a kind of large rat” (mina'l-ciradán) Kaş. I 521; sıçğaın takı: sıkırka:n a/-curd toa'l-fára 'rats and mice” 77 263, 22. VUD sokarlaç Hap. leg.; prob. a l.-w.; the Suff. -lac, which is very rare, is prob., like -va:ç, foreign (?Iranian). Xak. xı sokarlaç börk “a tall (al-fatwi/a) hat” Kaş. 1 493. D sığırlığ P.N./A. fr. sığır, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı sığırlığ er “a cattle-owner' (dü baqar) Kaş. 1 495. VUD suğurluğ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. suğur. Xak. xı suğurluğ ta:ğ "a mountain full of marmots” (zcabr) Kaş. I 494. Tris. V. SGRVUD sağurul- Hap. leg.; if this could be read as suğurul- (the script is Uyğ., and such a mistake is possible), Pass. f. of suBur-, which gives reasonable sense. Türkü viri ff. Man. (because they did not know the beneficent God) sağurulğay örtenğey otluğ tamu içinde “they will be sucked down and burnt in fiery hell” M 111 7, 11 (ii). D sığırla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. sığır, Xak. xı ol anı: sığırla:dı: "he reckoned that he was an ox (Pagar) and traced his ancestry back to one” (nasabahu ilayhi) Kaş. ITİ 331 (sığırla:r, sığırla:ma:k). D sağrı:la:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. sağrır. Xak. xı ol kömüğ sağrırla:dı: ittaxada'l-cild zargab "he made the skin into raw hide” Kaş. III 353 (safrtla:r, sağrı:la:ma:k). Dis. SGS D sakış (sa:kış) Dev. N. fr. sa:k-, originally “counting, calculation'; in the medieval period in some languages it came to mean 'thought, care, worry', and so more or less converged vv. sakınç, survives in this sense as sağış/sağıs in most NE languages and NW Kaz., R IV 270. Uyğ. vri ff. Bud. ayığ kilinçlarımız sanı sakışı idi yok “our evil deeds are quite innumerable (Hend.) TT IV 6, 25; a.o. VI 54: Civ. bés $rahalar yorikiı sakis (sic not sayış, see facsimile) 'enumeration of the move  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 861 
     
   
   
       DIS. ŞĞZ ments of the five planets (Sanskrit lL.-w.)! TT VII, s, bésotuz sakış “number 25' do. 21,3; a.o.o.: Xak. xı (I was counting ('adadtu) the revolutions of the Great Bear) sakış içre: künüm tuğdiı: “and while 1 was counting them (f£ dáltka'l-'adad) my sun rose” Kay. IJI 247, 25; n.m.e.: K.B (the gold and silver which I have collected lies idle) mapa teğdi sakış anipdin ülüş “my (only) share in them is counting them” 1363; o.o. 9 (katıl-), 367 (tüket-), 2220 (seç-, sakla:-), 4048 (ağıçı:): xin(?) Tef. sakış *counting, calculation! 260: xiv Muh. yawmu l-hisáb “the day of reckoning' sa:ğış gün Mel. 44, 14; Rif. 138 (sa:kış): Çağ. xv ff. sağış şumüra wa hisüb 'computation, reckoning' San. 232v. 6 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv sakış “thought, reckoning' Qutb 154; sakış kıldılar 'they counted up” Nac. 119, 5; sakışı yok “are innumerable” do. 260, 4: Kom. xiv sakış et- “to decide' (to do something): Kip. xir a/-hisab şa:ğış Hou. 22, 2: XIV sağış ditto İd. 58; al-'adad şa:ğış Bul. iz, ro: Osm. xiv ff. sağış “calculation, numbering'; common down to xviu 77S 7 588; II 778; III 586; IV 650. D sıkış Dev. N. (with Recip. connotation) fr. Sik-; n.o.a.b. (Uyğ. vt ff. Bud. sikiş in U H 73, 2 (iii) seems to be a misreading of sıkığ): Xak. xı stkış al-zalhima wa'l-tagadum, “crovvding together, colliding” Kaş. 7 368. E sakşı See sakız Uyg. Civ. Dis. V. SĞŞD sağış- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of sağ-. Xak. xı ola:r ikki: sü:t sağışdı: “those two competed in milking” (f? halbi'l-laban); also used, for helping Kaş. /I 101 (sağışu:r, sagisma:k). D sikig- Co-op. f. of sık-, survives in SW. Az. sixig-; Osm. Sikig- “to be crowded together, compressed; to be urgent', and the like. Xak. xı ol mapa: üzüm sıkışdı: “he helped me to press (f? "aşr) the grapes” , also for to compete (MS. in error “to help”), and one says Kişi: sıkışdı: “the people crowded together (izdahama) until the place was full” Kaş. II 104 (sıkışu:r, sikigma:k). D sofis- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of sofi:- with a connotation of totality. Xak. xı ö:d soğışdı: (MS. soğuşdi:) tamaccaha”l-xamön | li'l-burüda "the season tended to coldness' (i.e. the cold season came) Kaş. II 101 (soğışu:r, sofisma:k, sic). D sokuş- Recip. f. of sok- ; properly “to beat, crush one another”, and the like, but in the early period often 'to meet, encounter one another' with no implications of violence. S.i.a.m.l.g. in NE, NC, NW soğuş-/soğış-, and the like, in SE, SC, SW sokus- usually meaning 'to beat one another, to fight”. "There seems to be no certain occurrence of Sukus-. Türkü vı ff. sokuş- “to meet (someone, usually Dat., once. Acc.) is common IrkB 2.and 16 (utru:), 6 (topuz), .ə7, 35, 47 (Ömezle:-),   817 49: Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. PP 18, r (kikşür-): Civ, tütüşke sokuşur “one gets involved in a quarrel' TT VII 36, 5; bay bolur edgü yultuzka sokugur 'one becomes rich and meets a lucky star” do. 37, 3-4: Xak. xı ol mapa: tu:z sokuşdi: “he helped me to crush (fi daqq) the salt' (etc.); also used for competing Kaş. İİ 104 (sokuşu:r, sokuşma:k): Çağ. xv ff. sokuş- (1) ba-yak digar furü burdan “to carry one another down' (perhaps sukuş-, see Suk-); (2) “tö bite (gazidan) one another” San. 245r. 15. Tris. SĞŞ D sakışçı: N.Ag. fr. sakig; “accountant” and the like. N.o.a.b. Xak. xi KB (the mazir) sakışcı kerek bolsa bilge tetik “must be a knovvledgeable and quick-vvitted accountant” (. . . the whole work of a wazir is sakışlar “calculations”) 2218: xiv Muh. hásib “accountant' sa:ğışçı: Mel. s7, s; sazkışçı: Rif. 155. D sakışlığ P.N./A. fr. saktg; survives in some NE and NVV languages as sağıştığ, sağıştu:, sağıslı, etc. R IV 272 for "having a... mind or disposition; intelligent; anxious', etc. Xak. xı K.B (he managed all his affairs, and) sakışhif bitip kodti barca barın “made a written list, with figures, of all his property” 1722; a.o. 2997: xıı(?) Tef. sakışlığ “having a (predetermined) number” 26o. D sıkışlık Hap. leg.; A.N. fr. sıkış, “vorry, concern', etc. Uy£. vir ff. Bud. TT VIII B.6 (azkifia:). : D sakigsiz Priv. N./A. fr. sakis; “incalculable, innumerable'. Syn. w., and often used in Hend. w., sansiz. N.o.a.b. Uy£. vir ff. Bud. sansız sakigsiz tepriler yekler 'innumerable gods and demons” TT VI 431: (Xak.) xi(?) Tef. sansiz sakışsız 261 (under san): Xwar. xiv sakışsız “countless” Qutb 154 (under sakış), sansız sakışsız Nahc. 399, t. Dis. SGZ sağız/sakız Xaş. distinguishes these two words, but the meanings are very similar; perhaps both are later forms of *sa:kiz, but the Tkm. f. is sakiz. S.i.a.m.l.g., meaning *gum, resin', and the like, in a wide range of forms: NE sağıs/sanıs/sa:s R IV 269, 287, 394: SE Türki ségiz: NC sagiz: SC Uzb. sakiç (si); NW sağız/sakkız: SW Osm., Tkm. sakiz: Cuv. soxár/suxár Ash. XI 218. Uyğ. vı ff. Civ. kulak sakzı bolsa "if he has wax in the ears' H I $56 (not sakg *dirty' as suggested by Arat); a.o. İT 28, 137: Xak. xi sağız al-'ük 'gum, resin: sağız topra:k a/-şalşal wa'l-tinu'l-hurr. 'clay (or loam), unadulterated clay': sakiz kull luzüca 'any viscous substance' which sticks «o the clothes, like thickened fruit-juice (a]-rubb), etc. Kaş. 1 365: xiv Muh. (al-mtsk “musk” yıpa:r) al-kundur 'frankincense' sakiz Rif. 162 (in Mel. 63, 15 y1pa:r has fallen out and ka:glik, q.v., has come under ai-kundur): Çağ. xv ff.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 862 
     
   
   
     818 sakkız (so spelt) "a gum (samgi) which flows from a tree', in Ar. "ilku'l-butm ( turpentine") San. 232v. 22: Kom. xiv “güm mastic” sakiz CCI; Gr.: Kip. xin al-'ilk sakız Hou. 18, 9. D *sifiz See sığza:-. D sığza:ğ Dev. N. fr. sığza:- , lit. 'something inserted or fitted in (between two things)”: survives in SW Osm. sığza “the gusset of a garment' (Sami 847). Xak. xi sığzağ (MS. sığzığ) al-halb twahwa sayr yuc'al bayn al-xarzatayn fi'l-xuff wa nalnwihi "the strip of leather which is put between the two rows of stitches in a boot and the like' (the boot in this cnse seems to have been a top boot with a narrow strip of leather inserted (at the front or more probably the back) between the two edges of the piece of leather forming the main part of the top); sığzağ (MS. sığzıg) “a patch' (al-ru'ba) between two things, and “a toothpiek” (xilafu'l-asnás) is called tig. siğza:ğı: Kaş, 1 464: Kip. xiv $1Bza: fasoqu'l-qamis “the collar of a shirt 7d. 58. Dis. V. SGZD sığza:- Hap. leg., but see sığza:ğ, Den. V. fr. *sifiz Dev. N. fr. sığ- meaning 'something inserted or fitted in”, “to insert, or fit (something between two other things)”. Xak. xı ol trs sifza:dr "he picked (xallala) his teeth svith a tooth-pick'; and one says ol etik yi:sin (first yd” undotted) sığza:dı: cadara'l-kalb fi'l-xuff “he fitted the strip of leather (between the two seams) in the boot' (see sığza:ğ), also used of anything when it has been inserted (rdxr/a) between two things under pressure (5r-tadiiq) Kaş. III 283 (s'Eza:r, sığza:mn:k). D sığzal- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of sığza:-. Xak. x1 bi:r ne: bi:rke: sığzaldı: "one thing was inserted (fadaxxala) into another under pressure” (bi-kulfa); as a handle is forced into the socket of an axe or spade and fixed(yagtadd) in it, or a strip of leather is inserted between the two rows of stitches (in a boot) Kaş. TT 232 (sığzalu:r, sığzalma:k). Tris. SGZ sağızğa:n 'magpie'; an old animal name ending in -ğam. S.i.a.m.İ.g. w. various phonetic changes, with a metathesis only in SW Az. sağzağan, Osm. saksağan, Uy£. virt ff. Bud. TT VI 95 (kizil): Xak. x1 kuş yavuzı: sağızğa:n (MS. sagzifa:n) "the worst (kind of) bird is a magpie” (al-'ag'ag) Kaş. I 439, 6; n.m.e.: xiv Muh. al-'ag'aq sağısBa:n Mel. 73, 3; Rif. 176 (vocalized sisiga:m): Çağ. xv ff. sakızğan şağşağan Vel. 276; saksağan (sic) kalağ-i ablaq 'magpie', in Ar. “aq"aq San. 232v. 22: Kip. xin al-'ag'ag şa:ğızğa:n (?; unvocalized) How. 10, 19: XIV sağasğan al-'ag'aq; Tkm. sakasğan İd. 58 (one MS. has different vocalization); al-'ag'aq sağsağan (sic) Bul. ız, 6: xv abü zurayq “crovv”) tva'l-'agfag şağşağan Tuh. 4b. 10. DIS. SGZ D sağızlığ/sakızlığ P.N./A. fr. sağız/sakız, s.i.s.m.l. vv. similar phonetic changes, Xak. xr sağızlığ er “a man who owns chewing gum' (Hk yumdag): sağızlığ yé:r 'ground containing unadulterated clay' (tina hurra): sakızlığ ton "a garment with viscous substances sticking to it” (fa"alluqı”l-lusücdt fihi) Kaş. 1 495. Mon. SG sik “penis”, homophonous vv. sik-. Survives in SW Osm. and perhaps elsewhere, but the kind of vvord deliberately omitted fr. many dicts. Xak. xı sik 'ardu'l-racul “penis”, follovved by a para. saying that in reading the Koran before audiences of "Turkish men and women it is customary to omit Ar. words containing the syllables sik, tila:k, and am for fear of rousing ribald comments Kaş. I 334; 3.0. 7 zor (örün-): xiv Muh. al-dahar "penis" sik Mel. 48, 3; Rif. 142: Kom. xiv “penis” sik CCI; Gr.: Kip. xirt faracu'l-racul. "the male organ! Sİk Hou. zr, 3: xiv Sİk a[-dakar mugábilu'l-farac (opposite to “vulva”) İd. s3: xv al-dakar sik Kav. 61, 6; Tuh. 16a. 11. Mon. V. SGSik- (of the male only) 'to copulate' (w. a female cc.) S.i.a.m.l.g. R IV 681, but deliberately omitted fr. most modern dicts. Xak. xi er ura:ğutnı: sikti: "the man copulated with (càma'a) the woman! Kaş. 1I 22 (sike:r, sikme:k); a.o. 7 401, 21 stating that the Pres. Participle is sikke:n canına": xiv Muh. cáma'a si:k- Rif. 107 (only); náka “to copulatc” (misspelt sahá) sik- do. 116 (only); al-cimá' si:ğmek Mel, 34, ro, sikmek rış: Kip. xur (after sik) "and it is also the Imperat. for the (corresponding) V.' (bPE/€I bihi) Hou. 21, 3; nahaha "to marry! sik- do. 34, 9; rdka mina l-cimá' sik- do. 44, 2: xiv sik- nàka İd. s3; Bul. 83v.: xv cáma'a müna”l-cimd" sik- Kav. 77, 11; nakaha sik- Tuh. 37b. 3. : sö:ğ- “to curse, revile'. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. some variations in the last consonant, SVV "Fkm. sö:68-. Uyğ. vurff. Bud. Suv. 136, 9-10 (tota:-); TM IV 252, 17-18 (sarsi:-): Xak. xı ol anı: sö:gdi: sabbahu "he abused, or cursed, him” Kaş. 7/71 184 (sö:ge:r, sö:gme:k), başı: boynın söğe: turdiı: "he continuously cursed (zalla yasubb) his head and neck” III 230, 20; a.o, / 27 (söğüğ): KB yayığ tep söğerler bu kılkım üçün “they curse me and call me fickle because of my character” 6go: xiv Rbg. itni sógti “he cursed the dog” R. IV s71: Muh. damma “to reprove, blame' sö:8- Mel. 26, 7; Rif. 109; şatama "to curse SO:É- 27, t1; 110; al-gadab “to be angry' SÓkme:ğ 35, 1 (küsmek 130): Çağ. .xv ff. söğ(-di *with -&amp;-") sóg-, dugnám vér- ma'násina “to abuse, curse! Vel. 297 (quotn.); sök- ... (2) dugnàm dadan . . . in this meaning also SógSan. 245r. 25 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv söğ- “to curse' Qutb 159; Nahc. 14, 15-16; 129, 8: Kom. xiv “to curse, blaspheme” sók- CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kap. xin şatama SÓg- Hou. 34, 14; sabba SÓg-, also şatama, the káf in this ,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 863 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. word is like the Ar. gáfu'l-manqüta (&amp;) do. ao, 18: xiv söğ- ("with -$-") şatama İd. 53; Bul. 51r.: Xv ditto Kav. 32, 15; 75, 12; Tuh. 21b. 5; sabba wa şatama 8ÖŞ- do. 20a. 11; o.o. do. 28b. 3; 31b. 7. 1 sök- Trans.; “to tear apart, pull down, break through (an obstacle)', and thelike. S.i.a.m.l.g. with these and extended meanings. Türkü vir karif sökdim “1 forced my way through the snow' T'25; o.0. I E 35, I1 E 27 (batım): Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. ertinl alıp sóküp 'taking and detaching the jewel' (in his ear) PP şo, 8; o.o. U II 76, 1 (so); TT IV 6, 39 (buz-): Civ. otla:r sóküp 'pulling the vegetables to pieces” (and boiling them in milk) TT VII M.34; o.o. H 1I 26, 97; 28, 129: Xak. x1 ol yama:ğ sóktl: “he tore (naqada) the patch out of the garment'; and one says ol evin sókti: naqada xibá'ahu sva bind”ahu "he pulled down his tent or (built) house” Kaş. 11 21 (2 sókfollows in the same para.): K.B 2268 (cerig): xiv Muh. fataqa "to split, tear apart” (SÓkül- ; v.) sök- Mel. 29, 11; SÓk- Rif. 113; (al-naqş se:kmek is prob. an error for al-nagd sükmek 123): Çağ. xv ff. sök- (-ti, 'with -k-”) bir bütün nesneyi çüh et-, sók- ma' nàsina 'to tear apart something complete' Vel. 297 (quotn.) ; sök- (1) szkaftan “to split, tear apart" San. 245r. 25 (quotns.): Kap. xii fataqa min fatqi'l-qumág "to tear”, of tearing linen SÖkHou. 35, 2: Xiv SÓK- fataqa İd. 53; Bul. 68r.: xv fataqa (wa şatama) sök- Tuh. 28b. 3. 2 sók- Intrans. w. Indirect Object in Dat.; “to kneel down'. Syn. vv. çök- (Kaş. translates both the same), but n.o.a.b. ÜyB. vil ff. (if the man who understands this scripture stands among the company of Bodhisattvas and) iki tizin sóküp bérser 'kneels on both knees and presents it” U.Sp. 106, 19-20: Xak. xı (after 1 sök-) and one says ol beğke: SÓkti: “he knelt (cat4) in the presence of the beg (etc.)'; hence one says söke: oltur icis cátiya(n) "sit down kneeling” Kaş. II zı (söke:r, sókme:k); one says er sóke: olturdr cajd'l-racul "ala rukbatihi “the man knelt on his knees and sat” ZI 230 (verse): KB bu Aytoldı kirdi kóründi sóküp 'Aytoldi entered and presented himself kneeling' 581. Dis. SGE F sekü: 1.-vv. fr. Pe. sakü “bench, platform, terrace”, Survives in NC Kur. seki "a small flat ledge in the foothills': NW Kaz, seké “a bench in a house”: SW Az., Osm. seki, Tkm. seki “a wooden or stone bench, terrace, pavement, pedestal' Xak. xr sekü: a/-dukka “a (stone) bench' Kaş. III 230: Kip. xiu al-mastaba “a large stone bench' se:kü: Hom. 6, 6: xiv al-maştaba (sic, also correct) ditto Bul. 14, 11: Osm. xvi ff. seki used in several Ar. and Pe. dicts. to translate words meaning 'bench', etc. TTS I 611; IT 8c6; IV 673. D sóke: See 2 sök-, VUD sö:ki: N./A.S. fr. sö:, “former, of old”. N.o.a.b. Türkü vri ff. Man. (if we have someSGDhovv” sinned against) söki tepri yalavaçı burxanlarka “the former messengers of God, the prophets” Chuas. 64-5: Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (how was it possible that one day Dharmagupta) barı yarlıkadı erki tümen sökilerke *deigned to go to the innumerable men of old?” Hüen-ts. 1959-60; sökl arşılar biligipe “to the knowledge of the sages (Sanskrit rsi) of old” Suv. 589, 4-5: Civ. söki xanlar küci . . sop futsı bilgepir alı "the strength of former kings . . . the devices of the later sage Confucius! TT 7 105-7: Xak. xi KB söki teg bolur yandru kilki yanı “his character and habits turn back and become as they vvere formerly' 738. . E söKö is read in TT VIII K.10 and identified vv, the SW Osm. phr. sökü otu 'bird's-foot, Ornithopus compressus', but sökü is the Osm. f. of *sóküg Dev. N. fr. 1 sók-, so this is impossible. The Brahmı text syo kyo dham no doubt represents sógótin “its tree'. Dis. SGC PU?F sügic Hap. leg.; this word is glossed yıldız 'star' in the Fergana MS. but this is an obvious error; it must be some kind of a bird, prob. a l.-w. Xak. xı K B (just before dawn) süpic koptı órlep kalikka ağıp ünün sumlıdı süri “ibri okip “a sügfç rose and soared climbing to the firmament; it chattered unintelligibly (as if it was) reciting a Hebrew psalm' 5677. . 819 Dis. SGD sógüt (sögöd) in Uyg. a generic term for *tree'; fr. xt onwards specifically “the willowtree, Salix'. Survives in SE Türki sóget: NC Kir. sógót: SW Az. sóyüd; Osm. sógüd/ söğüt, Tkm. sóvüt. Cf. ta:l. Uyğ. vri ff. Bud. aşok sögüt 'Asoka tree' U II 24, 3; mulapuşup atlığ sógüt “a tree called Nilapuspa' do. 25, 17-18: yemiş sógüt “a fruit tree' PP 79, 4-5; söğüt 'tree' do. 7; o.o. U İT 7, 1; 26, 19; 35, 32; U İH z2, 14; Hüen-ts. 316; TT VIII K.10 (sökö), X 457, etc.: Civ. TT I 163 (tet), 165 (artuc), r9r (çüşüm), VII 28, 41-2 (tik-); etc.: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. *tree'! SÖŞÖL Ligeti 196; R IV 576 ('willow', Perror): Xak. xı sógüt şacarı”l-xilaf *willowtree' Kaş. 1 356 (prov., see kadm), same prov. III 134, 13; 369, 22; a.o. III 168 (kéyik): Çağ. xv ff. sógüd “a name for the willow (bid) tree” San. 245v. 28 (the spelling looks Rümi): Kip./'Tkm. xi al-şafşaf “villovr” (Kip. ta:1) Tkm. sógü:t ou. 8, 6. D sókti: Dev. N. in -ti: (usually -di:, Pass.) fr. 1 sók-; “bran”. N.o.a.b. Barsfa:n xi sökti: al-nuxála 'bran' Kaş. 1 416: Xak. xi KB 4767 (kavik). Dis. V. SGDE sekit- See sóküt-. D sikit- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of sik-, cf. siktür-. Xak. xı «ol» ura:ğutnu: sikitti: "he urged someone to copulate (hamala man 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 864 
     
   
   
     820 cáma' a) with the woman' Kaş. II 309 (sikitü:r, sikitme:k). D 1 sókit- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of 1 sök-, this V. seems to occur in the phr. bclow. Uyğ. vurff. Bud. sókitgülük etlerig (?read etlerin) “you must have (their?) meat minced" Suv. 592, 18-19. D 2 sókit- Caus. f. of 2 sök-, in Kaş. clearly w. Caus. meaning; but elsewhere it seems to mean simply “to kneel” and is a l.-w. ín this meaning in Mong. sógót- (sic) (Haenisch 135, Kow. 1433, Haltod 352). Cf. sókür-. N.o.a.b. Türkü vri ff. Man. (then the holy King Bógü Xan came to the assembly of his own Elect and) dindarlar[ka?] sökütüp yinçürü (MS. in error yingülii) ötündi 'knelt before(?) the Elect and ventured to bow to them” TT II6, 34: Xak. xı ol anı: sökitti: actáhu (MS. ahtahu) “he made him kneel] Kaş. Tİ 310 (sökitü:r, sökitme:k, everyvvhere vocalized sehit-): Kip. xv(?) catá “to kneel” (bağdaş oltur- (not an old phr.); in margin in two second hands) söküt- (perhaps here fr. Mong.) and çök- Tu. 122. 10. D siktür- Caus. f. of sik-;n.o.a.b. Cf. sikit-. Xak. xi er küpin siktürdi: “the man urged someone to copulate (irsán "ala camá') with his slave girl” Kaş. 11 186 (siktürür, siktürme:k). D söğtür- (só:&amp;tür-) Caus. f. of sö:ğ- , “to order (someone Dat.) to curse or revile (someone 4ce.). S.i.s.m.l. vv. the same phonetic changes. Xak. xı ol anı: sógtürdi: “he urged him to curse, or revile, him” ('alà sabbihi); originally só:gtürdi: with -ó:- but shortened Kaş. H 186 (sógtürür, sógtürme:k): Kip. Xv (in a para. on the Caus. f.) vea fi istaştama and for “to order to curse' sóktür- Tu. 55a. 3. D söktür- Caus. f. of 1 sók-;s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı ol to:n söktürdi: "hec ordered that the scams of the garment should be torn apart" (bi-naqd durüzi'l-tatcb); also used when he ordered the tearing down (57-naqd) of a wall, etc. Kaş. II 186 (söktürür, sóktürme:k): Çağ. xv ff. sóktür- Caus. f.; sikáfánidan "to order to tear apart, etc.” San. 245v. 17. Tris. SGD D sökitkü (sökitgü) Hap. leg.; prob. merely the Ger. of 2 sókit-, that of 1 sókit- is less prob. Uy£. viu ff. Civ. [gap] turmis tiktak yaf içürmiş kerek sökitkü içürmiş kere:k '. . . standing you must make him drink bitter (Sanskrit l-w.) oil; you must make him kneel and drink' (you must bleed him) TT VII 1.24. D sógütlüg P.N./A. fr. sógüt; survives with - much the same meaning in SVV Osm. sógütlü (Red. 1094). Xak. xı (after sógütlük) and “the owner of one” is called (the same) with (final) -&amp; Kaş. 7 506. D sógütlük A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. sógüt; survives in SW Osm. sógüdlük (Red. 1093). DIS. V. SGDXak. xı sógütlük manbat gacaru'l-xilaf 'a plantation of willow-trees', with (final) -k Kaş. 1 506; a.o. 1 510, 22. Tris. V. SGDD sógütlen- Hap. leg., Rcfl. Den. V. fr. söğüt. Xak. xr yér sógütlendi: “the ground was thickly planted with willows' (muxlrfa mün sacari'l-xiláf) Kaş. II 266 (sógütlenü:r, sógütlenme:k). Dis. SGG D sógüg Hap. leg.; Dev, N. fr. sö:6- , quoted only as an example of a Dev. N. used as a verbal complement. Xak. xı «ol» ant: sógüg söğti: sabbahu sabdaba(n) bálida(w) fihi "he cursed (or abused) him violentiy” Kaş. 7 27, 12. Dis. SGL VU sigil/sögöl (?*sigóol) “vart” or similar swelling including 'nipple' and 'piles'. "Vhe vocalization is chaotic, and perhaps best explained by assuming an original *sigól, Survives as NE Khak.,, 'l'uv. sözl: SE Türki sógel/sügel: NC Kir. só:l; Kzx. süyel, SC Uzb. süğal: NW Kk, Kumyk süyel; Kaz. söyal, Nog. şüyel (sic): SW Az. ziyil, Osm. siğil: 'Fkm. sippil (sic). See sengil. Uyğ. vii ff. Civ. kimnin etinde sógól ünser “if a wart emerges on someone's skin” H I 73; a.o. do. 74: Xak. xı sigil al-tu'lül *wart, nipple! Kaş. 7 394; söğül 7/I 3o1 (sógne:-): Caf. xvifF. siwel (spelt) "a hard lump' (dàna-i şulb) which emerges on a hand or limb; in Rümi sigil, in Ar. ti?lül San. 259r. 3: Osm. xiv bawásir sigili *piles', in one text TTS IV 692: xviii sigil (with -8-”) in Rümi, same translation as Çağ, sivvel San. 255r. 12. D sókel 'ill, sick': survives only(?) in SW xx”” Anat. sökel SDD 1248; perhaps Intrans. Dev. N./A. fr. 2 Sók- in the sense of 'kneeling, unable to stand up”. Jag.'s description as "Oguz' is dubious, since it is quoted in several Xak. phr. Xak./Oğuz xi sökel a/-marid 'ill', in Oğuz Xaş. 1 394; 0.0. in Xak. phr. 7 216, III 395 (both opal-); 7 ro(1 si:z-), 4o(tiniğ), III 180 (tur-), 281 (savra:-), 286 (suvşa:-): xın(?) Tef. sökel “Iİ” 275: xiv Mu. al-'alil “ill” (opposite to “vell” esen) sö:kel Me/. 56, 5; 64, 10; Rif. 154 (söğel, 163 sókellikli): Çağ. xv ff. sókel (*with -k-”) xasta tea bimàár “ill, sick', also used of a man who is crippled (ax 'udtwi ma"yüb) San. 245v. 25: Xwar. xiv sökel “II” Qutb 160; Nahc. 235, 5-6; 240, 13 etc.: Kip. xin al-marid (opposite to 'well' şa:ğ) söke:l /7ou. 26, 6; 33, 1 (MS. söhe:n): xiv. Sókel ditto 7d. 53; Bul. 9, 15; marida sökel ol- Bul. 82v.: Osm. xiv and xv sókel ill; in 3 texts T TS 1 640; 77 839. süğli:n 'pheasant, Phasianus spp.'; survives only in SW Osm. süğlün/sülün, 'l'km. sülgün; elsewhere displaced by Mong. 1.-vv. hirga'ul. Possibly a l.-w. cf. sügic. Uyğ. vur ff. Civ. H I1 24, sı: Xak. xı sügli:n al-tadruc 'pheasant'; süvli:n alternative form (Ju£a fihi)  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 865 
     
   
   
     LEE CERE  — — À—— DIS. V. SGN- (0821 Kaş. I1 444: xiv Rbg. sülgün (sic) “pheasant" R IV 833 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv süglün ditto Qutb 160 (söklün), 162 (sühlün): Kom. xiv ditto sówlün CCI; Gr. Dis.. V. SGLD sikil- Pass. f. of sik-, noted by Red. in SW Osm., and no doubt surviving elsewhere. Xak. xı ura:ğut sikildi: “the woman was copulated vvith” (cimi'at) Kaş. II 126 (sikilür, sikilme:k). D 1 sögül- (só:gül-) Pass. f. of sö:ğ- ş “to be cursed, reviled”, etc. S.i.s.m.l. w. the same phonetic changes, (Xak.) xııı(?) Ar. yerilğen sógülgen térip bermeğen “the man who accumulates (property) and docs not give is reviled and cursed” 247: Çağ. xv ff. sökül.. . (2) düşnüm düda şudan “to be reviled, cursed” San. 245v. 14. PU 2 sögül- “to roast (meat cc.) , a very unusual case of a Trans. V. with a Pass. f. N.o.a.b. There are two ancient cognate words, sóflün-, 2 sógüs, q.v., the latter still surviving; and some modern ones, SW Osm. söğleme 'roast meat” (Red. 1093), söyüle(sófle-) "to roast' Barbier de Meynard in R IV s8o and in xx Anat. söğür- “to roast kebabs', söğürme 'roast kebab! SDD 1248; the likeliest transcription is therefore sógül-. Uy£. vir ff, Civ. (if a man's armpits are malodorous) övkeni söğülüp üç kün yakzun 'roast a lung and rub it on for three days” H I 28-9: Xak. xı er et sögüldi: “the man roasted (şazıd) meat' (etc.) Kaş. 1 126 (sógülür, söğülme:k): xin(?) Tef. (PU) söğliditto 278 (süklt-[stkliü-): xiv Muh. şand sö:ğül- Mel. 27, ış, Rif. 111; al-şamd söğülmek 34, 16; 120; (under “food”) a/-jiwá 'roast mcat' söğülmiş 65, 12; 164: Kip. xul al-gard'ih “slices of meat” só:gülmis (MS. şö:gülmiş) et Hou. iş, 17: xiv sógül(with -8-”) saw İd. 53; Bul. s1 v.: Osm. XIV and xv sögül- “to roast'; in several texts TTS 1 639; 11 839; IV 704. D sökül- Pass. f. of 1 sök- , “to be torn apart, split”, etc. S.i.m.m.l. Xak. xr to:n sóküldi: nuqida durüzw'l-tawb "the seams of the garment (etc.) were torn apart'; also used of a building (ai-biná") when it has been torn apart Kaş. Iİ 125 (sökülü:r, sókülme:k): xıır(?) Tef. sökül- ditto 275: Çağ. xv ff. sókül(1) sikáfta şudan “to be torn apart' San. 245v. 14 (quotn.: Kom. xiv sökül- "to be torn apart, separated' CCG; Gr.: Kip. xv maftüq “split” sökülmiş Tul. 34b. 13: Osm. xvi sökül- “to be torn apart in one text 77S II 839. ı PUD söğlün- Refl. f. of 2 sógül-, generally used as Pass, N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vimff. Bud. süpükipe tegi eti yini söğlünüp "his flesh and skin being roasted through to the bone' U III 24, 6 (i); etózi sóglündi “his body was roasted' U IV qo, 171: Xak. xı et sóglündi: “the meat was roasted” (ingawd); and one says er ózipe: et söğlündi: “the man made it his business to roast (tawallà taşmiya) the meat: for himself” Kaş. II 248 (sóglünü:r, sóglünme:k); the second phr. translated “he concentrated on roasting the meat and did not ask anyone else to help” 77 254, zo: Kip. xiv söğlün- imgawá İd. 53; al-şarayih 'slices of meat' sölenmiş et Bul. 7, 15: XV injawa (şışlan-: in margin) söğlün- Tuh. 7a. 1: Osm. xiv söğlün- “to be roasted'; in one text 7 73 1 639. Tris. SGL PUD sóglüncü: Dev. N. (Conc. N.) fr. söğlün-, n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vı ff. Bud. (the cook brought the king) söğlünçüsin “his roast meat! TT V, p. z1, note A 124, 3: Xak. xi söğlünçü: a/-swà 'roast meat” Kaş. III 242; 8.0. II 309 (kokit-): xin(?) Tef. sóglünci ditto 279 (süklüngt): Kip. xim al-sivoà só:plüngi: Hou. 15, 17: xiv Sözlüncü: (sic, under sin-lám) al-şarüyih (slices of meat") wa'l-siwá İd. 53; al-síwa söğlenci: (sic) Bul. 7, 15: Xv al-şirüyih sölencü Tu. 21a. 9. Dis. SGM D sókme:n Hap. leg.; Dev. N. fr. 1 sók-. Xak. xı sókme:n min aígàbi'l-abtàl “a military title”, it means “one who breaks the ranks of the (enemy) army” (kásir. saffi'l-harb); taken from the phr. sökti: ne:mni: "he tore (hataka) the thing” Kaş. I 444. Tris. V. SGMD sókmenlen- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. sökme:n. Xak. xı er sökmenlendi: “the man put on military dress (fazayyd . . . bi-ziyi'l-abtál) and reckoned himself one of them”, the Imperat. is sókmenlen Kaş. 1I 278 (sókmenlenü:r, sókmenlenme:k). Dis. SGN PU sógen Hap. leg.; a Hap. leg. for such a common object is prob. a l.-w. Xak. xı sógen al-qirtála "a pack saddle! Kaş. I 403. D sógünc Dev. N. fr. *sógün- Refl. f. of SÓ:f.-; “a curse, abuse”, and the like. N.o.a.b.; cf. 1 sógüs. Xak. (xı KB in 4553 the Vienna MS. has sógünc, the others sógüs): xırı(?) At. 232 (t:d-): Çağ. xv ff. söğünç ("vith -6-”) düşnüm “curse, abuse” Vel. 297 (quotn.); sógüng (spelt) ditto San. 245v. 29: Xvvar. xiv sógünc ditto Qutb 162 (sügünç). Dis. V. SGND 1 sókün- Ref. f. of 1 sók-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı (after 2 sökün-) ol to:nın sökündi: “he pretended to tear apart (yangud) the seams of his garment" Kaş. 1I 154 (sókünü:r, sókünme:k): (xiv Muh. anqada (?for inqadda) se:kin- Rif. 104 (only) seems to be a misspelling of this word). D 2 sókün- Refl. f. of 2 sök- n.o.a.b. Xak. xı er beğke: sókündi: “the man knelt (catà “alğ rukbatayhi) before the 5eg” Kaş. II 154 (followed by 1 sókün-): xiv Muh. fttakd"tolean 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 866 
     
   
   
     822 on (something)' and the like sö:yğen- (sic) Mel. zr, rz, Só:kün- Rif. 102 seems to belong here). PUD söğne:- Hap. leg., but sce sógne:gü:; Den. V. fr. *sógün which seems to be cognate to siğil/söğül and may mean 'whitlow' or the like. Xak. xı er sögğöl sógne:di: 'alaca'l-raculu' l- tu'lil. wa. dáwálu “the man. treated and cured the wart' Kaş. I1] 3o1 (söğne:r, sógne:me:k). Tris. SGN PU?F sekentir virtually Hap. leg., occurring only in KB and the quotation fr. KB in Rog; “the planet Saturn”, The spelling is uncertain, the MSS. of both authorities varying between -r and -Z. Since, unlike sevit “Venus”, q.v., it has no Turkish etymology, no doubt a 1.-vv. Xak. xı KB (the highest of these is) sekentir (it revolves and remains in one sign of the zodiac for 2 years and 8 months) 131. PUD söğne:ğü: Hap. leg.; Dev. N. (Conc. N.)fr. sógne:-. Xak.xı söğne:ğü: 'aswelling (batra, i.c. whitlow) which comes out between the nail and the flesh” Kaş. 7 491. Dis. SGR D sekrik Dev. N. fr. sekri:- ; “a jump': Survives in NW Kaz. sikrik “a jump' R IV 681. Uyğ. virt ff. Man. [gap] Ségrik [gap] context obscure TT II 17, 59: Xak. xı sékrik “any place in the mountains which is crossed by jumping! (yu'bar 'anhá bi'l-watb) Kaş. I 478. D sókrük Hap. leg.; Kag.'s translation is the same as that of tila:k and no doubt means “a woman's sexual organs! ; presumably therefore Pass. Dev. N. fr. (2) *sókür-, Caus. f. of 1sók-. Xak. xi sökrük ^atá'u'l-mar'a Kaş. I 478: (Kip. xiv al-qadid 'aried strips of meat (kak et/) (PU) söğrük (unvocalized, -h- -A) (kuru: et) Bul. 8, o is obviously a different word and, if correctly transcribed, cognate to sógül-, q.v.). Dis. V. SGRD sökür- Caus. f. of 2 sök-, “to make (someone ce.) kneel' N.o.a.b., cf. çökür-. Türkü vii 7 E 2 (1 başlığ), 15, 18; 17 E 15, 16; N ro. ?D sekri:- “to jump'. Seesekergi:. S.i.a.m.l.g. w. unusual phonetic changes: NE sekir-/ ségivr- R IV 442-6: SE "Türki sekre-/ sékre-/sekeri- (also seki-/sekle- /sekli-/ sekilde-): NC sékir-: SC Uzb. sakra-: NW Kk, Nog. sekir-, Kaz. siker-: SW Osm. seğir-, in some cases with extended meanings. Cf. sagra:-. Uyf. vir ff. Bud. U IV qo, 47 (tólük); TT X 355: Xak. xı er suvka: sekri:di: "the man jumped (tcataba) into the water! (etc.) Kaş. III 281 (sekrir, sekri:me:k): o.o. / 142, 15; 354, 24: XIrt(?) Tef. sékri- "to jump' 267: xiv Muh. qafaza “to leap! ségir- Mel. so, o, Sékir- Rif. 114; wafaba ta waqafa (?error for qafaza) sékir116 (only): Çağ. xvff. ségri- (-di, *with DIS. V. SGN-8-”) sıçra- "to. jump' Vel. 288 (quotn.); ségri-/ségir- (both spelt) castam “to jump', but “to wake with a start” (castan az xtcab) and *to jump with surprise or fear' is sésken- (not an old word) San. 254v. 13 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv. Sekir-/sékir- "to jump, dance(?)” Qurö 156-7: Kom. xiv “to jump! sekir- CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiv sekri- wafaba İd. $3: xv raqaşa “to dance” sekir- Tuh. 17a. 11; a.o. 28b. s (saçra:-): Osm. xiv to xvr Sekri- (or segri- ?) "to jump'; in several texts T'T'S 1611; 11 806; IV 673. D sékrit- Caus. f. of sékri:- ; Kaş. notes two forms without a cross-refce. S.i.a.m.l.g.; in SE "Türki sekret-; SC Uzb. sakrat-; clsewhere sekirt- or the like. Xak. xi (in the section headed fa'landi:) ol atın ariktin. sekritti: (vocalized sekiritti:) "he made his horse jump (awtaba) over the canal' (etc.) (sekritü:r); similarly one says ol bitiğ okir erke:n sekritti: “he made an omission (aszoğ barzax) in reading the book or Koran' (sekritme:k) Kaş. II 333 (for the second phr. cf. sik): (in the chapter of words with, two consecutive consonants) ol at sekirtti: 'he started off (a"da) the horse' (etc.) IJ] 431 (sekirtür, sekirtme:k . . . Imperat. sekirt), o.o. II 274, 24; İİİ 429, 3: KB (the proud warrior) sekirtip “setting (the army) in motion' 2381: xın(?) Tef. sékrit- “to start off” (a horse) 267: Çağ. xv ff. ségrit-/ségirt- (both spelt) Caus. f.; cahántdan "to cause to jump' San. 255r. 5 (quotns.): Kip. xin /arada min fardi'l-faras “to drive (a horse) on" (VU) sekrit- (unvocalized) Hou. 33, 17: Osm. xiv ff. sekirt(?segirt-) c.i.a.p.; occasionally in xiv and xv *to drive (a horse) on', but normally Intrans., “to run; (of an army) to advance, attack” T'T'S I 611; İİ 805; İTİ 610; IV 672. D sekriş- Co-op. f. of sékri:-; "to jump together; to jump in competition with onc another". Xak. xr (in a grammatical scction) ol meninp birle: sekrişdi: "he jumped in competition with me (zoğ tabani mubára) to scc which of us was best at it” Kaş. JJ 225, 12; a.o. I 214 (tizig); n.m.e. Tris. SGR D sekerci: Hap. leg.; the context indicates a meaning like “brigand”. Perhaps der. fr. serker, if not N.Ag. fr. *seker, which is also the basis of Kip. xit hafza “to incite' (VU) seke:rle:- (sin unvocalized) Hou. 39, 12; /azza” mina'l-lazz "to molest! ditto do. 43, 3, and might possibly be the basis of sékri:- if that was a Den. V. in -i:-, Seker is prima facie the Aor. Participle, used as a N., of sek-, first noted in Kip. xiv sek- daraca, a word with several meanings, here perhaps 'to walk' d. 53 and surviving in SW Az., Osm. "to hop, skip along, walk mincingly' (a link, perhaps illusory, vv. sékri:-); "Tkm., more neutrally, 'to go, enter, come'. Xak. xi KB (thirdly, keep all the roads clear and) karakçığ sekerçiğ arıtğıl arığ 'clean out the highwaymen and brigands(?)' 5577. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 867 
     
   
   
        atis  ' TRIS. SGZ 823 Dis. SGS süksük some kind of a tree, prob. a tamarisk; prob. a quasi-onomatopoeic fr. the noise which it makes in a wind. Survives in SE Türki süksük “the saksaul tree' (ie. Haloxylon ammodendron, see U IIl, p. 32, footnote) Shaw 126 (only), and mentioned in SW Osm. “a kind of tree! (Red. 1067). Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. ötrü braman süksük otupin tamturmis *then the Brahman set fire to the firewood of sühsük U III 32, ig fi: Xak. xı süksük al-fKadá 'Euphorbia, tamarisk” Kaş. I 486: Çağ. xv ff. süksük 'plants which grow up in the spring and dry off in the summer and become dry sticks” (xas wu xaşah) Vel. 298 (quotns.); süksük (spelt) 'a tree (diraxti) which grows in sandy soil'; when it becomes dry its long roots emerge from the soil and they make sticks from them (quotn.); also called ucar (in 65r. 16 translated Aima-i tağ 'tamarisk”, otherwise unknown), in Ar. fadá San. 245v. 22 (followed by two RüZmi meanings otherwise unknown, “a rough, uneven gait, and “a horse that does not keep to the road"). VUC seksó:n 'eighty'; crasis of sekiz o:n, which was the form used in Türkü vit, Ix. 3 and Uyg. viri ff. Bud., PP 24, 4 and still survives as Ségiz on in NE Khak. In all other modern languages the form is seksen or the like. Xak. xr seksó:n the number 'eighty'; originally sekiz o:n 'eight times ten' and then joined together (cu'ilà wáhid) Kaş. 1 437: xi Tef. seksen 'eighty' 267: xiv Muh. 'eighty' sekzem Mel. 81, 15; sekse:in Rif. 187: Xwar. xiv seksen “eighty” Qutb 156: Kip. xim ditto Hou. 22, 15: XIV ditto İd. 53; Bul. 12, 14: XV ditto Kas. 39, 7; 65, 9 (sekse:n); Tuh. 6ob. ro. Dis. SGŞ D sikiş Dev. N. (connoting mutual action) fr. sik-; 'copulation'. Survives in SW Osm. and no doubt elsewhere. Xak. xr sikiş a/-mucáma'a Kaş. I 369: Kip. xiv sikiş al-rima" ld. 53. D1 sögüş Dev, N. (connoting mutual action) fr. Sö:$- , “cursing, abuse”, and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. w. minor phonetic changes. Uy£. viri ff. Man.-A M I ro, 19 (oyun): Xak. xr sögüş al-sabb mo”l-tasabb ma'a(n) both “abuse” and “mutual abuse” Kaş. 1 368: KB (there is little pleasure and much pain in governing a realm) az ol óggücisi telimrek sögüş “there are few who praise and many more (who) abuse” 2148; saran bolma artuk sógüs bulğa sen “do not be mean, you will reccive much abuse” 4553; 0.0. 239 (Ógdi:), 240, 260 (körksüz), etc.: xırı(?) 447. ajunka bu sógüs malàmat nelik "why these curses and reproofs to the world?" 453; a.o. 242 (uzal-): xiv .Muh. al-şatima “a curse' só:gis Mel. 84, 12; sö:güş Rif. 190: Çağ. xvff. sögüş. dugnàm “ curse, abuse” Sar. 245v. 28: Kom. xiv “abuse” söküş CC7I; Gr. (D) 2 sögüş 'roast meat'; morphologically obscure, but cognate to 2 sógül-, q.v. . Survives only(?) in SW Osm. sógüs 'roast meat'. Oğuz xı sógüs ("with -$-') mà yaşluh li'l-giwà' mina'l-cidà' wa'l-humlàn “a kid or lamb suitable for roasting” Kaş. 7 369: Osm. xvii söğüş . . . and, in Rümi, güşt-i yaxni 'cooked meat' San. 245v. 28. : Dis. V. SGŞD sikiş- Co-op. f. of sik-, survives in SVV Osm. and no doubt elsewhere. Xak. xr er ura:ğut birle: sikişdi: “the man and woman copulated” (báda'a); and both of them are described as active participants (mucümi") by this word Kaş. II 107 (sikişü:r, sikigme:k). D sögüş- (só:güg-) Recip. f. of só:$-; “to curse, or abuse, one another”. S.i.m.m.l. vv. some phonetic changes, SVV Tkm. sö:güş-. Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-A sógüsürler (VU) yontusurlar (sic) “they curse and threaten one another” M 7 9, 15-16: Xak. xı ola:r ikki: sógüsdi: tasabbd "those two cursed (or abused) one another” Kaş. JI 107 (sógüsü:r, sógüsme:k), a.o. JI 89, 13: Çağ. xv ff. söğüşRecip. f.; “to curse (or abuse, dugnám dadan) one another” San. 245v. 18. D söküş- Co-op. f. of 1 sök-, s.i.s.m.l. vv. minor phonetic variations. Xak. xı ol mana: to:n söküşdi: "he helped me to tear apart (/7 nagd) the seams of the garment'; also used for helping to demolish a house (f? hadmi'l-dàr) (etc.); and also for competing Xaş. II 107 (söküşü:r, söküşme:k), a.o. /T go, g-ro (artukluk). Tris. SGŞ D sógüslüg Hap. leg.?, P.N./A. fr. 1 sögüş. Xak. xı KB sögüşlüğ nelük boldı Dahhik utun 'why was wicked pablak (universally) cursed?” 241. Dis. SGZ sekkiz 'eight'; like ottuz, €kki:, q.v., and three other numerals it originally had a medial double consonant, but this is seldom written and in many languages not pronounced. S.ia.m.lg. with some phonetic changes (-k-/- — “z/-s). Only(?) SE Türki sekkiz: SC Uzb. sakkiz preserve the -kk-. Türkü viu sekiz (for sekkiz) is common? vir ff. including Man. and Yen. ditto: Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-A: Man.: Bud.: Civ. ditto: O. Kir." IX ff. ditto: Xak. xı sekiz the number 'eight'; it is an abbreviation (taxfif) of sekkiz Kaş, I 365; a.0. 1 437 (seksó: n): xiri(?) Tef. sekiz 266: xiv Muh. ht” sekkiz Mel. 81, 8; sekiz Rif. 186: cab xv ff. sekiz (with -k-”) sekiz Vel. 288; sékiz (spelt) “eight”, also prö- : nounced Sékkiz Sam. 255r. 10; (on the -kksee 20v. o ff): Kom. xiv 'eight" segiz (sic) CCG, Gr.: Kap. xır “eight” sekiz Hou: 22, 8: xiv ditto İ4. 53; sekkiz Bul ız, ir: OX sekiz Kav. 65, 7; Tuh. 6ob. 7. ” : Tris. SGZ D sekizinç (sekkizinç) Ordinal f. of sekkiz, “eighth”. As in the case of other Ordinals (see.   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 868 
     
   
   
     824 üçünç) the Suff. gradually became -ingi:, in some languages -incli:, fr. about xı, s.i.a.m.l.g. in those forms. Not well attested in the medieval period. Türkü vırı ff. Man. sekizinç “eighth (paragraph)! Chuas. 156; a.o. M II iş, 4 (1): Uy£. virit sekizinç ay “in the eighth month” Su. E 5, 6: viri ff. Civ. ditto in several. documents in USp.: (Xak.) xm(?) Tef. sekizinç 266 (under sekiz): Xwar. xiv seksinçi (sic) Qutb 156: Kom. xiv sekizinçi CCG; Gr. Mon. SL 1 sa:l “a raft', prob. specifically one made of timber, see 2 ta:r.. S.i.a.m.l.g., in SW Tkm. sa:1, See salla:-. Xak. xı sa:l al-'amd bi-ma'rà ta:r "a support” in the (same) sense as ta:r Kaş. III 156: Çağ. xv ff. sal “a thing used for crossing rivers; they fasten timbers together and launch them on to the water and they do not sink; with it they cross the water Vel. 278 (quotn.); sal 'a thing constructed of wood and reeds on which they sit and so cross deep rivers! San. 235v. 26 (quotn.): Kip. xiv sa:l 'poles ('idár) put together and tied” , one climbson toit on a river(al-bahr), and so crosses from one side to the other; an (Ar.) word for it is al-fatef (properly “a raft of inflated skins") İd. 59. VU?F 2 sa:l Hap. leg.; 'lacquer'. Prob. a L-w., FTokharian or Indian, not Chinese. Cf. 1 sir. Xak. xı sa:l [uzücát tuttaxad mina'l-fírà' 'viscous substances made of glue'; they are smeared on Chinese and other wooden bowls (a£-qisà'); then they are carved (or painted ?, yungag "alayha) Kaş. İİİ 157. VU si:l Hap. leg.; 'abstemious'.. Xak. xı sil kişi: 'an abstemious (qatir) person”, that is one who dislikes (yaf) cating all (sorts of) food; si:l at “a horse which eats sparingly' (galilu'i-itiláf) Kag. HHI 134. sozl “left” (opposite to 'right'). S.i.a.m.l.g.ş SW 'l'km. so:1, See soltun. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. sol kózi “his left eye” Suv. 595, 12; Sol atsiz erpek “the left ring finger! TT V, p. 16, Note A 54, 6: Xak. xı So:l elig “the left (a/-yusrd) hand” Kaş. III 134; a.o. I 72 (elig): KB solindin “in his left hand” 772; solupdin tamu orniı “the position of hell is on your left” 917; a.o. 4056: xrr1(?) Tef. sol “eft” (side) 273: xiv. Müh. al-yadı”l-yusra (ün Türkistan) so:l elig, (in our country) So:] eliğ Mel. 7, 15; Rif. 79; yasár “to the left” so:l el 14, 10; gö: Çağ. xv ff. sol sol taraf Vel. 297 (quotn.); sol cámb-i (ap “the left side” Sam. 246r. 17 (quotns.): X war. xiv ditto Qutb 158: Kom. xiv. "left; on the left” sol CCI; Gr.: Kip./ Tkm. xiv sol a/-samál "left in 'l'km.; also called şağ and son İd. so (Sad, the Tkm. word for “right”, is an obvious error; Son (sic) a Sec. f. of So:l, prob. due to the influence of on 'right', is noted in NW Krım, £ IV 533); şamdl şolda: Bul. 14, s: xv samál şol Kat. 35, 4: Tuh, 21a, 7; yasür şol do. 39a. 9;. 73b. 8, TRIS. SGZ sözl "the juice in mcat; lymph'; survives in NW Kk., Nog. söl, Kaz. sül, Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. (demons) sól aşlığlar 'who cat serum or İymph” U H ör, 10; a.o. U III 41, o-1 (ii) (kabar-): Xak. xı sözl “the juice (a/-rutüba) in a tree or meat'; hence onc says sözllüğ et *meat which has not been thoroughly cooked, so that traces of blood remain in it” Kaş. 77I 134 (prov., sec kadın). Mon. V. SLsal- basically “to move (something: /dec.), to put into motion', with some implication of violent motion, and a wide range of extended meanings. S.ia.m.lg. as a Trans., Intrans., and Aux. V. Cf. kemiş-. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. bódiyü kolin sala [gap] “dancing and waving her arms! U /7 24, 4: Civ. bu üç [gap] birgerü salıp kayinturup İçgül 'stir these three . . . together, boil them, and drink them" H I 193-4; (in an agreement for the lease of a vineyard, after a list of various taxes on it) biz salmazbiz tép biz Budaşiri Baxşıka tapşurup berdimiz “vee are not responsible for paying them; we have handed them over and entrusted them to Buddhasri Baxşı USSp. 14, 15-16; a.0. T T VII 42, s (beltir): Xak. xi ol mapa: to:nin saldi: "he waved (lama'a) his garment at me'; and one says ol mapa: kişi:de: altun saldı: "he made me spend (axraca li) money on the man”, and su:v yığa:çığ saldı: "the water washed away (laqata) the wood' (etc.); also used when a man signals (azcma'a) with his hand from afar Kaş. II 24 (sala:r, salma:k): xin(?) At. takabburn yérdin salip “drive pride away from the place” (and cling to humility) 267; isizlikdin özni srparu salip *drawing. voursclf aside from vvickedness” 366: xiv. Mu. (Mef.) abla'a "to cause to swallow'; (Rif.) ablaga “to bring (to a place)” Sa:l- ər, 11; 102; ba"afa “o send” sa:l- 24, 1r; ros; xala (read xallà “to release', sce. al-taxl;va) sa:l- 26, 1; 108; al-taxliva Sa:Imak 36, 1; 121: Çağ, xv ff. sal(mak, ctc.) sal- ; also used for viirek oynaması “of the heart, to palpitate', and harakat ve idtiráb "to move, agitate' Vel. 276 (quotns.); ditto also in the meaning of "acz “to be weak, incapable(?)' 277 (quotn.); sal- andáxtan “to throw', and rdtiráb hardan “to agitate', and mudtarib sáxtan dil "to make the heart palpitate'; in the last meaning it is both Trans. and Intrans. but cannot be used without the word “heart” San. 232v. 24 (quotns,): Xwar. xii sal- “to throw' “A/ 31: xiv Sal- "to puf, put down, throw down', etc. Qutb 152; MN 165, etc.: Kip. xiv. şal- arsala “to send” İd. 59: xv ramd “an fayri'l-qaws "to throw' (but not “to shoot! an arrow) sa:l- (fbırak-) Kav. 74, 2 (but “to shoot? an arrow at-); ramá (bırak-/ kemis-/) sal- (/y1k-) Tuh. 17a. 13; /aqqaha “to throw? şal- (fbirak-/kemiş-) do. 22a. ro: Osm. xiv ff. sal- is noted with eleven different meanings T'TS 7 sos: II 786; III soz, IV 657. PU sil- basically "to rub (something cc); to wipe' (often with the connotation of wiping  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 869 
     
   
   
      Mistafenbnlacas "UH: CAS olei ePi Maa eye rər eis i DIS. V.:SLD- 825 clean), with various extended meanings like 'to smear (plaster or mud) on to (a building); to massage; to caress, stroke'. Most modern forms have back vowels and are Dis.: NE Sag. sıla- "to smear, plaster; "Tüm. “to rub” R IV 652: SE Türki sıla- “to caress, stroke; to rub, rub down; to flatter” Jarring 273: NC Kir. Silà- "to stroke, caress'; Kzx. sil- (?sila-)/ sılan- “to rub off; to strip (flesh from bones); to smear; to massage': SC Uzb. sila- “to smoothe, stroke': NW all languages sila- “to stroke, caress; to massage; to smcar”: but SW Az., Osm. sil-; Tkm. sı:l- "to wipe, polish, clean, erase'. As the word is omitted fr. Kaş. and the only early der. f.s are sllig, and perhaps Sili:, q.v., it is uncertain whether it was originally sil- or sili:-, but it certainly had front vowels. Uyf. vir ff. Bud. türtüngü silip 'rubbing on ointment' U 77 40, 106-7: (Xak.) xiv Muh. malı "to erase” (VU) silMel. 31, 7; Rif. 115 (masaha ('to wipe") wa mahá); masaha yadahu “to wipe the hands' sile:- 115 (31, 5 éli: sürt-); al-mash silmak (unvocalized) 121 (only): Çağ. xv ff. sıl- (so spelt) bük hardan “to cleanse! San. 255r. 13: Xwar. xiv Sil- *wipe, wipe away! Qutb 157 (note form silgeymen), 164 (sila- in error): Kip. xtrt masaha sil- Hou. 33, 13: xiv ditto ld. 53; masaha wa mahd sil- (-mek) Bul. 81r.: xv masaha sil- Kav. 9, 21; 74, 1; Tuh. 25b. 13. Sol- See solus-. Dis. SLA VUD sili: Hap. leg.; the sin has a fatha in the MS., but if al-mityan (sic in the MS.), a word not contained in the ordinary dicts., means, as morphologically it should, “a mason's trowel' or the like, this is best explained as a Dev. N. (Conc. N.) in -i: fr. sil-. Xak. xı sili: a/-mütyan Kaş. III 233. Dis. V. SLAD salla:- Den. V. fr. 1 sa:l; “to put (people) on a raft'. This V. has been plausibly restored in Uyğ. vin Su. S 1, see altın, It has no connection vv, SW Osm. salla- “to swing, shake, hold in suspense', and the like, which is an . irregular der. f. of sal-. DF sola:- Den. V. fr. so:; lit. 'to chain, fasten with chains', metaph. “to interlock”. N.o.a.b. Uy. viuit ff. Bud. PP 31, 5-6 (so); TT V 8, ss (ictirti): Civ. (then that mucus dries like clinging mud) [gap] a:kağ yolla:rda: sola:p kodor perhaps '(the disease] fixes and deposits (mucus] in the respiratory passages' TT VIII I5. S sula- See suvla:-. D süzle:- Den. V. fr. sü:, “to campaign”. Common in Türkü, but otherwise n.o.a.b. "Türkü vir süle:- and the syn. phr. sü: Süle:- occur nearly thirty times in 7, 7I, T, e.g. ilğerü: santu:p yazı:ka: tegi: süledim “1 campaigned eastwards as far as the Shantung plain” 7 S 3; sü: sülepen “making campaigns” (he subdued peoples in every direction) 1 E 2, II E 3: Uyğ. vi ff. Bud. (if I have deprived other people of their lives) sü sülep 'by making campaigns' (putting on armour, etc.) U 11 78, 30; 86, 47; TT IV ro, 12: Civ. sü sülemek is the name of a hexagram TT I 31: Xak. xi beg yağı:ka: süle:di: "the beg campaigned against (ğazd) his enemy”, originally sü:le:df:, then the -ü:- was shortened Kaş. III 271 (süzle:r, sü:le:me:k (sic); verse): (xiv Muh.(?) sü:le:- is entered in the margin against Aabasa "to make prisoner zinda:nla:- (Pe. 1.-vv.) in Rif. 107). ” Dis. SLC (D) sa:lci: Hap. leg.; N.Ag. meaning “cook”, but there is no appropriate word *sa:l to provide a basis for it. Xak. xi sa:lct: al-matbaxi ft aşlı”l-luğa originally *'cook'; thence “a large kitchen knife' (safratu'l-mafbaxi) is called sa:lçı: biçe:k Kaş. 111 442. Dis. SLD D soltun Den. Adi. /Adv. fr. so:1, lit, “situated on the left”, in the early period also, as a Cardinal Point, “in the east” in the southoriented system. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. soltun "in the east' TT VI 94-5 (optun); soltun yınak “on the left” X 159: Civ. soltin başı “the left side of the head' TT VII 34, 6; o.o. do. 9 ('ear'); do. 12 ('eyebrow"): Xak. xi KB (God is neither behind nor in front) nà soldin opun “nor to the left or right” 18. Dis. V. SLDPUD solat- Hap. leg.; occurs in a text which certainly contains transcription errors; in the same line yağak was transcribed yasak. "The meaning is within limits clear, but although the word can hardly be a Caus. f. of sola:- it is hard to make an alternative suggestion. Uy£. vii ff. Bud. (if a man erects a monastery the size of a nutshell (see yağak) and) buğday evinince burxan kórkindin solatsar “adorns it(?) with a statue of Buddha the size of a grain of wheat' (and puts in it a reliquary the size of one seventh of a perilla seed) Pfahl. 6, 6. D sület- (sü:let-) Caus. f. of sü:le:-; “to launch (troops) on a campaign' and the like. N.o.a.b. Türkü vir on ok süsi:n sületdim “1 sent out the army of the On Ok (Western "Türkü) on a campaign” T 43; xağanımin (sic) sületdimiz “ve persuaded my xagan to start a campaign! T 53. D saltur- Caus. f. of sal-; s.i.m.m.l.g. vv. minor phonetic changes (-t-/-d-, -u-/-1-) and the same wide range of meanings as sal-. Uyğ. vit ff. Bud. burxanlarka saçığ tökük salturup “have offerings and libations put (or throvvn) before the Buddhas” (and give food to the spirits) TT VII 25, 7-8: Xak. xı (after Oğuz phr.) ol mana: ye:p salturdı: "he ordered someone to wave a sléeve at me” (hatta alma'a bi-kumma ilayya); also used for 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 870 
     
   
   
      826 DIS..V. ordering someone to throw (bi-tarh) something Kaş. II 187 (salturur, salturma:k): Oğuz xı ol meni: apa:r salturdi: amara bi'l-ihála li 'alayhi “he ordered me to make a payment to him'(?) Kaş. II 187 (followed by Xak.): Osm. xv saldur- 'to causc (someone) to abandon or give up (something)! TTS IV 65s. Dis. SLG D salığ Dev. N. fr. sal- (this, rather than salik, was prob. the original form) with a wide potential range of meanings. In the early period it meant some form of tax, and was the common word for 'tax' in the Golden Horde, see Caferoğlu in T M JV, p. 41. Itsurvives in this sense as Sélik in SE Tar. R IV 359; "Pürki P.$ 386. Üyğ. viri ff. Civ. borluknup negü kim salığı zakaütı bolsar 'whatever taxes and poor-rates (Ar. 1.-vv,) fall on the vineyard" USp. 2, 8; salió bérgü bolmis üçün "because they have become liable to pay taxes" do. 25, 7; 0.0. do. 14, 14 (basi); 3o, s(?): (Xak.) xiv Rbg. salığ bér- “to point out” (of the hand)(a route; lit. “to give a wave") RIV 359 (quotn.): Çağ. xv ff. salığ/salık (r) “a government assessment (fazecih-i mulki) imposed on a country for (the pay of) a mercenary army" (quotn.); (2) surdg «ca migán "a sign or mark” (quotn.); (3) harba * weapon of vvar” (Pe, quotn.) San. əşar. 14: Osm. xiv. salik (1) 'news, information'; (2) 'some kind of weapon', and salik/salu ver- "to point out, indicate; in several texts T TS I 593; H 784; III 591; IV 655. D sola:k prob. Dev. N./A. fr. *sola:- Den. V. fr. so:l; lit, 'situated on the left" or the like. Prob. the origin of Mong. sologay “left, left hand; left-handed' (Kom. r40r, Haltod 343). Survives for "left-handed' in SW Osm., but all other languages seem to use some form of the Mong. word in this sense. "The Kip. xı meaning, not recorded elsewhere, seems to mean literally “the organ on the left; Kaş?s ety mology is, of course, preposterous. Kip. xr sola:k “the spleen' (ai-tiha!); the s- is altered from t- (i.e. in tala:k, q.v.); this is like the (Ar.) word stt for síds and zast for fass (another example quoted) Kaş. I 411: (Kap. xv(?) al-a'sar "left-handed' şolağay in text, solak in margin in second (?SW) hand Twh. 4a. 4): Osm. xvi ff. solak (metaph. for) 'a personal bodyguard of the Sultan'; in several texts TTS II 832; III 634; IV 699: xvur solak in Rümi, "a man who uses his left hand” San. 246r. 19. S suluk See suvluk. D salğa: Hap. leg.; Dev. N./A. fr. sal-. Xak. xi salğa: at “a restive (camm') horse! Kaş. J 425. D salkim occurs in two quite different meanings (r) “cold, hoar-frost', and the like, and rather later (2) 'something pendulous, a bunch of grapes, ear-rings”, and the like. İn the first sense it is syn. w. Sarkim, q.v., which is prima facie a N.S.A, fr. sark-; but sark- means “to SLDhang limply' and the like, so is semantically the basis of salkim iin its second sense... On the other hand this is also onc meaning of salin-, q.v. "The explanation is perhaps that *salk-, a der. f. in -k- (Intrans.) of sal-, also meant “to hang limply' and is the basis of salkım in its second sense, and that sark- and sarkım arc Sec. f.s of these words. But the connection between Sal- and its derivatives and 'cold' is obscure. Salkim in the sense of “a bunch of grapes”, and the like, survives in NW Kk. Solkim: SVV Az. salxım, Osm., Tkm. salkım, it docs not survive in the sense of “cold”, hut the cognate form salkin s.i.a.m.l.g., in NE Alt, “el, for “a violent (cold) wind', elsewhere for 'cool', or “cold” (weather). Uyğ. vilr ff. Civ. (boil a few dry siri) bir keçe tastin salkimka tégürüp 'expose them one night out of doors to the cold' (and the next day take them and reduce them to ashes) I1 7 178: (Xak.) xui(?) Tef. salkim “a bunch (of fruits)” 26r (salğum “a mirage' is a Sec. f. of sakım, q.v.): Çağ. xv ff. salkum (spelt) xüga-i angür "a bunch of grapes' and the like, in Ar. "xeqüd Sar. 234r. ro: Xvvar, xim salkum “a bunch of grapes! ' Ali 52: Kom. xiv 'bunch of grapes! salkum; '(cold) wind' salkun (sic) CCG; Gr.: Kip. xii al-'ungid mina'l-'anab sta gayrihi salkuım How. 8, 1: xiv salkum ditto; and one says bir salkum üzüm yedim “1 ate one bunch of grapes! İd. 59: Xv 'unqüd salkim Tuh. 25a. rr: Osm. xvi ff. salktm 'pendulous ear-rings' in several phr. TTS I 594; IV 656. Mon. V. SLGSilk- “to shake (something. Acc.) ; s.i.a.m.l.g. as SÍIIk-/silik-/silki-, Uyğ. vrr ff. Bud. Sue. ago, 17 (çan): Xak. xı er yığa:ç silkdi: “the man shook (nafada) the tree” Kaş, III 422 (silke:r, silkme:k): xi(?) Tef. silk- "to shahc' 269: xiv. Mul. nafada. Silkit- (?for silki-) Mel. 31, 15 (only): Çağ. xv ff. silk(spelt) tagündan "to shake, shake off” Sam. 255v. zr: Kom. xiv ditto CCI; Gr.: Kip. xit nafada silik- Hou. 36, 3: xiv Sİlk- nafada İd. 53; ditto (but silik- before Suffs. beginning vv. consonants) Bul. 83r.: xv nafada mina'l-nafd silk- Kar. 76, 2; Tuh. 37a. 9. Dis. SLG Dsilig/silik(?) Dev. N./A. fr. sil-; 'clean, pure, smooth', and the like, lit. and metaph. "The original form (or forms?) is uncertain. The only certain early -k is in "Türkü and there the second vowel is not marked and might have been -ü-. Medieval and modern forms like sili: point to -$, Osm. silik to -k, Both forms may have existed, but if so were syn. Türkü vir (VU) silik kız oğlun "their pure (i.e. virgin) daughters' 7 F 7, 24; H E 7: Uyğ. vil ff. Bud. (the lay sister) Tepriken tégin (PU) siliğ terken kunçuy teprim P.N. Pfahl. 6, 4: Xak. xı (PU) silig er al-raculu'l- zarifu'l -naqryw'l - hasanwl -Jatifwl- kalám “a man who is graceful, clean, good-looking, and a witty speaker” Kaş. I ago: KB siliğ parM x—“v””9——xxə?ələəs.ə......—————————(K(K(Q 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 871 
     
   
   
         000. 0 .——.  DIS. V. SLN- 827 ticularly in the apostrophe ay siliğ is common; it consistently rhymes vv. words ending in -$, bilig, tilig, öğdiliğ, etc.; 42 (Kilk), 43 (alçak), 75 (1 okr-), 527 (8a:v), 956 (akru:), 2072 (1 ö:z), etc.: xııı(?) At. uluğka kiçiğke sılığ (or siltk, sic, MSS. vary) kil sözün “speak honestly to great and small” 356: xiv Muh.(?) al-nazif "clean, pure” si:li:ğ, quoted as a word ending in -ğ Rif. 77 (only): Çağ. xv ff. sılığ (sic) pák wa bi-'ayb "pure, faultless' (also an abbreviation of sili “hot”) Sar. 256r. 7 (quotns.): Kom. xiv “pure” sili CCG; Gr.: Kip. xit Ay sili: “clear (riazif) moon'; P.N. of slave girl Hou. 30, 18: xiv silik (MSS. selih) al-sabbu'l-zarif "a graceful boy” . . . sili: malmüs (?, MS. malmas) "smoothed” İd. s3. PUD sülük Hap. leg.; if correctly so transcribed perhaps A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. sü: meaning "army horses'. It is obviously not sülük “a leech' first noted in Çağ. xv ff. San. 246r. 26: Kip. xur Hou. 7, 6: xiv İd. 53 and s.í,s.m.l. Xak. xr KB (from the stockbreeders come food, clothing mingü at adğır sülük “riding horses, stallions, army horses(?)' (and load-carrying baggage animals) 4441. D sö:llüğ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. sözl, "juicy (meat, etc.). Xak. xr Kag. IJI 134 (Só:l); n.m.e. D silkim Hap. leg.; N.S.A. fr. silk-; lit. “a single act of shaking. "The word, with Sepük, also Hap. leg., occurs in the guide to good table manners. AA translation can only be conjectural. Xak. x1 KB (stretch out your right hand and pronounce the name of God; your food supplies will increase and you will become rich, Do not stretch out and take a meat ball opposite someone else; take whatever is oppostte you and eat it. Do not draw a knife and pick up a bone on it) ayı bolma kovdas nà silkim sepük 'do not be excessively quarrelsome (?; Hap. leg.) or upset the tableware'(?) 4599 (this would be easier if a corruption of yá silkme could be assumed). Dis. V. SLGD silktür- Caus. f. of silk-, “to have (something Ace.) shaken”, etc. S.i.s.m.l. Uy£. vir ff. Bud. (then the officials) kancanabati balikta çup silktürüp “had a bell (or gong, Chinese ].-w.) sounded in the city of Kaficanavati' U III 29, 13-14. D silkin- Refl. f. of silk-; s.i.s.m.l. as (1) Intrans. 'to shake, shiver'; (2) Pass. 'to be shaken'. Xak. xr er to:nin silkindi: "the man busied himself shaking (mafd) his garment'; and one says er silkindi: igsa'arra cildu'l-insán "the man's skin quivered” , and tevey silkindi: “the camel was restless” (intafada) Kaş. II 246 (silkinü:r, silkinme:k: prov.): Çağ. xv ff. silkin- zagdnda şudan “to be shaken' Sam. 256r. 1 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 158: Kom. xiv ditto CCG; Gr.: Kip. xv intafada silkin- Tuh. 6b. 4. Tris. SLG PUD siliglik A.N. fr. siliğ/silik, “cleanness, purity”, and the like, lit. and metaph." Xak. xr K.B (a man must have gentleness) ham siliglik kerek “and purity' (or honesty ?, understanding and knowledge) 326; (Aytoldi started to speak placidly, and said what he had to say) siliğlik bile “vith honesty (or sincerity ?)' 584: xiv Muh. (as an example of (r) yd” representing -1-; (2) kàf representing -8-) a/-nizafa 'cleanness, purity' si:li:gli:à Mel. 5, 18; 6, 9; Rif. 76, (77 see silig). Tris. SLM D sola:muk Tlap. leg.; prob. Dev. N./A. fr. *sola:-, cf. sola:k. Xak. xı sola:muk a/-a'sar mina'l-ricàl "a left-handed man” Kaş. I 487. Tris. V. SLMD salımlaş- Hap. leg.; Recip. Den. V. fr. *salim, N.S.A. fr. sal-. Xak. xı «ol» anın birle: salımlaşdı: cádalahu wa máráhu “he contended with him and opposed him stubbornly” Kaş. JI] 258 (salımlaşu:r, salimlaşma:k, sec note on konuklaş-). Dis. SLN D.salgu: Hap. leg.; in a section headed /a"/£ for words containing -D-; crasis of *salingu: Dev. N. (N.L.) fr. salın-, “a sling'; in most modern languages 'sling' is some form of sapÉan, not an ancient word, but in NC Kir. salmo:r Dev. N. fr. sal- vv. Suff. -mo:r, prob. Mong., see Studies, p. 203. Xak. xı salpu: “a sling (al-xaddafa) used to throw pebbles” (al-/taga) Kaş. III 379. Dis. V. SLND salin- Refl. f. of sal-; s.i.m.m.l.g. with a wide range of meanings. Uyğ. viir ft. Bud. (of a dying man) altın erini boş bolup kodı salınsar *when his lower lip becomes loose and hangs down' Suv. $95, 17; (of a corpse; the stomach bursts and) bagirsuklari salinip "its entrails hang out” 77 X 548-9: Xak. xı yinçü: kula:ktın salındı: “the pearl hung (tadalla) from the car”, also used of anything that was hanging from something Kaş. 1I 154 (salınu:r, salınma:k): KB (fulfil God's commands and offer Him your service) ucup kir sarayka erejin salın “fiy (i.e. die?) and enter the palace (of heaven) and grasp(?) its happiness for yourself' 3672; a.o. 118 (küjek): xiri(?) At. takabbur libasın kedip tap salın "f you are wearing the garment of pride quickly cast it off” 277; aya artak islig sevincin salın “O man whose deeds are corrupt, cast away your pleasure in them' 413; Tef. şadlık üze salınu salinu 'giving themselves over to joy' 261: Çağ. xv ft. salın-/ salil- andáxta şudan “to be thrown' San. 233v. 5 (quotns.): Xwar. xii ditto “AZ 33: Kom. XTV "to be suspended, to hang (Intrans.)' salinCCG, Gr.: Kip. xiv salin- istarsala “to hang down' İd. 59: (xv salin- in a second (SW?) hand in the margin against tadallà Tuh. şa. 9  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 872 
     
   
   
     828 and fa"allaqa "to be suspended" do. 10a. 11): Osm. xiv ff. salın- (1) * to sway, wobble'; (2) 'to be suspended'; (3) 'to be thrown (into something Dat.) ; c.i.a.p. TTS II 785; III soz: IV 656. Tris. SUN D salındı: Intrans./Pass. Dev, NJA.. fr. salın-, survives in SW Osm. salıntı "a swell at sca; swaying about”. Xak. xi salındı: otun 'firewood which a flood has thrown up (/aqatahu) on the bank of a river”: salındı: ne: “anything thrown away' (al-matruh): salındı: (MS. sol.ndt:) "a man's plait of hair” ('arf, ?read 'urf), derived fr. the phr. salındı: ne:n “the thing hung down' (fadalla), it means 'permanently hanging down' (abada(n) mutadalli), an incorrect word (/uğa ğayr fasilia) Kaş. I 449. Tris. V. SLND salıntur- Caus. f. of salın-, s.i.s.m.l, usually w. much the same meaning. Uy£. viti ff. Bud. (the maral deer) tillerin salinturup “hanging out their tongues” U IV 34,71. D salpu:la:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. salpu:; vocalized saltgu:la:- in the MS., but this seems to be an error, Xak. xı üzüm salgu:la:di: “the grapes hung (tadalla) from the vine trellis'; and onc says er 1tiğ salpu:la:dı: “the man threw a missile (ran . . . bi-qidáfa) at the dog” Kaş, 1H 410 (salpu:fa:r, salpu:la:ma:k). Dis. V. SLŞD salış- Recip. f. of sal-; s.i.s.m.l, w. a wide range of meanings. Xak. xı ola:r ikki: yé:p salışdı: “those two waved (/ama'a) their sleeves at onc another", also used when they £rasped one another by the shoulders (axada 2s. 'ataf) in wrestling and pushed one another right and left; the original meaning is shaking (tafd) garments, etc. at one another Kaş. I7 109 (salisu:r, salisma:k). D soluş- Co-op. f£. of sol- “to wilt, wither'. Sol- with the same meaning s.i.m.m.l. but is not noted earlier than Xwar. xiu “Ali 40: xiv. Qutb 158; MN 349, etc. Xak. xı ya:ş soluşdı: "the vegetables (etc.) vvithered” (dabala); also used of any vegetable or fruit when it has lost its freshness (dahabat taráwatuhu) Kaş. II 109 (solusu:r, solusma:k). Mon. SM se:m not an independent word but a jingle w. em in the phr. em se:m, n.o.a.b. Uy£. vrir ff. Bud. uküs tórlüg €m sem “many kinds of remedies! TT VI 264-5: Xak. xr “a remedy' (al-'ilàc) is called em se:m; se:m is not used alone (vufrad) but (only) in the Hend. (yuzdawac) Kaş. İİİ 157; a.o. (em sem) 7 407, 28: xın(?) Tef. em sem “remedy” 76: Osm. XIV to XVI (only) ditto, common T'TS 7 267; 1H 381; İH 2352; IV 296. sı:m alliterative Pref.; see si:m simra:k. süm alliterative Pref. in Oğuz xi; Kaş. 1 338 (süçi8). DIS. V. SLNDis. SMA VUF soma: Hap. leg.; prob. a Chinese phr., the -ma: may be mai/mo wheat! (Giles 7,602). Xak. xı soma: the word for 'sprouting wheat" (inta munabbata); it is dricd and ground and made into porridge (al-'agávid) or bread; also *sprouting barley! (a/-şa"ir) which is made into beer (xamiru'l-fugqà') Kaş. III 234. Dis. SMD VU?F samda: Hap. leg.; prob. a corruption of some form of Greek sandalion which is a L-w. in several Oriental languages, Cigil xt samda: a/-sandalu'lladi yulbas "a sandal” which is worn (i.c. not 'sandal-wood') Kaş. I 418. D sımta:ğ Dev, N/A. fr. sımta:- ; 'negligent, negligence'; n.o.a.b. — Uyf. vur ff. Bud. (of inferior men) Sanskrit pramattànám “of the negligent, careless” sımta:ğla:rnın TT VEHI 2.2, a.o. U I 58 (mis-spelt simtag). ?F samdu:y Hap. leg.; prob. a Chinese phr., san tui. Xak. xı samdu:y “the word for any food which is somewhere hetween (fa"dın mu'tadil) hot and cold, as suits its character” Kag. III 240. Dis. V. SMDsımta:- “to neglect, he careless about (something), l.-w. in Mong. as şimta- (Kom, 1507)/ şimda- "UHaltod 370), where, no doubt owing to a misunderstanding of some Buddhist text, it means 'to hasten, make great efforts, do one's best”. N.o.a.b. Uyğ- viti ff. Bud. (evildocrs must be rounded up and arrested) yaragmaz kemişip sımtap bos tdsar ^it is not scemly to disregard or neglect them and let them go frce” Sut. 561, 12-713; 0.0. U J 58. D sımta:1- Pass. f. of simta:- used as Intrans.; "to be negligent, careless'. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. Sanskrit abramaüdamişayesmin “in this region of non-negligence” simta:Ima:ma:kı [rap] TT VII] A2; ao. do. E.23; nom ermezde yoridaçı simtalmışlar “those who behave irreligiously and are negligent! Radloff, Kwan-fi-im — Pusar 71, 16. Tris. SMD D sımta:ğsız Priv. N./A. fr. simta:£; “free from neglectfulness, or idleness'. | N.o.a.b. Uy. vri ff. Man. (they observed your commandments) sımtağsız köpülün “vith a mind frec from neglectfulness! TT III 131; 0.0. do. 148; IX 46: Bud. (at that time they become) sımtağsız köpüllüğ, simtafsiz bolmista ken “after having become free from neglectfulness" (they can achieve all good things) Azafrrisimit fragment, TT III, p. 30, note r3r, 2; a.0. Suv. 247, 14-16 (2 örüğ). Dis. SMG simek this word and simekle:- raise some difficulties. Malov in Pamyatniki drevnetyurkskoi pis'mennosti, Moscow-Leningrad, 1951,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 873 
     
   
   
      ——:ı: -———.— DIS. V. SMR- , 820 P. 420, suggested w. refce. to Suv. 5, 2 that it was identical w. Cuv. çimök (syrmek) and meant "funeral feast”, but that word is merely the Cuv. equivalent of yémek 'food' and is quite irrelevant. In the vast majority of cases simek is used in the Hend. arığ simek and seems to mean “copse, forest, yungle”, or the like. In Suv. 602, 7 it is used by itself and cannot have this meaning. Semekle-, so spelt, in Suv. s, 2 may beadifferent word. Uy£. vii ff. Bud. arığ simek U II ro, 13-14 etc. (2 arığ), (on the banks of that river a large crowd- of fishermen had collected and) balik tartğu simekin kilurlar erti Suv. 602, 7-8 (for continuation see 2 to:$) meaning obscure, possibly "and had made scoops(?) to catch the fish', see simekle:-. Tris. V. SMGD simekle:- Den. V. fr. simek, q.v.; n.o.a.b. Uy£. viri ff. Bud. (he died . . . the people in the house) uluğ yığıt sığıt kili[p ölüğüğ) semekleğgeli [. . . éltmezken] üç kün ertip ba[rdi. törtünç) kün . . . Suv. $, 1—4 (text restored by Rad.) the meaning suggested by Malov, op. cit. above, is “raised loud lamentations; three days passed and they had not yet succeeded in burying the corpse. On the fourth day . . .; in this context semekle- might mean “to carry out (to burial) or the like; (after the passage quoted under 2 to:ğ, it was impossible to block up that outlet quickly. Seeing this he thought *when this outlet was broken up, a deep channel formed") incip yüz miy kişiler birle simekIlep terk tavrasar üç ayka tegi yeme bütürgülük iş ermez “so if a hundred thousand men together hurried to scoop up (carth) (7) the work of blocking it up could not be done within thrce months' do. 602, 15-18. Dis. SML VUD sumlim N.S.A. fr. sumli:-, n.o.a.b. Xak. xi sumlim tat 'a Persian who is completely ignorant qa ya'rif . . . albatta) of the Turkish language” , and anyone who does not know "Turkish is called sumlim Kag. I 486; 2.0. İİ 347 (sumlit-). Dis. V. SMLD semle:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. se:m, used only in the Hend. emle:- semle:-. Xak.xı one says as a Hend. (/f7”Z-atbü") o1 anı: emle:di: semle:di: "he treated him medically” (Hend., 'álacahu wa dáwáhu) Kaş. III 298 (semle:r, semle:me:k, MS. in error -ma:k). VUDF simle:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. "sim, no doubt a Chinese l.-w.; “to crush, mince', or the like. Cf. kinle:-, Uyf. vir ff. Civ. H 7 157 (cüwit). VU sumli:- “to talk unintelligibly'; pec. to Xak. Xak. xi er sumliı:dı: “the man spoke 2,nón-Turkish language (bi-kalàm Şayrp”l-turhiya) which the man addressed did not understand". Xaş." III 298.(sumhir, sumli:ma:k): KB ciceklikte sandvvaç ünün sumIidi “the nightingale sang unintelligibly in the flower garden' 5972; a.o. 5677 (süğiç). VUD sumlit- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of sumli:-. Xak. xı ol anı: sumlitti: “he urged him to talk a non-Turkish language” , this is because the Turks call anyone that does not know "Turkish sumlim, just as the Arabs call anyone that does not know Arabic a'cami; that is the original (meaning), but if he later learns Arabic they still call him by this name; but the Turks, when he learns their language, remove him from the category of sumlım Kaş. II 347 (sumhitu:r, sumlitma:k). VUD sumlis- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of sumlr:-. Xak. xı tat kamuğ sumligdi: “the Persians all talked to one another in their own foreign language” (tarátana . . . bi-luğatihim), also used of any people who talk to one another in a non-Turkish language Kaş. /T 216 (sumlisur, sumlişma:k). Dis. SMN sama:n 'straw'; s.i.a.m.l.g.; in SE: NC Kir.: SC: NW Kaz.: SW saman (Tkm. sa:man, with long vowel transposed): NE Tuv. savan: NC Kzx: NW Kk. saban, NW Kumyk, Nog. salam is a corruption of Russian soloma and not connected. Cf. 2 küvük, Uyğ. viri ff. Civ. (food, slaughter cattle, and) yeti 75 saman “seven wagons of straw' USp. 6: Çigil xı sama:n 'straw' (al-tibn) Kaş. I ne 2.0. in Xak. verse JI 316, rr: xiv Muh.(?) al-tibn (ke:wük; in one MS.) şama:n Mel. 77, 13: Çağ. xı saman kdah 'straw', in Ar. tibn San. 234r. 28: Kip./Tkm. xılı al-tibn (kewük/sala:m—see above), Tkm. sa:ma:n /1ou. 9, 14: Xv tibn (kevvük) Tkm. şaman Tu. 8b. 8: Osm. xv fi. saman oğrısı “the Milky Way' (lit. “the thief of straw"); c.i.a.p. TTS I 597; 11 789; İİİ 594; IV 659; San. 234v. 1. Tris. SMN D samanlığ P.N./A. fr. sama:n; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı samanlığ er "a man who owns straw' (tibn) Kaş. I 499; a.o. 500, 12. Dis. SMR sımra:k See si:m simra:k, Dis. V. SMRsimür- “to swallow in a single gulp'; survives as simir- in NE Bar.: NC Kzx. and sümürin SE Tar., Türki: SVV Az., Osm., Tkm. Xak. xı ol sü:tüg simürdi: "he gulped down (abba) the milk” (etc.) Kaş. 77 85 (simürür, simürme:k), bu er ol sü:tüg simürge:n (MS. sümürge:n) "this man is constantly gulping down milk" (etc.) I 523; 8.0. 525, 1: (XIV Muh. maşşa “to suck in” so:r- Rif. 115 (only); al-maşş samurmak (sic) Mel. 37, 3; 123 migbt be this word mis-speltor an error for So: rmak): Çağ. xv ff. sümür- (spelt) (bamangidan()) “to 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 874 
     
   
   
     830 murmur'; ?an error, not recurring), nüşidan 'to drink' (recurring alone throughout the Conjugation) in Ar. mass San. 246r. 27 (quotns.): Kom. xiv 'to swallow' sim- CCG; Gr. 220 (q.v., dubious). (D) semri:- “to be, or become, fat”, prima facie Den. V. fr. *semir, an R-Turkish form of semiz, q.v. S.i.a.m.l.g. as semir-. Xak. xi ko:y semri:di: “the sheep (etc.) became (or was) fat” (samina) Kaş. 11I 281 (semri:r, semri:me:k), a.o. // 365, 26: KB 3600 (2 bulak): xiv Muh. samtna semür- Mel. 27, 9; Rif. 110: Çağ. xv tf. semir- ('with -r-”) Jarbih şudan “to be fat), also spelt sémir- San. 234T. 19; reverse entry 256r. rr: Kom, xiv "to be fat” semir- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv semir- samina with -r-, but semiz with -z samin İd. 53: xv samina semir- (fsemiz bol-) Tuh. 20a. ro: Osm. xv and xvi semri- (szc) 'to be fat”, common until xvi. T7S I 612; II 808; 111 613; IV 675. D semrit- Caus. f. of semri:-; 'to fatten'; s.i.m.m.l.g. as semirt-, Türkü vırı ff. turuk nt semri:ti: ye:rin: öpen “a lean horse, remembering the place which fattened him” IrkB 16: Xak. xı er atın semritti: "the man fattened his horse' (etc.) Kaş. I7 333 (semritü:r, semritme:k); a.o. do. 366, r: KB özin semritür “he fattens himself! 988; o.o. 990, 3549: XII(?) Tef. semrit- (?sic, unvocalized) “to fatten” 267: Osm. xiv semritditto; in two texts T'T.S IJ 8o8. D semris- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of semri:-. Xak. xı atla:r kamuğ semrişdi: “the horses (etc.) all got fat” (axadat . . . fi'l-siman) Kaş. I1 213 (semrişü:r, semrişme:k). D simrüş- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of simür-, the sin everywhere carries both kasra and damnıa. Xak. xi ol menin birle: su:v simrüsdi: 'he competed with me in gulping down (fi "abb) the water! (etc.) Kaş. I] 213 (simrüşü:r, simrüşme:k). Tris. SMR samurtuğ Hap. leg. Xak. xı samurtuğ r:ş “a complicated (muxtalif) affair with no obvious way out” (là yazdıra maxracuhu) Kaş, I 494. VUD simürğük a kind of bird; spelt semürgüh in the MSS., but KB 66og shovvs that it must be a Dev. N. (connoting habitual action) fr. simür-, n.o.a.b. Xak. xır Bala:sa:ğu:n dialect simürgük “a creature (şay”) like a nightingale'; büç büç öter simürgük boğzı: üçün meplenü:r “he bird which sings its song (al-mutarrib. bi-ilhánihi) when it is hungry picks up (yalfaqit) seed for the sake of its throat' Kaş, I1 290: KB (knowledge is a sea which has no bounds or bottom) nece suv kótürgey simürgük sora 'however much water the simiürgük may suck up and carry off” 6609. S samursak Sce sarumsak. . DIS. V. SMRDis. V. SMS(D) samsıt- Hap. leg.; presumably Caus. f. of *samsr-; the only recorded cognate V. scems to be NE Tel, samzıl- “to lose one's strength, collapse" R IV 436. Xak. xi ol anı: samsıttı: “he injured him (adáAu) with his tongue or hands' Kaş. /7 336 (samsıtu:r, samsıtma:k). Tris. SMS C sı:m sımra:k Hap. leg.; listed among Mon.s w. a central long vowcl, which shows that si:m is an alliterative Prefix. "Vhe second sin is unvocalized but must represent S1; a/-ra”s means quite unspecifically “a head” of an animal, garlic, or anything else and its precise meaning here is obscure. Cigil xi si:m sımra:k "the name of a kind of food” (al-ta'ám); a head (a/-ra”s) is cooked, cut up small, and put in an carthenvvare bowl (al-bustiga) with spices (a/dzvih), sour cream is poured over it until it matures (yudrik), then it is eaten Kaş. III 136. Dis. SMZ semiz “fat”, etymologically connected vv. semri:-, q.v. S.i.a.m.l.g.- Türkü vim T ş (ıra:k): vini ff. IrkB 6s (ağız): Uyğ. viri ff. Man. (the trees and shrubs all become) semiz “fat” (full of colour and sap . . .) Wind. 19: Xak. xı semiz “fat” (a/-samin, of any animal) this word agrees with (sodfaqat) Ar., except that they have changed the -" to -z; this is permissible (cáyiz) in their language; they call *thou' sen and “you” siz, changing the -n to -Z Kaş. 1 365; a.o. / 285, 13: KB (this body is prone to evil) semiz tutsa 'if it puts on fat" (it becomes more evil) 3599: xiv Mu. al-samin (opposite to “lean” aruk) semiz/ semi:z Mel. 48, 12; 65, 12; Rif. 152, 164: Çağ. xv ff. semiz (spelt) farbih tva tamin “fat” and 'precious' (?error for samim); also spelt semiz San. 234v. 3; sémlz farbih 256r. ız: Kom. “fat” semiz CCI; Gr.: Kip. xui a/-samin (opposite to 'lean' aruk) semiz Hou. 27, 18: xiv Tkm. semüz aí-samin; Kip. semiz ditto İd. 53: xv asman 'fatter' semiz Kav. 24, ro, samin semiz Tuh. 18b. 3. Tris. SMZ D semizlik A.N. fr. semiz; 'fatness'; s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı semizlik a/-siman 'fatness" Kaş. I soz: xın(?) Tef. semüzlik ditto 267: Çağ. xv ff. semizlik farbihi “fatness” San. 234v. 4: Kip. xv (VU) sumna fattening food”(?) semizlik Tuh. 49b. 8: Osm. xvi semizlik otu 'purslane' (in Osm. usually semiz otu) TTS IV 675: xvui semizlik oti in Rími, xarqa "purslane”, in Ar. baqlatı”l-hamqà San. 234v. 4. Mon. SN .. D sa:n Preliminary note. There fs only one gemune Turkish cord sam, Dev. N. in -n (usually Intrans.[Pass.) fr. sa:-, basically 'number, estimate, calculation! , svhich later acquired  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 875 
     
   
   
     ———— ti menn ll 77i MON € such meaning: as "a military parade (i.e. count of the troops and '(personal) esteem, reputation', the latter following the development of meaning of Say- (S2:-) to mean “to respect (someone). With one or two such meanings, esp. “military parade', it became à l.-w. in Pe. It s.i.a.m.l.g. A Pe. word sün meaning 'manner, resemblance”, and the like used in such phr. as badin sün “iz this manner , and as a Suff. in words like pilsün “like an elebhant” entered Turkish as early as KB and si s.m.l. as a l.-w. San'san “in small pieces' noted in Çağ. and s.Ls.m.l. is merely a. quasi-onomatopoeic not noted in the early period. D sa:n Dev. N. fr. 88:-, see above. Uy£. vir ff. Bud, altmış iki koti, sanı Gang öğüz içindeki kum sanınça bodisatvlar “the Bodhisattvas, 62 crores in number, equal to the number of (grains of) sand in the river Ganges' Kuan. 84 (and U II iş, 11); (if a man has no faith) ol nep kişi sanipa kirmez "he is not reckoned as a human being” TT V 26, 114; 0.0. IV 6,25 (sakış) etc.: Civ. Yazdigird élig sanı üç yüz taki sekiz altmış “(the year) 358 of the era of King Yazdigird” TT VII 9, 11-13; kün tepri bun sanı bir takı üç tsu “the basic (Chinese l.-w. £én) number of the sun is one and three-quarters' do. 13-15; sa:n “number” is common in TT VIII L.; bérmis böznin sanı “the number of cotton cloths which 1 have distributed” US. 31, 4-5; a.o.o.: Xak. xı sa:n al-'adad “number”, one says ko:y sa:nı: neçe: *how many sheep are there?” Kaş. III 157; a.o. İİİ 429, 6: (KB sanı in such phr. as yinçü sanı “like a pearl, 211, is very common; 0.9. 266, 493, 1916, 2684, 5780, etc.; it is the Pe. .-w. sán mentioned above): xın(?) At. sanarmu ediz kum uşak taş sanı “can one count (the grains of) tall sand dunes and pebbles?” 6o, (the rich man... dies and) bérür sanını 'renders up the number” (of his goods; or “his accounts” ?) 276; Tef. san “number” 26:1: Çağ. xv ff. san hisáb wa sağış “number, calculation” Vel. 279 (quotns.); san (1) şumdra wa hisab 'number, counting' in general (quotn.), and şumdra ta "ard-i laşkar "numbering and reviewing troops' in particular; (2) pára-i “udu "part of a limb'(?) (quotns.); (3) one says san san meaning şarğa şarha "in slices” San. 235v. 2 (follovved by seven meanings in Pe. including münand 'resembling": Xwar. xiv san ("like” Quib 152; MN $86, etc.); 'reputation' MN: Kom. “number” san CCI; Gr.: Osm. xiv ff. san noted in various meanings, "number, calculation” (sometimes in san sağış), 'reputation”, various meanings which seem to be Pe., and as Imperat. of san- TS I 597; II 790; III 594; IV 660. sap Preliminary note. There is one meaning in which Say is not demonstrably .a l.-w., though even there it might be. Otherwise in Uyg. sap represents. Chinese 1.-w.s: (1) in U II 86, 4r (sanliğ) it is a Sec. f. of tsap, q.v.; (2) in H II “SN . Bal 30,1144 it is the name of an unidentified drug; (3) fn the formula namo sap" *homage to the community” it represents. tséng the Chinese transcription of Sanskrit sahgha. 0 sap Hap. leg.; but see sanpla:-, saplat-. Xak. xı sap salhu'l-tàyir “bird”s dung'; hence one says kuş sapı: darqı”l-tayir (this also means "bird”s dung', but is generally used in Ar. for 'mistletoe, Loranthus and may have this meaning here) Kag. III 357. sen the 2nd Pers. Sing. Pron. 'thou'. The vocalization follows the same irregular pattern as ben, q.v., the Dat. having always been Sapa:. In other cases the vowel was almost certainly -e-; spellings w. -é- are fairly common in some dialects, but it seems impossible to find any grammatical explanation of the difference. In Türkü sen was used both as Sing. and as Plur., the regular Plur. siz not being found in these texts, perhaps fortuitously, but in Xak., q.v., it was regarded as uncivil to address anyone except an inferior as Sen. C.ia.p.a.l. Türkü vin sen occurs several times attached to V.s, e.g. ölteçi: sen “you vvill. die” I S 8, I1 E 6, seni: Tavğaçığ ölu:rteçi: “they will kill you Chinese” T ro (the only example of -é-); ben sepe: (so spelt, perhaps in error) ne: ayayı:n “vhat shall 1 say to you?” T 3z: viii ff. Man. ay sen Warukdad oğulı senip ayğan ançağ ol “O thou, son of VVarukdad1 "Vhy words are thus” M III 23, 6 (i); örtenğey sen “thou shalt be burnt' do. 23, 4 (ii), seni okıyur men “1 am calling thee" do. 23, ız (11): Uyğ. viri ölmeçi: yitmeçi:sen “you will not die or get lost” Şu, E 5: virt ff. Bud. the normal form is sen (often spelt sz), e.g. sen neçük ozdun 'how did you escape? PP 54, 4; but sen occurs in barmağay sen do. 19, 3, seni teg “like you” U İİİ 53, 7 (ii) (doubtful reading); in TT VIII the forms are Se:n and se:níp: Civ. the normal form is sen, e.g. sen . . . bergil, sen ök tapşırıp bér£eysen “do you give . .., you shall hand over and give it” USb. 17, 14-16; but seni bertgeli “to wound you” TT I 17; senide boldi do. 126-7; seni birle “vith you” TT VII 30, 2 (same document): Xak. xı sen a Pron. (harf) meaning “thou” (anta); the "Turks address this word only to children (a/-şiğdr), servants, and anyone junior to them in age or rank; and anyone enjoying respect or (high) rank (/ahu hurma wa martaba) they address as SİZ, with 22; the Oğuz reverse this practice and say sen to an adult (or great man ?, /i'i-kabir) and siz to children and for the Plur. (/'l-cam') also; this is the rule (al-qiyás) for both (peoples) because SİZ is the Plur. Kaş. 1 339; both sen and seni:, senip, sapa:, sende:, sendin are common in Kaş.: K.B sen, séni (33, 194, etc.), Senin, sapa, senipdin (7, 23, etc.; perhaps only metri gratia) are the standard forms: Gancak xı sé:n 'thou' (anta); the Turks say sen, and in this the Gancak pronunciation is corrupt (faraddala) because they always use € (for e, zatba"u”l-hasra, followed by “arı irrelevant note regarding the Oğuz use of vv 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 876 
     
   
   
     832 and u/ü for Turkish v and i/i) Kaş. HI 138: xın(?) At. sen, senin, sara are regular; the MSS. vary between seni, sende and söni, sende, 7ef. sen, seni, senin, sapa/sapar, sendin/senipdin 267: xiv Afuh. sen, senin, sana, senden noted in Mel. 6 fT., Rif. 77 fL.: Çağ. xv ff. sen xi/tàb edüp "as a Vocative” sen Vel. 290; sen 2nd Pers. Sing. Pron. ti 'thou', used both at the beginning and at the end of a phr. e.g. sen sen 1/7? “thou art” San. 258r. 5: Xwar. xın(?) the standard forms in Og. are sen, senip/sennip, sendin and irregularly senler/sénler; siz not used: xiv Sen passim Qutb, MN: Kom. xiv sen, seni, senip, sapa (also spelt sağa, sa'a), sende, senden CCI, CCG, Gr. 217 (quotns.): Kip. xii sen Fon. şo, 8 etc.; senin sz, 8, sana: (triply dotted haf) sz, 12: xiv sen Pron. meaning “thou” İd. $4; ma"ah senin bile Bul. 14, 13; lak sana: (sanga:) and senün (sic) 15, 2; 'thou' sen 16, 6: xv sen Kar. 21, 1 etc.; Sana: (safa:) 2t, 2; seni: 32, rr: senin (bile:) 34, 4; senden 45, 6; sende: 4s, rs; seni Tuh. 41a. 12, etc.; senden 73b. 3. sın Preliminary note. Kag.'s theory that the second word is merely a special meaning of the first 15 not plausible and the teo have been listed separately. See sına:-. 1 srn originally “the human body”, hence 'stature, height, external appearance”, and the like. Survives in the latter meanings in NE: SE: NC Kir.: NW Kk,, Kaz., Nog., and in some of them for 'statue', esp. one on a grave. Cf. 1 bo:d. Türkü vin ff. Man. M III 16, 1 (1) (kedür-), do. 18, 15 (ii) (közün-): Uyğ. vil ff. bu. beş yar[uk tepri] sınları “the bodies of these five light-gods” M I 21, 5-6 (1), o.o. do. 23, 33 (baga:); M HI ış, 19 (ii): Bud. sinin bodin kirtisin "his body, stature, and complexion' Suv. $93, 20-1: Civ. (if there is an illness on a Monkey Day, it makes a man's head ache and) sinin sislatur 'his body swel' TT VII 24, 21-2 (transcribed sanın, no doubt in error): Xak. xı Stn a/-qadd zca”l-qüma “size, stature'; one says bo:dluğ sinlij kişi: “a tall (ase) man” Kaş. IH 138 (and see 2 sın): KB bod sin 1849 (2 kur), 2663: xiri(?) Tef. sınım süpüküm “my body and bones' 271. 2 sin 'tomb'; survives only(?) in SW Osm. sin (sic); v. G. in TT VI, p. 89 suggested that this might be a l.-w. fr. Chinese ts'in (ch'in, Giles 2,091) 'the rear hall in an ancestral temple', but this is impossible since in Middle Chinese this word had a final -r, not -nr. Uyğ. viii ff, Bud. (if one plans to construct) ölüğ kişi üçün sın orun "a tomb for a dead man” TT VI 289-go, a.o. U II 53, 5 (iii) (suburBan): Xak. xı (after 1 sın) hence “a tomb” (al-qabr) has been called sı:n because it is the length of a man's stature ('a/a qadri'l-qàma): sın al-gabr; ka:tu:n sini: a town between ''agut and China (a/-Şi) Kaş. IIl 138; sunka: kirüp kerü: yanma:s "a man who enters the tomb does not return" /// 65, 2: MON. SN xiv. Muh.(?) al-qabr Sin, (al-maqbara 'cemetery' sinla:&amp;) Hif. 179 (only): Çağ. xv ff. sın (with -1-") gabr wa madfan-i amwát “tomb, burial place” San. 258r. 6: X war. xın sın 'grave' "A 52: Kom. xiv sin “a memorial statue! CCG; Gr.: KiQip. xin: al-qabr tva'l-şanam (statue") Sin lou. 6, ır: XV şaxs “statuc” şın (/abak) Tuh. 21a. 5; sanam sin do. 22b. s: Osm. xiv ff. sin (sic, consistently spelt. with s/m not sgád) 'grave'; c.i.n.p.; and sinle “cemetery” down to xvit. £7 7S I 627; 11 824; İİİ 627; IV 692. Si onomatopocic for a humming or buzzing noise; n.o.a.b. Cf. sipek, sipi:le:-, In some Uyg. Bud. texts siy is a mistranscription of şen, q.v. Xak. xı onesays kula:kim sir etti: “my ear buzzed' (fana); and kömi:çe: (MS. kóminge:) sip etti: “the gnat buzzed” (naqqa), also used of a fly buzzing Kaş, III 358: (xiv Muh.(?) al-anin "to groan' sipa:tmak (unvocalized) might represent siy et- or at- Rif. 125 (only)). VU so:n IHap. leg. Xak. xı “a good-natured, kind-hearted (al-layyinu”l-cünibr l-salimu'l-qalb) man” is called so:n kişi: Kaş. /II 138. F su:n the Chinese word fs'un “a (Chinese) inch” (G/les 11,965) one-tenth of a Chinese foot (sce 2 çığ), noted as tsun, q.v., in Uyğ. Bud. is also spelt su:n in the passages below. Kag.'s exact meaning is uncertain; al-suftaca means 'a bill of exchange, cheque', and the like. "Vhe reference is perhaps to Chinese paper currency; these notes varied a good deal in size; it can hardly be to physical gold. Uyğ. vin ff. Civ. 7H I 146 (otura:): Xak. xı sun altu:n 'a currency note expressed in gold' (al-suftaca mina'|-dahab); it is something exceeding an inch and up to a cubit in length (mà ' zàda "ald tüli'l-igba! ila'l-dirà') Kaş. III 138. SOD originally perhaps physically “the end, or back' of something, but normally used of time, as a N. “the end”, an Adj. "later, subsequent', and an Adv. or Postposn. 'afterwards, after (vv, 421.) S.i.a.m.l. Uyğ. vini ff. Bud. munda (?read mundin) sor “after this” USSp. 103, ıı: Civ. son futs: bilge “the later sage Confucius” (in antithesis to “the former (söki) kings") TT I 106; (this man's body at first (burunda) suffered and is still (amtı ma) suffering) Sor yorryu edgüke tepir 'later he will proceed and reach a good state” TT VII 28, 47; bu küntin sop 'from today onwards' USb. 21, 11; s1, 4; antin sop “after that” do. 98, 4-5: Xak. xi sop 'agibu'l-insán “a man's descendants': sop a Particle (2arf) meaning 'after' (ba'd?; MS. ba'ad); hence one says Sen menip sonda: kel “come behind me” (Rhalfi): son “the end” (dxir) of any thing or action, one says bu: só:z sopinda: ayğıl “speak yourself at the end of this speech” Kaş. YE 357: xmn(?) Ar, kamuğ übádánnip xarab ol sotu 'ruin is the end of every (period of) prosperity” 200; o.o. 14 (ud-), 181 (yü&amp;ür-), etc.; Tef. sop “the end; afterwards; anda/ andın soy 273: xiv Muh. ba'd son Mel. 14,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 877 
     
   
   
       MON. V. SN8; Rif. go, áxiru'l-layl "the end of the night” dü:n 80:91: 8o, 7; 185 (tü:n); a.o. 179 (only): Çağ. xv ff. sop sopra 'afterwards' Vel. 299; son (spelt) pas wa 'agab wa ba'd “then, afterwards' (quotns.); and metaph. áxiri "latter, last" (quotn.) Sam. 247r. 21: Xwar. xin(?) phr. like andın sop are very common in Oğ.: Xiv 809 “the end (of something)” Qutb 158; w. Abi, “after” MN 756: Kom. xiv “last” sop CCI, CCG; Gr. 222 (phr.): Kip. xiv son (?for şon) axir, sona koy- axxara “to put, or leave, behind' /d. 60; ba'd (hanüz/) sonda: Bul. 13, ro: xv àxir $01) Tuh. ab. ro, özb. 3: Osm. xiv ff. Soy in various phr., esp. Sor uc 'consequence, result”, c.La.p. T'T'S I 635; 1I 833; İH 634; IV 700. Mon. V. SND san- (sa:n-) Refl. f. of sa:-; basically 'to count oneself, to be counted', hence, very early, 'to be counted among a group, class, etc.', that is “to be deemed to be (something Dat.) ; after about XI it seems to have been regarded as an Active V. and survives only(?) in SW Az., Osm. san- “to think, suppose, deem'. [t must not be confused vv. sana- Den. V. fr. sam, q.v. UyB. vui ff. Bud. (a person who wounds his father's or mother's heart is doomed to hell and) oğul kizka sanmaz "is not reckoned to be a son or daughter PP 11, 7; (if a man leads an upright life) ol temin kisike sanur 'he is immediately reckoned to be a (real) man' TT VI 34; o.o. do. 38, 194, etc: Civ. muna tuğmış kişiler (PU) lukususi yultuzka sanur “people born in this (year) are reckoned as being (born) under the star Lukususi(?)! TT VII 17, 4-5; similar phr. do. 17, 6 and 19-20: Xak. xi ol er xayl (sic, prob. a slip of the pen for yılkı:) bile: sandı: “that man was reckoned to belong to the horse class” ('udda . . . min cumlati'l-xayl); similarly used of anyone who was reckoned to be something ('udda ma"a”l-şay”), (prov.) ba:rığ utru: tutsa: yokka: sanma:s “if what is to hand (al-hádir) is put before (a guest), (the hospitality) is not, reckoned to be inadequate” (ma"düm) Kaş. 1I 28 (sa:nur (sic), sanma:k): KB bilip sózlese sóz biligke sanur 'if a man knows what he is talking about his speech is reckoned to be knowledge! 170; a.o. 262 (1 &amp;D: xın(?) Tef. san- “to think”, e.g. men ayla sandum 'I thought as follows'; yavuz sanman “do not have evil thoughts! 262; At. sanip sózlegen 'a man who thinks before he speaks' 133; 0.0. 326, 367 (6:t-): xiv Muh.(?) hasiba "to think, deem” (bul-; in margin) şa:n- Rif. 107 (only): Çağ. xv ff. san- qtyàs kardan "to estimate, judge, deem” San. 234v. 7 (quotns.; San. adds "and in Rümi vv, hdf?, ie. sen-, which is an error; most of the quotns. are in Rümi): Xwar. xiv san- “to think” Quib 152; (he will provide that believer with food) sanmaduk yöndin "from a direction that he had not thought of” Nac. 188, 8: Tkm. xiv şan- zarına “to think, conjecture'; Kip. sağan. “İd. 6o, (sağan- hasiba) Tkm. şan- do. 58: Osm. xiv ff. san- (r) “to think, suppose, ^8611125  833 expect'; (2) 'to wish (e.g. good, to someone Dat); c.i.a.p., the Imperat. also occurs in the phr. sanki 'suppose that', sometimes used ungrammatically as a N. 'supposition' 77:S 7 599; 71 791; İH 597; IV 662. D sin- Refl. f. of sı:- always used as an Intrans. or Pass.; 'to break; to be broken', physically or metaph. S.i.a.m.lg, Türkü vrr (he speared six men) süpügl: sındı: “his lance broke' (and he killed the seventh with his sword) 1 N s (hitherto mistranscribed): virt ff. İrkB 6 (azığ): Uyğ. vini ff. Bud, kemi süsüp sınur “the ship eollides (vvith the rocks) and is broken' PP 17, 5; tükel yazukluğ sınyuk çaxşaputluğ dındar “a devotee who is thoroughly wicked and breaks the commandments' TT IV, p. 14, note A 23, 13: Civ. TT I 225 (éndür-): Xak. xı yığa:ç sındı: "the piece of wood (etc.) broke” (imkasara); and one says sü: sındı: “the army was routed” (inhazama) Kaş. II 29 (sına:r/sınu:r, sinma:k); 0.0. İ 254, 24 (1 butt) etc.: K.B (if a man does not know how to perform a task) sinup kadğu yer "he is disheartened and distressed' 5534; 0.0.1 167 (1 trs), 4610: xin(?) At. 131 (1 t:5); Tef, sin- “to be broken' 271: xiv Muh. inkasara sın- Mel. 23, 11; Rif. 105: Çağ. xv ff. sın- (-ğan) gin- ya'ni şikasta ol“to be broken” Vel. 289; sın- sikasta şudan San. 256r. 12 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv sin- “to be broken' Quzö 164; Nahc. 275, 9 (oğurğa:): Kom. xiv ditto CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv sininkasara İd. 54; Bul. 31 v.: xv ditto sın- Tuk. $a. 8: Osm. xiv ff. sin- “to be broken; to be routed; to be weakened, lost, spoilt; (of the wind) to drop”, c.i.a.p. TTS I 624; II 821; III 624; IV 685. Sip- “to sink into (something Dat.); to be absorbed, digested”, and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. as Sip-/sipi-/sin-. Uyğ. vr ff. Bud. aş siper erken 'while the food is being digested" Suv. 592, 7; a.o. do. 8: Civ. [gap] sipme:se:r TT VIII M.z1: Xak. xı aş sipdi: "the food was digestible” (hana'a); and one says su:v yé:rke: sindi: “the water sank (ğdra) into the ground'; and só:z kópülke: sipdi: 'the remarks made a good impression (naca'a) on the mind and were effective! ('amila) (sine:r, sipme:k); and one says ördek kamışka: sipdi: "the duck (etc.) slipped into (tadxul) the reeds or litter (al-qumág) so that it was hidden (tawára) in them”: also used of anything that slips into something, e.g. of a man who has slipped into (tadaxxala) someone's house as an intruder (dömir) or the like (sipe:r, sinme:k) Kaş. İTI 391 (there is no obvious reason for having two paras. for this V.): KB tapuğ sipse “if his service is satisfactory! (the small man becomes great) . . , tapuğ sipmegince tilek kim bulur 'who achieves his desires if his service is not satisfactory ? 611-12: xııı(?) At. serip sende rüzi) sipip turmasa serermü ésipde “if your secret does not remain hidden within yourself, will it stay hidden within your friend?” 175-6: xiv Rbg. (this river completely) kumka siper “sinks into the sand' R IV 686; (Muh. hadama “to digest! Ee 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 878 
     
   
   
     834 MON. V. SN sin- Mel. 32, 5; error for Sipür-, q.v.): Çağ. xv ff. sip- (spelt) (1) »uncadib sudan ya'ni ba-xtvud furü haşida şudan “to be absorbed, that is drawn into oneself'; (2) xawd kardan “to plunge into (something)' ; (3) hadm kardan voa furü xwurdan “to digest, consume"; it is also used for taliammul hardan “to bear, endure' and they also use Slp- of a bird which hides its head under its wing San. 257r. 3 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv (if these two. women had not vornited, but) bu yégenleri icinde sipse erdi “if these foods had been digested by them” (they would have gone to hell) Nahc. 389, 9: Kom. xiv "to be absorbed, digested' sipCCG, Gr.: Kip. xiv sip- (with -D-”) “to hide oneself (xanasa) on the ground, and lie close to it (/aşıqa biha) in order to conceal (yuxfi) oneself 14. 54: xv inhadama “to be digested” sin- Tuh. 6b. 11: Osm. xiv ff. sip- (1) “to be digested'; (2) "to sink in; to influence'; (3) “to be beneficial; (4) "to hide oneself'; c.i.a.p. TTS 1630; 11 826; III 630; İV 694. sun- originally Trans., “to stretch out (one's hand Aee.), to offer or present (something Acc., to someone Dat.) ; later also Intrans. "to stretch oneself out”. S.i.a.m.l.g. Türkü vrtt ft. Man. Chas. 314 (elig): UÜyğ. vin ff. Bud. kalti toyin kişi eligi kanyuğaru kótürser azu kanyuğaru sunsar “ifa monk raises his hand against someone or stretches it out to him” TT V, p. 15, note A 23, 19-21; tepri burxan adakinda bagirin suna yatip "lying stretched out on his stomach at the feet of the Buddha” TT X 175; do. 458 (tağunçı:), 2.0. U IV 14, 153: Xak. xı ol mapa: etme:k sundt: "he offered me (nácalani) bread” (etc.) Kaş. 1! 28 (suna:r, sunma:k): KB biri kinda cikti sunup él tutar “the one has come out of the scabbard and reaches out and grasps the realm” 87; eliğ sundı 'stretched out his hand” 98; o.o. 281, qoo (Sevit-), 1410, 2647, 4130 (utruki:): xiri(?) 47. kédinrek qadahka sunup zahr katar “later he stretches out (his hand) to the cup and mixes poison in it' 208; 3.0. 286 (tapa:ru:); Tef. sun- 'to stretch (something) out” 277: Çağ. xv ff. sun- (-dı, etc.) uzan- yat- "to lie stretched out” Vel. 300 (quotn.); sun- both Intrans. and "Frans, diráz şudan "to be stretched out” and diràz kardan “to stretch out” Sar. 246v. 15 (quotns.): X war. xri Sun- “to offer! dii 41: xiv sun- “to stretch out, hold out” Qutb 161; MN 168, etc.: Kom. XIV "to stretch out, extend' sun- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xii madda “to stretch out”, in the sense of stretching out your hand to take something or to give it to someone else sun- ZTou. 43, 19; nüwala sunu: ber- do. 44, 2: XIV Sun- imtadda “to stretch oneself out” İd. 54; sunnátcala do. 60: Xv sun- is entered in the margin against immatja "to stretch onesclf out” Tu. 6a. 9 and madda do. 35b. 6: Osm. xiv ff. sun- (r) “to hold out, offer, present”, (2) "to stretch out one's hand, reach out” (Intrans.); c..a.p. TTS 1647; I1 847, III 642; IV 710. sön- “to die down, disappear, esp. of a flame, but also metaph. of other things; more or less syn. w, Óeg-.. Survives in NC Kzx. sön-: SC Uzb. sün-: NW Kk., Kumyk, Nog. sön-, Kaz. sün-: SW Az., Osm., Tkm. sön-. Uyg. vin ff. Bud. armaksizin sönmeksizin 'without wearying or flagging” Suv. 211, $-6; 236, 11; 0.0. U III 38, 35 (tikig); TT VI 446 (tindür-): Civ. TT I s-6 (topra:k); sónof an illness) “to die down, disappear" is fairly common in H / and TT, e.g. 1 44 (tolğağ): Xak. xı KB urup berge başı büter terk söner “the wounds inflicted by a whip quickly heal and disappear” 2580: xiv Muh.(?) infafa'ati'I-nàr "of a fire, to go out” só:n- Füf. 105 (only): Çağ. xv ff. són- (-gey) söyürn- "to go out”, of a candle or a fire Vel. 299 (quotn.): sön- xredmüş şudan dtaş "of a fire, to go out” San. 246v. 16 (quotns,): Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 160: Kip. xiv sóyün- (MS. seyfin-) tafi'a "to go out”, só:yün- intafa'a İd. 54 (sic); intafa'a söndi:, söyünür (si) Bul. 23v.: Osm. xiv ff. söyün- “to die down' (of fire) and the like is the common form till xvi and occurs sporadically Inter TTS I 643; I7 841; 1H 639; IV 706. *sürn- See süpü:, süpük, süpüs, sünüş-. Dis. SNA D sini: Dev, N/A. fr. sip-; “digestible” and the like. N.o.a.b. Xak. xr one says bu: aş ol Sİpi: “this food is wholesome and digestible' (mari? hani") Kaş. III 368: Xwar. xiw sipü "digestible” Qutb 158. D sunt: lap. leg.; Dev. N./A. fr. sun-; lit. 'something which stretches out”. Xak. xı sunt cáyizatu'l-bayt “the cross-beam of a house” Kaş, JI 236. ?F su:nu: 'coriander seed, Nigella sativa'; prob. a l-w.; Ar. gmniz is itself a L-w. fr. Persian. Uy£. vitt ff. Civ. (in a prescription for stomach ache) sunu tört bakırnı “four copper coins' weight of coriander seed' HI I 18: Xak. xı sunu: al-simiz Kaş. [11 238. D süpü: (süpü:ğ) "a lance, spear' (only(?) as a cavalry weapon); prima facie a Dev. N. in -ü: fr. *süp-; the cognate form süpü:g, a Dev. N. in -ü:g, seems to be pec. to "Türkü, in which süpü: does not occur. Survives meaning 'spear, bayonet', and the like in NW Kaz. söpğe, Kumyk sünğü, Nog. süpgi: SW Az., Osm. süngü, “Türkü vir süpüğ batımı: karığ 'snow a lance”s length in depth” JI E 35, II E 26, olo. I N s (sin-); T 28 (1 ac-): Uyğ. viii ff. Man.-A M I zo, 15-16 (bére:): Bud. (if the dödrani) süpüde aşsar “is hung on a lance' USp. 104, 19; o.o. U II 86, 48 (süvri:), TT V ro, 92 (kiliç): Xak. xı süpü: al-ramh wa'l-qanà 'lance, spear! Kaş. III 368; five o.0.: xiv Muh. al-ramh sü:pü: Mel. yr, 6; Rif. 173; al-'alam - 'standard" Süpü: 146 (tu:k sı, 4): Caf. xv ff. süpü (spelt süngiü) navza 'lance'; in Rumi sügü (misunderstanding of kàáf.used for p) San. 247r. 28: Xwar. xiv süni "lance" Qutb 162: Kom. xiv "lance' süpü CCG; Gr.: Kip. xim al-ramh süpü: (sic?, MS. süngii:) Hou. 13, 14; 24, 10: XIV süpü: ("with -p-”) ditto 7d. s4: xv   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 879 
     
   
   
         x DIS. ditto süpü: (singii:) Kav. 63, 19; Tuh. 17a. 7: Osm. xiv ff. süpü (transcribed sügü) 'lance'; c.i.a.p. TT.S 1653; 11 854; III 648; IV 716. Dis. V. SNAD sana:- (sa:na:-) Den. V. fr. sa:n, “to count'; syn. vv. 88:-, which it gradually displaced. S.i.a.m.l.g. (Türkü viri the reading sanağalı: in T 27 is an error, see asın-): Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. ülgülegeli sanağalı bolğay “it will be possible to measure and count' USp. 8o, 2: Civ. in contracts relating to the payment of money or goods sanap (or tükel sanap) aldım or berdim “1 have counted (in full) and received, or paid” is a stock phr. USSp. 16, 8-9: 51, 5; 56, rr (eğsüksüz) etc.: sana- "to count' (the age of someone) TT VII 12, r ft.; 13, 53-4: Sa:na:- “to count' is common in TT VIII L.: Xak. xı ol ko:yin sanazdı: “he counted ('adda) his sheep'; originally sa:na:dı: but shortened Kaş. IJ] 274 (Sana:r, sana:ma:k): xın(?) Az. 60 (kum): xiv Muh. “adda sa:na- (sic; v.l. sa:yr-) Mel. 29, r, (Rif. 112 (VU) azla:-): Çağ. xv ff. sana- (-p, etc.) ihtirüz et- ve tadüruh et- "to take precautions, prepare oneself'; hisdb ei- (and hisdb al-) ve say- ve f"tibür et- “to reckon up, to count, to take thought of” Vel. 279-80 (quotns.); sana- (spelt) sumurdan "to count San. 234v. 24 (quotns.; pointing out in 235r. 3 that Vel.'s first translation is an error): Xwar. xını(?) sanağuluksız nemeler yılkılar aldı “he captured innumerable things and livestock" Oğ. 308: Kip. xın a/-"adad "to count' şana:mak Hou. 22, 2; "adda müina”ladad şana:- do. 42, 5: xiv Şana- "adda, Tkm. saİd. 6o: xv "adda şana-İşay- Tuh. 25b. 13. D sina:- (sı:na:-) “to test (someone or something Acc.) ; Den. V. perhaps fr. 1 Sin, but the semantic connection is not close unless it originally meant 'to take the size, or measure, of something”. S.i.a.m.l.g.; SW 'l'km. sı:na-. Uy£. viii ff. Civ. sınamış em ol “tt is a tried (and proved) remedy” H 1 154, 175, etc.: Xak. xı ol anı: sina:dti: carrabahu fi şay” “he tested him about something” Kaş. /Z/T 273 (sına:r, sina:ma:k); sına:masa: arsika:r “the man who does not test a thing is deceived about it” (yağtarr bihi) 1 242, 16: KB sınamış kişi "the man of experience” (i.e. one who has been tested) is one of the sources of traditional wisdom 245, 723 (1 karı:), etc.; neçe me sinadim isiz kilBuci *whenever I have tested the evil-doer” 247; (hear now the words of the man .. .) Sınayu teğip 'who attains (his purpose) by trial (and error)” 346; (the king . . .) sınadı eriğ 'tested his advice' 593; Sinama yağığ “do not take chances with the enemy” (he is big and strong; get an iron shield as a protection against him) 4263: xır(?) At. baka kórgil emdi uka sınayu “be sure that you look (carefully) now, test and understand" (what other thing is as valuable as knowledge) og, Tef. sına- “to test” 271: XIv Muh. carraba sına:- Mel. 25, 1; st:na:-. Rif. 107; al-tacriba sınamak 36, 4; 131: Çağ. xv ff. sına- (misspelt s/ne-) imtihan kardan “to try, test" San.  SNC -— 83s 256v. 19 (quotns.): Xvvar. xiv ditto Quib 164, Nahc. 212, 13: Kom. xiv ditto CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv sina- carraba İd. $4: xv ditto Tuh. 12a. 4: Osm. xiv ff. ditto; c.i.a.p. TTS I 621; 11 817; III 620; IV 684. -Dis. SNB SF sanvvaç See sanduvva:ç. Mon. V. SNCsanç- properly “to pierce (vvith a lance), transfix”. S.i.a.m.l.g. w. some extended meanings as Sanc-/sanci-/sanc-/canc-, etc. "Türkü vir sanç- is fairly common, both lit, e.g. alti: eri sançdı: "he speared six men" / N s; and metaph., e.g. (I advanced against the Çik . . .) sü:si:xn sançdım “1 pierced (i.e. routed) their army" 11 E 26: vit ff. IrkB 34 (süz): Uyğ. viii süpügdim ... sançdım “1 fought . . . and routed' is common in Sw.: vin ff. Bud. yağı sançıp “routing the enemy” U II 78, 30; o.o. PP 57, 5-6 (tegler-); U İT 86, 48 (süvrl): etc.: Civ. TT VIII I.4 (tulup): Xak. xı ol ant: bice:kin sarçdı: “he stabbed him (waca'ahu) with a knife” (etc.); and one says beg yafrsrn sançdı: “the beg routed (Razama) his enemy" Kaş. III 4zo (sança:r, sançma:k): KB (the signs of the Zodiac Gemini and Cancer) sançu yorir “come piercing” 139: YAğI sançğa 2329: xırı(?) Tef. sanç- (of a thorn) “to pierce' 262: xiv Muh. ta"ana "to spear, stab' sa:nç- Mel. 28, o, Rif. 112; al-a'n sa:zncmak 37, 14; 124: Çağ. xv ff. sanç- (-ğay) sancVel. 279; Sanc- (so spelt) niş zadan “to sting', also “to plunge (a javelin, lance, and the like) into something' San. 235v. 26: Xwar. xiv Sang- 'to pierce' Qutb 152: Kom. xiv ditto CCİ, CCĞ, Gr.: Kip. xii fa"ana $a:ncHou. 33, 18: xiv. şanç- (-tis) ditto /d. 6o; Bul. $7r.: xv ditto sang- (sic) Kav. 75, 8; ditto şanç- (-tı) Tuh. 24a. 5: Osm. xiv ff. sanç- “to pierce; to plunge in (a sting, etc.)'; c.ia.p. TTS I 598; İT 791; 111 596; IV 661. Dis. SNC sanaç survives in SE Türki sanaç “an entire goat-skin used as a bag for flour (etc.)” Shaw 120 (only): SC Uzb. sanoç 'water-skin'. With final -ç it looks like a l.-w. Uyğ. vin ff. Civ. in a list of goods, one cow, one cooking pot) ir sanaç (spelt sac?) “one skin bag” (etc.) USp. 55, 3: Xak. xi “a red leather bag” (a/-cirábu'l-ahmar) is called sanaç kósürgü: (MS. h.sirlü:) Kaş. I 358: Çağ. xv ff. sanac (sic?) xikça wa anböni 'water-skin, leather bag” San. 235v. 1o (quotns.). E sepec See sepgec. VU?F sinçü: Hap. leg.; the shape suggests a l.-w. fr. a Chinese phr. Xak. xr sinçü: al-xubz bayna”l-ruqaqa sua”l-rağif "a loaf of bread (intermediate in shape) between a flat flap and a round loaf” Kaş. 7 417. D sançığ Dev. N. fr. sanc-; lit. 'something piercing”. Survives in SE Türki sançık “colic”:  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 880 
     
   
   
       836 NC Kir. çançu: "lumbago'; Kzx. şanşu: 'puncture, perforation, colic': SC Uzb. sancik “colic”: NW Kk. sansuw; Kaz. çençü, Nog. şanşuv 'colic, lumbago: SW Az., Osm., 'Tkm. sancı 'colic'.. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. yürekimde sançığ kirip "sharp stabbing pains enter my heart! U 711 37, 6-7; (in hell demons thrust down the wicked) süvri sançığın 'with a sharp spike' TAM IV 254, 102: Çağ. xv ff. sançığ 'colic and flatulence (qulanc sca. nafx) which collects in a man's side” San. 235v. 24 (quotn.): Kip. xv rifu'l-batn. *wind in the stomach' sansu (in margin in SW(?) hand sanci) Tuh. 16b. 6. ?D suncuk Hap. leg.; prob. Dev. N. fr. sun- ; lit. 'something held out”, v. G. suggests plausibly that it is a pure "Purkish word added to explain the l.-w. batır (Sanskrit pattra). Uyğ. vurff. Bud. (the Buddha said, "O Ananda”) batirtmin sunçukumin kötürgil “pick up my begging bowl (Hend.) TT X 124-5. VUD sangc£a:n in this form Hap. leg.; the sin is unvocalized but the obvious transcription of a word for some kind of thorny bush is sançğa:n, N./A. of Habitual Action fr. sanc-, lit. constantly piercing'. "The only difficulty is that it may survive in SW Osm. (only) sincan “the box-thorn, Lycrum. europaeum'.. Xak. xi sançğa:n ka:tı: "hamlul-idáh "the. fruit. of a thorny bush or tree! Kaş. III 146, 26 (see 2 ka:t); n.m.e. Dis. V, SNCD sançıt- Caus. f. of sanç-, s.i.s.m.l., but not with the unusual use of Caus. f. shown below. Uyğ. vii ff. Civ. (if this omen comes to anyone) süde erser sancitur 'if he is on a campaign he lets himself be routed' TT 7 67. D sançık- Hap. leg.; Intrans./Pass, f. of sanç-. Xak. xr yağı: sançıktı: "the enemy was routed! (Jiuzima, MS. in error Aaz.ma); also used when a man has been stabbed (fü"ina) Kaş, 11 228 (sangika:r, sançıkma:k). D sançıl- Pass. f. of sang- ; s.i.m.m.l. Xak. XI biçe:k ta:mka: sançıldı: “the knife was thrust (frtazza) into the wall' (etc.), and one says Sü: sançıldı: "the army was routed' (inhazama); the origin is the phr. erke: biçe:k sançıldı: “the man was stabbed (cucPa) with a knife! Kaş. İT 231 (sançılu:r, sancilma:k): xırı(?) Ar. qada birle sançlur adakka tiken “by fate the thorn is thrust into the foot” 455: Çağ. xv ff. sancıl- (sic?) furi şudan "to descend" and the like San. 235r. 28 (quotn.): Osm. xiv ff. sancil- (1) of a person, 'to be stabbed', etc.; (2) of a weapon, 'to be thrust in”, c.La.p. TTS I 598; 11 790; IV 661. D sançış- Recip. f. of sanç-, s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı ola:r ikki: sançışdı: "those two stabbed (tcaca'a) one another with daggers or the like” and one says beğle:r sançışdı: “the begs went to war (ta/iarabat) and routed (/razama) one another” Kaş. 77 217 (sançışu:r, sançış DIS. SNC ma:k): Çağ. xv ff. sancış- (spelt) Recip. f. "to stab one another, to wound one another with a javelin or lance” San, 23sr. 28: Osm. Xv and xvı sancış- “to spear one another”, in two texts 7737 598; III s96. Tris. SNC D sançığlığ P.N./A. fr. sançığ, survives in SW Osm. sancili 'suffering from colic'. The only early occurrence is damaged; Müller transcribed it sing[rhit] gi citing as a parallel NE Sag. si:ncik "a wooden wedge! R IV 635, but that word is clearly a Dim. f. of sin which represents an earlier Dis., sığın or the like, and cannot be relevant here. "The original Chinese text can be translated as “the immortal vajra-iron-spike mother”, the last word not reproduced in the Turkish version. Uyü. virtf. Bud. ölümsüz vacir sançlığlılğ “the immortal owner of a vajra spike' U 71 60, 2 (ii). Dis. SND VUD sipüt Hap. leg.; the sin carries both kasra and damnta in the MS.; the word scems to be a Dev. N. but there is no obvious semantic connection vv. Sip-. Xak. xı sipüt “a gift (a/-hiba) which is not matched by a return gift (/4 ya”tad fiha) and for which there is no offset! (/à rid fihd), one says bu: at mana: sipüt bé:rdi: "he gave me this horse' (without receiving anything in return?) Kaj. III 362. sındu: 'scissors'; one of several words with this meaning, cf. bıçğu:ç, kifti:, survives only(?) in SW Osm., "Vkm. sindi; perhaps a L-w. Oğuz xi sindu: a/-miqrad "large scissors” Kaş. I 418: xiv Muh. al-miqrad sindu: Mel. 60, rz, Rif. 1509: Çağ. xv ff. sındı göz “scissors”, in Ar. migrád San, 258r. 7: 'Tkm. xin Hou. 253, 11 (biçğu: €): xv Tuh. 34a. 11 (kifti:, sindi in the margin in SW(?) hand): Osm. xiv ff. sindu (normal till xvı)/sındı (normal fr. xvi) 'scissors'; c.i.a.p. 77TS 7 622, IL 818, HI 621; IV 685. D sandrış Dev, N. (connoting mutuality) fr. sandrı:-, in a Chapter for Dis.s containing consecutivc consonante, but misvocalized in the MS. N.oa.b. Xak. xi sandrış (MS. sanduruş) “mutual abuse and quarrelling” (a/-mu'átaba wa'l-mucádala) Kaş. İİİ 416 (prov.); same prov. / 402, 24 (sandrış), II 214, $ (sanrig). Dis. V. SNDD sinat- (sınat-) Caus. f. of sına:- , s.i.s.m.l, w. the same meaning. Xak. xı ol meni: bu: ista: sinatti; “he ordercd someone to test me (man carrabani) in this work! Kaş. İl 312 (sinatur, sinatma:k). D sopda:- Den. V. fr. sop; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı ol yağı:nı: sonda:dı: “he chased (afba'a) the enemy, and rode after him” (rakiba fi “aqibihi), also used of : anyone who followed (sara 'aqib) something to catch it Kaş. 777 400 (sopda:r,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 881 
     
   
   
       DIS sopda:ma:k): KB klsig sopdama 'do not persecute people' 4301. D sipdür- Caus. f. of sin-, s.i.s.m.l., cf. sipür-. Xak. xi sücig aşığ sipdürdi: “the wine made the food agreeable' (or digestible; amra'a'l-[a'üám); ahd one says ol anı: evke: sindürdi: “he surreptitiously introduced (adxala wa axassa; ?so read, MS. ahasa unvocalized) him into the house” Kaş. //İ 397 (sipdürür, sipdürme:k): Çağ. xv ff. slpdür- (spelt) cadab hunanidan “to cause to be absorbed, drawn in”, xawd farmüdan "to cause to plunge into (something); furi xwuránidan “to cause to be consumed' San. 257v. 8 D sóndür- Caus. f. of sön-, “to extinguish (a fire), etc. Survives in the same languages as són-. Uyğ. virt ff. (Bud. in some MSS. of TT VI 446 (tındur-) söndürmez is written instead of sönmez owing to a false analogy vv. tındurmaz): Civ. söndür- “to extinguish” H II 26, 97: (Xak.) xır(?) Tef. söndür- “to extinguish” (a lamp) 275: xiv Muh. ajfa'a “to extinguish' sóndir- Mel. 23, r, sü:ndü:rRif. 103: Çağ. xvff. sóndür- Caus. f.; xevdmüş hardan dtaş “to extinguish a fire” San. 247r. 13 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 160; Nahc. 257, 4: Kom. xiv ditto CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiii atfa”a söyündir- (MS. seyündir) Hou. 34, 7: xiv söyündür- ditto, also pronounced söndür- İd. s4; ditto. sóyündür Bul. 23r.: xv ditto só:ndür:- (or sówündür-?; spelt sewindir-, which is then said also to mean “to make glad”, i.e. sevindir-) Kas. 74, 3; ditto sówündür- Tu. 6a. 2: Osm. xiv to xvi (only) söyündür- “to extinguish'; common T'TS 1 642; I1 840; 111 638; IV 706. sandrı:- "to be delirious, to rave”, and the like. An early 1.-vv, in Mong. as saudur- (of a mob) "to be in confusion” (Haenisch 132); sandara-| sandura- 'to be in confusion; to scatter; to be uneasy, alarmed' (Kow. 1288, Haltod 318). Survives in SW 'Tkm. samra-; it is an open question whether sandıra- and the like in NC Kir, Kzx.: SC Uzb.: and some NW languages is a direct survival or a reborrowing fr. Mong., prob. the latter. Xak. xr esrük sanrı:dı: “he drunken man raved' (or was delirious, Rada): the original form was sandrı:dı: (MS. sandıraydı) Kaş. III 281 (sanrı:r, sanrı:ma:k): (Çağ. xvff. sandirak 'delirium in illness or a nightmare' San. 235v. 27 (prob. reborrowed fr. Mong); sandırakla- “to be delirious' 23sr. 14); Kom. xiv. "to rave, be delirious” sandıra- CCG; Gr. (?fr. Mong.). D sandrış- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of sandrı:-. Xak. xı esrükle:r kamuğ sanrışdı: (MS. sanruşdt:) the drunken men all raved (hadat) together'; originally sandrışdı: (MS. sandirigdi:) Kaş, II 213 (sanrisu:r, sanrışma:k, prov.). Tris. SND F sanduvva:ç 'nightingale'; l.-w. fr. Sogdian antw'ch "svveet-voiced”, see Henning, op. cit., s.v. suburğa:n and H. W. Bailey, “Arya IV” . SNG | 83 BSOAS, XXVI, p. 8r. Survives in NE Tel. sandığaş R IV 307: NW Kaz. sanduğaç, elsewhere displaced by Pe. bulbul. Xak. xı sanduvva:ç al-'andalib 'nightingale Kaş. I 529 (verse); III 178 (same verse); a.o. III 311 (sayra:-): KB ceceklikte sanvvaç öter “the nightingale sings in the flower garden” 78; a.o. 4963 (sayra:-): xiv Rbg. R IV 225 (sayra:-); Muh.(?) hazàr 'nightingale' sanduwa:c (MS. srd.wa:c) Rif. 176. (only): Xwar. xiv sanduvvaç “nightingale” Qutb 153; zanda:vva:ç do. 207. j VUF sondila:ç a small bird of some kind; translations vary; Red. 1177 translates $a'wa in Osm. “the fire-crested wren, Regulus ignicapitus', Hava "small sparrow, bullfinch'; dubsi is translated alternatively "wild pigeon, woodpigeon, honey-guide'. Prob., like other words ending in -la:g, a L-w. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı sondila:c a/-şa"ma Kaş. I 526 (prov., see órt$ü:n); o.o. (verse) 7 529, 5; İ/İ 178, 14: xiv Muh.(?) dubsi (VU) sandıla:ç (unvocalized, MS. si:día:c) Rif. 176 (only): Çağ. xvff. sandalaç/sandulaç (both spelt) "a small bird rather bigger than a nightingale'; the male is green (sabz) and the female yellow (zard); it has a long tail San. 235v. 26. VUF sondurı: Hap. leg.; under the heading fu'L.li; the dál carries kasra in one place and damma in the other. Hardly to be connected vv, Sanskrit sundara “beautiful, good”, but prob. a corruption, through some other language, of Sanskrit samudra *ocean, sea”, Xak. xı sondurt: (sondtri:) al-bahr “sea”, etc. Kaş, I 492 (prov.). Dis. SNG D sınuk (sinuk) Pass. N./A.S. fr. sin-; *broken', originally in a physical sense, later also metaph. 'defeated, broken (in spirit), and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g., usually as Sinik, but SE "Türki sunuk: SW Tkm. srnik. Türkü viii ff. IrkB 48 (sap-): Uy£. vii ff. Civ. USp. 98, ış (anuk): Xak. xi sınuk (sic) ne:p 'something broken' (al-maksür): the Oğuz call it sınuk without the Zunra (9) and their form is regular (al-qiyás lahum), because it is derived fr. sındı:, inkasara, and there is no funna in its Verb Kaş. III 365 (sıpuk, otherwise unknown, might be a crasis of *sinfuk, a cognate form vv. Suff. -ğuk): KB 1858 (buzuk): xırı(?) Tef. sınuk *broken' 272: xtv Muh. al-mahsür (opposite to “entire” bü:tün) sinuk Mel. 55, 1; sinuk Rif. 152 (and 191): Oğuz xı see Xak.: Xwar. xiv sinuk “broken” (e.g. of the heart) Qurb 165; Nahc. 433, 1: Kom. xiv ditto CCI; Gr.: Kip. xin al-maksür (opposite to 'entire' bütün) sinuk Hou. zy, 2: XiV ditto İd. 54: xv mahsür şınık Tuh. 34b. 7; 48b. 7: Osm. xiv ff. sinuk (rare)/Sinik (1) 'broken' ; (2) (rarely) 'defeated'; c.i.a.p. TTS 1 623, II 819; III 622; IV 686. D sopuk Hap. leg.; al-áxir “the last, latter” or “the end”, Den. N/A. in -uk (usually Dim.) fr. Sof, or perhaps crasis of 80p and 2 ok. Xak. xı Kaş. TH 107 (yétrül-); n.m.e. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 882 
     
   
   
      838 DIS VU sipkur a bird of prev, in modern times, and prob. always, 'the gerfalcon, Falco gyrfalco. "Yhe form in Uyg. (noted only as a P.N.) was Sipkur (or sipkor). This became an early l.-w. in Mong., with the usual sound-change S1- — gi, as giphor (or şinğor) (Haenisch 141). In Xak. it became sunkur by retrogressive vocalic assimilation and this form still survives in SW Osm. supkur/supğur. in Mong. by a similar process it became sogkor (Kot. 1536, Haltod 386). "This later Mong. form was reborrowed as sopkar/supkar and survives in SE “Türki sunkar/supkar/supBar (Falco Hendersoni): NC Kir. sumkar; Kzx. supkar (a hybrid form): SC Uzb. supkor: NW Kk. supkar: SW Az. sunfar; Tkm. supkar. See Doerfer | 360. Uyğ. x(?) Bud. (PU) Meplig Sıpkur P.N. Pfahl. rz, 18; küdegümüz Alp Sipkur Tégin “our son-in-law Alp Sipkur Tégin' do. 23, 13; Alp Sipkur Tarxan do. zo, [gap] Öğe Sipkur do. zı: xiv. Chin.-Uyğ. Dict. 'gerfalcon' sopkar (sopkar) R IV 1098; Ligeti 199, q.v.: Xak. xi supkur the name of a bird of prey (cárrh min cavearih”l-tayr), it is smaller (dün) than the toğrıl Kaş. HI 3Si: kirğu:y supkurka: karışmaz “a sparrow-hawk does not start a fight with a larger falcon” (akbar mina'l-buzát) II 9s, 8: KB 5639 (Sesüt);..a.o. 5697: xiv Muh. al-şunğur şunkar, vil. sunkur Mel. 72, 13; maltku'l-buzàát “king of the falcons” sunkur Rif. 175: Çağ. xv ff. sunğar “the bird called sunğur” Vel. 299 (quotns.); sunkur 'a hunting bird of the hawk (çarg) species', also called şunkar San. 247r. 17 (quotn.); sunkar 'a hunting bird of the hawk species', which is long-lived, also called sunkur, also used of the deaths of emperors and kings, as it is said in the Ta'rix-i. Büöbüri that "Umar Sayx Mirza sunkar boldi, i.e. 'died! 259v. 19: Xwar. xin(?) supkar "falcon” (of some kind) Og. 42-6: xiv supkur "falcon” Qutb 1590; sungar MN s: Kom. xiv “falcon” sonğur CCI; Gr.: Kip. xirt al-sunqur *well-known' (ma'rüf) Hou. yo, 3; sunkur as a P.N. do. 29, 6: xiv sunkur a bird and a P.N. (yısamnığ bihi) İd. sa, al-sunqur Kipçak Bul. 12, 1: xv sunkur is mentioned as the name of a slave in. Tut. Rob. 10-11; and şunkur is added in a SW(?) hand under “aqab "eagle” do. 25a. 9. Dis. V. SNGD sanğar- lap. leg.; '"l'rans. Den. V. fr. sa:n: syn. w. San-, Xak. xr ol anı: kisi:din sanğardı: “hc reckoned ('adda) that he was a human being! (mina'l-nas) Kaş. II 188 (sanğarur, sanğarma:k). Dis. SNG sepek still widely used in Anatolia for "a water vessel made of wood or earthenware', SDD 1205, and noted in SW Az. senek “a large jug with a long narrow neck and a handle'. Oğuz xı sepek “an earthenware mug (al-küz) for drinking'; also “a jar' (al-carra) Kaş. III 367: Kip. xiv sepek (*with -9-?) a/-carra İd. sa: .SNG Osm. xiv to xvir (only) senek “vater vessel; common T'T'S 1612; I1 809; III 613; IV 676. sipek 'a buzzing insect' of various kinds; Dim. f. of the onomatopoeic Sip; survives only in SW Az. sinek; Tkm. sipek 'mosquito' and Osm. sinek (sinek) “fiy”, sivri sinek 'mosquito'; elsewhere displaced by çıbın (first noted in Xak, xi KB 44099) Cf. uyaz. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. (in a list of noxious animals and insects; beasts with tusks and claws, birds) sipek (mantises, ants, beetles) U 7I 35, 23: Xak. xı sipek in the language of townspeople (ahlu'!amsár) 'a gnat' (al-baqq), and in the language of the nomads (ahlu'I-wabar) "a fiy” (al-dubab) Kaş. III 367; o.o. Ssipe:k af-ba"üd 'gnat' II 13, 23; JI 352 (yélpit-); TH 100 (yelpiş-): (xiv Muh.(?) al-dubab si:gek (MS. sfí:kek) in one MS. Mel. 74, 8): Çağ. xv ff. sinek (spelt, “vith -pD-') başşa 'gnat'; in Ar. baqq and ba'üd San. 258r. 12: Xwar. xiv ditto MN 12: 'Tkm. xit al-dubáb sipek (spelt sigek; Kip. çıbın) //on. 10, 11: xiv al-dubáb (çıbin, also called) sipe:k Bul. ro, 16: xv nömüs 'gnat, mosquito” sipek (/uyaz) Tu). 36b. 3: Osm. xvnr sipek . . . and, in Rümi, mahas “fiy, passa sivri sipek San. 258r. 14. D sönük Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. sön-, 'extinguished', and in some modern languages metaph. “depressed, undistinguished', and the like. Survives in SC Uzb. (sünik): SW Az., Osm., Tkm. Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. küçi sónók erser “if his strength is exhausted” TT VIII M.21. D süpüg See süpü:. VU süpük (?süDökK) 'bone'; morphologically Pass, Dev, N. fr. *süp-; survives in such a wide variety of forms that it is difficult to fix the original pronunciation, but the evidence rather points to Süpók, Survives in NE all dialects sö:k: SE Türki sönpek/sünek/süpgek/süyek/ sopak: NC Kir. sö:k, Kzx. süyek: SC Uzb. suyak: NW Kk., Kumyk, Nog. süyek; Kaz. söyek: SW Az. sümük, 'Tkm. sünk/süyek. Türkü vir süpükü:p (sünüküğ in 1/7) tağça: yatdı: “your bones lay in mountainous heaps! 7 E 24, II E 20: Uyğ. vi ff. Man.-A M I əş, 33 (baga:): Man. M İİİ 39, 3 (iii) (sı:-): Bud. yas süpükleri “his fresh bones' Suv. 625, 10; 0.0. do. 153, 2-3 (berüki:); U IH 24, 6 (i) (sóglün-); do. 35, 21: Civ. TT VII 23, s (üpgük), H I 16 (erkec), 79; H II zz, 29: Xak. xı süpük al-'azm 'bone' Kaş. HI 36; (prov); o.o., spelt süpü:k / 98 (oğruğ), 178 (oğur-), 247 (oğrul-), 38o (tobik), etc.: KB 2206 (etsiz), 4131 (kemdi:-): xıı1(?) At. (wisdom is to a man) süpekke yilik teg "like marrow to a bone”) (intellect is the beauty of a man and) süypeknin yilik 89— go (except süpük once, all MSS. have süpek); Tef. süpük/süpgük 275 (sópük): xiv Muh. al-azm sümük Mel. aş, ız, sü:pe:k Rif. 139: Çağ. xv ff. süpek (with -k”) kemik ... ustuxtedn. ma'násina. 'bone' Vel. 299: süpek (spelt, *with -g-") ustuxteán San. 247r. 20 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv sünek/süpük ditto 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 883 
     
   
   
     v   DIS. V/SNE- 839 Qutb 160; süpük Nahc. 65, 16; 191, 16; 28r, 17 etc.: Kom. xiv “bone” sówek CCI; Gr.: Kip. xin al-'azm. sü:pü:k (?; MS. siü:gü:k) Hou. 21, 19: XIV süpük ('with -p-") ditto; süvvük ditto /4. 54; ditto (s) sünü:k (sie) Bul. 8, o: xv ditto süvve:k Kas, 61, 9; (VU) sinfa (perhaps error for sin'a *wrist") süwek (in margin in second hand süpük 'bone" Tu. 192a. 3; aam Süwek do. 24b. 6: Osm. xiv ff. süpük 'bone', common to xvi, sporadic till xviii. T TS I 6s5; I1 855; III 650; IV 717. ?D sepğeç prima facie a Dev. N. in -fec; pec. to Kaş. where it is listed twice, in both cases under fa'lal, in the second case among words containing a -n-. Xak. xı senfec "a kind of apple (a/-tuffak), about as small as an almond (al-banádiq), sweet, red and white" Kaş. 1 455: segg&amp;ec (MS. sertleç) “the name of an apple as small as an almond, sweet' 717 381. sengil Hap. leg.; hardly to be connected vv. Sigil “a wart' although the latter survives in SW 'Tkm. as sipgil. Xak. xı sengil 'freckles (al-halafa) which appear on the face” Kaş, I 483. Tris. SNG s D süpüglüg P.N./A. fr. süpüğ (süpü:): "lancer and the like. N.o.a.b. Türkü vr (where did the men in armour come from that scattered you?) sünüğlüğ kantan kelipen süre: eltdi: “vhere did the lancers come from that drove you (before them)” I E 23, I1 E 19: xiv Muh.(?) al-rammáh "lancer! süpüzli: Rif. 84 (only). e D süpüklüg P.N./A. fr. süpük; “having bones, bony', etc.; s.i.s.m.l. with the same phonetic changes. Uyğ. viir (f. Bud, bodisatvnim kalmış sünüklüg saririn “the relics (Sanskrit 1.-w.) of the remaining bones of the Bodhisattva” Suv. 627, 16-17: Xwar. xiv süpeklig (of a date) 'having a stone' Qutb 160. Tris. V. SNGD süpüklen- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. süpük. Xak. xi oğla:n sügü:klendi: (sic) 'the boy's (etc.) bones grew bigger” (kabura alhwàh) Kaş. III 408 (süpüklenü:r, süpüklenme:k). : Dis. SNL sini:1 "a sister younger than oneself”, as opposed to “a sister older than oneself” (eke:, q.v., etc.). Survives in SE Türki sipil: NC Kir. sindi, Kzx. sipli: NW Kk., Nog. sipli/ Sipili; in other languages there is no special word for 'younger sister'. Türkü vir 7 E zo, II E 17 (kunçu:y): Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. tört sipillernin “of the four younger sisters' U II 62, 2 (ii), o.o. U III 14, 17; Pfahl. 23, 12: xiv. Chin.-Uyg. Dict. 'younger sister sipi R IV 687, Ligeti i95, q.v.: Xak. xı slpii “a man's younger sister” (al-uxtu'l-sagira) Kaş. III 366; o.o. I 457 (baldız), III 7 (yurç): xu(?) Tef. sipil “younger sister' 269: xiv. Muh.(?) uxtu'l-zawc "husband”s sister' si:ni:1 (MS. sipck) Rif. 144 (only): Çağ. xv ff. sipil/sipli küçük ktz karindag 'younger sister (ie. not an Osm. word) Vel. 288 (quotn.); Sipil (spelt, *with -p-') 'younger sister San. 258r. 18 (quotns.); a.o. 92r. 22 (2 uya:). E senleç See sepğeç. D sanlığ (sa:nliB) P.N./A. fr. sa:n, in the early period usually w. the Dat. and meaning “belonging to, responsible to”, lit. perhaps "having the number of, i.e. ascribed to”, cf. san-. Survives only(?) in SW Az., Osm. sanlı 'esteemed, distinguished'; "Tkm.- in phr. sa:nlı gün “a few days”. Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-A ol (PU) ismirin (or ismir yek?) sanlağ ağığ barımağ 'treasure and property belonging to...” M III 11, 20: Man. frnıbranka sanlığ kKiltuipz "you have made (them) destined for(?) parinirvána (Sanskrit l.-w.)' TT III 32-3: Bud. vrhar sangram sanlığ ed tavarığ 'movable property and livestock belonging to a temple or convent' (Sanskrit vihára sangháràma) U II 77, 24; similar phr. do. 86, 41; TT IV 6, 44; Suv. 135, 19; men ol rakşaska sanli men “1 am subject to that female demon' (Sanskrit rákgasi) U IV 14, 129-30; 0.0. do. 12, 112; 16, 154; TT VIII E.1; F.8: Civ. mana (VU) Tülek Temürke sanlığ . . . kavlalıkımnı “the vegetable garden belonging to me Tülek "Temür” USp. 15, 1; (a man born in the Ox or Swine Year) bu yultuzka sanlığ tuğar “is born under this star” TT VII 14,16-17;a.0.0.in TT VIT; (sanlığ in TT 7 84 (edlig) is prob. a P.N./A. fr. san as a Sec. f. of F tsap, q.v.): Xwar. xiv sanlığ ol bizge “that belongs to us” Qutb 153: Osm. ulu sanlu kişi “a great and distinguished person” TTS IV 662. D sı:nlığ P.N./A. fr. 1 sın, survives in NE Alt., Tel, sındu:, Sag. sınnığ "tall; long; as long as" R IV 634-5: NC Kir, sindu: 'shapely, well-built (man), handsome', and the like; Kzx. sındı ditto: NW Kk., Kaz., Nog. sinli ditto. Uyğ. vii ff. Man.-A M 7 zz, 1-3 (i) (ögdir): Xak. xı Kaş. 11I 138 (1 si:n). Dis. V. SNLD smal- Pass. f. of sına:-, “to be tested, tried”. S.i.s.m.l. Xak. xr rg smnaldı: “the matter was tested” (curriba) Kaş. İH 126 (sınalur, sinalma:k): Çağ. xv ff. sınal- (-1p) sinan-, ya'ni tacruba olun- ditto Vel. 289 (quotn.); sınal- (mis-spelt sínel-) imtihàn şudan ditto, San. 257r. 1 (same quotn.): Kom. xiv ditto sinal- CCG; Gr. D sapla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. san. Xak. xı kuş sanla:dı: "the bird defecated” (daraqa) Kaş. III 403 (sapla:r, sapla:ma:k). D senle:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. sen; "to address as “thou””, cf. French tutoyer. Xak. xı ol anı: senle:di: "he addressed him as an inferior” (xdzabahu bi-xitábi'l-adniyd') ; it means (to address as) 'thee' (arta), the most common (al-tahtir) form of address is (described by) sizle:di: meaning (he addressed him as) “you: 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 884 
     
   
   
     840 DIS. V. (antum); this corresponds to (bi-manzila) the form of address to kings, as in the Koran inná anzalnahu “ve sent him down' Kaş. III 298 (senle:r, senle:me:k). D saplat- Hop. leg.; Caus. f. of sapla:-, Xak. xı ol kuşni: saplattı: “he made the falcon (etc.) defecate” (aslaha"l-bazi) Kaş. 11 359 (saylatu:r, saplatma:k). D senlet- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of senle:-. Xak. xı ol ani: senletti: “he urged him to address him (ie. a third party) as an inferior' (bi-xitábi'l-giár); as we have explained (i.e. under sen) the “Turks address a superior with sin zöy and say SİZ and address someone inferior in rank with sim nün and say sen, hence the phr. ol anı: senletti: “he urged him to use this form of address as a humiliation' (tahkira(n)) Kaş. 1I 346 (senletü:r, senletme:k). Tris. V. SNLD sipi:le:- Den. V. fr. *sipi:, an onomatopoeic cognate to sip, q.v. Survives in SW Osm. sinle- (of animals) "to whine, moan'; XX Anat. sipele-/sinile-/sinle- 'to sob quietly; (of a dog) to howl (with the cold); (of copper vessels) to clatter, clang". Kag.'s second translation is hard to connect with the rest. Xak..xXr it sipi:le:di: “(he dog whined (Aarra) with the cold (etc.)'; and one says su:v sipi:le:di: “he water was (so) cold (Parada) that it almost froze' (yacmud); and kula:kim siyi:le:di: “my ear sang” (or buzzed, anna) Kaş. III 405 (sipi:1e:r, sipi:lesme:k, corrected from -ma:k, not vice versa as in ZAtalay); (Kip. xiv sipilde(with -p-") "of a dog, to howl ("arcd) with the cold” ]d. $4): Osm. xv ff. sinile-/sinilde-/ siple/?sinle- "to howl, or whine', usually of a dog; noted in several dicts. and two texts TTS I 630; II 826; III 628; IV 693. D süpü:le:- Hap. leg.(?); Den. V. fr. sünü:. Xak. xı ol anı: süpü:le:di: "he pierced him with a lance' (ta'anahu bi'l-rumh) Kag. III 405 (süpü:le:r, süpü:le:me:k). D sipillen- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. sipil. Xak. xı ol krzif sipillendi: “he adopted the girl as a. younger sister! (fffaxada”l-cöriya uxta(r) Kaş. TİL 408. (sipillenü:r, sipillenme:k). Dis. SNN VUD sene:n (?sine:n) Hap. leg.; under fa"al in the -n- Chap.; prob. a crasis of *sipgen Den. N./A. connoting habitual action fr. sin-. Xak. xı sepe:n ne:n fa"dı 'afs 'astringent food” Kaş. III 376. F'sagu:n/sepü:n the Chinese title chrang chün (Giles 1,212 3,276; Pulleyblank, Middle Chinese fsfay kon) "army | commander, general] was, bestowed by the Chinese emperor on, or assumed by, a number of Turkish notables. Such names occur in the texts and also the names of actual Chinese generals. As the first word had a back vowel and the second a front one scriptions vary. "Türkü vir Çaça: SNLSepü:n (Chinese) “General Sha Cha” 7 £ 32, II E 26; Çap sepü:n (Chinese) 'General Chang /| N 1:3; Ku: Sepüm (Chinese) “General Ku” 77 S 8-9: (leading the Kıtaf and 'Tatabi: people, PU) Udar Sepü:n (came) 7 NV ir-12:. Vil ff, Yen. Tarkan Sanu:n men Mal. 32, 7; er başı: sanu:n ölürü:p “killing the general, the leader of men” do. 48, 3: Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. tağay Toya Sapunka “for uncle "Tona Sanun” U II So, 67; upası Külüg Inang Şaçu (VU) sapun “the lay brother Külüg Inanç, General of Şaçu” Pfahl. 6, 5; in the list of names in the third 'Pfahl', do. 23, ış, Aytu&amp; mis (VU) sapun and Sağlığ (VU) sanun are mentioned between the fegins and the inals: O, Kir. ix ff. Boyla: Sapun Mal. 7, 1; (PU) Cocuk böri: sapu:n do. 12, r. Dis. SNR sepir 'a projecting part (lateral or vertical) of a mountain'; hence also “the projecting part (corner or buttress?) of a vvall”, Survives in NE Alt., Küer., Tel. sepir 'corner' R IV 448: NC Kir. sépir “a high mountain ridge covered with grass or trees; Kzx, sepğir “high mountain ranges”. Uyğ. viti ff. Bud. (then that cook) bulupda sepirde yaşa olurup 'hiding in corners and (behind) the edges of walls' (stole children in the strect) U 7/7 6s, 4 (ii): Civ. tağ yerinde tağ ündi sepir bold: “in the mountainous country a mountain rose and became a ridge” T7 I 44-5: O. Kar. ix ff. Kara: sepir, geographical name, occurs several times in Mal. 24: Xak. xı sepir “the projecting part (ra'n) of a mountain', also "the edge (or corner, farf) of any wall' Kaş. IIT 362; o.o., Kara: senir geographical name IJI 222 (kara:), (grief comes to a man;) ta: sepiri:pe: yé:l teği:r "the wind beats against the nose (anf) of a mountain' (then it passes away from him, as the wind drops from the projecting part (a/-ra"n) and the latter is as it was before) 111 360, 3: (Çağ. xv ff. the word in the passage fr. Bábur quoted in R IV 448 is Hindustani sangar "a stone breastwork"): Kom. xiv Sepir tav (ie. ta:ğ) 'projecting rocks! CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv sepir ("with -n-”) al-röbiya 'hill, mountain! İd. 54. s1pa:r "a side", properly a N., but often used practically as an Adv. or Postposn. Survives in NE Tel.: NC Kır., Kzx.: NW Kk., Kaz., Nog., where it tends to mean “one of two sides', or *one of two (anything), to the exclusion of the other, as in Kaz. sıpar küzle 'one-cyed', or alternativelv, “the düplicate” of something else, hence “like" as in SC Uzb. men (or menip) sipari "like me", See sarı: and cf. yipa:k. Türkü viri stpar süsi: 'one wing of the army” /7 E 32 (bark); sıparça: artuk “half as much again” T 4o (1 u:ç): Uyğ. viu berdin stpar “south of” Su. E 3 (berdin); sınarı: bodun içikti: sıparı: b[gap] "half the people surrendered to us and half” (fled to China?) do. E 6-7: Man.-A kün batsıkdın sıpar “in (or from) the west' M III 9, 4 (ii) (followed by three similar phr. for the other cardinal points): Man, koptin sipar “in every 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 885 
     
   
   
       TRIS. V. SNR- . Sal direction" TT I/I 6o (1 €:1), o.o. TT IX go, etc. (1 taş): Bud. kayudin sınar . . . antin sipar “in whatever direction' (or “on whatever side”) . . , “in that direction” (or “to that side”) U II 29, 19-21; 0.0. U III 29, 2-3 (:d-); Kuan. 2, 189, 218, etc.: Civ. alkudın sınar “on all sides! TT VII 29, 9: Xak. xı 81pa:r cüntbu”l-şay” “the side of a thing”, hence one says Sipa:rdin yorr “vvalk beside' (me, cániba(n) Kaş. III 375: KB tusulmaz kişiğ kil özünde sipar “put aside from you the man that is no use to you' 5538; 0.0. 1786, 4401 (sakınçsız), 4792: xın(9) At. 366 (sal-); Tef. sar közli 'one-eyed' 269 (sigir, hut ?so read); or sınar “the right side” (etc.) 272: Xwar. xiv sipar köz birle saklab *looking out with one eye", (the warriors looking) baylar sıparu “in the direction of the rich” Qutb 165: Tkm. xv (under 'alamatu'l-taşbih “Advs. of Comparison” .. . and in Tkm.) sınar (/-çılayın) Tuh. 8ga. 13: Osm. xiv, xv, and xvii bir sınar “one section”, ol sınarı “like that”, benüm sinari “like me', and other similar phr.; common TTS I 622; II 818; III 621; IV 684. sipir “muscle, sinew'; s.i.a.m.1.g. Türkü vu ff. Man. (the five component parts of the body: bones) sipir (veins, flesh, skin) M III 19, 14 (i): Uyğ. vii ff. Man. sinirin M 7II 29, 3 (i) (damaged passage): Bud. (he was very thin) sipiri tamırı sünükine tegi közünüp *his muscles and veins right down to his bones being visible! U 777 35, 20-1; a.o. do. 60, 4 (i) (1 tı:ş): Civ. H 7 76 (adgir); bışığ sinir “ginger” (lit. “cooked sinews', see H. W. Bailey in Fuad Köprülü Armağanı, Istanbul, 1953, p. 52) H T4, 8, etc., HH; TT VII 22,7; VIII M16, 29: Xak. xı sinir a/-"aşab 'muscle, sinevv” Kaş. HI 362; bu: er ol siniri: kurulğa:n “this man is constantly getting cramp' (ya'tarihi'l-tagannuc) 1 $20, 8: xin(?) Tef. sinir '(camel's) tendons” 269: xıv /Muh. al-'agab Mel. 4, 19; 45, 14; Rif. 75, 139 (and 142 only): Çağ, xv ff. sipir (spelt, *with -p-") "aşab wa pay (“sinevv”) San. 258r. 14 (quotn.): Xwar. XIV sinir “bovv-string” Quib 158: Kom. xiv *nerve! (?'sinew') sipir CCI; Gr.: Kip. xit al-“aşab sipir (MS. sigir) Hou zı, 18: xiv sipir (“vith -D-”) ditto İd. 54; ditto sini:r (8) (ie. sinir) Bul. 8, 9: xv "aşab sipir Tu. 24b. 8. Dis. V. SNRD sipür- Caus. 1. of sip-; basically “to swallow; to digest', vv. some extended meanings later. Survives in NE Khak., Tuv. sinir-: SE Türki sipür-: NC Kır., Kzx. sipir-: NW Kk. sipir-. 'There are sporadic spellings sipirin Uy&amp;. and in the MS. of Kaş. the vocalization is chaotic. Cf. sipdür-, Uy. viir ff. Bud. [gap] sipirip “svvallovving” U IV 4o, 175; sipirgelir do. 8, ro (kilin-); sipürür PP 17, 3 (udik): Civ. H 7 153 (2 yu:): Xak. xi ol tancu: sipürdi: (MS. sfyirdi:) “he swallowed (ibtala'a) the gobbet' (etc.) Kaş. III 392 (sipürür, also vocalized sigirür, si:yürme:k, sic): KB (true words are bitter to the mind, but).sipürse anın asğı bérgey tatığ “if one  swallows them, their benefit gives a pleasarit taste” 5774; a.0. 5777: xır1(?) At. sipür- “to swallow" 270: xiv Muh. hadama “to digest sipür- Mel. 32, s (see s1p-); si:pür- Rif. 116; hadmu'l- -ta'ám si: yü:rmek 125 (only): Çağ. xv ff. sipür- murncadib süxtan "to draw in, absorb'; xawd hardan “to cause to plunge into something); hadm hardan “to digest'; also an idiom for tahammul kardan 'to endure, put up with (something)! San. 257r. 27 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv sigür- “to absorb' (grief into the soul) Qutb 165 (stpur-); Kom. “to swallow, absorb' sipir- CCG; Gr. S sanrı:- See sandrı:-. VU?D sonra:- Hap. leg. Xak. xı er i:gka: sopra:dı: haruna”l-racul fi gabüli'l-amr na raddada”l-kalüm “the man was obstinate about accepting the order and rejected what was said to him' Kaş. III 402 (sopra:r, sopra:ma:k). S sanrış- See sandris-. Tris. SNR D sıpa:rkı: N./A.S. fr. sına:r, n.o.a.b. Uyğ. viti ff. Bud, Sanskrit vrvekam | anubrmihayet “let him strive for isolation' (i.e. standing apart from the world) sıpa:rkığ üklitgülük TT VIII E.6; on sipa:rki burxa:nla:r “the Buddhas in the ten directions! (the eight cardinal and semi-cardinal points, above and below) do. K.2; ondin siparki alku burxanlar USb. 89, 24-5; kayudin siparkı cerigig utar yégedür “he defeats and gets the better of armies on whatever side they may be' do. 104, 19-20: İçtin sıparkı . . . taştın sınarkı "interior . . . exterior" T T X 4rı-ız: Civ. (a vegetable garden) taş köprüğnün öndün sıparkı 'situated on the near side (or east?) of the stone bridge” US?. 15, 2. D sipirke: Hap. leg.; Dim. f. in -ke: (pec. to this word and yipke:; prob. a crasis of - kiye: for - kifie:); “a small sinew'. Uyğ. vur ff. Bud. Sanskrit tantu "thread” sipirke:le:ri: ylpke:leri: TT VIIH F4. D sepregü: Hap. leg.; Dev. N. fr. *sepre:-, a Den. V. fr. sepir presumably meaning 'to discharge (mucus) from the nose'. Xak. xi sepregü: at 'a horse with a continuous discharge from its nose like pus' (bii sudám yasil min anfihi' [-muxát ka'l-midda); and a boy is so called as a term of abuse (yrsağ5) when his nose is constantly running Kaş. III 387. D sepirliğ Hap. leg.; “having projecting rocks'. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. Tig. 31a. 6 (esripü:). D sıparsuk Hap. leg.; Den. N. fr. sınar, lit. something on one side”. Xak.xı sıparsuk al-qafdt wahtva | maq'adu'l-radif mina"l-faras 'the hindquarters of a horse, that is the place where a passenger (second rider) sits' Kaş. III 388. Tris. V. SNRD siparla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. sına:r. Xak. xr ol anı: siparíia:dr: "he took advantage of his weakness (istad'afahu) and took Eu ə” $, —- - ——— 7 ..—- .”” —......-.——”—. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 886 
     
   
   
       842 revenge on him, when he found him isolated and without a helper” (rcacadahuı farid bi-£ayr mu'in) Kaş. II 409 (s1parla:r, s:parla:ma:k). D sipirle:- Den. V. fr. sipir; n.o.a.b. with divergent but appropriate meanings. Xak. xt ol ya:sin sipirle:di: "he put a bovv-string (albasa'l-'agib) on his bow' Kaş. İTİ 409 (sipirle:r, sipirlezme:k): Çağ. xv ft. sipirle- (spelt, 'with -p-7) pay kardan "to hamstring', that is to cut the leg tendons San. 257v. 22: Osm. xiv to xviii sipirle- “to ham-string'; in several texts TTS I 628; I11 825; IV 693. D sipirlen- Refl. f. of sipirle:-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı et sipirlendi: “the meat was stringy” (Ratura a'sábu'l-lahm); and one says ya: sipirlendi: “a bow-string was fitted (ulbisa'l-'agib) to the bow' (etc.) Kaş, III 407 (sipirlenü:r, sipirlenme:k): Çağ. xv ff. sipirlenpay şudan "to be hamstrung” San. 258r. 5. Dis. SNS D sansız (sa:nsiz) Priv, N./A. fr. sa:n; “innumerable'. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE; in SW only Tkm. sa:nsiz (Az. saysız, Osm. say1s1z). Türkü vri sanstz kelürip kop kot(t)r “they brought innumerable (blood horses and furs) and deposited them all” (at the tomb)-£. S. 12: Uyğ. ix Sici 5 (ağıl): vir ff. Man.-A sansaz timen yıl 'innumerable myriads of years” M I 10, 4: Man. TT III 102 (ülgüsüz): Bud. sansiz tümen ózlüg ólürür 'they kill innumerable myriads of living beings! PP 1, ş, o.o, TT VI 431, etc. (sakışsız): Xak. xi KB (Thou hast created) tümen min bu sansiz tiriğ “these innumerable millions of living beings' 21: xin(?) KBPP sansiz salam u durüd 'innumerable grectings and praises! s: Xwar. xiv sansiz “innumerable” Qutb 152; sansızın 153; Sanstz Nate. 399, 1 (sakışsız). D sensiz Priv. N./A. fr. sen; without you”. N.o.a.b. Xak. xi Kaş. III 131, 22 (uzal-); n.m.e.: Çağ, xvff. sénsiz/sénsizin bi-tü "without you” San. 258r. ro (quotn.): Xwar. xiv sensizin Qutb 165 (under sir-). Dis. SNS E sapis See sakis. sürpüs Dev. N. (connoting mutual action) fr. *süp-; “a battle” and the like. N.o.a.b. Türkü vir yegirmi: süpüş süpüşmiş “fought twenty (pitched) battles” 7 E 15, 11 E 13; similar phr. 7 E 4o, İİ E 34; Ix. 11, etc.: ol süpüsgde: “in that battle' / N 2; 0.0. x. 9, etc.: viri ff. Man. M. HI 19, 11-13 (yöle:şür-): Uyğ. viu ekinti: süpüş “the second battle" Su. N 9: Xak. xi süpüs al-firad xa?l-mutá'ana xea”Hharb "battle, spearing one another, war'; Sünüş a man's name Kaş. 7/1 365. Dis. V. SNŞD sına:ş- Recip. f. of sına:-, “to test, or try, one another”, S.i.s.m.1. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. bir İkintike sınaşalım “let us test one another”   TRTS. V. SNR(to sce which of us is the stronger) U IV rz, 84-5: (?Osm. xvi see sunus-). D sipiş- Hap. leg.?; Co-op. f. of sip-. Xak. xi Su:vla:;r kamuğ sinişdi: “the waters all ran together! (tanádabat); also used of any liquid. (áyi) when. parts. of it penetrate (Tadaxala) something else Kaş, 111 394 (sipişü:r, sinişme:k). D sunus- Recip. f. of sun-, “to stretch out, or offer (something) to one another” N.o.a.b. Xak. xr ola:r ikki: etme:k sunusdt: “they two offered (sıdzcala) brcad (etc.) to cach other” Kaş. II 112 (sunuşu:r, sunusma:k): xri (?) Tef. sunuş- “to present (a cup) to one another; to hold out (swords) together! 277: (Kip. xv? náwala (VU usun-), below the line, in second (?SW) hand, sunuş- Tuh. 37a. 2): Osm. xv sunuş- “to present (a cup) to one another” TT'S III 643: (xv1 Ar. mudáwaka “testing one another” sünü ile bir birine ş.nu:şmak seems to be an error for sınaşmak rather than sünüsmek /V 711). D süpüş- Recip. f. of “sün-, “to fight (one another)”: n.o.a.b. "Türkü vir süpüş- is common, both by itself, e.g. üç yegirmi: süpüşdimiz “ve fought thirteen (pitched) battles” I E 18; and in the phr. süpüs süpüş-, see sünüş: vr ff. Man. (ve know) teprili yekli nede ötrü sünüşmiş “vhy the gods and demons fought one another” Chuas. 165; a.o.o.: Uyğ. vur süpüsdim anta: sançdım “1 fought and routed (them) there” Su. E 1, 3,4,6; 8 5$: Man. anın nomi bari süpügmek ol “his doctrine and being is fighting! M II 5, 5-6 (i): Xak. xi iki: er birle: süpüşdi: türada”l-riclan frl-harb wa. ta"and “the two men charged at one another in the battle and speared one another” Kaş. 7/1 394 (süpüşü:r, süpüsme:k); a.o. //7 393, 15. Dis. SNZ VUF sünzi: Hap. leg.; "İouse", No doubt a l.-w. fr. a Chinese phr. "The second syllable is the common enclitic fs (Giles 12,317), but therc are difficulties about the first. 'l'he normal Chinese word for 'louse' is shih/sé (Giles 9,929); there is an alternative. word, Giles 9,930, Karlgren, Grammata Serica Recensa, no. 506a., which has the same pronunciation, but has as its upper part a character, Karlgren, op. cit., no. 383a., which serves as a phonetic sin|stin (both current) in Giles 4,584-6/4,894-6. Prof. W. Simon says that there is no evidence that it ever had this phonetic value in Giles 9,930, but as its presence in that character is unexplained (see Karlgren, op. cit.) it seems possible that there was once a Chinese word sün, or the like, for “louse” which was later displaced by s/rh/sé, a commoner word. Xak. xı Sünzk: şay” min cins”l-barğüt ea ahsibulw'l-qaml a thing of the flea family; I reckon that it is "louse” Kaş. I 422. Mon. SR F 1 sir originally “İlacqucr”, l.-w. fr. Chinese ch'i "İacquer” (Giles 1,023; Pulleyblank, Middle  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 887 
     
   
   
     MON, V. SR- . 843 Chinese £s”/ə£, which would have been ts'ir or” the like in vir transcriptions of Chinese in” "Tibetan characters, see 7R AS, 1926, p. 521). S.i.a.m.l.g.; in NE, NC, NW usually 'colour, paint', in SE, SC, SW Osm. 'lacquer; glaze (on pottery); silvering (on mirrors)', and the like. Cf. sirgi, Xak. xi sir "viscous substances (luzücát) made of glue (al-girá) and daubed ( yulattax) on Chinese bowls (qişd7 and then carved” (or painted, yurgag); hence one says sırlığ aya:k “a cup daubed with it, and carved (or painted)! Kaş. I 324. VU 2 sir Hap. leg.; onomatopoeic. Xak. xı one says of the sound of a cricket (a/-cudcud) sir Sir etti: 'it made the sound of this onomatopoeic” (a/-hikaya), also used as an onomatopoeic for the scratching (al-sarir) of a pen and the like Kaş. T 324. PU sir (?şir) except for possible occurrences in / E 34 and Ix. zı (see 2 irkin) this word occurs only in T in the phr. quoted belovv. Various explanations have been suggested, the most plausible is that put forward by Aalto in Journal de la Société Finno-Ougrtenne XL, p. s1 that it is the Sogdian word $yr, “beautiful, good”, Türkü vir Türkü (PU) sir bodun “the good(?) Türkü people” T 3, ır, 6o, 61, 62. VU so:r Hap. leg.; prob. a mere onomatopoeic, but cf. so:r-, which may itself have an onomatopoeic basis. Xak. xı one says er so:r so:r mü:n ópti: "the man sipped (/asa) the soup noisily” (?, MS. bi-sib, which gives no sense and is prob. an error); it is an onomatopoeic (ikáüya) for the sound of the lips (a/-şafah) Kaş. 1II 122. Mon. V. SRsa:r-, ser- Preliminary note. 4 good deal of confusion has occurred between these two. V.s, chiefly owing to scribal errors in the MS. of Kaş, and misunderstandings by Atalay, but the difference is made clear by a grammatical passage, 11 37 ff., on the formation of the Infin., if it is correctly translated. İt states that there are two Infin. Suffs., -ma:k and -me:k, the first attached to V.s containing (1) qaf, (2) Bayn; or (3) back votwels, the second to V.s containing (1) al-kàfu'l-sulba (k); (2) al-kafu”l-rakika (8); or (3) front vowels (al-kalimatu'l-rakika). Exambics are given of each class, that for the last including the following; c.g. er telim serdi: 'tAe man endured (sabara) much', serer, serme:K; since the word has front votwels, the Infin. has -me:k (kafiya(n)), do you not see that a similar V. w. back vowels (al-mugbi'a) has an. Infin. tn -ma:k (al-qàfi), it ds in the sentence beg anı: sardı: "the beg rebroved him” (zacarahu), sarar, sarma:k (MS. serme:k)”, Atalay indexed sa:r- "as sarand ser-, and ser- and serme:- as sar-. In the medieval period and later saru:- sometimes occurs as sar-. 1 sa:r- “to ill-usc (someone)' and the like; pec. to Xak. Xak.xı (among the Mon V.s w. a long vowel) ol anı: sa:rdı: 'annafahu wa. xaşşana lahu”l-qanl "he ill-used him and used harsh language to him” Kaş. 117 181 (sara:r, sarma:k, sic, altered fr. -me:k); a.o. İİ 38, 29 (see above); KB 4610. S 2 sar- See saru:-. 1 ser- "Trans. “to endure (something); Intrans. "to be patient”. In this meaning n.o.a.b. İt is difficult to connect vv. this SW Az., Osm., Tkm. ser- “to spread out on the ground, beat to the ground, neglect (one's work), and the like; der. fs like serğek *swaying', seril- “to sway' seem to go back to some quite different V. here shown as *2 ser-. Uy£. vii ff. Bud. öz ig emgekimin serü umadin 'because I cannot endure my illness and pain” U III 37, 37; adinlarniy emgekin körser bir kşan ödün yeme serip turğalı umaz “if he sees the pain of others he cannot endure it even for an instant' (Sanskrit Aşaza) TT X 74-6; a.o. TM IV 255, 121: Civ. in TT VII 1, 36 ff, an astronomical text, serer, of a planet, means 'remains' (in a particular constellation) ; (you have sent a letter to the officials saying) sizler munun (?read munda) iköbçürni sersün “you must bear (ie. be responsible for) the tax (Mong. l.-w.) here” USb. 9, 1-2 (a very dubious text): Xak. xr ol serdi: 'he was patient about a matter' (sabara fi amr) Kaş. II 7 (sere:xr, serme:k); a.o. II 38, 21 (see above): KB (anything that stands firmly) tügmez serer 'does not fall but stays (upright) 807; serip turdaçı er “the man that waits patiently' (catches the white bird) 1319; o.o. 489 (tüne:-), 5823: xın(?) At. 175-6 (sig-): Xwar. xiv sér- “to endure' Qutb 165 (str-): (Kip. xr see Saru:-). 2 *ser- See serğe:k, seril-. 1 so:r- “to suck (something Zcc.); to suck up, or out (something cc). Listed in Kaş. among Mon. V.s w. a long vowel, but sometimes ?mis-spelt sor- in the MS. A L-w. in Mong. as soro- (Kon. 1413, Haltod 345); s.i.a.m.l.g.; SE Türki irregularly sora-/sor1- ; SW 'Tkm. şo:r-. Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A (a bug) kişinep kanın kentü sorar 'itself sucks a man's blood” M 7 8, 15-16: Civ. sor- “to suck up” H II 14, 133: Xak. x1 kenç sü:t so:rdi: "the child sucked in (maşşa) the milk” (etc.) Kaş. III 181 (2 so:r- follows); o.o. 1 16, 5 (sorğu:), II 7o (emig): KB sorar öz kanı 655; a.o. 4099: xiv Muh.(?) massa so:r- Rif. 115 (only): Çağ. xv ff. sor- (- Bah, etc.) şorVel. 294; sor- . . . (2) mahidan "to suck” San. 239v. 9 (quotns.): X war. xiv sor- (Aor. sorar /sorur) "to suck' Qutb 159: Kip. xit! maşşa müna”l-maşş bi'l-fam “to suck with the mouth' şor- Hou. 43, 20: xiv SOr- maşşa İd. 56: xv ditto TuA. 35b. 7: Osm. xtv ff. sor- “to suck; c.i.a.p. TT.S 1635; 11 834; İİİ 635; IV çor. 2 so:r- “to ask (a question); to inquire about (something Zcc.)', and the like, With long  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 888 
     
   
   
     844 vowel (cf. 1 so:r-) but sometimes ?mis-spelt in Kaş. An early |l-w. in Mong. as sort- “to examine, scrutinize, test” (Haenisch 136, Kotv. 1412, Haltod 345) and also sura- “to ask (a question)" (Zfaenrsch 137 only; only der. f.s later). Survives as Sor- only(?) in SW Osm,, and in SE Türki, where the forms (sce Jarring, p. 277) are Sor-/so:-/soy-/sora-/soya-. 'l'he forms sura- in NE and NC and sora- in SC Uzb. (süra-): NW Kk., Kaz., Kumyk, Nog.: SW 'Tkm. (so:ra-) look more like reborrowings fr. Mong. Uy£. viri ff. Bud. kişike sorgil "inquire of a man” USD. 46, 2 (not certain; in a very dubious text): Xak. xı (see Oğuz, the meanings given there seem to be good Xak.): KB (looking closely at what is and is not beneficial and) kereklig kereksizni kértü sorup 'enquiring into the truth about what is and is not necessary' 328; bu Aytoldı sordi kamuğ ış küdüg “Aytoldr inquired into everything that was going on” 1038: xiti(?) Tef. sor- "to ask (about something Aec., or of someone Dat.) 273: xiv Muh. sa'ala “to ask (a question)! so:r- Mel. 26, 15; Rif. 110 (mis-spelt sgr-); a/-sı” al so:rmak 36, 7; (Rif. 122, bizgi:r-): Çağ. xv sor- (1) pursidan 'to ask (a question), inquire" San. 239v. 9 əə sora- (spelt) surdğ (Turco-Mong. 1.-vv.) wa taftiş hardan "to inquire, investigate” do. 241r. o (quotns.): Oğuz xt er só:z so:rdi: isfacarra ”-raculu'l-xabr "the man tried to get news'; and one says er yitük so:rdi: “the man looked for (or asked for news about, anjada) the stray animal (a/-dülla) Kaş. IH 181 (sora:r, sorma:k, sic): Xwar. xır sor- “to ask” "AZ 28: xiv sor- (Aor. sorar) ditto Quib 189: Kom. xiv ditto CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xim sa'ala sor- Hou. 34, 11; a0. 43, 21 (after 1 so:r-): xiv ditto. /d. 56: xv sa'ala, in the sense of asking how it is or where it is SorKav. 76, 5; Tuh. 202. 7. sür- basicallv "Trans. “to drive away, to drive on”, and the likc.. S.i.a.m.l.g. w. these and extended meanings like “to plough, to follow (an occupation), to spend (timc)', and the like, and also in some languages as İntrans. “to continue, push on; (of time) to pass'. Note that SW Osm. Sür- 'to rub on, smear' may be a Sec. f. of sürt-. Türkü vri [gap] sü: sürti: 'drove the army on (or away?)' /x. 20; a.0. 1 E 23, I] E 19 (süpüglüg): vrrr ff. Man. uvutsuz bili sürüp “behaving shamelessly' (ie. having sexual intercourse) M 7 s, 6: Uyğ. vrir süre: in a damaged passage $4. S 2: viii ff. Man.-A (men and women . . .) nen etöz sevigin uvutsuz isig (sic) sürü umaz 'cannot enjoy bodily love or have sexual intercourse ' M 7 16, 18-20: Bud. (the king's ox-herd) süre ündi “came out driving' (five hundred oxen) PP 6s, 2; sürüp isletip 'driving and putting to work' (birds and animals) Hien-ts. 135; a.o. TT V ro, 86: Xak. xı ol at sürdi: "he drove on (sdqa) the horse' (etc.), and one says er itığ, sürdi: "the man drove away (farada) the dog” (etc.); also when a ruler has moved out (acla) of a town one says sürdi: Kaş. I] 7 (süre:r, sürme:k);o.o. translated saqa 1139, 9; MON. V. SR51, 8; gö, t2; farada 177, 10; kalın bulutuğ tüpi: süre:r "a high wind clears away (yağşif) the dense clouds" 777 217, 1; (respect the wise man and listen to his words) erdemni: öğrenipen ışka: sür-e: 'when you learn good conduct, put it into cffect' (ista'mil; Imperat. with enclitic -e:) 7 428, ro: KB (he has sent away the wicked) élindin sürüp 'driving them out of his realm' 437; 0.0. 65 (erincig), 2312 (1 ö:ç): xin(?) 7ef, sür- 'to drive” (a dog) 279: xiv Mh. da'aba “to drive, drive away' Sü:r- Mel. 26, ş (only); sága teca hatta (to drive on, incite") sü:r- 27, r, Rif. 110; farada Sü:r- 28, 9; 112; 0.0. 40, 7; 129 (and 149 only): Çağ. xv ff. sür- (-güm, etc.) sfir- Vel. 293 (quotn.); Sür- (with -ü-") (r) ründan 'to drive, drive away', etc. (quotn.); (2) metaph. şiydr kardan zamin "to plough land” San. 239v. ır (quotns.): Xvvar. xıv sür(r) “to drive away'; ((z), for sürt-, “to rub”) Qutb 163; (1) Nahc. 379, 17: Kom. xiv “to drive out” sür- CCG; “to plough' saban sürCCI; Gr.: Kip. xın sdqa mina'l-sawg sür-, also "al-nafa “to banish” Hou. 40, 16: xiv sür- farada wa sáqa İd. sz: xv saqa sür- Tuh. 20a. 2; nafá Sür- 36b. 12: Osm. xiv ff. sür'to drive away; to spend (time); to go ahead (Intrans.)', etc.; c..a.p. TT'S 1 657; // 857; HI 651; IV 718. Dis. SRA S sarı: 'towards, in the direction of”, and the like first appears in the medieval period, and s.i.s.m.l. İt has been suggested that it is the Sogdian Postposition s'r, but this would have appeared earlier in "Turkish or not at all, and there is little doubt that it is merely a crasis of siparr, Uyğ. xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. tört sarı “the four cardinal points! Liget! 192; R IV 321: Çağ. xv ff. sarı ((1) Scc. f. of sari); (2) simt «a taraf “direction, side" San. 231r. 2 (quotn.): Xwar. xur sari "towards! "A/ zz: xın(?) tört sarıka Og. 103; tap sarika *eastwards! do. 335; tün sarika *westwards' do. 336: xiv sari/saru *"townards' (somcone) Qutb 155: Kom. xiv sari 'towards' CCG; Cr. VU saru: Hap.leg.; perhapsal.-w. Cf. sekü:, Xak. xi saru: “a shelf' (a/-raff) in the house on which things are placed' Kaş. III 221. Dis. V. SRAsaru:- “to wind or wrap (something cc.) round (something); as such Hap. leg., but survives as Sar- in NW Kaz.: SW Az., Osm.; "Tkm. sara-. See sarla:-. Xak. xı ol su:luk saru:di: “he wound (kara) the turban round his head” ('alà ra'si!i); also used for wrapping (affa) something round ('alá) something Kaş. II 262 ((saru:r), saru:ma:k): xiv Muh. (?) laffa şay” bi-şay sar- Rif. rs (Mel. çuğlan-): al-laff Şa: rmak 122: Kıp. xin laffa nün lafffl-imáma "to wrap', of wrapping a turban, etc. şar- Hou. 43, 17: xiv. Sar- laffa İd. sy: Bul. 79v.: xv ditto Tuh. 32a. $? (xur nagara "to spread out” şar- (- Bil) Hou. 34, 15: 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 889 
     
   
   
     TRIS. xiv Ser- ditto İd. $2 seems to link with later meanings of ser-, q.v.). sırı:- Preliminary note. Kaş. puts these two V.s in a single para. which follows tire:- and precedes Saru:-; in this position Sarı:- might be expected, and im fact the facsimile seems to show fathas struck out above the sins and kasras substituted. There is sufficient evidence to prove that "to seto firmly” was Sirti-, but the other V. may tvell have been sarıt-. VU 1 sırı:- Hap. leg. Xak. xt 1t sirrdi: the dog defecated” (saliia) Kaş. III 262 (2 sırı:follows). 2 sırı:- "to quilt or smock' (a garment). Survives as Siri- in NE, SE, NW, SW Az.; SC Uzb.sir-; SW Tkm.sira-. Xak.xı (after | siri-) and one says ol kidiz sırı:dı: “he sewed with reinforced stitches' (xáfa. . . xeydfa mu'akkada), in 'Fürkmen fashion, the felt from which the curtains and coverings (girám . ... wa ağşiyatuhd) of tents are made during migrations (yawma'l-za'n) Kaş. III 262 (sırur, sirizma:k); Osm. xv Pe. ájandan "to sew' igne ile sirimak 773 111 626. Mon. SRB Sarp basically 'difficult'; survives only(?) in SW Az., Osm. with this and such extended meanings as “steep, rough, inaccessible”. Uyğ. viii ff. Civ. yırak barmış kişi kelmeki sarp “it is difficult for a man who has gone on a long journey to come back” T'T I 78; a.o. do. 221-2 (tig): Xak. xı KB idi sarp bolur bu yapi kelğüçi “t is very difficult for this nevvcomer” 492: bulardın idi sarp bu yavlak yağı “of (all) these the most difficult is the evil enemy" 3591; 0.0. 5312, 5549 (aya:-): Kom. xiv sarp “hard” CCG; Gr.: Kip. al-sa/b. 'difficult" (opposite to 'easy' kepe:z) sarp Hou. 25, 11: xiv ditto İd, 57: xv ditto Tul. 22b. 2: Osm. xiv ff. sarp “diflicult”, (of vinegar) 'rough'; (of magic or poison) “strong”, c.ia.p. T'LS İI 592; II 601; IV 665: xvi sarp (spelt) in Rumi, saxt :ea şadid "hard, difficult San. 230v. 25. Dis. V. SRBVUD sórple:- Hap. leg.; in a section for Dis. V.s containing three consecutive consonants; since it precedes the cross-heading T the third, yö” in the MS, must be p; the Infin. is given as -ma:k corrected to -me;k or vice versa, A Den. V., the basis otherwise unknown. Xak. xı ol erpe:k bile: sörple:di: “he drew a lot qüra"a . . . mina'[-qur'a) with his finger' Kaş. İH 443 (sörple:r, sörple:me:k, MS. söri:/e:éverywhere); a.o. 446, ro (ditto). Mon. V. SRCsürç- “to stumble'; survives only(?) in SW Osm.; the commonest modern word for 'to stumble' is sürün- but there can hardly be an etymological connection, Xak. xr at sürçdi: “the horse (etc.) stumbled' (a' tara) Kaş, III 420 SRC 845 (sürçe:r, sürçme:k): xiv Muh.(?) 'atara sürç- Rif. 112 (only); al-'itár sürçmek (MS. -mak) 122: Çağ. xv ff. sürç- (spelt, *with -ç-”) lagzidan 'to slip, stumble' Sam. 241v. 27: Xwar. xiv ditto Nahe. 299, ır: Kip. xiv ta'isa (to stumble") wa 'atara süçre- (sic, -c-) Bul. 40v.: xv 'atara (Sürün-; in margin in SW(?) hand) sürc- Tuh. 26a. 4. Dis. SRC S serçe: Sce Ssege:. S sırça See sırıçğar. DF sırçı: N, Ag. fr. 1 sır, "lacquerer, painter', and the like. S.i.m.m.l., usually for 'painter'. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. (titigci 'plasterer) . ... sirgi... (ığaççı *woodworker) Pfahl. 24, 29 (Müller read sürci, prob. influenced by an SE pronunciation (irregular) sürçi in .SAarc ızı): Xak. xı KB (in a list of craftsmen; “blacksmith, cobbler', etc.) sırçı 4458. (D) sürçük (?sürçök) “a story told at night", this is the commonest meaning of a/-samar and seems to fit all the passages quoted below. The alternative Xak. and Oğuz forms suggest an original -ó-. "The only other trace of such a word seems to be sürçek “a horse which is constantly stumbling” Vam., p. 297, not in any Çağ. authority, and so presumably Uzb. xix but not now current in Uzb. This latter is a regular Dev. N. fr. sürc-; there is no semantic connection between such a word and the earlier meaning, but there is no obvious alternative. Xak. xı sürçük a/-samar; the Oğuz pronounce it sürçek Xaş. 1 478: xiv Muh. al-hikaya “story, anecdote' sürçe:k Mel. 84, 14 (mis-spelt sürye:/), Rif. 190; Rog. biz olarnı Soy kélgen ya'ni sopra yaratılğan xalayıqlarka sürçek kilduk “ve have made them (i.e. the people of Saba) a cautionary tale for people who came after, that is were created later' R IV 828 (mistranslated): Oğuz xı see Xak.: Kip. xiv sürçek (with -ç-") al-samar İd. 52. Dis. V. SRCD sürgit- Caus. f. of sürc-; n.o.a.b.; the modern Osm. form is sürçtür-. Xak. xı ol atın sürçitti: “he made his horse (or something else) stumble” ('aig'i-'atra) Kaş, II 328 (sürçitü:r, sürçitme:k, corrected from -ma:k); Osm. xv and xvii sürçüt- “to cause to stumble'; noted in several xv and one xviii text 7 7S 1656; IV 718. Tris. SRC (D) sarıçğa: “İocust”, one of several names of animals ending in -Éa:. Survives in NE Koib., Sag. sariska; Mad. sariska R IV 325-6; Khak. sarisxa; some NW form with intrusive -n- became the basis of the Russian l.-vv. sarancha; NW Başkır, Cuv. saranca are no doubt reborrovved fr. this word. Cf. cekürge:. Xak. xi sarıçğa: a/-carad “locust”, “a lazy man” (al-raculu'l-raxw) is metaph. called sarıçğa: er Kaş. I 489 (follows sırıçğar, sin  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 890 
     
   
   
      846 TRIS. carries both fathia and. Ákasra): (xiv Muh. sec karınçğa:): Kip. xii a/-cardd şarınçka: (Ukm. çekürğe:) Hou. 10, 18: xiv sarinckan (sic, -c-) al-carád in Kup. İd. 57. sırıçğa: 'glass', perhaps originally a natural mineral like “rock crystal'. Survives only(?) in SW Osm,, 'TTkm. sirça, other modern languages use l-w.s, the commonest being Pe. şişa, for 'glass', Uy. viri ff. Bud. süzük arığ sırıçğa teg “like clear, clean glass! TT V 6, 24; 20.0. do. 48: Xak. xi siricfa: al-zucác 'glass' Kaş, 1 489: KB kişi kópli yuvka sırınçğa (sic) sanı "a man's mind is fragile, like glass! 4610: xiv. Muh. al-qàrüra *'glass bottle" sırça: (-c-) Mel. 69, 5; Rif. 170; (and al-zuccüc 'glass-maker' sırça:çı: (-c- -c-) 57, 11; 156): Caf. xv ff. sirca (spelt, “vith -Ç-”) şişa tea ábgina 'glass, glass bottle” San. 251v. 6 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv sırça 'glass' Qutb. 165: Tkm. xim a/-zucác sirça: Hou. 5, 11: xiv ditto Id. 52; Bul. 5, 5: XV zucác girga (in margin, in SW(?) hand, şırşa) Tw. 18a. 8: Osm. xiv ff. sırça 'glass'; c.Lap. TTS 1625; I1 823; III 625; IV 688. Mon. SRD F sart l.-w. fr. Sanskrit sarta 'merchant', prob. via Sogdian; it retained this meaning until xt but in the medieval period came to mean 'town dweller' as opposed to 'nomad', and more specifically 'an Iranian', as opposed to 'a Türk”, it retained this meaning in Russian "Turkistan until xix but is prob. now obsolete. Türkü vırı ff. Man. (wherever he finds) nığoşaklarığ sartlarığ 'Hearers and merchants! (he will kill them) TT JJ 6, 16: Xak. xı sart a/-tdcir “merchant” Kag. 1 342 (prov.); o.o. 4 66, 16 (same prov.); 7/7 13, 7: K B (hear now the words of) sartlar başı ajun tezginigli Xıtay arkışı “the heads of the merchants and the China caravan that traverses the world' 5754: Çağ. xv ff. sart “a Persian town-dweller' ('acamig şahri) who is completely ignorant of ''urkish Vel. 273 (quotns.); sart (spelt) tácik “Iranian” San. 230v. 26 (same quotn.): Kip. xv hadar? 'villager' sart (/tat) Tuh. 1zb. 3; “ümmi "common people” sart 24b. ır, 2 sart in sart sırt onomatopoeic; as such Hap. leg., but NC Kzx. sırt sirt has a similar meaning. Xak. xı one says anın ada:ki: sart sırt kildi: “his feet made a (clapping) noise' (sawwwata); the kind of noise made by feet in loose-fitting slippers (ai-mik'abr'l-wàsi) Kaş. 1 342. Sirt has a very miscellaneous range of meanings of which “back” is perhaps the basic one. "The Xak. meaning, unknown elsewhere, may have been properly “the thick hair on the back of a horse's neck. S.ia.m.lg. meaning “a mountain ridge; the back (of a man, knife, axe, etc.); the exterior of something', not all current in all languages. Xak, xı Sırt al-hulb (MS. halb) *thick, coarse hair” Kaş. 7 342 (cf. sırtla:-): Çağ, xv ff. sırt sur'at 'speed' (sic)   SRC Vel. 2835; sırt (spelt) şöra tea. düş 'shoulder blade, shoulder! Sam. 25:v. 4 (şdna also means “spced”, Vel.'s translation is prob. a misunderstanding of this word): Oğuz xı (after Xak.) and the Oguz call any mountain stream or small valley (ta/”a tea. qoddi şağir) sırt Kaş. ] 342: Kom. xiv sirt "ill" CCG; Gr.: Kip.//Tkm. xiv. şirt a/-rdbiya “a hill'; and in Kip. nag/u /-milirát "a ploughshare” Id. 57; 8.0. do. 52 (sürüğ), a/-rabiya sirt Bul, 3, ro, al-sikka “ploughshare” sirt (MS, sirit) do. 4, 1; 8.0. do. 5, 1 (Sürüg): xv saganqtür "skink” (a kind o£ lizard) şırt balıkı T'uh. 192. 8. Mon. V. SRDSürt- 'to rub', with several connotations, 'to rub (things) together; to rub (something Zcc.) on, or into (someone Dat.); to rub out, erase'. S.ia.m.l.g.; cf. türt-, 1 yak-. Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. (if you make a bran and) ala kişike sürtser “rub it on a man with skin disease (or leprosy)” TT VII 23, 4; 0.0. do. 6 (but in do. 3 türt-); 7/7 ] 65-6 (üze:), etc.: Xak. xı ol etme:kke: yn:ğ sürtti: “he smeared (/afaxa) oil on the bread'; and one says ol yarma:k ta:şka: sürtti: “he rubbed (or polished, ahahha) the coin on a stone” (etc.) Kaş, III 426 (sürte:r, sürtme:k): xiv Muh. dalaha "to rub, polish' sü:rt- Mel. 26, 3; Rif. 108; sahaqa "to rub clean! sü:rt- 27, 3; (110 süpür-); masaha yadahu “to wipe one's hands' él: sürt31, 5; (115 Sile:-): Caf. xv ff. sürte alsam süre bilsem Vel. 292; Sürt- (with -ü-") sıdlidan "to rub”, in Rümi sür- San. 241r. 29 (quotns.): Xvvar, xiv sürt- “to rub (on something Dat.) Qutb 163 (and see sür-): Kom. xiv 'to anoint' sürt- CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiv sürüt- (sic; ?error) masaha tea mahd (to erase") İd. şə: xv ahakka sürtü- (sic) Tuh. 5b. 8; hakka (kaşı-/) sürüt13b. 3: masaha (sil-/) sürüt- (sic) (in margin in SVV(?) hand, sürt-) 35b. 15. Dis. SRD (D) sırtığ Hap. leg.? (Uyğ. vin ff, Bud. sırtığ in the following text seems to be a misreading of kidii; “the edge of the hair” would make good sense here, and the error would bean easy one in badly written Uyj.; (the mysterious light) alın laksanindin saç sırtığındin üner 'emerges from the sign (Sanskrit l.-w.) on the forehead and the edge(?) of the hair TT VH 41, 29-30): Xak. xı sırtığ afar kull hadit yuhiss minhu'l-racul. ba'dahu min ğayr tamüm “a fragment of any piece of news which a man hears later and incompletely'; one says men bu: sö:zdin sırtığ buldim “1 got part of this story” Kaş. 7 463. D sürtük Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. sürt-; lit. 'rubbed, worn down', and the like. Survives in this meaning in SW Az.; the meaning in Osm. “a disreputable vvoman” is prob. an attenuation of the Xak. meaning. Xak. xı sürtük işle:r al-mar'atu'l-mashüqa “a passive Lesbian'; also al-sühiqa "an active Lesbian”, and anything that is rubbed (imsahaqa) is called sürtük Kaş. I1 47y: Osm. xvi Ar. tcallác “one who slips in,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 891 
     
   
   
      MON. V. SRĞ- 2084 or pushes his way in' érdügü yere sokulğan sürtük racül 773S IV 719. Dis. V. SRDD sarut- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of saru:-, the modern forms are Sardir- and the like. Xak. xı ol apar suvluk sarutti: (sic) "he urged him to wind ('ald takwir) a turban (round his head)'; also used for telling someone to wrap (bi-laff) something Kaş. JI 304 (sarutu:r, sarutma:k, MS. sarıt-). ?E serit- Hap. leg.; Arat plausibly translates "to melt”, in which case the text is prob. a transcription of a text in Arabic script in which the word was sızıtıp. Uy£. viii ff. Civ. (if a man gets measles and becomes constipated) inğek yağın serit(ip] (? sızıtıp) bérgü ol öter “you should melt butter and give it to him and his bowels open' TT VII 22, 17-18. D sırıt- Caus. f. of 2 sırı:-, s.iis.m.]. Xak. xı 01 kizka: kidiz siritti: “he made (kallafa) the girl sew the felt firmly' (bi-sjamracati'l-libd mu'akkadat(an) mugartamat(an)), that is like quilting (a/-tadrib) a garment Kaş. II 304 (sırıtu:r, siritma:k). D sorut- (or sorit- ?) Caus. f. of 1 so:r-; survives in SW Osm. sorut- 'to pout'. Xak. xt ura:ğut kençke: sü:t soruttt: "the woman made the child suck in (amassat) the milk”, and one says er yü:zin sorutti (MS. soritti;) 'abbasa'l-racul. wwachahu “the man frovrned” (i.e. screwed up his mouth) Kaş. II 304 (sorutu:r, sorutma:k, MS. sorit-). D sürtül- Pass. f. of sürt-, s.i.m.m.l.g. Xak. xı sürtüldi: ne:g “the thing was rubbed or abraded” (insaliaqa . . . wa'nsahaca); also used when someone does it; Intrans. and Pass.; one says teri:ke: ya:ğ sürtüldi: “oil was smeared (utixa) on to the hide” (etc.) Kaş. II 231 (sürtülü:r, sürtülme:k): Çağ. xv ff. sürtülmálida şudan "to be rubbed” San. 241 v. 17. DF sartla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. sart. Xak. XI ol anı: sartla:dı: “he reckoned that he was a merchant” (tácir) Kaş. IJI 444 (sartla:r, sartla:ma:k). D sırtla:- Hap. leg:, Den. V. fr. sırt. Xak.xı yıpnı: sırtla:dı (MS. yığır: sartla:di:) lawà'l-xayt "ala”l-hulb “he spun the rope of coarse hair” Kaş. 141 444: Oğuz xı and in Oğuz when a man climbed (sa'zda) up a small valley (a/-vüdi'l-safir) Kaş. III 444 (sırtla:r, sirtla:ma:k; MS. stritla:r, şırtla:ma:h). D sürtün- Refl, f. of sürt- ; s.i.m.m.l.g. Xak. xı at yığa:çka: sürtündi: “the horse rubbed itself (ihtakka) against the tree' (etc.); and one says er özİne ya:ğ sürtündi: "the man made it his business to oil himself' (tazwallà bi-tadhin nafsihi); also used when he pretended to oil something Kaş. I7 245 (sürtünü:r, sürtünme:k): Kip. xiv sürtün- immasaha “to wipe oneself”, with the sn of Refl, Action (al-muldtca 'a); then used for sağafa "to crawl (i.e. rub oneself) on the ground' İd. 52; inhakka'l-qumá "of linen (etc.), to be rubbed, worn (out) sürtün- Bul. 32r.: xv inhakka sürtün- Tuh. sb. 8: Osm. xvi Pe. xazidan “to crawl' (inter alia) sürtün- ve karnı üzerine sürtün(fon one's stomach") TT'S IV 719. D 1 sortur- Caus. f. of 1 so:r- ;s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı ol ka:nığ sorturdt: amara bi-maggi'l-dam müna”l-mihcama wa nazfihi "he ordered that the blood should be drawn off in a cupping-glass and made to flow freely! Kaş. II 184 (sorturur, sorturma:k): Çağ. xv ff. sordurCaus. f. . . . (2) “to order someone to suck' (makidan) San. 240v. 8. D 2 sortur- Caus. f. of 2 so:r-, n.o.a.b., modern V.s with this sense are derived fr. the longer modern form, e.g. SW Tkm. so:rat-. Xak. xı ol soruğ sorturdr “he ordered someone to call out for (or ask for news about, bi-nişdün) the stray anımal" Kaş. TI 184 (1 sortur- follows; N.B. not described as Oğuz): Çağ. xv ff. sordur- Caus. f.; (r) “to order (someone) to ask (a question, pursidan)' San. 240v. 8. D 1 sürtür- Caus. f. of sür-, s.i.m.m.l., usually as sürdür-. Xak.xı olanı: sürtürdi: “he ordered that he should be throvvn out and scared away from the place” (bi'l-cilà' wa'l-zaer 'ani'l-mawdi'); and one says ol apar ko:y sürtürdi: "he ordered him to drive (aságahu) the sheep' (etc.) Kaş. II 184 (sürtürür, sürtürme:k): Çağ. xv ff. sürdür- Caus. f.; “to order someone to drive out (ba-rándan) or to plough' (ba-siyár) San. 240v. 9. D 2 sürtür- Caus. f. of sürt-, s.i.m.m.l., usually as sürttür-. Xak. xı ol apar ta:s sürtürdi: "he ordered him to rub (or polish, ahakkahu) the stone” Kaş. 1I 184 (kadalika'l-maşdar "same Aor. and İnfin.?, i.e. as 1 sürtür-): Çağ. xv ff. sürttür- (spelt) Caus. f.; 'to order (someone) to rub' (málidan) San. 241 V. I2. D sürtüş- Recip. f. of sürt-; s.i.s.m.]l. Xak. xı ol menin birle: koğuşka: ya:ğ sürtüşdi: “he competed with me in smearing ( f? latx) oil on the leather; and one says ol menin birle: aşuk sürtüşdi: “he competed vvith me in rubbing and massaging(f? hakk .. . . sva sahcihi) the ankle' Kaş. 71 210 (sürtüşü:r, sürtüşme:k): Çağ. xv ff. sürtüş- Recip. f.; “to rub (málidan) one another” San. 241 v. 13. Tris. V. SRDD sürtüştür- Caus. f. of Sürtüş-, s.i.s.m.l. Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. (if a man's flesh is inflamed (or leprous, ala)) badıyannı yarıp yarıp (?dittography) sürtüştürüp "cut up some İllicium anisatum (Sanskrit 1.-vv.) and have (the pieces) rubbed together” (take the juice and rub it (sürtzün) on the flesh) H 7 48-9. Mon. V. SRĞsark- the basic connotation seems to be vveak downward movement with no force behind it,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 892 
     
   
   
     848 hence (1) (of a liquid) 'to overflow, drip'; (2) (e.g. of a limb) “to hang limply'. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE, SC in one or both meanings with some phonetic changes. Sce salkım. Xak. xi Su:v sarkdı: "the water overflowed' (sariba); also used of any liquid when it drips (tagátara) from something; and one says ada:kim sarkdr “my leg became numb and hung limplv (xadirat . . . teca taqdtarat a'yá a(n)) because of riding” Kaş. III 421 (sarka:r, sarkma:k): XT. xiv sark- “to hang limply! Qutb 155: Kip. xiv. sark- fadalla “to hang down' m HUE Osm. xvi and xvii sark(r) "to lean down'; (2) "to fall on, attack” TTS 1 601; II 795: xvin sarki-[sarkat- furi hiştan Tca üteixtan "to hang, suspend' (Trans.) San. 230v. rg (the translation fits only sarkit-). Dis. SRG sarığ 'vellow^; c.ia.p.a.]l, vv, some phonetic changes; apparently an early l.-w. in Mong. as gira (Haenisch 141). "Türkü vri sari altu:n ürüp kümüs 'vellow gold and white silver' T 88: viu ff. sarı:ğ ta:ş "a yellow (precious) stone' Toy. 8 (ETY 1I 58); sarığ atlığ savçı: “a messenger on a yellow horse! JrkB 11: Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. sarığ altun PP 43, 1; sarığığ “bile” Suv. 588, 14; sariğ tózlüg ig ağrığ 'illnesses arising from bile'.do. 19-20; 3.0.0.: Civ. sari munğa 'yellow mungo beans! (Sanskrit mudga) H I 87, 119; sarığ erük 'apricot' do. 101; sarığ [óplüg] 'yellow-coloured” (planet) TT VII 15, 1-2; sarif tözlüğ su:vsa:lik “thirst due to bile” VIII Lir, a.o.o.: Xak. xi sari£ 'yellow? (al-asfar) of anything; and for 'intensely vellow' (a/-asfaru'l-fáqi') one says sap sarig; and “bile” (af-mirratu'l-safrá) is called simply (mutlagqa(n)) sarığ, sarığ su:v 'yellow liquid (al-sufár) in the stomach'; and one says sarığ surif as a jingle (f?'I-izdrseác) for “yellovv” Kaş. 1374;0.0. I 301 (kezig), etc.: K.B the trees are adorned with crimson, scarlet) sariğ (blue and red) 67; (if my hand is narrow, i.e. stingv) sarığ kılğa ep “it will make my cheeks yellow' 477: xii(?) Tef. sarığ/saru “yellov” 262: xiv Mu. al-agfar sa:ru: Mel. 68, 2; sa:ruğ Rif. 168; al-büm "ovv” sa:ru: kuş 73, 3; 176 (in margin; ügi: in text); al-mignig 'apricot' sa:rığ (Rif. sa:ru:ğ) erük 78, ır, 182: Çağ. xv ff. sarığ/ sarik sar: Vel. 273 (quotn.): sarı abbreviation of sarığ zard 'yellow' San. 231r. 2 (quotn.); sarığ zard do. 6 (followed by several phr.): Xwar. xii sarif 'vellow* * Ali 12: xiv sarı/sarığ ditto | Qutb. 155: Kom. xiv *vellow; bile” sarı: CCI; Gr.: Kip. xir ai-aşfar sa:ru: Hou. 13, 6, 31, 2; aşfar faqi" şap sa:ru: do. 31, 6: xiv Sart: al-asfar; also used for a/-xamr 'wine'; sarı: kavvun “a yellow pumpkin” 7d. 57; al-dura “maize” saru (MS. sura) ot Bul. 7, 1: xv al-saman 'butter' şa:rı ya:ğ Kav. 63, 3; asfar şarı Tul. 4a. 2 (and several phr.). Siruk “a pole', and more specifically *tentpole'; s.i.s.m.l, as sirik.— UyB. vir ff. Civ. USp. 104, 13 (iğaç): Xak. xr siruk al-şaqb teahoa. 'amüdu'l-xiba' “tent-pole” Kaş. 7 381 MON. V. SRG(the sin also carries a damma): Çağ. xv ff. suruk sruk . . . ağaç ma"udsına qea (ádir direhi "a pole, tent-pole” Vel. 204 (quotn.); suruk (spelt) sufi? toa çiüb-i buland “a column; a long piece of wood' (quotn.); and metaph. 'a stick” (eibi) which children inake into a horse and ride on (quotn.) Sam. 242r. 22: Kom. xiv 'pole' suruk; 'fishing-rod' sirix CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv siruk “a pole (Ud) as thick as a man's arm and longer than a lance, on which clothes are hung', in Ar. al-migcab “clothes-horse” 1d. $2: Osm. xvi sirik (spelt) in Rmi, “a long piece of wood' in general; this is a corruption of Çağ. suruk, which has this meaning; and “a lance! (nayza) in particular San. 251 v. 20. D soruğ Dev. N. fr. 2 so:r-; 'question, inquiry'; survives in SW Osm. soru/soruk (the latter, used esp. in the phr. soruk günü 'the day of judgement, looks more like a cognate f. in -uk (Pass.)); ''km. so:rag; in most other languages the form is surağ or surak, prob. reborrowed fr. Mong. (see 2 so:r-), sirag in Pe., same meaning, was prob. borrowed fr. Mong. rather than Turkish, Uyğ. ix Suci 4-5 (kü:): Xak. xı soruğ 'calling out for (or inquiring about) a stray animal” (nigdánu'l-dálla); one says soruğ Krildr sagada'l-dálla Kaş. 1 374 (followed, irregularly, by çalığ, q.v.); o.0. İT 184 (2 sortur-): xiu(?) At. soruğ/ Soruk 'question, cross- “questioning" 273: Çağ. xv ff, soruk sormak ma"ndsina “inquiry”, H soruğ küni qivàümat güni “the resurrection day” (quotn.); surağ xabar 'news' (quotn.) Vel. 294-5; sarağ (sic) xabar do. 274 (quotn.); surağ fafahhuş wa taftiş "investigation, inquiry'; also n/şdır «va atar tca xabr “sign, trace, news' San. 242r. 8 (quotns.); soruğ/soruk (spelt) (1) pursis vea. su'al sa ihtisab “question, questioning, calculating" (quotns.), ((2) see sıruk) do. 22; soruğ küni rüz-i pursiş ya'ni rüz-i giyamat do. 27. (quotn.): Osm. xiv ff. soru 'question, inquiry; c.i.a.p. 7Z'7:S 7 636; II 835; İTİ 635; IV 702. D sorğu: N.I. fr. 1 so:r-; noa. b. virt ff. Man, [text begins] sütdin .. [gap] sorğun tartar(gap] “(üst as »0. from milk and draws off... by sucking it 3 Wind. 2-3: Xak. xt sorğu: al-mihcama “a cupping-glass” Kaş, I 425; for example, the word for al-mihcama sorğu: is derived fr. sordx: “(the animal) sucked in (zmtakka) (milk or blood)” / 16, 4; similar phr. 77 69, 29. Uy£. yeme VU sarkıç Hap. leg.; thus vocalized, but the Refl. Den. V. is vocalized sorkuçlan- and follows the Rell. Den. V. of sorkuc; a/-ya'did seems to be corrupt, al-ta' sir would link this word with the following but its meaning would be obscure. Xak. xi sarkiç al-mariira tcaDieea. nabt mün cinsi'l-ya'did "the corn-cockle, a plant of the . . . family" Kaş. 7 454. VU sorkic Hap. leg.; the Refl. Den. V. is vocalized sorkuçlan-. Xak. xr sorkic “uşüya şibği”l-lukh “a thick liquid made of the juice of lac', used to fasten the handles on the 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 893 
     
   
   
     TRIS. SRG tangs of swords, daggers, and knives Kaş. I 454. D sarkım Hap. leg.; N.S.A. fr. sark-; lit. “a single act of hanging down'. See salkım. Xak. xı sarkım al- şaqi" 'hoar-frost' Kaş. I 485. ?D sarğa:n a kind of plant; perhaps Dev. N./A. (connoting repeated action) fr. 2 sar(saru:-) in the sense of (a plant) that wraps itself round things. N.o.a.b. Uyf. viri ff. Bud. (by faith the fungi and crocuses growing in valleys and small valleys and) suvlardakı öğenlerdeki sarğan oti yaşı yas “the foliage of the sarğan plants in the waters and rivers is green” TT V 28, 123-4: Xak. xi sarğa:n “a plant (a/-nabt) which grows in saline ground' (al-sabxa); and the place where it grows (al-manbit) is called sarğa:n yé:r; and a thicket (al-acma) in which the reeds have withered is called sarğa:n kamış Kaş. 7 438. Dis. V. SRĞD soruk- IIap. leg.; Pass. f. of 2 so:r-. Xak. xr yitü:k (MS. yirü:)) sorukti: 'news was received (coucida xabar) of the stray animal after it had been called out for (or inquired about, i/şddihay Kaş. 1I xis (soruka:r, sorukma:k), D sarkit- Caus. f. of sark-; s.i.s.m.l., meaning 'to pour drop by drop; to hang up, suspend', and the like. Xak. xı ol to:ndin su:v sarkıttı: “he squeezed (qaffara) the water out of the garment' (etc.) Kaş. H1 339 (sarkıtu:r, sarkıtma:k): Kom. xiv sarxıt- “to drip' CCG, Gr. (Gr. 214 suggests that this is a mistranslation): Kip. xv saffá “to filter (a liquid)' (süz-/) sarkıt- Tuh. 22b. 13: Osm. xvii San. 230v. zo (sark-). D sarğar- Den. V., abbreviated, fr. sarığ, "to be, or become, yellow'. S.i.a.m.lg. as sarğar-, sarar-, and the like. Uy£f. vir ff. Bud. U I 37, 13 (kirtiş): Civ. H I 172-3 (kağur-): Xak. xı sarğardı: ne:n isfarra'l-şay” "the thing was, or became, yellow' Kaş. II ı87 (sarğaru:r, sarğarma:k), o.o. (of the face) 7 69, 11; 486, 16: (xiv Muh. işfarra sa:rığ idi: Mel. 22, 13; Rif. 103 is a phr., sa:rığ er-): Çağ. xv ff. sarğar- (-dı) sararVel. 273, sarğar- (spelt) zard şudan "to be, or become, yellow', in Rümi sarar- San. 230r. 19 (quotns.): Kip. xv (in a para, on Den. V.s) from şarı, şarar-/şarğar- Tul. 83b. s: Osm. xvır see Çağ, D sarkur- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of sark-, cf. sarkit-. Xak. xi ol ya:ğnı: ka:bka: sarkurdt: “he let the oil drip (qa//ara) from the leather container' (al-zigq); also used of any liquid when it has been poured (afra£a) from one vessel (toi'à') to another and the residue dripped (qatara) into it Kaş. II 189 (sarkurur, sarkurma:k). D sarkis- Hap: leg.; Co-op. f. of sark-. Xak..xı bu:zdin su:v sarkışdı: “the water 849 dripped in large quantities (taqdtara . . katira) from the ice” Kaş. II 214 (sarkışu: r, sarkışma:k). Tris. SRĞ D sara:ğuç n.o.a.b.; prob. a metathesis of vsaru:ğaç, Conc. N. fr. saru:-, in the sense of something wrapped round. "The word became a l-w. in Pe., see Szeingass, p. 686, sarağuc/sardğoçlsarağoş, arabicized (sic) form sarüqüç, 'a woman's hood, cloak, veil, fillet, or head-dress, a camel's halter', with the false Pe. etymology sar-dğoş 'head-embracing'. Xak.xı sara:ğuç ximáru'l-mar'a "a woman's wrap' Kaş. I 487: Çağ. xvff. sarağuç 'avratlar başlarına bağladukları çanbar "a handkerchief which women tie round their heads” Vel. 274; sarağuç “a woman's bag (i.e. hood) and veil" (Risa tea büş), it is a bag like a long purse (himyán) which they cover with embroidery; they put one side (taraf) on their heads and the rest of the veil (satr-i digar) they pass beneath their armpits and make into a sash (kamarband); this word is shared w. Pe. San. 230v. 24. D soruğçı: Hap. leg.; N.Ag. fr. soruğ. Xak. xı soruğçı: vdşidu”l-dalla "one who calls out for (or asks for nevvs of) a stray animal” Kaş. III 242. D sarığlığ P.N./A. fr. sarığ, s.i.s.m.l. usually as sarılı, “having a yellovv colour, ornamented with yellov”, and the like. Xak. xı sarığlığ er al-raculu'l-mamrür "a man suffering from biliousness” Kaş. 7 496, a.o. 500, 15. D sarığlık A.N. fr. sarığ, *yellowness'. S.i.s.m.l., usually as sarilik. Xak. xi sarığlık şufratu”l-aşya” “yellovvness of things! Kaş. I 503. D sirukluk Hap. leg.; A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. sıruk. Xak. xr sırukluk yığa:ç “a piece of wood suitable to be made into a tent-pole' (al-şaqb) Kaş. 1 503. D sarkındı: Intrans./Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. *sarkin-, Refl. f. of sark-. Survives in NC Kir.: SW Tkm. sarkindi 'residue, dregs' (and *water leaking through a dam”), the word used in this sense in most modern languages is the cognate Dev. N. sarkit; and SW Osm. sarkıntı 'robbery, molestation' (fr. the special meaning of sark- in Osm.). Xak. xr sarkındı: su:v al-qutár mina'l-má' "dripping water' Kaş. I 493. D *sarkiüuk crasis of *sarkinyuk Dev. N./A, fr. Ysarkın- Refl. f. of sark-; lit. *pendulous, hanging down', hence “the paunch'. The Uy£. f. may be a cognate Dev. N./A. in -ak. Uyğ. xır ff. Bud. (in a text regarding mystical letters to be placed on various parts of the body? . . . you should put the 12th letter on the groin; the r3th) sarkınak (sic) üze urğu ol “you should put on the paunch” (the r4th on the bladder) TT VII 41, ro: Xak. xı sarkiyuk (yd” unvocalized) a/-fahit “paunch”, bi'l-nün luğa fihi *alternative 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 894 
     
   
   
     Sso form sarkinuk'; there arc similar alternative forms in Ar. mizáb/minzáb and migárlmingár Kag. HI 179. Tris. V. SRGVUD sorkuçla:- so vocalized; Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. sorkic.. Xak. xi ol biçe:k sorkuçla:dı: "he fastened (şadda) the tang of the knife (etc.) in the handle with thick lac juice' (bi-'iesdárati l-Inkk) Kaş, HI 350 (sorkucla:r, sorkuçla:ma:k). VUD sarktçlan- Hap. leg.; this V. is vocalized sorkuçlan- and follows that word; this casts. doubt on the vocalization of sarkıç, Xak. xı yér sarkıçlandı: (sorkuçlandı:) 'corn-cockles (a/-maritra) grew on the ground, and it became full of (dát) corn-cockles” Kaş, II 271 (sarkıçlanu:r, sarkiclanma:k; MS. sorkuglan-). VUD sorkuçlan- Hap. leg., Refl. f. of sorkuçla:-. Xak. xi biçe:k sorkuçlandı: "the handle of the knife was fixed (şudda) with thick lac juice' (bi-'ugàra sibg Iukka(n)) ; and one says er sorkuçlandı: "the man came into possession of (şdra . . . ma") thick lac juice' Kaş. 17 271 (sorkuclanu:r, sorkuçlanma:k). MM xə. D sara:ğuçlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den, V. fr. sara:ğuç. Xak. xı ura:ğut sara:ğuçlandı: “the woman wore a veil' (taganna'at . . . bi'l-miqna'a) Kaş. Tİ 205 (sara:ğuçlanu:r, sara:ğuçlanma:k). D sarifila:-; Den. V. fr. sari. Survives in SW "km, sa:rila- “to embroider with yellow thread. Xak. xi 01 to:nin sariğla:dı: “he dyed his garment (ete.) yellow" (saffara) Kaş. III 336 (sariğla:r, sarığla:ma:k). Mon. SRG serk Hlap. leg. Xak. xi serk al-xazaf tva má'nkasara. minhià. *carthenware and. broken pieces of it" Kaş. I 353. VU sürk Hap. leg. Xak. xt one says anın ada:kı: sürk bu:z teğ “his fect are as cold as ice” (za Hcamd fi'l-buritda); the word is not used except in this phr. (al-matedi') Kaş. I 353. Dis. SRG D sürüğ Dev. N. fr. sür-; lit. 'something driven'; usually *flock, herd” in a broad sense, but sometimes specifically “a flock' of sheep, or other small livestock, in antithesis to öğür, “a herd' of larger animals. Survives in these senses in NE Tuv. sürüğ: SC Uzb. suru/suruv: NW Kk, süriw; Kumyk siriv; Nog. sürüv: SW Az., Osm. sürü, Tkm. süri, NC Kir, sürü: is merely a N.Ac. 'banishment, expulsion; UyB. vir ff. Man.-A M 78, 8 (u:d): Man. yunt sürügi "a herd of horses! Wind. 12: Bud. Sanskrit yard? “from the herd” sürügindin TT ITI C.5: sürüğ ud “the oxen of the herd” PP 65, 6: Xak. xr sürüg Aul qafi" mina l-an'ám "any herd of livestock” (a generic TRIS. SRĞ term for cattle, sheep, camels, etc.); onc says bir sürüğ ko:y 'one flock of sheep” Kaş. 7 389 (verse, sürüg ógür ko:y tevey 'flocks (qati") of sheep and camels"); a.o. 717 toz, 19 (kosul-): KB koy sürüğ 5371; a.o. 4353 (erkeç): xiv Rhg. bir sürüg koy R IV 816: Çağ. xv ff. sürük (with -k”) cami'at ve bölüh “a gathering, crowd' Ve/, 292 (quotns.): sürük (spelt) gal/a sea -ramma 'flock' San. 242r. 28 (same quotn.): Kom. xiv 'herd' sürüv CCG; Gr. (also "soft, thin leather' sürük CC7, and see Süvrkh): Kip. xut a/-qafi" müna”l-ğanam sürü: /Jou. 15, a: xiv sürü:/sürün (sic) ditto İd. s2— sü:rük şırt al-saqanqrr 'skink' Jd. 52; ditto sü:rek (sic) Strt. Hul. s, 1 (perhaps a different word). ?F 1 sirke: “vinegar”, s.i.a.m.lgr.; the word is also current in Pe. and may well be an Iranian l-w. Uy. xiv Chin.-Uyg.* Dict. 'vinegar' sirke Ligeti 195; R IV 704: Xak. xt sirke: al-xall "vinegar” Kaş. 1 430; 0.0. I 209 (üzit-), Ill 252 (açı:-): xiv Muh. al-xall sirke: Mel. 66, 7; Rif. 165: Kom. xiv 'vinegar' sirke CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv. sirke: al-xall. İd, şə: xv ditto Kav. 63, 2; Tuh. 14a. 13. 2 sirke: “a nit”, si.a.m.g. Xak. xı sirke: su'übatu'l-ra's “a nit on the head” Xaş. I 430: xiv. Muh. al-şübün *nits' sirke: Mel. 74, 6; Rif. 177: Çağ. xv ft. sirke (spelt) ((1) 'male mountain goat! is a Mong. 1.-vv. sérke); (2) “a small louse' (sipis-i riza) which appears on the body and clothing; in Pe. risk “nit” San. 251 v. ış: Kip. xiii a/-şi”ban sirke: Hou. 12, 3: XIV sirke: (after “vinegar”) also used for «/-si'bán (MS. siöydn) İd. 52: xv si'bán sirke Tuh. 22a. ro: Osm. xvı sirke 'nit'; in one text TT'S IV 965. D serğe:k IIap. leg.: Dev. N./A. (connoting habitual action) fr. 2 *ser-; cf. seril-. Çağ. xv t.; Kom. xiv serğek “vvakeful” is a Mong. ].-w., a Dev. NA. fr. serge-. Xak. xı serge:k (MS. sergeh, but under the heading /a74/) a/-ihzáz vea l-tumáyul 'swaying, tottering” from drunkenness and the like; one says esrük sergekledi: “the drunken man swayed' (tamáyala) Kaş. II 289. ?F serker lap. leg.; prob. a l.-w. fr. some Iranian language; there is no obvious origin, but a phonetic resemblance to Ar. saraqa 'to rob', of which derivatives occur in Pe, Cf. sekerci: Karluk xi serker qözı"ı /-tariq "a highwayman' Kaş. 7 457. Dis. V. SRGD sergür- Caus. f. of ser- in its meaning of “to be patient, stand still”, and the like; “to halt (something), bring it to a standstill”, N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viu ff. Man. TT HI 76-7 (eriş-): Bud. Sanskrit anádháraka *without holding back" tutuksu:z se:rğürte:çisiz TT' VIII 4.4; nga kalti çuğ suviğ (so rcad) turğurup artukrak sergürser “ust as, if one checks muddy water and brings it to a complete halt...” Sut. 74, 22-3; ao, U II 69, s (ii) (cerlg).  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 895 
     
   
   
     lI EN zə DIS. V.SRL- | 8st Tris. V. SRG-. D serğekle:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. serge:k; “to sway, totter'. Xak. xı Kaş. 7 289 (serge:k); n.m.e. D?F 1 sirke:le:- Hap. leg.?; Den. V. fr. 1 sirke:, Xak. xı ol su:vuğ sirke:le:di: “he mixed the water (etc.) with vinegar” (al-xall) Kaş. III 353 (sirke:le:r, sirke:le:me:k). D 2 sirke:le:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. 2 sirke:. Xak. xı ol oğlan başın sirke:le:di: “he pulled the nits (zaza'a'I-si' bàn) from the boy's head” Kaş. 111 353 (1 sirke:le:- follows). VUD sür$gü:le:- Hap. leg.; the vocalization is uncertain; the word is in a section for Tris. V.s ending in -le:- of which the second vowel is long; the Perf. is spelt siirgi:le:di:, the Aor. and Infin. sürgile:-; it is fairly obvious that the first is right on the length and the second on the quality of the vowel and that it is a Den. V. fr. *sürgü:, Dev. N. fr. sür- meaning “driving, pursuing', and the like. Xak. xı ıt keyikni: sürgüzle:di: "the dog made the antelope run (a'dà . . . 'I-zaby) and followed in its tracks to catch it”, also used of anyone who ran after something and attacked it in order to catch it Kaş. 171 353 (sürgüle:r, sürgüle:me:k). D sirke:len- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of 2 sirke:le:- ; in a section containing V.s of which the second vowel should be long, but not so spelt in the MS. Xak. xi oğla:n sirkelendi: “the boy's head (etc.) had nits' (şa"?5a) Kaş. III 202 (sirkelenü:r, sirkelemme:k). Dis. SRL DF sırlığ P.N./A. fr. 1 sir; "acquered'. S.i.s.m.l. with some phonetic changes with the same shades of meaning as 1 sır. Xak. xi Kaş. I 324 (1 sır). Dis. V. SRLD sarıl- Pass. f. of 1 Sa:r-; n.o.a.b., the translation in Kag., which would be appropriate for 1 sa:r- and has no Pass. connotation, is inexplicable, but the word is used as an ordinary Pass. in KB; arıldr: is a mere jingle, see 2 aril-. Xak. xi beg apa:r arıldı: sarıldı: “the beg (etc.) was angry with him” Kaş. TI 123 (sarilur, sarilma:k): KB (if a servant does something which does not please his master) ilenç özke kılğu sarilsa (Arat, serilse) kalı “he must blame himself, if he is abused (or ill-treated)' 1610; (a man's mind is like brittle glass, take great care of it, or it will break, sarma anı "do not handle it roughly") sarılsa kişi kópli kétti tatığ “if a man's . mind is roughly handled, the savour (of life) has gone' 4611. D sarul- Pass. f. of saru:- this V. seems to occur in two consecutive paras. in Kaj.; in the first the Perf. is spelt saruldt:, but the Aor. and Infin. are spelt sari/-; in the second the Perf. is spelt sirildi: but the Ínfin. is spelt sarul-; the basic meaning is “to be wrapped round (something)”. There is, however, one difficulty about this explanation; in Uyğ. Man. a V. meaning “to be attached to (something)' is clearly spelt 3iril-; this might be a Pass. f, of s1ri:- as a metaph. application of 'to be sewn firmly to (something)”, but there is no other trace of such a V.; Siril- in some medieval and modern languages is a Sec. f. of sıdrıl-, q.v. Sarul- survives as sarıl- in NW Kaz.; SW Az., Osm. and saral- in 'Tkm. (Uyğ. vrır ff. Man. sırılmışlarka TT lI] s3 (i1-)): Xak. xi yışığ yığa:çka: saruldr “the rope was wrapped round (//taffa) the tree'; also used of other things (sarulur, sarulma:k; MS. saril-); and one says ya:ğ eliğke: saruldi: (MS. sirildi:) “the oil stuck to (iltagaqa) the hand'; also used when parts of something have stuck to something else, e.g. flour to felt (sarlur (sc), sarulma:k) Kaş. 1I 123: xui (?) Tef. (a fairy (peri) comes and) er béline sarilur 'embraces the man's waist' 262: Osm. xvi ikinci hişara sarılup 'investing the second fortress! 7TS IV 664. D seril- except perhaps in Uyğ. can hardly be a Pass. f. of 1 ser- (which is normally Intrans.) and presents some problems. In Kaş. it is clearly cognate to serğe:k and the Pass. f. of 2 *ser-. This V., vv. the connotation of “to be fickle', may be that in PP 78, 5-6 (see amrak) but the right reading there might be sarilur. In SW Az., Osm,, Tkm. seril- is the Pass. f. of ser- with its meaning in those languages, and means 'to be spread out' (e.g. to dry.) Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. (when I enter nirudna, my doctrinal teaching called “good” without being extinguished or diminished . . .) yertinçüde serilip turur 'will endure (or remain?) on earth" Suv. 164, 16-17 (cf. Civ.); Sanskrit missing se:rilü TT VIII F.ro, 2.0. PP 78, 5-6 (amrak): Civ. in TT VII 1, an astronomical text, the word used for a planet 'remaining' in a particular constellation is Serer (see Ser-), but in l. 46 it is serilür: Xak. xı er serildi: (translated) tamdyala”l-sakrán “the drunken man swayed', and almost fell down; also used of anything. else that sways and almost falls down Kaş. İT 123 (serilür, serilme:k); a.o. 7 196 (éril-): KB (when I was angry with you, you yourself blamed me) serildim sana men tügüldi yüzün “1 relented (lit. svvayed) tovvards you, and you frowned at me” 795. D sırıl- See sarul-. D sorul- (so:rul-) Pass. f. of 2 so:r-, “to be inquired about, questioned', and the like. Survives in SW Osm. sorul-, Tkm. so:ral-. In other modern languages sorul- is the Pass. f. of 1 so:r- “to be sucked' and the like, not noted in the early period. Uy£. viri ff. Man.A M I 26, 27-8 (1 a:t): (Xak.) xıır(?) Ar. sorul- “to be questioned”: Çağ. xv ff. sorul(spelt) bursida şudan "to be asked, questioned" (and makida şudan "to be sucked”) San. 240V. IO. : 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 896 
     
   
   
     852 DIS. V. SRL D sürül- Pass. f. of sür-; s.i.s.m.l. with the same range of meanings as Sür-. Xak. xi at sürüldi: 'the horse was driven' (siga); and one says er sürüldi: "the man (etc.) was driven away' (or repulsed, furida) ; and one says monçuk sürüldi: “the bead was rubbed' (or polished, suğiqa), also used when a thing rubs itself (insafiaga bi-nafsihi); Yntrans. and Pass. Kaş. İl 1:23 (sürülür, sürülme:k; for the last meaning cf. sürtül-): xiri(?) Tef. sürül“to be driven away! 279: Çağ. xv ff. sürül(with -ü-") “to be driven away'; metaph. “to be ploughed' San. 240v. To. D sarla:- ifap. leg., but sce der. f.s; Den. V. fr. *sar, cognate to Saru:-, which might be a Den. V. in -u:- fr. *sar, Xak. xı ol suvluk sarla:dı: “he wound (Aára) a turban round his head”, and one says (ol? ada:kipa: yörge:nçü: sarla:dı: “he wrapped (/affa) a bandage round his leg'; also used of anything wrapped round something Kaş. III 296 (sarla:r, sarla:ma:k). DF sırla:- Dev. N. fr. Sir; s.i.s.m.l, but usually for 'to colour, glaze', and the like. Xak. xr aya:kçı: aya:k sırla:dı: “the cupmaker (a/-qaşşa”) smeared viscous paste (i.e. lacquer; /afaxa luziicati'l-fira) on the cup to ornament it” (/i-yunaqqişahd) Kaş. III 296 (sırla:r, sırla:ma:k). D sarlat- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of sarla:-. Xak. xr ol suvluk sarlattı: “he ordered that the turban should be wound round” (bi-takwir); also of anything else Kaş. II 346 (sarlatu:r, sarlatma:k). DF sirlat- Caus. f. of sırla:- , s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı ol aya:k sirJatti: “he ordered that viscous paste (i.e. lacquer) should be smeared on the "Purkish (sic) cup” Kaş, 11 346 (sirlatu:r, sırlatma:k). D sarlan- Refl. f. of sarla:-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı er suvluk sarlandı: “the man put on a turban' (ta"ammama), and one says er yörge:nçü: sarlandı: “the man wrapped himself (talaffafa) in a bandage”, and one says yıp yığa:çka: sarlandı: "the cord was wrapped (/ltaffa) round the tree'; it is both Active (Refl,) and Pass.; and one says er i:gka: sarlandı: ista'adda'l-racul li'l-'amal "the man made himself ready for vvork” Kaş. II 246 (sarlanu:r, sarlanma:k, the last sentence with unvocalized V. follows the Infin. but clearly belongs to the same para.): Osm. xv and xvi sarlan- “to be wrapped in (something Dat.) in several texts T'T'S II 795; İİİ 600; IV 664. DF sırlan- Refl, f. of sırla:- , s.i.s.m.]l. Xak. xr aya:k sırlandı: “the cup was smeared with viscous paste (ie. lacquer) in order that it might be ornamented” (/i-yungag "alayhi) Kaş. II 246 (sırlanu:r, sirlanma:k). D sarlaş- lHap. leg.; Refl. f. of sarla:;-; Xak. xi (Col? mapa: suvluk sarlaşdı: "he helped me to wind (/f7 takseir) a turban (round my head)'; also for (helping to) wrap(/fi laff) something, and for competing Kaş. JI 215 (sarlasu:r, sarlaşma:k). Dis. SRM D serim N.S.A. fr. ser-; in its most obvious meaning 'patience', der. fr. ser- as an İntrans., attested only by its P. N./A. and Priv. N./A.; in the meaning 'strainer', noted only in Kaş., it looks at first sight like a seribal error for *süzim, the obvious word to give such a meaning, but its existence is proved by its Den. V. serme:-, q.v., and der. £s of that V.ş in this sense it must be der. fr. ser- in its rarer, 'l'rans., mcaning “to endure', hence “to hold back”, Xak. xi serim kul/ mà yuğattd bihpl-ibriq seva İ-hasrac mina'l-ibrisam 1a nahtihi li-yugaffá bihi'l-garáb “any piece of silk or the like used to cover a jug or mug in order to strain a beverage! Kaş. 7 397. S sırım See sıdrım. D sorma: Pass. Dev. N. fr. 1 so:r- lit. 'something sucked in”, in practice “vine, beer'. Survives only(?) in SE Salar (see Ligeti, op. cit. below). Cf. bo:r, çağır, sücig. Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. (you should make a powder of various substances and) tanda sayu bor sorma birle içürser “give it (to the patient) to drink every morning with a draught of wine (Hend.?)' H I 164: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. “vine” sorma ZLigeti 196; R IV 771: (Xak.?) xiv. Muh. nabidu'l-hinta *wheat beer” sorma: Mel. 63, 7 (only): Xwar. xin(?) Og. (various kinds of foods and) sormalar (MS. sórmeler) "wines Og. 93; a.o. do. 10 (aş): Kip. xiv şorma: al-mizr “millet beer! İd. 57. D sürme: Pass. Dev. N. fr. sür-, lit. 'something driven, pushed', etc.; not noted before the medieval period, but s.im.m.lg.; the commonest modern meaning is 'antimony, collyrium', presumably originally 'something rubbed (on the eyebrows)' In this sense it became a l.-w. in Russian as surma and has been reborrowed, with back vowels, in some languages. İt also means “a sliding door-bolt; a sliding drawer! in some languages. Xwnr. xir sürme “antimony” “AH ss: xiv. ditto Qutb 163: Kip. xiii (under ^women's gear”) a/-kuhl 'collyrium" sürme: 7Jou. 18, s: xiv sürme: al-itmid ditto İd. şə: xv fárihwl-naccár "a carpenter's plane' sürme Tuh. 28a. 3; kuhl sürme do. 31a. ro: Osm. xiv and xv sürme “collyrium” in two texts TTS 7 657; IV 718. D sarma:k Hap. leg.; Dev. N. fr. *sarma:-; lit. 'something wrapped round'; misvocalized sırma:k in the MS. Xak. xr sarma:k 2arda"atu l-himar “a donkey's pack-saddle' Kaş. Ia. D sarma:ş Dev. N. (connoting reciprocity) fr. *sarma:-; lit. “being wrapped in one another”. Survives vv, same meaning in SW Osm. Xak. xi sarmaş //riyafu Hşay” bil -sav* "the involvement of one thing in another” , and t  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 897 
     
   
   
      DIS.'SRN ' 853 if (the members of) a tribe have been involved (máca) with one another in rioting (fi fitna) one says sarmaş boldı: Kaş. 7 460. Dis. V. SRM*sarma:-, serme:- Preliminary note. There is n.m.e. for either of these V.s, but in brincible Kaş. distinguishes carefully between their der. f.s. Unfortunately the distinction is blurred by scribal errors. D *sarma:- Den. V. fr. *sarum, N.S.A. fr. saru:-, “to wrap round, enfold”, and the like. Sce sarma:k, sarma:ş, sarmat-, ctc. D serme:- Den. V. fr. serim, properly "to strain (something out of a liquid)', but with a much extended meaning in Çağ. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı sermemiş sü:ttin kayak “the cream has been skimmed off (suffiya min) the milk Kaş. III 167, 8: Çağ. xvff. sérme- (-di, etc.) sir-, hab-, al- "to strip off, snatch, take” Vel. 285 (quotns.); sérme- (spelt) rubüdan "to rob, steal' San. 25or. 29 (quotns.) D sarmat- Hlap. leg.; Caus. f. of *sarma:-. Xak. xı ol yışığnı: yığa:çka: sarmattı: “he had the rope wound (a/affa) round the tree" (etc.) Kaş. 71 349 (sarmatu:r, sarmatma:k). D sermet- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of serme:-. Xak. xı ol apar balık sermetti: “he urged him to pull the fish out of the vvater” ('alà ixrdc . . . mina'l-mà'); and one says ol tutma:ç sermetti: “he urged him to remove ('alà an 'azala) the noodles from the vvater” , also used of anything when one has strained it (saffahu) out of water Kaş. II 349 (sermetü:r, sermetme:k, corrected fr. -ma:A). D sarmal- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of *sarma:-. Xak. xr anın to:nı: başına: sarmaldı: “his garment was wrapped (z/taffa) round his head”, also used of other things; this V. is Pass. (làzim) Kaş. II 233 (sarmalu:r, sarmalma:k). D sermel- Pass. f. of serme:-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı balık sermeldi: “the fish was pulled out (uxrica) of the water', as if it had been strained (şuffiya) out of the water; and also tutma:ç sermeldi: “the noodles (etc.) were strained out of the water' Kaş. II 233 (sermelü:r, sermelme:k; MS. -ma:k). D sarmas- Co-op. f. of *sarma:- ; survives in SW Az., Osm. sarmaş- “to embrace one another, to intertwine'. Xak. xi ol mapa: ' yışığ sarmaşdı: “he helped me to wind (f? laff)a thing like a rope (sic) round a tree'; and one says iş sarmaşdı: “the affair was complicated and confused' (Z/taxxa . . . wwa'xtalafa); "Trans. and Intrans. Kaş. II 216 (sarmaşu:r, sarmaşma:k): Çağ. xv ff. sarmaş- (spelt) "to envelop (or embrace, piyidan) one another” San. 23ov. 22: Osm. xiv ff. sarmaş- “to be wrapped, or wrap oneself, round something”, sometimes metaph.; c.i.a.p. TT.S I 60v; JI 795; İII 6oo, IV 664. D sermes- Hlap. leg.; Co-op. f. of serme:-. Xak. xı ol mapa: balık sermeşdi: “he helped me to pull( f? ixrác) the fish out of the water'; also used for helping to strain (fi taşfiya) noodles out of the cooking-pot, or of any liquid when something of a different nature (Uaysa min cinsihi) is removed (uxricat) from it Kaş. II 216 (sermeşür, sermeşme:k corrected fr. -ma:h). Tris. SRM D sarmaçuk as such Hap. leg., Dev. N. fr. *sarma:-; lit. 'intertwined'. İt is not clear whether sarmaşık (sarmasuk) which survives in SW Az. sarmaşığ 'convolvulus'; Osm. sarmagik 'intertwined; ivy' is a Sec. f. of this word, or a Pass. Dev. N. fr. sarmas-. Xak. xı sarmaçuk (only cim vocalized) “a kind of noodle' (1triya); the dough is cut up into small pieces like chick-peas (al-himmis); invalids, and other such people, take them in small quantities (yağsıha) Kaş. I 527: (Çağ. xv ff. sarmasik 'the name of a plant which climbs up trees', in Ar. "aşaqa or lablab 'bindweed, convolvulus”, in Rümi (PU) serigen (?for sarınan) San. 231r. 2). D serimlig P.N./A. fr. serim; 'patient'; pec. to KB, where it is laudatory. Xak. xı KB serimlig kisiler 'patient people' 1310; o.o. 1317, 1867, 2480. VU?D sarumsak 'garlic, Allium sativum'; original pronunciation uncertain, but prob. sarumsa:k, which is morphologically a Dev. N. fr. a Desid. Den. V. fr. *sarum (cf. *sarma:-), lit. 'something which desires to wrap round something', but there is no close semantic connection. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE, usually as sarimsak, but SE “Türki also samsak: NW Kumyk samursak. Xak. xt sarmusak (sie, but ?read sarumsak) al-tim “garlic”, samursak metathesized alternative form (iuga) Kaş. I $27: xiv Muh. al-tüm sarimsa:k Mel. 78, 3; Rif. 181: Xwar. xiv sarımsak ditto Nahc. 422, ır: Kom. xiv ditto sarmisak (preferred to sarımsak by Gr.) CCI; Gr.: Kip. xii al-tüm (MS. al-füm) sarimsa:k (unvocalized) Hou. 8, 16: xiv şarımşak ditto fd. 57; ditto sarımsak Bul. 8, 6: xv ditto saramsak (sic) Kav. 64, 13; tüm Sirimsak (sic; in margin in SW(?) hand sarımsak) Tuh. 10b. 13. D serimsiz Priv. N./A. fr. serim; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı KB közi suk serimsiz osayuk “covetous, impatient, and careless” 3568. D sarmaşık See sarmaçuk. Dis. SRN saran 'miser, miserly”, and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SW as saran/sarap with the same meaning except in SE 'Türki: SC Uzb., where saran has come to mean “mad, crazy, foolish'. Uyğ. vrrff. Man. TT III go (kivirğak): Xak. xı (people do not respect or like) saranka: a/-baxil “a miser” Kaş. II 250, 3; 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 898 
     
   
   
     854 n.m.e.: KB saranka tapınma “do not enter the service of a miser” 949; saran bolma “do not become a miser' 1402; a.0. 1669. D serine Dev. N. fr. serin-, 'patience'; as such Hap. leg, but see serinçsiz. Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-A (then that good spirit made... the words which he had spoken and) [bo]dun kópül[t]e serincin [. . .|1 'put(?) patience in the minds of the people” M 7 32, 9-11. F sarnig water container', vartously defined; also existed in Pe. fr. an early period and is prob. a l.-w. in both, see Doerfer III 1206. Survives in SVV Az., Osm. sarnic 'cistern'. Xak. xi sarnıç al-'ulba "leather milk-pail' Kaş. 1 454: Çağ. xv ff. sarnic “cistern” Zam. 319 (s.v. sa”ülğa). Dis. V. SRND sarın- Refl. f. of Saru:-; survives. with the same meaning in SW Az., Osm. sarin-; "Vkm. saran-. Cf. sarlan-. Xak. xı er suvlukin sarindi: "the man wound (Rarerceara) a turban round his head”, and one says ura:ğut bürünçük sarındı: “the woman veiled herself' (taqanna'at); also used of anyone who has wrapped or wound (f/tapafa . . . twa'ltaffa) something round himself Kay. II 151 (Sarınu:r, sarınma:k): xui(?) Zt. (when you are dead, your enemies) uyadıp bérürler sarınğu bözün 'will feel ashamed and give a shroud to wrap you in” 432: Xwar. xiv sarin- “to wrap round (oneself, etc. Dat.)' Qutb iss: Kip. xiv /affa”l-şaş “to wind muslin (round oneself)' sarin- Bul. 8or.: xv ta'ammama 'to put on a turban' saran- (sie) Tu. 10b. 4. D serin- Refl. f. of ser- “to bc patient; n.a b. Türkü vir ff. Man. serinmek biligin üntürüp 'causing the mental process of patience to rise' (from his own limb of thought) M HH 16, 7-8 (0: UyÉ. vri ff, Bud. Sanskrit titiksà 'patience' seiríinme:klig (?for -k) TT VT A.3s: ağruş serinmekinin “your endurance of pain' U JI] 21, 4 (1); serinmek "patience! as one of the Buddhist virtues is fairly common, see Hüen-ts. Briefe, p. 39, note 2099; Suv. 207, 18; 208, 1; 225, 21; 229, 9 etc.: Xak. xı er s:şka: serindi: şaöbara”l-racul nafsahu “the man forced himself to be patient', among a crowd of people who found tasks which they wanted him to do Kaş, 71 ts) (serinü:r, serinme:k; MS. in error -ma:h, mistranslated by Atalay), seringil asbitr "be patient! 777 233, 15: KB serin- “to be patient' is very common; (do not go into anything in a hurry) şabır kil serin “be patient (Hend.)' 587; serin 1107, 1310 (bok-), etc.; serinğil 1322, 6289, ctc.; (he said) serneyin *'[ will be patient! 558; a.0.0.: xtv Mut. al-sabr serinmek (mis-spelt siminmak) Mel. 37, 14; seri:nmek, Rif. 1:24 sabara serbn- i11 (27, ış Sabr et-); al-ihtimál “to bear patiently' seri:nmek (-mak) 123 (only). D sürün- Refl. f. of sür- ; s.i.s.m.l. vv. similar meanings, and see sürç-. Xak. xı kişi: ö:z süründi: 'the man rubbed (or scratched, DIS. SRN hakka) his own body”, also used of anything hard when it has been rubbed (or polished, insahaqa) Kaş. II ışı (sürünlüir, sürünme:k): xın(?) Tef. süren- (sic?) "to be dragged oft' (to hell) 279. Tris. SRN S sarınçka: See saricfa:. S sırınçğa See sırıçğa:, D serinçsiz Hap. leg.?; Priv, NA. fr. serinç, 'unbcarable, intolerable” (suffering). Uy£. vir ff. Bud. U H 32, 61-2 (onçsuz). D süründi: Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. sürün-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı süründi: er “a man who is driven out (al-matrüd) of any place” Kaş. 1 449: KB yerindi alunuğ süründike kod 'leave (this) hateful world to the outcast' 5327: xiv Muh.(?). tuflu'l-gjay! "the: dregs of anything" sü:ründe: Rif. 190 (only; dubious). D saranltk Hap. lcg.; A.N. fr. saran. Xak. xi saranlık g/-buxl 'miserliness, meanness” Kag. I 504 (verse). Tris. V. SRND saranla:- Hap. lcg.; Den. V. fr. saran, mentioned only as an example of this meaning of a Den. V. in -la:-. Xak. xı olanı: saranla:dt: “he reckoned that he was a miser (baxil) and ascribed miserliness (a/-bux/) to him” Kaş. Ill 345, 20; n.m.e. PUD sürpü:le:- Hap. leg.; the Infin. is -ma:k corrected to -ze:k; spelt seriyüzle: in the MS. but in the same section as kalnu:la:- and salpu:la:-; there is no semantic connection with Ser-, but a clear connection w. sürün(sce sürç-), so prob. Den. V. fr. *sürnü abbreviated Dev. N. fr. sürün-. Xak. xr er sürpü:le:di: “the man slipped (7aza//aqa) on the ice” (etc) Kaş. Il] 4o9 (sürpü:le:r, sürnü:le:me:k: sec above). Mon. V. SRS?E sars- Sec sarsı:-. Dis. SRS D sarsi$ Dev. N./A, fr. sarsı:- 'rough, harsh', lit. and metaph.; n.o.a.b.. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. sarsığ kópüllüg "hard-hcarted” U IV 38, 125; o.o. TT VI 66 (VIII O.9) (kadir); U II 76, 6 ctc. (2 irig); U 1I] 24, 3 (tidil-): Xak. xı sarsığ sö:z "a harsh (a/-xaşin) word'; also used for a harsh affair (al-amr) and a harsh thing (al-5ay') Kaş. I 464. VU?F sarsa:l Hap. leg.; ?a l.-w.; there is no widely distributed "Turkish word for *weascl'. Xak. xı sarsa:l a/-dalaq “vveasel”, it is a small animal like the sable (al-sammür) Kaş. 1 483. Dis. V. SRSPU?D sarst:- “to be harsh, rough', and the like, “to use harsh language”, N.o.a.b.; the surviving occurrences could be taken fr, sars- or  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 899 
     
   
   
       DIS. V.:SSD- | 855 Sarst-, but there is a clear semantic connection w. 1 sa:r- (see esp. Sarsit-) and it is therefore best explained as a Simulative f. of 1 sa:r-. "There is no obvious semantic connection vv. SW Az. sarsi-; Osm., "Tkm., Sars- "to sway, totter, shake; to be embarrassed'. Uyğ. viirff. Bud. bu muntag ilrig) s[arsi$] savin só[ge] sarsa 'cursing and speaking harshly with these rough, harsh words' TM IV 252, 17-18; a.o. Suv. 136, 9-10 (tota:-): (Xak.) xırı(7) Tef. al-rihu'l-'dsifa "a violent gale' yél katığsığlı sarsığlı 262: (Çağ. xv ff. sarsa- (spelt) tahdnida şudan wa larzidan wa cümbidan zamin wa ğayr-i dn “to be shaken; to quiver; (of the earth or something else) to quake', in Römi sarsı- San. 230v. 8: Osm. xvii sarsi(spelt) Rmi form of sarsa- do. 18). D sürse:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of sür-. Xak. xı ol atığ sürse:dl: "he wished to drive (sateq) the horse' (etc.) Kaş. 11I 284 (sürse:r, sürse:me:k, MS. everywhere sürtse:-). D sarsit- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of sarsi-; for the translation cf. 1 sa:r-. Xak. xi ol anı: sarsıttı: 'annafahu wa ğallaza 'alayhi "he illused him and treated him harshly' Kaş. 7I 336 (sarsıtu:r, sarsıtma:k): (KB see sasit-). Dis. SRŞ D soruş Hap. leg.; perhaps best explained as a Dev. N. fr. 1 so:r-, in the sense of 'something sucked'. Cf. soruşla:-. Xak.xı soruş *wheat (al-hinta) roasted in the ear before the grains have become hard, arıd then detached (from the ear) and eaten! Kaş. I 368. Dis. V. SRSD sarus- Co-op. f. of saru:-; apparently originally vocalized saruş-, later changed to sarış- in the MS.; survives in NW Kaz. sarışR TV 32s (only?). Xak. xı ol maya: suviuk sarusdt: “he helped me to wind(/i kar) the turban (round my head)'; also (for helping) to wrap( fi laff) anything, and for competing Kaş. II 96 (saruşu:r, sarugma:k): Osm. xvt sarış- (of dragons) “to intertwine! TTS II 795. D sırış- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of 2sirt:-.. Xak. xı kiz ana:sipa: kidiz sırışdı: “the daughter helped her mother to sevv the felt extremely firmly' (fi xiyáta . . . mugarmita bt-muğdlaba) in the same way that the coverings (ağşıya) of "Türkmen tents, saddle-cloths (al-sealáyá), etc. . are sewn Kaş. II 96 (sırışu:r, sırışma:k). D sorış- (so:rigs-) Co-op. f. of 1 so:r-; n.0.a.b.; but the Co-op. f. of 2 so:r- s.i.s.m.]., in SW 'Tkm. so:raş-. Xak. xı to:n te:rig soruşdı: (sic) “the various parts of the garment (aczd'u'l- tawb) absorbed (naşşafa) the perspiration”, and one says ani yli:zi: sorigdi: “his face wrinkled up” (or frowned, kalaka) Kaş. IT 96 (after the first sentence soruşu:r, soruşma:k and after the second sorışu:r, sorış ma:k, the difference prob. fortuitous): Çağ. xvff. soruş- (bursidan "to ask” and) makidan “to suck' San. 240v. 12: Osm. xiv to xvii soruş- "to suck one another” (in a kiss); “to absorb' (a liquid); in four texts T T'S 7 637; 11835. : D sürüş- Recip. f. of sür-; s.i.s.m.]., usually for “to drive one another out”. Xak. xı adğır kısra:k birle: sürüşdi: "the stallion bit (sarma) the mare”, that is when he wished to cover her (yanzü "alayhd), and one says ol menin birle: sürüşdi: zdradani "he drove me back" (and I him); and one says ol anda: (?read andın) alımın sürüşdi: “he exacted (taqüdü) his debt from him” ('alayhi) Kaş. II 96 (sürüşü:r, sürüşme:k): Çağ. xvff. sürüş- ('with -ü-”) muncarr şudan “to be pulled, or dragged' (sic) San. 240v. 12. Tris. V. SRŞD sorusla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. sorus. Xak. xı ol tarığ sorusla:di: “he roasted the ears of wheat (şarod sunbula'l-barr) to eat them” Kaş. III 335 (soruşla:r, soruşla:ma:k). Mon. V. SSSus- See susğa:k. Süs- basically (of an animal) “to butt”, with some extended meanings. S.i.a.m.l.g., vr. some minor phonetic changes; exceptionally in SE Türki üs-/üsü-. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. PP 17, $ (sın-): Xak. xı u:d süsdi: “the ox (etc.) butted' (zataha) Kaş. II 293 (süse:r, süsme:k); a.o. 7JI 364, 15: Kip. xv nafaha süsTuh. 37b. 2: Osm. xiv ff. süs- “to butt”: in several texts T'T'S I 658; II 858; IV 719: xvin süs- in Rümi, (1) şöx zadan “to butt”, in Ar. munátahat; ((2) sákit. sudan “to be silent; error for SUS-, same mcaning, a modern V. pec. to SW Az., Osm.) San. 243v. 23. Dis. V. SSASast:- “to be malodorous, to stink'; s.i.a.m.l.g. Cf. yıdı:-. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. [gap] sasıp turur 'stinks' U 77 24, 8, a.o. U III 25, 6 (toBral-); in TT VI 44s some MSS. read yıdıyur sasryur for yıdığ sasığ bolup. Xak. xı sası:dı: (MS. sasidi:) ne:p "the thing stank” (nafuna) Kaş. III 265 (sasrr, sast:ma:k): Çağ, xv ff. sası- gandidan wa muta'affin şudan "to stink” San. 231r. 13: Xwar. XIV ŞAŞI- ditto Qutb 155; sast- Nahc. 389, 11: Kom. ditto CCI, CCG; Gr. 215 (quotns.): Kip. xv zatuna sua terfiha (ditto) sası- Tuh. 378. 11; a.0. 84a. 1 (sasig). Dis. V. SSDD sasit- Caus. f. of sast:-; s.i.a.m.l.g. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. (when death, the enemy, comes) tolp etózin yıdıtıp sasıtıp "it makes all his body stink (Hend.)” TT X 547: (Xak. xı KB sevindi tedükte sasıtur söğer 'when you say “he is pleased”, he uses harsh language and curses” 4756; the Hend. vv. 8öğ- makes it clear that sasıt- is here an abbreviation, mefr? 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 900 
     
   
   
     856 DIS. V. gratia, of sarsıt-): Çağ. xv ff. sasıt- Caus. f., gandánidan wa muta'affin kardan 'to cause to stink' San. 231r. iq: X war. xiv şaşıt- ditto Qutb 155. D süstür- Caus. f. of süs-, s.i.s.m.İ, vv. minor phonetic changes, e.g. SC Lizbh. suzdir-. Xak. x1 ol koç süstürdi: "he egeed on the ram to butt until it butted' ('ala'iI-nitah hattd tanğtaha) Kaş. II 184 (süstürür, süstürme:k). Dis. SSG D sasığ N./A.S. fr. sasr-; “stinking, malodorous'. S.La.m.lg. w. minor phonetic changes. Uyf. virt ff. Bud. etözi yıdığ sasığ bolup “his body becomes stinking (Hend.)” TT VI 445 (and sce sası:-): Xak. x1 Kaş. I 372 (burığ), n.m.e.: Çağ. xv ff. sasığ yaramaz rüyiha “an unpleasant smell” Ve/, 274; sasığ gandida 1a muta'affin “stinking” San. 231r. 15: Xwar. xiv sasig 'stink; stinking” Naltc. 347, 1; 422, 7: Kom. xiv “stinking” sası CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv. şaşı: simnatu'l-bawl “the stench of urine'; one says sagst: ytytr vafihu'l-sunàn 'it diffuses a foul smell /d. 58: xv (among Dev. N.s) “from şaşı-, şaşığ” Tuh. 84a. r. ?F sasik Hap. leg.; no doubt a 1-vv, Uc xi sasık 'earthenware' (a/-hazaf) in thé language of Uc and its vicinity (mà zodlaha) Kaş. I 382. VU?D susik Hap. leg.; 'bucket'; the vocalization seems to have bcen added later; it should prob. be taken as a Sec. f. of susğa:k and spelt susak. Xak.(?) xi susik al-dako fi luğa samt tiia "bucket, I heard it in a dialect Kaş. I 382. D susğa:k 'ladle, scoop' and the like; Dev. N. in -ğa:k (normally connoting repcated action) fr. sus- “to scoop up”, which is not noted in the carly period but survives in NE Alt., Sor, "Tel OR. IV. 871), Khak. sus-: SE Türki us(cf. süs-): NC Rır. suz-. Survives only(?) in NE Bar. suskak R IV 784; other languages use Sus£u or the like in this sense, Karluk, Kip., and all the nomads (alu Hecabar) x1 susğa:k Au/l mü vugraf brhi'[-má' tta ğayruha 'anything used to scoop up water (etc.)” Kaş. £ 470: Çağ. xv f. susak (spelt) pumca. $a mil'aqa “a spoon or ladle', used to stir a cookingpot San. 243v. 24. Dis. SSG D süsgün Pass. Dev. N. fr. süs-; lit. 'something butted' or the like, N.0.a.b.; clearly an anatomical term, possible 'backside, rump'. Uy£. vini ff. Civ. in TT VII 19 listing the part of the body in which the soul is in each day of the month süsgün (l. 12) comes between yan 'the side' and tópü 'the top of the head", in a similar list in do. 25, 4 (tutuş-) it is linked with arka “back” hetween “vaist and armpits” and 'legs'; in another text, do. 41, 26-7 süsgün oğurğasındın üner “it emerges from the base(?) of the spinal column'. SSDDis. V. SSGD süsgir- FHap. leg.; Inchoative f. of süs-. Xak. xi sığır eriğ süsgirdi: "the ox threatened to butt (Fara . . . an yantali) the man" Kaş. II 189 (süsgire:r, süsğirme:k). Dis. V. SSNVU 70 sesin- IHap. ley: , the second sii carries both fatha and kasra in the MS., the second obviously right. It comes between Sé:zin- and süsün-, which excludes the possibility. that the second -s- should be -S-, but in its second meaning it seems to be a Sec. f. of Yseşin-, there is no obvious etymology for the first meaning. Xak. xı er kulin urğa:lı: sesindi: "the man threatened (/ramma) to bcat his slave, and advanced on him and came to blows' (qaşada ilayhi wa dtaraba); also used of a horse when it has almost got free of its halter (yazfalit mina l-watáq- Kaş. II 1s2. (sesinü:r, sesinme:k). D süsün- Hap. leg. , Refl. f. of süs-. Xak. x1 er başın ta:mka: süsündi: “the man pretended to beat (yadrib) his head against a wall (etc.) Kaş, II 152 (süsünu:r, süsünme:k). Dis. V. SSSD süsüş- Recip. f. of süs-; s. i.m.m.l.g. vv, the same phonctic changes. Xak. xi ikki: koçna:r süsüşdi: “the two rams butted one another” (fandtahat) Kaş. II 101 (süsüşü:r, süsüşme:k): Osm. xiv ff. süsüs- lit. (of animals) “to butt one another”, metaph. (of armies) “to clash'; in several texts 773 7 658; II 8:58; IV 720. Mon. SS Preliminary note. Zhie combination of S and S teas very unstable in. "'urhish and did not survive for loig; occasionally the S became S (see sesin-), but usually the S became Ş, and in some modern languages one or both the Şs have become es. Satş survives onlv(?) in NE Mad. sas (of a horse) *wild, unbroken' R IF 924. "Vhc homophonous V. şaş- (*sa:s-), “to be astonished, startled', and the like, is first noted in Xwar. xut(?). Og. 280 and s.i.s.m.].; it must not be confused with şaş- as a Sec. f. of saç-, Xak. xi Sa:ş at a/-farası”l-rümülhüu (MS. rimi) "E-nafür “a horse which is given to kicking and shying' Kaş, HI isə. Sé:S "a surcty'; n.o.a.b.. Xak. xi (after 2 si:ş) se:ş (bi I-imála “vith-6:-”) al-damán "a surcty' ; hence one says men anar Sé:s bé:rdim addaytu damánahu “1 gave a surcty for him" Kaş. III 126: KB sés 295 (béril-). 1 sxS “a spit, fork, spike', and the like. "The vowel was t in Xak. and is now everywhere 1, the date of the change is uncertain. S.i.a.m.l.g. (except SE, SC where it has been displaced by Pe. six) vv, wide phonetic changes (S-/S-/€-, -S[-s[-«); SW "Tkm. çi:ş. Uyg. vitr ff. Man. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 901 
     
   
   
      DIS. V. SŞL- | 857 sışların bulupan “finding their spikes” M III 29, 12 (i) (see sışlığ): Bud. PP 57, 8 (kamış): 65, 8: Xak. xı sı:ş minzdm tutmác “a fork for (eating) noodles” Kaş. III 125; siş “a spit' (ai-sufüd), and "a fork for (eating) noodles! is called Siş 7 331; S1S (sic) "a fork for eating noodles' 11 282; o.o. sışka: JI 15 (tev-); sı:şka: 77 174 (taktur-): xiv Muh. al-six "a spit' 81:8 Mel. 69, 1; Rif. 169: Çağ. xv ff. 818 (r) six (quotn.); (2) metaph. “small nails used to fasten horseshoes” (quotn.) Sar. 260r. 25: Kip. xii al-six St:S Hou. 17, 16: xiv şiş ditto İd. 54: xv ditto Tuh. 19b. 6—şış börek 'picces (qrfa") of dough which are cooked” İd. $5; a.o. Íd. 3o; Bul. 8, 12 (bürük). 2 sı:ş 'swelling, boil', and the like; survives in NE Khak. sis: (SE Türki issik: NC Kir. şişik, Kzx. isik): NW Kk. is; Kaz. sés; (Nog. sisik, Kumyk şişik): SW Az., Osm. şiş: Tkm. cis. "The longer forms are prob. Dev. N.s fr. sış-, q.v., with which this word is homophonous. Uy£. viri ff. Bud, TM IV 253, 56 (süvri:): Civ. sışka: ya:ra:şur “it is beneficial for the swelling" TT VIII M.27; 2.0. do. 33; S181 ağrığı kéter “the swelling and pain disappcar” H I 121; a.o. I] 26, 82: Xak. xı sı:ş a/-roaram “a swelling" Kaş. III 1255 a.o. II] 184 (2 ko:k-): Çağ. xv ff. sis... (3) waram San. 260r. 25: Kip. xiv şiş al-waram İd. 55; Bul. 10, 3. Mon. V. SSYsa:ş- See sa:ş. seş- “to loosen, untie', and the like. More or less syn. vv, €ój-, q.v. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SW (where çö)- survives as çöz-), usually as çeç-, less often şeş- or some other form. Üyü. vini ff. Bud. bağın seşip 'undoing their fastenings' U 77 76, 2: Xak. xı er attin kisen seşdi: “the man unfastened (talla) the hobble from the horse'; also used for anything which you have unfastened from its fastenings (witàqiht) Kaş. II 13 (seşe:r, segme:k); er tügü:n sesdi: (sic) “the man unfastened the knot'; also used when he unfastened a horse or something else from a fastening /7 293 (sese:r, şeşme:k): xıı(?) Tef. çeş- (sic) “to unfasten” 358: xiv Muh. halla şeş- Mel. 25,9; Rif. 108; al-hall sé:áimek (MS. -mak) 34, 10; sesmek (ditto) 119: Çağ. xv ff. yés- (sic) kugüdan band u girih "to undo a fastening or knot' San. 349v. 11 (quotns.): Xwar. xit çeş-/şeş- “to undo' "AH sr, 52: xiv sesditto Qutb 166: Kom. xiv ditto PU seş- CCI; Gr.: Kip. xi halla şeş- Hou. 39, 12: xiv ditto İd. ss: xv ditto Kav. 9, 9; 77, 9; Twuh. 13b. 2 (in 32a. 9 SeS- is a Sec. f. of sec-). : SkS- “tö swell'; homophonous vv, 2 si:ş, and S.i.s.m.l.: like it originally w. -1-, later w. -1-. vv, the same phonetic changes; SW “Tkm. çi:ş-. Uyğ. vii ff. Man. Wind. 21-2 (ürül-): Bud. (this stra) kógüzlüg kölinte sışmış “svvelled in the lake in (the Buddha's) breast' (and gushed out by way of his mouth) US?. 103a. 31: Civ. H I 119, etc. (emiğ), 17 26,82: (Xak.) xin(?) Tef. VU sis- "to swell' 364: (xiv Müh. al-manfüx 'swollen' gkgü:k Mel 64, 10; si:şü:k Rif. 163): Çağ. xv ff. sişzcaram hardan "to swell' San. 260r. 5: Kom. XIV "to swell' PU şiş- CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiv Sls- warima "to swell' İd. 55; al-mafxa "a swelling' şişmek Bul. ro, 3; intafaxa şiş- do. 33r. ; tearima şiş- do. 88r.: xv ditto Kas. 9, 9; Tuh. 38b. 9; o.o. do. 84a. ro, 9oa. To. Dis. V. SSAD seşü:- Hap. leg.; morphologically explicable only as a Den. V. in -ü:- fr. *ses, a N. homophonous vv. seş-. Xak. xi tüğü:n seşü:di: “the knot weakened (rcalarnat) until it almost came untied' (kàádatr'L-inhilal) Kaş. III 267 (seşü:r, sesü:me:k). Dis. SŞD D seşüt See şeşüt. Dis. V. SŞD?E sastur- See seştür-. D seştür- Caus. f. of seş-, "to have (something) unfastened” and the like. S.i.s.m.l. vv. the same phonetic changes. Kaş. has two paras. ; in the second the Infin. is -ma:k and the sin carries both fatha and asra but semantically the second is clearly the Caus. f. of seşused metaph. Xak. xi ol tügü:n seştürdi: ahalla”l-"uqda "he had the knot (etc.) untied' (seştürür, seştürme:k), and one says ol alım berim birle: seştürdi: translated avwga'a'l-mugássa bi'l-dayni'lladi lahu | ma'a'l-daynülladi 'alayhi fa-taraka hàádà lahu ta düha li-hádà “he arranged a set-off between thedebts due to and from him, so that they were respectively released to him and the other party” (seştürür, seştürme:k, MS. -ma:k) Kaş. II 184; ol tügü:n şeştürdi: same translation; alternative form of sestür- (/uğa fi'l-sin); examples of s for ş in Ar. l.-w.s fr. Pe. and vice versa follow 77 187 (no Aor. or Infin.). Dis. SŞG D sesük Hap. leg.?; Pass. Dev. N/A. fr. seş-, 'unfastened' and the like. Xak. xr anything released from its fastenings (rulla mir vwatágihi) is called sesük; one says seşük at “a horse set free (mrflag) from its fastenings' Kaş. I 390. Dis. SSL D sışlığ P.N./A. fr. 1 stg; survives in SW Osm. sisli (of a stick) “vith a spike on the end”. "The only early passage is in a much damaged text, meaning conjectural. Uyf. vırı ff. Man. (if he does not make a dwelling for the homeless arhat Elect) sışlığ opri içinte olğurtur 'he seats them in a hole with spikes in it' M III 29, 10-11 (i). Dis. V. SSLD seşil- Pass. f. of seş-, “to be unfastened” and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SE vv. the same 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 902 
     
   
   
     858 phonetic changes. Uyf. vir ff Bud. bağ çuğ yok kim yórülmegülük şeşilmeğülük (stc, the MS. is xvii) “there are no wrappings and bonds which must not be unwrapped or unfastened' Sun, 165, 21-2: Xak. xr tügü:n seşildi: "the knot came untied' (inhalla), also used when it was untied (illa); Intrans. and Pass. Kaş. H 124(sesilür,sesilme:k); kocpa:r teke: seşildi: "the rams and he-goats have been separatecd” (tafarraqá) (i.e. from tbe ewes and nanny-goats) 7/7 102, 18; olo. 7 524, 1; 525, zo: X war. xiv şeşil- “to be untied; to be loose! Quib 1:66; Nahc. 226, 6: Kip. xiv inhalla şeşil- Bul. 33r. D sişıl- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. (Intrans.) of st:8-; irregular since St:g- itself is Intrans. Xak. xt bişığ tarif sisildi: “the boiled wheat swelled' (intafaxat) until there was hardly room (dáqa makönuha) for it in the pot; also used of anything the parts of which have been squeezed because of swelling (mina'l-intifáx) until there is hardly room for them Kaş. II 124 (sışılur, sışılma:k). D sışlat- Caus. Den. V. fr. 2 sı:ş, "to make (something cc.) swell'. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vit ff. Civ. TT VII 24, 21-2 (1 sun); 25, 2 (ko:l). D seslin- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of sesil-; lit. “to get free by one's own efforts. Xak. xi at seslindi: 'the horse got free (intalaga) from its fastenings” (etc.) Kaş. 77 247 (seşlinü:r, seşlinme:k). Dis. V. SŞND *sesin- See sesin-. Dis. V. SSRD seşür- Caus. f. of seş-, lit. "to cause to be unfastened'; in practice it seems to he used only for "to cause a gap” in a series of identical things. N.o.a.b. Uy. viu ff. Bud. (distinguishing thus between the differences of the (twomonthly periods in) the series (kezig), one must give the (appropriate) remedies) seşürmedin keziğin “vithout causing a gap in the series” Sut. 590, 7; alo. do. 23: Civ. (I will pay) ay sayu seşürmedin [gap] “every month without leaving a gap” USp. 67, 3 (the more usual word in this context when a single payment and not a series is promised is kegürmedin "without delay, promptly): Xak. xı ol yincü:ni: çaş birle: seşürdi: “he separated (faşala bayn) the pearls and the turquoises (or other jewels) in a necklace (/7 tam) Kaş, Il 79 (seşürür, sesürme:k; MS. -ma:k): B sózüg sözke tizdim seşürdim ura (?read ara)" I strung word to word and spaced əm out” 6616. Mon. SY | sa:y originally "an area of (level) ground covered with stones; stony desert'; s. i.a.m.l. M (in "Tkm, say; lacking in Osm.)' usuall such extended meanings as 'a dry stony er bed; a river or stream with intermittent flow of water; a shoal or shallow, in a river or the DIS. V. SŞLsea”. UÜyğ. vin ff. Civ. TT VH 42, 8 (be:l): Xak. xi sa:y al-harra "ground covered. with loose stones! Kaş, III 158: KB (if a man does not bring a pearl up out of the sea) kerek yinçü bolsun kerek say taşı “it may just as well he a pebble as a pearl” 212: Çağ. xv ff. say 'a river (dere) that flows in the winter and is dry in the summer" Vel. 283 (quotns.), say (2) 'a river which is dry in the summer and flows in the winter', and “a river with little water in it” (rüd-) ham db) San. 238r. 12 (quotns.) Kom. xiv say 'shallow' CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv. şay al-má' dün qàmatil-xayl "water not too deep for a horse to walk through” 1d. 6:; similar translation but af-maxdda 'ford' instead of al-mà' şay Bul. 4, 16: xv raqráq 'shallow water' şay şu Twh. 16b. rr. ?F 2 sa:y prob. a L-w., perhaps Chinese; pec. to Kaş, Xak. xi sa:y yarik al-cawgan "a breastplate; plate armour” Faş. III 158; a.o. HI 15 (yarik). SF suy See tsuy. Mon. V. SYS say- See sa:-. soy- originaly specifically 'to skin” (an animal); thence more generally also 'to peel (a fruit); to strip (an individual); to rob', and even, in some languages, “to slaughter! (an animal) S.i.a.m.l.g.; SW Tkm. soy-. Uyğ. vii ff, Bud. PP 3, 3 (teri); U İH sz, 9 (ditto): Xak. xı er ko:yuğ soydi: “the man flayed (salaxa . . . cild) the sheep' (etc.) Kaş, III 244 (soya:r, soyma:k; prov.): (xiv Muh. see soyul-): Çağ. xv ff. soy- (spelt) “to strip off (kandan) clothes or skin”, in Ar. xala'a and salaxa San. 248v. 8 (quotn.): Xwar. xın soy“to strip off' Air 26: xiv ditto Qutb 158; Nahe. azı, 10: Kip. xii salaxa Soy- Hou. 34, 4: Niv salaxa «a qaşara ('to pecl') soy- Hid. 48r.: xv salaxa aca 'arrá ("to denude, undress”) şo:yKan. 75, 4; Tui. aoa, 7: Osm. xiv soy- "to flay”ş in one text T7S II 838. Dis. SYA D sayu: Ger. fr. Sa:- , lit. “counting”, in practice “every”, but unlike other words meaning 'every', it retains its character as a Ger. and follows the word which it qualifies. Survives in such phr. as cıl say “every year” in NE Şor R IV 220 and Khak. and as sayın in other NE languages R IV 225: NC Kir., Kzx.: SC Uzb. "Türkü vii yer sayu: bardığ “you went to every country” 1 S o, I1 N 7; bodunrn sayu: it(tümiz “vee sent (envoys?) to all their peoples! T 42: vr ff. Man. ay tepri künin sayu “every day in the month” C/uas. 261-2; kün sayu do. 293; o.o. do. 333-4: Uyğ. viri ff. Man. yükünmis sayu “every time that he worships' TT 2/71 5; ol yaruk örtüğ sayu “every time that that light is obscured” M III 7, 5-6 (iv): Bud. sayı is common, c.g. ol 1mxwa sayu “every one of those lotuses' (Chinese l.-w.) PP 38, a: vo. do. 38, 6; U IT. 34, 15; 45, 52 etc:: Civ. sayu is common, e.g.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 903 
     
   
   
          D1S. V. SYR- . 859 olurtuk sayu orun yurt 'every place and camping site where you reside” T'T I 120; o.o. in H I, TT VII, USp., etc.: Xak. xit KB (if he is awake like the owl) tünle sayu “every night” 2314: Çağ. xv ff. sayı a word that is meaningless unless attached to another word, e.g. alğan sayı alfinra "whenever one takes” Vel. 283 (quotns.); say (1) waqt wa hangám 'time, occasion” (same quotn.) . .. (3) hfsab wa şumdra “number, counting! (quotns. including har tügi sayu “every hair of my head') San. 238r. rz, sayu (spelt) 21:45 wa şumdra (quotn. containing har ğul sayu “every rose”) do. 27 (both words really mean “every”). Dis. V. SYBsaypa:- “to squander'; n.o.&amp;b., but see sayka-. Xak. xı ol tawa:rin saypa:dı: “he squandered (baddara) his property, and spent (asrafa) it on anything” Kaş. III 310 (saypa:r, saypa:ma:k): Çağ. xvff. sayfa- (spelt)/ saypa- ("vvith -p-”) xarc wa baraganda hardan “to spend, squander” Sar. 237r. 20 (quotns.; the Pass. f. sayfal-/saypal- is also listed vv. quotns. in 237v. 7; these V.s are listed in Vel. 282-3 and consequently P. de C., etc. as sayğa-, say£al-). D saypat- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of saypa:-. Xak. xı ol Çapar? tawa:rin saypattı: “he urged him to squander ("a/2 tabdir) his property” Kaş. II 357 (saypatu:r, saypatma:k). Dis. V. SYDD soydur- Caus. f. of soy-: s.i.s.m.l. Uy£. viii ff. Man.-A (the chief of the demons hid in a tree) vreştiler tutup tartdı soydurdı "the angels seized and pulled him and had him dragged off (the tree)” Man.-uig. Frag. 40o, 6: Çağ. xv ff. soydur- digari-rà ba-kandan büst wa libüs amr hardan "to order someone to strip the skin or clothes (off someone)' San. 248v. zo. Dis. V. SYGD sayik- Intrans. Den. V. fr. 1 sa:y; survives in NE 'l'ob.: NW xix Kaz. sayık-, xx Kaz. sayeğ- (of a stream) “to become shallow, form shoals'. Xak. xı y€:r sayıktı: “the ground became stony” (şörat . . . harra) Kaş. III 189 (sayıka:r, sayıkma:k). D soyuk- Hap. leg.; Emphatic Pass. f. of soy-. Xak. xı er soyuktr Juriba málu'l-racil “the man's property was plundered' (i.e. he was stripped of it) Kaş. 1/1 18g (soyuka:r, soyukma:k). E sayğa:- See saypa:- (Çağ.). ?E sayka:- Hap. leg.; almost certainly a mistranscription of Saypa:-. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. (they sat cross-legged at the cross-roads and filled the beakers) tuturkan suvsuşuğ saykadilar alkınçsız “they poured out the rice wine unstintingly' ITüen-ts. 1941-2. D sayğır- Hap. leg.; Inchoative Den. V. fr. 1 sa:y. Xak, xi yér sayğırdı: "the ground became almost covered with stones' (kádat . . . an tagir harra) Kaş. III 193 (sayğıra:r, sayğırma:k). Tris. SYĞ D sayu:kt: N./A.S. fr. sayu:, pec. to Uyğ. and grammatically dubious. Uy£. viit ff. Bud. on orunlar sayukt irü belgüler “the omens and signs in all the ten quarters! Sus. 315, 14; (the root of the profound doctrine) kamağ nikay sayukı “in all the schools' (Sanskrit mikdya) Hiien-ts. 213. (?D) soya:ğu: morphologically obscure, perhaps a L-w. | Survives in NC Kzx. soyaw “pine-needle, tooth-pick; splinter' Xak. xı soya:ğu: si'siu'l-dik “a cock”s spur' Kaş. 1H 174. Dis. SYL SDF suylığ See tsuylığ. Dis. V. SYLE sayıl- See sapıl-. D soyul- Pass. f. of soy-, si.s.m.]. Xak. xı buht soyuldi: “the clouds were swept away" (taqaşşa"at), and one says ko:y teri:si: soyuldı: “the sheep was flayed” (Rugifat . .. "art cildiha) ; and one says erdin to:n soyuldi: “the garment was stripped (r2:'a) off the man” Kaş. HI 190 (soyulu:r, soyulma:k): (xiv Muh. “ariya wa'nsalaxa “to be stripped naked; to be flayed' şo:ya:- Mel. 22, 1; Rif. 112 (?error for so:yul-); al-'ury (Rif. adds wa'l-salx) so:ymak (sic) 36, 11; 122): Xwar. xiv soyul- (of a nut kernel) “to be peeled” Qutb 158: Kip. xiv insalaxa şoyul- Bul. 331.: xv maslüx “Hayed” (şırik, in margin in SVV(?) hand) şoyılmış Tuh. 33b. 10. Dis. SYR (S)D seyrem (sedrem) Hap. leg., but see seyremlen- ; although the Infin. of the latter has -ma:k in the MS. this is clearly a N.S.A. fr. seyre:- (sedre:-) 'to be sparse, scattered', and the like. Xak. xı seyrem su:v a/-mö”u”l-dahdah 'shallow, scanty water' Kaş. HİT 176. E suyra:n See subra:n. Dis. V. SYRsayra:- (of a bird) “to twitter, sing', with some extended and metaph. meanings. S.i.a.m.l.g.; in SW only Tkm. Cf. 2 ót-. Xak. xı sanduwa:g sayra:dı: “the nightingale sang melodiously' (Zarraba . . . bi-alhán); and one says er sayra:dı: “the man raved in delirium' (hagü . . . mina”l-hadyan), this is one of the words with two contrary meanings (mina'l-addad) Kaş. III 311 (sayra:r, sayra:ma:k), sayrap 'raving' 1 467, 9; "singing” 111 240, 26: KB sarığ sandvaç ötti ünin sayradı “the yellow nightingale sang (Hend.) melodiously' 4963: xiv. Rbg. sanduvvaç kuş séwinip' sayradi 'the nightingale sang happily' R IV 225: Çağ. xv ff. sayra- sarayidan wa xwándan   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 904 
     
   
   
     860 mur£án '(of birds) to sing (Hend.)' San. 237v. 26 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv ditto Quib 152; MN 174, etc.: Kip. xv zagzaqa “to twitter' sayraTuh. 18b. 6. D sayrat- Caus. f. of sayra:-;n.o.a.b. Xak. xr ol anar sayrattı: sö:züğ "he egged him on to chatter ('ala'l-kalámrl-hatir) Kaş, II 357 (sayratu:r, sayratma:k): Xwar. xiv til sayrat- “to chatter' Quth 152. D sayraş- Co-op. f. of sayra:-, s.i.s.m.l, Xak. xı ola:r telim sayraşdır: takallamn Faldm katir ka l-hadayán "they chattered a great deal as if they were delirious” , and one says kuşla:r sayraşdı: “the birds sang together” (farannamat) Kaş. III 194 (sayraşu:r, sayraşma:k, verse): Çağ. xv ff. sayraş- “to singr (saráyidam) togcther' Sam. 238r. rr. Tris. V. SYRS soyurka:- See tsoyurka:-. D seyremlen- (sedremlen-) Hap. leg., Refl. Den. V. fr. seyrem, Xak.su:v seyremlendi: “the water became shallov” (or scanty, sára . . . dahdah) Kaş. HI 205 (seyremlenü:r, seyremlenme:k; MS. -əva:5). ETIN Dis. V. SYS- — "tnt D soysuk- Hap. leg.; Emphatic Pass. f. of Soy-; quoted only as a grammatical example. Xak. xı and the gàáf is combined with sir... as in the phr. er soysukdt: suliba màli'l-racul “the man's property was plundered' Kaş. I 21, 6; n.m.e. Dis. V. SYSD soyuş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of soy-, Xak. xı 01 mana: teri: soyusdi: *he helped me to strip the skin ( f? salxi'l-cild) off the sheep'(etc.) ; also used for peeling (the bark off) a tree or (the shell off) an egg (f? qugri'l-gacara. tva'l-bayda) Kaş. HI 188 (soyuşu:r, soyusma:k). Mon. SZ SIZ Sec sızla:-. Sz 2nd Pers. Plur. Pron. “you”. C.i.a.p.a,l, Often. used honorifically for the Sing., in which case sizler is somctimes used for the Plur. Türkü viri ff. Man. sizler preceding an Imperat. T T 77 8, 7o; other cases noted sizni, sizip, sizine: Uyğ. vii siz taşıkın “start out on the campaign' Sui. E ro: vini ff, Man.-A sizlerde almış ağu “the poison received from you” M I 19, 15; Sizen “your” do. 37, 17; (the body) kim sizni üze turur “vhich is over (i.c. clothes) you” M /17 9, 10 (ii): Man,, Bud,, Civ. the cases noted are siz, sizni, sizip, sizipe, sizde, sizdin, sizler: O. Kir. ix ff. siz is very common in the epitaphs in the lists of persons fr. whom the deceased has been parted in such phr. as siz elime: “from you my realm” Mal. 1, r, and sizime: “from you who belong to me”: Xak. xı si:z a Pron. (2ar/f) used to address a distinguished person (al-kabiru'l-muhtaram) in GCigil in the sense of 'thou' DIS. V. SYR(anta); but originally 'you' (antum); an inferior (al-sagir) is addressed as sen; the Oğuz reverse this usage Kaş. [11 124; 0.0. 1 339 (sen); other cases noted sizin, sizge:, sizde:: xın(?) At. siz before Imperats. 104, 284; Tef. cases noted are siz, sizni, sizin, sizge, sizde, sizdin, sizler, sizlerni, sizlerip, sizlerke, sizlerdin 268-9; xiv Midi. antum Siz Mel. $, 17) 6, 3: Rif. 76; siz 12, 8; 86; minhum sizden iz, 7; 86; a.0.0.: Çağ. xv ff. siz gumá 'you', in Ar. antum. San. 18v. 9; siz (1) 2nd Pers, Plur. Pron. gumá; (2) when it is combined. with itself it is used predicatively, e.g. SİZ siz “you are) 252v. 12: Xwar. xiv siz Qutb, MN, Nahe. passim: Kom. xiv the cases noted arc siz, sizni, Sizin, size, sizden CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xitt anti Siz JHou. so, 8 ff. ; sizin, sizğe do. 52, g-13: XIV siz antim İd. $2 (also a Priv. SufE"); Bul, 16, 16; sizin do. 14, 1415: XV sizni: Kar. 32, ız, sizin, sizde, sizden do. 4s, 6-15; siz Bul, 39b. 12; other cases Sizni, sizge, sizden. SÓó:z very broadly 'anything spoken', the precise translation, *word, specch, statement', etc., depending on the context; but apparently referring to shorter utterances than Satv, q.v. Rare before xı, s.La.m.lg. Türkü vri ff. IrkB y, 11 (Sa: v): Man. (if vee have sinned), sakınçın sözün kilinçin “by thought, word, or deed” Chuas. 96-7; 0.0. do. 296-7; M III 20, 7 (i) (sa:v): Uyğ. vii Su. W 5 (2 yaz-): virt ff. Bud. tarni söz sözlemiş kergek “he must recite a q/dran” TT V 8, 74 (perhaps dittography, the normal phr. in this text is tarnı sózle-); o.o. VIII 4.25 (tile:-), .X 26 — (sa:v): Civ. beğde sözi yorır “his words find favour with the beg" 77 VII 28, 28; (if he goes on a long journey) sözke kirür “he mects with criticism" do. 39 and şr, bu sözke tanuk “the witnesses to this statement are . . .' USp. 6,6; . have written this document) İkegününin sözinçe "to the dictation of both parties! do. 12, 25; SÖZ is common in similar contexts in USp.: Xak. xi sö:z al-halám *word, specch, statement! Kaş. 7/7 124; about 100 0.0.: KT] söz is very common, e.g. bayat atı birle sözüğ başladım '[ began my exposition with the name of God” 1:24 (the same verse is interpolated as 1 only in the Vienna MS.): xin(?) Ar. söz occurs about so times, c.g. eşit emdi kaç söz 'hear now a few words' 21; Tef. söz word, speech', etc. 274: xiv. Muh. al-halüm sö:z Mel. 84, 14; Rif. 190: Çağ. xv ff. söz (with -ü-' 25v. 9) suxn “vord, speech', ctc. San. 248r. 12 (and two phr.): Xwar. xır Sö:z ditto "AZ s: xın(?) ditto Og. 120, 198, etc.: xiv ditto Qutb 160, MN 3, etc.: Kom. xiv ditto; common CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv söz ("with -6-”) al-kalàm İd. 52: xv ditto Kav. 31, 6; Tuh. 31a. 7: Osm. xw ff. söz is common in, phr., including söz sav, until xvi and occurs sporadically later TTS I 643; II 841; III 639; IV 707. Mon. V. SZSéz- (SÉé:z-) s.i.a.m.l.g. except NE(?) with a rather wide range of meanings 'to perceive*  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 905 
     
   
   
      DIS. V, SZĞ- | 861 feel, discern, understand, conjecture!', etc.; in SW Az. Séz-; Osm. sez-, 'Tkm. Siz- (sic); but it seems originally to have meant 'to think' or perhaps “to doubt', see s€:ziğ. (Xak.) xin(?) Tef. Séz- (1) "to feel” (the results of a beating); (2) a'lamu 'know' bilin sézip 265: Çağ. xv ff. séz- (-di, etc.) sez- ya'ni szann eyle- “to suppose, conjecture' Vel. 272 (quotn.); Séz- fahmidan 'to understand' San. 251v. 24 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv sez- 'to feel, anticipate' Qutb 157: Kom. xiv "to perccive, become aware of (something)! sez- CCI, CCG; Gr. 219 (quotn.): Kip. xiv séz- /Jradasa “to surmise, conjecture' İd. 52: xv fahima "to understand” (apla-/) sez- (mis-spelt ser-) Kav. 29, 7; 'arafa wa 'alima "to know, apprehend” (bil-/) sez- do. 74, 5; hassa'l-xàfir "of the mind, to perceive! sez- Tuh. 13b. 6: Osm. XIV, XVI “to feel, perceive; to think, conjecture' TTS IV 680. 1 s:Z- “to melt” (Intrans.) with the implication of consequential dripping or oozing; with extended meanings. Survives in NE sıs- “to ooze' and the like R IV 66r, SE Tar. sizditto R IV 723: NC Kir. sız- “to ooze gently; to slip away unnoticed; to move at a steady pace'; Kzx. sız- “to slip away unnoticed”: SC Uzb. siz- “to ooze': SW Az., Osm., Tkm. sizditto.: Çuv. sár- “to urinate” Ash. XVII 329. Cf. erü:-. Xak. xi ya:ğ sızdı: “the fat (etc.) melted” (dàba); and one says kü:n sızdı: (MS. suzdi:) bada qarnı” l-şams “the first rays of the sun appeared'; and one says sökel sızdı: "the invalid lost weight and wasted avvay” (indaqqa . . . wa tadaá'ala) Kaş. I1 9 (sıza:r, sızma:k), ya:ğ sızdı: “the fat melted'; and one says olma:dın su:v sı:zdi: *the water overflowed and dripped (sariba ... wa taraşşaha) from the şar” (etc.); and kü:n sı:zdı: göbazı”l-şams "the sun began to get hot”, that is when its rays first appear in the east //I 182 (sı:za:r, sıszzma:k): KB sakınç birle duşman sip ölsün-i "may (your) enemies waste away with anxiety and die” 944; 2.0. 5800: xiv Muh.(?) dába sıiz- (MS. sir-) Rif. 109 (only); a/-dawabán sizmak 11:9 (ditto); (under "illnesses') al-datwabán 'wasting sickness! sızmak (MS. -mek) 163: Çağ. xv ff. SIZ- (-1p) s:z-, ya'ni taraşşuh eyle- "to drip, ooze' Vel. 286 (quotn.); siz- (sic) taraşşuh hardan San. 251v. 24: Xvvar. XIV SIZ- “to melt'; metaph. “to waste away, pine' Qutb 165: Kom. xiv “to melt, become liquid' sız- CCG; Gr. 229 (quotn.): Kip. xiv şız- dàba “to melt', of lead and the like /d. 57 (and see erüt-). S2siz- See çız-. süz- “to filter or strain (a liquid Aec.)”. S.ia.m.lg. w. some extended meanings. Contrast serme:- which means “to strain (something cc.) out of (a liquid AB. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. köpülüğ süzer aritur üçün “because, it strains and cleanses the mind” T'T V 26, 98; o.o. do. 97 (turuldur-), 100 (2 çuğ): Civ. suvin süzüp 'straining the vvater” H I 106; a.o. I1 8, 38: Xak. xı ol su:v süzdi: (MS. in error süjdi:)) "he strained (şaffd) the water' (etc.) Kaş. İI 9 (süze:r, süzme:k), a.o. 1 450, 15 (sü:zti:): KB süz- is normally used metaph., e.g. üküş işni süzgen “clarifying many tasks” 421; bodun bulğanukın siyásat süzer “a sound policy clears up all popular disorders” 2131; (if the people deteriorate, the beg disciplines them; if the beg deteriorates) anı kim süzer 'who is there to put him right?' 5203; o.o. 268, 1856: xiv Muh.(?) şaffd wa rawwaqa ('to clarify") sü:zRif. 111 (only): Çağ. xv ff. süz- şöf kardan 'to purify, clarify'; also used in two special idioms; (1) of birds when they fold their wings and glide down to the ground, in Ar. kusür; (2) "to make (the eyes) melting” (ndzik) in a state of intoxication or overpowering sleepiness; in these senses 8üz- cannot be used by itself but *bird' (as the Subject) or 'eyes' (as the Object) must be mentioned San. 242v. r (quotns.): Xwar. xiv süz- “to look coquettishly' Qutb 163 (rather dubious): Kom. xiv 'to strain, purifr süz- CCI, CCG, Gr.: Kip. xii saffa mina'L-tagfiya süz- Hou. 40, 15: XIV SüZ("with -ü-”) saffa'l-mà' . . . (after Süzme:) and one says kózin süzdi: ğadda farfahu “he lowered his eyes (coquettishly)” İ4. 52: xv ràqa “to clarify süz- Tuh. 17a. 13; şaffa süz(/sarkıt-) do. 22b. 13. Dis. V. SZDD sizit- Caus. f. of 1 sı:z-, n.o.a.b. Cf. sızğur-. (Uyğ. vin ff. Civ. TT VII 22, 1718(?) see serit-): Xak. xı ol apar ya:ğ sızıttı: “he urged him to melt ("a/2 adába) the congealed (a/-cümid) fat" (etc.) Kaş. II 3o5 (sızıtu:r, sızıtma:k), a.o. 7 374 (sıdığ). D süztür- Caus. f. of Süz- ; s.i.s.m.l., usually as süzdür-. Xak. xı ol su:v süztürdi: “he ordered someone to strain (or clarify, bi-taşfiya) the water' (etc.) Kaş. II 184 (süztürür, süztürme:k). Dis. SZG ?F suza:k “village”, pec. to Uyğ. Bud.; no doubt like kend a l.-w.; the spelling is fixed by TT VIII. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. Sanskrit gráma “village” suza:k1 TT VIII C.3; kend suzak *town and village” U 7V 38, 149 (and see note thereon); Suv. 479, 22; 528, 4; 531, 19. Dis. V. SZGD sızğur- Caus. f. of 1 sı:z- , “to melt (something cc.) , survives in NE Bar. Tel. sıskır-: NC Kir, sızğır-: SC Uzb. sizğir-: SW Osm. sizir-. Cf. sızıt-, Uyğ. vit ff. Bud. sizáurmuis altun “molten gold” Suv. 28, 14; 3.0. 71, 16: Civ. sızğurup 'melt' (and drink on an empty stomach) H I 19: Xak. x1 er ya:ğ sızğurdı: "the man melted (agdba) fat” (etc.); and when fever has emaciated (nahakat) an invalid one says sızğurdı: Kaş. 1] 1:88 (sızğurur, sızğurma:k:, verse): xııı(?) Tef. sızğurmış “molten” (copper) 271: (Çağ. xv ff. sızğur- an otherwise unrecorded Caus. f. of 2 sız- (çız-) San. 252r. 28): Xvvar.xıv sızğır"to melt (something)! Qutb 166: (Kom. xiv 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 906 
     
   
   
     862 "tö hiss, sizzle' sızğır- perhaps belongs herc CCI; Gr.). Dis. SZG D sézig Dev. N./A. fr. sez-, in the early period almost certainly “doubt”, Survives as sezik in NE Tel.: SE Tar.: NC Kzx. (and in der. £s in Kir. and NW Kk.) generally with the meaning of 'suspicion, apprehension', and the like, in Tar, "the fancies of a pregnant woman'. Uyğ. vit ff. Man.-A M 119, ri (ayıt-): Man. seziğ köpüllerin tarğartı "they restrained (or got rid of) their doubtful thoughts! T'T 777 rao: Sézikle:rin ta:rğa:rğa:lır üçün "in order to restrain (or dissipate) their doubts' TT VII H.6; a.o. do. 10; (in a list of harmful emotions) Sézig 'doubt' U 77 77, 15; 86, 32; 0.0. Kuan. 206, etc.: Xak. xi sö:ziğ al-zann “opinion, conjecture, doubt, suspicion' (a rather imprecise word) Kaş. 7 408; a.o. IH 152, 4 (sé:zin-): KB barirmen mupar sen sézig tutmağıl '[ am going away; have no doubt of this” 1090; wa likin seziğim bu ol "but this is my doubt" 3823; 0.0. 3785, 5408: Kap. xv /iiss (ün/) sezek (sic) Tul. 12b. 7 (i.e. “voice” ün, “feeling, presentiment” Sezek): Osm. xvi ff. al-zann (see Xak.) is translated seziğ in onc dict. and sezi in another; al-muxammin “an appraiser' Sezig -birle., söz söyleyici kişi T'T'S 77 812; IV 679. D süzük Pass. N./A.S. fr. süz-; lit. (of a liquid) “clarified, strained'; metaph. “pure, transparent', and the like. S.i.s.m.l. in NE, SE, SC. Uyğ. virr ff. Man.-A M 727,35(1 turuk): Man. süzüg (sic) kópüllüg “vith pure thoughts! TT LX 95: Bud. Sanskrit acehüni pánivdni "pure waters' süzök (sic) su:vlarığ TT VIII C.6; üg ertinide süzük kértgünç kópüllüg "havinu a pure belief in the three jewels' 77 40, 7; 0.0. TT V 6, 22 etc. (1 arığ), 6, 24 (sırıçğa:), az, 42; VI 361 (1 turuk); VII 40, 117; X 24; U İİ 37, 60-3 (tapçasız), etc.: Civ. TT I 135 (tig): Xak. xı Süzük su:v 'blue, clear (al-azraqu'l-sáfi) water'; also anything clear like a sapphire, etc. is called süzük Kaş. 7 389: KB süzük ol bu dawlat süzükni yöler “this fortune is pure and supports the pure" 2105; 0.0. 973 (e&amp;S:-), 1521 (édizlik): xın(?) 4t. navvüdir süzük az bolur "pure witticisms are rare' 479, (in 477 ?read sözüğ): xiv Afuh. al-şafi (of wine, etc.) Sü:zü:k Mel. 63, 10 (MS. siü:ri:R); 84, 14; Rif. 162, 191: Çağ. xv ff. süzük (spelt) şaf San. 243r. 21 (quotn.): Kom. xiv süzük su CCG; Gr. D süzgü: N.I. fr. süz-; 'strainer, filter”, S.i.m.m.l.g., but the cognate N.I. süzgic, with minor phonetic changes, is rather commoner. Uyğ. viti ff. Bud. Sanskrit parisrávanam 'strainer' süzkü (sic) TT VIII C.8: Osm. xvi ff. süzğü 'strainer', in several dicts. TTS Il 859; IV 720. D süzgün Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. süz-; lit. “strained”. Survives in SVV Az., Osm. for “filtered, clarified; (of an eye) melting, languid'. İts application in Xak. is obscure, perDIS. V. SZGhaps to a trec which naturally exudes sap or gum, or is tapped to yicld it, Xak.xı süzğün “a kind of mountain. tree (min şacari l-cibal with black thorns” Kaş. 7 443. Dis. V. SZGD se:zik- liap. leg.; Einphatic f. of séz-; zanna is ambiguous, but cf. sé:zig, sö:zin-, the meaning is prob. as below. Xak. xı bu rsSip ana:r sö:ziktim zannantu hádàá l-amr münhu “I suspected him of this affair” Kaş, 77 117 (sözike:r, sézikme:k; sic). "Fris. SZG D séziglig P.N./A. fr. sézlg; apparently both “feeling doubt, or suspicion' and 'open to doubt or suspicion, dubious, suspect'. Survives only(?) in NW Krım sezikli 'hesitant, cautious” R 72V 491. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. Sanskrit linabhisamkita “doubtful” sézéklég (sc) TT VIII A48; o.o. do. H.6 (erki:), TT VI 38o (alkmç), Sus. 290, 17 (İkirçgü:), 7T X 538; Hüen-ts. 210, etc.: Xak. xi KB (food and drink are very awkward) séziglig kişidin yése “if one gets them from a dubious character' 2826; (you have lived through the night which has just passed) keçermü séziglig künün 'will the dubious day which is coming to you (also) pass?” 3633: (xın(?) Tef. séziglik (A.N.) 'doubt' 266). D só:zkine: Hap. leg.; Dim. f. of só:z; the last consonant has one dot above and two below, so só:zkiye:, another Sec. f. of -kifie:, is a possible reading. Xak. xi (from a love poem) be:rip mapa: só:zkine: “give me one little word' Kaş, HII 359, 7; n.ii.e. D sé:zigsiz Priv. N./A. fr. séizig; “free from doubt; not open to suspicion', and more often 'undoubtedly'. N.o.a.b.. Uyf. viu ff. Bud. (if he says this dhdrani) seziğsiz sidi teğme işi küdügi büter "his ceremony called siddhr will undoubtedly be (successfully) completed" TTV 8, 69—70; sézékséz (sic) VIII 4.36; sézigsiz 'undoubtedly' U 7/7 26, 11; /Tüen-ts. 1992: Xak. xi KB seziğsiz bir ök sen *undoubtedly 'Thou art one' 10; o.0. 339 (birtem), 2296,—(on the subject of cooks, cf. sé:ziglig) sézigsiz yése beg anipdin asığ “if the beg can eat without misgivings, he (the cook) is valuable" 2825. Dis. SZL D sızla:ğ Dev. N. fr. sızla:-, "an ache' and the like. S.i.s.m.l., esp. in NW where the forms are sızlav/sızlavv. Uy$f. vir ff. Civ. H 1 165 (kavuk): Xak. xi sızla:ğ the word for “a numb feeling” (Aa/al) in the teeth when one drinks very cold water or chews ice and feels the cold of it Kaş, 7 464. Dis. V. SZLD sizil- Pass. f. of siz-; strictly speaking irregular since Siz- “to melt' is Intrans., but seems to mean “to be melted'. N.o.a.b. Sizilin Çağ. xv ff. San. 232r. 26 and some modern s  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 907 
     
   
   
        DIS. V. SZL- 863 languages, A 1 V 665, is a Sec. f. of çızıl- which is not an ancient word. Uy£. viu ff. Bud. (their flesh and bones) sağ yağ teg sizilip barir 'are melted like butter and disappear' TM IV 252, 22; iki adakınta yağı sizilip akıp “the fat in his two legs is melted and flows away' U IH 24, s (i): (Xak.?) xiv Mh. al-mudab 'melted' sızılmış Mel. 84, 15; Rif. 191. D süzül- Pass. f. of süz- ; lit. “to be strained, clarified' ; metaph. "to be purified' and the like. S.i.s.m.). Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. (he believes in the three jewels and the commandments and) süzülür “is purified! TT V zz, 38; (then the 77,000 people in that community, hearing the Buddha's words) ertipü süzültiler 'were greatly purified' İT 303; o.o. Suv. 63, 8-9 (art:-); PP 47, 1: Xak. xi su:v süzüldi: “the water (etc.) was clear' (safá; i.e. Pass. used as Intrans.) Kaş. II 124 (süzülür, süzülme:k); a.0. II 139, 15: KB bilig birle süzlür bodun bulğakı "by knowledge the people's confusion is clarified” 221; süzülmiş könül “the clarified mind” (very shrewdly said) 3752; o.o. 3632, 4795, 5921 (bulga:üiuk): Çağ. xv ff. süzülşüf şudan "to become clear, pure”, etc.; also used as the Pass, of the tvvo idioms mentioned under süz-, kuş süzüledür “the bird folds its wings to glide down' and köz süzüledür "the eye looks blankly”, because of intoxication or being woken suddenly San. 242v. 14 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv süzül- (of the eyes) 'to be used coquettishiy” Qutb 163. D sizla:- Den. V. fr. sız, which survives in NE Alt., Tel, sıs (before vowels S1Z- . , .) 'ache, pain”, "to ache, to have a sharp pain”. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SE, SC w. some phonetic changes. Xak. xı anın tışı: bu:zdin sizla:di: "his teeth ached (tawacca'a) and developed a sharp pain (naxs) because of ice or drinking very cold water'; and one says ernip süpü:ki: sızla:dı: “the man's bones were acutely painful (zaxasa) because of a sharp pain (garş) in them” Kaş. III 297 (sızla:r, sızla:ma:k). D sizle:- Den. V. fr. si:z; "to address respectfully', i.e. as “you”, not “thou”. Survives in SC Uzb. Xak. xı Kaş. III 298 (senle:-); n.m.e. D só:zle:- Den. V. fr. sö:z, “to speak, say”. Like ay- (but unlike té:-, which could properly only precede or follow a speech in oratio recta) it could be used both with and without such a speech. İn about xit for some unexplained reason, possibly to avoid the juxtaposition of s- and -z- (though such juxtaposition is very common), it became söyle- in some languages. Survives in NE Tuv. söğle-: SE “Türki sózle-: NC Kir. süyló-; Kzx. sóyle-: SC Uzb. süzla-: NW söyle-: SW Az., Osm. söyle-, Tkm. sözle-. "Türkü vir ff. Man..tepri nomin sözleser "if someone preaches the sacred doctrine' Chuas. yz, nece sózlemesig irincülüg söz sózleyürbiz 'whatever wicked things we say that we should not have said' do. 295-6; a.o. do. 105-7 (kikşür-): Uyğ. vırır ff. Man.-A M I15,1-3(ógek): Man. TT IJI 161 (başık): Bud..sózle- is. common; (1) by itself, e.g. belgürti sözleser “if 1 speak declaring" (my lineage and family) PP 67, 2; a.o. do. 73, 5; (2) with an Object, e.g. (if I do not go) ezük sözlemiş bolğaymen “1 shall have told a lie' U III69,1-2;0.0. TT 1V 8,70; V 8, 58-9, etc. ; (3) before oratio recta, e.g. ötrü Sastrakari baxşı sözledi “then the teacher Süstrakára said', followed by a speech, followed by tép TT X 10-11; 2.0.0.; (4) combinations of (2) and (3), e.g. savlar sözleyü yarlıkadı “he deigned to say (the following) words' do, 216— 217: Civ. bu darnığ özlerinin sanınça sözlep “reciting this dhdrami as often as the years of his life" TT VII 26, s-7, sözleser follows oratio recta USp. 77, 15-16: Xak. xt ol mapa: sö:z sö:zle:di: takallama ilayya bi-kalüm “he spoke to me" Kaş, 1I] 296 (sö:zle:r, sö:zle:me:k), o.o. 7 qoz (tümen); III 208, 14: KB sözle- is common, both by itself, e.g. bilip sózlese 'if a man speaks with knowledge' 170; and with an Object, e.g. üküş sözleme söz birer sözle az “do not speak a great deal, say little, a vvord at a time” 172: Xiri(?) At. sözle- is common in both these usages, e.g. kalı sózleser söz bilip sözlegil “if you speak, say what you know' 226; Tef. sözle- is common in both these usages 274: xiv Muh. takallama sö:zle:- Mel. zo, 12; 24,9; Rif. 100, 106; kadaba "to lie' yalğa:n só:yle:(sic) 3o, 13; (ötrükle:-, in margin yalğa:n sö:zle:- rıq): Çağ. xv ff. sózle- (spelt) harf zadan wa guftan 'to speak, say' San. 242v. 19 (quotns.), söyle- ('with -6-”) guftan San. 248v. 21 (perhaps Rümi, see sö:zleş-): Xwar. xı sözle-/söyle- 'Ali 13: xiv sözle- Qutb 160: Kom. “to speak” sózle- CCI, CCG; Gr. 224 (quotns.): Kip. xit Radaba (Otukle:-, ?error for ötrükle:-/) ötrük sóyle:-; Tkm. yala:n sóyle:-; şadaqa “to tell the truth' (kerti: ayit-); Tkm. kérgek söyle:- How. 36, 4-5; takallama só:zle:- do. 38, 16: xiv sózle- (*with -6-”) takallama İd. sz, tahaddata "to speak, relate' sözle-/söyle- Bul. 37r.: xv tahaddata Só:yle:- Kav. 8, 16; 38, r, ditto sözle- 38, 3; qála "to say” sö:yle- (MS. só:le-) 31, 14; 8.0.0.; tahaddata sözle-, takallama söyle- Tuh. ga. 6—7; and many o.o. of both forms; in Tuh. gála is translated ayıt-/d6-. D sızlat- Caus. f. of sızla:- ; s.i.s.m.]. Uyğ. viri ff. Civ. sının sizlatur “it makes his body ache” TT VII 24, 21-2; a.o. do. 25, 2 (1 bu:t): Xak. xı bu:z tı:şığ sızlattı: "the ice made his teeth numb” (akalla), that is that the cold makes his teeth crawl(ya'xud . . . fi'l-dabib) as if they ached (swaca'a) or ants crawled (in them); also used of cold water when one puts a hand in it and experiences a feeling of cold Kaş. IJ 346 (sızlatu:r, sizlatma:k). D sizlet- Caus. f. of sizle:- , survives in SC Uzb. Xak. xı and onesays men ant: sizlettim *] ordered (someone) to address him respectfully! (bi-xifübi'l-akábira) Kaş. II 347 (sizletüzrmen, sizletme:k, after senlet- and not in its proper place). D sözlet- (sö:zlet-) Caus. f. of .só:zle:-; s.i.s.m.l. vv, the same phonetic changes. Xak,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 908 
     
   
   
     864 xı ol meni: sózletti: “he urged me to speak” ('alá'l-kalám) Kaş. II 346 (sözletü:r, sózletme:k): Çağ. xvíF. sózlet- (-keli, sic) sivlet-. Vel. 295; sözlet- /sözleştür- madkür süxtan wa guyd kardan "to have (something) stated, to order to speak" Sam, 243r. r5 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv sözlet- ditto Qutb 161. D sö:zlen- Refl. f. of só:zle:-; s.i.s.m.l. as sózlen- or sóylen- 'to be said; to talk to oneself, grumble", Xak. xı ol sö:zin mapa: sözlendi: fakallama sea azhara li bad kalámihi “he spoke and clarified soine of his remarks to me” Kaş. 11 247 (sö:zlenü:r, sö:zlenme:k, sic); KB tili birle yalguk sözi sözlenür a man speaks for himself with his tongue' 275. D süzlün- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of süzül-, used as [ntrans. Xak. xı su:v süzlündi: “the water (etc.) was clear” (şaf4) Kaş. 1I 247 (süzlünü:r, süzlünme:k). D sö:zleş- Recip. f. of sö:zle:- , “to converse”, S.ia.m.l. as sözleş- or söyleş-. Türkü vri inim Kül Tegin birle: sözleşdimiz “my younger brother Kül Tégin and I discussed (the situation)' 7 E 26, II E 21: vui ff. Man. (for two days and nights the sacred King and the Hearers) savlarığ sózlesdiler exchanged remarks! TT II 6, 28: Uyğ. viii ff. Chr. tép sözleşdiler “they said to one another” (after a speech in oratio recta) U I 8, 8: Bud. Sanskrit análapanmo "without conversing” só[zle:]sme:din TT VIII C.11; ópi öni sözle:şme:kke "by various conversations do. G.14: Civ. (gap] 1nga sózlesdimiz 'we discussed (the matter) in this way! USp. 108, 5; sati kümüşin ınça sözleşdimiz “ve discussed the sale price in the following way' do, 109, 3-4: Xak. xi ol menir birle: sözleşdir takallama ma"i “he conversed vvith me”, originally sö:zleşdi: Kaş. 77 215 (sözleşür, sözleşme:k), kişi: sö:zleşü: yılkı: yıdlaşu: “people (get to know one another) by conversing (bi'I-takallum), animals by smelling one another” 7/I 104, 17: xiui(?) Tef. sózles-/ söz sözleş- “to converse! 274: xiv /Muh. tahddata "to converse” sö:zle:ş- Mel. 42, 6; Rif. r33: yataqdıcalün “they say to one another” sözleştiler 42, ro (Rif. corrupt): Çağ. xv tf. sözleş- (-ti) söyleş- Vel. 295; sözleş- “to converse (mukdülama hardan) with one another” San, 243r. 7 (quotns.); söyleş- ditto 249r. 2 (quotn., Fudili, which suggests that this should have been described as Rümi): Xwar. xiv sözleş- ditto Qutb 160: Kip. xv (in a para. on the Recip. Suff. -s-) (for takallama or tahaddata you say sözle- or sóyle- and) for takálama sö:yleş- (MS. só:leg-) Kav. 70, 2-3, söyleşmeke kelir-mi ser (si) "have you come for a conversation?” (/'I-tabádut) Tuh. 60a. 4-5. : D süzlüş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of süzül-, expressing joint İntrans. state. Xak. xr su:vla:r kamuğ süzlüşdi: tasafati'[-miyà' "the waters were all clear” Kaş, IJ 215 (süzlüşü:r, süzTlüşme:k). : : DIS. V. SZLTris. V. SZLD sözletil- Pass. f. of sö:zlet- , n.o.a.b. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. Sanskrit uAtà 'uttered' sózle:tilmis e:rme:z TT V77 4.44 (sic; inexplicable mistranslation): Xwar. xiv sózletil- “to be uttered” Qaf? 161. Dis. SZM D süzme: Pass, Dev. N/A. fr. süz-, lit. 'something strained or clarified”. S.i.s.m.l,, usually for *curds, cheese”, or “skim milk; thus SE "Fürki süzme: NC kir. süzmö, Kzx. Süzbe: SC Uzb. suzma: NW Kk,, Nog. süzbe; Kaz, sözme: SW Az., "km. süzme, but Osm. süzme means 'strained, filtered”, Xak. xı süzme: a/-hdaflim 'curds'! Kaş. 1 433: Çağ. xv ff. süzme (spelt) şardb sáf xdliş “clear pure wine' (or “beverage" ?) San. 243r. 21: Kip. xiv süzme: al-römüq "a strainer” (sie, ?error); and süzme: ğadid 'languishing'; one, says süzme: közlü: 'with languishing eyes” /d. $2 (and see süz-): xv (VU) mugabbaka "a kind of sweetmeat' (lava) süzme Tuh. 34a. 7; (in 32a. 1 one of the translations of /aban "milk” is süzmeli). Dis. V. SZND s€:zin- Refl. f. of s€:z-, survives as sezinin some NE languages for "to have a feeling (about something), to suspect' and SW Osm. for “to be aware, or conscious of (something); to have an inkling'. Kag.s translation is ambiguous, see Sézik-. Uyf. viu ff. Bud. (Hüen-tsang consulted a soothsayer and) sézinmişin ayıtdı inca tép 'asked him about his doubtful (point) speaking as follows' Hüen-ts. 20-1: Xak. xı ol apa:r sö:ziğ sö:zindi: ganna lahu zann "he had a suspicion of him'(?) Kaş. II 152 (s€:zinü:r, sé:zinme:k); a.o. 1 419, 10 (tuzBu:): xiri(?) Tef. sézin- seems to mean 'to think, to have a feeling that' (kim) 266; sizin- 'to be patient', 268, seems rather to be sözin- "to be doubtful. D süzün- Hap. leg.; Refl, f. of süz-. "The translation is doubtful; Ó:zipe: suggests that it should be simply "the man strained water for himself” , without that word the translation would be appropriate. Xak. xı er ö:zine: su:v süzündi: "the man pretended to strain (annahu yusaffa) water for himself! Kaş. HH 151 (süzünü:r, süzünme:k). : Tris. SZN PUD sazınçı: Lap. leg.; this word is in a small section for words ending in -nç- and a vowel; it follows tutuncu: under the cross-heading T, and the cross-heading Z, but precedes karinga:, which suggests that the Z and the -zare errors for R and -r-; there is in fact a possible etymological link w. sarın-. "Dl here is no widely distributed word for “gypsum” in "Furkish. Xak. xr sazınçı: ta:şı: a/-şuhrüc 'gypsum' Kaş. III 375. D süzündi: Hap.:leg.; Pass. Dev. N./À. fr. süzün-. Xak. xi süzündi: su:v *water which  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 909 
     
   
   
       TRIS. SZN has been thoroughly clarified' (suffiya katira(n)) Kaş. 1 449; a.o. 450, 20. D süzinlüg (süzünlük) Hap. leg.; A.N. fr. Süzün-; 'purity'(?). Türkü vir (all the gods came down to fight the demons) süzinlügün Chuas. I 2. : PU?C só:zepri: Hap. leg.; in a note in Kaş. HI 389 it is said that there cannot in Turkish 8641125 rf  865 be two consecutive consonants of which one is D unless the other is a liquid (harfu”/-dalaqa), that is l or r, and this “rare vvord” is quoted as an example. 'l'he only vowel sign is a damma on the sin. There is no good morphological explanation of the word, but it might be a compound of sö:z and an abbreviated Dev. N. fr. apra:- “to scream”, Xak. xi sö:zenri: kişi: al-insünmu l-mihdür "an incoherent, delirious man” Kaş. III 389.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 910 
     
   
   
     Preliminary note. 7t is reasonably certain that, apart fr. onomatopoeics and interjections, which are in a class by themselves, no pure. Turkish teord originally began scith Ş-. The other words listed below are either swords in schich the şfs. a Sec. f. of S-, or less often Ç- or t-, or scords of a kind tchich are likely to have been borrowed İr. some foreign language, Chinese, Tokharian, or some Iranian dialect. MON. SA F şa: Hap. leg.; perhaps a Chinesel.-w. Xak. xı Şa: the word for a parti-coloured (ablaq) bird resembling a heron (màáliku'l-hazin) ; it has the nickname erdemsiz sa: that is 'a bird without merit! (/6 manqaba fihi) because it always flies close to the ground Kaş. 777 211. F si: Hap. leg.; Chinese l.-w. Xak. xi si: an exclamation used in greeting thc kings of China; it is the equivalent of the Ar. phrase abayta”l-la"n “you have rejected (or averted) the curse (or rebuke?)' Kaş. III zır. S su:/sü: See çu:/çü:, Mon. SB PU sa:b Hap. leg.?; onomatopoeic more or less syn. vv. çap, q.v. Xak. xı anı: sa:b şa:b boyunla:dı: şafa"ahu bi-sawt badà minhu "he hit him a resounding blow on the back of the neck'; and one says ol ka:ğunuğ şa:b şa:b yö:di: “he ate the melon smacking his lips” (bi-sib wa tamattuq), also used when one eats anything juicy like a peach; this word agrees. with Ar., because a/-şib is gatvtu'l-majüfir 'the sound made by a camel's lips' Kag. HI 145. PU?F şap Hap. leg.; if not a mere interjection an. abbreviation of sa:bü:k, q.v. Cf. zep zep. Xak. xi şap /arf ta'cil “an interjection of urgency', like Ar. /ralla; hence one says şap kel “come quickly' Kaş. 7 319; a.o. do. (1 bat). F sa:v Hap. leg.; no doubt a local word, prob. Iranian. Xak.(?) xı şa:v “a plant like soap-wort (al-hurd) in Ug with which clothes are washed" (yerhad) Kaş, HHI 155 Dis. SBG F sa:bü:K Hap. leg.; corruption of Pe. fübük, same meaning. Xak, xr açığlığ er şa:bü:k karı:ma:s "a prosperous man does not grow old quickly” (sari'a(u)) Kaş. I 147, 5; n.m.e. S sóblk See çöbik. ! Dis. SBN PU?F sabty "a slcdge-hammer'; n.o.a.b.; tbe second vowcl is kasra in the main entry, fafha in the other. "The suggestion that (VU) bon is an abbreviation of this word is not plausiblc. Prob. an lranian L-w. Çiğil xı sabip a/-mirzabba "a sledge-hammer” Kaş. III 369; a.o. III 354 (boy). F *sabnu:y See şanbu:y. Dis. V. SBSPUSD suvsat- (suvşat-) Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of suvşa:-, Xak, xı ol menir kulakka: sö:z şuvşattı: “he urged someone to whisper a word (man haynama bi-kalam) in my car” Kaş. II 337 (şuvşatu:r, suvsatma:k). PUSD şuvşaş- (suvşaş-) Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of suvşa:-., Xak, xı olanın birle: şuvşaşdı: “he whispered a secret word (Rtaynama . . bi-kalám xafi) with hin” Kaş. II 350 (suvşaşu:r, şuvşaşma:k). Mon. ŞD F şad Iranian l.-w. in a form not found in any known dialect, but cognate to Saka fao, Sogdian 'y4£y8, Pe. sáh, ultimately der. fr. Old Pe. x£ayafiya. In "Turkish the title, ranking prob. next after xağan and bestowed by the xagan on some close relative, younger brother or son, often carried with it the duty of ruling part of the xagan's dominions, so that 'viceroy' is perhaps the nearest English equivalent, but not an exact translation. In Turkish, apart fr. one occurrence in Uyg. and a very dubious one in O. Kir., Mal. 2, 1, pec. to "Türkü, but various "'urkish sads are mentioned in the Chinese records, the word being transcribed sö, shé, or ch'a, see Chavannes, Documents sur les — Tou-kiue (Turcs) occidentaux, St. Petersburg, 1900, p. 320. Cf. yabğu:. "Türkü vir tórt yegirmi: 15 Tarduş bodun üze şad ertim (77 olurtim) “in my r4th year I was (assumed the post of) sad over the 'Tardug people” I E 17, . II E iş, (with my younger brother Kül Tégin and) eki: şad birle: “the two şads” 7 E 27 (I E 22); (the Türgeş xagan and his army attacked) xaganrn yabğu:sıun sadrn anta: ölü:rtim 'I killed their xağam, yabgw:, and şad there” II E 28; uluğu: şad erti: “their (the 700 men's) headman was a şag” T 5; sad atığ anta: bérmis “he gave him the title of jad there” Ongin 6; o.o. IN 1v; T E 14, ILE 12; T 31, 41, etc.: Uyğ. vur eki: oglima: yabğu: sad at bertim “1 gave my two sons the title of yabğu and sad respectively' Su. E 7. PU?F sat n.o.a.b.; prob. a l.-w. Xak. xi sat al-cur'a “bravery”, hence one says anıp ne: 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 911 
     
   
   
         TRIS. SGR 867 şatı: ba:r *what bravery has he got?', implying that he has none ("a/2 fariqi'l-inkar) Kaş. I 320: KB meniy sózlegüke özüm yok sati “1 do not myself dare to speak” 776. VUF şu:t Hap. leg.; prob. an lranian or Indian l.-w. Xotan xi su:t a/-nicdr "origin, root” Kaş. İİİ 120. Dis. ŞDA ?F satu: "ladder, staircase” , almost certainly a ].-w. of unknown origin. A l.-w. in Mong. (Kow. 1446, Haltod 359) and Pe., see Doerfer III :320; survives in NE "Tuv. cada: SE Türki sati/satu Saro, sota B$; sote Jarring: NC Kir. gati; Kzx. satı: SC Uzb. Sot1; in Kom. and Kip. fr. xiv onwards the word .for “ladder” was ağınğa:ç, now obsolete; most other modern languages use başğıç, notan old word, or l.-w.s. See bağna:, Uyğ. vurff. Man. TT III 46-7 (biliglig): Xak. xı KB satu kórdüm ellig anın bağnası “1 saw a ladder with fifty rungs” 6033: Çağ. xvff. satu (spelt) nardubün 'ladder, st3ircase” San. 259r. zo (quotn.). VUF gott: Hap. leg.; meaning uncertain; the Ar. translation is unvocalized and the last letter undotted. Brockelmann suggests either al-şabat “spider” or al-şibitt 'aniseed'; another possibility is a/-şabab "young sheep or bovine'. Kaş, is no doubt right in describing it as 'non"Furkish”. Xak. xi sott: al-sabat(?); luğa ğayr aşliya "not originally Turkish” Kaş. 777 218. Tris. ŞDB VUF şadapr:t n.o.a.b., prob. a title of some kind compounded of şad and (VU) apı:t, perhaps meaning “the entourage of the şag” or the like. Türkü vir (listen to me all of you, my younger brothers, sons, united clan and people) berye: şadapı:t begler yirya: tarxat buyruk beğler “the şadapbı:ts and begs on the right (or to the south), the tarxars ministers and begs on the left (or to the north) 7 S r, Türkü amtı: begler késre: Tarduş beğler Kül Çor başlayu: ulayu: şadapı:t begler, öpre 'Tólis begler Apa: Tarxan başlayu: ulayu: sada[pi:t] begler “novv the "Türkü begs, to the west the ""arduş 5egs, all the şadağa:ts and begs vvith Kül Çor at their head, to the east the Tölis begs, all the sadapt:ts and 5egs with Apa: Tarxan at their head” I7 N 13-14. Dis. ŞDG VU?F şütük Hap. leg.; no doubt like all "Turkish words for “ink” a l.-w. Cf. mekke:. Xak. xı şütük “ink” (a/-dandt) which is made from the horns of oxen and the like, şütük saka:l al-katsac "having a thin beard”, a metaph. use of the word Kaş. 7 390. Dis. V. SDLPUD?F satlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. Sat; spelt satlan- in the MS., but as it is placed between söğlün- and kartan- it must begin vv, S-. In the Ar. translation sctara'a is Brockelmann's emendation of the inappropriate  ihtazá in the MS. Çiğgil xı ol bu: ışka: şatlandı: "he showed bravery (íctara'a) in this affair” Kaş. II 248 (şatlanu:r, gatlanma:k). ] Mon. SG F gik1.-w. fr. Chinese shih (Giles 9,964; Pulleyblank, Middle Chinese Zyek), lit. "a stone”, as a measure of capacity 'ten pecks' (/ou, kürl:, q.v.), conventionally 23 bushels. Pec. to Uyğ Civ., where it is fairly common and often transcribed sk. It occurs in two contexts: (1) as a measure of capacity; (2) as a measure of land, based on the amount of seed required to sow it. Uyğ. viri ff. Civ. bir şık üyür bir böz "one measure of millet and one (roll of) cloth” USb. 31, 9; 0.0. do. 32, 12 and several occurrences in Fam. Arch.—tört şık yerimni “my land requiring 4 measures (ro bushels) of grain” 15,4; 8.0. 28, 3-4 (anuk); in this usage it alternates with kürl:, c.g. yeti küriliğ yerimni “my land requiring 7 pecks of grain” rs, 3. Dis. SGL VUF şuğlu: Hap. leg.; no doubt a l.-w., perhaps Chinese. Cf. supla: Xak. xı şuğlu: "inabu”l-ta"lab 'garden nightshade, Solanum nigrum' (foxes” grapes”) Kaş. 1 431. Tris. V. SGLD şağı:la:- See çağı:la:-. : Dis. SGS E şakşı See sakız Uyg. Civ. Mon. SG : F şük 'quiet, silent, still”, L-w. fr. Sogdian fwk, see Benveniste in Journal asiatique, 236, Pt. 2 (1948), p. 184. Survives only(?) in SE 'Tar., Türki R IV 1108. Uyğ. vii ff. Chr. ol yultuz tepremedin şük turdi “the star stood still without moving” U 7 6, 8-9: Bud. témedin sük bolup 'becoming silent and speechless! U 11 31, 501; 2.0. U III $1, 8: Civ. şük tur TT I 223: Xak. xı şük galima isküt "a word calling for silence'; the "Turks say şük tur “be silent” Kaş. I 335: KB nelük şük turursen 'why are you silent?' 957; 0.0. 1018, 3476 (kurit-): Xwar. xır(?) şük bolup uyup turdi “he became silent and slept' Og. 136. Tris. SGR ?SD şekirtük Hap. leg. as such, but one of a number of words with similar meanings beginning w. €-, which suggests that this word also originally began with ç-. They seem to be Dev. N.s fr. onomatopoeic V.s, in most cases çatla:- (çatı:la:-). "The closest parallel is SW Osm. çekirdek 'pip; seed; fruit-stone”, Xak. xı şekirtük al-/ustug "pistachio nut' Kaş. 7 $07: (Çağ. xv ff. çatlağuç “Pistacia terebinthus, the fruit of the terebinth tree” San” 205r. 8: Kom. xiv catlawuk “hazel nut' CCI; Gr.: Kip. xui al-fustuq. sa'l-bunduq. ('hazel nut") and all nuts that crack (ai-mukassarát) çetle:yik, a word compounded from the noise which they make when cracked Zou..8, 3:.   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 912 
     
   
   
      868 xıv (after çatla-) hence al-bunduq is called çetlevvük İd. 42: Osm. xvi ff. çıtlamuk/ çatlağuç/çitlenbik 'Pistacia terebinthus! TTS İT 213). Mon. SL sal sul Hap. leg.; quasi-onomatopocic. Xak. xı “a clumsy fellow! (a/-axraqı” l-yad) is called şal sul eli$lig Kaş. I 336. Tris. SLS F şaln:şu: Hap. leg.; no doubt a ].-w., perhaps a Chinese phr. Xak. xi şala:şu: “a kind of Chinese woven fabric (rrasicu'l-Sin) Kaş, I 446. Dis. SMN VUF simnu: l.-w. fr. Sogdian fmnto, which ultimately goes back to Avestan agró mainyü "evil spirit', Pahlavi/ Persian A/riman. — In “Purkish the Sogdian spelling is preserved but the. Christian Sogdian form fimanu suggests that the first vowel was -1-; see W. B. Henning, Mitteliranisch', p. 66, in Handbuch der Ortentalistik, Section I, Vol. IV Iranistik, Pt. I Linguistik; Leiden-Cologne, 1958. 'T'he word is fairly common in Uyğ., meaning 'devil, demon, evil spirit”. N.o.a.b.; cf. yé:k. Türkü vin ff. ai á. kilincli:$ smnu: "the. wicked demon' Toy. IIIv. 2-4 (ET Y I1.178);, Man. ditto Chuas. 1 18: Uyğ. vini ff. Man.-A şmnuğ (4cc.) M T 19, 12; a.0.0. Man. şmnu küçine kopuğ uğay “by the power of the devil he will be able to do everything” M 77 5, 10-11: Bud. şmnu is common; in Suz, 429, 13 (a very late MS.) apparently spelt şamnu: Civ. sumnu (sic) yekler TT VII 28, 23 (also a late MS.). Tris. SMS F şamu:şa: Hap. leg.; no doubtal.-w. Xak. xı şamu:şa: al-Inibatu' lladi. yu” hal 'edible fenugreek” Kaş. 1 446. Mon. SN F sep the Chinese word shéng (Giles 9,879), a liquid measure conventionally translated “pint”, Uyğ. vir ff, Bud. (if in the course of trade 1 have deceived with balances, scales, foot and inch measures) şenin kavin “pints and onetenth pints" (etc.) U 77 77, 26; o.o. do. 86, 43; TT IV ro, s, Suv. 135, 9. Dis. SNB PUF sanbu:y (sabnu:y) Hap. leg.; entered in the section headed fa 7a:/ for words ending in -y, under the cross-heading B for the penultimate consonant, which confirms the spelling sanbu:y, but prob. a metathesis of sabnu:y. No doubt an Iranian l-w., syn. vv, Pe. şabnişin, lit. 'evening session". Cf. kestem. 3ancak xı sanbu:y ism li-diváfa yutaxxad layla(u) li-gurb. hadarü mün da'sta. uxrá. “the word for a drinking party at night (for guests) who have come on from another party” Kaş. 111 239. Dis. SNG S şünük See çünük.  "TRIS.  ŞGR Dis. ŞNL VUF şunla: lap. leg.; no doubt a l.-w., prob. Chinese. Cf. şuğlu:, Xak. xi supla: a/-du'bitb “the root of an esculent plant which is pecled and eaten' (Lane); it is a plant in the Argu: country of which the root is dug up (yrmnbag aslulin) and caten Kaş, HI 379. Mon. SR S sar sar an onomatopoeic which survives in NE 'T'cl.; SW Osm. şar/şar sar “an onomatopocic for the sound of running water' R IV 950; Red. 1108; no doubt, as Kaş, says, a Sec. f., but not exactly syn. vv. 1 car, q.v. Xak. xı şar şar "an onomatopocic (/kaya) for the sound of falling heavy rain'; also for the noise made by any liquid (máyr); the ş- is changed from ç- Kaş, I 324. F şir Sce sir. F şor 'salt, salty'; an Iranian l-w., cf. Pe. şör, which s.i.s.m.]. asa l.-w. Uyğ. vir ff, Bud. yay yesünler şor açığ “let them cat salty and sour (food) in the summer” Sur. 591, 18: Civ. TT VIII I.12 (çıvşa:ğun), 19: (Xak.?) xiv Rbj. suni) açığı sori “the bitter, salt (taste) of the water' R IV 1027. Mon. SS S 1 şı:ş Sec 1 sts. $2 srg See 2 Sis. Mon. V. SSS şeş- Sce seş-. S şış- See sış-. Dis. ŞŞD (S)D şeşüt (sesüt) Dev. N./A. fr. ses-; lit. loose, untied'.. Mistranscribed sagt by Arat, presumably owing to a false etymology fr. *sa:S-; n.o. b. Xak. xr KB saçım boldi Sopkur tüsi teg şeşüt “my hair has become dishevelled, like a falcon's plumage' (and my beard withered like the summer flowers) 5639; (my hair has become withered like the summer flowers, and my beard) sesüt (like a falcon's plumage) 5697. Dis. V. ŞŞDS şeştür- Sec seştür-. Dis. SSG S şişek See tişek. Dis. V. ŞŞLS şeşil- Sec seşil-. Dis. ŞŞR VUF şişir no doubt a l.-w.; in Suv., R. translated it 'crystal' on the basis of the Chinese original. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. şişir Suv. 515, 17 (see sata:); Civ. (for... siftr, 3 bakir I bought) sekiz şişir “cight crystal (beads?) Fam. Arch. 19.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 913 
     
   
   
       Y Preliminary note. It can be shown by the study of Turkish loan-words in certain languages and some other evidence (see Studies, p. 124, etc.) that some words which began with y- in VIII had earlier begun with d- or fi- ; sehere such evidence is available the original initial is added in brachets after the word. Words scith. mtial yhave undergone exceptionally large phonetic changes in modern times; in most NE languages the y- has become C-, Ç-, or some cognate sound, in NC, some NW languages, and SW Tünr. C- or İ-, while in other languages, esp. SW Az., Osm., the y- has been elided, esp. fr. words beginning w. yi-[yi-. On the other hand in Xah. and one or two other languages a prosthetic ywas added to some words beginning ww. votcels, esp. V-fi-. There is, however, seldom any difficulty 1n determining the original forms of such words. Mon. YA 1 ya: 'bow' (weapon); s.i.a.m.l.g. w. some aberrant forms; NE ya, ça, çağ (Khak. ca:cax/oxca:): SE ya: NC Kir. ca:, Kzx. jak: SC Uzb. yoy: NW Kk. jay; Kaz. ceya; Kumyk jaya; Nog. yay : SW Az., Osm. yay; "Vkm. ya:y. Uyğ. viri ff. Man.-A Man.-uig. Frag. 401, 7 (kur-): Man. TT IX 79 (2 kiriş): Bud. U 1JI ss, 4 etc. (kur-): Civ. TT I 162 (at-): Xak. xı ya: al-qatws 'bow' Kaş. HI 215) 0.0. I 360 (bağır), etc. (about ao): KB ya “the constellation Sagittarius! 140; ya “the bow' (erooked, as opposcd to thearrow, straight) 371, a.0. 65 (kur-): xııı(?) Ar. 462 (kur-); Tef. ya/ yay 'bow; bow-shot' 130-5: xiv Mu. al-qaws ya: Mel. 5, 7; 11, 2; Rif. 75, 84; ditto ya:y 11, 7i 17, 4; 23, 11 (Kur-); 71, 6; 79, 6 ("Sagittarius); 85, 95, 105, 173, 183: Çağ. xv ff. ya(1) kamárn 'bow', also called yay San. 324v. 25 (quotn.); reverse entry 340v. 25: Xwar. xrmi(?) ya 'bow', common in Oj.: xiv ditto Qut 63; MN 272, etc.: Kom. xiv ditto CCI, CCG; Gr. 109 (quotns.): Kip. xii a/-qaws ya: Hou. 13, 16; 24, 7: XIV. ditto İd. gö: xv al-qaws ya:y Kav. 64, 1; Tuh. 29b. 1: Osm. xiv to xvi (only) ya 'bow' TTS I 762; 1I 971; III 746; IV 821. 2 ya: an Exclamation or Interjection; ya means “OT” in Ar. and “or” in Pe. ; both meanings occur in modern Turkish languages; the second, noted as early as Xak. x1 K B 912, is certainly a 1.-vv. the first is noted early enough to show that it is not merely an Ar. l.-w., though it may now have .converged vv. that word. Kag.'s first meaning is Hap. leg. Uy£. viu ff. Chr. ya amti amrak oğlanlarım 'now, O my kindly children” U 7 s, 3: Xak. xi ya: ğar/ inkar ka'l-awwal “an exclamation signifying dissent," like  the preceding (word, wa: q.v.) Kaş. III 215; ya:h an Exclamation (harf) meaning 'yes' (na'am); this is the answer to one who says at tut “hold the horse'; the respondent answers ya:h “yes” 777 118 (followed by a long para. regarding the status of h in Turkish, the gist of which is that it is not a "Turkish sound and that in Mon.s like this it is merely an orthographical device, and in words like ü:hi: “ovvl” a Sec. f. of -£-); see also yamu:: xii(?) At. ya dóst 'O friend' 82 (and occurrences of yà "or”): (Çağ. xv ff. ya... (2) a word used for “or” (dar maqàám-i tardid), and shared with Pe. San. 324v. 27: Kip. xv immd 'or! is represented by ya, one says ya munu alır sen (sic) ya munu “are you taking this or that?'; ya is an Ar. (sic) word used by the Turks Tuh. 81b. 2. S yı See r, Xak. S yi: See yigi:, Xak. 1 yu: Exclamation; Atalay says the word survives vv, this meaning in SW xx Anat., but SDD 1548 mentions it only as meaning “Hil”, Xak. xı yu: an Exclamation (arf) used by a woman when sbe is ashamed of something ('inda'l-istihya" mina”l-şay)) Kaş. III 215. PU?F 2 yu: seems to occur (other explanations based on the assumption that the Suff. is -1 not - SI are possible) in two phr. in Uyğ. vı ff. Civ. yusın sipürgil H / 153 and (PU) tınbar yusi do. 163; a meaning 'juice' would suit the context, “suck out the juice' and “the juice of tinbar'. 1f so prob. a Chinese 1.-vv. Mon. V. YA*ya:- See 3 yak-, yal-, 1 yan-, yaru:-. - (?d-) 'to eat', with several metaph. and extended meanings. C.i.a.p.a.l. vv. phonetic changes. "The form of yemiş “fruit”, q.v., as a l-w. in Hungarian suggests that the initial was originally d-, but the resemblance to Mong. ide- “to eat” is prob. fortuitous. Türkü vi keyik yéyü: (sic) tavisBan yeyü: (sic) 'eating gazelles and hares' T'8: vir ff. yaş yépen “eating grass' JrkB 17; o.o. do. 3 (sev-), 37, 46: Man. yédimiz erser 'if we have misappropriated' Chuas. 113 (urunçak): Uyğ. virt ff. Man.-A neçeke tegi beş tepri kücin yémeser “to the extent that they fail to participate in the strength of the five gods' M 7 16, 16-18; [gap) yédiler ólürdiler “they ate and killed' do. 20, 10: Bud. yédimiz yupladımız erser “if we have devoured and used” (the food, drink, arıd other goods of religious communities) TT IV 6, 38; yép yuplap (our ancestral property) UTİ 81, 14; ,nomlu&amp; tayakığ aşağuda yegüde (sic) 'in partaking (Hend.) of the support of the true doctrine' 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 914 
     
   
   
     870 TT V 24, 52-3; o.o. U İT 32, 56; III 63, 2 etc.: Civ. [gap] yémis (so spelt) ke:re:k 'he must eat' TT VIII Tao, o.o. H I 63, etc.: Xak. xı er aş yö:di: “the man cat (akala) the food” (etc.) Kaş. III 67 (yer, yé:me:k); ol aş ye:di: "he ate the food" (etc.); in Yapa:ku:, beg kişi:ni: yé:di: “the beg destroyed (ağ/aka) the man's property and despoiled it” (atlafahu) Ill 249 (y€:r, yö:me:k), over 20 0.0. usually translated. akala: KB yé- is common both in a lit. and a metaph. sense, e.g. başınnı yéyür 'it will eat your head' 164; (how many good men) yédi bu cihàn 'has this world devoured' 279; yer sakınç “he will suffer anxicty' 913; berge yer “he will get a beating' 2296; 0.0. 724, 966, 3522 (evin), etc. : xin(?) At. yé- (some MSS. occasionally ye-) is common, usually lit., e.g. basal yep 'eating onions' 162; also metaph., e.g. biligsizlik icre kan1 xayr yedi “vhere could one enjoy good fortune in the midst of ignorance?' 122; Tef. yé- “to cat” 149: XIV. Muh. akala yé:- Mel. ie 18; 16, 16; 23, 5; Rif. 91, 94, 104; al-akl yé:mek 34, 7; i19: Çağ. xv ff. yé-(-p, etc.) ye- Vel. 413 (quotn.); y€- x«uüurdan "to eat' (also metaph.) San. 352v. 23 (quotns.): Xwar. xim ye- "to cat” "Ali 29, ctc.: xii(?) yé- ditto Og. 23, etc.: Niv. yé- "to eat! Qu7) 77; “to enjoy! MN 66: Kom. xiv “to cat” ye- CCG; Gr. (CCI] asa-): Kip. xti akala ye:- (Jaga:-) Hou. 43, 9: XIV ye: kul, Perf. yedi: akala İd. 9o; akala yeBul. 21y.: NV ditto ye:- Kan. 8, 16; al-akl yemek (also as a N. for “food”, a/-ma”kül) do. 62, 16; akala ye- Tuh. sa. 11; over 10 0.0, occasionally yé-. *yo:- Sce yo:d-, yo:k, yoza:-. yu:- “to wash (something Zcc.)'; s.i.a.m.l.g. vv. many phonetic changes, not only in the initial but also by adding consonants, e.g. NE Khak., 'Tuv. çuğ-: SC Uzb.: NW Nog.: SW Tkm. yuv-: NW Kk, Kumyk juv-. Uy£. vii ff. Civ. burunni arığ yup "washing the nose clean' H 7 132; a.o. H II zo, 6 (atiti:)): Xak. Ni er to:n yu:di: “the man washed (ğasa/a) the garment! (etc.) Kaş. III 66 (yu:r, yumma:k; prov.); ol to:zn yü:di: "he washed the garment” 777 249 (yu:r, yuma:k): KB cándin elğin yudu “he washed his hands of lifc” 1115; a.o. 2108 (arr-): wxin(?) 42. cahil yup arımaz “the fool, when he washes, does not become clean' 112; o.o. 230 (kl:r), etc.; Tef. yuv- (sic) “to wash' 163: xiv Mu, ğasala yu:Mel. 29, 9; 40, 19; Rif. 113, 130; al-£asl yu:mak 35, 4; 120: Çağ. xv ff, yu- (- Ban, -p, etc.) bir nesneyi su ile yu- “to wash something with water' Vel. 419(quotns.); yu- (with -u-") şüstan "to vvash” San. 347r. 13 (quotns.): Xwar. xin yu(w)- ditto “A/ 3o: xiv yuQutb 84; MN 244, etc.; yuv- Qutb 87; Nahc. 331, 6: Kom. xiv ditto. yu-/yuw- CCI, CCG; Gr. 128 (quotn): Kip. xir ğasala yu:- (-gil in error) Hou. 34, 15; 37, t: XIV yu: ağsıl: Perf. yudi:, and in the Kitáb. Beylik yuydi: Hh. go, yuy- ğasala do. 100; ğasala yuw- Bul. 66r.: xv ğasala yuw-(?) Kav. to, 4; yu:-(?) do. 75, 2; yu- Tuh. 27a. 3: Osm. xiv ff. yu- "to wash', common till xvr, sporadic MON. V. YAthercafter T TS 7 847; HI 1074; İİİ 826; IV 904 (now usually yiKa-, sec yayka:-). *yü:- See yü:d-, yük. Mon. YB PU ya:b yo:b Tlap, leg.; see yobt:la:-, Xak. x1 ya:b yo:b a/-mahr wa'l-xadi'a 'trick, deccit, fraud'; yo:b cannot be used bv itself, but only in Hend. (vuzdatcac); hence. the Oğuz say ol ant: yo:bla:di: (sic) xada"ahu Kaş, HI 142; ya:b yo:b al-xilába qca"l-xida" whecdling, deceit'; one says ya:b yo:b kildi: xada'a na xalaba III 159; a.o. III 328 (yobi:la:-). 1 yap/yep Reduplicative Intensifying Prefix, cf. 1 ap/ep, used before words beginning w. y-;s.is.m.l. "Vhere is no other trace of such a word meaning 'round' and Kaş. seems to have misunderstood its usage. Xak. xı yap “round, circular" (a/-mudarvtcar) of anything; hence one says yap yarma:k yo:k “İ have no round dirhems', that is perfect (ie. unclipped, şahih) ones Kaş. III 3: KB (the enemy's rosy cheeks) bolur yap yaşıl 'become bright green” 238s: Çağ. xv ff. yap ("vith -p) a Redüplicative Prefix (závid) which is placed before certain other words to intensify their meaning, c.g. yap yasil 'bright grecn', yap yası “absolutely flat! San. 325v. 19. 2 yap (Cd-) Hap. leg; svn. w. yapğut, yapa:ku: which arc der. fr. yap-, and homophonous vv, that V. Xak. xı yap a/-qarda “matted wool; hence one says yu yap “clean and matted wool! Kaş. III 3. yıp 'cord, thread, string”, and the like, athinner article than that described by 1 uruk, ba:ğ, etc. "Phe vowel was originally -1- but became -i- fairly carly (in late Uyğ., sce yipke:) and is now -i- everwhere,. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv, the usual phonetic changes; 8C Uzb.: SW Az., Osm. ip; Tkm. yüp. Uy£. vii ff, Bud. PP 41, 2-3 (egir-): Civ. yip birle yórgep 'wrapping it round with thread" 77 1 150: Xak, xi ytp a/-ğazl 'spun thrcad”, yıp: “the long cord (a/-fateila) with. which a horse is fastened up'; and 'cord' (a/-Babl) is also called yip Ka. 7/7 3; over 30 o.o., including yıpığ, yıpıuğ, usually translated ai-faz! or al-habl: KB yinçge yıp “a thin thread” 748: xui(?) Tef. VU yip r54: xiv Muh.(?) xaytı”l-ibra 'sewing thread' yip (MS. yif) Rif. 159 (Mel. 6o, 12 i:plik), a/Z-habl yip (-b) 169 (only): Çağ. xv ff. ylp ip Vel. 416 (quotn.): yip (^with -p”) rismán 'cord' San. 347v. 29: Xwar. xri İp, occasionally yip “cord, string” "A/) 49: xiv yip ditto Qutb 79; Nahc. 17, 11; 214, 7: Kom. xiv “thread, cord' ip CCT, Gr. 107 (quotns.): Tkm. xiv ip al-habl ; Kip. ylp İd. 7: xv al-hablip . . . al-xayt yip Kav. 64, 8-9; habl yip Tuh. 13a. 1; xayt ylp rab. 3. VU yo:b See ya:b. Mon. V. YByap- (?d-) this V. and its der, f.s have a wide range of meanings, "to build (c.g. a wall); to 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 915 
     
   
   
     DIS shut (a: door); to cover (things); to stick (things) together' the basic connotation of which scems to be “to put (things) together'. "There are some indications, see yapa:ku, and Mong. dabgi “cover”, dabgur “doubled” (Haenisch 30), that the initial may óriginally have been d-, but this is üncertain. S.i.a.m.].g. vv. the usual phonetic changes, the prevailing meanings are “to cover, shut, shut up” in NE, SE, NC, and SW 'Tkm.; ditto, and “to build, complete' in SC, NW; 'to make, construct, do, arrange”, etc. in SW Az., Osm. Türkü vırı ff. IrkB 28 (1 ordu:): Uyğ. viti ff. Man.-A (first of al) yapdilar yaratdilar 'they created (Hend.)” (the tenfold heavens) M I 14, 8 (in subsequent parallel sentences yarat-, and once ét- yarat- are used); Civ. yap- 'to cover' H II 26, 110: Xak. xı er kapuğ yaptt: (MS. yağıttı:) “the man slammed (şa/aqa) the door”: and one says er to:r yaptı: (ditto) “the man threw down (alqd) the net over the birds” (etc.); and işle:r ótme:k yaptı: (ditto) “the woman fixed (or stuck, a/sagat) the bread in the oven'; and er ta:m yaptı: (ditto) "the man built (bana) a wall! Kaş. İTİ s? (yapa:r, yapma:k), yuvka: yapa:r taxbiz ruqaq *makes thin loaves! II 33, 26; 0.0. 7 348 (2 kars): 7 374 (sıdığ): 771 208, 23 (?; corrupt): KB yaparsen kapuğ “you slam the door' 719; 0.0. 1303, 6152: xin(?) Tef. yap- “to construct, build' (e.g. a wall) 141: xiv Muh. (?) al-tağtiya "to cover" yapmak Rif. 119 (only): Çağ. xv ff. yap- (“vith -p-”) both Intrans. and Trans. büşidan tva büşünidan (the grammatical analysis is directed towards the Pe. V.s, the second a Caus. f. of the first but both Trans.) “to put on; to cover; to hide, conceal” and “to clothe, to cover, to conceal'; and zın ba-tannür gaspándan “to fix bread in the oven' is also yap- San. 324v. 28: Xwar. XIV yap- “to shut (e.g. a door); to cover” Quib 63 (vab-); "to build' do. 68 (yağ-): Kom. XIV yap- “to cover, to shut! CCI; “to make” (in phr.) CCG, Gr. 113 (quotn.): Kip. xır xabaza "to make bread' ya:p- which also mcans ğalaqa”l-büb "to shut (a door)” and bana Hou. 34, 3; 0.0. 34, 1o (ğalaqa), 37, 4 (band): xiv yap- gatjà (“to cover”) ma band, and in the Kitab Beylik ağlaqa İd. go, ğallaqa yap- (-tı:) Bul. 64v.: xv yap- ğafta Kav. 9, 3, Tuh. 27a. 12 (also órüt-); bana yap- (with -a-") 75, ır (also Zattà); 8b. 2; satara ('to conceal') wa ğattü yap- 20a. 12; a.o. 27a. 2: Osm. xiv to xv1 (only) yap- for “to shut (a door)'; common TTS I 782, II 997; III 767; IV 841. *yav- See yavğa:n, yavrı:-, yaviz. yıv- etc. Preliminary note. There seem to be several V.s of the form y.v-, but all are excessively rare and the only ones of which the vorvel is reasonably certain are *ylv- and 1 yuv-. If any have survived they have become unrecognizable owing to phorietic changes. . VU yiv- n.oa.b. in the Hend. öğ- yiv-; presumably “to praise” or the like. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud: élig begig ögüp yıvıp 'praising . YBA' (8p (Hend.?) the king” U III 46, 1:3; tepri burxanığ óge ytva 'praising (Hend.?) the divine Buddha' TT X 146-7. i *yiv- See ylvit-, yiviğ, yivil-. VU 1 yov- n.o.a.b. in the Hend. ar- yov(2 a:r-), presumably “to cheat, defraud”, and the like. Cf. ya:b yo:b. Uyğ. vii ff. Man.-A ara yova buşı alırlar “they obtain alms by fraud (Hend.)" M HI 29, $ (ii): Bud. arip yovup 'cheating and defrauding' (customers with false weights, etc.) U II 77, 26 (mistranscribed); o.o. in same context do. 86, 43 (ditto); TT V ro, s: Xak. xı (after 2 yov-) and one says ol anı: ardı: yovdi: “he cheated and defrauded him” (xada'ahu wa xatalahu) Kaş. III 62 (followed by 3 yov-; for translation cf. ya:b yo:b). : VU 2 yov- Hap. leg. Xak. xı egye:k yovdi: "the donkey ran at top speed” ("add . . . aşadd 'adwihi) Kaş. III 62 (followed by 1 yov-). VU 3 yov- pec. to Kaş., the quality of the vowels is uncertain; it follows 1 yov-, which in Uyğ. had back vowels, and the Infin. of this V., yovsa:-, and yovuş- are in -ma:k, but its Imperat. is given as yóvgil (sic) and yóvtür- and yóvüslüg have front vowels. Xak. xi (after 1 yov-) and one says er kada:şın kurdi: yovdi: “the man made contact with (wagala) his neighbour, and shared his wealth with him and overwhelmed him with kindness” (zodsdhu bi-màál sva xawwalahu nima) Kaş. III 62 (yova:r, yovma:k); yövgil III 172, ız (2 ula:ğ). 1 yuv- n.o.a.b., but see yuvtur-, yuvul-, clearly the basis of SW Az., Osm. yuvarla"to roll, rotate”, and other cognate words. Cf. yumğa:k. Xak.xı er tobik yuvdi: “the man rolled (dahraca) the ball” (etc.) Kaş. III 61 (yuva:r, yuvma:k; verse); alpla:r başın ol yuwa:r (sic) “he rolls (yudahric) the warriors' heads like balls! 777 393, 16; o.o. III 112, ro, 113, 4 (in a grammatical section); Osm. xiv yuvdular eski daftarı “they have rolled up the old scroll TTS T7 1079. S 2 yuv- See yu:-. Dis. YBA yava: Preliminary note. Im addition to the two words listed belo,w, Kaş. listed before them Yava: an Oğuz tribe, also called Yawa: and Avaz, this is the twell-known tribal name usually spelt Yıva:, in the list of Oğuz tribes in I 56 it is sbelt 1va:[y1va:. Another word spelt yava meaning “foolishness, cárélessness; foolish, careless”, and the like is very common in Xak. XI: KB 323, 339 (birtem), 359, 360-2, 987, etc.; it is obviously a l.-tw. fr. Pe. yàwa "absurd, foolish, vain, futile, idle'. It also appears in XIV Muh. (?) al-xalt 'foolish' yava: (MS. yafa) Rif. 19r (only). : 5 1 yava: a plant; the most precise translation of al-turtüt is in Red. 1236 “a species of fungus, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 916 
     
   
   
     DIS 2 phallus or orobanche(5) , this is prob. the original meaning, but it seems to survive in NW Kk, Kaz., Nog. yuva/yuwa "wild onion': SW "Tkm. yuva “a spring plant with a rather bitter taste". Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. TT V 28, 122-3 (çiğdem): Xak. xı yava: (MS. yafa:) al-turtüt Kag. III 24; yawa: al-turtüt, *a plant the juice of which is uscd to colour (yusbag) noodles; alternative form under -v(al-fa'wl-rakika) TİT 26; included in list of words with alternative -v-/-w- 1 84, 1: Kom. xiv. "wild onion'(?)) yowa CCG; Gr.: Kip. xin al-bagal! 'onion' ya:wa: (also so:fa:n which is better known (al-aghar)) fou. 8, 15: XIV yu: (so spelt, in section vv. ya:, yé:-, and yu:-) al-başal İd. go: xv harrát "leek' yawa: Tuh. 31a. 6. 2 yava: n.o.a.b.; perhaps homophonous vv. yava:-, with which there is some semantic connection. Xak. xı yava: (MS. yafa:) yéir al-marvedi"u” l-dafi mina'l-bard "a warm place (sheltered) from the cold” Kaş. 777 24; yawa: alternative form for the phr. yava: yémr "a warm place”, I have already explained that -W- alternates w. -v- 777 27. F 3 yava Sec Preliminary note. VU yebe: Hap. leg.; apparently cognate fo a modern V. yibi- (/ibi-/fcibi-) "to be moist, with various der. f.s, of which the earliest trace seems to be in Çağ, xv ff. ibin- xisidan “to moisten'; ibit- Caus. f., xisanidan "to cause to moisten', Sam, 93r. s, and so prob. to be transcribed yebe: rather than yaba:, Oğuz xt yebe: a/-rafb sca”İ-nadd 'molst, moisture! of anything Kaş. HI 24. S yapı: See yapığ. S yuva: Scc 1 uya:. Dis. V. YBA*yvava:- Sec yaval-, yavaş, yuba:- Hap. leg, but see yubat-, yuban-. "Uhe status of the entry in. Rif.'s MS. of Mul, not part of the original text, is obscure. Not to he confused w. NE coba-/coba-/yoba-: NC Kir, jobo- "to suffer, be in pain, be troubled", which is a L-w. fr. Mong. cobo- (Haeniseh 91; Kotw. 2378). Xak. xı er işığ yuba:di: “the man neglected the matter and did not follow it up” (ağfala . . . ava lam yubrimhu) Kag. III 86 (yuba:r, yuba:ma:k); yuba:ğu: r:$ "a matter which ought (a//agi haqquhu an) to be neglected and not followed up” Z/7 36; xiv. Muh.(?) matala tca dafa'a “to stretch out and put ofP'(?) yu:ba:y- Rif. i15 (Mel. 31, 7 matala tart-): (Kom. xiv yobap 'scarcely, with difficulty" CCG; Gr. is the Mong. V.). Dis. YBC yabça:n/yavça:n (?yavsa:n) wormwood, Artemisia'; perhaps a l-w. Survives in NE Tuv. caspan: NC Kzx. jusan: SC Uzb. yovşon: NW Kk. juwsan; Kumyk yuvsan; Nog. yuvsan: SW Az. yovsan; Osm. yavsan; . YBA "kis yavşam. Xak. xr yahçamn o/-yib 'wormwood'; yavça:n alternative form; the substitution of -v- for -D- is in accordance with the rule Kaş, 11I 37: Çağ. xv ff. yawsan (spelt) dirmana-1. fürhi wormwood', in. Ar. sili (quotn. and note on the way in which it is used) San. 340r. 21; 3.0. 259v. 22 under Şibak syn. Mong. L-w.: Kip. xii al-ş/lr yawsa:n Hou. o, 4: xv ditto Tui. 21a. 3: Osm. xiv ff. yavsan 'wormiwood'; c.i.a.p. T'T'S 1 799; II 1016; and see yıparr, Dis. V. YBCS yanpçın-/yavçın- Sec yapsin-. S yapçur- Sec yapsur-. Dis. YBD E yaptaç See yapğuç. Dis. V. YBDD yapıt- (?d-) Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of yap-, cf. yaptur-, yapur-. Uyğ. viu ançıp(?)lkö)çgen Soğldlak Tavğaçka: Selepede: Bay balık yapıtı: bertim "so I had Bay Balrk built on the Selenga for travelling Sogdians and Chinese” Su. W &amp; (first three words much damaged, rest clear). S yavut- Sec yağut-. D yivit- Caus. f. of * yiv-; pec. to Uy£. Bud., and used only in the phr. yivig yivit- “to supply equipment'.. Uyğ. viti ff. Bud. (completing tasks which are difficult to perform) iki törlüğ yiviglerin eğsüksüz yivitip (MS. ?yivetip) 'equipping (yourselves) completely with the two kinds of equipment Suv. 429, 6-7; a.o. TT V, 35, 5. D yubat- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of yuba:-; Kag.s etymology is unconvincing. '"l'here does not scem to be any connection between this V. and one meaning 'to comfort, console (esp. a child, NC Kir. Jubat-; Kzx. juwat-: SC xix. Uzb. cuwat-. lam. 279: NW Kar. L. yubat-/yuvat-/yuvut- Kow. 205-6; Kk. jubat-; Kumyk yibat-; Nog. yubat-, which is $yn. vv, avit- and might perhaps be a corruption of it. Xak. xı ol r:şığ yubattt: "he had the affair neglected (ağfa/a) and urged others to neglect it” ('a/à iğ/alihi), its origin is “deceit” (al-xadá') ; the Oğuz say ol ani: yobt:la:di: xada'ahu Kaş. IH] 3:15 (yubatu:r, yubatma:k). D yaptur- (?d-) Caus. f. of yap- ; s.i.a.m.l.g. w. the usual phonetic changes; cf. yapit-, yapur-. Xak. x: ol anar kapuğ yapturdi: "he ordered him to shut and slam (bi-radd . tea şafqihi) the door'; and one says ol apar ta:m yapturdi: “he commissioned him to build (kallafahu sbi-bind”) a wall'; and ol apar etme:k yapturdu: “he made him bake (axbazalhu) bread” Kaş, III 93 (yapturur, yapturma:k): xii(?) Tef. yaptur- “to order to build” (a wall) r42: xiv Mu. radda'l-bab “to shut a door' (sic) kapi: yapdur- Mel. 26,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 917 
     
   
   
     DIS. 9; kapuğ yapdur- (MS. yandur-) Rif. 109: Osm. xvi yapdur- “to order to shut” (the city gates); in one text 7 7. 7V 842. D yuvtur- Hap. leg., Caus. f. of 1 yuv-. Xak. xı ol tobik yuvturdi: “he urged him to roll (an dahraca) the ball” Kaş. 7Tİ 96 (yuvturur, yuvturma:k). VUD yövtür- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of 3 yov-, this entry comes betvvcen yığtur- and yuvtur- and the spelling is chaotic. Xak. xı ol kada:şına: ne:p yövtürdi: (MS. yigturdi:) “he urged him to share his property (bi'I-muásádt) with his neighbour or kinsman' (awi'l-axihr) Kaş. III 96 (yövtürür, yóvtürme:k; MS. y.ftürür, y.ğt.rme:h). Tris. YBD yabrtak of a horse, “bare-backed, not saddled'. Survives in several NE languages as yabidak/cabidak/cawdak; Khak. cabdak; "Puv. çavıdak. No obvious etymology, perhaps a l-w. Xak. xi yabı:tak at “a horse which has neither a saddle nor a saddlecloth on it”, hence one says ol atığ yabı:tak mündi: a'rawrá'l-faras “he rode the horse bare-backed' Kaş. 7/7] 48; er atın yabı:tak mündi: "the man rode his horse bare-backed (mi'rawriya(n) without a saddle or felt on it” II 177; both main cntrics. Dis. YBG D yapığ (?d-) Dev. N. fr. yap-; with a wide range of meanings; s.i.s.m.l., e. g SVV yapı Osm. “building, edifice'; 'Tkm. “cover, lid”, 'The cognate form yapuk w. Suff. -uk (Pass.), not noted in early texts, also survives, e.g. SW "Fkm. yapık 'covered'.. Uy. vrirff. Bud. yapığ as a Bud. technical term means “attachment" (to this world, etc.); five good and five bad 'attachments' are mentioned in Suv. 704, 13 fF, see TT VI, p. 67, o f.; bes yapağ (Uyi.-A form) etüzüm yerke yapışıp "the five attachments which attach. my body to the carth” U 171 37, 33-4: Clgil xi yapı: a/-mitara 'horsc-blanket' Kaş. 111 24: Xak.(?) xiv Muh. al-gàgiya “saddle-housing” eyer ya:pujgi: Mel. 71, 12 (Rif. 173 al-gágrya and yağırlık, v,, have both fallen out of the MS. and this phr. translates the Ar. meaning of the latter); al-cull “horse-blanket” (at?) ya:pugr: 71, 14; 174; al-bind” "a building” ya:puğ (-5-) 75, t3; 178: Çağ. xvff. yapuğ/yapuk (1) büşida “covered, hidden” (quotns.), (2) büşişf 'a covering” over anything in general (quotns.) and “a woman's veil' (niqáb sca burqu') in particular (quotns.) Sam. 326r. 7 (and see yapa:ku:): Kom. xiv *horse-blanket, saddle-cover” yaboğ CCI; Gr. 109 (quotn.): Osm. xvı ff. yapuk (xvii yapık) 'saddle-cover' TTS 7 781; IV 842: xvi yapu in Rümi, bind" wa asás-i "fmarat * a building, the foundation of a structure' San. 326r. 6. D yuvuğ Dev. N. fr. yuv-; pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı yuvuğ (MS. yavuğ 2) “boulders of rock” (culmüd şaxr) which a torrent carries down YBĞ . 873 from its upper reaches; also used when a man or a bear walks on the top of a mountain and boulders (displaced) by their walking roll down (yatadahrac) and fall to the bottom of the valley Kaş. //I 13; yuwuf alternative form (/uğa) of yuvuğ 'boulders which a torrent rolls down' (yudahric) ITİ 164. PUF yabğu: a title of great antiquity, certainly going back to the Yüeh-chih, that is before the Christian Era, which has frequently bcen discussed by historians of Central Asia (for some refces. see Caf., p. 226). In the 'Türkü period it was, like sad, q.v., a title conferred by the xagan on close relatives and normally carried with it the duty of administering part of the xağar”s dominions. Although the yabğu: is sometimes mentioned before the Sad he prob. ranked below rather than above him. After the Türkü period the title seems to have lost some importance and Kaş. describes it as two ranks below the xağarı, that is below the yuğruş 'vizier', q.v.; by this time the title sad had disappeared. The word is spelt yavğu: in Xak., the pronunciation in "Türkü is uncertain owing to the ambiguity of the Runic alphabet, but as it is spelt lapgu (in the Hephthalite version of the Greek alphabet) on a coin attributed by Ghirshman to a Western "Fürkü ruler of the mid-seventh Century (see H. Ghirshman, Les Chionites-Hephtalites, Cairo, Institut francais d'Archéologie orientale, 1948, p. 50) it was prob. yabğu:. It survived as the title of the supreme ruler of the Oğuz of the Aral Sea area until the tenth century, but most references to it are in non'Turkish (Chinese, Ar., Pe., etc.) texts. 'The "Turkish refces. are assembled below. Türkü vir (at the beginning of his reign Elteris Xağan organized his realm and inter alia) yabğu:ğ şadığ anta: bermiş “then appointed the yabğu: and the şad” 1 E 14, I7 E 12; El etmiş Yabğu: oğlu RA Işvara: Tamfan Çor. Yabğu: inl:si: “son of El-etmiş Yabğu: and younger brother of Igvara: Tamğan Çor Yabğu:” Ongrn 4; o.o. II E 28 (sad); T 41-2: Uyğ. viii [gap] Tay Bilge: Totokığ yabğu: ata:dı: “he nominated Tay Dilge: "Totok as yabğu?” Su. N 11-12; a.o. do. E 7 (şad): xiv in the long mid-xtv petition USp. zə (better text in R. Arat, Uygurca Yazılar Arasında, İstanbul, r937) line 12 (zo) (in the reign of Kibek (?) Xan) Yabğu Beg kalan kesip 'when Yabğu (so spelt) Beg assessed the land tax”: Xak. xı yavğu: /aqab man hdna ba'da'l-xaqan bi-daracatayn miüna”l-süqa “the title of a subject who is two ranks below the xdqdn” Kaş. İH 32 (followed by Yavğu: the name of a town neat Barsgàn, and a pass near it is called Yavğu: Art): KB (in a passage about the high ranks which people can receive) kayu yavğu yuğruş bolur éI begi “some become yavgu, or yuğruş ('vizier'), or él begi (headman of a province'(?)) 4069; a.o. 5523 (bóke:). yuvğa:, yuvka: Preliminary note. Kaş. distinguishes between these two vvords, placing the first under the cross-heading Ğ and the second 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 918 
     
   
   
     874 under the cross-heading K, but in other passages the second is spelt yuvğa:. yuvğa: n.o.a.b.; al-da'i mcans both "bastard” and 'adopted son", but the meanings of yuvğad-, yuvğalan- suggest that the first is intended here. Xak. xı yuvğa: (MS. vufga:) al-da"i Kaş. HİT 33: KB bayusa baş eğmez bodun yuvğası 'base-born people, when they grow rich, cease to be respectful” 5523. yuvka: 'slender, insubstantial', and the like; al-dagiq and al-raqiq, both used to translate this word, are practically syn., and hard to distinguish in some places. S.i.a.m.l.g., in SE Türki jupka: SC Uzb. yupka: SW Az. yuxa, Osm. yufka; Tkm. yu:ka, elsewhere yuka/yukka/yuğa/çuka/çuğa and the like. Türkü vri yuyka: 'thin T r3 (uguz; the word is quite clear on the stone, but y and v are much alike in Runic script and this is almost certainly a mason's error for yuvka:): Uy£. viii ff. Bud. (of a gift, deprecatingly) az yuka (?sic) 'scanty and meagre' Hüen-ts. 2029: Civ. yuka (?s?c) kadız “hin cinnamon bark” H TI roy: Xak. xi yuvka: 'thin' (a/-daqiq) of anything; in a prov. yuvka: yapa:r taxbiz rugáq 'bakes thin loaves'; yupka: alternative form (/uga) for the -v-, the -preplacing it as in Ar. usruf/usrub; agtalla] maştafa, (Pe.) pánid, when arabicized, becomes fánid Kaş. IIl 33; o.o. of yuvka: (MS. ?yufka:) II 350 (kalna:d-); 711 204, 12 (yuvkalan-); 3o2 (kalnu:-); o.o. of yuv£a:; yuvğa: yağı: "the straggling (al-nákib) enemy” H 6, 3: 294, 25 (yomğuı:), HI 8o, 21 (suvla:-), yuvka: bolup ka:l "stay in a state of madness” (al-cuntin) 156, 13: (under the heading faw'al) yuwfa: al-xubzu'l-mugdaddan — 'puff pastry! HI 27; o.o. 1 433 (katma:); //İ 25 (yala:, speIt yuga:); 35 (yala:çış): 34 (yarma:): KB 4610 (sıriıçğa:): Çağ. xvíff. yupğa (spelt) názik va ragtg 'thin, slender' San. 341r. (quotn.); yuka shorter form of yupğa názik, and metaph. “a kind of thin loaf' (nàn-i tangi) which they make very thin and bake on a girdle 344r. r: Kom. xiv “thin" yoğa CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiu al-ruqüq yupka: (-5-) etmek Hou. 16, 2; al-sandalat yupka: (-5-) cuz that is 'thin satin” (atlas raqiq) 19, 7; 8.0. 27, 19: xv xafif "light, insubstantial” (yenil/) yuka Tuh. 14a. 7: Osm. xiv yuxa “thin” (cloud); in one text 7 7S II 1073. D yapğuç (?d-) N.I. fr. yap- ; “lid, cover”, and the like; survives in NE Khak. çapxıs: NW Kk. japkis; Kaz. yapkıç, Nog. yapkis. Cf. kapak, kapğak. Xak. xi yapğuç (yağzaç in the printed text is an error) “a small felt hood (lubáda) which shepherds wear in the rain'; yapğuç “a slender stick (a/-qadib) used for driving donkeys, etc.” Kaş, 111 38 (the second meaning is hard to connect semantically): Kom. xiv “cover, lid” yapkıç CCI; Gr.. D yapğut (?d-) Hap. leg.; Dev. N. fr. yap-; more or less syn. vv. 2 yap, yapa:ku:, Xak. x1 yapğut a/-haşiya wa'l-qarda “a stuffing or matted mass of hair or wool Kaş. 171 38.” DIS. YBĞ D yapğa:k (?d-) Dev. N. (connoting repeated action) fr. yap-; prob. Hap. leg.; SW Osm. yapak 'wool in the fleece! is prob. a shorter form of yapa:ku:, not a later form of this word. Xak. xı yapğa:k “a kind of trap (or net, al-fuxüx) for catching birds! Kaş. 7I 42. D yavéÉa:n Dev. N./A. (connoting repeated action) fr. *yav-; survives in SVV Az., Osm. yavan “plain, dry (food) without fat or oil”, "Fhe meaning in Uyg. is less obvious, it generally relates to mental processes and seems to mean “coarse, unsympathctic', or the like. Uyğ. viu the phr. İriğ yavğan qualifying kópül or kópülliig occurs several times alternating vv. iri&amp; sarsığ, sce sarsığ, e.g. (the Buddha has made good and mild) iriğ yavğan köpüllüğ yek içğekninp könülin “the minds of the harsh and: coarse-minded demons (Hend.)! TT X 13-14; o.o. do. 269, 278; TM TV 254, 89-90; U III 17, 11-13 (taya:ğu:)— yavğan turma offerings of plain food” Suv. 26, 19 (1 turma:): Xak. xı yavia:n aş “food (al-ta'àm) which contains no meat (lam) Kaş. İTİ 37: Çağ. xv ff. yawfan uvulmg ve yincelenmig “pounded and crushed' in the sense of yavan yemeh Vel. 409 (quotn.); yawBan (spelt) ma'hül-: xaliş bi adam 'simple food without seasonings' San. 340r. 24 (same quotn.) Dis. V. YBGD yuvğa:d- İlap, leg.; Intrans. Den. V. fr. yuvğa:, MS. vuffad-. Xak. xi ofla: yuvğattı: "the boy was shameless and illmannered” (macuna . . . «ca "aruma), originally yuvğa:dtı: but assimilated Kaş, 1] 354 (yuvğatu:r, yuvğatma:k). "Tris. YBG D yapa:ku: (d-) morphologically obscure (-ku: is not a recognized Suff.) but obviously connected vr. yap- and 2 yap, vv. which it is more or less syn., and perhaps a Dev. N. fr. *yaps:- a Den. V. fr. the latter. 1t scems originally. to. have. meant 'matted hair, or wool (cf. yapgut) and hence “an animal whose hair has grown long and matted' and, more specifically, *a colt', and “a man whose hair is long and matted”, hence perhaps its use as a tribal name. It became a First Period 1vv, in Mong. as da'aga(») 'two-year-old colt" (Haenisch 30; dağa in Kom. 1570, Haltod 445); the connection vv. Mong. dağahi “a tangle or mass of hair' (Haltod 445; w. Den. V. listed there and in Kom. 1581) is obscure. Itsurvives as yapağı in SW Az. “the spring shcaring of hair or veool” , Osm. (also yapak) 'wool in the fleece'; and as yapagt in 5W 'Tkm.; yabağa/ yabafi/cabagi/jabagt, etc. in most NE, NC, NW languages, for 'colt'! the ages (from 'newly born” to 'two-year-old') varying fr. language to language, see SIcherbak, p. 92. Xak. xi Yapa:ku: "a tribe (ci!) of the Turks”, yapa:ku: “a thick mass (a/-qarda) of wool or hair on the head'; (and) when it has become matted (i/tabada) one says yapa:ku: boldt:; Yapa:kır suvi; the name of a river which 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 919 
     
   
   
       DTS" flows to ("a/a) Özcend” and Fargána from the mountains of Kaşğar Kaş. 711 36 (the Yapa:ku: (hitherto transcribed Yaba:ku:) tribe, and words in its dialect, are mentioned elsewhere in Kaş.): Çağ. xv ff. "yapağ/yapak (with -p-”) Rura-i asb gir-xswára "an unweaned colt' San. 325v. 22: Xwar. xiv yapagu koy 'a sheep with a thick fleece' Qutb 63 (-b-): Kip. xim al-cazza mina”l-şüf "a shearing of vvool” yapa:ğu: (MS. in error 5aya:ğu:) Hou. 15, 5: xv wabar "soft hair” (of the camel, etc.) yapak (-5-) Tuh. 38b. 2—fawliyu'l-xayl "a one-yearold colt' yapağlı (sic, -5-) do. 13a. r: Osm. xvii yapağ/yapak . . . and, in Rümi, pagm-r narm 'soft wool', in Ar. şüf San, 325v. 22. D yapığlığ (?d-) P.N./A. fr. yapığ, s.i.s.m.l. in various forms and meanings. Xak. xı yapığlığ kapuğ “a bolted (muğlaR) door” Kaş. III 49: Kom. xiv 'fitted with a cover” yabovlt CCG; Gr. D yapa:kulak in Kaş. this word in both meanings is described as peculiar to the Yapa:ku: and Yeme:k dialects, which makes it fairly certain that it is a Dev. N./A. fr. a Den. V. fr. Yapa:ku: as a tribal namc, meaning lit. (a disease or bird) 'peculiar to the Yapa:ku: country”. "Vhis would explain why it has two quite diflerent meanings, the first Hap. leg., the second not a generic term for 'owl', which is ügi:, q.v., but the name of some particular kind of owl, not always the same. In the first entry the yü” carries a damma, but this is an obvious error since with this spelling it should have followed the second. Survives meaning 'owl', of no specified kind except where stated, in NE Bar. yapkulak R l/I 267; Koib. yaba:kulak do. 273; 'l'ob. yabalak 277: SE Tar., Türki yapalak 'short-eared owl, Otus brachyatus! Shato 215, etc.: NW Kk., Nog. lapalak, Kaz., Krım, Kumyk yabalak * great owl, Bubo maximus": SW Az. yapalağ, Osm. yapalak 'great ov”. Yapa:ku:, Yeme:k xt yapa:kulak a/-rií'da mina'l-humma “feverish Shivering, aguce'; yapa:kulak al-hàáma rina'l-fayr 'owl' Kaş. TT 56: Çağ. xv ff. yapalak (with -p-”) “a yellow bird with large eves'; the author of the Burhàn-i Qàti' says that in Pe. it is called cagza, arabicized as cagnaq (same meaning) San. 325v. 25 (prob. “great owl): Kom. xiv 'screech-owl' yabalak CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiu ai-büm 'the great owl' yabala:k Hou. 1o, 8: xiv (under “birds”) a/-maşşdşa wa'l- (VU) warag 'screech-owl' ditto (vocalized ytblak) Bul. 12, 2—yabalak 'uryán (this word, der. fr. 'ariya, means 'naked'; if it could be taken as a non-Classical der. f. fr. 'ará (arfma) "to shiver”, it might be linked to Kaş.”s first meaning; but it is ə to be a quite different word or corrupt) İd. 91: xv maşşüşa yablak Tuh. 33b. 7: Osm. xvi Pe. cuğd "ovv” translated bay kus, also called ügü and yapalak, in one dict. 7T'T'S IV 839. Tris. V. YBGD Tyluvğala:- Sec yagid-.  YBG D yuvğalan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. yuvğa:. Xak. xi oğla:n yuvğalandı: “the boy was ill-natured” ('aruma) Kaş. III 203 (yuvğalanu:r, yuvğalanma:k). D yuvkalan- Refl. Den. V. fr. yuvka:, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı ol mapa: yuvkalandı: tamallaqa li toa xada'a "he flattered and tried to soften me' Kaş. III 203 (yuvkalanu:r, yuvkalanma:k), in 7/] 204, 7 er yuvkalandı: "the man flattered” is given as an example of a Refl. Den. V. der. fr. a quadriliteral letter word (a/-ruöd?) in which the fourth letter (the a/if of yuvka:) is elided before attaching the Suff. (in all cases the MS. has -f- for -v-). D yavğanlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. yavğa:n, Xak. xı er aşığ yavğanlandı: “the man reckoned that the food contained no meat (5:-ğayr lahm) and felt starved (şüra gatin) after eating it” denn III 116 (yavganlanu:r, yavğanlanma:k). 875 Dis. YBG D yiviğ Dev. N. (Conc. N.). fr. *yiv-; 'equipment' and the like; generally used in association vv. yivit-. Pec. to Uyğ. vrirff. Bud. and discussed at length in 77 V, p. 34, note B 103, where it is tentatively (but wrongly) transcribed yrvek, and rightly identified as a translation of Sanskrit sambhára, 'supplies' for the body or soul, food, wisdom, etc.” Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (faith) atlığ yolluğ kilmaknip yivigi tétir 'is called the instrument for making (a man) famous and having the (right) way' TT V 26, 103; yiviğin tizigin kemisip *throwing away their equipment and (breaking) their ranks! Suv. 642, 3-4; 0.0. do. 354, 1-3 (buyanlığ), 429, 6—7 (yivit-) etc.: Civ. TT VII 38 is a fragment of a text listing the inauspicious days for various activities; (after a list of days) bular yüvig (?sic) kelmis yaviz künler ol ton bicsar ol ton birlen ök adalar “these are the inauspicious days for the coming of equipment(?); if one cuts out a garment, there are dangers with the garment" lines 8-11; the next section deals with days for titig kılğu “making mud: (for building houses ?). PU?D yübük Hap. leg.; spelt! yüb” ük, or possibly yübniük; perhaps a Pass. Dev. N. "JA. s a meaning like 'moist' or 'well- cultivated seems to be required. Cf. yebe:. Uyğ. vir ff. Man.-A (just as fire ignites dry wood, and fish swim in water, and) kalti uruğ evin yübük yerde örerçe “as grain and seed spring up in moist (or well-cultivated?) ground” M I 17, 14-16. D yipke: Hap. leg.; Dim. f. in -ke: (noted only in this word and sipirke:) fr. yap. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. Sanskrit tantu 'thread' sipirke:leri yipke:leri TT VIII F.14.. PU yipgil (Hap. leg.)/yipgin originally əb “violet-coloured” or “purple”, but sometimes used to translate Chinese hung “red” (Giles  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 920 
     
   
   
     858 the hairs removed from her face” (nammagat 2. s şa"r tachiha) Kaş. II 355 (yiplatu:r, yıplatma:k). D yublun- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of yubal-, the meaning must be something like 'to be neglected, uncultivated'; t. G.'s translation 1s based on a false etymology fr. a Mong. l.-w., cf. yuvul-. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. (now that my master is dead) yublunmaklığ kópülümin urğu yer bulmazmen 'I can find no place in which to put my neglected mind” Hiüen-ts. 1968-9. D yuvlun- Refl. f. of yuvul-; pec. to Xak. Xak. xı yuvlundiı: ne:;p “the thing rolled' (tadahraca) Kaş. III 111 (yuvlunu:r, yuvlunma:k), (in a grammatical para.; when a Dis. V. is Trans. and a /öi is added to it it becomes Pass., and if a mün is added to that it becomes Intrans. . . . e.g.) one says er tobik yuüvdi: “the: man rolled (dahraca) the ball”, then one says tobik yuvuldi: "the ball was rolled (duhrica) by someone' or 'rolled' (tadahraca); then a nin is added and one says yuvlundt: “it rolled of its own accord” (tadahraca bi-tab"ihi) III 112, 9 ff.: KB neteg kim orunsuz tobik yuvlunur “ust as a ball with no fixed position rolls about" 662. um D yıplaş- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of yıpla:-. Xak. xı ura:ğutla:r yü:zin yıplaşdı: “the women removed the hair (mammagat) from: one another's faces! Kaş. HII 104 (yiplagu:r, yıplaşma:k). D yuvlus- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of yuvul-. Xak. xi korumla:r (MS. Rorimla:r) Kamuğ yuvluşdi: “the boulders (a/-canddil, etc.) all rolled together' (zadalıracat) Kaş. III 105 (yuvluşu:r, yuvlusma:k). * Tris. YBL S yapalak See yapa:kulak. DF yavalik A.N. fr. 3 yava; 'carelessness, folly', and the like, Pec. to KB. Xak. x KB 708 (suk-). Tris. V. YBLVUD yobr:la:- Den. V. fr. an extended form of yo:b (ya:b); consistently described as Ojguz/Kup., but the verse illustrating it is part of a poem relating to the "aput, which is elsewhere quoted to illustrate Xak. words. N.o.a.b. Oğuz/Kıp. xı ol anı: yobi:la:dı: “he deceived him” (xada"ahu), the word is Oğuz/ Kip. and other Turks seldom use it; they call “deceit” yab yob and do not form a V. from it Kaş. Hİ 327 (verse; yobizla:r, yobi:la:ma:k); o.o. JI 315 (yubat-); III 142 (yab yo:b).” D yavaltur- Caus. f. of yaval-; 'to tame, pacify, subdue', and the like; syn. vv. yavaş kil-, see yavaş... Pec. to Ulyğ. Bud. Uyf. viri ff. Bud. (the all-wise Buddha Atavaka) yekiğ utup yeğedip yavlak kópülin yavalturğalı uğay 'will surely be able! to conquer and get the better of the. demon DIS. V. YBLand subdue his evil mind” 7T X 8o-1; yagisin yavlakın kentü yavalturğay biz “ve ourselves will subdue his enemies and wicked mien? Suv. 409, 12-13; 0.0. do. 506, 16; Iüen-ts., Briefe, p. 38, note 2064, 8. Dis. YDN VUD yapan (?yapın) IHap. leg.; Dev. N. fr. yap-, perhaps in the sense of something that closes in or adheres. Xak. xr yapan yé:r a/-'ánik mina'l-ard "a sand dune'; that is sand in which animals' feet sink (yağiş) and it is diffi cult (yata'addar) to pull them out again Kaj.. III 372. yipin/yipün See yipgil/yipgin. Dis. V. YBND yapın- Refl. f. of yap- , s.i.m.m.l. with the same wide range of phonetic changes and meanings as yap-. Uyğ. vri ff. Bud. ayaların yapınıp “placing the palms of their hands together' U IV 8, 36-7 (also 7 41, 21 fT.), o.o. do. 22, 299; TT X 440: Xak. xı er kalkan yapındı: “the man covered himself (tasattara) with a shield'; and one says ol kapuğ yapındı: infarada toa büşara şafqa bab "he went apart and proceeded to slam the door (behind him)” Kaş. İİ 82 (yapinu:r, yapınma:k): Çağ. xv ff. yapın- (spelt) mutalabbis şudan va bar xtud büşidan “to dress, clothe oneself” San. 325r. 22 (quotns.): Kip. xut i/taşaqa "to adhere, cohere' ya:pin- (-5-) Hou. 37, 8: xv tagattá “to hide oneself! yapın- (-5-) (fórtün-) Tuh. ga. $: Osm. xiv ff. yapin- (1) xiv. “to cover oneself with a shield'; (2) xv, xvı “to be shut” TTS II 996; III 766; IV 841. D yuban- (yuba:n-) Refl. f, of yuba:-, n.o.a.b., the Kom. word seems to belong here, but its semantic connection is w. ya:b yo:b. Xak. xı er rstin yubandı: “the man neglected (ağfa/a) the matter! Kaş, III 83 (yuba:nu:r (s), yubanma:k): Xwar. xiv yuban- “to be careless, negligent! Quzb 84; MN 74: Kom. xiv yubanğan söz 'falsehood, subterfuge' CCG; Gr. Dis. YBR yıpa:r the relationship between this word and kin, q.v., is obscure; kin has always meant *musk', the secretion of the musk-deer and the musk-rat; yıpa:r seems originally to have meant more generally 'scent, fragrance', both of musk and of other things like flowers, esp. in the Hend..yı:d yıpa:r, but became specialized for “nusk” at an early date. It was a Second Period l.-w. in Mong. as ci'ar[cihar|cifar for *musk deer' (Studies, p. 232), but more usually 'musk' (Kow. 2833, Haltod 569), and s.i.m.m.l.g. vv. a wide range of initials yı-/cı- / €1-/1-[i-; see Doerfer II 411. “Türkü vir (in the damaged account of the xagan's funcral; the Chinese emperor) yoğ yıparı:ğ kelü:rüp tike: berti: 7] S 11; meaning obscure, perhaps “brought perfumes and had the funeral feast set up”, but this is awkward and yof may 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 921 
     
   
   
      TRIS. YBR 879 be the Zee. of a Chinese L-w. in Hend. vv. yıparı:ğ: Uyğ. vini ff. Man. M II8, 14-15 (ii) (kin): Bud. yıd yipar 'fragrance', the object of perception by the nose TT VI 168 ff., edgü yid yıparlar türtüp “rubbing good perfumes (on his body)” U 7 29, 13; o.o. Hüen-ts. 145 (kóti:-); Suv. 475, 22 (kin): Civ. (your name and fame have been spread abroad) yid yıpar teg “like musk” T'T 1 146; a.o. do. 193 (bu:r-); yipar *musk' is included with other ingredients to be mixed with wine and drunk H 7 67 (misspelt sıbar ?), 94; and in a mixture with sesame oil for external application do. 161: Xak. xi yıpa:r (bi-bà' şulba *with -p-”) al-misk 'musk' Kaş. HII 28; I 327 (1 kiz), 340 (kin), and several o.o. translated a/-misk or röythatı”l-miskh "the scent of musk'; KB yağız yer yıpar toldı “the sweet scent (of flowers) has filled the brown earth” 64; in 311-12 yıpar “müsk” and bilig 'knowledge' are compared because both are perceptible even when hidden: xiv Mu. al-misk yupa:r Mel. 38, 16; yıpa:r Rif. 126, 162: Çağ. xv ff. ıpar (spelt) misk va "üd wa "anbar toa har giz-i xuuş-büyi 'musk, aloe wood, ambergris, and everything sweetscented” Sanz. 93r. 8; yapar misk náfa "a musk sac' 347v. 29: Xwar. xiv yipar/kin yipar 'musk' Qutb gr, Nahc. öz, 7: Kom. xiv *musk' ipar CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiu al-misk yipa:r (sic) Hou. 18, 10: xiv iparr ditto İd, 7, 63 (toz-); ditto Bul. 5, $: xv ditto Tuh. 35a. 6: Osm. xiv-xvi 1ipar 'musk' in one XIV text, and 1par yavşanı *wormwood, Artemisia” in one xv1 one TTS I 351; IV 393. D yaprı: abbreviated Dev. N. fr. yapur-, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı yaprı: ye:r al-ardu'l-malsá'u'l-'arida "vide, level ground'; yaprt: kula:k al-udnu'l-a£daf "a pendulous ear” Kaş. III 31. Dis. V. YBRD yapur- morphologically Caus. f. of yap-, but with no perceptible Caus. meaning, and in its first sense hard to connect semantically; pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı ol ye:riğ yapurdı: “he smoothed and levelled (mallasa . . . tva malaqahd) the ground'; and one says er sö:züğ yapurdı: "the man concealed the statement and kept it secret' (axfd . . . tva katamahu) Kaş. IIl 6; (yapurur, yapurma:k); bu er ol rgim yapurğa:n “this man always keeps his affairs secret and conceals them” (yaktum . . . va yaduss), also used for hiding ( fi £x/f4”) anything 711 535. D yavrı:- apparently Den. V. fr. *yavar, Aor. Participle of *yav-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xr er yavrı:dı: sd”at hàlw'l-racul wa da'ufa mina'l-faqr awi'l-'illa "the man's condition deteriorated and he became weak owing to destitution or illness! Kaş. 171 304 (yavrı:r, yavrizma:k): xiv Muh.(?) da'ufa yavrı:- (-f-) Rif. x11 (Mel. 28, s arukla:-). D yapurt- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of yapur-. Xak. xr ol só:züg yapurtti: “he ordered that the matter and statement should be kept secret' (bi-ixfà'); and one says ol yé:rig yapurtti: “he urged someone to smooth (man mallasa) the ground'; also used of anything disordered (or dishevelled, şa"aza) when some parts of it are gathered together (dumma) with others Kaş. III 436 (yapurtur, yapurtma:k). D yaprıt- (yaprı:d-) Hap. leg.; Den. V. in -d- (Trans.) fr. yaprı:, q.v.; “to flatten'. Kaş. made two mistakes in this entry; as in the case of kuta:d-, q.v., he failed to recognize that the. Aor. and Infin. should be shown as yaprı:du:r, yapridma:k, and he translated it 'to prick', whereas anyone familiar with horses knows thata horse that is going to kick does not prick its ears but flattens them backwards, Xak. xi at kula:kın yaprıttı: "the horse pricked (aşarra) its ears', that is when it intends to kick (yarmah) something, or is wary (yağdar) of something Kaş. II 352 (yapritu:r, yaprıtma:k). D yavrıt- Caus. f. of yavrı:-, “to weaken'. N.o.a.b., but fairly common in KB. Türkü vi süsin anta: sançdım yavrıtdım “1 routed his army there and weakened it” II E 31: Xak. xi ol anı: yavrıttı: xatotarahu wa da"afahu "he weakened him (Hend.)' Kaş. II 352 (yavrıtu:r, yavritma:k); alp erig yavritma: "do not injure or weaken (là təsi” wa là tada"if) the warrior' 7 139, 6: KB (wise men) etóz yavritur 'keep their bodies under' (take pleasure in wisdom and fatten (semrit-) their souls) 990; o.o. 3549 (in antithesis to semrit-) 4076 (ignorant men weaken the people), 4302, 4616 (illness weakens a man): Kip. xiv yavrut- 'to overstrain' (a horse). CCG, Gr. 119 (quotn.). : D yaprul- Hap. leg., Pass. f. of yapur-, but with semantic changes. Xak. xı bkr ne: birke: yapruldı: “one thing stuck closely (/ltabada) to another”, hence one says to:n yapruldiı: i/tabada 'aqru'l-tawb hattà carana "the constituent parts of the garment stuck together (i.e. shrank?) so that it became unwearable' Kaş. III 107 (yaprulu:r, yaprulmak). D yapruş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of yapur-. Xak, xı ol apar yer yaprusdr: “he helped him to smooth and level (fi tamlis . . . wa taswiyatihá) the ground” Kaş. I1I 101 (yapruşu:r, yaprusma:k). Tris. YBR D yapurfa:k Dev. N. (connoting repeated action) fr. yapur- ; “a leaf' of a tree or plant, hence metaph. of a book. S.i.a.m.l.g., usually as yaprak (c-, ç-) and the like, but NE Alt. yalbirak; NC Kir. jalbirak; there is an alternative word in SE Türki yapurmak/ yopurmak, Uyğ. vinff. Man.-A ol : yalp(u)rğakı (sic) "the leaves of that bush' Man.-uig. Frag. 400, 7: Bud. (writing a spell on birch-bark) yapırğakta “on palm-leaf' (paper, etc.) U II zo, 4 (2); o.o. Suv. 529, 8 (ulun), Tig. 49b. 4-5 (yavışğu:): Civ. H II 22, 23: Xak. xı yapurğa:k waraqu'l-sacar “the leaf of a tree”: and the leaves (ateráq) of a. book are m——————————————ssmm—n—À—s—— sr ái iiL em BESEE XX 00.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 922 
     
   
   
     876 DIS 5,270). The oldest form of the word is yipin/ yipün, and, as in these dialects a - &amp;- could not have been elided, it seems likely that this is the original form, that it was a l.-w. (since there is no obvious "Turkish etymology for it), and that the longer forms result fr. efforts to give it a more Turkish look. "The Den. Suff. -gil forms N./A.s associated w. colour (sce Studres, p. 48); there is no Den, Suff. -gin; both -ğil and -ğin are Dev. Suffs., but have no such associations. "The latest recorded forms of the word are NW Kar. T. ipkin 'scarlet, purple! Kor. ros; L. yipkinli ditto R 777 530. Uyf. vir ff. Bud. yürür) yipin óplüg yaruk yasuk 'a light violet-coloured light (Hend.) TT V 4, 12; yipün linxvva “a violet-coloured lotus' TT X 213; U IV ao, 52; Suv. 347, 10; yipüni yürüni Suv. 651, 1-2; the form yüpün occurs several times in Maitrisimit, see TT V, p. 14, footnote 1 (in all these passages the meaning may be “red”: Civ. yipgin orduluğ “having a violet palace” TT VII 13, 45 (Chinese parallels make this meaning certain); a.o. 7 İT 14, 126 (the TT VI text is dated A.D. 1202): xiv. Chin.-Uyg. Dict. tzit “purple” (Giles 12,329) şipgin (sic) Ligeti 198; R IV 1077 (this ts prob. based on a mistake in the Chincse representation sAA- hin (Giles 9,981 2,019); in transcribing forcign words this shih is often substituted for the similar and syn. character i/yi (Giles 5,533) which is sö vv, a radical attached): Xak. xt yipgil to:n "a purple (urcutcántyu'l-latn) garment", the -1 is changed fr. -n Kaş. III 46; yip£in to:n fazceb urcuicán; luğa fi'l-làm 'alternative to. ylpgil' 777 47; yipgin ne: “a darkish-coloured (al-athamiyu'l-Iazen) thing” İTİ 37; 8.0. I 395, 4; (after yelim and the cross-heading. N and before yatan, VU) yipün (MS. in error bev.z) al-ahmarı”l-müşba", :walnca. kull (şay” "ald lavoni'l-sagüyiq 'dark red, that is anything the colour of peonies'; prov. kilnu: bilse: kızü kede:r, yara:nu: bilse: yaşıl (read. yipün) kede:r translated “ifa woman knows how to be coquettish and flirt she wears a red silk (dress), and if she knows how to blandish and be witty (Iusna'l-tamalluq.- sca l-latáfa) she wears a purple (arcuzeáni) silk (dress)! 177 20: KB (the dry trees have put on green, and adorned themselves with) yipün al sarığ kök kızıl “pr 75. scarlet, yellow, green, and red” 67: Xt ^3) latenu'l-xitmr “the colour of the »' yepü:n (MS. bebu:n) Rif. 168 "ff, epgin (with -p-”) náx-i “ic” (quotns.), also pro^7V. 13; revetse entry ” ipkin CCI; Gr. ^^ped' and Yə, “anskrit e Sə gə) "m4 *, Pod yu Ə x... more Of ios o, i " xı yapğut a/-Prayr, $2, matted mass of hair or (Vo. . YBG Dis. YBL VU yovlaç Hap. leg.; under the heading fau'al; the second. vowel secms to be mcant for a fatiia rather than a &amp;kasra ; if so, prob. a ].-w. with the rare, ?foreign, Suff. -Jac.. Xak. xı yowlae al-mir'izzi "line goat's hai" Kaş, III 27. D yavla:k apparently Dev, N./À. fr. à Den. C) V. fr. *yav, homophonous vv, *yav-, with a clear semantic connection w. yavız, basically it meant 'bad, evil', but by extension it sometimes came to mean practically 'excessively'; its semantic history is therefore parallel to that of afit, q.v. Very common in the early period but not noted later than xvi. Türkü vrir yavlak occurs nine times in 7 and 77 meaning “bad”, sometimes with a hint of 'inadequate' or inefficient; in 7,5 7, II N s there isan antithesis between yavlak ağı: “bad (or inadequate) trcasures” (gifts) and edgü: agi; in 7 E s, IT E 6 good xağans were succeeded by biligsiz .. . yavlak xağan 'ignorant . . . and bad (inefficient) xagans! with biligsiz . . . yavlak buyruk ('ministers"); similar connotation in I E 23, İİ E 19, 20; in 1 E 26, İİ E zi yavlak yavız bodun seems to mean “people in a bad way' (with no food or clothing); similar connotation in 7 E 39; IJ E 30; 1 N 7, 11: vri ff. the omens in [rk B. are. classified as edgü:, afığ edgü:, yavlak (less often yavız), anığ yavlak 'good, very good, bad, very bad'; yavlak çulvu: “evil blasphemy” Toyok IIIv. 4-6 (ET Y II 178): Man. yavlak és tüş “evil associates! C/nas, 197; 0.0. do. so-1 (afi); M I s, 10 (arığsız): Uyğ. viri yavlak sakinip 'contemplating evil” Su. N 11; yavlakın üçün “because of the wickedness' (of certain people) do. E «: vini ff. Man.-A yavlak irü “a bad omen' M 7 35, 3: Man. üç yavlak yol “the threc evil ways? TT II 16, 22; III 149; LX 47; M İİİ 44, 4 (ii) : Bud. yavlak 'bad, evil” is common, e.g. edğü yavlak bulsar "if (we) find good or evil" PP şo, 2-3; oğul kiingr yavlak üçün 'because his son's be- “ haviour was bad” do. 30, 4-5; 0.0. U III 60, 7 (i); IV 22, 285; TT VIII A.31 (Kavzatil-); O.4, etc.—yavlak katığ ünin "with a very strong voice” U 7/8, 8: TT X 362; 0.0. U IV 34, 67, ctc. (alakir-): Civ. TT I 39 (alta:-): Xak. xı yavlak kişi: aj-insdnu'l-wa'iru'l-xulq "a man with a difficult character” (Oğuz/ Kip. meaning follows here; verse); yavla:k sarığ the name of an amir (beg); yavla:k basically means “strong, extremc” (a/-şadid) of anything; one says yavla:k katığ yığaç xaşab şulb şadid cidda(w) "an extremely hard bit of wood' Kaş. III] 43; the Turks say edgü: yavla:k, “good” is edgü:, yavla:k “bad” (al-radi) is used only in association (miuzdateica(n)) with edğü: and not by itself; the Oğuz use it by itself 7 432, 23; yavlak yağığ kaçurğa:n farrad 1i-“udütihi *constantly routing his enemies' 7 516, 2; o.o. 7 177, 145 519, vaş İİ 74, 12; 204, is: K B yavlak "bad, evil, ! the like is common; e.g. bodun tili yavlak “vs tongues arc evil (i.e. malicious)! 194; * nep ol "what a had thing . . . is” 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 923 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. YBL- . 877 1179; yavlak yağı 2692, 3591; 0.0. 1534-7, 4651, etc.: xın?) KBPP bu kitab yavlak *aziz turur 'this book is very precious' 2, 8-9; Tef. yavlak is used both to qualify N.s, *violent' (rain), 'strong' (magic), and to qualify Adis., “extremely” (great, good, etc.), and V.s, yavlak kork- “to be very much afraid' 131: xiv. Rbj. yavlak “extremely” qualifies Adjs. and V.s R III 297: Çağ. xv ff. yawlak (spelt) “a place in which there are many enemies”, i.e. dugmanistan; F'arráfi translated it 'acab wa bi-ğüyat 'extraordinary, unlimited" San, 340r. 26; it is'also quoted in 317v. 4 as a word carrying the suffix -lak (this theory, and the mistranslation, are based on the delusion that it was derived fr. yaw, a Çağ, Sec. f. of yağı: “enemy”: Oğuz/Kıp.xı yavla:k al-radi “bad, vvicked” of anything Kaş. III 43: Xwar. xı yawlak/yawla “extremely” "AZ ız, 54: xiv yavlak “extremely” qualifies Adjs. and V.s Qutb 75; Nahc. 106, 13: Kip. xiv yawlak (some MSS. vowlak) cidda(n) 'extremely'; they say yawlak kórklü: dür 'he is extremely handsome” İd. go (and see ofila:k); (among the names of God) al-'agim “Mighty” yawlak Bul. 2, 9; cidda(n) yawlak (vocalized yu:lak) do. 16, 3: (xv see ağla:k): Osm. xiv to xvi yavlak 'extremely! is common till xv and occurs twice in xvi 773 1 797; II 1015; HI 982; IV 857. Dis. V. YBLy.v.l- Preliminary note. The vocalization of V.s of this form in the MS. of Kaş. is chaotic, but semantic considerations seem to require that they should be arranged as below. D yaval- Pass. f. of *yava:- (cf. yavag); 'to be tamed, calmed, quietened', and the like. N.o.a.b. See yavaltur-. Uyf. vin ff. Bud. Sanskrit [gap]acarya ya:va:lrmnisgla:rnip ba:xşısı “the teacher of those who have been calmed(?)” TT VIII F.4; sıdaçı siz karnin yavalmış yatlarığ translates a Chinese phr. meaning 'you destroy the strangers (i.e. nonBuddhists) who wear a metal protection over their stomachs' ; the two are hard to reconcile unless the Uyf. translator took the phr. to mean 'you destroy the strangers who have been subdued by their stomachs' (i.e. bodily desires) Hüen-ts. 2063-4: Xak. xı (after yığıland before yuvul-) oğla:n yavaldı: (MS. yovuldi:?) sukkina'l-sabi min da"aratihi “the boy was quietened down from his naughtiness' Kaş. III 8o (yavalu:r, yavalma:k; MS. yov.lu:r, y.vilma:h), yağı: andın yavaldı:mat (MS. yav.ldı:mat) sakuna ğayzu”l-"adü minhu "as a result the fury of the enemy became quiet 7 397, 7: katığ yağı: yavalsu:n (MS. yuvilsu:n) hatta yalina”l-"adüum” l-şadid "so that the violent enemy may be tamed” I 441, 11: (Çağ. xv ff. yuvvul- (spelt) sata şudan “to become vveak” San. 347v. 7, perhaps a Sec. f. of this V.). D yapıl- Pass. f. of yap-, s.i.s.m.l, vv. the same phonetic changes and range of meanings as yap-. Xak. xı kapuğ yapuldiı: (sic) “the door was slammed” (ingafaqa), also used of anything when it has been closed (or stopped up, insadda) Kaş. III 76 (yaplu:r (?sic), yapulma:k): KB (how can I serve your master?) yapılmış turur kor mapa bu kapuğ “this door is closed to me” 4oo3: Cağ. xv ff. yapıl- (spelt) püşida şudan “to be covered, concealed' San. 325r. 16 (quotns.): Osm. xiv ff. yapıl- (of a door) “to be shut'; common to xvi, sporadic later; xvi (of hair) “to be matted', in one text 7 TS 1 781; II 996; III 766, IV 840; xviii yapıl- . . . and, in Rümi, sáxta şudan "to be made” San. 325r. 16. VUD yivil- Pass. f. of *yiv-; the main entry follows yuvul-, so that -1- might be expected, and the meanings fit vv. those of yivit-, yivig, but the vocalization in the MS. is chaotic. Xak. xı sü: yivildi: (MS. yifildi:) tadáraka'l-cayş "the army was equipped, or fitted out”, and one says begni: yivildi: (MS. yavuldi:) balağa"l-mizr wahwa şarabı”l-burr vca'l-dura *the beer, which is a beverage made of wheat and millet, matured'; and one says bilig yivildi: (MS. yifildi:) tadaraka”l-“aql “the intellect was trained(?)'; also used of anything of which the season of maturity has been reached and achieved its summit (?; balaga amünuhu wa'ltahaqa bi'l-awwal) Kaş. III. 81 (yivilü:r, yivilme:k (MS. yev.li:r, y.v.Ime;k); emdi: yigit yivilsü:n (MS. y.v.lsü:r) fa'l-àn yacib "ala”l-şubbün an yatakattabü wa yatacamma"ü “nov the young men must join the ranks and assemble” TİT 356, 4: (Kup. xiv VU yiwil- imtadda wa tala namuwwa(n) "to become longer, to grow in stature', İd. gg, can hardiy be connected). D yubal- (yuba:1-) Pass. f. of yuba:-, n.o.a.b. (Türkü vr see yuvul-): Xak. xr ış yubaldı: “the matter vvas neglected and not followed up” (u£fila (MS. ağfala) . . . wa lam yubram) Kaş. 111 76 (yuba:lu:r (sic), yubalma:k). D yuvul- Pass. f. of yuv-, n.o.a.b. Türkü vil the word read yobalu: in T' 26 and translated *with difficulty” owing to a supposed connection vv. the Mong. l.-w. yoba:- should be read yuvulu:, see én-: Xak. xı tobik yuvuldi: “the ball (etc.) was rolled' (tadahracat); in a verse Kolpak udu: yuvulma: “do not roll along behind Kolpak” (ld tatadalirac fi itrihi) Kaş. III 81 (yuvlu:r, yuvulma:k); o.o. 7 397, 6 and (grammatical) III 112, 12; 113, 7: KB yuvuldi yaşı “his tears rolled down' 6213: (Çağ. xv ff. see yaval-). D yıpla:- Den. V. fr. y1p; in Kaj.'s meanings Hap. leg., but s.i.s.m.l. in such meanings as SW Osm. iple- 'to bind with rope'. Xak. xi ura:ğut yü:zin yıpla:dı: "the woman removed the hairs from her face” (nammagat . . . wachahá) (yıpla:r, yipla:ma:k); (yatla:follows here); er yıpla:dı: "the man performed on the (tight) rope' (/a'iba . . . 'ala'l-habl) Kaş. III şo? (y1pla:r, yipla:ma:k). D yıplat- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of yıpla:-. Xak. xı ura:ğut yü:zin yıplattı: the woman had 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 924 
     
   
   
     88o called yapurğa:k Kaş. HJ] si: xni(?) Tef. yapurğak/yaprak “leaf” 131 (-5-), 141-2: xiv Muh. al-rcaraq yapra:k (-5-) Mel. 78, 7, yapurğa:k (-5-) Rif. 182: Çağ. xv ff. (yapurğan vaprak Vel, 410. (quotn.); yaprag/ yaprak/yapurğağ/yapurğak (all spelt) barg 'leaf'; also called yafrag/yafrak Sar. 326r. 2 (same quotn. as in Vel., pointing out that the word is mis-spelt in Vel.); reverse entry 333v. 9: Xwar. xiv yapurfak/yaprak 'leaf! Qutb 63 (-5-); MN 87; Nahe. 319, 13: Kom. xiv “leaf” yabuldrak (sic) CCI; Gr.: Kip. xur (under “trees”) al-:araq (VU) yapildurak (-5-, unvocalized); Tkm. yaprak /fon. 7, 9: xiv yaprak (-5-) ditto İd, go, tcaraqu'l-sacar (VU) yapıldurak (-5-, öd” unvocalized); rcaraqa tvahida “once leaf” yaprak (-5-) Bul. 3, 11: XV ateráqu'l-gacar yaprak (-5-) Kav. 59, 6; Tuh. 38a. 10; xüş "palm-leaves” yaprak (-5-) do. 13b. r. D yapurğaklığ P.N./A. fr. yapurğa:k, 'leafy'. S.i.s.m.l, w. the same: phonetic changes, Uyf. viii ff. Bud. bir mig yapurğaklığ dünxwa 'a lotus with a thousand leaves! TT V 6, 18. D yıparlığ P.N./A. fr. yıpa:r, properly 'scented, fragrant”, but sometimes “muskscented'. yıdlığ yıparlığ 'fragrant (Hend.)' (and bright) M Il 9, 7; o, 9; a0. Wind. 29-30 (kil-), yıparlığ "a fragrant' (orchard) M III 25, 11— 12 (i): Bud. yıparlığ tütsüg 'fragrant incense' USp. ror, 10-11; o.o. TT V 8, 72-9 (tütsüğ): Xak. xı yiparhg kósürgü: “a leather bag containing musk' (dÀ? misk) Kaş. III 48 (prov.); a.o. HI so, 23. i Dis. V. YBSD yapsa:- (?d-) Desid. f. of yap-, pec. to Kaş., the entry follows that of yé:se:-, q.v., and the first illustrative sentence is almost the same as that for that V.; in the Ar, translation the V, was originally omitted and when it was inserted the word appropriate for yé:se:- was inadvertently supphed. Xak. xı er" etme:k yapsa:dı: tarianná'l-racul an. ya! kuli (substitute yalsagi) I-xubz "the man wished to put the bread in the oven' (not “to eat"); also used for wishing to shut (az varudd) a door; and one says er tu:za:k yapsa:dı: “the man wished to close (an yulgi) the trap on the birds to catch them” Kaş. HI 304 (yapsa:r, yapsa:ma:k); (the cold weather came and) karlap ajun yapSadı: 'snowed until it almost covered (yufbig) the world' 7 463, 11; başlığ közüğ yapsama: 'do not try to close the wounded eye' II 172, 12. VUD yovsa:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of 3 yov-. Xak. xı ol mapa: tava:r yovsa:dı: “he wished to share (yıvrefsiyani) the property with me" Kaş. III 306 (yovsa:r, yovsa:ma:k). D yuvsa:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of yuv-. Xak. xı ol tobik yuvsazdı: "he wished to roll (ah yudahric) the ball” (etc.) Kaş. 771 306 (yuvsur, yuvsa:ma:k, MS. in error yususit-). Uyğ. viri ff. Man. (the Davn.,God), ''RIS. YBR Dis. YBS D yavaş (yava:ş) Dev. N/A. fr. *yava:-; “gentle, mild, peaceable”, and the like; more or less syn. vv. amul and often used in Hlend., vv it in the early period. S.ia.m.l.g., much distorted in NE, e.g. 'T'uv. ça:ş: yavaş in SE "Türki, SW. Az, Osm.: NC Kir. jo:s; Kzx. juwas: SC Uzb. yuvos: NW yuvas, cuwas, etc.: SW "Tkm. yuvasg. Türkü viri ff. (the name read Yabaş (Yavaş) Totok in Tur. 1V 3-4 (ETY İİ 96) is more likely to be Ay baş 'Totok); Man. M III zo, 6 (1) (amul): Uyğ. virt ff. Man.-A M II 31, 4 (iii) (amul): Man. yavaşım birle yakışıpan 'being united with my gentle one” M II 8, 16-17 (i); a.o. TT II 17, 57-8 (amul): Bud. (the . . . Buddha) tüzün yavaş kilu yarlıkadı “has deigned to make good and peaceable' (the minds of the wicked demons) Z7 X rs, olo. do. 517; TT IV 10, r5-16 (tüzü:n); U IV 34, 60 etc.: Xak. xi yavaş kişi: “a man who is mild, tractable, and peaceable' (af-/ayyiiu'I-cánibu'l-halim); and any animal when it is 'docile" (mungád) is called yavaş Kaş, 1H 10 (verse); (a girl with a dowry) küde:gü: yavaş bulu:r “finds a bridegroom who is gentle and docile' (ccaqür munqad lihà) IH 12, 1: KB (he must make the wicked fear him and) yavaşlarka edgğü kerek sevseler “must be good to the peaceable so that they may love him” 2299; a.o. 6453 (satğağ): xiv Rbg. R III 1568 (tölek): xiv Meh. tayyibu'l-liqà doa"l-tab" “pleasant to meet, good-natured' yawa:g Mel. 51, 14; Rif. 147: Çağ. xv ff. yavvaş barr wa bürr wa halim “good, kindly, peaccable” San. 340r. 18 (quotn.): (Kom. xiv 'humility' yovaşlık (sic) CCI; Gr.): Kip. xi (quarrelsome” ça:lık) “the opposite. of çazlık” yawa:S; also used w. reference to horses Hou. 26, 1; (among the Proper Names of slave girls) yavva:ş a/-"aqila 'sensible':do. 30, 13: xiv. yawa:g “pcaccabiy disposed” (or 'placid', söhünü l-xalq), and one says bu at yavvaşdur “this horse is docile and vvell-trained” (sa//ieo/-xuluq mu'addab); sea yusammá bihi "also used as a P.N. Jd. gg: xv hayn “quiet, placid' yawas Tul, 37b. 9; in margin of do. 12b. 8 in a second hand, halim yawasg: Osm. xiv fl. yavaş 'peacceable, patient, mild'; c.i.a.p. TS 1 797, H 1014; İİİ 782; İV 856. VUD yovus Hap. leg.; Dev. N. fr. 3 yov-. Xak. xı yovus al-i'àna li'l-agàárib bi-hista aw bi-mdl “help to kinsmen in the form of clothing or goods'; this is most often used of a bride, when she has been taken to the bridegroom (zuffat) and her kinsmen send anything suitable that they have for her equipment (fi tachizilà) as a token of respect to her; in a prov. yövüşlüğ (sic) kelin “a bride endowed with goods (»inkarrama bi-amtvál) by her kinsmen” Kaş. IIJ 11 (sec yavaş). S yavşa:n Sec yapça:n, Dis. V. YBŞD yapış- Recip. f. of yap-: “to adhere, stick to (something Dat.)', w. vinious metaph. ex 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 925 
     
   
   
     DIS tensions. S.i.s.m.İ, w. the usual phonetic changes. Uy£. viii ff. Bud. U III 37, 33-4 (yapığ): Civ. (the omen is bad) kop işi bütmez uluğ yek yapışur “all his undertakings fail, the great demon attaches himself (to him)" TT VII 28, 38; a.o. H II 31, 198: Xak. xı yelim yü:gke: yapusdt: “the glue stuck to (/tasaga) the feather'; also used of anything when it has stuck to something and become fastened to it (ta'allaqa bihi); hence one says it keylkke: yapusdi: “the dog held fast (ta"allaqa) to the wild animal” (bi'l-sayd) Kaş. III 7o (yapuşur, yapuşma:k, in all cases simultaneously vocalized yapış-), ol er ol rska: yapuşğa:n “that man's habit is to be closely concerned vvith affairs” (a/-ta"alluq bi'l-umür), also used of anything closely concerned ("a/laq) with affairs JII 53: KB (if you follow it, it runs away) kaçsa yapçur (sic, Vienna MS. yapşur) sapa “if (you) run away, it clings to you' 1409; (whoever has understanding) anar bar yapuş (rhymes vv. ukuş) “go and attach yourself to him” 1870; yapuştun . . . berk "you have attached yourself firmly” (to this world) 663o: xın(?) At, tavvadu"ka berk tut yapuş ked anar 'hold fast to humility and cling tightly to it 268: Çağ. xv ff. yapuş- (spelt) çaspidan “to stick, adhere” San. 325v. 2 (quotns.); yapış- (spelt) ditto 325v. 14: Xwar. xiv yapus- 'to cling to (something Dat.) Qutb 63: Kom. xiv ağaç yapşarmen (MS. yapsarmen) “I join (?dovetail) the (pieces of) wood together' CCG; Gr. 114: Kip. xiv. yapış- (-5-) /aziqa “to adhere' İd. 91; Bul. 79v.: xv ditto Tuh. 32a. 7. S yavuş- See yağuş-. VUD yovuş- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of 3 yov-. Xak. xı ola:r ikki: yovugdt: translated “each of them helped and shared with (a'àma sta tdsd) the other” Kaş. III 73 (yovuşu:r, yovuşma:k, MS. everywhere yofug-). D yuvuş- Hap. leg.; Recip. f. of yuv-. Xak. xı ola:r bi:r bi:rke: tobik yuvuşdi: “they rolled (daraca) the ball to one another” Kaş. III 74 (yuvuşu:r, yuvugma:k). D yapşın- Refl. f. of yapış-, practically syn. vv, it. S.i.s.m.l, vv, the usual phonetic changes, but there are no other occurrences of Kaj.'s alternative f. vv. -ç-. Uyğ. viii ff. Man. TT III 127-8 (atka:ğ): Bud. adinlarni yutuz1pa yapsinmamak “not to have liaisons with other people's wives' Suv. 219, 24ff.; o.o. U III 36, 36 etc. (ilin-), U IV 34, 69 (sığın-), TT VI, p. 82 etc. (atkan-): Xak. xı okka: yelim yapçundiı: (sic) “the glue stuck (iltasaga) to the arrow' ; also used of anything when it has stuck to something or become fastened to it (ta'allaga bihi) Kaş. II1 108 (yapçınu:r (sic), yapçınma:k), alternative form (/uga) with al-şin yapsundr, and with a/-/4” yavçundı:: Xwar. xiv yapşun- “to cover oneself up” Qutb 63 (-5-); “to cling to (something Dat.) Nahc. 112, 13; 361, ır. D yapsur- Caus. f. of yapış-, “to fasten, or stick. (something Acc., to something Dat.)'; . YBZ 881 s.i.s.m.l. in NE, NC; elsewhere displaced by yapıştur- which is noted in Çağ. xv ff. and Kip. fr. xii onwards. Uy&amp;. vit ff. (Man. TT IIİ 127-8 (atka:ğ), yafşınmış erroneously read yafşurmış): Bud. iki uluğ epreklerni yapşurup 'placing the two thumbs together” U II 47, 72: Civ. bu vu kapığta yapşurzun “let him stick this spell on the door” TT VII 27, ry: Xak. xı ol o:kka: yüğ yapçurdi: “he stuck (a/saqa) the feather to the arrow'; also yavgurdr: alternative form vv. al-fà' Kaş, IIT 97 (yapçurur, yapcurma:k); (ol? o:kka: yelim yapşurdı: “he stuck glue to the arrow' (mistranslated “feather”), alternative form with al-cim III gg (yapşurur, yapşurma:k). Tris. YBŞ D yavışğu: Dev. N. (Conc. N.) fr. yavış(yapis-); lit. 'something attached to something else'; n.o.a.b. In Uy£. it seems to have meant 'foliage'; in Xak. it was a kind of fruit; it seems impossible to connect the 'alternative form' morphologically w. this word, and since it seems to be syn. vv. yemşezn it is possible that (VU) yumuşğa: (which is fully vocalized) and yemşe:n are cognate l.-w.s and that yaviSÉu: acquired its specialized meaning in Xak. because of its resemblance to the former. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. xwa yavışğu 'garlands of flowers! (Chinese hua 'flower', Giles 5,002) U II 4o, 105; TT VI 144; (by virtue of this sütra) ol sógütnig yapı yavışğusı xwasi yapırğakı “that tree's leaves (Chinese yeh, Middle Chinese yap “leaf”, Giles 12,997), foliage, flowers, and leaves' (vill become green again) Tig. 49b. 4: Civ. yaş yavışğu 'fresh foliage” TT 1 55-6 (kuri:-): Xak. xr yavışğu: al-zu'rür “the medlar, Crataegus azarolus' ; (VU) yumuşğa: alternative form Kaş. I1I 48. D yapuşğa:k Dev. N./A. (connoting repeated action) fr. yapuş- (yapis-); as such Hap. leg., but other Dev. N./A.s in the medieval period and later have cognate meanings, e.g. Çağ. xv ff. yapuşğa:n 'bird-lime' San. 326r. 6. Xak. xı yapuşğa:k “a spinous (muş"ar) plant, with burrs (şarvk) like hazel nuts, which stick (yata"allaq) to the tails of horses, etc.'; simiİarly a man who is closely concerned (yata'allaq) with anything is so called Kaş. İİİ sı. PUD yövüşlüğ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. yövüş (yovuş). Xak. xı Kaş. III 12 (yovuş). Tris. V. YBŞD yavaşlan- Refl Den. V. fr. yavaş, s.i.s.m.l. vv. some phonetic changes. Xak. xı er yavaşlandı: abdá'l-racul min nafsihi'l-hilm “the man radiated mildness” Kaş. //T 114 (yavaslanu:r, yavaşlanma:k). Dis. YBZ D yavız Dev. N./A. fr. *yav-; basically “bad” in every sense of that word, usually *morally bad” or “unfavourable, inauspicious', and the like, but in Türkü rather 'in a bad way, unfavourably situated' or the like; more or less 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 926 
     
   
   
     882 syn. vv. afığ, yavla:k, but unlike them never means 'excessively, extremely'. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv, phonetic changes, usually meaning 'bad' but with odd evolutions of meaning in some languages, e.g. in SW Osm. 'grim', hence 'stern', hence 'efficient', hence “good”. "lürkü vri yadağ yavız bolti: “the men travelling on foot got into a bad way' /1 E 32; o.o. I E 26, II E zı (yavla:k), Ongin 7 (3 bat): vin ff. in IrkB 12, 24, 44, 45 'bad' omens are described as yavız instead of the usual yavlak; in Tur. IV ro-11 (ETY II 96) the writer describes himself as bötğe:çi: isi:z yavrz kul “the scribe (your) worthless (Hend.) servant”: Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. (1 have not done good) yaviz kiltim “1 have done evil” U JJ 78, 40; 87, 58; yavız yavlak ayığ óglilerke “to the evilly disposed” Suv. 101, 17-18; o.o. do. 135, 11-13; 136, 13; 141, 6) 553, 12 etc.: Civ. yavız kart “a mahgnant ulcer! H 2 81; in TT VII yaviz is common for “bad” (omens); 'inauspicious' (days), etc.: Xak. xı yavuz “bad” (al-radi") of anything Kaş, 441 10; III 41 (yunçiğ) and 10 0.0: KB talu nep bolurda yavuz ne kerek “vhen there is a good thing, what need is there for a bad one?” 688; o.o. 321 (koldaş), 413 (yunçığ), 2639 (kovi:), 406r: xu(?) KB VP bu kutsuz yavuz “this is unlucky and bad” 49: xııı(?) At. (although a snake is, soft), yavuz fi'l éter “it does evil things” 215; Tef. yavuz “bad” r3z: xiv Muh, al-fálih 'wicked, evil” (opposite to “good” eyğü:) ya:vvuz Mel, 54, 15; Rif. 152: Çağ, xv ff. yavvuz (spelt) bad sca zabün "bad, vile' San. 340r. 27 (quotns.): Xwar. xur yawuz “bad” "Al 8: xiv yavuz “evil” Nahe. 252, ız, 286, ız: Kip. xut al-radi” (opposite to “good” eygi:/key) (yaman/) yawuz Hou. 25, 10: xiv yawuz al-wahg 'wild beast” Jd. gg: xv şarr “bad” yawuz Tuh. 218. 7; al-aşarr yowuzrak (sic) do. sb. 5: Osm. Xiv İT, yavuz is common in the meaning "bad, evil, violent', etc. until xvi and is noted , sporadically thereafter T T'S I Sor, II 1018; III 785, IV 859. : "ris. V. YBZD yavuzla:- Den. V. fr. yavuz (yavız), n.o.a.b. Xak. xı ol yavuzla:dı: ne:nni: "he reckoned that the thing was bad” (zadı) Kaş. III 342 (yavuzla:r, yavuzla:ma:k): Osm. xv yavuzla- “to blame, abuse”, in two texts TTS II 1020. : D yavuzlan- Refl. f. of yavuzla:-, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı ol atığ yavuzlandı: "he reckoned that the horse (or something else) vvas bad” (rad!) Kaş. III 114 (yavuzlanu:r, yavuzlanma:k): Osm. xvi yavuzlan- (of an animal) 'to be savage, dangerous'; in one text TTS İl 786. Mon. YC S yiç See iç Uyğ. Dis. YCA D ya:çı: N.Ag. fr. 1 ya:, 'archer; bowmaker”, S.i.s.m.l., sometimes as yayçı and in DIS. YBZ thesecond Çağ. meaning which prob. represents a faulty Sec. f. of ya:tçi: (ya:dçi) Xak. xr KB (in a list of craftsmen) oket yaçı 'arrow-maker and bow-maker' 4458; ok yaçı “archer” 4046 (1 ok): xiv Muh. al-gawtods 'bow-maker' ym:gs fr. ya: 'bow' Mel. 11, 3; Rif. 84; (in the list of craftsmen) gatowüs ya:yçı: 58, 7; ya:cı: 157; Çağ. xv ft. ya:yçı (spelt) kamöngar 'bow-maker'; also cádügar 'magician' (and a place-name) San. 341r. 5. PU(?D) yiçe: (or eyiçe:) n.o.a.b.; the meaning which suits the contexts best is “as before, as previously' which suggests that it is an Equative f. in -ce:, but there is no other trace of *yi: or *eyi:; Türkü vur (my father died and my uncle became xajan) eçim xağan olurupan "Türkü bodunığ yiçe: etdi: (77 adds yiçe: igit(t)iz) when my uncle ascended the throne as xafan he organized the "Fürkü people as before (and fed them as hefore) I E16, II E 14: UyB. vin (I told them to follow and left them; they did not come) yiçe: értim Burğu:da: yetdim “1 rcached them as before and caught up with them at Burğu:” $u. E 2-35; yiçe: işiğ küçiğ bergil “give me your services as before” do. E s. D yi:çi: N.Ag. fr. yi: (yigi:), 'tailor'. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı Kaş. II 3 (sap-), 111 216 (yigi:). Dis. V. YCN1 (D) yaçan- prima facie a Refl, f. ; survives only (?) in SW Anat. xx yacan- (1) 'to be bored (by something Dat.)'; (2) "to be shy, or frightened, of (something 452)”, (3) “to be disgusted” SDD 1450. Xak. xr ol mendin yaçandı: istahyü wa'htagama min haytu lam. yugdim “ala”l-amr "he was ashamed and embarrassed (in my presence) because he had not started on the matter' Kaş. I71 83 (yaçanu:r, yaçanma:k): Kom. xiv 'to be ashamed, embarrassed” yaçan- CCI; Gr.: Osm. xiv to xvr yacan- (sic) (r) “to be on one's guard'; (2) “to be embarrassed'; in several texts 7”TS I 763, II 972; III 750; IV 822. Mon. YD 1 ya:f (-d) 'stranger, foreigner; strange, foreign”, S.,am.l.g.; SW Az. Osm. yad, Tkm, ya:t. Cf. 1 tat. ''ürkü vur Toy. 23-4: (ETY II 58; ada:rt-): Uyğ. viu ff. TT III 108 (adir-): Bud. yat élli&amp; toyin “a monk from a forcign country” Hüen-ts. 294-5; do. 2063-4 (yaval-): Civ. yat kigi 'stranger, foreigner' TT I 56-7, 214; VII 30, 11 (éltis-): O. Kir. ix ff. yatda: tüpürime: adrıldım Mal. 11, 7; this is quite clear on the stone and seems to mean 'I have been parted from my relations by marriage in foreign countries”: Xak. xı ya:t kişi: al-acnabi “a stranger; hence one says ya:t ba:z yadıl (sic) /i-yatafarraqa'l-acünib “let the strangers be separated, set apart! Kaş. 111 159; yat yağuk 'strangers and neighbours! I 433, 7; o.o. III 43, 2; 148 (ba:z): KB kahn yat ara 'among a crowd of strangers! 491; (what is your name? Where  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 927 
     
   
   
     MON. V. YD- 883 do you come from?) negü ol yatip 'what is your foreign country?” 583; o.o. 495-6 (yarlıka:-), 2495, etc. (ba:z); 5087: Çağ. xv ff. yat bigdna 'strange, foreign” Vel. qor (quotn.); yat bigüna wa acnabi (quotn.); also called yad San. 326v. 10; reverse entry 327r. 13 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv yat 'stranger' Qutb 75; yat eren “strangers" Nahc. 26, 16: Kom. xıv 'stranger, foreigner” yat CCI, CCG; Gr. 118 (quotns.): Kip. xin al-garibu'l-acnabi 'stranger' ya:t Hou. 32, 14: Xiv yat ditto /d. 94: XV ğarib yat Tuh. 26b. 4: Osm. xiv ff. yad 'stranger, foreigner', by itself and in phr.; c.i.a.p. TTS I 763; IJ 972; III 7so, IV 822. 2 ya:t (-d) 'rain magic; rain stone'; the history of this word, which is extremely complicated, is discussed at length in Doerfer I, 157 (cadàámigi); as such it is n.o.a.b., but it became a Second Period lw. in Mong. as cada (Haenisch 84) and found its way back into "Purkish in this form and as yada (see Çağ.), s.i.s.m.l. in one form or the other. İt has at one” time or another been connected with 'jade' and Pe. cádi *magic', but these are certainly errors. 'There is some evidence of the existence of a word in Sogdian, £9, which might mean 'rain stone' (see Doerfer, op. cit.), but there is no reason to suppose that this is a l.-w. in Turkish, though the reverse might be the case. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud, TT. X 387, etc. (yatlan-): Xak. xı yat (sic) a magic ceremony which is performed (kahána yutakahhan) with special stones by which rain and wind are procured (yuclab); this (ceremony) is well known among them, IJ myself witnessed it in Yağma:, it was performed to extinguish a fire which occurred there; snow came in the summer by the permission of God most high and extinguished the fire in my presence Xaş. II] 3; ya:t “a magic ceremony with stones to procure rain and wind' III 159: (Çağ. xvff. yada taş yağmur boncuğı "a rain bead'; that is a thing of such a kind that when the blood of a sacrificial animal is wiped on it, it rains Vel. 399 (quotn.); cada taşı sang-? yada “a yada stone”, which they also call yada taşı/yada: taşı/ yazda taşı, in Ar, hacaru'l-mafar 'rain stone” San. 205r. 21; reverse entry 327r. 15 (quotns.; and see ya:y)). yad 'scent, odour, smell'; originally neutral in connotation, : in some contexts, e.g. yıd yıpa:r “a pleasant smell', but usually, esp. in der. f.s, “an unpleasant smell, stink'. S.1.a.m.l.g. in a wide range of forms; NE yit, «1t: SE "Türki hid (sic) BS 314: NC Kir. Jit; Kzx. iyis: SC Uzb. is/xid: NW Kk., Kumyk iyis; Kaz. is: SW Az. iy; Tkm. xs. UyB. vir ff. Man. Wind. 35-7 (ur-): Bud. in Bud. terminology the sense corresponding to burun “nose” as the organ of smell is yıd/yıd yıpar 77 1I, p. 26, footnote 4: VI, p. 6s, note ısı, yid aşlığlar (demons) *who devour sweet smells” (sic, the next entry is those who devour incense) U IJ 61,5; o.o. do. 57, 1 (ii) (ucruğ), TT VI 168 ff. (yıpa:r), (in TT İV 12, $56; Suv. 48,:23 the word read yıdı before yok is 2 idi): Civ. TT I 146, etc. (yıpa:r): Xak. xt (if musk is removed from a perfume bag) yrdr kalı:r “its scent (rihuhu) remains be-' hind” Kaş. III 48, 22; n.m.e.: KB yipar toldi káfür ajun yid bile 'the world has become full of musk, camphor, and (other) scents' 70; yıdı “the scent” (of flowers) 97; (if you hide musk) yidi belgürer “its scent becomes perceptible” 312: xırı(?) At. (modesty has vanished) bulunmaz yıdı “no trace (lit. scent) of it can be found' 417: xiv Muh.(?) al-rá'iha "odour” yıyı: (sic?) Rif. 162 (only): Çağ. xv ff. is koku .. . büy ma'nàsina "odour” Vel. $5 (and other meanings; quotn.); 18 (with 1-7) ... . (2) rd”iha wa bü San. 104v. 12 (quotn.): Kip. xit yı: al-rá'iha Hou. 41, 3: XIV yiyı: al-rö”iha mujlaqa(n) (in general) 1d. 100; a.o. do. (yıdı:-): xv al-rá'iha yı Tuh. 16b. rz (y1y1: here and in Muh. may be a survival of yıdığ, not yr:d). yu:t (-d) basically “veather so severe that it kilis livestock', with extended meanings for other things which cause losses of livestock, and even the death of human beings, like lack of grazing and epizootic (or epidemic) disease. A Second Period 1.-vv, in Mong. as cut “famineş epizootic or epidemic disease! (Kot. 2385), cud (Haltod $83), and in Russian as dzhut; s.i.a.m.l.g. except SW as yut/cut/cut/jut. Türkü (when we spent the winter at Amğa: korığı:) yut boldi: “there was severe, killing weather IJ E 31: Xak. xı yu:t 'severe weather (al-cálifa) which kills livestock and sheep with the cold in vvinter” Kaş. 111 142; KB (if a man gets too near a blazing fire) apar yut turur “it is fatal to him” 654; (if a man is born wicked there is no cure for him) ajunka bala ol bodunka yutı "he is a disaster for the ' world and fatal to the people” 879; a.o. 1780: Çağ. xv ff. yut (r) 'heavy snow which blocks the roads'; (2) in Mong. (sic) 'an epidemic (wabá") which attacks flocks and herds' San. qı v. 8: Kip. xv faná “death, destruction' (ölet/) yut (/kiran) Tuh. 27b. 9 (a marginal note in a second hand says that the first is used of humans, the second of animals, and the third of death by the sword). Mon. V. YDya:d- “to spread out (on the ground, etc.)', hence metaph. “to publish abroad” and the like, S.i.a.m.l.g. as yay-/cay-/çay-/iay- ; SW Tkm. ya:y-, these modern forms are not to be. confused vvith those of yan- and yay-, but as the basic meanings of all three verbs (or both if the last tvvo are identical) are not very different it is not always easy to distinguish between them. Uyğ. vı ff. Man.-A tepri nomın yad[ayin] “let me publish abroad the sacred doctrine" M I 33, 6: Bud. (the Buddha) yada yarlikap 'deigning to spread out' (his gracious thoughts over (üze) mankind) TT' X 8; (we regret and deplore our misdeeds) aça yada *we disclose and publish them” (and ask for forgiveness) TT IV 4, 18; aça yada ötüneyin “let me venture to disclose and publish' (our many grievous constrictions arid” 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 928 
     
   
   
     884 MON. V. YD sufferings) Suv. 109, 3; a.o. do. 141, 11: Xak. xı ol to:nuğ kü:nke: yattı: “he spread out (basata) the garment (or something else) in the sun”, originally ya:dtı: but assinilated Kaş. II 313 (yada:r, yadma:k): ol ya:dtı: ne:pni: “he spread out the thing”, for example bread on a tray ZII 434 (yada:r, yadma:k): KB (the Prophet) yaruklukı yadti “videly displayed his light! 35; 0.0. 68 (arkış), 69, 1299 (to publish abroad"), 2197 ("to open the hands”), 2329, 3637 (2 a:ğ), etc.: xin(?) Tef. yad-/yay"to spread out, stretch out” 133-5: xiv Mu. basata ya:y- Mel. 23, 15; Rif. 105: Çağ. xv ff. yay- (spelt) (r) bah, kardan "to spread out”, (2) (see 1 yay-) San. 340v. 1 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv yay- (1) 'to spread out (lit.); to publish abroad, disseminate! Qutb 64; MN 39, etc.; Nac. 301, 4: Kom. xiv "to spread out” yay- CCI, CCG, Gr.: Kip. xiv yay- faraga (“to spread out bedding, etc.”) za basata İd. 100: XV najara 'to spread out, publish abroad" yay- Tuh. 37a. 4. yat- 'to lie down', w. some extended meanings, 'to lie down to sleep, (of nomads) to settle down in one place' (cf. olur-), etc.; s.i.a.m.l.g. vv, the usual phonetic changes. Türkü vii sünükü:p tağça: yatdı: “your bönes lay in heaps” 7 E 24, II E 20; o.o. I N 9, etc. (yurt): vit ff. (of an eagle) talu:yda: yatıpar”lying down by the sea” J[rkB 3, a.o. do. zo (udt:-): Man. ölüğ birle yat(t)ı “he lay down with the corpse M 1 5, 4; a.o.o.: Uyğ. vri ff. Man. yérte yatıp 'lying on the ground' TT JI 15, 10: Bud. yat- 'to lie down' is common, e.g. yérde yatip PP 19, 5: Civ. (when a dog is old) yatıp ürür “it barks lying down' TT VII 42, 6; (drink it) keçe yatmışda “vhen you go to bed at night” H T 195: Xak. xı er yattı: “the man (etc.) lay down to slecp” (haca'a) Kaş. II 313 (yatu:r, yatma:k); 777 42 (yatğa:k), 50.0.: KB yat- “to lie down! and the like is common, e.g. (God) yorimaz nü yatmaz “does not walk or lie down' 17; (knowledge) yatur “es” (at the bottom of the mind, as a pearlat the bottom of the sea) 211; o.o. 38, 164,.214, etc.: xın(?) Tef. yat- "to lie down (to sleep)” 148: xiv Muh. nàma “to sleep! yat- Mel. 31, 9; 41, 10; Rif. 115 (in margin, u:di:- in text), 131; ai-nawm yaà:tmak 35, 9; 37, 3; 121, 123: Çağ. xv ff. yat- xwübidan “to sleep” San. 326r. 18 (quotns.): Xwar. xın(?) anın birle yattı “he lay with her” Og. 64; a.o.0.: xiv yat- “to lie down' Qutb 75; MN 149: Kom. xiv ditto CCI, CCG, Gr. 118 (quotns.): Kip. xii a/-ná'im (opposite to 'awake' oya:nak) ya:tur Hou. 26, 16; raqada “to sleep” ya:t- do. 34, 7: xiv yat- ditto d. 94; báta (to spend the night”) rea nüma wa raqada yat- Bul. 35v.: XV nüma yat- Kan, s, 1; ro, 8, 68, 18; raqada yatTuh. 17a. 11; a.o.o. VU yé:d- (or yi:d-) Hap. leg., but see yédtür-, yédil-, yediş- , the erratic vocalization points more to -é- than -i-. Xak. xr ol yetge:k ye:dti: (MS. vevdti:) "abba rizmata'l-mitd" awi H"ayba "he filled the bale or sack of goods' Kaş. III 434 (y€:de:r, ye:dme:k, unvocalized). 1 yét- (-d-) “to lead (a horse)', vv. some extended meanings. Survives only(?) in NW Krim yete- R 771 360; Nog. yet-: SW Osm. yed-, but the Dev. N. in -ek (prob. original rather than a Sec. f. of -ğe:k), meaning “a led (spare) horse; a lead, halter' and the like, si a.m.lg. except. NE, SE as. yetek/cetek/ etek, SW Osm. yedek; w. Den. V.s in -lehaving the same meaning as this V. Türkü vur T 25 (1Baq): Uyğ. vir ff. Bud, kolin yétip 'leading (the blind man) by the arm' PP 25, 1-2; 36, 3: Xak. xı ol at yétti: “he led (qada) the horse' (the blind man, etc.) Kaş. II 314 (this V. follows 2 yét- in a separate para. and in all three places is spelt yeyt-, which taken vv, the Uy£. spelling makes the -é:- certain and confirms the original -d-); a.o. 7 424, 18 (tizBin): K.B ukus ol burunduk ani yetse er 'understanding is a bridle (or headstall); if a man uses it as a lead' (he attains his desires) 159; (bridled words are like the nose of a camel, (they go) kança yetse *wherever you lead them” 206; (722 see 2 yét-): Çağ. xv ff. yét (Imperat.) . . . also at ve ya Şayrı nesne yed lead a horse or something else' Vel. 412; yét- (spelt) . . . (2) yadak haşidan “to lead a horse” San. 348r. r: (Kom. xiv see 2 yét-): Kip. xır canaba min carr”l-canib “to lead in the sense of pulling along a led horse! yet- Hou. 35, rr: xv gáda yet- Tuh. 30a. 9: Osm. xiv yed-, sometimes yéd-, “to İcad” (a person or animal); c.i.a.p. T T'S 1 809; II 1028; 111 792; IV 866; xvii (after Çağ.,) in Rümi the word in this sense is pronounced yéd- San. 348r. r. 2 yét- originally “to overtake, catch up with (someone Zcc.)', implying movement by both parties, as opposed to teğ- “to reach (something stationary Dat.) ; but from an early period also almost Intrans., “to be sufficient”, ie. “to catch up with what is required”, and sometimes more vaguelv 'to reach'; in these usages the Object, if stated, is normally in the Dat. S.ia.m.l.g. vv. the usual phonetic changes; the position in Kaş. and variations in vocalization point clearly to -é-. Uyğ. vin Su. E 2-3 (ylge:); o.o. do. E 1, S 8: vir ff. Bud. avıçğa arukti yétti “the old man's weariness overtook him” PP az, 1; yilimiz yaşımız yetdi “our years and age have caught up with us” (i.e. we have come to the end of our lives) U II 88, 79; birök senin küçün yétmese(r) “if your strength is insufficient" do. 26, 12-13; similar phr. U 111 71,6; TT V 8,67-8; 73-4; USD. 43, s: Civ. küçi yétmeser TT VII 25, 18: Xak. xı (after yit- and in the same para.) and one says ol ment: yétti: (yd” carries both fatha and kasra) lahiqa li “he caught me up” (or someone else) (yete:r, yétme:k; MS. yeteir, vetme:h; 1 yét- follows here) Kaş, II 314; emdi: anı: kim yete:r “vho can now overtake him?” (ya/haquhu) I 192, 6; (he takes his hawk and mounts his blood-horse and) arkar yete:r 'overtakes (yudrik) the mountain sheep! 7 421, 17; andağ sü:ke: kim yete:r *who can overcome ( ytiqdir muqáwama) an army like that?” I7 274, 27; a.o. HI 406, 3  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 929 
     
   
   
       ' perish” and the like. M ——————x—  MON. V. YD- |. 885 (laliqa): KB (your authority) tüzü nepke yettl “has extended over everything! 9; (a small boy) yaşı yetmegince “until he reaches years of discretion' 293; (if the man that catches me docs not put a halter on me, I fly like a gazelle) kim ol yetteçi *who will be able to overtake me?' 722; 0.0. 12, 2401 (ugar): xin(?) At. yeter başka bir kün bu til boşlağı “these idle words will one day catch up with you” (lit. your head) 136; aki er biliğni yete bildi kör “see, the generous man knows how to achieve knowledge' 237; Tef. yét- “to reach; to suffice (vv, Dat.) 151: xiv Muh. balağa “to reach! yéit- Mel. 24, 3; Rif. 105 (adding zoa wagala “to arrive"); lahiga wa vacada (to find”) yet- rr4 (da:p- 30, r5): Çağ. xv ff. yét-(-tl) yetiş- . . . wa döndür- "to reach . . . to turn (someone) back” Vel. 411-12 (quotn.); yét- (spelt) (r) rasidan “to come, arrive” San. 348r. 1 (quotns.): Oğuz/Kıp. xı (after 1 yé:t-) the Oğuz and Kip. turn every initial y- into c- and say ol meni: cetti: lahiqani for yéttl: (sic) vv. y- Kaş. II 314: Xvvar. xri yet- “to reach' ' Ali 32: xiv yétditto Qutb 78; MN 6o, etc. (also “to equal in value”): Kom. xiv “to reach; to suffice" yet-, yet- is also used for 'to join, to fasten on', which might be a muddled reminiscence of 1 yét- CCI, CCG, Gr. 123 (quotns.): Osm. xiv ff. yet- “to overtake, to reach'; c.i.a.p. TTS 1824; II 1045; III 804; IV 878. yit- “to stray, get lost” , hence by extension “to S ia m.L g. w. the usual phonetic changes. Türkü vim (the people) ölü: yitü: 'dying and getting lost” I E 27, 28, II E 22; (the people) yitmiş ıçğınmış *went astray and submitted' (i.e. to China) Ongin 1; yitmezün do. 3: Uyğ. vii (you my people) öltip yitdir . . . ölmeçi: yitmeçi: sen 'died and got lost . . . you will not die or get lost” Su. E s: vir ff. Bud. Suv. 615, 14-15 (0na:): Xak. xı yltti: ne:p “the thing went astray' (dalla) Kag. 11 314 (no Aor. or Infin.; followed by 2 yét-); biliğip yite:r “your mind wanders” (yadull) I 467, 8: KB (some stars are guides) yltse yol “if a man loses his way' 129; (if the wicked raise their heads) edgü yiter "the good man is at a loss' 890; yitti ögi “his mind wandered' 1062; a.o. 1178 (2 ófsüz): xiui(?) At. uvut yitti “modesty has ceased to exist” 417; Tef. yit- “to go astray” rs4: Çağ. xv ff. it- (*with 1-”, treated in a single para. vv. ét-, 1 it-, and it- (yıdı:-)) .... . (3) gum wa mafqüd gaştan "to be lost, missing; (4) pirhàán va muxfd şudan "to be hidden, concealed” San. gar. 16: Xwar. xii11(?) (the stallion) kózdin yitü kaçtı “ran away and was lost to sight Oğ. 228-9: xiv yit- “to perish” Qutb 8o: Kip. xmi halaka min halüki' l-ma'mür “to perish', of an official (?corrupt) yit- (MS. t.5b-) Hou. 35, 10: XIV. ylt- halaka wa fand ("to disappear) İd. 91: xv dá'a “to go astray, to perish” yitKav. 9, 4; Tuh. 23a. 12; “adima “to be lost, deficient! (tas bol-/) yit-, which also means dü"a do. 26a. 10: Osm. xiv ff. yit- “to be lost, to perish'; c.i.a.p. T77TS 7 832; II 1055; İİ 813; IV 889.  D yo:d- der. f. in -d- (here 'Trans.; cf. to:d-) fr. *yo:-, cf. yo:k; 'to destroy, obliterate, wipe out, wipe off', and the like. Survives in NE 'Tuv. cot-/cod-: NC Kir., Kox. Joy-: NW Kk. Joy-; Nog. yoy-: SW 'Tkm. yoy-, other languages use yok ét- and the like in this sense. SC Uzb. yüy- “to interpret (dreams)! is a Sec. f. of yor-. Uy£. vii ff. Bud. Sanskrit nirmádayitva “having abandoned arrogance” yotop (for yodop) TT VIII C.9; ((he cut through the youth's neck and) başın yerde yoydi *hid(?) his head in the ground' U III 64, 21; prob. a misreading of yıkdı): Xak. xr ol topra:k yü:zindin yo:dti: “he wiped (rmasaha) the dust off his face”: and one says ol bitiğ yo:dti: “he obliterated (mahd) the writing' (etc) Kaş. HI 434 (yo:da:r, yo:dma:k): xıı1(?) At. balà ranc yodup *wiping out the pain of misfortune” 350: Çağ. xvíff. yoy(sic?) male ma ma"düm kardan “to destroy, annihilate” Sar. 347v. 13; cuy- (spelt; *with -u-”) bar taraf wa nd-büd hardan "to remove, destroy" 215v. 19: Xvvar, (xı yoyüt- “to hide”, if correctly read ?Caus. f, “to hide” “Ali 49): xiv yoy- “to erase! Qutb 85 (yuy-); MN 3: Kip. xii. hagata “to strip off” yo:y(Imperat. in error -gil) Hou. 33, 13: xiv yoymahá wa haşafa d. 100: Osm. xiv to xvi (only) yoy- 'to destroy, obliterate'; fairly common TTS I 843; II 1068; III 821; IV 899. yut- 'to swallow' and the like; s.i.a.m.l.g. vv, the usual phonetic changes. Oğuz/Kıp. xı ol yumurtğa:nı: yutti: “he swallowed (ibtala'a) the egg' (etc.) Kaş. II 313 (yu:ta:r, yu:tma:k, sic): (xiu(?) Tef. yutdur- “to cause to svvallovv” 164): xiv Muh.(?) al-bal" "to swalow' yutma:k Rif. 119 (only); in 105 balağa wa scaşala (a repetition of the previous entry) yartı: is no doubt a corruption of balia yu:tti:: Çağ. xv ff. yut- fura xwurdan à bal" hardan “to gulp down, swallow' San. 341r. 15 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv yut- “to swallow, absorb” Qutb 87: Kom. xiv ditto yout- (sic?) CCG; Gr. 127 (quotn.): Kip. xiu bali'a yut- Hou. 35, 6: xiv yut- balı"a, and in the Kitàb Beylik yut- macca “to sip” İd. 95; bali"a wa macca yut- Bul. 34v.: xv yut- balı"a Kas. 8, 16; ro, 8; 76, r, Tuh. Sb. 2; $3a. $. D yü:d- der f. in -d- (here 'Trans.; cf. to:d-) fr. *yü:-, cf. yük; “to carry (something Zcc.)'. Survives only( ?) in NE Tel yüy- quoted under 4 yüt- R III 6:1. Uyğ. vit ff. Hü (faith is the support) yük yüdmeknin “ carrying the burden' (of attaining Soodncas) TT V 22,43; yüküg yüderler “they carry the burden" do. 24, 49; yükin yüde U II 76, 3: Xak. xı ol yük yü:dtl: hamala”l-himl "he carried the burden” Kaş. 1I] 434 (yü:de:r, yü:dme:k), o.o. 7 4o4 (keten), 448 (kük): KB yüdti .. . yüki 59, 1874-6; (he is the best of men and) bodun yüdgüsi “the one who carries the common people” 543; o.o. 1720, 2680 (ava:ğ), stt5, 5558: xın(?) At. (do not take more of this world's good than is necessary or) wabal yüdgülük 'you will have to carry  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 930 
     
   
   
     886 (a load of) sin” 190; (suffering is transitory : the patient man survives) tavvübın yüdüp “carrying his (load of) uprightness' 352; Tef. yüdditto 165. Dis. YDA yetti: (yeddi:) “seven”, There is no doubt that the medial consonant was originally double, cf. €kki:, q.v. C.ia.p.a.l.. The original voiced consonant survives in the Kip. forms listed below and in SW Az. yeddi, Osm., Tkm. yedi, and the double consonant in SE Türki yette BS 648, yetti Tarring 155: SC Uzb., NW Kumyk yetti: SW Az. yeddi, For the -é- cf. yetmiş. Türkü vii over a dozen occurrences, yeti: commoner than yeti:: viri ff. Man. yéti is common: Yen. yeti: yegermi: 'seventeen' Mal. 26, s, yeti: do. 48, 9: Uyğ. Ix inim yeti: 'I had seven younger brothers' Suci 6: vini ff. Man.-A, Man., Bud., Civ. yeti is common: Xak. xi (by itself, under the heading fa'lal, requiring four letters) yeti: (?read yettl:) 'the number seven';- hence one says yeti: kat kö:k sab'a atbüq mina”l-samateát “the seven layers of the heavens” Kaş. III 27; yeti: IJ] 227 (bóke:): xin(?) Tef. yetl: (once yetdiü:) 152: xiv Muht. sab"a yé:di: Mel. 81, 8; yeti: Rif. 186: Çağ. xv ff. yétti “the number seven', also pronounced ba-taxfif-i ta, i.e. as yétl San. 348v. 17 (on the -tt- sce 20v. o f£): Xwar. xiv yeti Qutb. 78: Kom. xiv 'seven; a wcek' yeti/yetti CCG; Gr.: Kip. xir sab'a yeti: Hou. 22, 6: xiv yetti: (sic) al-sab"a, originally (wa'l-ag]) yedi:, also so pronounced M. 91; sab'a yeddi: (sic) Bul. 12, ır: xv yedi: Kav. 65, 7; Tuh. 60b. 7 a.o.0. (the forms vv, -d- are prob. "Tkm.): Osm. xiv and xv yedi occurs in several texts T'T.S III 810; IV 884. . E yità: in O. Kir, sec ayıt-. S yitl: Sce yitig. yota: 'the thigh'; unusually rare for an anatomical term. Survives in this sense in NE yoda/yodo R HI 440: SE Tar, yota do.; Türk: yota BS 662; yote/yo:tö/yöte/l6:ta/ lo:te Jarring 159: (NC Kir. joto; Kzx. jota *mountain crest, or range' is difficult to connect). Uyğ. viri ff. Civ. in TT VII 19 describing the position of the soul in the twelve days of the animal cycle yota comes after *armí and a gap and before 'forehead' and “side”, (the order seems to be chaotic): Xak. xı tavğa:ç (VU) yoda:si: “the name of a tree' Kaş. 1 453 (tavğa:ç) may perhaps belong here,' but medial -d- is unusual in Xak. and may be an error for -d-, which makes the connection improbable: (KB yodası teziğ is an error in the Vienna MS. for tuşa ham tiziğ 71:2): xiv. Muh.(?) al-saq "leg, thigh' yo:ta: Rif. 142 (only): (Kom. xiv yota “a set of teeth', CCG; Gr., might be a mistranslation of this word). Dis. V. YDAD yidr- Den. V. fr. yrd; 'to have an unpleasant smell, to stink'.. Survives only(?) in NE yıdı-/çıdı- , Khak, cizi-. Some languages MON. V. YDuse yidla:-, q.v,, (normally Trans.) in this sense, but the syn. V. Sast:- is much more widely distributed. Türkü vru ff. Man. M 7 6, s (toz-): UyB. vii ff. Bud. U HI 25, 6 (toBral-); TT VI 44s (sası:-): Xak. xi et yıdı:dı: "the meat smelt bad” (axamma), also used when anything 'stank' (antana) Kaş. IIT 86 (yıdı:r, yıdı:ma:k, corrected. fr. -me:k); yıdı:dı: ne:g “the thing stank' (rratina); a pejorative word (/uğa radiya) III 260 (a later insertion in the text, after the cross-heading -R- and without Aor. or Infin.; prob. originally a marginal note in an earlier MS.): KB (the mind of man is like meat) artar yidir 'it decays and stinks' 5862; xiv Muh. cüfa "to stink” yıy- Mel. 24, 15; Rif. 107; (cöyif yur 66, s: 16s yıyığ): Çağ. xv ff. It- ("with i-', see yit-).. . (4) bti hardan 'toemitanodour' San. 93r. 16: Kom. xiv “to stink' 1y- (or ty1- ?) CCT, CCG; Gr. 273 (quotns.): Kip. xiv yıyı- "to emit an odour' ( faha); in the Kitab Beylik yıyı is *pungency' (al-dafar), and when they said yıydı: (sic) it meant specifically an unpleasant smell (fxtaşşa bi'l-rávihati'l-muntina), and if they meant “a pleasant (fayyiba) smell' they added an indication of it to the V. and said tatlu: yıyır "it smells sweet! İd. 100; autana yıyı- (sic?, Infin. -mek) Bul. 3or.: Osm. xiv to xvi (only) yiy-/yiyi- (Infin. -mek) 'to stink'; common TTS 1834; İT 1057; İH 814; IV 891. yiti:- “to be sharp'; not noted earlier than Çağ., and now ?obsolete cverywhere, but sec yitit-, yitig. Çağ. xv ff. iti- (spelt, with i-") tund gudan “to be swift, active, impetuous', and the like Sax. 94v. 19 (quotn.). Dis. YDC D ya:tçı: (ya:dçış) N.Ag. fr. 2 ya:t, properly 'a rain-making magician', but in translated Bud. texts used less specifically for 'magician' in general, As such n.o.a.b.ş forms like yadaçı in Çağ. xv ff. (quoting Báhur; not, as described, Osm.) and NE Alt., Kumd., Tel, R İİ 210 are reborrowings fr. Mong. ; and scc ya:cı:, Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. U 7I 84, iz etc. (1u:): Xak. xı Kaş. III 307 (2 yatla:-); n.m.e. Dis. YDD VUD yatut Hap. leg., but syn. w. yatrum; Dev. N., Active or Caus.?, fr. yat- in the sense of “İying down, waiting', or the like. Xak. xt yatut a/-madad fi'l-cund "the reserves in an army”, taken fr. the phr. yatut saç a/-ga'ru'lladi ursila ba'da'l-atewal “the hair which has been left to hang after the first' (has been plaited or cut off?) Kaş. 77 287 (al-awwal does not seem to have any special technical sense in this context and may be corrupt). D yodut Active Dev. N. fr. yo:d-, lit. *destructive, damaging', or the like. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı yodut aí-say'u'lladi lá xayr fihi “a thing which has nothing good about it'; and when a man is cursed (or abused, subba) one says yodut Kaş. 111 8; a.o. do. 13 (yoduğ).  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 931 
     
   
   
        DIS. YDG 887 Dis. V. YDDD yıdı:t- Caus, f. of yıdı:- ; “to make (something) stink'; n.o.a.b. "Türkü vırı yılka: teğml:şi:g yıdı:tmayı:n ayka: teğmil:şl:g arta:tmayrn edgü:si: bolzu:n “1 will not make one that has reached (the age of) a year stink, or one that has reached (the age of) a month putrefy; may good come to them” IrkB 59: UyB. vifi. Bud. TT X $47 (sasit-). D yitit- Caus. f. of yiti:-; “to sharpen'.. Not well attested in the early period or widely distributed now, but survives in NE Khak. çitet-, Tuv. cidit-: SW xx Anat. itit- SDD Soz, the cognate form SW itile-; Tkm. yitile- also occurs. Cf. bile:-, yanu:-. Xak. (xr yıtıt- (sic) in Kaş. İl 317 is a correction in a later hand of yanut-, q:v.): xırı(?) At, ukuüş xüş yititip sözümni ap-a 'sharpen up your understanding and mind and remember my words' 22: xiv Muh.(?) ahadda “to sharpen” (bile:-; in margin) yitit- Rif. roz: Çağ. xv ff. itit- (spelt) Caus. f.; tund kardan “to make Swift, activc”, etc. San. gör. 4 (quotns.; corrupted in P. de C. to £nit-): Kip. xiv yititsanna "to sharpen” 7d. 91. D yadtur- Caus. f. of ya:d-; 'to order to spread out” and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. as yaydur-/caydur-, etc. “Türkü vırı ff. Man. nomuğ törüğ yadturmatin tıdtımız erser “if we have impeded the (true) doctrine and rules by not causing them to be published abroad” Chreas. 74-5: Xak. xı ol apar töşe:k yatturdı: "he ordered him to spread out (absatahu) the mattress', or anything else that is spread out; originally yadturdt: but assimilated; and one says men apar sü:sin yatturdum 'I ordered him to disperse (2:-tafriq) his army” (etc.) Kaş. III 93 (yatturur, yatturma:k). D yedtür- Hap. legii Caus. f. of yé:d-. Xak. xı (after yittür-; yettürdi:) is also used when one has urged him to pack (“ala ta"biya) his goods and stores in a bale or the like, originally yedtürdüm (sic) but assimilated Kaş. ETT 94 (no Aor. or Infin.). D yodtur- Caus. f. of yo:d- ; s.i.s.m.l, vv. the same phonetic changes as yo:d-. Xak.xı men anar bitig yotturdum “1 made him obliterate (amhaytuhu) the writing' (etc.); originally yodturdum; also used of anything when you have wiped it out (arısahtahn) until the traces of it disappear Kaş. III 94 (yottururmen, yotturma:k, MS. y.tt.rdma:k). Dis. YDG yada:ğ “on foot' (as opposed to "on horseback”). S.i.a.m.l.g. except SE; NE Khak. caza; Tuv. çadağ: NC Kir. jó: (sic); Kzx. jayaw: SC Uzb. yayov: NW yayav/layavv, etc.: SW Az., Osm. yaya, Türkü vir yadag süsin “their infantry' (as apposed to atlığ süsi: “their cavalry”) ZI S 1; (two-thirds of them were mounted) bir ülügi: yadağ “one-third on foot' T 4; yadağın “on foot” 7 E 28, 32; T 25; a.o.  II E 32 (yaviz): Uyğ. vir Şu. S o (kedimlig): Xak. xı yadağ (MS. ?yadajg) al-rácil “pedestrian, on foot” Kaş. III 28, a.o. 1 381, $: KB 1734 (kulaçla:-), 2370 (okçı:), 3831: xiv Rbg. yadağ yor1 “go on foot” R 111 209; Muh. al-rácil (opposite to “mounted” atlığ) yaya:ğ Mel. şo, 12; 55, 11; yada:B (-d-) Rif. 146; ya:ya:k 153: Çağ. xvff. yayak biydda “pedestrian, on foot” San. 340v. 29 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv yadağ ditto Nağc. 24, 17: Kap. xut al-rácil (opposite to 'mounted' atlu:) ya:ya:ğ Hou. 26, 15: Osm. xiv ff. yayak and yayan (?crasis of yadağın) common till xvi, yaya noted fr. xv onwards TTS 7 804; II 1021; 111 587; İV 861. D yatığ Dev. N. fr. yat- ; lit. lying down' and the like. S.i.s.m.l., e.g. NC Kir. Jatu: NW Kk. jatiw: SW Osm. yatr, Tkm. yatuv; the specific meaning in Kaş. seems to be Hap. leg. Xak. xı yatığ al-manám 'slecping quarters'; hence one says ant: yatığında: tutğul 'seize him in his sleeping quarters” Kaş. III ız: (KB not noted, yatığ in 495-6 is the Acc. of 1 ya:t and in the Vienna MS., 4704, an error for batığ). VUD yatitk Dev. N. in -1k (?) fr. yat-; this Suff. is very dubious in Xak., the word follows the” entries of yatuk and may be a misvocalization of that word, cf. yitükle:-; it is Hap. leg. in this sense; all modern forms of yatık are Sec. sf. of yatuk. Xak. xr yatik al-nawm toa”l-manüm ayda(n) both “sleep” and 'sleeping quarters'; hence one says (0l» anı: yatıkında: tutti: “he seized him in his sleep or in his sleeping quarters! Kaş. III 15. D yatuk Tntrans. Dev. N./A. fr. yat-, the general meaning is 'lying down, prone, prostrate” vv. various special applications. S.i.a.m.lg. except NE, SE as yatik/jatik “prostrate, horizontal, gently sloping'; metaph. “polite, modest', and the like. Kaj.'s first meaning is difficult to connect semantically and may be a l-w. Xak. xı yatuk the name of “a woollen fabric' (a/-şüf) woven of two kinds (of thread); the warp is wool and the weft cotton; yatuk ne: 'anything thrown away and abandoned” (al-matrüh sca”l-mansi), hence “a sluggard” (or idler, a/-2as/an) is called yatuk kişi:, and a section of the Oğuz who live in their towns and do not migrate to other places or engage in raids (yagzün) are called yatuk that is 'sluggards and wasters' (al-kusalá voa l-matrühün) Kaş. III 14 (yatik follows): Çağ. xv ff. yatuk surahi-yi pahn "a broad squat goblet', called in Pe. baftak (little duck') (quotn.); the translation of yatuğ/yatuk as “a musical instrument” in the Rümi author (Vel. 407) is an error San. 326v. 22 (it is a misreading of yatuğan, a Mong. l.-w. listed in San): Osm. xvff. yatık/yatuk “a broad squat goblet, or jug'; fairly common T TS I 795; JI 1013; JI1 780; IV 855. D yıdığ Dev. N./A. fr. yıdı:-, “smell, odour (usually, not always, unpleasant); foulsmelling”. Survives in NE yıdığ/çıdığ/çızığ ;  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 932 
     
   
   
      888 elsewhere it is difficult to distinguish between modern forms of this word and yad. Uyf. vun ff. Bud. TT VI 229 (ölüg), 445 (sasığ): Civ. (if a man's armpit is) yıdığ 'malodorous' . yıdığı keter “its foul smell disappears” H ras -9: Xak. xr yıdığ “malodorous” (a/-muntin) of anything; yidij$ ot a/-harmal “rue, Peganum harmala” in the language of Ka:sgar; in the language of Uc and Barsğa:n it is called ildrük and in Oğuz yü:ze:rlik Kaş. 171 12: KH 999 (tidiğ): xiv. A/nh.(?) cá'if “stinking” yıyığ Rif. 16s (Mel. 66, 5 yur): Xwar. xiv yidig/yidi 'smell, odour” (usually. pleasant) Qutb 89; Nahe. 31, 7; 263, 3-5; 422, 11: Osm. xiv. yty! (sic?) “odour, smell” (not unpleasant); in several texts, transcribed 57yi TTS 1 834; II 1057; IV 89r. D yoduğ Dev. N. fr. yo:d-; survives in the sense of 'destruction, extermination', and the like in NC Kir. joyu:; Kzx. joyu: NW Kk. joyrw. Cf. yodut. Xak. XI yoduğ husea an yttxada'l-racul bi-curm ğayriht is used when a man is caught for someone else's crime; hence one says ani) yodufr tokindi: aşabahu vcabál curm ğayrihi “the evil effects of someone else's crime struck him” Kaş, III 12: KB isizke ot erdi yagika yoduğ “he was fire to the wicked and destruction to thc enemy” 408; (your life is finished) ökünç ol yoduğ "it is (the time for) repentance and annihilation* 1400; 0.0. 3552, 4545, 5423, 5864 (yODa:ğçı:): Gancak xi yoduğ “a term of abuse” (sabh) applied to boys, takes the place of yodut Kaş. IH 13. ?E yodka: Hap. leg.; there is at lcast one other mis-spelling in this verse, and this word, which is morphologically inexplicable, is no doubt an error, prob. for kodkr. Xak. xı bakmas bodun sevüğsüz yodki: yüzi: (MS. vüdi:) saranka: /d (VU) va/ra"ati (unvocalized, ? error for ye//f”ati) "Hqasen id l-baxilil-bagidt (MS. bagizt) H-Ralih l-scach 'the people do not raise. their heads(?) to the odious pecvishfaced miser! Kaş, Tİ 250, 3; n.m.e. D yatğa:k Dev. N./A. (connotingz habitual action) fr. yat-; lit. 'habitually lying down'. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE(?),in SEasyatkak 'sluggard' (cf. yatuk) and elsewherc as yatak/jatak 'sleeping quarters! and usually more specifically "bed, animal's lair, permanent settlement), and the like. Xak. xı yatğa:k harisu/-malik aea"l-hişn ca nahıcihi “the guard. (or sentry, here specifically by night) of a king, fortress, etc.'; hence one says yatğa:k yattı: háta'l-racul hárisa(n) “the man spent the night on guard' Kaş, İİİ 42: KB tüni yattı yatÉakta “he spent his night on guard' 952; 0.0. 608 (turğa:k), 1606, 2533: NIV MuhA?) Rif. 168 (only, arka:): Çağ. xv ff. yatağ/yatak xicübgáh "slceping quarters! (quotns. Çağ. and Rümi), and metaph. pás tea büsdüri 'guard, guard duty! San. 326v. 12 (adding that some lexicographers claim the word as Pe.): Osm. XIV and xvi yatak 'animal's lair”, in two texts TTS II 1013; IV 854.   DIS. YDG D *yadguk llap. ley. Conc. N. (N.1.?) fr. ya:d-; lit. 'something which spreads out something. Kip. xi yayğuk sisiva fadyrl-faras "the teat of a mare's udder'; some of them say yazguk Kaş, H1 27. D yadğun Pass, Dev, N./A. fr. ya:d-, lit. "spread: out”. Survives in NE: Alti, “Tel, yaykin/yaykkin; Bar. yayğın, uscd in the phr. yaykin (etc.) su: “a river in flood', R 171 7, and recently revived in SW. Rep. "Furkish as yayğın widely used or seen; spreading (borrowed fr. R IJ] 7). Xak. xi KB begig koşnı kılma ya yadğun ögüz “do not make a beg or a river in flood your neighbour! 4546. Dis. V. YDĞD yatik- llap. leg.; Intrans. Den. V. fr. 1 ya:t. Xak. xı yağuk kişi: yatıktı: “the neighbour became a stranger! (şdra . acnahi) Kaş. II 56 (yatika:r, yatıkma:k). D yutik- Intrans. Den. V. fr. yut.. Pec. to Kaş. Xak. xr yılkı: yutikti: "the: livestock were severely affected (ihtaraqat, lit. “burnt”) by the snow', that is when they died of cold Kaş. III 56 (yutika:r, yutikma:k); the same sentence is quoted in 7 21, 2 as an example of a Pass. (naf nl) V. in which the Suff. -1k- has the. connotation of being overcome (maglib aw maqhür) bv something. D yatğur- Caus. f. of yat-; s.i.s.m.l. w. the same meaning, e.g. NW Kk. jatkar- (sic): SW Osm,, 'l'km. yatir-; (Az. yatirt-), but most use forms of the later Caus. f. yatğız-. Uy£. vur ff. Bud. (if a murderer is reborn in hell, the lords of hell there) tópün yatğururJar "make him lie face downwards' (on the red-hot floor) T.M IV 252, 34; 0.0. PP 65, 4 (çombur-), U III] 14, 7: Xak. xr ol anı: yatğurdi: adca'afiu :ca andmahu "he made him lic down and sleep! Kag. //7 go (yatğurur, yatğurma:k): xiv Mult. natercama "to put to sleep” (ya:tztiz- Mel. 41, ro), yatğur- Rif. 131: Çağ, xvİT. yatkur- yerr- Vel. 405; yatğur- (spelt) xcecabünidan “to put to slcep' San. 326r. 27 (quotns.): Xwar. xır yatkur-/ yatur- ditto “A/ 24, 25: xiv yatur- ditto Qutb 735: Kip. xiv. yatkir- arqada "to put to sleep”, originally yatdir- with the -dirregularly altered. to. -K-. /[d. 94; arqada yatur- Bul. 22r.: xv ditto yatkir- Tu. ssa. 10; the Caus. f. of yat- náma is yatkir- Kar. 68, 18. D yatğaş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of *yatfa:Den. V. fr. yatığ. Xak. xr ol anın birle: yatğaşdı: da'acaliu “he lay down beside him” Kaş. III 103 (yatğaşu:r, yatğaşma:k). Tris. YDG D yadağlık Tlap. leg.; A.N. fr. yada:ğ. Xak. xi yadağlık a/-rucla fi'l-sayr. "travelling on foot Kaş. JI] si: (KB 4263 yıdağlık in the Vienna MS. is an error for tayağlik). D yadığlığ P.N./A. fr. *yadiB Dev. N. fr. ya:d-; pec. to Xak.. Xak. xı yadığlığ töşe:k  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 933 
     
   
   
        DIS "a mattress which is spread out (al-mabsüf) Kaş. III 49; a.o. şo, 18. D yıdığlık Hap. leg.; A.N. fr. yıdığ. Xak. xı yıdığlık (MS. yadjihk) al-natn wa'l-bilà ma'a(n) both “foul smell” and 'putridity' Kaş. Ill şa. D yatğaşuk Hap. leg., Intrans. Dev. N./A. fr. yatğaş-. Xak. xt yatğaşuk al-daci' (MS. al-dacig)'a bed-fellow' ; yatğaşuk (MS. yatgagik) ufri: al-'atama '"bed-time', in one dialect (f? luğa) Kaş. İİİ ss. Dis. YDG D yitiğ Dev. N./A. fr. yiti:-; lit. "sharp”, metaph. 'alert, quick, clever', and the like. S.iLa.m.l.g. except SC; NE Kac, Koib., Küer. yidig R III 527; Alt. ödü, Khak. citiğ, Tuv. cidig: SE Türki yittik/ittik/iştik Jarring 144: NC Kzx. jiti: NW Kumyk itti: SW Az. iti; Osm. iti/fitik (now obsolete); "Tkm, yiti, "The Uyg. forms yiti/yitti and yiti in K.B are unusual for so carly a period. Uy£. viu ff. Bud. yiti (spelt yt) kiliç “a sharp sword' UT 37, 14; II 78, 30-1 (ditto); 86, 48 (yrti); yitti 'sharp' (knife) 271 64, 12; IV 32, 6; 38, rar: Xak. xı yitig bicek “a sharp (al-hadid) knife' ; also used of anything else with a sharp edge (lahu hidda), swords etc.; yitig er 'a man who is clever and sharp” (a/-nadb . . . al-hádd) in dealing with atfairs Kaş, JI 18; a.0. / 384, 22: KB yitig 329 (ic) —yiti kil bu köz “keep a sharp look-out” 927; (young warriors) bolur ked yiti (rhymes vv. oti) "become very keen! 2373; 0.0. 1133, 1855: xı11(?) Tef. yitiğ ( . . . köz) 154: xiv Muh. al-hadd (opposite to “blunt” biçma:z) yi:ti:/i:ti: Mel. s4, 5; yiti: Rif. 151: Çağ. xvff. itik Cwith 1-") . ... (2) Zend sa tiz 'sharp, quick, alert' (quotns.); and metaph. sari! wa züd “rapid, fast” (quotn.) San. sv, ro: Xwar. xiv yltig 'sharp' Quth 78; Nahc. 239, 14; Kom. xiv yitifiti "sharp" CCG; Gr. 134 (quotn.; misspelt yitifitr): Kip. xii al-háddu'l-qátí! (cutting), e.g. a sword, etc. (opposite to 'blunt' (PU) çüne:) Cylti: ?» [J0u. 27,7 (omitted in MS.): xiv yitl: al-háddu'l-qàti' Id. 91: xv hadd yiti: Tuh. 132a. 7: Osm. xiv to xvi (only) yiti (rare)/iti 'sharp, quick”, etc., usually metaph.; fairly common T'TS I 395; I1 553; İİ 388; IV 443. D yitük Intrans./Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. yit-, “lost, strayed', and the like. Survives in SW Az. itik; Osm., Tkm. yitik; such forms are not to be confused vv. yitig. Xak. xt yitük a/-dálla 'a.strayed or lost animal” Kaş. III 18 (prov., yitüklüğ), o.o. IJ 115 (soruk-, mis-spelt tiyil); 143 (bulun-); 182 (caltur-); IH 181 (2 so:r-): xin(?) At. biligsiz tiriéle yitük kórgülük “one must look upon ignorant mortals (?, reading tirigler) as strayed (or lost)” 94: Çağ. xv ff. itik (with 1-”) (1) mafqüd swa gum şuda “lost, strayed' San. 95v. 19: Kip. xiv yitük al-dáyi' "straying” İd. 91: Osm. xivff. yitük, often yitik, occasionally yütük “lost, strayed” (usually of animals), c.i.a.p. TTS I 832; II 1056; Hİ 813; IV 889. 3 :   . YDL 889 D yétge:k (yedğe:k) as this word is noted only in association vv. yé:d- and its der. f.s, presumably a Dev. N. (connoting habitual action) fr. ye:d-, lit. 'something habitually filled”. Xak. xr yetge:k al-'ayba wa'l-rizma “sack, bale' Kaş. I1] 7o (yédig-; mis-spelt yenge:h), al-rizma 77; (yédil-); rizmatwl-mità' aict'l-'ayba 434 (yé:d-); n.m.e. Tris. YDG D yiti:gliğ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. yitig, presumably in its metaph. sense of 'clever, alert', etc. Türkü vrit ff. (a brave man's son went to the army; on the battlefield he made himself(?) a powerful messenger(?); when he comes home) özl: a:tanml:ş ógrüncü:lü: ati: yiti:gli:$ keli:r “he comes as one who has made himself famous, joyful, and with a reputation for alertness(?)” IrRB ss. D yitüklüg Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. yitük; noted onlv in a prov. illustrating yitük. Xak. xr yitüklüg ana:sı: ko:yun aca:r “the ownet of a lost animal (sálibu'l-dàlla) searches for his lost animal (even) in his mother's bosom' Kaş. III 18; n.m.e. D yéti:ge:n Den. N. in -£e:n, apparently a Sec, f. of -&amp;ü:n (Collective), fr. yeti: (yétti:); lit. "seven together'; “the constellation Ursa Major, the Great Bear”. Survives in NE yetteden and the like R III 365: SW Osm. yediğer (sic); Tkm. yedigen. Uyf. viri ff. Bud. yetiğen sutur “the Sütra of Ursa Major TT VII 40, 10; olo. dö, 120 (ağzan-), etc.: Xak. xı yeti:ğe:n bamát naş “Ursa Mayor” Kaş. III 37; o.o. 40, 12 (yultuz); 247, 24 (kaçar): KB yetiğen kötürdi yana baş örü “Ursa Mafor raised its head again” 6220: xiv Muh.(?) banát na"ş tegiz(?) yetigem | Rif. 184 (the first word corrupt, prob. only an abortive attempt to write yetige:1): Çağ. xv ff. yétigen 'the name of the constellation banátu'l-na'$ (sic) , in Rümi yediler/yedi kardaş San. 348v. 19: Xwar. xiv yetigen ditto Quib 77: Kip. xiv yetigen (MS. yetegen) banüt nafş İd. 91; ditto (MS. yitgen) Bul. 2, 13: xv ditto yétiger (sic) Tuh. va. ır: Osm. xiv ff. yediğen once or twice in xiv; yediger c.i.a.p. 7 7S 7 808; II 1028; İH 792; İV 865; and see Çağ. Tris. V. YDGD yitükle:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. yitük; everywhere spelt yitikle:- which was no doubt the vocalization familiar to the scribe of our MS. Xak. xı ol at yitükle:di: arşada dülla faras wa gayrahu “he stated where the lost horse (etc.) could be found” Kaş. III 343 (yitükle:r, yitükle:me:k). Dis. YDL yötül (yötöl) “a cough'; w. no obvious "Turkish etymology, perhaps a l.-w. Survives in NE Alt, Tel. yödül, Bar. yödöl, Tuv. çödül: SE Tar., Türki yótel(7arríng yütel): NC Kir jótól; Kzx. jótel: SC Uzb. yütal:   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 934 
     
   
   
     890 DIS NW Kk. çötel, Kaz. yutel (sic); Kumyk, Nogay yötel, Uyğ. vini ff Civ. TT. VIII M.26 (1 bas); H II 22, 3o: Çağ. xv ff. yótel surfa 'cough' San. 341 v. 9 (quotn.). D yıdlığ P.N./A, fr. yd; “having a smell, or odour', usually preceded by a qualifying word describing its nature. S.i.s.m.l,, sometimes much distorted, e.g. NC Kir. jittu:; Kzx. iyisti: SC Uzb. isli. Uyğ. viui ff. Man. M 118, 14-15 (ii) (kin): do. 9, 7; ro, 9 (yıparlığ), Wind. 29-30 (kil-): Bud. (of fruit, etc.) öplüğ yıdlığ 'colourful and fragrant” Sut. 529, 12; a.o. TT V 8, 72-9 (1 tütsüg). Dis. V. YDLD yadil- Pass. f. of ya:d- ; “to be spread out; to be published abroad', etc. S.i.m.m.lg. vv. the same phonetic changes as ya:d-. Türkü vini: ff. Man. (these twelve. two-hour periods, a Man. technical term) kópül icre yadilur yaraşur “are published abroad in the mind and are beneficial M III: 19, 8-9 (i); nomi dını yadılmışta “since the (Man.) doctrine and religion were preached” TT 7T 17 bottom: Uy£. vir ff. Bud. ot óplüg saçı arkasinda yadilu turup 'his flame-coloured hair being spread over his back" U IV 10, 67:8 (nd 7 aş, 13-14); ölüm yadılıp “death spreads" (through all the organs of the dying man) TT Hİ, p. 26, note ş, 11; 0.0. PP 7, z (kü:); U HII 7,14; TT VI 464; VIII K.8: Civ. atın kün yadildi "your name and fame have been pubİlshed abroad! TT 7 146; a.o. VII 29, ro, see 1 yayıl-: Xak. xı sü: yadıldı: “the army (etc.) dispersed” (tafarraqa), and one says to:n kü:nke: yadıldı: "the garment was spread out (busita) in the sun”, also used of anything else when it was spread out; and ya:ğ to:nda: yadıldı: “the oil spread (Intrans.; tafaşşü) over the garment (etc.) Kaş. III 77 (yadlur (sc), yadilma:k); (after 1 yaytl-) yayıldı: sü: "the army (etc.) dispersed', alternative form with -d- in yadıldı: 777 192 (yayılu:r, yayılma:k): o.o. 7 44z, 7 (tergin); HI 148 (ba:z), 159 (1 ya:t): KD yadil- (of a man's fame) “to be spread abroad” is common 458, 496, 737, etc.; yadıldı ağı "his net has been spread” 4224; a.o. 4892 (butik): xin(?) Tef. yazıl- (sic) “to spread out, stretch out” (Intrans.) 135; yayil- ditto 136; Çağ. xv ff. yayıl- (1) balın sudan “to be spread out”, (2) çaridan sutür (of livestock) “to graze' (i.e. spread out over the pasture) Sar. 340v. II (quotn.): Xwar. xiv yayıl- “to be disseminated”, etc. Qutb 65: Kom. xiv yayıl- “to be spread out CCG; Gr. D yédil- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of ye:d-. Xak. xı yetge:k yedildi: xitati'I-rizma ta "ubbiyati (MS. 'aybatiyl-mità' fiha "the bale was sewn together and the goods packed in it" Kaş. III 77 (yedilür, yedilme:k, both unvocalized). D yétil- Pass. f. of 2 yét-; not Pass. in its ordinary meanings, which are rather Intrans.; survives, meaning 'to arrive; be, or become, ready; ripen, reach maturity” in SE. Türki . YDL yétil-: NC Kir, Kzx. jetll-: SC Uzb. yetll-: NW Kk. jetil-. The Pass. f. of 1 yé:t- is not noted carlier than Osm. xiv ff. yedil- (of an animal, blind man, etc.) “to be led” T'TS 7 809; II 1028; HII 792; IV 865. Yitil- "to be sharpened' Pass. f. of yiti:- is first noted in Osm. xv TTS1831. Xak. xı ol sü:ke: yétildi:/afiiga'l-cund :a ğayrahu 'he caught up the army" (etc.) Kaş. IH 77 (yötilü:r, yetilme:k, sic); a.o. I 106, o (1 él): KB (listen to the wisc man . . .) yetilmiş yaşı “of mature years” 261, 1222; (my life has ended) yetildi ödüm “my time has come” 1099; kamuğ arzularka yetildi elíg "his hand has reached all his desires! 1253; o.o. 1211 (mapit-), 4066, 5716: xin(?) 7ef. yétil- (of a crop) “to mature”, yaşı yétilmis; faqat yétildi “his patience was exhausted” 152: Çağ. xv ff. yétil-(-ip) yetiş- Vel. 412 (quotn.); yétil- (spelt) rasida şudan “to have arrived; to be ripe, mature" San. 348r. 22 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv yétll- "to arrive; to be achieved and the like Qutb 78. D yodul- Pass. f. of yo:d-; s.i.s.m.]. w. the same phonctic changes. Xak. xı ka:n kiligtin yoduldi: "the blood was wiped (muhiya) off the sword' ; and one says anın at aydın yoduldi: "his name was erased from the Sultan's register (mnudiya .. . min disváni' l-sultán) ; also used of anything idà nehiya Kaş. HI 77 (yodulur, yodulma:k): Çağ. xv ff. yoyulmal: wa ma"düm şudan “to be wiped out, annihilated” Sam. 347v. 18: Osm. xivff. yoyul- “to be erased, wiped out”, ci.a.p. TTS I 843; II 1069; İİİ 822; IV 899. D 1 yatla:- Den, V. fr. 1 ya:t; "to treat as a stranger and the like; survives in SE "Türki yatli-: SC Uzb. yotla-; most modern V.s of this form mean “to memorize' and the like, and are Den. V.s fr. the Pe. L-w. yad “memory”. Uyj. vut ff. Civ. (after undertaking various obligations) apam birök bu bitigdeki sózdin kayusı yatlasarbiz “if we repudiate any of the undertakings in this document' USp. 77, 16-17: Xak. xi (after 2 yatla:-) and one says ol anı: yatla:dı: "he reckoned that he was a stranger” (acnabi) Kaş. II 308 (no Aor. or Infin.): Çağ. xv ff. yatla:- bigana wa dür hardan 'to treat as a stranger; to banish' San. 326v. 6 (quotn.). D 2 yatla:- Hap. leg., but see yatlat-, yatIan-; Den. V. fr. 2 ya:t.. Xak. xı ya:tçı: yatla:dı: fakahhana"l-köhin | bi'l-ahcár ıı-suhub wwa'l-amtár “he: magician performed magic ceremonies vvith stones to (bring) clouds and rain! Kaş. İİİ 307 (1 yatla:- follows). D yidla:- Den. V. fr. yid; "to smell (something Ace.) ; cf. ytdt:- (Intrans.), q.v. S.i.s.m.l. w. the usual phonetic changes. Uy£. viu ff. "Bud. (so too the nose) . . . yıd yıpar yıdlayur *smells (all sorts of) odours' TT VI 168-9; yıdlamış yıdığ “the odour which it smells' do. 172; Xak. xı ol yıpa:r yıdla:dı: "he smelt (tagammama) the musk” (etc.) Kaş. II 308 (yidla:r, yidla:ma:k): Xwar. xiv yıyla'to smell' Qutb 91; (the murderer) uçtmax 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 935 
     
   
   
        DIS. YDN 891 yıdığnı yıdlamağay “vill not smell the odour of paradise! Nahe. 336, 7; a.o. 348, 7: Kip. xı şamma “to smell (VU) yiyla:- (?src, Imperat. -gil) Hou. 41, 3: xiv ditto İd. 100: Osm. xiv to xvi (only) yıyla- “to smell'; common TTS 7 835; İİ 1058; III 814; IV 891 (transcribed yíyle-; both -mak and -rmek noted). D yatlat- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of 2 yatla:-. Xak. xı beg yatlattı: “the beg ordered the magician (al-káhin) to perform magical ceremonies! and he brought (cá'a bi-) wind and rain; this is well known in the country of the "Turks, wind, hail and rain are procured (yustaclab) with a stone by the permission of God most high Kaş. /1 355 (yatlatu:r, yatlatma:k). D yatlan- Refl. f. of 2 yatla:-; pec. to Uyğ. Bud.; in spite of the views expressed in TT X, p. 29, note 387, where the relevant quotns. are assembled, which were put forward in ignorance of the existence of 2 ya:t, there is no doubt that yat yatlan- was the phr. used to translate an (ultimately) Sanskrit V. meaning “to perform magical ceremonies'; in this context there is no implication of rain magic. Uy£. vin ff. Bud. (the ya&amp;ga's son for twelve years) yat yatlanğuçı braman basasinda barıp “follovved the örahman who performed magical ceremonies! TT X sör-z, (when) anıtyatlığ ürlüksüz yat yatlanğuçı “(the magician) who performs impermanent (Sanskrit anityatá) and transitory magical ceremonies' (comes and tries to steal my life) do. 539-40; 0.0. (damaged) do. 387, 402, 413. D yidlan- Refi, f. of yıdla:-, used as Intrans./ Pass.; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı et yıdlandı: “the meat (etc.) began to smell' (bad, tarawwaha) Kaş. IH io (yidlanu:r, yidlanma:k): Xwar. xiv yidlan- 'to be smelt' (of milk on the breath) Qutb 89. D yitlin- n.o.a.b. and generally used in association w. bar-; the meaning is clearly something like "to go away, disappear', which indicates that it is a Refl. Pass. f. of yit-, irregular since yit- is Intrans. and cannot properly form a Pass. Cf. yitlintür-. Uyj. vn ff. Bud. (on the approach of death) ağazımdakı tatağlar barca yitlinip “all the pleasant tastes in my mouth disappear! U III 37, 30-1; (the sons of all the notables in Benares) yitlinip barip 'went away' (from the city) do. 65, 8 (ii); (all the evil omens in the city) yitlinip barip U JV 24, 314; (if this sütra did not exist, the true interpretation of the doctrine) yitlinür yokadur 'would disappear and perish' Suv. 198, 9: Xwar. xiv yitlen-/itlen- (sic) “to disappear” Quib 62, 81 (and 8o yinlen-, scribal error); MN gr. D yadlış- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of yadil-, used as Intrans. Xak. xi sü: yadligdr: “the army dispersed (tafarragat) in every direction'; also used when something spread (tafaşşd) in something else, e.g. thin ink in inferior paper Kaş, III 104 (yadlışu:r, yadlışma:k). D yıdlaş- Recip. f. of yidla:-; “to smell one another”. S.is.m.l. vv, the usual phonetic changes. Xak. xi yılkı: yıdlaşdı: “the livestock (etc.) smelt one another” (taşammamat) Kaş. III 104 (yıdlaşu:r, yidlasma:k; prov., see sözleş-): Osm. xiv and xvı yıylaş- “to smell one another”, in two texts TTS I 835; II ıos8 (yiyleş-). D yodluş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of yodul-. Xak. xı bitigle:r yodluşdi: "the writings (etc.) were (all) obliterated' (:rmahat) Kaş. III 105 (yodluşu:r, yodlusma:k). Tris. YDL D yitilik Hap. leg.?; A.N. fr. yiti: (yltig); 'sharpness, alertness'. Xak. xı KB 2328 (komit-). Tris. V. YDLD yitlintür- Hap. leg.?; Caus. f. of yitlin-; “to destroy, remove”, and the like. Uyf. viri ff. Man. (anger) yokadturur yitlintürür “destroys (Hend.)' (all developed doctrines and modest thoughts) TT II 17, 71-2. Dis. YDM D yadim N.S.A. fr. ya:d-; lit. 'a single spreading out", in practice 'carpet, rug”. Apparently survives in SW Osm. cacım “a kind of shaggy carpet' Red. 663; in xx Anat. cecim/cicim ,SDD 25o, 272; but this word must have been borrowed fr. some other unidentified Turkish language. See yayım and cf. kerim. Xak. xr yadım al-firáj wa'l-mihád 'carpet, mattress”, hence "a Chinese carpet! (al-fagfüri, MS. al-mağfüri) is called tü:lüğ yadım “a hairy carpet' (i.e. one with a woollen pile, di şa"r), wa laysat hüdihi bi-aşliya “this is not original” (meaning doubtful, ?not the original kind of carpet) Kaş. III 19; yadım al-bisát “mattress” is derived fr. yadti: basata I 15, ız, a.0. İ 119, 5: KB 4442 (azar). E yitim read by Atalay in Kaş. III 24 is an error for yayim. D yetmiş 'seventy'; der. fr. yetti:, cf. altmış only. S.ia.m.lg. (except NE where crases of yétti: o:n like Khak. çeton, Tuv. çeden still survive) vv. the usual phonetic changes. Türkü vin yetmiş 7 E 12, /7 E 11: Uyğ. virt ff. Man.-A yetmiş M I zo, 15: Civ. yetmiş USp. 74, 2; 83, 4; 107, 6: O, Kir. 1x ff. yetmiş Mal. 41, 9; 42, 3; 49, 2; yétmis (w. the special letter for -é-) do. 45, 5: (Xak. ?) xin(?) Tef. yetmiş 153: xiv Muh.. sab"ün "seventy” yö:tmi:ş Mel. 81, 15; Rif. 187: Çağ. xv ff. yetmiş San. 12r. 6: Kip. xu sab'ün yetmiş Hou. 22, 14: xiv yetmiş sab'ün; the -t- is changed from -d-, because 'seven' is yedi: and -mis is attached to change it to *seventy' /4. or, sab"ün yetmiş Bul. ız, 13: xv ditto Kav. 39, 6; 65, o: Tuh. 6ob. ro. Dis. YDN D yadın Hap. leg.; Intrans. Dev. N. fr. ya:d-. Xak. xi yadıp su:v 'shallow (al 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 936 
     
   
   
     Soz -dahdöh) water evhich spreads (yanbasrt) over the surface of the ground' Kaş. IJ] 372. VU yatan/yatar pec. to Kag.; grammatically this can hardly be a compound of 1 ya:; the alternative. pronunciations. suggest a l.-w., perhaps Chinese. Xak. xi yatan “a wooden how! (al-qates min xagab) for shooting arrows; yatan teca Iva. qarısı”l-naddaf also "the bow-shaped implement of the cotton-carder" Kaş. III 21; yatap al-haniyatı”llati yunfaş bihd"l-şüf “the bow-shaped implement with which raw wool is worked' 777 372. D yodun Intrans./Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. yo:d- ; lit. "being obliterated, destroyed; used only in the phr. yo:k yodun 'destruction, annihilation. N.o.a.b. Uy£. vitr ff: Man.-A yok yodun bolupuz “may you be destroyed, and annihilated' AT I^9, ir: Bud. yok yodun kilmazun “let it not destroy” TT X 321; 0.0. (damaged) do. 314, 410; U İİİ 86, ro: (Xak.?) x1(?) Tef. yok yodun/yozun bol- “to perish' 109-10 (mis-spelt Pudun/buzun). D yetinç (yédding) Ordinal f. of yétti:; “seventh”. A Tris. f. vv, -İ: attached emerged in the medieval period and s.i.a.m.l.g. w. the usual phonetic changes except in some NE languages which use other forms; SW Az. yeddinci: Osm. yedinci. Türkü vitr yetifrç ay “the seventh month” 7 NE, yetinç fayl Ongin. 12; ao. I N s (kiliçla:-): vin ff, Man. yötinç Chuas. 124: Bud. yetinç PP sr, 6 ctc. Dis. V. YDND yadın- Refl. f. of ya:d- ; s.iim.m.l.g. ve, the usual phonetic changes, usually meaning “to spread' (Intrans.) and the like. Uy£. vii ff. Bud. Sut. 137, 23 (agin-): Xak. xi ol to:nin kü:nke: yadındı: “he made it his business to spread out (hast) his garment (etc.) in the sun" Kaş. 111 83 (yadinu:r, yadinma:k): Kip. xv. /tfaşa"a “to spread” (Intrans.) yayın- Tu. sb, 3; 6b. 8. D yodun- Hap. lez. , Refl. f. of yo:d-. Xak. xı ol kö:zdin ya:ş yodundr "he wiped (masala) the tears from his (own) eyes”, also used when a man has undertaken by himself (/nfarada) to wipe something off something else Kaş. III 83 (yodunu:r, yodunma:k). "Tris. YDN i D yötinçsiz Priv. N./A. fr. *yétinc, Dev. N. fr. *yétin- Refl. f. of 2 yét-; lit. (something) "which you cannot overtake, reach', or the like, that is "infinitely broad'; generally used in association vv. other words meaning 'broad'. Cf. yetiz. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. Man.-A M III 31, 1 (iii) (kadız): Bud. bu y€tinçsiz yetiz yağız yer “this broad (Hend.) brown carth' U IV 12, 116; 48, 91; in TT VI 241, (this heaven and earth) kér alkığ “are broad', some MSS. read yétincsiz yétiz ken alkığ. Dis. YDR D yatar/yatur n.o.a.b.; Dev. N. fr.: yat-; both words clearly spelt, but as the Aor. of DIS. YDN yat- is yatur the first is unusual; lit. (something) "İying down' or the like. Xak. xi KB (whichever celestial mansion the moon enters it quickly leaves) çıkarı üçün terk yatarin yikar 'because it leaves quickly it destroys its resting place” 745; (the king came to inquire after Aytoldi) kelip kördi éli&amp; yatur halını “the king, when he came, saw the condition of the invalid! 1068. VU yidruk (ü-) “fist”, there is real doubt about the first vowel; the only Uyğ. occurrence is spelt vidruk; it was a. First Period l.-w. in Mong. vv. initial n-, which makes the original fi- certain, but while the earliest form is nodurğa (Haenisch 118) the standard form is nidurfa (Kos. 659, Haltod 142) and all modern forms in Turkish have -u- in the first syllable, which strongly suggests that the original vowel was -1- later rounded by retrogressive assimilation. Survives in NE Alt., Bar., Leb, Tcl. yudruk R 7/1 s6ş, 'Tl'uv. çüdürük (Khak. munzuruk is morphologically inexplicable): NC Kir. juduruk; Kzx. judirik: NW Kk. ditto; Kaz. yodrik; Nog. yudirik/yumirik. SE Türki: SC Uzb. use the Pe. l-w. must; other NW and SW languages use forms of yumruk (sce below) which is a Pass. Dev. N. fr. *yumur- Caus. f. of yum-, lit. “clenched”: Kumyk yumuruk: SW Az. yumruğ, Osm., "km. yumruk. Uyf. vir ff. Bud. (interlock the ten fingers of the two hands and) yidruk kilu sikzumn "press them together making a fist' 77” V ro, 95: Xak. xt yudruk cum'wl-kaff “a fist. Kaş. HI 42 (prov.): (Çağ. xv ff. yumruk rşf 'fist' Sam. 346v. 23: Xwar. xiv ditto Qurb 86): Kom. xiv. 'fist yuruk CCG; Gr.: Kip. (xr (among 'parts of the body”) al-kaffu'l-matbiiq “a clenched. fist" yu:rmuk (sre, MS. yu:rmak); also al-lakm “a blow with the fist' Hou. 20, 13; /akama “to strike with the fis yumrukla:- do. 34, 13; lákama mina'l-mulàkama yumrukla:ş- do. 43, 14): xiv yuruk . al-/akma | "fisticuffs'; Tkm. yumruk İd 93; (/akama yurukla-; Tkm. yumrukla- do.; yamrukla- Jw. 79r.) D yüdrük Hap. leg.; Pass. Dev. N. fr. yüdür-. Xak. xı yüdrük (MS. -4-) "a stand (al-sarir) on which goods and clothing are piled” (yynaddad) Kaş. HİT 45. VUD yatrum Hap. leg.; cf. yatut; prob. N.S.A. fr. *yatur- Caus. f. of yat- (not noted in the early period but cf. yatgur-); lit. 'a single act of laying down'. Xak. xı yatrum sac al-sa'ru'lladi ursila. ba'ada'L-awtoal (see yatut) Kaş. III 47. Dis. V. YDRS yatur- Sce yatğur-. S yattur- See yadtur-. D 1 yetür- Caus. f. of yé- “to give (something Zcc., to someone Dat.) to eat'. S..a.m.l.g. vv. the usual phonetic changes; in some languages the later form yéfiz-, etc. is used as well or instead. Uyf. viu ff. Civ. H IH 24, 43: Xak.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 937 
     
   
   
      TRIS. V. YDR- 893 xi KB ayama oğul kizka berge yétür “do not be gentle; let boys and girls taste the whip' 1494: xu(?) KBVP s üçür-): xui(?) At. yarağlığ aşınnı kişike yétür “give your nutritious food to the people to eat' 329; Tef. yédür- ditto 149: xiv Muh. affama “to feed” yö:dür- Mel. 41, 16; Rif. 94, 132: Çağ. xv ff. yédür- (spelt yéydür-) xwuranidan “to give to eat' Sax. 353r. 14 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv yédür- ditto Qutb 77: Kip. xim af'ama yédür- (MS. yüdir-) Hou. 34, 4: xiv (after ye-) and for affama yedir- İd. go, at'ama yedür- Bul. 21 v.: xv ditto yedir- Kav. 7$, 3: Tuh. 78b. 9. D 2 yétür- Caus. f. of 2 yét- ; survives, usually meaning “to cause to arrive; to make sufficient; to ripen ('Trans.)', in NE yettir-/cettir-: NW Kk. jetir-: SW Osm. yetdir-/yettir- ; Tkm. yetir-; in some other languages displaced by yetişdir- ; other forms are SE Türki yetkür- : SC Uzb. yetkaz-: NW Kk. jetker-. Cf. tegür-. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. Sanskrit vyàápi “reaching to” yöetirü TT VIII F.3: Civ. a:Da: otoz yettürü “adding thirty to it TT VIII L.25; yétirà TTS I 113 (asığ): Xak. xi KB yetür- is common, usually in such phr. as ukuşka biligke yetürmis ógi 'who has trained (lit. brought) his mind to understanding and knowledge' 216; yetürmiş yaşı “of mature years” 426; kamuğ işni yetrü körüp işler er “a man who works taking care to bring all his work to fruition” 544; 0.0. 302, şo? (bütürü:), 2586, 4231, 5894 (erejlen-): xui(?) Tef. yetrü “completely, in full”, (yétger-/yétgür- “to bring; to bring to completion”) 1:53: Çağ. xv ff. yétkür- (-üp, etc.; *with -k-”) yetişdür- Vel. 412-15; yétür-/yétkür-/yétkürt-/ yetişdür- Caus. fs; rasámidan "to cause to arrive, convey, deliver' San. 348r. 28 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv yétür-/yétgür- “to bring to completion, to accomplish! Qutb 79; MN 175: Kip. xır ballaga'l-masir ma'ak “to bring your fellow traveller to his destination'(?) yetürHou. 38, 13: Osm. xiv ff. yetür- (occasionally yetir-) “to bring” physically or metaph. ; common TTS 1 823; II 1045; III 804; IV 879. S yéttür- See yédtür-. D yitür-/yittür- Caus. f. of yit- , “to lose; to cause to stray', and the like. Survives in NE Tuv. çidir-: NC Kir, Jitir-: NW Kk. ditto: SW Az. itir-; Osm. yittir-; Tkm. yitir-. "Türkü vir 7 E 7, I1 E 7 (rd-): Xak. xr er yarma:k yitürdi: “the man lost ( faqada) the coin” (etc.) Kaş. III 67 (yitürür, yitürme:k); ol apar yarma:kın yittürdi: “he made him lose (a'damahu) his coin' (etc.) II] 94 (yittürür, yittürme:k; and see yédtür-): KB (when I saw this) yltürdüm bilig 'I lost my sense of judgement' 799; (when a slave sees his master's face) yitrür ógi “he loses his senses” 958; (if one reaches out to grasp the affairs of this world) yitrür kişi “they elude a man" 1410; ayur bu bitig tut yitürme oğul “he said, “take this document and do not lose it, my son” ” 1497; a.o. 6096 (ört-): xııı(?) Tef. yitür-/ yütür- “to lose”, esp. yol yitür- “to lose the way' 155, 168: Caf. xv ff. itür-/itkür(spelt) gum twa mafqud hardan “to lose' San. 94r. 27 (quotns.): Xwar. xir yitür- “to destroy! 'Ali 49: Kom. xiv “to lose" yitirCCG, Gr.: Kip. xiv. yittür-/yitür- (MS. ye-lye-) atlafa "to destroy” Id. 91; hacama “to throw down, ruin' yitür- Bul. 86r: xv waddara “to squander', etc. yitir- Tuh. 38b. 5: Osm. xiv ff. yitür-, later yitir-, occasionally itir- “to lose, to destroy'; c.i.a.p. TTS 1832; II 1055; IH 812; IV 889. S yottur- See yodtur-. D yüdür- Caus. f. of yü:d-; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. viii ff. Chr. yilkika yüdürser “if they loaded it on an animal” U 7 8, 3: Xak. xı ol teveyke: yük yüdürdi: “he loaded the load (hamala”l-himl) on the camel” Kaş. III 67 (yüdürür, yüdürme:k, verse); a.o. I 371, r: KB amànat yüdürdi boyunka uluğ “he loaded great loyalty on his neck' 1720; 0.0. 4441 (kólük), 4528 (tepes). VUD yadrat- as such Hap. leg., but, as 'Thomsen suggested, prob. the original f. of NE Alt., Tel. yayrat- “to overturn, destroy'; the parallel V. in the sentence, tigret, supports this vocalization; if so, this must be a Caus. f. of a Den. V. fr. *yadar, Aor. Particip. of ya:d-, 'spreading out'; a meaning 'to make (a horse) lie on the ground' seems to be indicated. Türkü viii ff. (tie up the roan horse's tail and make it break wind) yazığ kodi: yadrat “make the bay(?) lie down' (heap nine blankets on it and make it sweat) JrkB şo. D yetrül- (yétrül-) Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of 2 yétür-. Xak. xı sopuk burunka: yetrüldi: ulhiqa'l-áxir bi'l-awwal “the last was joined, or added, to the first” Kaş. III 107 (yetrülü:r, yetrülme:k). D yetrüş- (yetrüş-) Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of 2 yetür-. Xak. xı ola:r ikki: bi:r bi:rke: at yetrüşdi: “they helped one another in overtaking (or tying up?, fi ilhág) the horse' Kaş. III 101 (yetrüşü:r, yetrüşme:k). Tris. YDR VUD yütürük (?yitürük) Hap. leg.; prima facie a Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. yitür-; lit. 'lost, strayed', and the like; either a scribal error or an early example of retroactive vocalic assimilation. Türkü vırı ff. (a blind colt looks for an udder on a stallion) kün ortu: yütü:rük *(if it is so) lost at midday' (where and how will it be at midnight?) IrkB 24. Tris. V. YDRVUD yudruklan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. yudruk (yidruk). Xak. xı er yudruklandı: qabada”l-racul 'alà cam" kaffhi “the man grasped (something) in his fist" Kaş. IIT 116 (yudruklanu:r, yudruklanma:k; MS. everywhere -d-). — 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 938 
     
   
   
     894 Dis. V. YDSD yadsa:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of ya:d-. Xak. xı ol töşe:k yadsa:dı: “he wished to spread out (yabsut) the mattress', and was on the point of doing so; and one says ol sü:sin yadsa:dı: “he wished to disperse (yafarriq) his army” (etc.); also used of dough when one intends to roll it out (yabsutahu) Kaş. III 30$ (yadsa:r, yadsa:ma:k). D yatsa:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of yat-. Xak. xr er yatsa:dı: “the man wished to settle down for the night and go to sleep and lie down' (al-baytüta tea'l-nawm dva”l-idtica") Kaş. III 304 (yatsa:r, yatsa:ma:k; MS. yatısa:-). D yetse:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of 2 yét-. Xak. xı 01 meni: yétse:di: “he was on the point of overtaking me” (valhaqani) Kaş. III 304 (yétse:r, yétse:me:k; MS. yétise:-). D yodsa:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of yo:d-. Xak. xı ol bitig yodsa:dı: “he wished to obliterate (yamhü) the writing', also for (to wipe) a. sword clean of blood and the like Kaş. İİİ 305 (yodsa:r, yodsa:ma:k; MS. yodtsa:-). D yetsik- (yétsik-) Emphatic Pass. f. of 2 yét-; 'to be effectively overtaken'. Pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı er yetsikti: bafağa”l-vacul ardala'l-'umr "the man reached senility' (lit. “vas overtaken by”), and one says kaçğın (MS. haçığan) er yetsikti: “the fugitive was overtaken” (ulhiqa) Kaş. III 106 (yetsike:r, yetsikme:k); a.o. / zı, ro (kaçğın). Dis. V. YDŞD yadış- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of ya:d-. Xak. xı ol apar töşe:k yadışdı: “he helped him to spread out (fi basf) the mattress”, also for competing Kaş. III 7o (yadışu:r, yadışma:k). D yediş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of yéd-; unvocalized everywhere; listed in the same para. as yıdış-, q.v., but specifically given a different Infin. Xak. xi ol mapa: yetğe:k (MS. y.nge:k) yedişdi: “he helped me to sewiup the seams” ( fi xtyáta £uraz; MS. in error furaz) of a sack, bale, and the like Kaş. 11J zo (yédişü:r, yédigme:k; MS. everywhere -d-). D yetiş- Co-op. f. of 2 yét-; s.i.a.m.l.g. vv. the usual phonetic changes, and practically the same range of meanings as 2 yét-, which it has almost displaced in some languages. Xak. xt yetşü: kelip Uğra:k translated /ajigatà xayl Uğra:h 'the Uğra:k”s cavalry overtook us” Kaş. Iİ 183, 8; n.m.e.: (xiv Muh.(?) lahiqa (da:p-, in margin) yetiş- Mel. 3o, 15): Çağ. xv ff. yétig- (spelt) rasidan "to arrive” Sar. 348r. 17 (quotns.): Xwar. xi yetiş- “to reach" ' Ali 56: Kip. xv men bolma:saydum bu: Saga: (for sapa:) yetişme:seydi: “if it had not been for me, this would not have come to you” (caşala ilayka) Kav. zı, 9; lahiqa yetiş- do. 73, 10; Tuh. 32a. 9; adraka (to overtake) ses lahiqa do. 6a. 12. EN D yıdış- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of yıdı:-, Xak. xı yıdışdı: ne: baliya acxö”u”l-şay” ba'duhu fi  DIS. V. YDSba"d "every part of the thing stank'; (yédisfollows here); and the Infin. of the first V. is with a/-qadf yıdışma:k Kaş. 111 7o (MS. -dcvery where). D yoduş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of yo:d-. Xak. xı ol kilictin ka:n yoduşdi: “he helped to wipe (f? mash) the blood from the sword'; also for obliterating (f? malı, MS. nalhw) writing and removing (id/ràb) the traces of anything liquid Kaş. 1/7 7o (yoduşu:r, yodusma:k). D yüdüş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of yü:d-. Xak. xı ola:r (MS. ol) ikki: tarığ yüdüsdi: "they helped one another to load (fi ham) the wheat' (etc.); also for competing Kaş. 717 71: (yüdüşü:r, yüdüşme:k). Dis. YDZ D yetiz Dev, N./A. fr. 2 yöt-, “vide, broad, far-reaching', and the like, later apparently “perfect, complete' (i.e. reaching the limit of possibility). Survives in SW xx Anat. yetiz “perfect, complete', w. Den. V. yetizle- SDD 1521. Uy£. vin ff. Bud. yétiz (so spelt) occurs apparently only in Hend. w. other words mcaning 'wide' and the like; U III 72, 27 etc. (köp), IV şo, 54 (emig); JV ız, 116 etc. (yétincsiz); yétiz uzun 'broad and long” Suv. 347, 9: Xak, xı yetiz “vide” (or broad, al-'arid) of anything; hence one says yetiz kadış “a broad strap”, yetiz y€:r 'a broad piece of ground' Kaş. III 10: xin(?) Tef. hihma böliğa "mature wisdom' hikmat yétiz; . yetiz kil- seems to mean “to present (someone)' 152: Xwar. xiv yétiz 'perfect', or the like Qutb 79; men yetiz 'àlim boldum 'I[ have become a perfect scholar' (I have on need of Abü Hanifa) Na/ic. 193, 7. VU yutuz n.o.a.b.; the contexts clearly indicate the meaning “vvifc”, not 'slave girl” as it has sometimes been translated; the vowels were certainly back, but the first might be either -0- or -u-. Cf. kisi: Türkü vri (I attacked the Tanut and captured) (oğlr: yutuzr: “their children and wives' (livestock and property) II E 24; I1 E 38 (ditto the Oguz?); /1 S 3, 4 (damaged?):vrn ff. (a gambler staked his children and wife (oğlanı:n kisi:si:n) on a bet; but did not lose them) oğlı: yutu:zi: kop öğirer "his children and wives all rejoice' İrA8 29; yutu:zi: (sic, clearly, in photograph) erksi:z bolu:pan 'his wife not being a free agent' Toy. IV v. 5-7 (ETY II 180): Man. bu menin yutuzum bu “this is my wife' M 7 5, 2: UyB. viri ff. Bud. (if we have killed people or stolen other people's property or) evnip yutuzipa yazındımız erser “sinned against a housewife' 77 IV 8, 69-zoş “similar phr. U II 76, 5; 85, 22; amrak yut[uzim] *my dear wife', followed by her name, and amrak kizimiz and oğulumuz Pfahl. əz, 5; 2.0. Suv. 219, 24 (yapgin-): Civ. beg yutuz "husband and wife! TT VII 26, 4-5 (baca:-); 14-15: O, Kir, ix ff. bodunima: oflima: yutuzima: adrıltım “Iİ have been parted UNU —— Tn Óá € EE E LLL ÉLLCLECIELEEIILSE,LLOOLLLLBELLLLBIHLLLLEOLOQIHI 0200020000 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 939 
     
   
   
      MON. YG from my people, children, and wives! Mal. 43, 1—2; 8.0. 42, r (?küp): Kip. xii a/-darra 'cowife' y.q.r, bi-zdà' mufaxxam 'emphatic', no doubt error for yutuz Hou. 32, 4. UE Tris. YDZ D yetizlik (yétizlik) Hap. leg.; A.N. fr. yétiz. Xak. xı yetizlik “the width (or breadth, "ard) of anything” Kaş. 111 52. Mon. YG ya8:B a generic term for 'grease, fat, oil', etc., specific kinds sometimes bcing indicated by a preceding word. S.i.a.m.l.g. w. a wide range of phonetic changes. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. yağı sızılu akıp “his fat melts and flows' U ZİT 24, s (; TM IV əsə, 22 (s1zil-): Civ. ingek yağın 'cow's butter TT VII zə, 17; tikta:k ya:ğ içürmiş kere:k "you must give him bitter (Sanskrit tiktaka) oil to drink' VIII I.ə4: künçit ya:ğı: 'sesame-secd oil” do. M.28; bir tipcan yağ “oil for one lamp” (Chinese 1.-vv.) USb. 91, 11 and 26; yağ is common in H I both by itself, e.g. 106, and in such phr. as ingek yağı 77, etc.; künçit yağı 92, etc.; sağ yağ “butter” 145; xuma yağı “linseed oil” (hu ma, Chinese, see note) 64: xiv Chin.-Uyg. Dict. fat” yağ Ligeti 277; R I1I 22: Xak. xt ya:ğ al-duhn "fat, sa:ğ ya:ğ al-samn 'butter' Kaş. İli 159; kara: ya:ğ al-nift “mineral oil” III 222, 18; over 30 o.o. usually translated a/-duhn or al-samn: KB 4442 (azar): xin(?) Tef. yağ “oil” 132: xiv Muh. al-duhn ya:&amp; Mel. 66, 5; Rif. 165 (followed by phr. for various animal and vegetable fats and oils): Caf. xv ff. ratığan 'oil, fat” (generic term) yağ San. 333r. 2 (quotn.): Ofuz xi (after Xak.) and the Oğuz call "suet” (a/-şahm) ya:ğ Kaş. III 159: Xwar. xiv yağ “fat, oil” Qutb 64: Kom. xiv “oil yağ CCT, yaw CCG, Gr.: Kip. xii al-duhn ya:ğ Hou. 15, 18: xiv yaf al-samn İd. 95; al-duhn sahma(n) aw gayruhu (solid or otherwise) yağ Bul. 6, s: xv al-duhn ya:ğ, al-samn Sa:r1 ya: f; al-alya "a sheep's fat tail" kuyruğ yağı: Kav. öz, zo, duhn yaw; Tkm. ya&amp;/yilik/kirfis tea örğeç yavvı Tuh. 15b. 1. S ya:h See 2 ya:. 1 ya:k apparently a jingling prefix in the phr. ya:k yu:k, since yuk can apparently be used by itself in the same sense. Pec. to Ka;.; cf. yakı:, Xak. xr one says ya:k yu:k for 'residues of food in a pot' (sulálatu'l-qas'a) ; hence. one says aya:k yukt: same translation; and “distant relatives! (a/-aba"id mina'l-agárib) are called ya:k yu:k kada:ş Kaş. III 143; ya:k yu:k sulálatu'l-qag'a; hence al-garibu'l-ba'id is called ya:k yu:k kadaş that is “he has stuck to us” (iliagaqa bind) as residues stick to the pot III 160; yuk 'residues of food in a pot', hence one says yuk yak (sic in MS., ?read yak yuk) as a jingle ('ala tariqi'l-itbà") İTİ 4. 2 yak jingling prefix to yağu:k (Xak.) (?), but see yağru:. nad yo:ğ (d-) 'funeral feast, wake'; the d- is fixed by the statement of Menander Protector (3rd, 895 quarter vı) that the Western Türkü called a funeral feast Söycta, see G. Moravcsik, Byzantinoturcica 1I, Budapest, 1943, p. 112. N.o.a.b., but see yoğla:-. Türkü vri yof ertürtimiz *we celebrated the funeral feast! 7 NE; yoğın umaduk üçün “because we could not hold his funeral feast! Ixe-Asxete b. 1 (ETY II 122); o.o. İT S ro and 15(?) ; 1 N 7, ITE 31 (egir-); Ongin ız (atac); (for yoğ yıparı:ğ I7 S Tı see yipa:r): Xak. xı yo: the name of “the real given to a tribe' (ta'àm yuttaxad li-qawmrn) for three or seven days when they have returned from a funeral (dafni'l-mayytt) Kaş. III 143; 8.0. 1 398 (basan): KB bu Aytoldınınp oğlı kildi yog: 'Aytoldi's son held his funeral feast' 1564; yoğ aşı 'funeral feast' 4577: xiv Muh.(?) fa'ámu'l-'izya “a memorial feast' yo:ğ aşı: Rif. 164 (only). D 1 yo:k Dev. N/A. in -k fr. *yo:-, cf. yo:d-: with a variety of uses. Like ba:r, q.v., of which Kaş. describes it as the opposite, it is most commonly used as the Predicate of a sentence, with the Subject stated or inferred. As such it is of the nature of a V. but cannot be conjugated and so must be supplemented by an Aux. V., 1 er- or the like, if a mood or tense form is required. İt is occasionally used as an Adi. meaning “having nothing”, generally in association vv. another Adj, e.g. yo:k çığa:y 'destitute', and even less often as a N., either by itself in such phr. as yo:kka sanma:z “is not considered to be nothing”, or in association vv. another N., e.g. yo:k yodun. C.i.a.p.a.l. vv. the usual phonetic changes. Türkü viri yok is common:- (1) as a quasi-V. ol.amtı: afığ yok Türkü xağan “if now that Türkü xağan, who is free from harm” (settles in the Ötüken mountain forest) élte: bur yok “there will be no trouble in the realm” 7 Sş, I1 N2;(2) ditto w. Aux. V. Ötüken yışda: yég idi: yok ermis 'there was positively nothing better than the Ötüken mountain forest” I S 4, II N 2; Türkü bodun yok bolma:zun “may the "Türkü people not cease to exist” I E 1o, II E 10; Kül Tégin yok erser 'if it had not been for Kül Tégin' 7 N ro: (3) as Adj. 1 S 10, Il N 8 (çığa:ü), qualifying a V. ol süg anta: yok kisdimiz “ve annihilated that army there” I E 34: vin ff. öğrünçü:p yok “you have no pleasure! IrkB 36; a.o.o.: Man. yer tepri yok erken *when earth and heaven did not (yet) exist” Chuas. 162; yok bolğay 'will cease to exist” do. 170: Uyğ. vir (thereafter the "Türkü people) yok boltu: Şu, N ro, (the common people) yok kılmadım f1 did not destroy” do. E 2; a.o.o.: vitr ff. Man.-AM T 8, 7-9 (alkin-); 9, 11 (yodun): Man. yok tözlüğ *rooted in nothingness” TT II 17, 8o; a.o. M III 35, 10 (çığa:n): Bud. yok is common: in all usages; (suppressing all the emotions) idi (so read) yokipa tegi kalısız “to the point of complete destruction TT IV 12, 56; o.o. do. 6, 25 etc. (2 idi:), PP s, s etc. (çığa:ü): TT X 321, etc. (yodun): Civ. yok is common, e.g. adırtı yok “there is no difference" TT 1 81; tavar yok bolsa “if wealth ceases to exist” do. VII 28, 11; o.o. USp. s, 3 (üçün) etc.:  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 940 
     
   
   
     896 xiv. Chin.- Uyğ. Dict. wu "(there is) not” (Giles 12,753) yok Ligeti 286; O. Kir. ix ff. bepiksi: yok ermiş “he had no memorial” Mal. 9, 3; a.o.o.: Xak. xı yo:k a Particle (arf) meaning “is not” (laysa); hence one says ol munda: yo:k "he is not here” Kaş, 111 143; (if you offer a guest whatever food there is) yo:kka: sa:nma:z /6 yu'addu'l-qirá ma"düm “the meal is not reckoned to be non-existent” 7 68, 11; II 28, 19; o.o, IHI 147 (ba:r); 238 (çığa:n), etc.: KE yok is common in its normal uses, c.g. (of God) anar yok fan “he is imperishable” 2; (the moon's brightness wanes and) yana yok bolur *ceases to exist again” 734: xıu()) At, yok erdim yarattıp yana yok kilip 'I did not exist; Thou didst create me, and again art destroying me' 9; a.0.0.; Tef. yok “is not”, yok kil- 158; o.o. 109-10 (yodun): xiv Muh. laysa yo:ğ Mel. ış, 14; yo:k Rif. oz, dayya"a “to squander” yo:ğ ét28, 6, yo:k (MS. yozodh) et- 111; là “no” (opposite to “yes” ba:r) yo:ğ 56, ro, yo:k 154: Çağ. xv ff. yok za “not”, in Ar. /á (quotn.) ... yok ise/yok érse/yoksa (1) yà 'or'; (2) 'is not”, (3) 4//4 ica agar na 'if not” (quotns.) San. 343v. 29: Xwar. xı yoxsa “f not" “AF 59: xni(?) yok bolsungil (szc) Og. 114; yok erdi 251; yok turur 334: xiv yok common in Qutb and MN 95, etc.: Kom. xiv 'no', yok CCI; “there is not" yok/yox CCG; Gr. 126 (quotns.): Kip. xiv yok al-ma"düm, also used for là İd. 96; a.o. do. 29 (ba:r); at “or” yoksa; and yoksa is also used for t//a Bul. 15, 8; là yok do, 15, 11: xv al-ma'diim yok Kav. 23, 12; Tuh. ssa. 12; là yok Kav. 53, 10; al-nafi 'the negative” yok Tu. s2b. 2; a.o.o. 2 yok *high ground'; Hap. leg. but the basis of yokaru:, q.v. The weight of evidence is in favour of -0- against -u-. Xak. xı yok yé:r al-şa"üd mina'l-ard “high ground" Kaş. Hİ 4. yuk See ya:k. Mon. V. YĞyağ- (? da:ğ-) "to pour down; to rain”, or, vv. qualifying N.s, “to snow, hail', etc. , the evidence for d- will be found under yaku: and yağız. İt cannot be used Impersonally as in English, it must have as Subject either the source of precipitation, e.g. cloud, or the precipitation itself, e.g. rain. S.i.a.m.lg. w. the usual phonetic changes. “Türkü vr ff. (the grey cloud, buli:t, rose and) bodun üze: yağdı: "rained on the people” ZrkB 53: Uyğ. vitff. Bud. iğlemekliğ tolı yağmur sizlerni üze yağdukda “vhen the hail and rain of illness poured down on you” U III 14, 4-6; (you must imagine that) yağmur yağmış teg xwa çeçek yağmışın "flowers (Hend.) pour down like rain' TT V ro, 107-8: Civ. yürür bulit ünüp yağmur yağdı “the white cloud rose and it rained” 777 s, teprimlerke yağış yağzun "let libations pour out to the göddesses” (sic, if -m-?) VII 25, 20: Xak. xı yağmur yağdı: »uatara'[-mafar "it rained' (prov.); also (used of) snow and hail (al-talc toa'l-barad) when they have fallen. (sagata) MON. YG Kaş. III 6o (yağa:r, yağma:k), toli: yağdı: ingabba'l-barad "the hail poured down' 7 139, 19; four o.o.: KB yağa tursu yağmur “let the rain go on falling” 118: xnir(?) Tef. yağmur yağ- 132: xiv. Muh. sála'l-mà' "of water, to pour' yağ- Rif. 110 (only); a/-sayl yağmak Mel. 34, 5; 120: Çağ. xv ff. yağ- 5aridan "to rain' San. 332v. 29 (quotns.): Xwar. xin yağa dur- “to rain continuously! ' Ali 37: xiv yağ- Qutb 64: Kom. xiv "to ram” yağ- CC/, yav- CCG; Gr. rio (quotns.): Kip. xin "abba mön [omission] (of water) “to, gurple'(?) yağHou. 42, 9: Xiv yağ- matara İd. 95: xv matara yaw-; Tkm. yağ- Twh. 35b. 13. 1 yak- basically “to rub (something cc.) on to (something 2at.)'; hence "to anoint' and the like. Survives w. some cxtended. meanings in NE Tuv. ça:-/çağ-: NC Kir, Kzx. Jak-: NW yak-/iak-: SVV Az. yax-; Osm., Tkm. yak-. More or less syn. vv. türt-, sürt-. UyB. vii İL Civ. yak- is very common in such phr. as kózke yakğu ol “you must rub it on the eye” H 7 28 (közke sürtsün do. 36 is exactly syn.), üç kün yakzun 'rub it on for three days' do. 29; a.o. do. 30-1 (büt-): Xak. xı er başka: yakığ yakdı: "the man anointed the wound with ointment' (dammada'l-curh bi-dimád); (2 yakfollows); and one says ol apar elig yakdı: “he rubbed him (massahu) with his hands” (etc.) Kaş. III 62 (yaka:r, yakma:k): Çağ. xv ff. yak- .. . (2) tila hardan wa bastan hind ata marham wa aşbdüh-i dn "to anoint; to dress with henna, a plaster, or the like” San. 333v. 12 (quotns.): Kom. xiv “to stick, adhere" yaxCCG, Gr. (perhaps rather 2 yak- than this V3: Kap. sv fafaxa "to sicat! yak- Tut. 3b. 1; 322. 8. 2 yak- basically “to approach, or be near to (something Dat.y, which is still the only meaning in yakin, q.v.; but at a fairly early date it came also to mean 'to touch (something Dat.)' and fr. this, metaph., 'to touch (someone's heart), impress, please”, and the like. Survives, in this sense only, in SE Türki yak- : NC Kir. jak-: SC Uzb. yok-: NW Kk. jak-. Obviously connected semantically w. yagu:-, but the morphological connection is obscure. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. (the corpse begins to smell, and everyone is disgusted and) yakmaz bolur *begins not to go ncar it” TT VI 445: Civ. (with a bad omen; the work which you undertake does not succeed) kilmiş kilinç sığmaz yakmaz 'the things which you do do not fit or approach (your needs)! TT 7 76-7: Xak. X1 (in the middle of the entry of 1 yak-, q.v.) and one says ol apar yakdı: izdalafa tlayhi sva qaruba minhu “he approached and drew near to him”, hence one says anın kelme:ki: yakdı: “his arrival is imminent” (garuba) Kaş. 111 62 (no separate Aor. or Infin.); (if a man carries a piece of jade) yaşın yakma:s /4 yadurruhu'l-barq. "lightning does not injure him” 711 22, 5; a.o. 11 69, 10: KB bu iki bile işke yakma eve, kalı yaksa kıldın tiriglik yava "do not approach a task in a hurry with  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 941 
     
   
   
       MON these two (emotions, anger and irritation); if you do you will have made your life worthless” 323; küyer otka yaksa 'if a man approaches a blazing fire” 654; 0.0. 1432, 1630, 2192: Çağ. xv ff. yak-(-t1, -ar, -may) atar kardan 'to impress'; yak-(-ma) tuhmat et- ve mucrim q1kar- "to calumniate, accuse'; yakmak risbet; the quotn. under this suggests the meaning “to approach” Vel. 398-9 (quotns.; San. 125v. 28 points out that yak-(-masa) 'to water (livestock)' is a mistranslation of a misreading of bak-), yak- . . . (3) atar hardan wa basand uftüdan “to impress, please”: (4) tuhmat hardan wa isnád dádan suxn ğayr (MS. xayr) teági' "to calumniate, make false accusations' San. 333v. 12 (it is doubtful whether the last meaning is correct or belongs here): (Korn. xiv see 1 yak-): Osm. xiv, xv yak- “to approach' in one text, and 'to be suitable, becoming” in two T'T'S I 769; II 980. D 3 yak- Emphatic(?) f. of *ya:-, cf. 1 yal-, 2 yan-, “to ignite, burn (something Aec.)”, not noted before the medieval period but morphologically a very old word, and see 3 yaktur-. S.i.a.m.lg. except NE(?) vv. the usual phonetic changes. (Xak.?) xiv Muh.(?) adrama'l-nár "to light a fire” ya:k- Rif. 103 (only): Caf. xv ff. yak- (1) afrüxtan 'to ignite' San. 333V. 12 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv yak- 'to burn (something Aec., with fire Dat); to ignite (something Aec., in something Dat.)'; both metaph. Qutb 68: Kip. xiv yak- agla'i-şay” fi'l-nár “bo put something in the fire” Jd. 95: Osm. xv yax- “to burn'; in three texts TTS II 977; III 754. yığ- (2y:8-) “to collect, assemble (Trans.)'. S.1.a.m.l.g., w. the usual phonetic changes, in this meaning, cf. tö:r-, ük-. The meaning "to restrain, hold back”, and the like, cf. ti:d-, in Xak. and a few later authorities is presumably an extension of the basic meaning, but hard to explain. Türkü vırı (the scattered "Türkü numbered 7oo . . . their chief was a şad) yığ(ğ)ıl tédi: yığmışı: ben ertim "he said “bring them together"; it was I that did it” T 5; keligme: begleri:n bodunrn étip yığa: 'organizing and assembling their begs and people when they came' T 43 (in this text spelt yg-); etmiş yığmış Ongin r: UyÉ. viri ff. Man. (making them understand their own origin öğlerin kópüllerin yiftipiz “you concentrated their minds and thoughts" TT III 31: Bud. Sanskrit samhrtyà “having collected' bürtüp (p-) y1sárp TT VIII C8; köpül yığmakda USp. 43, 6; o.o. U II 34, 13 (kazğan-): Sue. 627, 17 (idi:-): Civ. köpülün yığ enç tur 'collect your thoughts and keep quiet” T'T 7 222; a.o. do. 184 (mistranscribed yığ tiler), and see ığ-: Xak. xi ol meni: aşka: yığdı: mana'ani ü'l-ta'àm "he detained me for a meal” (etc.); and one says ol tarığ yığdı: "he piled up (Ratetvama) the vvheat” (etc.); also used of anyone who has collected (cama"a) something Kaş. III 61 (yığa:r, yığma:k), five o.o. translated cama'a or kawtama (once): KB kamuğ 8641125   . V. YG 897 sózni yığsa “if a man collects all (sorts of) speeches' 185; similar metaph. uses 368, 372; ay edgü du'À sen baláni yığ-a “Öh benediction, restrain (or hold back) evil” 1:265; yığa tut “keep under control] 1:i49:; yığ “restrain” (your anger) 6097; a.o. 2347 (ti:d-): xui?) At. yığ- (1) "to accumulate' (wealth, etc.) 262, 299; (2) 'to restrain' (e.g. the tongue) 135 (ud-), 160, 403, 416; Tef. y1&amp;- (1) "to collect! (troops); (2) “to restrain” and the like 155: Çağ, xv fi. yığ (Imperat.) man' eyle 'prevent', also hàdir “present” Vel. 415 (the quotn. does not seem apposite and may be corrupt); yığ- cam" hardan “to collect! San. 349v. 27 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv yığ- “to collect; to restrain” Qutb 89; mu'minni yazukdin yığğan "restraining the believer from sin” Nac. 313,9; 2.0. 218, r3: Kom. xiv “to collect, assemble" yıy- CCG., Gr. 132 (quotn.): Kip. xiv yığcama'a wa mana"a mugtarak (simultaneousiy”) ld. 95: xv cama'a yıy- (in margin in SW(?) hand yığ-/der-) Tuh. rza. s: Osm. xiv ff. yığ- in the unusual (and novv obsolete) meanings of (1) “to restrain, prevent”ş (2) “to vvithhold, grudge” , fairly common TTS 7 827; II 1048; III 807; IV 881. y1k- “to overthrow, demolish, destroy”, and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. the usual phonetic changes. Uy£. vir ff. Bud. (he severed the maral deer's neck and) başın yerde yıkdı “threvv its head on the ground” U IV 38, 133-4: Xak. xı ol evin yıkdı: "he demolished (hadama) his house” Kaş. III 63 (yıka:r, yıkma:k), similar phr. 7 85, s, 343, 26, 384, 6; III zo, 4: KB 745 (yatar), 1045: xiu(?) Tef. yık- "to demolish; to strip off (leaves)” 157: Çağ. xv ff. yık- (1) bar zamin afgandan “to throw to the ground'; (2) xardb hardan “to demolish” San. 350v. I2 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv yık- “to demolish” Qutb gr: Kom. xiv “to overthrow' yıx- CCG, Gr.: Kip. xin hadda mina'l-hadd wa'l-xaráb "to overthrow, demolish” yik- Hou. 44, 6; xaraba "to demolish” yıkdo. 37, 5: xiv axraba ditto yık- Bul. 28v.: XV ramá'l-garim “to throw an adversary”, that is “to fell him to the ground” (sara'a), also “to throw down' a timber, a wall, and the like yık(vv, the -k- tending towards -&amp;-) Kar. 76, 2; hadama y1k-, which is also used for “breaking something' (a/-kasr) in one place and not another; and it is their word for xátarahu 'to endanger”(?), they say kü:ni: yıktı: (not translated) do. 76, 11; ramd yık- Tuh. 3b. 2; 17b. r: Osm. xiv, xv yix- “to throw down, destroy'; noted (as an unusual form) in three texts 7 7.S 77 1049; 111 808. yuk- “to stick to (something Dat.); (of a disease, etc.) to infect (someone Dat.). S.i.a.m.l.g., except SW, w. the usual phonetic changes. Xak. xı eligke: ya:ğ yukdr: “the fat stuck (talattaxa) to the hand”, and one says anın uduzi: apar yukdi: “his itch infected (add) someone else” (7-ğayrihi), also used for anything that sticks to something else Kaş. III 63 (yuka:r, yukma:k): Çağ, xv ff. yuk-(-tt) tohun- “to come into contact with, affect” Vel. Gg   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 942 
     
   
   
     898 MON 419 (quotn.); yuk- siráyat kardan 'to infect San. 343v. 4 (quotns.): Kom. xiv yuk-/yux"to stick to; to loiter' CCG; Gr. 129 (quotn.). Dis. YGA ?D 1 yaka: basically “the edge, or border” of something, but from an early period usually more specifically "the collat" of a garment; perhaps Dev. N. fr. 2 yak- in the sense of “a part of something which is adjacent to something else”. A Second Period l.-w. in Mong. as caka “edge, frontier, collar', and the like (ITaenisch 84, Kow. 2244); s.a. m.g. vv. the usual phonetic changes and the same range of meanings. Uyğ. viri (E spent the summer there and) yaka: anta: yakaladım “fixed the frontier (of my dominions) there” Su. E 8; S 2: (vini ff. Bud. the sentence “he deigned to be the venerable master of İndia” is translated enetkek €linip ayağuluk yakası yarlikar erdi, there is a curious double mistranslation here; the more usual meaning of /isic (Giles 4,683) is not “master”, but 'slecve'; the translator took it in this sense, but translated it by “collar” which Au never meant Hüen-ts. 1935-6): Xak. xı yaka: al-ciribbàn “collar” Kaş. IIl 24; yaka:da:kı: yalğa:ğa:lı: “the man who licks up the food on his collar' (drops the food in his hand) 7 253, 21; J1I 307, 1 ; à.. I 189, 2: KB 2377 (ilig-): xir(?) Tef. yaka 'collar' 136: xiv. Mu, (under: 'clothing') ai-qabb "collar” ya:ka: Mel. 67, 1; Rif. 166: Çağ. xv ff. yaka (1) kanar "boundary, shore, bank”, etc. ; (2) giribün-i cáma “a collar” San. 334v. 18; under kirpik (not an old word) and “the fur which they sew on the edge of a collar” is called yaka 295r. 19: Xwar. xiv yaka (1) 'collar'; (2) “edge, shore, bank” Quib 69; MN 437: Kom. xiv “collar” yağa CCI; Gr.: Kip. xim al-tateq "the: collar! of a robe, etc. yaka: Hou. 18, 17: xiv ditto 7d. 95: xv ditto Tul. 23b. 7; játi 'shore, bank” yaka do. zob. ro: Osm. xiv ff. yaka (in xiv, XV sometimes yaxa) 'colar; shore, bank; the opposite shore'; c.i.a.p. 773 1768; II 977-9; İTİ 755; IV 826. 2 yaka “rent, lease'; common in USp.; perhaps a l-w. UyB. vinff, Civ. yakaka tuttim '[ have taken (a piece of land) on lease, or for a rent” USp. 2, 5; 11, 6; 86, 4 etc.; altmış tembin süçüğ yakanı kóni berürmen “1 undertake to pay a rent of 60 tembin of wine' do. 6, 6; o.o. 66, 6, 87, 4. n yağı: (d-) “enemy, hostile. A First Period l.-w. in Mong. as dayi(») (Haenisch 34) ; s.i.s.m.l. in NE, NC, NW as yaw/yu:/jaw/jo:, etc.: SC Uzb. yov; in SE, SW replaced by Pe. düşman, NE 'Tuv. dayzin is a distorted reborrowing from Mong. Türkü vii yağı: is common, e.g. tört bulun kop yağı: ermiş “all four quarters of the world were hostile' IE2,II E 3: viu ff. IrkB 34 (süs): Yen, Mal. 27, 6 (kadir); a.o.o.: Uyğ. vir yağı: is common, e.g. yağı: [keli]r tédi: "he said “the enemy are coming” ” $u. E 6: vin ff. Bud. yağı is fairly common, e.g. (making an expedition, putting on a breastplate, and) .V.YĞ yağığ sangip 'routing the enemy” U II 58, 30; TT IV 10, 12: Civ. TT I 58 (tegirmile:-); 2.0.0. : O, Kir. ix ff. Mal. ig, r (kadir); a.0.0.: Xak. xi yağı: a/-"adinc "enemy” Kaş. HII 24; nearly so o.o.: KB yağı is common, e.g. (protect his friends and) yağısın kötür “remove his enemies ır7, bularda birisi biripe yağı 'among these some are hostile to others” 144: xin(?) At, (a talkative tongue is) utulmaz (?so read) yağı “an invincible enemy! r34: 7ef. yağı “eneniy” 132: xiv Muh. al-'adit (opposite. to 'ally andlığ) ya:ğı: Mel. so, 1; yağı: Rif. ras (and 132): Çağ. xv fF. yağı dugman “enemy” San, 333v. 4; yaw ditto 340r. 18 (and see yavla:k): Xwar. xiv yağı "enemy” Na/ic. 146, 15: Kom. xiv yağı “var” (sic) CCG; Gr.: Kip. xin al-"adinu (opposite to “friend” rna:kK) ya:ğı: How. 26, 13: xıv ya:ğı: al-müharib "one who makes war (on you)” /4. 95: (xv in Tuh. 'adin is translated tuşman): Osm. xiv ff. yağı 'enemy'; common to XVI, sporadic to xviii TT'S 7 564; II 9745 İİİ 752; IV 824. 38 yakı: Hap. leg., in the jingle yakt: yukt:, perhaps an expanded form of ya:k yu:k, see 1 ya:k. Xak. xı “a humble, obsequious (al-mutawüadi'u'L-mutamallig) person” is called yakı: yukr er Kaş. III 25. D yaku: (dağğu:) Conc. N. in -ku:, dissimilated fr. -Bu: after - &amp;-, fr. yağ-, 'a raincoat'. A First Period 1l.-w. in Mong. as daku “a fur coat with the fur outside” (Kotv. 1570, Haltod 445), which fixes the d-; cf. yağız. N.o.a.b. Xak. xi yaku: al-minfar "a raincoat', originally ya:&amp;ku: but shortened (fa-xuffifa) Kaş. III 25; a.o. İİİ 226 (soku:): xiv MuA.(?) furto müqlab "a reversed fur coat! ya:ku: Rif. 167. S yuka Sec yuvka:. Dis. V. YGAE yaBu- in ETY IV 130 is an error for yagid-. ? D yagu:- “to approach, be near to”, syn. vv. 2 yak-, but the morphological connection is obscure; see yagru:, Survives only(?) .in NE Kumd,, Tel. yu:- R III 535: NC Kir. ju:-; Kzx. ju-. Uy£. vii ff. Man, (whenever the light of moon is obscured) ay tegri ordusı kün tenri ordusına yağuyur “the palace of the moon is near the palace of the sun” M İH 7, 8 (v): Bud. ölüm ödi yağudukda 'when the time of death approaches" U III 43, 28: Xak. xi beg kelme:ki: yağu:dı: "the arrival of the beg (etc. is imminent" (qaruba) Kaş. III 89 (yağu:r, yağu:ma:k), a.o, ]1 148, 7: K B yagudi tileki “(the achievement of) his wishes is near” 1631; yağıka yağusa “if he approaches the enemy” 2349: . xır(?) At. isizke yavuma (sic) “do not go near a wicked man” 379; Tef. yavu- ditto 131: xiv. Muh.(?) qaruba yağu:- (MS. yagur-) Rif. 114 (only): Çağ. xvff. yawu- (-dı, etc.) yakın ol-, yakın var- "to be near, to approach' Vel. 402-5 (quotns.); yavvu-/yavvuş- nazdik  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 943 
     
   
   
      DIS. V..YĞD339v. 8: Xwar. xiv şüudan “to be near” San. 75: Kip. yağu-/yavu- “to approach” Qutb 64, xiv yavi- garuba İd. 99. Dis. YGC S yığaç See iğaç. yoğu:ç (yoğo:ç?) n.o.a.b. Uy&amp;. vuv ff. Bud. U II 88, 3 (indin): Xak. x1 yoğuç “the other side” (ai-cánibu'l-áxir) of a river or canal; and on whatever side a man stands the other side is for him yoğuç, hence one says yoğuç keçtim “1 crossed to the other side of the river” Kaş. 111 8; má wará hull nahr aw wádi "the other side of any canal or river” is called yoğu:ç, but it may also be pronounced yoğuç I 18, 19: Kom. xiv “the other side, beyond' yovaç CCI; Gr. D yoğçı: (d-) N.Ag. fr. yo:ğ, 'mourner' (lit. “the participant in a funeral feast"). N.o.a.b., see yuğuçı:. Türkü vri (when the xağan died) yoğçı: sığıtçı: “mourners and vveepers” (came from many countries) / E 4, I1 E s; INri: Dis. V. YGC(S)D yakgirt- Hap. leg.; Sec. f. of *yakSirt- (cf. yapçur-), double Caus. f, presumably of 2 yakış-, the meaning is obscure; it would be easier to explain as a misreading of yığçırt- (see yığ- used in such phr. as kópül yığ-), which could mean “to bring together' or the like. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. (then Prince Mahisthava, being under the pressure of sharp longing, falling into great desire, rousing great thoughts of compassion) kópülin kógüzin yakçırtıp "bringing together his mind and breast (i.e. his thoughts and feelings) (. . . said) Suv. 615, 8-9. Tris. YGC D yağıçı: N.Ag. fr. yağı:: lit. “one who acts against the enemy'; 'aggressive' or the like. N.o.a.b. Xak, xi KB ürüp kırğıl artuk yağıçı bolur, yağıçı bolur ham yarağçı bolur *white- and grey-haired (vvarriors) become extremely aggressive; they become both aggressive and efficient! 2372; a.o. 2371 (Kkirgil). D yuğuçı: (yuğu:çı:) Hap. leg.; Dev. N.Ag. fr. yu:-; vocalized yugit: in the MS. Xak. xı yuğuçı: a/-qaşşür "a fuller” Kaş. 1I 170 (bürkür-), n.m.e. S yığaçlık See ığaçlık. Tris. V. YĞCS yığaçlan- See ığaçlan-. Dis. YĞD yoğdu: “the long hair under a camel's chin'. "The alternative pronunciations and the lack of an obvious etymology suggest that it may be a l-w.. A Second Period 1.-w. in Mong. as coğdor (Kow. 2401, Haltod 579); NE Tuv. 899 çoğdur: NC Kir. joédor are no doubt reborrowings fr. Mong. Xak. xı yoğdu: fırod/ wabari'l-ba'ir "inda'l-"utnán “the long hair under a camel's chin' (lit. 'in the region of the beard") Kaş. III 3o; yoğru: “a camel's long hair”, also called yoğru:y, the -r- is changed fr. -d- as in Ar. 'akaral'akada İİT 31; the Turks call “a camel's long hair” yoğdu:, and they (the Oğuz and Kip.) coğdu: 7 31, 9. Dis. V. YGDD yağıd- (d-) Intrans. Den. V. fr. yağı:, "to e, or become, hostile'. N.o.a.b., cf. yağık-. "Türkü vir Karluk yagit(t)ukda: “vvhen the Karluk became hostile' Ix. 18; a.o. do. 5 (mistranscribed yağı:- in ETY IV 1309): Uyğ. vir Basmı:l yağıdu: “the Basmı:l becoming hostile” Su. S 4; a.o. do. E 1o (yara:-): vir ff. Man.-A (then the people in the city of Babylon) İyluvğaladı yağıdtı "became ill-mannered and hostile! Man.-uig. Frag. 400, 9 (only one letter is missing in the first word and the only possibility seems to be y-; if so it is a Den. V. fr. yuvğa:, cf. yuvğalan-): Xak. xı (between yağıtğa:n, see yağıt-, and yomıtğa:n) ol kişi: ol tutçı: yağıtğa:n "that man constantly engages in hostilities after peace” (has been concluded, abada(n) yu'àdi ba"da”l-şulh) Kaş. III 53 (with -d- dissimilated to -t- before -$-); n.m.e. D yağıt- (d-) Caus. f. of yağ-: n.o.a.b.; cf. yağtur-. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. nos teg tatığlığ yağmur suvin yağıtıp “pouring down rainwater as sweet as an elixir' Kuan. 202; similar phr. U I zo, ro, 22, 5-6; III 13,6; USp. 102, 23; (the gods) xwa cecek sactilar yagitdilar 'scattered and poured down flowers' U III 46, 11; a.0. TT X 155: Civ. yağmur yağıtğuka kórser 'if one consults the oracle about (the possibility of) rain TT VII 29, r: Xak. xi tepri: yağmur yağıttı: amfara' láhu'l-mafar “God made it rain' Kaş. 1İ 316 (yagiturr, yağıtma:k), tepri ol yağmur yağıtğa:n "God is constantly making it rain” 7/7 53. D yağut- Caus. f. of yağu:-, “to bring (something Aec.) near (something Dat.) and the like. Survives only(?) in NE Alt., Tel. yu:t-: NC Kir. ju:it-; Kzx. ju(w)it-. Cf. 1 yakur-. Türkü vırr (the Chinese, by flattery and bribes) ırak bodunığ ança: yağu:tur ermiş “thus brought distant peoples near to them” 7 S $, /I N 4: Xak. xı ol atığ mapa: yağuttı: “he brought the horse (etc.) near (qarraba) to me” Kaş. 1I 316 (yağutu:r, yagutma:k; after yağıt-, verse); ol kişi: ol ö:zin yağutğa:n translated “that man is constantly bringing himself near to the people by his kindness! ]7] 52: KB yağutsa begine yıramış kişiğ "he should bring distant people near to his master” 2506; a.o. 1299 (uşakçı:): Çağ. xv ff. yavvut-(-up, etc.) yar” eyle- Vel. 406 (quotn.); yavvut-/yavvuştur- Caus. f.; nazdik kardan “to bring near” Sar. 339v. 25 (quotns.): Xwar. xı yavut- ditto MN 46; Nahc. 229, 3: Kip. xii qarraba yawut- Hou. 43, 3: (xiv yawuklat- 7d. 99). 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 944 
     
   
   
      900 DIS. V. D yo:ka:d- Intrans. Den. V. fr. 1 yo:k; "to perish'. N.o.a.b. SE "Türki yokat-: SC Uzb. yükot- 'to destroy' are not survivals of this word, but prob. crases of yo:k ét- which occurs in this meaning e.g. in SW Osm. "Türkü vır (the “Türkü people) yokadu: barrr ermiş “vere on the way to perishing” 1 E 10: Uyğ. vir ff. Bud, Sanskrit [illegible, ?na] veyetr. (MS. vyaiti) "does not perish' yoka:dma:z (MS. vokatmáz) TT VII F.7; taluy içinde yokağtı "they have perished at sea” PP 54, 1; yokadıp barır U III 66, 15; o.o, TT VI 97-8 (yaş-), Suv. 198, g (yitlin-): Xak. xı yalnuk oğlu: yo:ka:du:r “the children of men perish” (yafıdş but their good name remains) Kaş. 2/1 384, 18; n.m.e.: KB (Thou hast created all things) yokadur ne erse "things perish” (but 'l'hou remainest) 14: (xin(?) Tef. yokat- 'to destroy' 159): Kom. XIV “to perish, be destroyed' yoxa- CCG; Gr. 125. D yağtur- (d-) Caus. f. of yağ-, "to pour down, rain down' (Trans). S.i,s.m.l, vv, the usual phonetic changes. Cf. yagit-. Xak. xı tepri: yağmur yağturdı: “God most high poured down (artara) rain' (etc.) Kaş. III 95 (yağturur, yağturma:k): Çağ. xv ff. ya£dur-/yağdurt- Caus. f.; báránidag "tç pour down (rain)' San. 333r. 8 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv yagdur- ditto Qutb 64: Kom. xiv ditto yavdır- CCG; Gr. 119 (quotn.). D 1 yaktur- Hap. leg.?; Caus. f. of 1 yak-. Xak. xı ol ba:şka: yakığ yakturdı: “he ordered that ointment should be applied (bi-tadmidr'l-damád) to the wound' Kaş, III 96 (3 yaktur- follows in the same para.). D 2 yaktur- Hap. leg.?; Caus. f. of 2 yak-; the existence of this V. seems to be implied by the sentence below. Cf. 1 yakur-, Xak. xi after 3 yaktur- tva kadálika idá massa'l-insán jay'a(n) "likewise when a man has touched something', implying a meaning 'to order to touch” Kaş, III 96. D 3 yaktur- Caus. f. of 3 yak-; 'to order to ignite”, etc. S.i.m.m.l.g. vv, the usual phonetic changes. Uy. vir ff. Bud. (reciting” this precious . . . süfra and) mip küün tükel yakturup 'having a thousand candles (Chinese 1-vv.) all hit TT VII 40, 121: Xak. xi (after 1 yaktur-) and one says ol anın evipe: o:t yakturdt: “he ordered that his (i.e. someone else's) house should be burnt (bi-i/ràq) and kindled the fire' (areqada”l-nür) Kaş. İH 96 (yakturur, yakturma:k): xiu(?) Tef. uluğ ot yakturdi: "he had a great fire lit” 136. D yığtur- Caus. f. of yığ- , “to order to collect, or heap up (something)'. S.i.m.m.l.g. w. the usual phonetic changes. Xak. xı ol apar tarif yığturdı: "he urged him to heap up (ald taktoim) the wheat (etc.); also used when he made him detain (hallafahu bi-man"—MS. yamna") someone for a meal or something else Kaş. HI 95 (yığturur, yığturma:k: the next para. relates to yövtür-, mis-spelt yığ”ır  YĞDin the MS.): Çağ. xv fT. yığtur- Caus. f.: cam" farmüdan “to order to collect' San. 3şor. 4 (quotn.): Xvvar, xıv yığdur- ditto Qutb go, D yıktur- Caus. f. of y1K-; s.i.s.m.l, w. the usual phonetic changes. Xak. x1 ol anın evin yıkturdi: ahdama baytahu "he had his (i.e. someone else"s) house (etc.) demolished” Kaş. 11 97 (yıkturur, yıkturma:k): Çağ. xv ff. yıktur- Caus. f.; andázántdan xa xarab farmüdan "to order to throw down or demolish' San. 350v. 21. D yuktur- Caus. f. of yuk-; s.is.mn.l. vv, the usual phonetic changes. Xak. xi ol anın to:nipa; yripazr yukturdi: a/taxa tea amassa'l-müsk “he had musk smeared or dabbed on his (someone else's) garment! Kaş, HII gö (yukturur, yukturma:k): Kom, xiv yuktur'to make (somcthing) adhere to (something) CCG, Gr. 129 (quotn.). Tris. V. YGDD yokadtur- Caus. f. of yo:ka:d- ; 'to destroy' and the like. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viii ff. Man. TT JI 17, 71-2 (yitlintür-); Z/7 28 (arta:-): Bud. alku yaviz tüllerig yokadturdaçı 'destroy.ing all bad dreams” U 77 58, 2 (iii); öğümin kapımın yokadturdim erser “if I have destroyed my mother or father' Suv. 134 15-16. Dis. YGG (D) yağa:k 'nut', prob. a generic term; morphologically this could be a Dev. N. fr. yağ- in the sense of 'something which pours down (from trees)', but this is improbable. Survives, meaning ^valnut', in SE “Türki yapak: NC Kır,, Kzx. Şanak/lanğak:SC Uzb. yopok: NW Kk. jap&amp;ak; most other languages use some form of Ar. cawz. "Türkü vir ff. yağak ığaç ya:ylağı:m “uy summer station is a nut-tree” JrkB 56: Uyğ. viri ff. (Man.-A in a damaged text M I 32, 11 ff. “Mar Amu Mojak walked about the town and begged for alms' [gap] bir yağak bul[t]t(or bol[t]1); “nut” does not seem relevant in this context, the word is prob. the Man.-A form of yağuk "neighbour"): Bud. kim kayu tinh yağak (sic, not yasak as in the text) ka[buk]tinca vrhar étser 'if a man makes a monastery the size of a nutshell' (and adorns it with a statue of Buddha the size of a grain of wheat, etc.) Pfahl. 6, 5-6: Xak. xı yağa:k al-catoz "nut” (usually specifically “valnut”) Kaş, ZE 29; 0.0. £ go (akt); 267 (2 ağnat-), 417, 5; /H 8 (18ac): Çağ. xv ff. yapak/yanağ yaşak “nut” Vel. 404 (quotn. 'nuts on a tree); yanak/ yanpağ ('with -p-") ((1) 'cheek'); (2) catoz San. 339r. 14 (quotns.): Osm. xvi yapak noted only in Vel. 404 (Çağ.). D yakığ Dev. N. fr. 1 yak-; “ointment”. Survives in SW Az, yaxı 'ointment'; Osm. yakı originally “a plaster, now usually 'cautery, blister' owing to a false etymology fr. 3 yak-. Xak. xi yakığ al-damád fi'l-awrüm | wa nahmıhd “an ointment for swellings and the  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 945 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. YGLlike” Kaş. İİİ 13; four o.o., see 1 yak- and der. m í D yağu:k Dev. N./A. fr. yaBu:-; “near, neighbour; neighbourhood; relative', and the like. Survives in some NE languages as yu:k; "Tuv, çok: NC Kir, ju:k; Kzx. ju(w)tk: SC Uzb. yovuk: NW Kk. Juwik; Kumyk yuvuk; Nog. yuwik. Cf. yakın, Türkü vii yağuk erser “if they are near” 1 S 7, II N s: Uyğ. vi ff. (Man.-A see yağa:k): Bud. (before a list of names) yağukta “in this neighbourhood” U 11 8o, 65: Civ. yağuktakı İş 'affairs in the neighbourhood! TT I rao (esidüt): Xak. xı yağu:k yé:r “a near-by (a/-qarib) place” , hence onc calls “neighbours” (or *kinsfolk', al-agárib) yak yağu:k Kaş. İTİ 29; o.0. 7 433, 7: İİİ 22 (yakın), 76 (yatik-); 255 (ula:-): KB otka barma yağuk “do not go ncar a fire” 653: 0.0. 778, 783, 4229: xın(?) Tef. yavuk “near, neighbourhood”, yak yavuk “kinsfolk” 132-6: xiv Muh. (under “terms: of relationship") a/-qarib ya:wuk/ya:xin Mel. 49, 2 (only); al-qarába "kinsfolk” yağu:k Rif. 143 (Mel. ka:ya:ş): Çağ. xv ff. yawuk yakın Vel. 402 (quotn.; yawuk yir belürsüz "lost, unknovvn”, 407 is prob. a corruption of 1 yo:k); yawuf/yawuk razdik 'near! San. 340r. 29: Xwar. xiv yavuk 'near' (in space or time) Qutb 75; Nahc. 39, 11; 243, 11; 251, 7; yak yavuk “neighbours” (or kinsfolk ?) Nahc. 8, ro, 16, 13: Kom. xiv “near” (Adv.) ya'ox CCI; Gr.: Kip. xij al-garib (opposite to “distant” yıra:k) yawuk (/ya:kın) Hou. 25, 12; (under “terms of relationship") al-garába yawuk do. 32, 6: xiv yawuk (or ya'uk?) al-qarib İd. gg: qarib (yakın/) yuwuk (sic) Tuh. 28b. 8. D yuğa:k Dev. N. (connoting repeated action) fr. yu:-; lit. 'constantly washing'; in practice “some kind of water bird”, prob. a diver. Xak. xı ördek yuğa:k fuyüru'l-má'l-iwazz wa nahwuhu 'water birds, geese (should be “ducks”) and the like” Kaş. 7 222, 18; 111 17, 10; n.m.e.: KB yuğak in a list of eight sporting birds 5377. *yafku: See yaku:, Dis. V. YGGD yağık- (d-) Intrans. Den. V. fr. yağı:, “to be hostile", N.o.a.b.; R's statement in //7 41 (based on Zenker) that it is Osm. is prob. an error for Çağ. Cf. yağıd-. Xak. x1 beéle:r bi:r bi:rke: yağıktı: “the 5egs vvere at enmity (ta'ada) with one another” Kaş. 11] 76 (yağıka:r, yağıkma:k): Çağ. xv ff. yağık(spelt) yağ şudan "to be hostile” San. 333r. 13 (quotns.). Tris. YĞĞ D yağaklığ P.N./A. fr. yağa:k, “bearing nuts. N.o.a.b. Türkü vir ff. (1 am a grey buymul falcon; I sit on a rock with a wide view and look around—-see körüklüğ) yağaklı:ğ toğra:k üze: tüşü:pen yaylayurmen “1 settle on a poplar bearing nuts and spend the summer” IrkB 64 (this is of course   gor nonsense, but as in the case of do. 56 (see yağa:k) all the vvords in the para. are chosen for the alliteration :- kö-, ka-, ko-, kö- ; ya-, to-, tü-, ya-): Xak. xı yağaklığ yığa:ç al-şacar dü'l-cawz "a nut-tree” Kaş. III şo. D yağaklık Hap. leg.; A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. yağa:k. Xak. xr yağaklık manbitu'l-cawz “a plantation of nut-trees” Kaş. 11] şı. D yağukluk A.N. fr. yağukK, s.i.s.m.l. vv. the usual phonetic changes. Xak. xı K.B yakınlık yağukluk yırattı kadaş “kinsfolk have put an end to neighbourliness and feelings of kinship' 6468: xin(?) Tef. yavukluk 'proximity' 132: Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 75. Dis. YGL D ya:ğlığ P.N./A. fr. ya:B; s.i.s.m.l. w. the usual phonetic changes. Türkü vir ff. IrkB 13 (kamıç): Uyğ, vir ff. Man. (trees and shrubs become, inter alia) yağlığ “full of oil Wind. zo: Bud. bişmiş yağlığ et 'cooked fat meat” U III 41, 2 (i)—yağlığ yumşak kózin “her lustrous soft eyes” TT X 437; (he went about visiting the sick and) edgü yağlığ yumsak savın ötlep eriglep “advising (Hend.) them vvith kind soothing gentle words' Suv. 597, 6-7: Civ. yağlığ aş 'fatty food” TT VII 16, 11-13; a.o. VIII Liş (odğurak): Xak. xı ya:ğlığ dasim 'greasy, fatty” Kaş. 1 70,24; 11 309 (büküt-): 777 43, 2; n.m.e.: Çağ. xvff. yağlığ/yağlık çarö wa rawfan-dlüd 'greasy, oily' San. 333v. 2 (quotn.) Dis. V. YGLD yağıl- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of yağ-. Xak. xı yağmur yağıldı: “the rain (etc.) was poured down' (umtira) Kaş. III 79 (yağılu:r, yağılma:k). D yakıl- the Pass, f.s of 1, 2, and 3 yakhave all existed at one time or another. "The early occurrences are of the Pass. f. of 2 yak-, those of 1 and 3 yak- are noted in the medieval period and still s.1.s.m.I., but that of 3 yak- is the commoner, and it is doubtful whether that of 2 yak- still survives although other der. f.s like SW Osm. yakışıl- do so. Uy. viit ff. Bud. bürtmekdin yakıldaçı “being brought together by (the sense of) touch” TT V 24, 66-7o: Xak. xi anar yakıldı: umissa (MS. amassa) bihi "it was brought into contact with him'.Kag. III 81 (yakilu:r, yakilma:k): Çağ. xv ff. yakil- (1-3) afrüxta şudan 'to be ignited'; (2-1) basta şudan hinná wa marham toa amtál-1 ün "to be dressed with henna, a plaster, and the like”, (3-2) rmu'attar wa pasandida şudan “to be impressed, pleased'; (4-22) mutham şudan "to be calumniated' San. 343r. 13 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv yakil- 'to be burnt MN 237: Kip. xiv yakil- iktaraqa "to be burnt! /d. gs: Osm. xv ff. yakil- to be burnt; to be greatly distressed; to be deeply moved'; in three texts 77S 7 768; 1I 980. D yığıl- Pass. f. of y1&amp;-; s.i.s.m.l., vv. the same phonetic changes, for 'to be heaped up' and  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 946 
     
   
   
     902 the like. Uyğ. viri ff. Man. (gap) yığılmak (gap] TT LX 117: Bud. Sanskrit samsthügüra 'mecting-house' yığılğuluk evimiz TT VIII G.3; o.o. do. C.12 (olur-); D.16 (teğinç): alku yigilmis ed tavar 'all the goods and property that have been accumulated” U 7/7 33, 12; 0.0. U 1 23, 4 (birğerü:), U TI 28,6 (1), Hüen-ts. 1800; Suv. 553, 8; USSp. 58, 10: Xak. xı er rstin yığıldı: “the man held back (imtana'a) from the affair'; also used when someone else has restrained him (mana'ahu); Intrans. and Pass. (yığılu:r, yığılma:k), and one says bodu:n yığıldı: “the people assembled' (ictama"a), and yarma:k yığıldı: "the money (etc.) piled up” (icfama"a), and topra:k yığıldı: “the: earth (etc.) was heaped up” (Ktetetma) (yiğılu:r, yığılma:k) Kaş. 111 79; bu yér ol munda: kişi: yığılğa:n “this is a place where people constantly assemble' (yactamf) HI 54: KB (if a man has no wealth) er yığılmaz apar “people do not rally to him” 5460; 8.0. 460, etc. (a:v-): xın(?) Tef. yığıl(1) “to assemble”, (a) ' to refrain, hold back” 156; yığlu bar- 'to assemble and go” 133 (mistranscribed yağlu and mistranslated): Çağ. xv ff. yığıl- /yığılış- cam" şudan “to assemble” San. 35or. 6 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv yığıl- “to assemble” Qut? 91; “to refrain, hold back” Nahe. 281, 13; 306, 9: Kom.,.xiy..'to assemble' yıl- (yı:1- € yigil-) CCG; Gr. D yıkıl- Pass. f. of yrk- ; usually Intrans. "to collapse, fall down', and the like, S.i.s.m.l. vv. the usual phonetic changes. Xnk. xi ta:m yikildi: "the vvall (etc.) collapsed' (inftadama) Kaş. III 81 (yikilu:r, yıkilma:k), bu ta:m ol tutçi: yikilfa:n “this wall is constantly collapsing” 7/7 54; a.o. 7 348 (külf): xın(?) Tef. yığıl-/fyıkıl- 'to collapse! 156-7: xiv xariba tva tcaqa'a “to become a ruin, fall down" yıxıl- Mel. 25, 13; yikil- Rif. 108: Çağ. xv ff. yıkıl- uftádan wa xaráb sudan ditto San. 350v. 21 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv yıkıl- ditto Qutb gr: Kom. xiv ditto yıkil- CCI; yixilCCG; Gr. 133 (quotn.): Kip. xv wvaqa'a yikilKav. 29, 15-20; Tuh. 38b. 11: TTS I zo (alik). D yokal- “to perish, be destroycd or lost; to disappear'; presumably Pass. f. of *yoka:-, Den. V. fr. 1 yo:k, S.i.a.m.l.g. except SW. Cf. yoka:d-. Xak. xı KB (the sun, when it rises, illuminates the world and reaches all inen but) yokalmaz özün 'does not itself perish” 827; 0.0. 692 (törü:-), 828: xi11(?) Tef. yokal*to perish' 159: Çağ. xv ff. yokal- nist wa ma"düm şudan "to be, or become, non-existent” San. 343v. 28: Xvvar. xiv yokal- “to be destroyed, to perish' Qutb 82. D yukil- Pass. f. of yuk-, survives only(?) in NE Bar. yuğul- “to be infected (with a disease)' R III 542. Uyf. viu ff. Bud. (if any man) beglerde ağır yazuklukun yazuksuzun yana yukila kelip (he is put in prison and bound and lies in his bonds and suffers pain); if correctly transcribed this seems to mean *comes again to be infected (with suspicion) of grievous offences against the begs whether he Osm. xiv DIS. V. YGLis guilty or innocent' Kuan. 36-7: Xak. xi to:nka: kara: yukuldi: “the black substance stuck (talattaxa) to the garment (etc.) Kaş. III 81 (yukulu:r, yukulma:k): Çağ. xv ff. yukul- (spelt) sirdyat karda şudan “to be infected' San. 343v. 21. D yağla:- (ya:ğla:-) Den. V. fr. ya:ğ, “to grease, or oil (something 4cc.)'. S.i.a.m.l.g. w. the usual phonetic changes. Xak. xi er koğuş yağla:dı: “the man oiled (da/ıhana) the leather” (etc.), originally ya:ğla:dı: Kaş. III 308 (yağla:r, yağla:ma:k): xiv Mu. dahana ya:bla:- Mel. 26, s: yağla:- Rif. 109: Kip. xiv yağla- dahana İd. 95: xv ditto Kav. 75, 10; ditto yawla-; Tkm. yağla- Tuh. 16a. 1. S yığla:- See ığla:-. D yoğla:- (d-) Den. V. fr. yo:ğ, properly "to celebrate a funeral feast'. Survives in NC Kir. jokto-; Kzx. Jokta-: NW Kk. Jokla- "to mourn for (a deceased). See yokla:- Preliminary note. Türkü vrı 7 E 4, J1] E s (sığta:-), Ix. 27 (kuvra:-); Ixe- Asxete C 2 (ETY II 123; dubious): O, Kir. ix ff. yogladipiz Mal. 42, s: Xak. xı ol ölüğke: yoğla:dı: ittaxada da'wa (MS. du"ua) l'l-mayyit “he held a (funeral) feast for the deceased'; this is a custom of the "Turks Kaş. III 309 (yoğla:r, yoğla:ma:k). D yokla:- Preliminary note. part fr. the Den. V. fr. 2 yok listed below, there is clear evidence of the existence of a Den. V. fr. 1 yo:k at any rate in SVV Tim. yo:kla- “to destroy, hill, expend (money)'.. "This 'Thm. V. also means "to remember, or commemorate, and there is a toide range of V.s fr. Çağ. omwvards schich have more or less similar meanings: NE Tus. çokta- “fo notice the absence of (someone or something); Alt. yokto- 'to feel, examine" R IH 407: SE Türhi yokla-/yokli- “fo look after, to visit (a friend to ask after his health), to inquire, verify, check" : NC Kir. jokto-, Kzx. Jokta- “zo investigate, check; to discover a los”: SC Uzh. yükla- “zo visit, inquire, investigate : NW Kk. jokla- 'to discover the loss of something; Nog. yokla- “to visit": SVV Az. yoxla“to check, investigate, fee; Osm. yokla- “fo feel, examine, search, try, test, visi”. While it toould be just possible to regard these as Den. V.s fr. V yo:k in the sense of “to note, or investigate, the absence of something, tt is likely that some at any rate are extensions of the meaning of yoğla:- ehich developed svhen, with the adoption of Islam, the practice of holding funeral feasts mas dropped and forgotten. D yokla:- Den. V. fr. 2 yok; “to rise', and the like. Survives in NE Sag., Şor (R 11] 2008), 'Tuv. çokta-, Khak. çoxta- “to go upstream'. Cf. a:$-, ün-. Uyğ. vrir ff. Bud. (the king said to his ministers . . .) yoklan bari “get up and go” (to every street, etc.) USp. 97, 32-3; 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 947 
     
   
   
       DIS. ol evde' kün künişe yoklamak aşılmak bolur 'there will be in that house every day a rise and increase (in prosperity" TT VI 287; o.o. do. 346; PP 57, 2-3 (4 kó:k); TT III, p. 26, note 5, rr (1 karak): Xak. x1 (under - ka: Dat. Suff.) ta:ğka: yokla: 'climb (fş"ad) the mountain” Kaş. III 212, 1; 8.0. IIl 221 (tó:r); n.m.e.; KB yokla:- is common; kuti künde arttı órü yokladı “his good fortune increased daily and rose higher” 438, ara kilkim ildi ara yokladi 'sometimes my character deteriorated and sometimes improved' 746; (by the proper use of language man on the brown earth) yaşıl kókke yoklar 'rises to the blue heaven” 1002; şatunun basipa tegi yokladım “1 climbed to the top of the ladder” 6053 (in 6054 ap): xırı(?) At. bil birle "Alim yokar yokladı "by knowledge the scholar has risen on high” ror, Tef., yokla- 'to rise (to heaven), to climb (a mountain) 160: (Çağ. xv ff. yokla- (-mış) fokundur- 'to cause to touch or be touched' Vel. 419; yokla- (r) tafahhug hardan “to investigate'; (2) pum wa na-badid hardan “to lose San. 343v. 15: Kom. xiv yoxla- “to lose, note the absence of” CCG; Gr. 125 (quotn.)). D yağlat- Caus. f. of yağla:- , "to have (something) greased, oiled', etc. S.i.s.m.]. xw. the usual phonetic changes. Xak. xı ol koğiışni: yağlattı: “he gave orders for oiling (bi-tadhin) the leather' (etc.) Kaş. İT 355 (yağJatu:r, yağlatma:k). S yiflat- See ığlat-. D yoğlat- (d-) Caus. f. of yoğla:-, n.o.a.b. "Türkü vir (the xağar said, 'I must go home, my wife has died") ani: yoğlatayın “I must have a funeral feast celebrated for her” T 31; Isvara: Bilge: Küli Çorığ yoglat(Ou “they had a funeral feast held for Küli Çor” Ix. 24. D yoklat- Caus. f. of yokla:-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı ol anı: ta:ğka: yoklattı: "he made him climb (as'adahu) the mountain' (etc.) Kaş. JI 355 (yoklatu:r, yoklatma:k): KB kişig yoklatur “it raises a man('s reputation)' 175, 2120: xır(?) Tef. yoklat- “to lift, raise' 160: (Çağ. xvff. yoklat- Caus. f; tafahhuş farmüdan “to order to investigate", San. 343v. 27); Xwar. xiv yoklat- “to raise (dust) Qutb 85. D yağlan- Refl. f. of yagla:- ; s.Ls.m.l. vv. the usual phonetic changes, usually in a Pass. sense. Xak. xı yağlandı: ne:p “the thing was oiled' Gddahana) Kag. III 111 (yağlanu: r, yağlanma:k), D yoklun- Hap. leg.; unusual Refl. f. of yokal-. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. ançulayu ok ol 1duk tinliğ (MS. ziniğiğ) yoklunmaksız erür , 'thus that sacred mortal is indestructible” U I7 37, 58-9. iL. : S yığlaş- See ığlaş-.. D yığlış- Hap, leg.; Co-op. f. of yığıl(Intrans.). N.o.a.b. Xak. xi sü: kamuğ YĞM 903 yığlışdı: tadárakati'l-cunüd "the. armies. all came together' Kaş. /İII 10$ (yığlışur, yiBligma:k; MS. yyilig-): Xwar. uv yığlış“to assemble” Qutb go. ' Tris. YĞŞL | ”” D yağı:lığ (d-) P.N./A. fr. yaBr; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vii ff. Civ. (in a bad omen) kilmis isi yağılığ "whatever you have done meets with hostility! TT I 37 (cf. tütüglüg): Xak. xı K.B (do your duty and do not make enemies) yağılığ kisike kopar min cogi “a man who has enemies is involved in innumerable quarrels” 4232. D yağı:lık (d-) A.N. fr. yağı:, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı KB (there are two kinds of enemy; one is the pagan temple; pagans are always hostile) taki bir yağılık asığ yas üçün "the other kind ofenmity arises from (hope of )profit or (fear of) 1oss” 4226: Kip. xiv yagilik (MS. yağlıR) al-nuşşab mu'add li'l-'aduw "an arrow destined for the enemy” İ4. 95. Tris. V. YGLD yaka:la:- Den. V. fr. 1 yaka:; s.i.s.m.l, vv. the usual phonetic changes, usually for 'to seize by the collar or throat' or “to go along the edge (of something)'. Uyğ. viii Şu, E 8; S 2 (1 yaka:): Çağ. xv ff. yakala- giribán-i kasi giriftan “to seize someone by the collar" San. 334t. 29. D yafrla:- (d-) Trans. Den. V. fr. yaf; 8.1.s.m.l, vv. similar phonetic changes, meaning "to be hostile to, engage in hostilities vvith (someone /cc.), and the like. Uyğ. vir ff. Man. yağılalgapl TT LX 74 (fragmentary): O. Kir. ix ff. Mal. 45, 4 (élle:-): Xak. xı ol anı: yağı:la:dı: 'adahu "he was hostile to him”, and one says er ya:ğı: yağızla:dı: “the man fought (hàraba) the enemy” Kaş. IIl 328 (yağı:la:r,- yagirla:ma:k); a.o. İTİ 325,4 KB yağılayu . . . yağısın 4227; 0.0. 4261, 5318: xiv Muh. "ada ya:ğıdla:- Mel. 28, ış, Rif. 112. 35 Dis. YĞM D yığım Hap. leg.; N.S.A. fr. yığ- , lit. “a single. act of heaping up”. Xak. xi yığım topra:k tull mina'l-turáb "a heap of earth”, the -m is changed from -n Kaş. III 19 (see yığın). D yağmur (d-) Dev. N. fr. yağ-: 'rain'. S.i.a.m.l.g., SW Az., Osm. yağmur, Tkm. yağmır, in almost all other languages yamBur w. the usual phonetic changes. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. yağmur yağmış teg “like rain pouring down' TT V ro, 107; o.o. Kuan. 202, etc. (yağıt-): Civ. TT i s (yağ-), VII 29, 1 (yaiit-); a.o, H II 30, 142: Xak. xı yağmur al-matar 'rain' ; ; yamBur alternative form Kag. III 38 (prov.); 15 o.o.: KB yağa tursu yağmur (Vienna MS. yamğur) “let the rain go on raining” r18: xiu(?) Tef. yağmur 1353: xiv. Muh. al-ğayt "heavy rain yağmur Mel. 79, 10; Rif. 184: Çağ. xv ff. yamğur yağmur Vel. 410; yamğur baran 'rain' San. 337v. 6  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 948 
     
   
   
     904 (quotn.); a.o. 333v. 3 (Osm.): Kom. xiv 'rain' yamğur/amğur CCI, CCG, Gr.: Kip. xit al-matar yamğur, Tkm. yağmu:r Hou. 5, 7: xiv Tkm. yağmur a/-matar, Kip. yamBur /d. 95; al-matar yağmur Bul. 2, 16: xv ditto yamğur/yağmur Kar. 58, 4; yamğur Tuh. 38b. 3: Osm. xviii yağmur in Rumi, “rain), Çağ. yamğur San. 333v. 3. Tris. YGM D yağmurçıl Hap. leg; N./A. of Addiction fr. yağmur, elsewhere “rainy” is usually a P.N./A. in -lığ or the like. Xak. xı yağmurçil yö:r "a place where there is much rain' ( vaktrir ffhil-matar) Kaş. 111 56 (followed by a note on the Suff. - cil). Dis. YGN 3F yaga:n 'elephant'; cf. yana: ; the fact that elephants were exotic to the early Turks, and the alternative. pronunciations, suggest that this is a lw. of unknown origin. A Second Period ].-w. in Mong. as cağan (Kot, 2245, Haltod $54); survives only in NE Alt., Tel. yan, "Tuv. çan, which are perhaps reborrowings fr. Mong.; elsewhere 1.-vv.s, usually Pe. pil/fil, are used for 'elephant'. Oğuz/Kıp.(?) xr yağam affi fi ihda'l-lugatayn 'clephant' inone of the two languages ; hence a man is called Yağa:n Tegi:n Kaş. III 29: Xiti(?) At. (Postscript) yağan "an elephant" (if loaded with gold) 487: xiv Rhg. yağanlar ya'ni piller R JI] 39; Muh. al-fil yağan Mel. 72, 6; Rif. 174: Xvvar. xiv yağan “elephant” Qutb 64. D yakın Intrans. N./A.S. fr. 2 yak-, “near” (in place, time, or kin); syn. w., and to some extent complementary to, yagu:k; s.i.a.m.]. except NE and some NW. |. Uyg. vui ff. Man. TT HI sz (élet-): Chr. yakın barip 'approaching! U 7 6, rr: Bud. yekke yakın kelse “if he approaches the demon” U II 24, 12; yakın yoriyu barip 7/7 64, 5; 0.0. of place U İH 39, 8; (aymin); Suv. s85, 13-15 (ağrığlığ)--ölümi yakın keltükte "when (the time of) his death approaches! TT III, p. 26, note 5, 9: Civ. TT VII şo, ro (eltiş-): Xak. xı yakın “near” (al-qarib) of anything; one says yakın yé:r “a near place” and yakın er al-raculu” l-qarib. mina l-ixtca "a kinsman” Kaş. HI 22 (verse, yakın yağuk a/-qarib sea "1-ax): KB yakın is common, e.g. biliğke yakın ... özke yakın "near to knowledge . . . near to himself 254; yéme tutti és tuş yakın kıldı öz "and he took comrades and make himself near to (i.e. intimate with) them” 500; similar phr. 1464; hişarka yakın turma “do not live near a castle” 4546: xit(?) Zt. 174 (inançlığ), Tef. yakın 'near' 136: xiv Muh. Mel. 49, 2 (yağu:k): Çağ. xv ff. yakın nazdiR "near” San. 334v. 22 (quotn.): Xwar. xii ditto "Ali 40: XiV. ditto Qutb 69; Nahc. 105, 15: Kip. xi Hou. 25, 12 (yağu:k): xiv yakın al-qarib İd. 95: xv Tuh. 28b. 6 (yağu:k). : D yığın Intrans./Pass. N./A.S. fr. yığ-: s.i,s.m.l. w. the usual phonetic changes. Xak, DIS. YĞM xı yığın topra:k “a heap (a/-Aatıma) of earth" (etc.) Kaş. II 22; (as an example of a Dev. N. in -n) the phr. for "a heap of earth” yı:ğın (sic) topra:k taken fr. the phr. topra:k yığdı: “he heaped up earth” 7 ış, zr (and sce yığım): Çağ. xv ff. yığın (spelt) fate wa girüh “a body or group of men" San. 350v. ro: Kom. xiv yr'in "a gathering' CCG, Gr.: Kip. xiv yığın al-macmü" 'a collection, gathering" İd. 95; al-qabila "a tribe' ıyun Bul. s, 8. yoğu:n (yofo:n) 'thick' and the like; see kalın for the difference between the meanings of these two words. S.iam.lg.; NE yo:n, ço:n: SE Türki yoBan: NC Kir. )0:n, Kzx. ju(w)an: SC Uzb. yüğon: NW Kk. juwan; Kaz. yuan; Kumyk yuvan: SW Az., Osm. yoğun, Tkm. yogrn. Türkü vii (when a thing is thin, it is easy to tear it) yinçğe: yoğun bolsar üzgülük alp ermiş “if the thin thing becomes thick it is difficult to tear it” T 13-14: Uyğ. vr ff. Bud. yoğun TT VIII 4.33 (boyunduruk); yoğon do. C.7 (azığlığ): Civ. evdeki(?) yoğun iş isletsermen “f I made him do heavy work in the house” US). ss, 7-8; a.o. TT VII 42, 3 (tamar): Xak. xı yoğu:n 'corpulent (or bulky, a/-daxim) of anything” Kaş. /II 29: xii(?) Tef. yoğun “thick, bulky; (of a voice) low' 158: xiv Muh. (under 'physical characteristics) a/-ğaliz “corpulent” (opposite to “thin” incge:) yo:ğun Mel. 48, 10; Rif. 143; 8.0. yoğun ss, 9; 153: Çağ. xv ff. yoğan/yoğun daxim wa sitabr 'corpulent, gross' Sar. 343v. 2 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv tonupuz yoğun süfdin turur “your clothing is of thick wool' Nahe. 105, 15: Kom. xiv thich yoğan/yoğun CCI; Gr.: Kip. xit al-faliz (opposite to 'thin' yinçe:) yoğun Hou. 27, 13: xiv yoğun al-taxin 'thick, stiff' ld. os, yowun bold: faxıma do. 99: xv al-ğaliz (opposite to inşğe:) yoğun Kan. 64, 16; ğalis yowun; Tkm. yoğun Tuh. 26b. ir: Osm. xiv ff. yoğun 'thick', with various shades of meaning; c.i.a.p. TTS I 836; II 1039; //I 815; İV 892. Dis. V. YGND yığın- Ref. f. of yığ-, s.i.s.m.l, vv. the usual phonetic changes for “to come together” or “to be collected'. Vyğ. vurff. Man. (Thou hast commanded them) yığınkuğ (sic) "to assemble! (for religious ceremonies) TT III 162: Bud. Sanskrit. sanıdhita "assembled” yığınmış T7 VIII A.zy: Xak. xr er ö:zipe: yarma:k yığındı: “the man devoted himself to collecting (5:-canı") money (etc.) for himself' Kaş. III 84 (yığınu:r, yığınma:k): Kip. xv indanma “to be collected' yıyın- Tuh. 6b. 8. Tris. YÓN D yağanlığ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. yağan. Xak.(?) xı yağanlığ er racul fayydl “an elephant leader, or driver” Kaş. III so. D yakınlık A.N. fr. yakın, 'nearness, propinquity'. S.is.m.l sv, the usual phonetic changes. Xak. xı KB yakınlık is fairly com  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 949 
     
   
   
       DIS. YĞR 905 mon, e.g. yakınlık kilur er kişike tust 'propinquity makes a man the comrade of other people” 910; o.o. 605, 886, 6468 (yağukluk), 6470. Tris. V. YGND yoğunad- Hap. leg.: Intrans. Den. V. fr. yoğu:n. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (if one thrusts an iron peg into the ground, however long it lies in the ground) yoğunadu uzayu umaz 'it cannot get any thicker or longer' TT IV 12, 43. Dis. YGR yağır (d-) “a saddle-gall'; a First Period l.-w. in Mong. w. the same meaning, da'ari (Haenisch 3o)/dagari (Kow. 1582); survives vv. this meaning in SE Türki yeğir: NC Kir. Jor; Kzx. Jawir: NW Kk. jawir; Nog. yavır: SW Az, Osm., Tkm. yağır. The reason why in the medieval period it came to mean 'shoulder' or the like, and still has the second meaning '(a horse's) withers' in Osm., is obscure, but this perhaps evolved from 'the part of the animal where saddle-galls occur”. "The position is complicated by the simultancous emergence of yağrın apparently as a Sec. f. of 1 yarın, q.v. Xak. xı yağır al-dabar fi'l-dábba “a saddle-gall on a pack-animal'; hence one says yağırlığ at “a galied (dabir) horse” Kaş. IİI 9; o.o. in a prov. I 68, 4; 370, 4: Çağ. xvff. yağır (spelt) katif wa şüna *shoulder; shoulder-blade' (quotn.), also called yağrın, and, metaph., caráhati . . . hi dar düş wa şüna-i dawabb ba-ham-rasad "a sore which appears on the back or shoulders of pack-animals” Sar. 333v. 4: (kebze (prob. a 1.-vv,) Ratif sva düş, also called yağır/yağrın 300r. 10); a.o. 323r. 27 (İ yarın): Xwar. xırı(?) (the infant Oğuz”s . . . chest was like a bear's) yağrı kiş yağrı teg “his shoulders like a sable"s" Og. 13: Kip. xiv yağır 'agru'l-dábba “a sore on a pack-animal' İ4. 95 (also ya:ğır "a small iron shield'; Hap. leg.): Ostn. xiv ff. yağır “a saddle-gall'; fairly common T'T'S 7 765; II 975; İH 754; IV 825. S yokar See yokaru:. yakrı: “fat, suet', and the like. Cf. ya:ğ, which cannot, hovvever, be connected etymologically. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (in a list of demons between 'meat eaters' and 'marrow eaters') yakrı aşlığlar “fat (or suct) eaters” U 77 60, 2 (ii): Civ. H I 57-8 (erğüz-): Xak. xı yakrı: al-sahm “fat, suet” Kaş. III 31 (verse); o.o. 1I 105, 24; III 204, 10; 306, 2. : D yağru: “near”, apparently a Directive f. in -ru:; if Kaş. is right in saying that this was originally yakru: then the base must be 2 yak, which would then be not a jingling prefix to yağu:k but a N. homophonous w. 2 yak-; but the supposed form yakru: prob. rests on a false etymology fr. Ar. and the 'Türkü form is yağru:, the basis is more likely to be Fyağ, which would also be the basis of yağu:-. Türkü vu: (thus the Chinese drew people near (yagu:ttir) them) yağru: kontukda: "when they had settled down near (them)” 7 S 5; (ignorant people accepted this argument and) yağru: barıp 'went near (them)! 7 S 7, I] N 6: Uy£. virrff. Bud. yağuru (sic) translating Chinese chin ché (Giles 2,021 542) “in the near future” Hüen-ts. 314: Xak. xi one says ol apar yağru: yorima:s /6 yagrub hawlahu “he does not go near him”, originally yakru: with a -k- which was changed to -&amp;because it was near it (in sound); this is near (garib) the Ar. word yaqrub, taken from the word yaqrü, the tedw changed from the 5ö” in yaqrub Kaş. III 31 (sic?, the grammar is very confused). VU yoğrı: pec. to Xak. Xak. xı yoğrı: a/-cafna “a large, deep dish' Kaş. 111 31 (prov., see tatığ), yoğrı: çana:k “the dish and the bovvl” (al-gas'a) İİ 32, 4 (in a verse). S yoğru:/yoğru:y Sce yoğdu:. D yuğrut abbreviated Dev. N. fr. yuğur-, 'coagulated curdled milk, yogurt'. Metathesized to yuğurt in the medieval period; survives only(?) in NW Nog. yuvirt; Krim yoğurt/yuğurt R III 412, 453: SW Az. yoğurd, Osm. yoğurt. Uy£. viii ff. Bud. U İV so, 122 (safu:): Civ. yoğrot [gap] TT VIII 1.21 (there are other cases of o for u in this text); (mix it) yurğurtka (sic) *with yoğurt” H 1 45; yurğutka (sic) do. 169; yuğrut satığı “the sale (price?) of yogurt! USp. 35, 3: Xak. xı yuğrut (sic in the MS., consistently transcribed yoğurt in the printed text and Atalay) al-laban “milk” I 182 (udış-), 77 189 (sütger-); al-rá'ib “curdled milk' 7 208 (udit-); I7 295 (1 kat-); //I 190 (koyul-); rafiya ditto III 164 (suwuk); n.m.e.: KB yuğrut 4442 (azar): xiv Muh. al-labanu”l-hümid "sour milk” yugurd Mel. 66, 9; al-cümid 'thickened (milk)” yuğurt (MS. yagurt) Rif. 166: Xvvar. xiv (VU) yuğrut Qurb 81 (the MS. has yt£u:rt, but it rhymes vv. sağar süt): Kom. xiv 'sour milk' yuğurt CCI; Gr.: Kip. xii al-rá'ib yaığurt Hou. 16, ız: xiv yağurt ditto /4. 95; al-laban yağurt Bul. 8, 2: xv al-labanu'l-rá' ib yuğurt ... 63, 4: laban (inter alia) yavurt Tuh. 31b. 15. D yuğrum Hap. leg.; N.S.A. fr. yuğur-. Xak. xi bir yuğrum u:n daqiq qadr mü yutcan bihi marrata(r) “the quantity of flour which is kneaded in a single operation” Kaş. III 47. S yağrın See 1 yarın. (D) yuğruş morphologically Dev. N. fr. yuğur- but with no apparent semantic connection. "This title first appeared in the Karakhanid period and was superior to yabğu:, q.v. ; it thus displaced sad, q.v., in the "Türkü hierarchy. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı yuğruş “a man of the common people (al-siiga) who holds a position equivalent to that of a/-tcazir among the Turks”) it is not permissible to give this title to a Persian or man of another race, however distinguished he may be; he is one rank (daracata(n)) below the xáqdn; he is given  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 950 
     
   
   
      906 a black umbrella (qubba) which is held over his head in rain, snow, or great heat Kay. JJ] 41: KB (in a list of high positions which a man may hold) kayu yavğu yuğruş bolur él begi “some become yarğu or yuğruş or chief of a province! 4069: (Çağ. xvíf. yuğruş sirişt tea taxmir 'kneading' San. 343v. 3). Dis. V. YGRD 1 yakur- Caus. f. of 2 yak-, syn. w. yağut-, q.v.; survives only(?) in NW Kaz. yakır- R İİİ 28. Xak. xi ol atığ mana: yakurdi: “he brought the horse (etc.) near me' (qarraba ilayya) Kag. III 68 (yakurur, yakurma:k): KB (I took hold of it gently and) yakurdim ara “then brought it near me” 6617. 1 2 yakur- Hap. leg. Xak. xı er yakurdı: tanahhada l-insàn wea axadahu'l-rab:w “the man gasped and suffered from shortness of breath' Kaş. 111 68 (yakurur, yakurma:k). yuğur- “to knead (dough, etc.)'. Survives in SE "Türki yuğur- Shaw, farring; juBurBS: NC Kir. ju:r-; Kzx. jur-: SW Az. (and Rep. Turkish) yoBur-; Osm., Tkm. yuğur-. Uy£. vuir ff. Bud. TT VI 82 (2 titig): Civ. (pound the herbs until they are soft and) mir bilen yuğurup 'knead them with honey" TT ^ VII zə, 13; yuğur- “to knead (drugs, etc.) together' is common in H 7 and JI: Xak. xı Kaş. II 102 (suvig-); n.m.e.: xiv Muh. 'acana “to knead' yuğur- Mel. 28, rs: (Rif. 112 uy-); al-'acn yuğurmak 36, 13; 122; al-'acin *dough' yuğurmiış u:n 64, 7; 163: Çağ. xv ff. yuBur- xamir kardan tea siriştan (o knead' Sam 343r. 22: Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 85: Kom. xiv “to knead' yur- CCG; Gr.: Kap. xin "acana yuğur- Hou. 34, 2: XIV ditto; one says u:n yuğurğul 'knead the dough' /d. 95; ditto Bul. 61r.: xv ditto Kav. 75, 3: 'acana yuwur- Tuh. 26a. 9: Osm. xiv yukur- (sic) “to knead'; in one text, ?scribal error T7S 1847. PUD yokur- this V., which is clearly not yuğur-, is pec. to Uyğ, Bud; it would suit the context to take it as a Den. V. fr. 2 yok, but the ordinary Den. Suff. is -ar- not -ur- and such V.s are properly Intrans. Uyf. vir ft. Bud. (the lotuses present a great danger) ol linxwa (PU) yoluğ yokuru usarsiz “if you can surmount the road(?) past those lotuses' PP 39, 1; (there are also dangerous dragons and snakes) anı yokuru usarsiz "if you can surmount that" do. 7; (you will reach the island of jewels) yokurunçsuz uluğ ön körtük yokurup “after surmounting the unsurmountable grcat desolate snowdrifts' TT VI, p. 62, footnote 2. 5 D yağrı:- (d-) Den. V. fr. yağır, n.o.a.b.; cf. yağrıt-. Türkü viri ff. (the horse) yağrı:pan *was galled' (and stood still) JrkB 16: Xak. x1 İ 104, 25 (icHk). D yuğurt- Hap. leg.?; Caus. f. of yuğur-. Xak, xı ol anı: yuğurtti: “he ordered him to  DIS.  YGR knead (a"canahu) flour! Kaş. 1I 436(yugurtur, yuğurtma:k). D yağrıt- (d-) Caus. f£. of yağrı:-, pec. to Xak.; cf. yagirla:-. Xak. xı ol menip atığ yağrıttı: “he galled (adbara) my horse” (etc.) Kaş. II 352 (yağrıtu:r, yağrıtma:k), o.o. I 139, 7; İH 342 (yağırla:-). D yığrıl- Pass. f. of yığur-, Caus. f. of yığ-, basically "to be drawn together, concentrated, and the like. Yığur- surcives in NE Sor çığır- “to fold together, draw togethet on a string” R J1I 2065; and this word in NE Bar, yığrıl-, Leb. yığırıl- “to be wrinkled; (of curls) to be crisp or tight'. Xak. xı er tumluğka: yığrıldı: "the man crouched (12/a”azza) because of the cold”, and one says to:n yığrıldı: “the garment shrank (faqallaşa) in the wash! Kaş. IJI 107 (yığrılu:r, yığrılma:k), (in the winter) çığa:y yavuz yığrılu:r "poor wretched people draw their clothes tight round them” (yataqabba") I 248, 4. D yufrul- Pass. f. of yuğur-, s.i.s.m.l. vv. the same phonetic changes. Xak. xi um yugruld:r “the dough was kneaded' ('ucima) Kaş. III 107; (yuğsulu:r, yufrulma:k); baflçık balık yuğrulu:r “mud and slime are heaped up” (yatarákam) 1 248, 3: Çağ. xv ff. yuğrul- (spelt) sirişfa sudan sa. xamir şudan "to be kneaded' Sar. 343r. 28: Xvvar. xiv ditto Quib 84. D yufrus- Co-op. f. of yuğur-, pec. to Xak.? Xak. xr ol apar u:n yuğruşdi: "he helped him to knead (fi 'acn) the dough'; and one says soduk ağızda: yuğruşdu: “the spittle dried ('asaba) in his mouth' Kaş. 7]I] oz (yuğruşu:r, yugrusma:k); (in the spring) çında:n yıpa:r yuğruşu:r translated “the solid mass (tir) of sandal-wood and musk is kneaded ( yata'accan), and their odour is smelt' II 122, 24. Tris. YGR S yağuru Sec ya£ru:, D yokaru: crasis of “yokğaru:, Directive f. of 2 yok, “upvards” and the like; in Türkü the form is yoğaru:. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. some fluctuations in the first vowel; NE Khak. cogar: SE Türki yokarı Share; yukuri/jukuri BS; yokarı/yukarı Jarring: NC Kir. 1oğoru, Kzx. Poğarı: SC Uzb. yukori: NW Kk. jokari; Kaz. yuğarı, Nog. yoğarı: SW Az. yuxarı, Osm., Tkm. yokari Türkü vii (I led them to the Ötüken mountain forest) Kök Önüğ yoğaru: “up the Kök Óy river" T 15; yokaru: (sic) at yete: yadağın ığaç tutunu: aftu:rtum önreki: er yoğaruça: (sic) te&amp;dürüp “I made them climb upwards on foot leading their horses and holding on to the trees, sending the advance guard up to the top” T 25-6; a.o. I1 SE: vir ff. Man. basin (sic) yokaru kötürübp “raising his head” M 7 6, «: Uyğ. vut ff. Man.-A M £13, 15 (1 8:&amp;-), 19 (ağtur-), 26, 26 (ilgerü:): Bud. (Sanskrit lost) yoka:ru etóz tülüg erür 'his hair stands on end” TT VIII G.63; (unable)  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 951 
     
   
   
     DIS. YĞS yokaru turğalı “to stand up” PP 19, 5; o.o. do. 19, 8; 60, 5; tiz yokaru belke tegi “from the knees up to the waist' TT V 4, 4; a.o. do. 11 (egin): Xak. x1 yoka:ru: (in verses twice yoka:r / 142, 15; 320, 26) occurs ten times qualifying V.s like kop-, tur-, etc. but is not separately translated; n.m.e.: KB (as the month proceeds the moon) yokaru afar “climbs higher' 731; a.o. 72 (kakıla:-): xin(?) At. 101 (yokla:-); Tef. yokarı/yokaru kozi (sic for kodi) “up and down' 159: xiv Mu. al-'dlà “high” üstün yo:karu: Mel. t4, 9-10; (Rif. go üstün, al-'àlà yüksek, in margin yofarr :53 only): Çağ. xvíf. yokkari yoharı Vel. 419; yokarı/yokğarı bàálà wa fawq 'upwards, above” San. 344r. 2 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv yokaru “upvvards” Qutb 83: Kom. XIV 'upwards' yoxarı CCI; Gr.: Kip. xim fawq (opposite to 'downwards' aşağa:) yo:ka:rı: Hou. 26, 19: xiv yokaru: fawg İd. 95; fauq yoğaru: Bul. 14, 4: XV fawg yoğarı: Kav. 35, 3; yokarı TuÀ. 28a. 7; 73b. 6. D yuğrutluğ P.N./A. fr. yuğrut,: n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vr fl. Civ. yuğrutluğ aş “food containing. yoğurt” TT VII 16, 9: (Xak.) xiv Muh.(?) al-labaniya "a milk diet” yuğurtluğ aş Rif. 165 (only). D yuğurğu:ç Hap. leg.; N.I. fr. yuğur-. Xak. xı yuğurğur:ç “a roller (a/-mitmala) used to spread out (yaösu?) dough for noodles, etc” Kaş. I 493. VUD yoğurka:n 'blanket'; first vowel uncertain, but prob. -0-: there is no semantic connection vv. yuğur- and -ka:n is a Den., not a Dev., Suff.; perhaps connected etymologically w. yoğu:n, Survives in NE Alt., Tel. yu:rkan: Kaç., Koib. yorğan, Sag., Tuv. ço:rğan, Khak. çorğan: NW Kaz. yurğan, Kumyk yuvurğan, Nog. yuvirkan/yurkan; SW (all) yorğan. Uyğ. vırı ff. Civ. TT VII 36, ro (3 kök): Xak. xr yoğurka:n a/-dizar *blanket' Kaş. 111 54; o.o. 11 137 (kösül-), IJ] 110 (al-lihaf *'blanket' ; yórgen-); 253 (eşü:-), etc.: xııı(?) Tef. yorğan ditto 162; xiv Muh. al-liháf yorğan Mel. 67, 3; Rif. 166; ditto döşe:k/yorğa:n 67, 13; yorğa:n 168: Xwar. xiv yoğurğan 'blanket' Qutb 81: Kom. xiv ditto yovvurğan CCI; Gr.: Kap. xii al-lihaf yoğurğa:n, Tkm. yorğa:n Hou. 17, 1: xiv yo:rğan ditto İd. 92: xv ditto yorğan Kar. 64, 6; Tuh. 31b. 11. D yakrika:n Den. N. fr. yakrt:, lit. 'inclined to be fat” or the like, Pec. to Xak. Xak. xı (under fa"/alal indicating -kan) yakrıkan nabt yatanütar minhu haml amtálu'l-banàdiq "a plant which sheds fruits like hazel-nuts” , their skins are stuck to the lips vvhen they are cracked by the (cold) wind, and they recover; yakrika:n (stc) a word for 'suet ice” (safimu'l-camd), that is when ice is cut up, and things in the shape of (bits of) suet are scattered from it Kaş. III 56. D yağırlığ (d-) P.N./A. fr. yağır, pec. to Kaş., but the corresponding A.N. (Conc. N.) 907 is noted as below. Xak. xı yağırlığ tevey “a galled (dabir) camel' (etc.) Kaş. Tİİ 49; o.o. II 9 (çil-): HI 9 (yağır): xiv Muh. al-mi'rafa wa'l-namáriq (MS. tamárin) "the place where the mane grows; saddle-pads' yağırlığ Mel. 71, rz, (in Rif. 173 the Ar. word al-ğüştya is omitted and its translation transferred to this phr, see yapığ): Kip. xiv yafurlik al-mirgaha 'saddle-felt' /d. 95). Tris. V. YGRD yağırla:- (d-) Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. yağır, Xak. xı ol atığ yağırla:dı: “he treated the gall (aşlaha” l-dabar) on his horse'; if you wish to say “he galled it”, you say ol atığ yağrıttı: adbara'l-faras; the difference is the same as that between taríba and atraba and qasata and aqsafa (MS. qasata) in Ar. Kaş. 111 342 (yağırla:r, yağırla:ma:k). D yağırlan- (d-) Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of yağır1a:-, Xak. xı tevey yağırlandı: “the camel (etc.) had many saddle-galls” (katurat adbar), also used when it scratched (rğtağka) the saddle-galls Kaş. 111 113 (yağırlanu:r, yağırlanma:k). ; D yakrilan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. yakrr, Xak. xı ko:y yakrılandı: “the sheep was, or became, fat” (katura şahm . . . wea şüra dà şahm) Kaş. III 203 (yakrılanu:r, yakrılanma:k), verbs of this kind are compounded from four-letter nouns (al-rubá'iya) by eliding the end of the word, and are pronounced as fiveletter words (xumàsiya) but not so written; for example ko:y yakrılandı: . ... the yd” of yakrı: having disappeared (saqatat) 204, 7. S(E) yağrınla:- See yarınla:-. Dis. YĞS D yoksuz Priv. N./A. fr. 1 yo:k; fairly common in Uyğ. Bud. where it clearly means "ineffective, to no purpose', and the like; by the medieval period it had come to mean 'poor, destitute'. Survives in this sense in one or two NE languages: SE Türki: NC Kir. (Joksuz): SW Osm. (obsolete?). It has been displaced by yoksul in SC Uzb. (yüksil): NW Kaz. (yuksil): and SW (all); this word is first noted in Xwar. xi “Alf $53 and Kom. xiv CCI, CCG and is clearly a corruption of yoksuz. Uyğ. vurff. Bud. bu menip ötünmiş ótügümin yoksuz kuruğ kılmap “do not make this request of mine ineffective and barren” U T 31, 6-8; bu tepriler yoksuz emğgenürler “these gods are distressing themselves to no purpose (or unnecessarily)” U IV 20, 252; (if I do not treat them properly, any friendly language that I use) yoksuz bolğay "will be ineffective! do. 46, 70-1; Sanskrit avandhyateydt "because it is not fruitless, ineffective yoksoz héri bolma:ma:kındın TT VIII A.g (heri is prob. a misreading of yérl); o.o. U İİİ 31, 7; 38, 14; Kuan. 81, 181: (Xak.?) xın(?) yoksuz (/yoksul) “poor” Tef. r6o: xiv Muh.(?) al-faqir “poor” yo:ğsız Mel, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 952 
     
   
   
     908 DIS. YĞS  $5, to (only): Çağ, xv İT. (yoksul/) yoksiz müflis wa bi-çiz 'poor, destitute' San. 344r. 8. Dis. V. YGSD yagsa:- Hap. leg.; Desid. Den. V. fr. ya:ğ. Xak. xı er yağsa:dı: “the man longed for butter and fat” (al-samn 1a l-duhn) Kaş. III sos (yağsa:r, yağsa:ma:k). D yağsı:- Hap. leg.; Simulative Den. V. fr. ya:ğ. Kaş. did not realize the nature of this Sut. Xak. xr yağsı:dı: ne: axada'(-gay' (MS. in error ractd) ta"ma”l-dühn "the thing acquired a fattv taste'; and one says yakri: ya:ğı: yağsı:ma:s diilatu'l-gahm là yücad fihi má yu mal "amala”1-dühn “the fat of suet has not the qualittes (necessary) to perform the functions of oil”, originally yağsa:dı: but altered (?, udğima) Kaş. III 305 (yafsur, yağsı:ma:k). D yıksa:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of yık-. Xak. xı ol ta:m yiksa: di: "he wished to demolish (hadm) the wall' (etc.) Kaş. 777 306 (yıksa:r, yıksa:ma:k, MS. yitsa:-). D yaxsın- (yaksın-) Hap. leg.; Refl. Simulative f. of 2 yak-. Xak. xı er kafta:n —. sındı: “the man threw (a/qd) the cloak over | shoulders but did not fasten it in the mi die or insert his arms (in the sleeves); also used of a tunic (a/-qurtuq), etc. Kaş. III og (yaxsınu:r, yaxsinma:k). Tris. YĞS D yağısız (d-) Hap. leg.; Priv. N./A. fr. yağı:, Türkü vii kop baz kiltim yağısız kilim “1 made all (the people in the four quarters of the world) peaceable and free from hostilities” IEEE 30, H E 24. Dis. YGS D yağış (d-) Dev. N. fr. ya£-; lit. 'lowing down together'; originally rather specifically "a libation” to a deitv; later, more especially in Moslem areas, more generally “a downpour', usually of rain. S.i.s.m.l., e.g. NE Tuv. ça:s: SW (all) yağış. Uyğ. vui ff. Bud. (demons) yağış aşlığlar “vho devour libations” U 77 6r, 4: 0.0. TT VII 2s, 1 (ay1k); zo (yağ-): Xak. xı yağış “the word for a sacrificial victim (al-'atira) which the pagans used to sacrifice to their idols in fulfilment of a vow or to seek a favour' (faqarrub, MS. yagarrub) Kaş. HI 10: Çağ. xv ff. yağış yağmak Vel. 411; yağış barış "rain” San. 333v. 8: Osm. xiv, xv yağış 'rain'; in two texts 77S II 975. D yaxşı: abbreviated Dev. N./A. fr. 2 yaktgvv. sound change -kş- — -XS-; not noted before xı. Although all the authorities fr. Kaş. to Tuh. use much the same Ar. wotds to translate this word and edgü:, it is difficult to believe that they were originally syn. and it is likely that this word originally had some shades of meaning der. f. 2 yakış- which distinguished it fr. edgü:, 'suitable, pleasing, goodlooking', or the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv, the usual phonetic changes, and largely syn. vv, edgü:, some languages using only one or the other but most both; in the latter case yaxşı: has some meanings like “good-looking” which edgü: has not. Xak. xr yaxşı:a/-hasan"good-looking, fine' of anything; hence one says yaxşı: ne: “a fine thing”, yaxşı: tiş “a fine affair” Kaş. 1H] 32; (if you reach a position of distinction) edpü: kihn bolgil kisi:ó beğle:r katin yaxşı: u:la:n afmin xulqah wa kun /"inda'l-nmard” wagsál xayr hiasanu l-mahdar li-amri'l-nás "improve your character and become a good representative with the begs of the affairs of other people” 7 64, r4: KB (man uses his tongue to speak) sözi yaxşı bolsa “if his words prove to be appropriate (he is honoured) 275; similar phr. 1008; (listen to the words of) yaxşı Yağma bei 4947; idi yaxşı aymış “said very appropriately” 5308: xiri(?) Tef. yavlak yaxşı hukm kılmış “he made a very good (i.e. appropriate) decision! 148: x1v Muh. al-cayyid “good” (opposite to “bad” yama:n) yaxşl: Mel. 18, 6 (Rif. 97 edgü:), s4, 3; 150; aşlaha “to do good' yaxşı: işle- 22, 13; 103; haşuna “to be good-looking, fine' yaxşı: bol- toz (zs, s yaxstla:-): Çağ. xv ff. yaxşı xüb wa nihü 'good-looking, good” San. 326v. 26: X war. xın(?) yakşı (?yaxşı) “good” is common in Oğ.: edgü does not occur: xiv yaxşı 'benevolent, kindly! Qu/2 64; şaburdın yaxşı yoktur “therc is “nothing better (more appropriate?) than patience” MN 127 (the refrain to each Chapter); Kom. xiv. *good* yaxşı/yakşı CCI, CCG; Gr. 114 (quotns.): Kip. xii (“good” eyği:/key, “bad” yama: n/ yavvuz) al-hasan (opposite to 'ugly' çirkin) yakşı: Hou. 25, 10: xiv yakşı: fayyib 'good'; -k- and -X- interchange (tabaddala) in this word 74. 96: xv al-cayyid yaxşı: Kar, 23, 8; 6o, s; faba "to be good” yaxşı: bol- do. 39, 11; malih 'good-looking' (inter alia) yakşı Tuh, 33a. 4: Osm. xiv ff. yaxşı 'pretty, agrecable, good”, c.i.a.p. T TS I 767; II 977; III 754; IV 825. Dis. V. YGSD yağuş- hecip. f. of yağu:-: properly “to approach one another", Survives only(?) in NC Kir. ju:s-. Cf. 2yakış-. UyÉ. viii ff. Civ. (if a man consults the oracle about himself) énc turmak yavsur 'tranquillity approaches' TT I 220: Xak. xi bi:r ne: bi:rke: yağuşdı: “one thing drew near (fagáraba) to another” Kaş. III 73 (yağuşu:r, yağuşma:k), a.o. II 9o (artukluk): KB 1:36 (ula:-); ş3rr (ékkigü:): Çağ. xv ff. yavvuş- (-ur, -ğan) yahın ol- Vel. 402, 411; yavvuş- San. 339v. 8 (yağu:-): Xwar. xiv yavuş-/yavvuş- “to approach, or be near to, one another” Quib 75-6. . D 1 yakis- Co-op. f. of 1 yak- , survivesin SW "Tkm. Xak. xı ol apar yakığ yakışdı: “he helped him to apply the ointment (f? zcad"r”l-damád) to the wound' Kaş, 717 74 (2 yakışfollows). D 2 yakis- Co-op. f. of 2 yak-, originally syn. vv, yağuş-, “to approach, draw near to, one  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 953 
     
   
   
     —— EmMMMME———————ss—Á——— SERIEM RR ESSE 5822... 1 11  MON. YG 909 another'. In this sense it has been displaced by Den. V.s fr., or compound V.s w., yakın or yağu:k, but yakig- survives in SW Osm. for 'to be suitable, becoming, proper, fit; to look well, be handsome'; cf. yaxşı. Uyf. virt ff. Man. M İİ 8, 17 (ii) (yavaş): Xak. xt (after 1 yakig-) and one says anıp kelme:ki: yakışdı: “his arrival is imminent! (qaruba), also used of the approach (qurb) of anything when its arrival has become imminent (dna); hence one says of an eloquent speaker (al-fagih) when he has spoken anir érni: yakışma:s "his lips never come together' (yagrub) becausc of the speed and effectiveness of his speech Xaş. III 74 (yakışu:r, yakigma:k); o.o. I 170, 19 (tutuş-): 383, s (1 kurug); IJ 105, 26: KB 134 (bakış-): Osm. xiv to xvi yakış- “to approach, draw near”, in several texts TTS 7 769; İİİ 755. D yığış- Co-op. f. of y1&amp;-; s.i.s.m.l. vv. the same phonetic changes as yığ-. Xak. xı ol mana: buğda:y yığışdı: “he helped me to heap up (fi takwim) the wheat' Kaş. III 73 (yığışu:r, yığışma:k). D yıkış- Co-op. f. of yt1k-; s.i.s.m.l. w. the same phonetic changes as yık-. Xak. xı ol apar ta:m yıkışdı: “he helped him to demolish (fi hadm) the wall' (etc.) Kag. III 74 (yıkışu:r, yıkışma:k). D yukuş- Hap. leg.?, Co-op. f. of yuk-, between yakış- and yıkış-, but spelt tukuş-/ t.h.ş- in the MS. Xak. xı uduz yukuşdı: “the itch passed (zta"addö) from one place on the body to another because of its moisture” (bi-rutübatihi) Kaş. III 74 (yukuşu:r, yukusma:k). D *yaksirt- See yakçırt-. Tris. YGS D yağışlığ P.N./A. fr. yağış, "for pouring libations” and the like. Pec. to Uyg. Bud. Uyğ. vr ff, Bud. (the innumerable almsbegging Brahmans) yağışlığ orunka buşıka keltiler “came to the place vvhere libations are poured to receive alms' U IH 11, 13 (ii); o.o. do. ız (i), TT IV 6, 46 (é:t-); Suv. 29, 8-9 (tapi£). Dis. YGZ D yağız (d-) 'brown'; originally a stock epithet of the earth, as opposed to the blue (kö:k) sky. It is therefore prob. a Dev. N./A. İr. yağ- and originally meant “poured upon, saturated” and so *brown'. Later used for the colour of a horse's coat or a man's complexion. A First Period l.-w. in Mong. as dayir (Haenisch 34; now obsolete) and used in the Secret History (1) as the name of a horse; (2) in the phr. dayir etügen 'the brown earth', mistranslated 'great earth' in the Chinese translation. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. yağız of a, horse, darkish brown' (and kara yağız “very dark brown, almost black”). Cf, yazığ. "Türkü vırı üze: kök tenr1: asra: yağız yer kihndukda: *when the blue sky was created above and the brown earth belov” I E 1, IT E 2; (Kül Tégin) Az yağızı:n binip "riding his dark bay horse Az” 7 N 5, 8: Uyğ. viri ff, Bud. yağız yer U IV 48, gr, TT VII 40, 13; X 162, etc.; Suv. 530, r: Civ. ditto TT I4: Xak. xi yafiz al-athami 'dark brown', that is a colour between red and black; and the earth (al-ard) is called as a simile (yuşabbah bihi) yağız yér; yağız at “a dark bay (al-ajlas) horse” Kaş. III 10: KB yağız yer 3, 64, 68: xiv Rb. R II 1449 (kürge:k): Kip. xıl (under 'colours of horses” coats") a/-yağız ma'rüf "a word used both in Ar. and in Turkish” Hou. 13, 6; al-'ufr “earth-coloured” ya:ğız do. 15, 1605 3.0. 31, ro (kara:): xiv ya:ğız “the wellknown (ma'rüf) colour of horses'; and the earth (al-ard) is called after it ya:ğız ye:r İd. 95; kara: yağız “black” (a/-asıcad) in colour; yağız is usually used vv. kara:, but may be used separately (yunfarad) and one says yağız at “a horse of a colour between black and sorrel' (al-duhma sca”l-şuqra) do. 69; (see bakır, the phr. for 'Aldebaran', bağır şığan (under b-) /d. 33 and yağır (sic) şığın in Bul. 2, 14 may be misreadings of yağız şığın lit. “the dark brown maral deer): xv (under “human complexions”) a/-asmar “svvarthy” kara: ya:ğız Kav. 59, 18: Osm. xvin yağız (spelt) in Rumi, çarda wa rang-i siyah "dark bay" and “black” in colour; and as a descriptive Adj. (sifat-i tawdihi) they say kara yağız siyáh carda; they use this metaph. for “a black horse', which in Ar. is adham San. 333v. 6. Mon. YG 1 yéf “better” (than something else); the object of comparison, when mentioned and not merely implied, is normally in the AB5L., although the connotation of comparison was always present in the early period, it is sometimes best translated “best”. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. yeg/yey; Tkm. yeğ (described as 'obsolete") “better”. Türkü vir Ötüken yışda: yeğ idi: yok ermis “there was Pe no better (place to live) than the tüken mountain forest” I S 4, I1 N 3; arığ uvuti; yeg “modesty in a pure man is better (than pride?! T 37; oo. I E zo, Il E 34 afar); I SE (tayğu:n): vin ff. Tun. III a. 3-4 (kör-): Uyğ. ix [gap] eki:de: yég [gap] “better than both” (or “best of the two'?) 771 B 6 (ETY II 38): vii ff. Man. yég nomuğ ukitttpiz "you have made them understand the better doctrine! TT III 56; tüzgerinçsiz yég 'unsurpassable and better” do. 178; o.o. do. 75, etc. (üstünki); (my god,) ratnida yég “better than a jewel' M /İ 7, s, etc.: Bud. Sanskrit $reyo “better” yég TT VIII B.s; F.5; ol yég bolğay “that will be better” TT IV 10, 25; 0.0. do. 12, 57 etc. (tüzgerincsiz); 24, 71-2 (adruk), etc.: Civ. TT VIII I.16 (suvsuş): Xak. xı yé:$ a Particle (harf) meaning “better” (xayr), used only in speaking of the superiority (tafdil) of one thing over another; hence one says bu at anda: (sie, ?for andın) y€:&amp; “this horse is better than that” Kaş. III 144; Six o.0. at the end of proverbs saying that 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 954 
     
   
   
      | İ ! i | 910 MON. YG it is better, e.g. to be a widow than have an abusive husband: KB bodunda yegi “best among the people' 50; (is a bad man) sapa yéf “better for you” (or a good one?) 243; sözüğ açsamu y€g azu kizlese “vould it be better to make a statement or conceal it?” ror8: xin(?) At. tabi"atta yégi “the best human characteristic! (is generosity) 249; a.O. 409 (borçı:), (Tef. yeğrek “better” (than something bl), under vig 1:53); Xwar. (xin yegrek “better” 'Ali 19, 59): xiv yég “better” Qutb 77: Kip. xiv yég al-cayyid 'good' İd. 96: Osm. xiv ff, yeg/yég “better”, c.ia.p. TTS 1 810; II 1029; İİİ 792; İV 866. PU?D 2 y€:ğ Hap. leg.; perhaps Dev. N. fr. yé:- in the sense of 'something bitten'. Xak. xı y€:ğ fa'su'1- (MS. fágu'l-) licam "a horse's bit” (lit. the bit of the bridle); hence one says yügü:n yé:gi: Kaz. III 144. ?F?D ye:k “demon, devil'; the old theory, which still has some support, is that this is a l.-w. fr. yakka, a Prakrit f. of Sanskrit yaksa *demon'; as such this is improbable, yağşa itself occurs in TT VII 13, 55; 16, 17; but it might be a L-w. fr. a Sogdian or Chinese transcription of the Sanskrit word. v.G. in TT VI, p. 61, note 131 put forward the more plausible theory that, since yek often occurs in the Hend. yek Icóek, in which İçğek is a Dev. N./A. in -ğe:k (connoting habitual action) fr. İç- meaning 'constantly drinking”, i.e. 'vampire', ye:k is a Dev. N. in -k (her theory that it is a crasis of *ye:ge:k is improbable) fr. yé:meaning '(constantly) eating', ie. 'glutton'. "The only objections to this theory are (1) that a Dev. N./A. fr. yé:- should be ye:k (cf. 2 yé:), not ye:k; (2) that an actual 1.-vv, ye:k might well have been taken for such a Turkish Dev. N. and iggek devised to match it, in order to represent “demons and vampires. For “demon” the word is now obsolete, displaced by Mong. l-w.s in the NE and Ar. words like şaytan, iblis elsewhere, but survives as yek “hateful, hostile' in NE Alt., Tel., çek in Şor, çek in Sag., ditto, and ce:k 'glutton' in Sag., R III 316-17, 1945. Türkü vır ff. yek “demon” in antithesis to terri “god”, and interchangeable vv. şımnu:, q.v., is common in Chuas., yek icgek do. 144-5: UyĞğ. vr ff. Man.-A yek “demon” M I 15, 19; 19, 1 etc.: Man. yek tuğum 'rebirth as a demon” TT IX ör, a.o. HI 91 (oiim): Bud. yek, spelt yek in TT VIII O.4, 9, is common esp. in TT X; where it occurs in lists of supernatural beings of which the Sanskrit originals are known it corresponds to yağşa (not, as stated Kuan., p. 28, note 142-3, nága, which corresponds to lu) U II zo, 22; 35, 19; TT VII 13, 49; Kuan. 142; 0.0. TT V ro, 84 etc. (içgek): Civ. yek by itself and yek içgek are common in TT 7 and VII: Xak. xı ye:k ai-şaytün "the devil” Kaş. III 160 (prov.); 7 266 (esnet-) and 3 o.o.: K.B (the sky became dark yek yüzi teg “like a devil”s face” 5029; (if he has a dream) yektin bolur “it comes from the devil' 6017: xı1(?) Tef. al-şaytan)ibliş yek 150:                                           xiv Muh. al-şaytün yé:k Mel. 45, 8, Rif. 138 Çağ. xv ff. yek/yekles (spelt) bad wa sabi “bad, vile' San. 334v. 23; yEk ditto su náxteug ('unpleasant') 351r. 6 (quotn.): Ko xiv. 'devil' yek CCG; Gr. 121 (quotn.): K1 xiv. yek al-saytán (and yek kör- abgada 't İoathe”) İd, 96; al-zaswba'a 'devil' yek yabı” -şaytün Bul. 3, 1: xv zatba'a yek (fburğa Tuh. 17b. 11; şaytün yek do. 21a. 7. yl: 'raw'; more or less syn. vv, çiğ, n.o.n.b. modern words all seem to go back to çiğ Uyğ. vir ff. Bud, Hüen-ts. 2128 (burna:ç) Civ. yiğli bışığlı et 'raw and cooked meat TT VII 24, 9-10; 25, 10-11; yiğ şakar “ra sugar' H 1 87; a.o. TT I 192 (bigil): xi Chin.-Uyg. Dict. 'raw' yiğ Ligeti 284; R II 507: Xak. xı yl:ğ et 'raw (al-ni) meat; and anything raw is called yl:&amp; Kaj. HI 144; a.d 1 338 (çım): KB (if a man's behaviour i grasping) yiğ erse özl “his soul crude' (hi character hasty and his eye greedy) 849 (if the head cook is dishonest, all his staff ar: dishonest) yomitsa kalın yig bu as oğrıs “if these crude food-stealers collect in a crowd (how can their master's table look nice?) 2861 xiv. Muh.(?) al-labin ğayr mufaxxar 'unbaked brick' yl:ğ kerpi:ç Rif. 158 (only): Xvvar) xı1(?) ylg et Oz. ro. S yik See İk, yü:ğ 'feather'; survives only(?) in NE Kaç yü R III 586; Sag. çüğ 2192; Khak., Tu çüğ. NC has yün (yup) properly *wool'; som other languages use tü: properly 'hair', anq some use l-w.s. Xak. xı yü:ğ rigw'[l-fay “bird”s feather' Kaş. III 143; o.o. III 4 (yüksek); 7o (yapis-); 97 (yapsur-): KB 3005 (1 er): xiv Miuh. rigu'l-nijüb 'arrow feather' o:k yü:gi: Mel. 71, 8; Rif. 173; al-ri yü:g 73, 8; 176: Kip. xii a/-riş yüğ Hou. 10 14: XIV ditto /4. 96: xv ri; (yup/tüg; in margi in second hand) yüğ Tuh. 16b. 13: Osm. xi to xvı yüğ 'feathers'; in several texts T7T.S 855; İT 1083; HT 833; IV giş (transcribed yün in 1 to İİİ and yüp in IV but no doub belongs here). D 1 yük (yü:k) Dev. N. fr. *yü:-, cf. yü:d“a load, burden'. S.ia.m.lg. vv, the usua phonetic changes. Uyğ. vr ff. Chr. U 76 11-12 (2 açığ): Bud. Sanskrit bhárasya "of th4 load” yük[gap] TT VIII G.22; a.o. do. 4.34 ağır yükler “heavy loads” Kuan. 47; bir yü nom “one load of scriptures' (fell in the water| Hüen-ts. 2022; 0.0. TT V əz, 43 etc. (yli:d-) Xak. xı yük a/-ğaml “a load'; hence one say: bir yük buğda:y “one load of wheat; alsq toígr “a donkey-load', etc. Kaş. III 4; nearl 3o o.o., including four of yü:k: KB yeni boldi yük “the burden became light” 19s 0.0. şo (yü:d-), 687, 4528 (tepes): xırı(?) At (wealth is a source of anxiety and care today| and tomorrow) yük wabál “a burden and 4 curse' 426; Tef. yük “load, burden' 166: xı Muh. al-himl yü:k Mel. ao, 4; Rif. 129; al -rahl 'luggage' yü:k 68, 11; 168: Çağ, xv fi yük (*with -ü-”) bar 'burden, load' San. 345r| 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 955 
     
   
   
     Ə TNT UN HOMI NS s YT na di 400 DIS. V. YGD- 911 1: Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 88: Kom. xiv “load, baggage! yük CCI; Gr.: Kip. (xut after "hill Tkm. öyük ca huwa'l-wiqr wa'l-himl Hou. 6, 16; prob. a lapse of memory): xiv. yük al-himl, wa huma kináya 'am'l-damán “and it is an idiomatic expression for “bail, surety" ” /d. gö, al-himl yük Bul. 7, 7: xv ditto Kav. 77, 9; Tuh. 13a. 1. 2 *yük See yügerii:, yükse:-. Mon. V. YG*yig- See yigi:, yigtür-. S yük- See ük-. Dis. YGE D 1 yégi: Conc. N. fr. yé-; “food”, n.o.a.b. Xak. xi K B(when a stranger comes, grant him lodging) içür ber yégü “give him drink and food” 495; a.o. 4601 (uvşa:k): xin(?) Tef. yégü aş “food to eat! 149: xiv Muh.(?) (after al-ta'àm ag); al-ma”kül 'edibles ye:gü Rif. 164 (only). ?E 2 yeğü: in TT VHT A.1 (see 1 bi:) the translation of Sanskrit ksurasya dhárá va is damaged, but is read y[e]&amp;[ü]nip bisi (MS. pisi) teg. The word to be expected here is yüligünip and this should perhaps be restored. "e D yiği: Dev. N./A. fr. *yig-, cf. yigtür- ; lit. “close, compact'; hence “a (tightly sewn) seam'. Kag.'s phr. yigl: yığa:ç may be authentic, but the shorter form yı: yığa:ç is the common Uy£. phr. r 1$ac “bushes and trees”, see 1 ız, and it may be no more than a mistaken reconstruction of that phr. The only certain survival is in NC Kzx. liyi “thick, dense, frequent'; apparently also survives meaning 'seam' in NE Alt, Bar., Leb., "Tel. ylk (also “a cleft', e.g. in the mountains) R 7/7 507; Koib., Sag., Şor çik do. 2111; Khak. çik, Tuv. tig: NC Kir. İlk (also “cleft), and perhaps SE Türki çek BŞ. SW Az., Osm. ylv, now 'scratch, groove', is the same word, see below. Uyğ. viii ff. Civ. [gap] yigi yekler bir[le] “vith a crowd of demons' TT VII 28, 2: Xak. xı yigi: yığa:ç 'closely packed (ai-katiru'l-multaff) trees' ; and the -&amp;- is omitted from it and one says yl: (?y1:) yığa:ç, and one says ylgi: tış al-sinnu'l-mutaráss “close set, compact teeth'; hence one says to:n yigi: tik *sew the garment and make its seams tight and strong” (ac'al darzahu müutarüşş müuşamrac mu'akkad); and one calls “a seam” yl:, originally ylgl: fr. this word Kaş. 111 25; yl: “the seam of a garrnent'; hence “a tailor' (al-xayyáf) is called yl:gl:; yi: “a small cleft" (a/-şi"5) in the mountains; and one says yi: (?yı:) yığa:ç for *closely packed trees', originally yigi: mutaráss, but contracted; hence 'close set teeth' are called yigi: tış 77] 216; cigi: yl: “a firmly sewn seam', the C- is altered fr. y-, fr. the phr. yigi: (MS. tigi:) tikti: "he sewed firmly'. "This is as vve explained in the introduction to this book, the €- is substituted for y- in the language of the Kip. and others, as in the word cinçü: originally vv. y- IJI 229; a.o. III 283 (sığza:-): xiv Muh. al-darz yl:&amp; Mel. 67, 1: Rif. 166 (biyig): Osm. xv ff. yiv c.i.a.p.; once (xv) definitely for “seam”, but generally translates darz in its broader meaning of 'suture, wrinkle (on the face, etc.)” 77 7 833, 1I 1056; III 8135; IV 889. : Dis. YGD yigit usually “a young man, strong and vigorous”, also occasionally used for “young woman'; Kag.s translation prob. does not imply that it could be used for other than human beings. S.ia.m.lg. w. the usual phonetic changes, e.g. NE Alt. yi:t R IJI $23. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (this old man was formerly) yigit iğsiz sizinteg kiçiğ körtle urı “a vigorous, healthy, young, good-looking youth like you” USSp. 97, 10-12; o.o. U İİİ 81, 3 etc. (türk): Xak. xı yigit a/-şabb min kull şay” "a young man (from 16 to 30) of anything” Kaş.. III 8; o.o. 1 353 (türk) and 9 others translated al-sább or al-fatà "youth”: KB ay edgü yigit 359: (Aytoldi) yigit erdi oğlan *was a young man”(good-tempered and intelligent) 463:xu1(?) At. yiğit koca bolur "young men become old” 193; Tef. yigit “a young man” 153: xiv Muh. al-sább (opposite to “old” karı:) yigi:t Mel. 48, 15; Rif. 143; a.o. 152 (only): Çağ. xv ff. yigit (with -&amp;-") cuman “young man” San. 351r. 9 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 80; MN gö: Kom. xiv “young man” yigit (or igit?) CCI; yegit CCG; Gr.: Kip. xır al-şabb yeyit, also pronounced yigit Hou. 24, 19: xiv yigit ditto İd. 96; ye:'it ditto, also called yigit do. 100: xv şöbb yigit Tuh. zob. 4: Osm. xiv ff. yigit (occasionally in xiv igit) (r) “a young man”, (2) as an Adj. 'young', also used to qualify *woman, moon, tree', etc. 7 TS 1830; II 1053; II] 810; IV 885. yigde: originally "the jujube tree, Zizyphus angustifolia” but in some modern languages “a species of oleaster, Elaeagnus angustifolia'. Survives in SE Tar., Türki cigde: NC Kir. jigde/liyde; Kzx. Jide: NW Kk. fiyde: SW Az. iyde, Osm., Tkm. iğde. The word is used both for the tree and its fruit. Uyğ. viiff. Civ. yiğde H II 14, 128: Xak. xı yléde: a/-ğubayrd "the jujube tree” Kaş. III 31; a.0. II] 147 (ba:r): xiv Muh. al-gubayrá yiğde: Mel. 78, 13; Rif. 183: Oğuz xı the Oğuz Türkmen pronounce yide: al/-ğubayrd as yiğte: (-ğ- marked) Kaş. / 31, 25: Kip. xii al-ğubayrq yiğde: Hou. 8, 8. i VU yöğdik Hap. leg. Xak. xı KB $377 one of eight sporting birds. Dis. V. YGDD yéged- Den. V. fr. 1 yé:$; pec. to Türkü and Uyg.; apparently both Intrans. “to get better, to succeed” and Trans. “to make better, to improve” and, at any rate in the Hend. yéged- ut-, “to get the better of (someone)'. "Türkü vı [gap] kilmadım [?elig] tórü:g yegedi: kazğantım 'I did not make . . . 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 956 
     
   
   
       912 I strove to improve and acquire the realm(?) and traditional law 7/ E 36: vrir ff. Man.-A M III 6, 2-5 (iii) (uti): Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A (in a dating formula; at a good moment, on an auspicious day, in a blessed month) yeğedmiş kutluğ yılka "in a successful and fortunate year” M 1 26, 23; 0.0. do. 28, 18 etc. (ut-): Bud. (this Buddha is called "having the voice of the sea”) yértincüde yeğedmiş ünlüğ “having a voice which is successful in this world! Kuan. 204-5; 0.0. U II 21, 11-12 etc. (ut-); TT VI 419 (ógüt-): Civ. asra ati) yégedtip "you have improved. your low reputation T'T 7 7-8; o.o. do, 2 (ut-), 205 (alkin-). S yigit- See igid-. S yögüt- See ögit-. D yiğtür- Caus. f. of *yig-, cf. yiği:, "to squeeze, compress', and the like. Semantically close to yığtur-. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı ta:r etük ada:kığ yiğtürdi: "the tight boot lamed (aksaha) the foot! Kaş. III 97 (yi&amp;türür, ylgtürme:k): Osm. xvırı-xıx Red. 22085 (quoted in R III 319) lists yekdir- “to make, or let, hobble; to hop or hobble', perhaps taken fr. an entry in the Osm. translation of the Ar. Qümiüs quoted in TTS IV 868; no doubt the.same. word, ?mistranscription of yiğdir-. Tris. YGD D yigitlik A.N. fr. yigit; 'the time of youth'. S.i.s.m.lg. w. the same phonetic changes. Xak. xı yigitlik a/-fata "the time of youth'; hence one says essiz anın yigitliki: “alas for his youth” (sabàbihi) Kaş. İİİ 51; o.o. 1 143 (essiz); şır, rr: KB yigitlik kaçar “youth is fleeting' 231; o.0. 360, 362 (1 kü:ç), 375 (1ra:-), 1079, etc.: Çağ, xv ff. yigitlik cazedı? “youth” San. asır. o: Xwar. xiv ditto Qurö 8o: Kom. xiv “youth” yeyitlik CCI; Gr.: Osm. xiv fF, yigitlik the meaning 'youth' is common till Xvr; it now means rather 'courage, heroism' TTS Il 1053; İT 871; İV 886. Tris. V. YGDD yeğedmekleş- Hap. leg.; Recip. Den. V. fr. the Infin. of yéged-. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. (the suitors amused themselves) bir ikintike yégedmeklegü: “trying to get the better of one another” U /1 zə, 27. Dis. YGL D yéglik A.N. fr. 1 yö:ğ, 'superiority'; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. viti ff. Bud. Sanskrit Artágra "the height of (good) behaviour! kilmis yéglikleir (MS. yégligie:x) TT VHT G.4: (Xak.) xını(?) Ar. 410 (borçi:). D yeklük A.N. fr. ye:k; “devilry”, n.o.a.b. Türkü virt ff. Man. (the five gods) su(ylın yeklügün süpüşüp 'füghring with sin and devilry” Chas. 38; 2.0.0. D yüglüg P.N./A. fr. yü:$; 'having. fes thers'. N.o.a.b, Xak. xi Kaş, 111217 (kaba:): n.m.e. DIS. V.  YGDDis. V. YGLS yikle:- See irkle:-. D yükle:- Den, V. fr. 1 yük, normally "to lond (something 4cc., on to something Dat.)', but in some modern languages 'to carry a burden', and esp. (of a woman) 'to be pregnant'. S.ia.m.lg. w. the usual phonetic changes. Xak. xi ol teveyke: yü:k (sic) yükle:di: "he loaded the load (Aamala'l-himl) on the camel (etc.) Kaş. III 309 (yükle:r, yükle:me:k); 0.0. 314, 27; 316, 4-9: Xım(?) Tef. yükle- "to load” 166: xiv Muh. hamala yü:kle:- Mel. 24, 4 (Rif. 108 kótür-); 40, 4; 129 (and 107, see aylığ): Çağ. xvff. yükle-(-p) yükletVel. 418 (quotn.); yükle- bàr kardan "to load' San. 344r. 15 (quotns.): Xwar. xin(?) yükle*to load” Og. 273: xiv ditto Quib 88: Kom, xiv ditta CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiv yükle- damana "to warrant, güarantee” iz 96. D yüğlet- (yü:glet-) Hap. leg.; Caus. Den. V. fr. yü:&amp;. Xak. xı ol ok yügletti: arága'l-nabl "he had feathers fixed to the arrow'; originally yü:gletti: but shortened Kaş, JJ 356 (yügletü:r, yügletme:k). D yüklet- Caus. f. of yükle:-; s.i.s.m.l, w. the usual phonetic changes; in those languages in which yükle:- has come to mean “to carry' it means “to load”, Xak. xı ol yük yükletti: ahmala”/-himl "he had the load loaded' Kaş, II 355 (yükletü:r, yükletme:k): Çağ. xv tf. yüklet- Caus. f. bör farmüdan “to order to load” San. 344r. 22: Kip, xii kammala “to load, impose a burden” yükle:t- /7on. 39, 14: xv ditto Kar. 77, 9; zoaqara "to load” yükletTuh. 38b. 10. Tris. V. YGLD yüklemsin- Hap. leg., mentioned only as a ıı example; Reft, Simulative Den. V. fr. the N.S.A. of yükle:-. Xak. xr ol yük yüklemsindi: “he pretended to load (yağmi?) the load but did not actually do so” Kaş, //7 322, 12. Dis. YGM S yükmek See ükmek, Dis. YGN yegen (?yégen) originally "the son of a younger sister or daughter', see K. Grenbech, op. cit. under 1 €çi:, A Second Period l.-w. in Mong. in this sense as cegen (Haenisch 88, ce]ce'e; not in Kow. or Haltod). Survives in NE Alt., Küer. ye:mn; Şor cein. R 7I 328, 1960; Khak. ce:n (?çeyen), 'T'uv. çe:n usually 'sister's son or grandson', Sor also 'son of mother's younger sister”: SE Türki ciyen: NC Kr. İe:n “sister"s son or grandson”, fen kiz 'sister's daughter or grand-daughter” ; Kzx. Jiyen ditto, or 'daughter's son/daughter : SC Uzb. ciyan *nephew, niece”: NW Kk. jiyen 'sister's or daughter's son', and jiyen kız 'ditto's. daughter; Nog. yiyen/yiyen kız ditto: SW Osm. yegen 'nephew', and more recently also 'niece'; "Pkm. yeğen “sister”s  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 957 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. child or grandchild'. Cf. €çi:, atı:, 1 çıkan, Uyğ. viii [gap] xatun yégeni: Öz Bilge: büf?ülin [gap] (my) xatun's sister's son Öz Bilge?” Su. W 8: ix Suer 8(ati:): vini ff, Bud. (in a list of relatives) yeğenimiz "our younger sister's sons” Pfahl. 23, 15; a.o. do. 24, 26, etc, (tağay): the word also occurs in a number of P.N.s Inal Yegen do. 8, 9; Yegen Külüg Sapun do. ro, 15, etc.: Civ. in USp. 114, 115 there are stock provisions prohibiting various relations from disputing the contracts (my elder and younger brothers, my offspring and kinsmen) yegenim (/yégenim) tağayım rıq, 9; 115, 13-14: O, Kir. ix ff, Öz Yégen Alp "Turan P.N. Mal. 5, 2; Yegen Bilge: Sapup P.N. do. 24, 6: Çağ. xvff. yégen (spelt) hamşira záda “a sister's child” San. asır. 8: Osm. xvii yegen, in Rümi, birádar-i. zan “a wife's brother” San. 334r. 23. PU?D yigen (? or yégen) “a rush'; later sometimes “a rush-mat'; perhaps a crasis of *yiggen fr. *yig- meaning 'closely packed' or the like, Survives only(?) in NE Bar. yigen 'tall, stiff steppe grass! R 777 509: SE "Türki yiken “a rush' Jarring, p. 157. UyB. vir ff. Bud. (if a man makes a vihàra the size of a nutshell . . ., and puts in it a reliquary the size of one-seventh of a perilla seed) yiğençe sutup cekür(?) turgursar 'and erects a stüba . . . like (or the size of) a rush” Pfahi. 8, 7: Xak. xı yiğen al-bardi "a rush' Kaş. III 23: Kom. xiv “rush-mat” yeğen CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiu al-hagir "a rush-mat' yege:n (sic) Hou. 17, 4: xiv. yigin (sic) ditto İd, gö, al-bardi yegen Bul, 3, 14: xv haşir yegen Tuh. 16a. 9. yügü:n (?yügó:n) 'bridle'! Survives in NE yügen/cügen: SE "Türki yügen: NC Kir. Jügón; Kzx. Jügen: SC Uzb. yugon: NW Kk. jüwen; Kaz. yógen; Kumyk, Nog. yügen: SW Az. yüyen; Osm. and xx Anat. oyan; Tkm. uyan. Uyf. viuirff. Bud, Hüen-ts. 162 (tul-): Xak. xi Kaş. İİİ 144 (2 yé:8); do. 163 (küveç), 366 (cipi); 371 (tulup); n.m.e.: xiv Mwh. al-licàm “bridle” yü:ge:zn Mel. 71, 14; Rif. 174 (mis-spelt ümgem): Çağ, xv ff. (VU) üyen rilaw-i asb “bridle”, also called tizgin Sar. 92v. 3: Xwar. xiv yügen “"bridle” Quib 87; Nahc. 535, 2; 72, 6: Kom. xiv. ditto CCI; Gr.: Kip. xı üygğe:n Hos. 14, 4: xiv üyen al-licám; Tkm. üygen (?, vocalized üyügen) İd. 26: xv licám yügen (below, in second hand, üyen) Tuh. 31b. 9; ditto yü:lige:n (sie, in error) Kav. 64, 3: Osm. xiv ff. (VU) oyan 'bridle'; c.i.a.p. TTS I 733; II 940; İİİ 721; IV 793. S yigne: See Igne:. D yükünç Dev. N. fr. yükün-, “an act of worship or obeisance”, N.o.ab. Türkü vin ff. Man. yekke teprike tepen yükünç yükünüğme “vvorshipping a demon, saying that he is a god” Chuas. r3o: UYĞ. vir ff. Man. alkunun barça(?) yükünçin “by the worship of all” TTS III 4; yeti yüküncüg “seven obeisances” do. 1r47: Chr. yükünç YGN- 913 yükündiler “they worshipped' U 7 6, ış: Kip. xı yükünç al-şalüt 'prayer', in Kip.; hence one says tepri:ke: yükünç yükündi: “he prayed (şa//4) to God”, and ol begke: yükünç yükündi: "he bowed (fa'ta'a) his head to the beg' (etc.) Kaş, İİİ 375: Oğuz xı Kaş. I 171 (6:t-), /7 25 (kil-): Kom. xiv 'worship' yüğünç CCG, Gr. 130 (quotn). Dis. V. YGNyükün- 'to bow, do obeisance to (someone Dat.); to worship'. Survives only(?) in NE Kur. yügün- R II] 594: SE Türki yükünBS, Şarring (and yürken-) Türkü vim xağanka: Kırkız bodun:: içikdi: yükünti: “the Kirkiz people surrendered and did obeisance to the xagan' T' 28; (the begs and people of the On Ok) kop kelti: yükünti: “ali came and did obeisance” T aş: vir ff. Man. neçe yanılu yüküntümüz erser “if we have somehow vvorshipped in error” Cl/iuas. 139-40; 0.0. do. 13o (yükünç), TT II 10, 81-3 (ötün-): Uyğ. vir ff. Man. yinçürü yükünü tekinürbiz (sic) “ve venture to bow and worship' TT IX 5; IIJ 2 (ayangap); a.o.o.: Chr. barıp yükünelim anın uluğ kutiya “let us go and worship His great majesty' U 7 $, 1; o.o. do. 6, 3-4 (ol), rs (yükünç): Bud. süzük kértf£ünc kópülin yükünü inca tép tézünler “let them worship with a pure and believing mind and say”, followed by a string of sentences each beginning yükünürmen “1 worship”, and ending kutipa “the majesty' (of various Buddhas) U 7 3r, 16 to 33, 10; yinçürü yükünürler TT X 272-3; o.o. Hüen-ts. 2030 (küntüz), etc.: Xak. xı kul tepri:ke: yükündi: “the servant prostrated himself (sacada) before God most high”, and one says toyın burxa:nka: yükündi: “the infidel prostrated himself before the idol”, and ol mana: yükündi: “he bowed (fa'fa'a) his head to me, and bovved himself in respect”” (inhafada ihtiráma(n)) Kaş. III 84 (yükünü:r, yükünme:k, verse); o.o. II 167, 3 etc.: KB éligke yükündi “he bovved to the king” 582; (atdawn he rose, washed himself, and) yükündi *worshipped' $452: xın(?) Zt. (believe me, every morning the body stands up) tilke yüknüp tadarru' kilur 'bows to the tongue and prays” 148; Tef. yükin- “to worship' 166: Çağ. xv ff. yükün- zün bar zamin zadan “to kneel on the ground” as a mark of respect; it is the custom of the Turks when they enter the service of the Sultans in the palace to kneel and offer their greetings: and petitioners kneel on both knees to present their requests; this action the Turks call yükünmek and the Persians bd büs San. 344v. 11 (quotns.): Oğuz/Kıp. xı Kaş. III 375 (yükünç): Xwar. xiv yükün- “to bow, to worship! Qutb 87: Kom. xiv “to kneel (before someone 2ar.)” yügün- CCG, Gr.: Kip. xiv yükün- xadama bi'l-rukü' "to serve kneeling” /d. 96: xv baraka “to kneel' (cók-/bük-/) yükün- Tuh. 8b. 6: Osm. xiv to xvr yükün- “to kneel'; in several XIV, XV, and one xvI text; in other XVI texta described as Kip. 7TS 1 855; II 1082; III 833; IV 912. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 958 
     
   
   
     914 TRIS. V. YGN Tris. V. YGND yükündür- Caus. f. of yükün-; n.o.a.b. "Türkü vii 7 E 2, İİ E 3, etc. (1 bash): Çağ. xv ff. yükündür- Caus. f., "to make (someone) kneel in respect and grcet', and metaph. "ard kunánidan “to order to present, request”, etc. San. 344v. 26 (quotn.). Dis. YGR S yügür See üyür. D yüğrük (yügürük) Intrans. Dev. N./A. fr. yügür-; “fast-running, swift. S.i.s.m.l, vv. the same phonetic changes as yügür-. Uyğ. virt ff, Bud... Suv. 625, 5 (koşuğluğ): Civ. TT I 124-5 (körünçle:-): Xak. xı yügrük at “a swift, fast-running (al-sabiqu'I-mulidir) horse” Kaş. HI 4s; tayfa:mn yügrükin tilkü: sevme:s "the fox does not like a nimble (afrah . . . fi'l-'adtw) dog” IH 175,2; a.o. İ 110, ız (1du:): xın(?) 4f. qada kelse yügrük yüğürmez urup “if fate intervenes the svvift horse does not run fast, even if you beat it” 401; Tef. yüğrük “a swift horse” 164: xiv Muh. (under “horses”) a7-catedd “a swift horse" yügrük Mel. 7o, 2; Rif. 171: Çağ. xv ff. yügürük sahib-i dam “galloping” Sag... 345r. 3: Oğuz xı (after Xak.) and the Oğuz call “a penetrating, intelligent, learned scholar' (a/-'álimu' l-hadiqu'l-fatinu'l-fádil) yügrük bilge: Kaş. III 45: Xwar. xiv yügrük 'swift' (dog) Quib 87: Kip. xiv. yügrük at “a spirited (carrd”) horse! İd. 96: xv carrà' yügrük/yürük Tuh. 11b. 8, sabiq tva carri! yüğrük do. 19b. 3: Osm. xiv ff. yügrük (r) “fast”, (2) 'speed'; c.La.p. down to xviii. TTS I 852; II ro8o, III 831; IV 910 (now replaced by yürük). D yügrüm Hap. leg.; N.S.A. fr. yügür-. Xak. x1 bir yügrüm yér ard qadr mà yu"da fiha marrata(n) "a piece of ground of such a size that one can run across it as a single operation' (i.e. without halting) Kaş. III 47. yeğren (?yégren) “chestnut” as the colour of a horse's coat. A Second Period lw. in Mong. as cegere (Kow. 2320, Haltod 564) where it is used as a N. meaning 'gazelle, Gazella subgutturosa', see Doerfer 1 171, the der. f. cegerde being used for the colour. In this meaning and in forms similar to the Mong. it was reborrowed by various Turkish languages fr. Çağ. onwards, but survives vv. its original meaning in NE Alt. yeren (ye:ren) R III 338; Koib. yégrin (sic) do. 322; Leb. yigren do. sır, Sag. cegren/cegri/ciger do. 1958, 2114; Sor çeğren/çiğren do. 1958, 2115; Khak. cégren; (Tuv. şilği ?not connected): SE Türki çiren: NC (Kir. je:rde); Kzx. Şiren: SC Uzb. jiyron: NW Kk. jiren; Kumyk jiyren; Nog. yiyren: SW "Tkm. yeg&amp;ren. Türkü vii Küli Çor özlüki: yefren at binip “Küli Çor riding his favourite chestnut horse” Ix. 15; a.o. do. 21(?): (Çağ. xvff. ceren (spelt) áhi 'gazelle' San. 20sv. 28 (verse); ceyren aii 210v. 17 (verse)). Dis. V. YGRyüğür- “to run fast", of a man, horse, etc., and metaph. of other things. S.i.a.m.l.g., in NW Kk. juwir- (sc)/fügir-; Nog. yuvir- (sic); SW Az. yüyür-, (Osm. yügür- obsolete); 'km. yüvür-. Türkü vir kanın suvça: yügürti: “your blood ran like water' 1 E 24, H E zo, kara: terim yügürü: “my black sweat running (down me)” 7 sz, vii ff. kéyik oğlı: yügürü: aztı: “the young wild animal ran and got lost” /r22 15; (a lean horse . . .) yügürü: barmií:s “vent running” do. 16; a.o. do. 44 (üpüş-): Man. yügürü bard: M 1 7, 17; &amp;.0. do. 12 (anga:): Uyğ. vir ff, Bud. sansar içinde yoksuz órü kodı yügürdün “you have run upwards and downwards to no purpose in the series of rebirths” U III 31, 7-8; yel teg tavrak yügürüp “running swiftly like the wind' TT X 295: Civ. H II zo, 9: Xak. xı kişi: yügürdi: “the man ran swiftly' (add tea şadda) (yüğürü:r, yügürme:k; verse); and one says 0l bó:z yügürdi: asdá'l-sadà fi'l-kirbás “he wove the woof of the cotton cloth' Kaş, 111 68 (the position of the last sentence suggests that it was taken into the text fr. a marginal note in an earlier MS.; it is obviously out of place here, and is perhaps based on a misreading of *tügür-, Caus. f. of tüğ-, which is not recorded but could have this meaning); four o.o. translated “adü: KB yüğür- is common, e.g. a7ip yügrür erdim “1 was running astray” 384; o.o. 1734 (kulaçla:-), :999 (övin-), 24or (uçar), 2370 (oKçı:): xin(?) 4t. bu düny3 sonında yügürmek neçe 'why run after this world?' 181; o.o. 6 (uç-), 46r (ylügrük); Tef. yüğür- “to run” 164: xiv Mu. al-"adıc “to run” yüğürmek Mel. 36, 11; 37, 16; Rif. 122, 124 (in margin, sekritmek in text); "add yügür- ız (only): Çağ. xv ff. yügür- (-di, etc.) sekirf- “to run” Vel. 419; yüğür- (spelt) dawidan “to run” San. 344r. 26 (quotns.): Xwar. xii ditto Ali 54: xiv ditto Quib 87: Kom. xiv ditto CCT, CCG; Gr. 130 (quotn.): Kip. xır "ada yügür- Hou. 35, 9: XiV yügür(-&amp;- marked) card ta camaza "to run; to walk quickly İd. 96: xv cará mina'l-cary yügür“vith -ğ-” Kav. 74, 7; carü yüwür-; Tkm. yügür- Tuh. 12a. 6: Osm. xiv to xvii (only) yüğür- "to run”, common 77S I 854; II 1081; III 832; IV 910. D yügürt- Caus. f. of yügür- s.i.s.m.l. vv. the same phonetic changes. 'Türkii vri1 7 54 (tógünliğ): Xak. xı ol anı: yüğürtti: a'dáhu “he made him run” Kaş. III 437 (yügürtür, yügürtme:k), a.o. // 274, 25: KB bir oğlan yügürtti “he sent a boy running' (with a message) 574: Çağ. xv ff. yügürt- (spelt) dascánidan “to cause to run” Sam. 344v. 4 (quotns.): Kip. xiv acrd “to cause to run” yügürt- Bu/, zşv.: Osm. xvi yügürt- ditto; in a few texts 7735 II 1081; IV grr. (D) yiğren- “to be disgusted, revolted (by something Aec.)”, perhaps Refl. Den. V. fr. yi. Sa. a.m..g. w. the usual phonetic changes (y-/c-/ç-/İ-, etc.), exceptionally NW EMEEEE——————— ss "nsM MÀ iem E | | | 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 959 
     
   
   
     DIS. Nog. şiyken- (sic); SW Az. iyren-, Osm. Igren-; Tkm. yiğren-. The modern meaning is sometimes 'to be fastidious, squeamish'. Cf. yarsr-. Xak. xı anip yi:ni: yigrendi: (MS. zügründi:) iqşa"arra cilduhu "his body shuddered'; and one says er etni: yigrendi: “the man reckoned that the meat was raw (ri) and loathed ("dfa) eating it” Kaş. III 109 (yiğrenü:r, ylárenme:k): xui?) Tef. yigren- “to loathe' (enemies) 154: xiv Muh. (?) al-karh “to loathe' yigre:nmek (MS. -mah) Rif. 1:25 (only): Çağ. xv ff. yigren(spelt) nö xtouş àmadan "to be unpleasant; syn. vv, yiğir- San. 351r. s (reverse entry vv. one quotn. 350v. 28, this V. is otherwise unknown and prob. inferred fr. a faulty reading): Xwar. xiv méni yigrengeyler 'they will loathe me” Nac. 278, 3, biri birinizke (sic) yigrenmepiz 'do not loathe one another' do. 412, 6: Kip. xv qarifa “to loathe” iren-; Tkm. igren- (in margin in second hand yigren-) Tuh. 3ob. 4: Osm. xiv ff. yigren“to loathe'; common till xvi, sporadic till xviii instead of iğren- 773 7 83: , H 1054; HI 811; IV 887. D yüğgrüş- Co-op. f. of yügür-; s.i.s.m.l. vv. the same phonetic changes. Xak. xı oğla:n yüğrüşdi: “the boys (etc.) ran” ('adat, together) Kaş. III 1o2 (yüğrüşü:r, yügrügme:k, MS. -ma:k); (in summer dangerous insects) kudruk tikip yüğrüşü:r “attack (tahmil "ala) people with their tails erect” 7/7 367, 12: xınu(?) Tef. yüğürüş- “to run together” 165: Çağ. xv ff. yügürüş- bà yak digar dawidan “to run together San. 344v. 11: Osm. xiv to xvr only yügrüs- ditto; common TTS 1853; Hl 1081; İH 832; IV 910. Tris. YGR D yüğerü: no doubt crasis of *yükgerü: Directive f. of 2 “yük, cf. yükse:-, properly ii but vvith some odd meanings in Uyğ. N.o.a.b. Türkü vin kózi: yüğerü: körti: "the eyes (of the rejoicing people) looked upwards' 7I E 2; a.o. I E 11, I1 E 1o (kötür-): Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. óvke köpülüm yügerü bolmayuk erser “if thoughts of anger do not arise in me” U IJI 61, 4-5; (then the hunter) yarlikanguci köpüli yügerü kihp *rousing compassionate thoughts in himself' do. 58, 9-10 (i); (if in a woman's mind the passion of lust) yüğerü bolsar 'arises' do. 79, 3 (i); o.o. do. 41, 7-8 (ii); U I 20, 14-15 (1 turBur-); TT IV 12, 25-6; V 22, 42; öpre ertmiş ódki ermez ken keliğme ödki ermez yüğerü közünür ödki ermez “it does not belong to the past, the future, or the present day” Suv. 204, 7-12: Civ. (if the right ear twitches) yüz yüğerü asığ bolur “a hundred (or, taking it as a Reduplicative Prefix, “very”) superior advantages arise” TT VII 34, 8-9; 2.0. J 1 (tapığ). D yügürük See yügrük. D yügürge:n. Hap. leg., Dev. N./A. (connoting habitual action) fr. yügür-. Xak. xr YGS 915 yügürge:n the word for any 'courier' (bdrid) who sets out in advance of the merchants of China to the Moslem countries and carries their messages and letters; yüğürğe:n at “a race-horse' (al-muhdir), etc. Kaş. III s4. D yügürgü:n Hap. leg.; Collective f. of yügür (üyür); lit. 'a quantity of (millet) seeds'. Xak. xı yügürgü:n “a plant (raf) which has red seeds like millet (a/-duxn) that the Türkmen eat' Kaş. 11I s4. yégirmi: 'twenty'; c.ia.p.a.]l. vv, the usual phonetic changes; Cuv. çirdmiçirem (syiram/ Syirem) Ash. XII 1:69, 170; the -é- seems to be fixed by one scription in O. Kir. and other evidence. Türkü vir yeğirmi: sünüş süpüşmiş “he fought twenty battles! 7 E rs, II E 13; yégirmi: kün 'twenty days” 7 SE; a.o. II E 25: vri ff. Man. yğrmi (so spelt) M III 22, 16 (ii); Yen. yeti: yegirmi: 'seventeen” Mal. 26, 5; altı: yegi:rmi: yaşıma: “in my sixteenth year” do. 48, 7: Uyf. vini yegirmi:ke: “on the twentieth' (day of the eleventh month) Şız. S rr: viii ff. Man. M IIJ 39, 1-3 (ii) (adınçığ): Bud. beş ygirmé “fifteen” TT VIII H.7; altı yğirme (src) “sixteen” do. 8; ygirmi TT IV 8, 53: Civ. in TT VIII the spellings are L.1 yérmé, L.26 ff. yğermi, elsewhere ygrmi: O. Kir. ix ff. yegi:rmi: Mal. 5, 2; yegirmi: do. 11, 1; yégi:rmi: do. 45, 2: Xak. xı yegirme: 'twenty'; yegirmi: alternative form Kaş. 1II 48 (yd” unvocalized): xiv Muh. 'twenty' yégirmi: Mel. 81, 11; Rif. 186: Çağ. xvíff. yégirme (spelt) 'twenty" San. 351r. ro, yégirml do. 18r. 4: Xwar. xiv. yégirmi MN 96: Kip. xii 'twenty' yeğirmi: Hou. 22, 8: xiv yégirmi: and égirmi: (-ğ- marked) ditto İd. 96; ditto yépirmi: Bul. ız, ız: xv ditto Kav. 39, 4; 65, 8; yegirmi 7uh. 6ob. 9. D yé$irminc Ordinal f. of yégirmi:; 'twentieth'. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. the usual phonetic changes and the longer form of Suff., -nçi and the like. Türkü vırı ff. Man. bir ygrminc (sic) 'eleventh' Chuas. 221: Uyf. vi bir yeğirminç ay “in the eleventh month” Şu. S 11: vil ff. Man.-A bir yörminç M I 15, 16: Civ. in the dating formulae for the eleventh month in documents in USSp. the spellings are yg£rminc/ygirminc/yegirmine: xiv Chin.Uyg. Dict. bir yeğirminç ay Ligeti 143; R III s1o: Xak. xi yégirming 'twentieth" Kaş. 1 132, 10; İİİ 449, 9; n.m.e.: KB in the list of Chapters in the Vienna MS. 8, 22 the later form yeğirminçi is used: Kom. xiv yiriminçi 'twentieth! CCG (mistranscribed yirençi and mistranslated in Gr. 124). ra Dis. YGS D yüksek (yükse:k) N./A.S. fr. yükse:-, “high”. Survives only(?) in SW Az., Osm.; other modern languages use other words, generally édiz or bedük, q.v., in this sense. Uy£. vini ff. Bud. PP 61, s (orunluk): Xak. xı yüksek ta: “a high (a/-murtaf”) mountain'; similarly anything, when it is "high or ri 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 960 
     
   
   
     916 DIS. YGS  tall (riurtafí tamil büdix) is yüksek, it is compounded from yü:ğ “a bird's feather', because its nature is rising and ascent (al-^uhi sea'l- sa'iid), and anything “lofty” (“2/7) is called yüksek Kaş. III 45 (verse), yüksek tağığ al-sáhiq "a high mountain” HH 294, 24: KB bu tórt nep uçuz tutma yüksek yör-i(?) “do not regard these four things as trivial, describe(?) them as important” 308: xııı(?) Tef. yüksek “high” (place) 167: xiv Röğ, özüm yükseki a term of endearment R 7/1 592; Mu. (2) al-àli yüksek Rif. 153 (only): Çağ. xv ff. yüksek (spelt) buland ('high') cca murtafi'; also called üksek Sar. 345r. 3; reverse entry 7j9v. 22: Xwar. xiv yüksek “high” Qutb 88: Kıp. xır al-'dli (opposite to 'low' aşağ) yükse:k (/yü:çe:) Hou. 25, 17: xiv yüksek ditto İq, 96: xv ditto (opposite to “lov” algak) yüksek (/büyük) Kav. 36, 8. D yüksük perhaps Intrans. Dev. N. fr. yükse:-; lit. 'elevated' or the like, in practice 'a thimble'. Survives only(?) in SW Az. üskük, Osm. yüksük; displaced elsewhere in the medieval period by oymak, which first appears in Kip. xirí; Kom. xiv CCI, CCG; Gr. and Çağ. xv ff. San. 92v. 20, or by l.-w.s. Xak. xı yüksük (MS. yühsek) "a thing in the shape of an archer s thumbstall (a/-Xáti'a, undotted in the MS.) made of brass or raw hide, which tailors put on their fingers to protect them from being pricked by the ncedle” Kaş. 111 46: Kip. xii al-kustuban 'thimble' (oymak/) yüksük (MS. yzksik) Hou. 23, 13: xiv yüksük ditto İd. 96: xv ditto (oymak) 'Tkm. üksük (in margin in second hand yüksük) Tuh. 31a. 4: Osm. xvin. yüksük (spelt) in Rrmi, angugtwana-i. xayyati “a tailor's thimble” San. 345r. 4. D yégsiz Hap. leg.; Priv. N./A. fr. 1 yé:g. Uyğ. viui ff. Bud. Sanskrit asárá “from worthless” yégses yarpsistin TT VIII D.33. Dis. V, YGSD yükse:- Desid. Den. V. fr. 2 *yük, cf. yügerü:; “to be high” and the like. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı "yükse: di: ne:n “the thing was high or tall' (frtafa"a wa tala) Kaş. HI 306 (yükse:r, yükse:me:k): KB (if the beg's words are kindly) kult kópli yükser “his slave's ə rise” (and his brow clears) 1809. D yükset- Caus. f. of yukse:-, nbn in SW Osm. where yükse:- has been replaced by yüksel-, this V. has been replaced by yükSelt-. Xak. xı ol ta:m yüksetti: “he heightened and raised (rafa'a . . . tva agáda) the wall'; also used when anything has been raised Kaş. H 354 (yüksetü:r, yüksetme:k): Kip. xır "allá müna”l-ta"liya “to raise” yükset- Hou. 42, 10. Mon. YL ya:l (d-) “a horse's mane", hence “the place where the mane grows'. While this seems to be the standard pronunciation, there are traces of an alternative f. w. a front vowel. A First Period l-w. in Mong. as del (Haenisch 35; Studies, p. 238; Kon, 1716); survives in NE Alt., "Fel, yal, Sor çal, (Khak. celin); Tuv. çal "the place where the mane grows'; cel “mane”: SE "Far, yayl R 7/7 11; Türki yal: NC jal: SC Uzb. yol: NW yal/jal: SW Az. yal, (Osm. yele); "Tkm. ya:l. "Vhis word is quite unconnected vv, the modern word yal “vvages” and the like, Radloff read the latter twice in USp. 7o, but the new edition by Yamada in The Forms of the Uighur Documents of Loan Contracts, Memoirs of the Faculty of Letters, Osaka University, XI, March 1965 (in Japanese) shows that these were mistranscriptions. Xak. xr ya:l 'a horse's mane” ('urfu'l-faras) and “the place where the mane grows' (ra'rifatuht, sic for ma"rafatuhu) in all the languages; hence one says at yazlı: “the place where a horse's mane grows', that is the flesh (a/-/alımn) on which the mane grows (şanbut) Kaş. HI 160; a.0. İH 13 (1 yaltf, q.v.): KB 5801 (buka:): Kom. xiv yalı (sic) “the mane” CCG, Gr.: Kip. xi ma'rafatiu'l-faras ya:1 Hou. ız, 17: xiv yal (with back vowel") ditto İ4. 97: Xv ma'rafa yal Tuh. 33b. 9: Osm. xiv, xv yal “manc” in several texts; XVI to xviii yalı *mane'; in several texts TTSI 770: II 980; Hİ 756; İV 829 (Kom. and Osm. yalı are presumably Sec. f.s of yalığ). 1 yé:l “vind” , also metaph. “demoniacal possession' and the like, owing to a supposed connection between evil spirits and the wind; it is not always easy to see which meaning is intended. S.ia.m.Lg. w. the usual phonetic changes. Cuv. çil (syll) Ash. XII 146; hence lw. in Hungarian as szel. Modern forms like SC Uzb.; SW 'Tkm. yél, taken w. the TT VII seriptions, indicate -é-, not -e-. "Pürkü vii ff. Man. yél tepri “the wind god” Chuas. 35: Uyğ. vin ff. Man. yél tepri Wind. 5; a.0.0.: Bud. yel (often spelt 57i, t.e. y€:17) is common, e.g. (dust) yel üze tokitilip "whipped up by the wind' U 17 39, 90; taluy içinde kara yél "a strong wind at sca' uem 20; o.o. TT V 6, 44; X 58, 115, 295, etc.; Suv. 588, 13 the four kinds of illness are ea fied as those due to yel, *wind, flatulence” , sarığ “bile”, leşip “mucus” (Tokharian I. -w.) and sanipat Sanskrit samnipáta 'disorders of the three bodily humours': Civ. yel bu:lğa: [gap] (?-) 'flatulence'(?)) TT VII 16, tünle: sogik yélta: (sic) tokimakta: "because he is buffeted by a cold wind at night” do. T. 14; alku yéligig “all diseases due to flatulence' H I 135; yéltózlüg ağrığ “pain caused by wind" do. 139; ağız yél (spelt y/) emi “a cure for bad breath'(?) do. 177; o.o0. TT 115-16 (tigile:-); H Iİ ro, 54 (ötül)—y€l seems to mean 'demoniacal possession” in kiçiğ oğlan yél tartsar “if a small boy is possessed by a devil'(?) VII 27, 8; kimnin közin ağızın yél tartıp "if a man's eyes or mouth are distorted by an evil spirit'(?) H. I 124: Xak. xi yél al-nasim “the wind'; yé:l a/-cinn “an evil spirit'; hence one says er yelpindi: agaba'l-racul sa'fa mina'l-cinn “demoniacal possession attacked the man” Kaş, Iİ 144; (for the preamble see ko:l) RU —)es— en! Ào LLL EHE ERERERRUMAILIRIRII... o 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 961 
     
   
   
     MON. YL 917 another example is yé:l “the wind' (with a Short vowel) in the sentence anın yell: (sic) kü:clüg 'its wind (rihuhu)is strong”, with “vind” spelt in the same way as “year” yıl 77] 161, 15 ff.; 0.0. I 415 (köğe:n), 7/1 93 (1 yélpir-), 108 (yélpin-), 227 (böke:), 268 (toki:-), etc., translated al-rih, al-nasim, or sa'fa mina'l-cinn: KB (what you call life) yél teg kecer 'passes like the wind' 693; a.o. 63 (Ópdün): xıl1(?) Ar. (moments of enjoyment) keçer yél (v.l. yel) kecer teg 'pass as the wind passes! 194; Tef. yél (1) 'wind'; (2) (a good) “spirit” ro: xiv. Muh. al-harıd” “vind” yé:l Mel. 79, 13; yel Rif. 184: Çağ. xv ff. yel bad 'wind' San. 351 v. 21: Xwar. xiv yél *wind' Qutb 77; MN 11, etc.; Nahc. 30, 16: Kom. xiv ditto CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xim al-hawa? yel (MS. yel), also “year” Hou. $, 7; a.o. 28, 6 (yıl): xiv yel ("front vowel') al-rih; one says yel esti: “the wind blew" /d. 97; ai-hawa' yél, al-nasim yéléser (sic) Bul. 2, 16: xv hawá' yel "uh. 3a. 13: 37b. 8. S 2 yél See 1 yalığ Xak. yil "year", A Second Period l.-w. in Mong. as ctl (Haenisch go, Kow. 2343), originally only “a year of the rz-animal cycle', later “year” generally; s.i.a.m.l.g. vv. the usual phonetic changes. Türkü vin yıl “year” is common, esp. in dates in the r2-animal cycle: viri ff. üçünç yılta: “in the third year” /rkB ış, o.o. do. 21 (yaru:-), $9: Man. bir yılka “in one (i.e. every) year” Chuas. 244: Uyğ. vir yıl “year” is common in JSu.: vin ff, Man.-A sansaz tümen yıl bolti “it is countless years (since)” M 7 10, 4-5; a.o. do. 12, 16 (laBzin): Bud. (if you keep livestock) yiltpa asiur “they increase from year to year' PP 13, 6; yılın ayın “from year to year and month to month” 77” VI 62; o.o. do. X $561, etc.: Civ. yıl “year” is common in dating formulae and calendar texts: xiv. Chin.-Uyg. Dict. “year” yıl Ligeti 284: O, Kir. ix ff. kirk yıl “for forty years” Mal. 45, 4: Xak. xı yıl al-sana "a year”, hence one says bir yıl kecti: “one year has passed” Kaş. III 5; about zo o.o. esp. in 7345, 27fT. on the 12-animal cycle: KB iki yu sekiz ay “for two years and eight months” 131; (if a man does not bring out his knowledge . . .) yatsa yılın “it will lie (idle) for years on end” 214; a.o.o.: XiII(?) Tef. yıl “year” 157: xiv. Muh. al-sana yl Mel. 79, 15; Rif. 184: Çağ. xv ff. yıl (same para. as 1 ye:l) also used for “year” (sal) San. 351v. 21: X war. xin yıl “year” “Ali zo: xiv ditto Qutb 91; MN 70, etc.: Kom. xiv “year” yil/51 CCI, CCG, Gr. 132 (quotn.): Kip. xiu al-'àm “year” yil, also *wind'; followed by phr. for 'this vear', ctc. Hou. 28, 6; a.0. 5, 7 (1 yéD): xiv yl a/-sanaş one says yıl kutlu: bolsun “may the year be blessed” (mubürak) İd. 97; al-sanatw'l-hádira “the present year” bu: yıl, other similar phr. Bul. 13, 11 ff: xv al-sana yil Kan. 36, 11 (followed by phr.); Tuh. 3a. 13; 19b. 11. yo:l 'road, way', and the like; fr. the earliest period used in various metaph. meanings, e.g. (so many) “times”, and later 'streak, stripe' (see bars). S.ia.m.lg. w. the usual phonetic changes. Türkü visi Köğmen yoli: bir ermiş "there was one road across the Kógmen mountains' T 23; o.o. I N 9 (yurt), etc.— altı: yoli: süpüsdim “1 fought six times" (Le. battles) Z7 E 28, o.o. I E 15, H E 13 (Kirk), etc.: vir ff IrkB 3o (yara:-), 35 (1 a:r-); ala: atlığ yol (or yul?) tepri: men *'I am the God of the Road (or the Spring?) with a dappled horse' do. 2; ao. ditto do. 48: Man. eki ağuluğ yol “the two poisoninfected roads” Chuas. 125-6; yolunuz “your road” TT II 6, 24: Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A (explain) üç yoli "his three vvays” M 7 34, ız (religious metaphor): Man. barku (sic) yoluğ bilmedin “vithout knowing the way to go” TT HI 128; o.o. do. 63 (0:z-), etc.: Bud. yol is common both lit. for 'road' and metaph. for *way', esp. in a religious sense translating Sanskrit marga, (then the door-keeper lifting him up) yolta ópi ol&amp;urti “sat him facing the road' PP 66, 2; (let us be released from this sinful body and) kurtulmak yolka teginelim 'reach the way of salvation” de. $2, 1—2; at yol ayağ cilteg tileser “if he desires fame (Hend.) and respect' Suv. 444, 5 (or perhaps "a (good) name and the (right) road'?); o.o. U II 4, 2-3 etc.: Civ. yol is common, at yol tilemekte TT I 196 (cf. Bud.); o.o. do. 21 (0:z-); H I 38 (kaşanığ), etc.: Xak. xı yo:l al-tariq "road”, and a journey (al-safar) is also called yo:l; hence one says anın yo:l çıktı: “a journey appeared (badá) for him”, this is said only when the journey appears suddenly (or urgently, "nd zuhür . . . “ala ğirra) Kaş. III 1445 1 63, 13 (ança:) and about 30 o.o., usually translated al-tarig: KB kóni yolka kirdip *you have entered the straight road' (to paradise) 36; sevinc mende sakınç mapa yol azar 'I have happiness, care loses its way to me' 677; kildi yol “he set out” 766; o.o. 842, etc.: xırn(?) At. yol is common; generally metaph., e.g. aya sakk yolinda yelígli odun 'O you who are trotting along the road of doubt, wake up! rr, Tef. yol “road, way (lit. and metaph.); time(s)! 160: xiv Muh. al-tariq yo:1 Mel. 74, 13; Rif. 178; tarraqa "to open the way to (someone)' yo:l ét- 28, 7; (112, vul-): Çağ. Xv ff. yol rah ("road”) wa tariq; and metaph. ráh-i sulük “a way of behaving” San. 345v. 13: Xwar. xii yol “road, vay” ' Ali 36: xin(?) if the transcription is right, in Og. sometimes spelt yol, e.g. yolda *on the way' 248, and sometimes Col, e.g. colda 228: xiv yol “road, way; time(s) Qutb 81-2; MN 114, etc.: Kom. xiv yol “road, way, journey', etc. CCI, CCG, Gr. 125 (quotns.): Kip. xir al/-fariq yo:l Hou. s, 20; 51, 4: XIV yol ("back vowel") ditto /4. 97; (under “the earth and what is in it”, between “gypsum” and 'fortified enclosure") al-xatt fPl-ard wa ğayrihd “a line on the ground, etc.” yol Bul. 4, 2; a.o. 2, 13 (kus): xv fariq yol Tuh. 3a. 13; 23b. rr: Osm. xiv ff. yol in various phr.; c.i.a.p. T'T:S 7 838-40; I1 10631065; III 817-19; IV 895-7. yul “a spring, fountain', and the like; survives only(?) in NE Kaç., Kız., Koib. yul mountain 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 962 
     
   
   
     918 MON, YL  stream, brook' R IJI i32; Sag. qul do. 2175; Khak. qul. Kag.'s alternative form yu:l seems to be an error. Cf. bipa:r, 1 bulak. Türkü vini ff. [rk B. 17 (kör-), o.o.? do. 2, 48 (see yo:: Uyğ. viri Kara Buluk óp[dü]n Sukak Yul:nda: "at the Gazelle Spring east of Kara Buluk' Su. S 11: vin ff. Bud. Anupadat yul (spelt yuul) suvt erürsiz "you are the water of the Anavatapta spring” Hüen-ts. 2104-5; (all the rivers, lakes) yullar (yrullar) yulaklar 'springs and small springs! Suv. 529, 4: Civ. TT VIII Lis (ağu:suz): Xak. xı yul 'aynu'l-má' “a spring”, hence one says çokrama: yul "ayn fatewwára “an abundant spring” Kaş. İİİ 4; yuz "aynu"l-mö” III 144; olo. 1 492 (çokrama:), 777 17 (yulak): KB 973 (egsü:-): xın(?) At, 387 (kuri:-). Mon. V. YLD 1 yal- Pass. f. of *ya:-, cf. 3 yak-, 2 yan-, normally Intrans. “to blaze, burn, shine', and the like; occasionally irregularly "Trans. Survives only(?) in NE Alt, Tel. yalı- (sic) “to blaze, shine” R 111 165; Şor çal- do. 1877, but see yalın, Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. (justas a fire blazes up under the influence of dry fuel, so also under the influence of grasping (upadàána) the fires of action (PAava)) örtenür yalarlar *flame up and blaze' U 7/ o, 3o: Xak. xı o:t yaldı: “the fire blazed up” (rltaaba); and one says ba:ş yaldx: “the wound burnt' (or ached, amadda); and kü:n yü:züğ yaldı: "the sun tanned (/arezcalıat) the face and blackened it” (saseivcadathu) Kaş. 111 63 (yalar, yalma:k); a.o. III 65 (2 yan-): KB kün ay teg yala “shining like the sun and moon” 415: (Çağ. xv ff. yele- duraxşdnidan “to cause to shine, San. 3s1r. 26 (quotns.), may be connected). 2 *yali See yalt, yalim, yalma:, yalıp, yalın-. 5 1 yel- (?vél-) (of a horse) “to trot, amble”, with some implication of haste; s.i.a.m.l.g. vv, the usual phonetic changes; in SW only Osm. Türkü vitt (the xağan said) yelü: kör 'advance at a trot” , . . kün yeme: tün yeme: yelü: bardimiz “ve went at a trot day and night” T 26-7; (velmedi: in İİ E 41 seems to be a misreading of kelmedi:): Xak. xı atlığ yeldi: (MS. véldi:) “the horseman ambled and trotted” (xabba . . . tea ahdara) Kaş, III 64 (yele:r, yelme:k, sic; this V. is listed between yul- and 2 yél-, which implies a pronunciation vél-, and this is perhaps right): KB (what good is fortune when it comes to you) yana barmaz erse tilekce yelip 'and then does not go trotting along as vou wish?' 1077: XIII (3?) At. 11 (yo:; Tef. yél- (?sic) “to trot! rso (mistranslated “to break wind"): Çağ. xv ff. yél- püya hardan sca ráh raftan ba-ta'cil tva dawidan ba-ftariq-i hirawtla “to canter, to travel rapidly, to run likc an advance guard' San. aşır. 11 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv (a negro slave mounted on a camel) yelip kele turur "is approaching at a trot' Nahc. 133, 7: Kip. xiv yél- Aabba "to move briskly! /4. 97; xv xabbaba “to trot' yel- Twh. r4b. 8 (yelmek added in second hand over xabbaba) ; hartvala “to amble' yel- do. 38a. r: Osm. xiv ff. yel(occasionally yél-) 'to trot', more generally 'to hurry, move quickly; c.i.a.p. TTS 18:5; IT 1035; İİİ 795; IV 872. D 2 yözl- Pass. f. of yé-; "to be eaten'. S.i.a. mil. g. vv, the usual phonetic changes, but Mon. forms like NC Kir. jel- are less common than Dis. forms like SC Uzb. yéyil-. Xak. xi aş yéldi: “the food (etc.) was eaten' (uRrla) Kaş, Il] 64 (yélü:r, yélme:k); as yé:ldi: same translation 777 185 (y€:lü:r, ye:lme:k). S yil- Sec il- Uyğ. Bud. yul- basically 'to pull out, pluck out” (e.g. a thorn 4ce., fr. a wound 452) but with various extended meanings, particularly in Xak. S.ia.m.lg. as yul-/qul-/jul-, but SW Az., Osm., "Fkm. yol-. Cf. yulk-; not to he confused w. yulr-. "Türkü vr ff, IrkB 8 (i:xn); Uyf. vini ff. Civ. yul- al- or al- yul“to take back, recover! (something which has been sold) is a stock phr. in contracts for the sale of land, slaves, etc. in U Sp. in the context that third parties who yulayın alayın téserler “say "we will take (her or it) back” ' will be liable to stated penalties 16, 20-1; 30, 185; roy, 14 etc.: Xak. xi er bulunuğ (MS. bulunuk) yuldi: "the man. redeemed (fakka) the prisoner'; and one says er tutuğ yuldi: “the man redeemed the pledge' (or surety, al-ralın), and er kuş yuldi: “the man plunged (&amp;amasa) the bird in boiling water in order to pluck it" (/i-yafamarrata), also (used when) he scalded (asmafa) the hair off a hide (etc.); and ura:ğut başın yuldx “the woman obtained a divorce” (/xfala"at . . . mina'l-mahr); and ol bitiğ yuldi: "he copied (nasaca) the book" Kaş. III 63 (yula:r, yulma:k); a.o. 77 24, 4 (kir-): KB. bulun kilsa nafsim. yuluğli kanı “if it makes my soul a prisoner, who will redeem me?” 3636: xitt(?) Az, kel ottin ózüp yul ölümdin ön-e "pull yoursclf out of the fire before you dic” 12; a.o. 160; Tef. yulu(sic?) "to pull out” 16r (yolu-): xiv fada “to redeem, get a divorce" yu:l- Mel, 29, 13; Rif. 13; mufdá yudlmiş şi, 11; 147; (25, 9 sec yüli:-; riz see yo:1): Çağ. xv fF. (yul- (-up) yol bulub gel- "to find a way and come" Vel. 418 (quotn.) mistranslated); yul- kandan mü tea. par "to pluck out hair or feathers', in Ar. natafa (to pluck') San. 34sr. 6 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv yul- “to pull up (grass); to ransom, rescue! Quib 8t (vol-), 85: Kom. xiv “to redeem' (in a religious sense) yul- CCI, CCG; Gr. 128 (quotn.). Dis. YLA yala: 'suspicion; blame; false accusation', and the like; homophonous w. yala:-. Survives w. the same range of meanings in NE Alt., Tel. yala R II] isa: SE Türki yala: NC jala: NW yala/lala. Uyf. vir ff. Bud. Suv. 135, 6 (kadağ): Civ. yala yanaru (?read yanırtı) ükliyür “false accusations increase afresh' TT Il 75: Xak. xı yala: al-fuhma fi'l-gay' 'suspicion (or false accusation) about something"; u——mxxamcammMmmĞ8ım64am.ısmqdd.axrcmmgm—rnnrkmmmmmrmbrkMur——ur-—x.sssn.vvə—xv—ı—ı-—-- 220 ıı o 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 963 
     
   
   
      DIS. and a kind of (VU) al-miğdan "pufT-pastry” is called yala:çı: yuğa: that is “vvrinkled (mugaddan) bread'; whenever the least thing touches it it breaks because of its fragility (riqqatihi), and the baker is falsely accused (yatahham) for it and they say 'you broke it” Kaş. III 25; ao. III 82 (yalal-): Kom. xiv. “false accusation yala CCG; Gr. 110 (quotn.). VU?D yelü: (?yélü:) Hap. leg.; perhaps Dev. N. fr. 1 yel-, but there is no obvious semantic connection. Xak. xi yelü: ribátu'l-aflà! "a tether for colts'; when the sucking foals (a/-"dmiş) are taken from the mares, they are tethered to a single rope, so that the mares circle round them in the meadow to be milked Kaş. İTİ 26. yula: “torch, lamp", and the like. A Second Period l.-w. in Mong. as cula (Studies, p. 239; Kow. 2386). Survives only(?) in NE Alt., Tel. yula R HI 553; Tuv. cula. Uy£. vii ff. Bud. ençğülük yaruk yula tamdurdaçı 'kindling the bright lamp of tranquillity' USPp. 102a. 35; 0.0. U I 22, 3 etc. (tamdur-); U III 28, 26 (osuğluğ), TT V 6, 49 (toduncsuz), TT VII 24, 11; 25, 12; 40, 98 etc.: Xak. xı “a lamp' (al-sirác) is called yula: Kaş. III 25 (verse); a.o. 7 zoo (udin-): KB (the Prophet) yula erdi xalqka *was a lamp for the people” 35; ukuş ol yula teg 'understanding is like a lamp' (on a dark night) 288; 0.0. 601, 885, 1861, etc.: xiv Muh.(?) ('lamp' (Pe.) ciráj$); ai-sama' 'candle' yu:la: Rif. 170 (only): Xwar. xrv yula 'lamp' Qutb 85; MN 253, etc. Dis. V. YLAyala:- in this meaning Hap. leg.; later occurrences of yala- and the like are Sec. f.s of yalBa:-. Homophonous vv. yala: Xak. xı ol anar ofr: yala:dı: “he falsely accused him (Gttahamahu) of being: a thicf” (etc) Kaş, III 89 (yala:r, yala:ma:k, MS. yalama:k). D yılla:- Den. V. fr. yıl, s.is.m.l, e.g. NW Tat. yélla-; Nog. yilla- 'to spend a year; (e.g. of wine) to be kept for a year': SW Osm. yilla- “to spend a year, to be a year old”, etc. Xak. xi KB karimaz bu edgü nece yillasa “the good man does not grow old, however many years he lives! 347: Osm. xv ff. yılla-, meanings as above, in several texts T 7S 1 829; Il 1051; IV 883. yılı:- “to be, or become, hot'; s.i.a.m.l.g. vv, the usual phonetic changes, but SC Uzb. yili-/ili- : SW (Az. Dev. N./A. iliğ (src) only); Osm. 1li- (sic) “to become lukewarm' (after being either hotter or colder); Tkm. yila(sic). Xak. xr suv yılr:dı: "the water (etc.) was, or became, hot” (saxuna) Kaş. III 91 (yrl:r, yılııma:k): xiv Muh. napfa (Rif. 25. l-harüra "to be lukewarm' yızlı- Mel. , 8; yıl- Rif. 131. D yola:- Den. V. fr. yo:l; “to set out, or go, on a journey'. As such survives only(?) in YLB  .919 NC Kir. Jolo- Kzx. jola- “to approach, drew near", but the Den. V. in -la:-, yolla-/joldaetc., s.i.s.m.l. in the original meaning. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. angakr'a titsi ulugindin yolayu barsar 'if he travelled making a small detour (?) through his pupil's country” Hüen-ts. 281—2; o.o. PP 60, 6—7 (ünde:-), Kuan. 43 (1 ert-). VU yult- “to pillage'; not to be confused vv, yul-; n.o.a.b., cf. yulit-. Türkü vrrr teğdimiz yuh:dimiz “ve attacked and pillaged them” T 39; a.o. 11 E 32 (bark): Uyğ. vir evin barkrn yilkisrn [y]ulimadim “1 did not pillage their dwellings, property, or livestock' Su. E 2; evkn yulr:p do. S 5: Xak. xı beg bodu:nuğ Yuli: di: (changed by second hand to yula:ydı:) “the beg raided (ağdra “ala, so read, cf. yulit-, MS. a'àána) the tribe' (a/-qawm) Kaş. III go (yulr:r, yult:ma:k, MS. yulay-). yöle:- “to prop up, or support (something Acc.) ; later also "to lean (e.g. one's head Acc.) against something. Survives in NE Alt, Küer., Tel. yölö- R III 451; Sag., Sor (do. 2043), Khak, Tuv. cóle-: SE Tar. yóli-; "Türki yóle-/yóli-: NC Kir. Jóló-, Xak. xı ol ta:mığ yöle:di: “he propped up ('ammada) the wall' (etc.) Kaş. 1II 89 (yöle:r, yöle:me:k, verse): KB (my Lord, . . .) yölegil kutun “support (me) with (Thy) grace” 5125; seni ol yöledi kopurdı kutun “he supported you and raised you by his grace' 5792; a.o. 2105 (süzük). yüli:- 'to shave'; survives an in NE "Tuv. cülü-: NW "Kumyk yülü-: SW Osm. yülü-. Xak. xr er saç yüli:di: "the man shaved (ğalaqa) the hair” Kaş. III go (yüll:r, yüli:me:k): xiv Muh. halaqa yü:li- Mel. 25, 9; yü:l:- Rif. 108; al-halg yü:li:nmek (MS. -mak) 37, 10; yu:li:mek (-mak) 123: Xwar. xiv başımnı yülürmen 'I shave my head” Nahc. 37, 2: Kom. xiv “to shave' yülü- CCI, Gr.: Kip, xur halaqa min halgi'l-ga^r. yü:1:Hou. 36, 20; xiv yüli- halaqa fh 97: XV 25 yülü- Tuh. Tab. 7; 41a. s: Osm. xiv ff. yüli(rare)/yülü- “to shave'; c.i.a.p. 77TS 1885; I7 1082; İİİ 833; IV giz. Dis. YLB PUF yalbı: Hap. leg.; under cross-heading B ; no possible "Turkish etymology, perhaps a L-w. Xak. xr yalbı: ne: “broad” (al-'arid) of anything carved (marqür) out of wood, for example a shallow platter 2: lladi là "umq lahu) Kaş. III 30. yélvi: “sorcery, witchcraft', and the like. "The connection between this and yölpi:- and its der. f.s is obscure; the spelling of both is certain; they may both be der. fr. some forei; word. The semantic connection vv. 1 yéi is prob. fortuitous. A Second Period l.-w. in Mong. as cilbilcilci 'sorcery, trickery, deception” (Kow. 2346, Haltod 573) NE Tel. tyllbi R IJI 522; Sor (do. 2139), Tuv. çilbi are no doubt reborrowings fr. Mong. Tür viri ff. Man. neçe yélvi yélviledimiz erser  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 964 
     
   
   
      920 DIS 'inasmuch as we have practised vitchcraft” Chuas. 108-9: Uyf. vin ff, Nlan, M. II ş, 8-10 (antağ): Bud. U 77 71, 3 (i1) (kömen): Xak. xı yelvi: ai-silir 'sorcery' ; hence al-sáhir “a sorcerer” is called yelvi:çi: Kaş. 111 33 (verse); yelvin tuta:r közkiye: /ahd "ayn salira, properly “little eve that captures by sorcery” //İ 359, 9. D yelpik Dev, N. fr. yelpi:-, q.v. regarding the basic meaning. Survives in NE Sor celbeg "fortune-telling bv letting a cloth wave in the air” R IHE 1981: SW Az. yelpik “a fan”, Osm. yelpik 'difficulty in breathing, severe asthma”. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. (if a man belicves false doctrine and sins, his house is invaded bv all sorts of evil demons, false teachers) onjin. yelpik (TT VI (?)1pağla:r) yekler 'ghouls, evil spirits(?), demons' (ravens, owls, etc.) TT VI so (EHI O4): Xak. xi yelpik a/-sa"fa mina l-cinn 'demoniacal possession! (cf. 1 yö:l), hence one says erke: yélpik tegi: “demoniacal possession attacked (aşdba) the man” Kaş. İH 46. Dis. V. YLDS yalva:- See yalğa:-. yelpi:- not noted before the medieval period, but see yelpik, 1 yelpit-, etc. Semantically connected vv. 1 yé:l in both meanings, *wind' and “evil spirit', but it is difficult to suggest a morphological connection; -pi:- is not a known Den. Suff.; and sec yélvit, S.i.a.m.l.g. vv, the usual phonetic changes, but only in the sense “to fan, winnow', and the like. The Dev. N. (N.1) yelpiğüç "a fan” also s.i.s.m.L, sometimes much distorted. as in SW. Osm. yelpaze. Çağ. xv tf. yélpi- (spelt) baq zadan vea mürvcaha cunbándan “to fan, to wave a fan” San. 351 v. 6 (quotn.): Xwar.xiv payğambar 'alayhi'l-salàmni yelpir erdi “he was fanning the Prophet” (and. driving away, flies) Nahc. 120, 12; a.0. 235, 13: Kom. xiv “to fan” yelpi- CCG; Gr. S yalvat- See yalğat-. D 1 yélpit- Caus. f. of yélpi:-; 'to order to fan” and the like, S.i.s.m.l. in this sense-vv, the same phonetic changes. Xak. xı ol anar sine:k yelpitti: (also vocalized »ve/petti:) “he ordered him to drive away (ga55) the flies with a fan” (bi'l-miricalia) Kaş. II 351 (yelpitü:r, yelpitme:k; not vocalized). PU(D) 2 yélpit- Tap. leg.; this V., which precedes 1 yélpit-, is almost entirely unvocalized, only one /at/ia on the ya” being marked; it is obviously not connccted with yélpi:- but is semantically connected with a medieval and modern V. yibi- “to he moist', which, vv. its der. fs, survives in some NE, SE, NC languages as yibi-/cibi-/jibi-/ibi- “to be moist, in the Caus. f. “to moisten”, "The earliest trace of it seems to be in Çağ, (see below). Cf. 2 yelpir-. Xak. xı ol atka: aşba:r yelpitti: "he moistened (balla) the horse”s forage”, that is straw and bran; also used of drizzling rain (a/  . YLB -radüd mina” l-amfár) when. it. has. marked (ccasanıa) the surface of the ground with moisture (mina [-nadà); onc says ynámu:r yé:rig yelpitti: Kaş. 77: 3s1(yelpitü:r, yelpitme:k): (Çağ. xv fT. ibin- (spelt) xisidan “to be moistened, soaked'; ibit- xisünidan 'to moisten, soak' San. 93r. 5). D yélvik- Intrans. Den. V. fr. yélvi:; “to practise sorcery'.. N.o.a.b.. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. Kuan. 184, etc. (a&amp;uk-). S yalvan- Sce yalğan-. D yélpin- efl. f. of yelpi:- ; s.i.s.m.l, w. the same phonctic changes, usually as a Pass., "to be fanned, winnowed', etc, Xak. xr oğla:n yelpindi: axadati[-sabi sa'fa “the böy was possessed by a devil'; and oné says ol ó:zipe: yél yelpindi: rarcealla /— tarwihr'l-nasim li-nafsihi “he fanned himself! Kaş. HI 108 (yelpinü:r, yetpinme:k); a.o. //7 144 (1 yé:l). yalvar- 'to beg, beseech, pray (to someone Dat.) ; s.i.a. m J.g. vv, the usual initial changes; -v- survives in SE "Türki: SW Az., Osm. but has become -b- elsevhere. Türkü vri ff. kuzğu:n savı: teprigerü: yalvaru:r “the raven's words arc a prayer to heaven” IrkB 54; 3.0. do. 19 (1 ayin-): Uy£. vii ff. Man.-A tümen tümen yalvardı: "he made innumerable requests” M 1 20, 4-s: Man. tepri yaruk küçlüg bilgeke yalvararbiz “ve pray to the divinc, bright, strong sage! M I7 ro, 2 (1): Bud. yalvara ötünürmen “1 venture to pray' (on behalf of all mankind) U 7I 79, 52; same phr. do. 88, 7o-1; TT IV 12, 34; Kuan. 40; 0.0. TT IV 4, 13 (iğla:-), U İT 79, 46: Xak. xt ol maya: yalvardı: /srağdta bi wa [falaba münni tahşil mürddihi “he asked for my help and begged me to fulfil his desires! Kaş. 777 99 (yalvarur, yalvarma:k); o.o. ! 494, 4; 498, zo: KH (1 have entrusted (tutuz-, q.v.) him to God) yalvara “in my prayers! 1483: xm(?) Tef. yalvar- "to pray! 137: xiv Mu. al-tadarru" "to make a humble. request? ya:lba:rmak Afe/, 38, 8; Rif. 125; tadarra'a yalba:r- ro6 (only), al-sw'ül "to ask” yalba:rmak ız3 (so:rmak 36, 7): Çağ. xv ff. yalbar- “aca kardan "to entrcat” San. 335v. 1 (quotns.): Xwar. xrır yalwar- “to pray”, etc. “Ali 7: xiv yalbar- ditto Qutb 65: Kom. xiv ditto CCI, CCG; Gr. 111 (quotns.): Kip. XIV tazcassala “to entreat' yalwair- Bul. 40v.: xv tadaxxala ditto yalbar- Tuh. ob. 9. D 1 yélpir- lap. leg.; Inchoative f. of yélpi:-. Xak. xı yél yelpirdi: tamassama'l-nasim “a gentle wind blew'; and onc says er yélpirdi: (MS. téltiredi:) iltafata'l-racul yamnaht a vasrahu ha-annahu aşübahu sa'fa müna”l-cinn "the man constantly. turned. to the right and left as if he was possessed by a devil Kaş. H1 93 (2 yélpir- follows). PU(D) 2 yélpir- Hap. leg.; cognate to 2 yélpit-, q.v.; follows 1 yélpir-. Xak, xi kepek yélpirdi: (MS. vélprredi:) "the chaff was wetted' (nuddivat); similarly when gentle rain (al-taşş) has struck the surface of the ground  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 965 
     
   
   
     DIS one says yağmur yélpirdi: that is "the rain has wetted (naddá) the surface of the ground" Kaş. III 99 (yeipire:r, yelpirme:k, MS. yélpereme:k). D yélvir- Hap. leg.; Intrans. Den. V. fr. yélvi:. Syn. vv. talpır-, q.v., and more connected semantically vv. yélpi- and its der. f.s than vv. yélvi:; the word is only partially dotted, and vocalized and farfara is written very oddly and unvocalized. Xak. xı tolvir yelvirdi: xafaqa”l-hacdl wa farfara "the canopy fluttered in the wind (Hend.) Kaş, 1I] 100 (yelvire:r, yelvirme:k). D yelpiş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. t. of yelpi:-. Xak. xr ol apar sipe:k yelpişdi: “he helped him to drive away( fi dabb) the flies” , also used when he fanned him (ratwtvahahu) (yelpişü:r, yelpişme:k), and one says kepe:k yelpişdi: “the chaff flew about in every direction' (tacádabat . . . ba'duhà min ba'd) (yelpisü:r, yelpişme:k) Kaş. III 100 (the double entry, with kepe:k in the second one, is curiously reminiscent of the entry of 1 and 2 yélpir-, but in this case the two are clearly identical). Tris. YLB F yala:vaç/yala:vvaç/yala:var an İranian l.-w.; -va:ç/-vva:ç is an Iranian word meaning *voice', see Sanduvva:ç, -var too is an Iranian Suff., but the first part is not yet identified and the word has not been found in any Iranian language. |t might be (Iranian) Xwarazmian. Originally 'a diplomatic envoy from one ruler to another, ambassador'; adopted in Manichaean and Moslem terminology for 'Prophet', i.e. God's envoy to mankind; the Ar. word a/-rasi/ has both meanings, which causes some ambiguity, but prob. in the medieval period it was used only for 'Prophct'. N.o.a.b.; cf. €lçi:, arkış, sa:vçı:, Türkü viri II E 39 (2 ötüğ): vin ff. IrkB 11 (sa:vçı:): Man. söki tepri yalavaçı burxanlarka “against the former l'rophets, the envoys of God” Chuas. 64-5; o.o. do. 69; M İİİ 14, 7-8 (ii): Yen. erdem üçün Tüpü:t xanka: yalavac bardim kelmetim (?so read) “because of my manly virtues I went as ambassador to the Xan of Tibet and did not return” Mal. 29, 8, Kara: xanka: barıpan yalavaç barıpan kelmedipiz "you went as ambassador to the Karaxan and did not return” do. 3o, s: Uyg. viri ff. Bud. U TT 21, 17-18 (arkis); 22, 21: Civ. in contracts in U.Sp. there is a stock clause forbidding the seller's relatives to try to get the contract revoked by appealing to erklig beg eşi elçi yalavaç “the responsible district chief and his vvife, the local representative of the central government and envoys from it'(?) 13, 13; 16, 19: Xak. xr yala:vaç al-rasül (see above); yala:vvaç alternative form (luga fihi); yala:var the word used for "royal ambassadors! (rusulu'l-mulk) in the Uyğ. language Kaş. III 47 (prov.); o.o. 1 66 (uzak); 83, 9; 97 (alkış), II 288 (1 kırğa:ğ), III 266 (bosu:-); 438 (1:d-): KB in Chapter II 34 ff. the Prophet is called yalavaç in the heading . YLC  921 but savçı in 34; (Atiq) yalavaç sevinçi tiledi “desired the happiness of the Prophet' 52; the reasons for sending yalavaç 'ambassadors' from one country to another are discussed in 2593 fT.,, and their functions and privileges in 3814 ff. ; a.o. 2362 (élleg-): xi(?) Tef. yalavaç payğambar savçı translating rasül nabi 136; a.o. 257 (8a:VÇ1:): xiv. Muh. (the first entry in “kinds of men', before “Adam") al-rasül yalavva:ç Mel. 45, 2; Rif. 138: Çağ. xv ff. yolavvuç (so spelt) paygámbar wa rühnumü wa mürşid 'prophet, guide, spiritual director” Saz. 345v. 15: X war. xır yalavvaç “envoy” "AZ 49: xiv yalavaç “the Prophet” Qutb:65; Nahe. 230, 6: Kap. xii "the Prophet of God” is called payğambar, a Pe. word meaning 'the bearer of a message'; al-rasül muffaga(n) "an envoy' in general is called yalavva:ç Hou. 3, 15-16: xiv yalavva:ç al-rasül İd. 97; (al-nabi pay&amp;ambar); al-rasul yalawac Bul. 2, 10: Osm. xiv and xv yalavaç 'ambassador' in one text, “Prophet” in two TTS 7 771; IV 828. D yeölvi:çi: Hap. leg.; N.Ag. fr. yélvi:; 'sorcerer'. Xak. xı Kaş. /II 33 (yélvi:). ?E yılpağu:t See alpağu:t, Türkü. S yala:var See yala:vaç. Tris. V. YLBD yélvile:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. yélvi:; “to practise witchcraft'. Türkü vii ff. Man. Chuas. 108-9 (yélvi:). Dis. YLC E yo:lıç Sec yovvlaç, D yolçı: N.Ag. fr. yo:l; originally 'guide'. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SE(?), vv, the usual phonetic changes; in NC Kir, inter alia, 'guide', otherwise usually 'traveller, road-mender”, and the like. Uyğ. vir ff. Man. TT III 69 (a:z-): Bud. (I will first seek out the way (yol) and then become) yolçı yerçi “a guide (Hend.)' (to others) U II s, 13; o.o. Kuan. 46; TT VI 154; PP 40, 8 (kóni:): Civ. USp. 93 is a brief note ordering that a yol atı should be given to a yolçı:: (O. Kir. ix f£. y[ol]ei: in. Mal. 44, 2 is corrected to yağı:çı: in Shcherbak's revised text): Xak. xı KB ukuş bolsu yolci kereşçin bilig “let understanding be your guide and knowledge your counsellor' 5209: xıl1(?) Tef. yolg1 'guide' 161: xiv Muh.(?) (in the list of 'professions') hüm? 'protector' yo:let: Rif. 155 (only): Çağ. xv ff. yolc1 ráhraw wa müsafir 'traveller San. 345v. 17 (quotns.): Kom. xiv 'guest' yolçu CCG; Gr. D yalçık “the moon", n.o.a.b.; a word apparently invented by the author of K B, cf. sevit, 1 yasuk; by analogy vv. the latter a connection w. 1 yal- must be suspected, but -çik is not a recognized Dev. Suff.; there is no semantic connection vv. yalçı:-. Xak. xı KB in the list of *planets' in Chap. V “the moon” is yalcik (137), not 1 ay as elsewhere: xiv Rbg. yalçık  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 966 
     
   
   
     922 “moon” also occurs in the passage (fol. 66v. of the D.M. MS.) copied fr. &amp; B. Dis. V. YLCyalçı:- not noted before the medieval period but scc yalçıt-, survives, meaning “to get what you wapt, or need”, in SE "Türki yalgi- : NC Rir. jalei-: 5C Uzb. yalci-f/yolci- : NW Kk. )alşı-. Çağ. xv (T. yalçı- (spelt) baira yáftan ava faydmand gudan “o achieve, or enjoy, favour' San. 335v. iz: Kip. xv aflajía “to prosper, thrive” yalşı- (fop-) Tuh. sb. ro. D yalçıt- Caus, f. of yalçı:- , survives in the same languages for “to satisfy, give satisfaction”, and the like, Uy£. viri ff. Bud. (if, when they arc reborn as human beings) yavlak kilinçlarka yalçıtıp yarağsız orunlarda tu&amp;mislart bar erser “they are reborn in disagrceable places which cause them to find satisfaction in evil deeds?! U 77 81, 70-1. Tris. YLC D yala:çı: N.Ag. fr. yala:; pec. to Kaş, Xak. xr yala:gir er “a man who is quick to make false accusations against someone (vattahimvl-insan sari'a(n)) about anything'; hence a kind of puff-pastry (a/-mugaddan) is called yala:çı: yuwfa: hecause it breaks when- the slightest thing touches it Kaş, 171 355.0. IJI 25 (yala:). D yolçılığ Hap. 1cg.(?); P.N./A. fr. yolei: ; “having (someone) as a gutde”, Xak. xi KB 2354 (bóke:). Mon. YLD ?D yalt Hap. leg.; cf. yalım, also used vv, kaya:; perhaps Dev. N./A. fr. 2 *yal-, and lit. 'bare', i.e. free of vegetation, Xak. x1 yalt kaya: “a bare (or sterile, a/-sald) rock” (Kaş, al-cabal *mountain); also used of anything massive (or solid, müşmat) Kag. İİİ 7. Dis. YLD D yulat apparently Dev. N. fr, *yula:- Den. V. fr. yul, lit. flowing from a spring” or the like, Survives in INE Sag., Sor (R III 2176), Khak. çulat 'brook'.. Uy£. vir ff. Bud. (ina long list of natural objects, see toS; streams, river waters, all pools) yulat suvlar 'brooks and waters' (all shrubs and trees, etc.) TT V, p. 15, note A 23, 17. PU yaltğa: Hap. leg.; this word is placed in a small section containing words with several consecutive consonants under the crossheading G, followed by the cross-heading K before yaldrik, yartma:k, which suggests that a final -É has been lost. Xak. xr yaltğa: “derision” (a/-suxriya) of something; one says ol ani: yaltğa: kildi: "he laughed at him and derided him” (/stahza'a bihi wa saxira münhu) Kaş. II 432. VU yaltrik Dev. N./A, fr. yaltrı:-, q.v. regarding the vocalization; “shining, a shining object'; as a star name. prob. 'Procyon', see DIS. YLC Clauson, 'Early "'urkish Astronomical ""erms?, U.A.Ş., vol. 35D, 1963, p. 366. S.i.a.m.l.g., generally as yaltirak, with the usual phonctic changes (y-/C-/j- ; -d-/-t-) 'gleam, gleaming, shining'.. Uyğ- viri fT. Bud. (that golden drum . . Muminated the world) yaruk yaltrik üze *with a brigbt. gleaim! Si. oz, 19; (drawing back the (over...) valturukan étiglig öligi birle with her hand adorned with a shining ornament(?) TT XN 49r: Civ. in the fragmentary list of the lunar mansions in 77" VIT, p. 57, middle, yaltrak represents the 23rd lunar mansion, prob. “Proeyon”: Xak. xt (in the same section as yaltBa:, q.v.) yaldrik ne:y (MS. yaldurakl-ih) 'anything shining' (nudi) like a brass basin and the like; and “a smartly. dressed. (alf -mutabarrica) woman! is called. yaldrik (MS. ditto) işle:r that is "a woman who has adornced herself! (al-»tazayxina), wa yudamm al-yà' fiha “also yoldrik" Kaş, HT 432: KB the name of a star, prob. '"Procyon' 5676, 6220; in 5676 Fergana MS. yudrik, others yulduz; in 6220 Vienna MS. yrltirik, others unvocalized: Çağ. xv ff. yaldırak (spelt) the name of the star Canopus! (sthay San, 336v. 14. yiltiz “root”, survives in one or two INE languages as yrlfis/ciltis, etc.: SE Tar, yiltiz; 'Türki yildiz/yildiz: SC Uzb. ildiz; in some modern languages such words represent yultuz. Cf. ti:b, tö:z, 1 kök, Türkü vur ff. Man. iki yıltız “the two roots' (heaven and hell) Chuas. 158 ff, o.0. 47-8, etc. (tö:z): Uy$. viri ff. Man. iki yıltız M I 30, 5-6: Bud. y11t1z “root” U J1I 41, 7 (D (VL i:8); TT III, p. 28, note 71, 3(kedéir-); 7V rz, 58; VIII K.10 (butik), Suv. 529, 7-9 (ulun)—in Buddhist terminology. Sanskrit fndriya "organ of sense, owing apparently to an over-literal translation of the Chinese equivalent, is translated ytltiz or tóz yrltiz, e.g. köz ulati alt: tórlüg el(Denür yıttıztar "the six kinds of ruling sense organs, the eve, etc.” TT VI 189-90; ertipü terin töz yıltız nomin 'the very profound doctrine of indriya! do. 148; a.o.o.: Civ. H I 45 (osi$un); a.o. 77 6, 13: Xak. xr yıldız "irqu” l-şacar “the root of a tree'; also used metaph. for the "pedigfee” (nasab) of a man; one says tö:zlüğ yıldızlığ that is “a man with along pedigree, vvell-horn” (imsaán “ariq fPl-nasab aşil) Kaş. II 40: KB köpül kodkisi ol anm) yrldizi *the man with a humble mind is the root of it 1704; 0.0. 2132, etc, (1 kök), 4411. yultuz “star”, a generic term for fixed stars and planets. S.ia.m.l.g.; in NE yiltis, etc: SW Az. ulduz, Osm., "Tkm. yıldız, elsewhere yulduz w. the usual phonetic changes. Türkü vru ff. kamağda: erkli:g yultu:z ermi:ş “the stars have authority over all” Toy. JlI 2v. 7-8 (ET Y TT 170); a.o.o.: Uyf. vin ff, Chr. ol yultuz “that star” U I 6 6: Bud. (Buddhas showing a bright lamp) yultuz teg "ike a star” TT F 8, 78: Civ. yultuz “star” (fixcd or planet), common in TT 77, VET: Xak. xi yulduz al-kaikab “star”, a generic term , then there are specific names (yifarraq  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 967 
     
   
   
     ——— M— DIS. V. YLD- . 23 baynahumá, sic); 'Jupiter' (al-mugtari) is called eren tü:z, kara: kuş is 'Libra' (a/-mizán); ülker “the Pleiades' (al-twrayyà); yetl:ge:n “Ursa Major' (barıdt naş), temür kazuk "the Pole star” (al-qutb fi'l-falak); bakir sokim “Mars” (al-mirrix) Kaş. İH 40; 0.0., translated a/-nacm 'star', 7 96, 10; İT 303, 13; İTLİ 194, 15) 378, zr: KB 22 (beze:-): xın(?) Tef. yulduz “star” 163: xiv Muğ. al-naçm yuldu:z Mel. 78, 16; Rif. 183: Çağ. xv rA yulduz sitára “star”, also name of the son of Ay Xan, son of Oğuz Xàn San. 345v. 25: Xwar. xii yulduz/ulduz “star” "A/f 56: xıı1(?) (they called the third con) Yulduz Og. 69, a.0.0. as P.N.: xiv yulduz “star” Qutb 85: Kom. xiv ditto, common CCG; Gr.: Kip. xii. a/-nacm yulduz (MS. yalduz) Hou. $, s: xiv yulduz ditto İd, 97; ditto (MS. yaldiz/-uz) Bul. 2, 12; al-watni “pagan” yulduz (yalduz) eri: do. s, 8: xv al-nucüm yulduzla:r, Sing. yultuz (sic) Kav. 58, 6: nacm yulduz Tuh. 36a. 4. Dis. V. YLDD yılıt- Caus. f. of yılız- , “to heat, or warm (something J4cc.). S.i.a.m.İ.g. w. the same phonetic changes. Uyğ. vitr ff, Civ. (take sesame oil and musk and) azkr”"a yılıtıp “heat them a little” H 7 r6r: Xak. xı er yılıttı: "the man was feverish (humma) and his body was hot with fever” (saxuna . . . müna”l-humma), this is Intrans. (fázim); and one says er su:vuğ yilitti: “the man heated (saxxana) the water'; this is Trans. (muta"addi) Kaş. 11 31:6 (yılrtu:r, yılıtma:k): xiv. Mu. (after ytli:-, q.v.) amara bi'l-tantif "to order to warm' yılıt- Mel. 41, 8; Rif. 131 (tanşif). D yulit- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of yult:-. Xak. xı beg bo:ynı: yubttr “the beg ordered (omitted in MS.) the pillaging of the tribe" (bi'l-i&amp;ára "afa”l-qabila) Kaş. 11 316 (yultu:r, yulitma:k, corrected fr. -me:k). D yülit- Caus. f. of yüli:- ; survives in NE 'Tuv. cülüt-: SW Osm. yülüt-. UYĞ. vii ff. Bud. saçın sakalın yülitip (MS. yulttip) “having his hair and beard shaved” U'Sp. 105a. 9: Xak. xi er sacin yülitti: 'the man had his head shaved” (ahlaga . . . ra'sahu) Kaş. I1 316 (yülitü:r, yülitme:k): Xwar. xiv (the servant of God) kim başını yülitse *who has his head shaved” Nahc. 46, 14: Kip. xv alilaga yülüt- Kav. 74, 13.   D yaltur- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of 1 yal-. Xak. xı tüpi: o:tuğ yalturdi: “the wind made the fire blaze” (alhabati'l-nár) Kaş. III 97 (yalturur, yalturma:k). ?D yéltir- (of the wind) “to blow'; not a Caus. f., which would have the Suff. -tür- not -tir- in these languages; this Suff. is otherwise unknown; perhaps a crasis of 1 yé:l and té:r-, lit. “to collect wind'. N.o.a.b. Türkü virtu ff. Man. M 11I 45, 6—7 (i) (künür-): Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A kün batsıkdın sıpar yél yeltirser (MS. yitriser?) “if a wind blows from the west" M Hİ, 4 (ii): Bud, PP 18, 2-3 (tüpir-): Civ. TT I 15-16, 143, 225 (éndür-): Xak. xi yel yeldirdi: zanassama”l-nasim “the wind blew' Kaş, III 98 (yeldire:r, yeldirme:k): Osm. xiv “asq degil mi yeli dün gün yeldiren “is not love a wind which blows both night and day?” TT. S 1812. D yeltür- Caus. f. of yel- ; s.i.s.m.l. usually for “to make (someone) hurry'. Türkü vir bu Türkü bodun ara: yarıklığ yağı:ğ yeltürmedim “1 did not allow armoured enemies to gallop about among this Türkü people” T s4: Çağ. xv ff. yéldür- Caus. f.; dawàanidan wa ta'cil-i rawàn sáxtan 'to make (someone) run or hurry' Sar: 351r. 24 (quotns.): Osm. xv ff. yeldir-/yeldür- ditto; in several texts TTS I 812; II 1032; III 795; IV 869. , D yultur- Caus. f. of yul-; s.i.s.m.l. w. the usual phonetic changes, generally for “to order to pluck out” and the like, Xak. xı ol bulunuğ yulturdi: "he urged someone to ransom (kamala man fada) the prisoner' ; and one says ol taka:ğu:nı: yulturdi: “he ordered (someone) to pluck (artafa riş) the fowl' (etc.); also used when he had anything hairy (muş"ar) plucked (fstamrata), and one says ol kulin yulturdi: “he urged his slave to buy his own (freedom, an $ştarü nafsahuy Kaş. III 97 (yulturur, yulturma:k): Çağ. xv ff. yuldurCaus. f. (after yul-, no translation) San. 3457. 15. yaltrı:- “to shine, gleam”, and the like. This seems to be the oldest form, but as in the case of yaltrik the vocalization is chaotic; Kaş. distinguishes, not very plausiblv, between the meanings of yaldrı:- and (VU) yoldri:-. Si.amlg: NE yıltra-/fyıldira-/çıldira-: SE Türki yaltiri-: NC jaltira-: SC yaltira- : NW yaltira-/jaltira- (Kumyk yırtılMa-): SW Osm., Tkm. yaldira-. Uy$f. vin ff. Man.-A yaltrağlı yaşın tenriçe “like the flashing lightning god” M I 25, 33-4; a.o. do. 10, 8-9 (Isid): Man. yaruk biligleri yaltrıyu “their bright knowledge shining! TT III 133; yıltırar (sic?) ay “the shining moon” Wind. 17: Bud. Sanskrit vyattrocanti “they shine over” ertip yaltrı:yu:rla:r TT VIII A.15; prabhásate “gleams” ya:ltrıyu:r do. B.13; a.o. do. F.2; yaltriyu yasuyu 'shining and flashing" U H a, 56; ao. TT V 4, 9; yarumi$ yaltırmış do. VI 378 v.l., yarumis yaltrirmiS do. 383 v.l. both seem to be errors, or mistranscriptions, for yaltrimig; (if one sees that the doctrine and teaching) yarumakin yaltrımakın “shine and gleam' Hüer-is. 2014: Civ. TT VII 30, 5-6 (artukrak): Xak. xı kü:n yaldrı:dı: (altered in MS. to ya/dırandı:?) "the sun shone faintly” (adà^a . . . qalila(ıı)), also used of lightning, fire, and anything else; when it shone faintly one says yaldrıdı: (ya/dıradı:), yaldrı:r, yaldrizma:k (yaldirayr, yaldwrayma:k); and one says kiliç (VU) yoldrıdı: (yoldiradi[yal-) "the sword gleamed” (adá'a), also used of any jewel (caswhar) ; with a fatha (i.e. yaldrı:-) it is used for al-dıyd” and with a damma (i.e. yoldri:-) for the sparkling (talàmi') of jewels; yoldrızr, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 968 
     
   
   
     924 yoldrima:k (yoldirayirivil-, voldirama:R]yil-) Kaş. HI 437: xii(?) Tef. yıldıra- (sic?) “to shine! 157: Çağ. xvíff. yaldıra- durixşidan “to shine, flash” San. 33sv. 18: Kom. xiv “to flash” yıltra- CCI; Gr. (and "glass! yiltrin): Kip. (all the vocabularies have. words for "lightning! or 'elass' variously vocalized as yaldrım/yıldrım/ (VU) yoldrum/yoldurum, the onlv V.s are) Tkm. xiv (VU) yoldurum a/-zicác wa hurca"l-barq "glass", also 'lightning', one says yoldurum yolduradi "the lightning flashed' /d. 97: Kip. xv lama'a “to glisten, sparkle' yıldıra- Tuh. 322. 13: Osm. xtv ff. “to gleam, flash, sparkle', c.i.a.p. in various forms, some ambiguous, including. yaldura-/yildira-[yildura- /ildira- (not voldura-) TTS I 829; 11 1049; İİ 808; IV 881. D yaltrıt- Caus. f. of yaltrı:-, sis m.l. w. the. same phonetic changes. See yalrıt-. Uyğ. vi ff. Bud. yertinçüğ yarutmak yaltritmak "to illuminate and give light to the carth” U /7 46, 68-9; (that golden drum . . .) yarutu yaltrıtu turur erdi “vas continuously illuminating and giving light to” (all quarters of the earth) Ste. 92, 20-1: Çağ. xv ff. yaldirat- duruxgánidam 'to cause to shine or flash' San. 335v. 25. Tris. YLD ?D yuldurğa: possibly Dev. N. fr. yuldur-, but as Kag. spells this word yultur- more likely to be one of the numerous names of plants and animals ending in -fa:n N.o.a.b. Uyğ. virt ff. Civ. yuldurğa xuasın yaşın yumşak sokup 'pound the flowers and leaves of a thistle until they are soft' 77 7 168 (transcribed yo/durğan w. a note that the - may be an error); Xak. xr yuldruğa: al-nagi ca thistle', that is a plant which grows tall as if it was a sword; and the d67 is vocalized and it is called yuldurğa: Kaş. III 433. D yaltrıklığ P.N./A. fr. yaltrik; n.o.a.b. Uyf. vir ff. Bud. in the Turkish translation of Suvarnaprabhásasrtra, prabhása "glcam” is translated yaruk yaltrıklığ Suv. 2, 7, etc.; the same phr. occurs as part of the title of (PU) Luşanta Buddha TT V 6, 23. D yultuzçi: N.Ag. fr. yultuz; "astrologer”. N.o.a.b. Uy. vin ff. Man.-A ol yultuzçi "that astrologer” Af III 30, 2 (if): Bud. TT VI 133 (Kórümgi:): (Xak.?) xiv Mult. munaccim 'astrologer' yulduzçi: Mel, 58, 13; Rif. 157: Xwar. xiv yulduzei ditto Qab 85: Kom. xiv ditto CCG; Gr. D yıldızlığ Han. leg.; P.N./A. fr. yıldız (yiltiz); "having a (long) pedigree". Xak. xt Kaş. İİ 40 (ytltiz); n.m.e. Tris. V. YLDD yıldızlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. yıldız (yrltiz), Xak. xi yığa:ç yrldizlandi: "the tree vas well-rooted' (a'raqat); similarly when a man has made a place his home (tarcalla maddi”) and arranged his property DIS. V. YLDthere one says er yıldızlandı: 'the man has cast his roots (a'raqa . . . ka-annahu bafta 'uriiqahu) in a place”, or “had a (long) pedigree" (sdra "ariq £”İ-nasah) Kaş. HI 116 (ynldizlanu:r, yıldızlanma:k). Mon. V. YLĞyalk- “to be nauseated' or the like. N.0.a.b.; cf. yarsı:-. Uyf. vini ff... Suv. 235, 10-12 (1 i:r-): Xak. xi ol ya:ğka: yalkdı: “the oil lay heavy on his stomach (Şğamatahu) so that he was nauscated by it” (başıma münhu) Kaş, HI 435 (yalka:r, yalkma:k; prov.): KB üküş sózke yalkar bu yalpuk ire “a man is disgusted and bored by many speeches" 6628: (Çağ. xv fF. yalkı- rancida sudan wa. zahmat kagidan wa hüfta wa xasta gudan “to he exasperated, to suffer pain, to be distressed and ill' San. 336r. 3 (quotn.)). D yulk- Emphatic f. of yul- and almost syn. vv, dt, later sometimes in the more regular f. yuluk-. S.ia.m.lg. except SW as yulk-/ yulki-/yuluk- w. the usual phonetic changes. Not to be confused w. yoluk- Den. V. fr. yo:l, "to meet! and the like, which is first noted in the medieval period and s.i.s.m.]l. Xak. xı ta:ş anı ada:kın yulkdi: “the stone scraped and bruised (sajraca . . . wa latamahu) his foot', also used of anything that has scraped something (yulka:r, yulkma:k); and one says ol andın ne:g yulkdi: “he stripped (qaşara) the thing off him”, the meaning is that he gained and acquired (imtafa'a sva haşala) the thing from him: Kaş. HII 435 (yulka:r, yulkma:k) Xwar. xiv yulk- “to pluck out” Qutb 82: Kom. xiv ditto CCG; Gr,: Kip. xv satafa “to pluck” yuluk- Kac. 75, 13; ditto yulka- (helow the line yul- added) 7t. 37a. 10; (fafarraqa "to aim at, draw near: to” (presumably) yolukdo. oa, 8). Dis. YLG (D) 1 yalığ (d-) syn. w. ya:l and obviously cognate, but morpbologically obscure, since -1f is not a recognized Den. Suff. N.o.a.b. Xak. xr yalığ "urfu'l-dik “a cock's comb', hence one says takuk yalığı:, yalığ also “a horse's mane” ('urf); luga fi ya:l, yétl aşahh minhum Kaş. İH 13 (the clear implication of the last sentence is that both ya:l and yé:l were used for “mane”, but that yalığ was a more correct form than either): (Kom. xtv see ya:l: Osm. xvi to xvii see yatl). VU(D) 2 yalığ “saddle-bovv" , pec. to Kaş, this word is listed after yuluğ and yu, and so should presumably have -1- as its first vowel; but, although generally unvocalized, it has a fatha on the yö” in the first entry, and seems to be a metaph. usage. of 1 yalığ in the sense of something sticking up. İt was therefore prob. an afterthought of the author inserted in the wrong place in our MS. Cf. ümzük. Xak, xı yalığ a/-qarbüs wa'l-qavqab ma"a(n) both "the front and the back saddle-bow'; they are distinguished and a/-qarbüs is called öndünki: yalığ that is “the 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 969 
     
   
   
        DIS. YLĞ ' 928 front one' (al-»ugaddam) and al-qayqab ké:dinki: yalığ that is “the back one” (al-mu'axxar) Kaş. III 14; a.o. (unvocalized) 1I 327 (köklet-) D yılığ N./A.S. fr. yiht-; 'hot; warm. S..a.m.lg. w. the same phoncetic changes. Uy$. vin ff. Civ. (avoid quarrels) yılığ yumşak bolgil 'become warm and gentle' TTI178;2.0. H 11 34,21: Xak. xi yili$ su:v *lukewarm (a/-fatir fi'l-harr) water'; also used for“anything which is between hot and cold in temperature Kaş. 111 14; the "Turks call "lukewarm water' yılığ su:v and they (ie. the Oğuz and Kip.) lığ su:v 7 31, 6: xiv Muh. (al-mà') al-fatir yMll:g (sic) su: Mel. 77, 10; Rif. 1891 (ylllg): Çağ. xviT. rliğ/ılık nöm garm 'lukewarm' Sam. 113r. 18 (quotn.): Oğuz, Kip. xı ılığ su:v "lukewarm water', originally yılığ Kaş. | 64 (and see Xak.): Kom. xiv yılıyyılu "hot, warm, "Turkish bath" CCG, Gr.: Kip. xii (under “buildings”) a/-hammám "Turkish bath” (iss: şu:, that is “hot water', and) ill: şu: “Tukevvarm water' Hou. 6, 8: xiv ili: şu: "hot (suxa) vvater” İ4. 21: Xv hammám yılı şu (in margin, in second hand, id” fátir, also 111) Tu. 13a. 13; fátir yılı do. 28a. 4. D yıllık A.N. fr. yıl, “a period of a year”, usually preceded by a numeral. S.i.s.m.l. w. the usual phonetic changes. Uyğ. viu (I set up a memorial there) bin yıllık tümen künlik “to last for a thousand years and ten thousand days” Şu, E 9: (Xak.) xin(?) Tef. yıllık a period of (sixty, a hundred) years" 158: Çağ. xv ff, San. 352r. 6 lists, vv. quotns. yılçılık, yıllık, yillik, yılkı as syn. and used vv. a preceding numeral for “a period of years”, yılkı is certainly and the others possibly Adis. (vv, Çağ. -hk for -lif): Xwar. xiv (the distance between heaven and carth is) bés yüz yıllık yer "a journev of soo ycars” Nac. 66, 6; (if you do not become Moslems, submit to us and) yıllık məl berinler “pay an annual tax” do. 82, 14; a.0. 335, 13: Kip. xv musánát "a period of a year" yillik (sic) Tult. 35b. 4; a.0. 50a. 3. D yolak (yo:lak) Dim. f. of yo:l; “a small path'. Survives, meaning 'stripe, striped”, in NC Kzx. jolak: NW Kk. Jolak; Kaz. yulak; Nog. yolak; and, meaning 'corridor', in SC Uzb. yülak. Xak. xi yolak a/-tarha (?read al-turraha) wahwa tariq şağir fi'l-mafaza “a small track in the desert”, yolak barçın “striped (a/-muxattat) brocade'; and anything with streaks or stripes (fardyıq £a xutüf) is called yolak; originally yo:lak Kaş. 171 17. D yulak Dim. f. of yul, “a small spring”. N.o.a.b., but in Ar. script easily confused w. 1 bulak. Cf. yulat. Uy$. viri ff. Bud. Suv. 529, 4 (yu: Civ. TT VIII Las (ağu:suz): Xak. xı yulak 'aynu'l-má'i'l-ka firati "İL şiğür “a lovv-ytelding spring”, hence one says yul yulak with the qdf attached (mulhaga, MS. muhlaqa) to the /öm Kaş. III 17 (verse); same verse 7 222 (aktur-): (xiv Muh. Rif. 180, see 1 bulak).  D yolluğ P.N./A. fr. yo:l; in the early period rather specifically 'having the right way'. S.is.m.l. with a wide range of meanings, “having a . . . road, having a . . . mannet, striped', and the like. Uyğ. vr ff, Bud. TT V 26, 103 (ylvig): (Xak.) xin(?) At. (nowadays the hypocrite is regarded as the best of men) kim ol yolluğ erse anın yoli yok “the man vvho follovvs the (right) road has no road open to him” 410. D yuluğ Dev, N. (N.Ac.) fr. yul-. Survives in NC Kır., Kzx. )ulu:: NW Kk. yuliw, but only as an ordinary N.Ac. for 'tearing out, tearing up, vveeding”, and the like. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. yuluğ 'buying' in the stock phr. satığ yuluğ 'commerce' TT VHI E.9, etc. (satığ): Civ. yuluğ bérim kelse “if a tax on trade(?) becomes due” U/Sö. 11, 9; a.o. do. 66, 9: Xak. xı yuluğ a/-fida” “ransom” and the like Kaş. III 13 (verse); o.o. meaning 'ransom' (for a prisoner) İ 210, 22 (taşut-), 243, 12 (same verse); 399, 25; III 333, 10: KB (the Prophet) atasın anasın yuluğ kildi ol “made his father and mother the ransom” (i.e. sacrificed them; for the people) 37; same phr. 52; kolsa cánim yuluğ “if he asked for my life as a ransom' 85; a.o. 1736 (2 tura:): xiv Muh. al-fida” wa'l-'wád (compensation), yu:lu:ğ Mel. 85, 5; Rif. 191; al-fidà' yu:lug ra? (only, mis-spelt tu:/uğ): X war. xiv (let our family and all our possessions) sizke yuluğ bolsun “become a ransom for you” Nahe. 84, 13; a.o. 115, r: Kom. xiv yuluv 'ransom'; yuluğna (*yuluvgina) “a small ransom' CCG; Gr. D yuluk Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. yul-; survives in SC Uzb. yuluk: SW Az. yoluğ, Osm., "Tkm. yoluk “torn out, plucked, hairless', etc., and perhaps in NC Kir. juluk; Kzx. fulik: NW Kk, İulrk, Nog. yulik “the vamp (of a shoe)', although the connection is not obvious. "Türkü vni (Heaven) Türkü hodun yitmezün teyin yuluk ermezun teyin “said "let the "Türkü people not go astray and be extirpated” ' Ongin 3: Çağ. xvff. yuluk müy kanda *one whose hair has been torn out' San. 345v. 29 (quotn.). (D) yalğu: Hap. leg.; the semantic connection is vv, yalk-, perhaps a crasis of *yalkgu:, “nauseating, revolting'. Oğuz xı yalğu: al-fasl mina”l-rical "a base, ignoble man” Kaş. İH 33. D 1 yılkı: N.A./S. fr. yıl, "lasting for (so many) years”. N.o.a.b.(?). Xak. xı K B bu bir söz sınamış üküş yilki ol “this is a saying which has been tested and is many years old” 2042: xiu(?) Tef. tört yılkı “four years old” 158: Çağ. xv ff. ilki ,.... (2) and one says yüz ilki şad sala "a hundred years old” San. 112v. 27 (quotn.): yılkı syn. vv, (murddif-i) yıllık/ yılçilrk, e.g. they say on yilki dağ sála “lasting ten years” 352r. 8 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv yılkı “asting (fifty, a thousand, etc.) years” Qut5 9r. ?D 2 yılkı: basically "livestock, quadrupeds” (not including small game, etc.), but in  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 970 
     
   
   
       926 Buddhist terminology 'animal' as opposed to “human being”, and sometimes, even quite early, used in association vv, sheep, camels, etc. in such a way as to suggest that it meant only “cattle and horses'; in some modern languages it is used even more restrictively for "horses”, S.ia m.l.g. vv. the usual phonetic changes, see Shcherbak, p. 84, and a l.-w. in Pe. and other languages as ilkifilxi, etc., see Doerfer 11 658. lt is very possible that the word is a special usage of 1 yılkı: and means lit. 'giving an annual increase! or the like. Türkü vii (1 routed the Tanut tribe and captured their children, wives) yilkrsrn "livestock! (and property) Z1 E 24; 0.0. 1I E 38, etc. (igid-); 77 S 3: vrir fT. (there was heavy rain ....) yılkı:ka: kişi:ke: edgü: bolti: “conditions became good for man and heast” IrkT 55; a.o. do. 47 (ail): Man. C/mas, 200, etc. (bul-): Yen. Mal. 26,6 (tamğalığ): Uyğ. vit Su. E 2 (yulii-), E 3: IX. Suci s (ağıl): viru ff. Man. yılkıta “during (existence as) an animal'(?) 77 7/7 26: Chr. U 18, 3 (yüdür-): Bud, koy yılkı igidser “if one keeps sheep and (large) livestock” PP t3, 5; a.0. U II 73, 1 (iii) (kégen)—(rebirth in) tamuh yılkilı erkliğ xan yértincüsin "hell, as an animal, or in the realm of the lord of the underworld' U 77 33, 7-8; yılki ajuninda barmış “have gone to be reborn as-animals' do. 43, 12-13; 0.0. Suv. 6, 14; 138, 8; TT VIII N.12; Kuan. 1gi, etc.: Civ. kayu kişinin yılkısı üküş ölser “if a man's livestock die in large numbers” U I7 100, 8-9; TT VII 27, iy, yilki kara 'livestock' (or 'livestock and serfs'?) do. 28, 43 etc.: O, Kir. ix ff. tört adakeligo yrlkim my four-footed livestock' (in antithesis to “my eight-legged barım”, q.v.) Mal. ro, 16; 0.0. do. 11, 3; 46, 3 (?, misrcad): Xak. xı yılkı: al-bahiáyim "livestock), a generic term for all quadrupeds Kaş, İİ 34; about 20 0.0. usually translated al-dazwább "beasts. of. burden! or a/-hayırdn 'animal : K B (compared to a wise man) barça yilki sani “all the rest arc like animals” 266; (the indolent man) os ol yılkı ud “is just (like) an animal or ox” 4821; 0.0. 385, 985 (ata:-), göz, 2041: xin(?) Tef, yrlka "livestock', and in phr. 'sheep and (large) livestock'; "livestock and camels! 158: Çağ. xv ff. ilki (r) dxi-yr asb "a herd of horses! San. 112v. 27: Xwar. xii(?) Og. 15-16 (küd-), etc.: xiv teve yılkı sığır koy 'camels, horses(?), oxen, and sheep' Qutb 178 (teve), sığır yılkı kara koy 'cattle, horses, and black sheep! (or 'serfs and sheep” ?) 91; (sons, daughters, male and female slaves, and) ytlk1 karasi Nae. 17, 8: Kom. xiv "horse” yılkı CCG; Gr.: Kip.(?) xiv yilkit ak -bahima; this is the original meaning; and it is used in Kip. (sic) for "horse” (ai-xayl), but anvone who means specifically (yrxtiss) “horse” in Turkish says yu:nd (MS. yn:5da); and when they wish to abuse (al-satm) someone they say ay yrilku, that is và bahima İd. 97: XV xayl yılki Tui. rab, 3; in a list of collective terms (cam'; a collective term. for "wild game” kéyik); a collective term for 'horses' yılkı, (ditto for "livestock! (a/-bahavim) tawarlar) do. 85b. 12: Osm. xiv yilki "livestock, in two DIS. YLG texts; xvI “a herd of horses', ditto T'7:S / 829; 11 1081. D yalğıl liap. leg.; Den. N/A. in -ğıl (associated w. colours) fr. ya:l. Xak. xi yalgil atım, yazlınu:r “my: horse that has white in its mane (alladi fi “efihi baydd) gets loose! 11 228, 15; n.m.e. ?D yalğa:n 'untruthful, a lic, a Har”, prima facie a N./A. (connoting habitual action), perhaps fr. 2 *yal- but there is no obvious semantic connection except vv. yala:, yala:-. $.i.a.m.l.g. except NE(?) vv, the usual phonetic changes; SW yalan, Cf. ótrük, ezüğ. Uyğ. vir ff, Bud. U 71756, s ctc. (ezüg): Civ. (if there is a complaint) yalğanı bolsar “and it contains a lie' U Sp. s6, 16-17: Xak. xri yalğa:n al-kadib “a lic”, and it is used attributively (yigaf bihi) and one says yalğa:n kişi: “a liar' and yalğa:n só:z “a false statement! Kaş. 111 37: KB til yalğanı “a lying tongue! 338; 2.0. 848: xın(?) Zt. 152-3 (tez-), 163; Tof. yalBan “İe, liar, lying! 137: xiv Muh. al-hadib yalan Mel. 52, 3; Rif. 148; a.o. zo, 13; 114: Çağ. xv İT, yalğan durü “he” San. 336v. 15 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv yalğan ditto Out 65, MN 135, etc.; Nahc. 2, 8: Kom. xiv ditto CCG, Gr. 111 (quotn.): Kip. xui al-kadib (opposite to 'truth' kerti:, ötrük and also) yala:n Hou. 27, 4; kadaba . . . 'Y km. yala:n söyle:- do. 36, a: xiv yalğan al-kadib İd. 97; kadaba yalan sóyle- Bul. 76v.: xv hanita 'to swear falsely" yalğan ant iç- Tuh. r3b. 9: Osm. xv ff. yalan “lic, İying” , fairly common TTS I 770; III 757; IV 827. yılğu:n 'tamarisk'; survives in SW. Osm. iléin; Tkm. yılğın, Xak. xı yılğu:n al-farfa “tamarisk” Kaş. 17] 37: xiv. Aluh, al-tarfa” yulğun Afe/, 78, 7; rlğun Rif. 182: Kip. xii al-tarfa” yılğu:n Hou. 8, 7. S yalğuz Sce yalgu:s. Dis. V. YLGS yuluk- See yulk-. yalğa:- (d-) properly “to lick', in Uyğ. sometimes metaph. 'to fondle', or the like. A First Period l.-w. in Mong. as do/iğa-/doliğu-İdoliya(Kot, 1850, Haltod. 471); survives in. NE yalğa-/çalğa-, "Tuv. çılğa-: SE: Türki yala-: NC jala- : SC yala-: NW yala-/jala-: SW yala-. Türkü vir ff. (an old woman... found a greasy spoon and) yalğayu: tiri:lmi:ş 'kept herself alive by licking it” ZrkB 13: Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (the oxen) tilin yalap (sic) "licking him with their tongues ' PP 65, 7; (the delicate maidens) éli&amp; beğnin baştın adakigategi kodi(?) yalğadılar *fondled (rather than "licked') the king from head to foot U II is, 1-3 (): Civ. bu isiğ igligke yalğağu vu ol “this is an amulet which a man suffering from fever must lick” TT VII 27, r, 2.0. do, 4 (a:2-): Xak. xi (ol) aya:k yalğa:dı: “he licked (Jahisa) the cup” (etc.) (yalğa:r, yalğa:ma:k, prov.); er ya:ğ yalva:dı: "the man licked up (/a"/qa) the butter'; this V. is  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 971 
     
   
   
      DIS commoner (akfar) than the previous one (yalva:r, yalva:ma:k) Xaş. İİİ 306; same prov. 7 253, 21: xiv Muh. lahisa ya:la- Mel. 30, 15; Hif. 114; lahisa wa lata'a (to lick!) yala:- 41, 6; 131: Çağ. xvif. yala- (1) lisidan 'to lick'; (2) fir dar kamán paywastan “to put an arrow on a bow' Sar. 334V. 24 (quotns.; no other trace of second meaning): Xwar. xiv yıla- (?sic, spelt y::1a:-, Za). yéle-) “to lick" Qarb 77: Kom. xiv ditto yala-: Kip. xur /a"iqa yala:- (MS. vola:-) Hou. 35, 17: xiv yala- ditto Id. 97; lahisa wa la'iqa yalaBül, 8or.: xv /ahisa yala- Kav. 77, 4; la'iqa yala- Tuh. 32a. 7. D yalfat-(d-) Caus. f. of yalğa:- : s.i.s.m.l. w. the same phonetic changes. Uyf. vini ff. Bud.(?) (in a treatment for a pregnant woman who cannot give birth; write this d/aranı and its accompanying magical drawing on a mirror with a brush(?) and) yalğatğu ol “make (the woman) lick it off” USp. roza. 11: Xak. xr ol npar ba:l yalğattı: “he made him lick up and lick (al'agahu . . . wa alhasahu) the honey” (yalğatu:r, yalğatma:k), ol anar ya:ğ yalvattı: “he made him lick the butter'; alternative form to yalğat- Xaş. II 354 (yalvatu:r, yalvatma:k, MS. everywhere -f-): xiv Muh. “to order to lick' yala:t- Mel, ar, 7; Rif. 131. D yalğan- (d-) Refl. f. of yalğa:- ; s.i.s.m.l, vv, the same phonetic changes. Xak. xr er çana:k yalğandı: "the man set himself to lick (labs) the bowl (etc) (yalğanu:r, yalğanma:k), er ağzın yalvandı: "the man put out (adla'a) his tongue and passed it over his lips' (talammaza (MS. in error -ta) fáhu) Kaş. III 109 (yalvanu:r, yalvanma:k): xiv Muh. tamallaqa “to flatter, blandish” ya:lanMel. 24, 11; Rif. 106 (MS. ta:lan-). D yulkun- Tap. leg.?; Refl. f. of yulk-. Xak. xı yulkund:: ne:p “the thing was scraped' (f”sa/aca) Kaş, III 110 (yulkunu:r, yulkunma:k). VUD yol£gir- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. yo:l; “to go on a journey'; so vocalized in the MS.; yolğar- might be expected, but it rhymes w. .odfura: and kadğura:, Xak. xi kelse: sana: .yolgira: “if he comes to you when he is on a journey' (márra(n) fi taviqihi) Kaş. II 193, 3; n.m.e. D yalğaş- (d-) Hap. leg.?; Co-op. f. of yalğa:-. Xak. xr ola:r ba:1 yalğaşdı: "they licked up (ta/a"aqü) the honey (etc.) together” Kaş. III 103 (yalğaşu:r, yalğaşma:k). D. yulkuş- Hap. leg.?; Co-op./Recip. f. of yulk-. . Xak. xı yulkuşdi: ne:p “the (whole) thing was scraped' (imsahaca) (yulkuşu:r, ;yulkugma:;k; everywhere vocalized yulkag-) ; ola:r bi:r ikindi:din ne:) yulkugdi: “each of them drew an advantage (carra .. . manfa'a) from the other” Kaş, 7I] 103 (yulkusu:r, yulkusma:k), : : HR ME Tris. YLG . D yılkıçı: N.Ag. fr. yılkı:, “herdsman”., S.i.s.m.l. Xak. xi KB 5590 (igdis): xiv Muh.   . YLG 927 "rü"i 'shepherd, herdsman” yılxıçı: Mel. 57, 12 (Rif. 156 has ko:yma:nct :, ? for ko:yunci:). D yılığlık A.N. fr. yılığ, n.o.a.b. Xak. xr yılığlık (MS. ?yaljihk) al-suxuna “heat” Kaş. II sı. 'D yuluğluğ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. yuluğ. Xak. xı yuluğluğ kişi: “a man who is ransomed” (al-mufaddà) Kaş. III 49. Tris. V. YLĞD yuluğla:- Den. V. fr. yuluğ, pec. to KB; lit. "to offer, or pay, (something cc.) as a ransom', but in practice the meaning seems to be “to risk (something Acc., for the sake of something Dat.). Xak. xı KB kayu cün yuluğlar tepizke kirür “some risk their lives going to sea” 1733; similar phr. 2281, 6105; bağırsak yuluğlar kişike özin “the compassionate man risks his life (or “sacrifices himself”) for the sake of others 1943; a.o. 4227 (satığ). D yalığlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. yalığ. Xak. xi takuk yalığlandı: “the cockerel's comb ('urf) grew'; also used of a horse's mane ('urf) Kaş. III 114 (yalığlanu:r, yalığlanma:k). D yulaklan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. yulak, Xak. xı yér yulaklandı: kafurót yanábi'u'l-ard “the ground was full of springs Kaş. III 115 (yulaklanu:r, yulaklanma:k). D yalğantur- (d-) morphologically this must be a Caus. f. of yalğan-, meaning something like *to flatter, blandish', but the temptation to connect it w. yalga:n was irresistible and this is reflected in the Xak. translations. N.o.a.b. Uy£. viii ff. Bud. künçüylarnın isiz yavaz (sic) sakınçın uzun turkaru Brahmadatı eliğke yalğanturur erdi (Queen Bhadra) *with evil, wicked women's wiles for a long time and continuously was in the habit of blandishing King Brahmadatta” U 777 s4, 11-13 (İİ 23, 23-5); (then the tigress came up to the king) amranmaklığ erigin barığın tü törlüğ yalğanturup “blandishing him with all sorts of wild amorous movements'(?) do. 63, 5-6: Xak. xı er yalğandurdı: kaddaba”l-racul “the man accused (someone) of İying” Kaş. HI 116 (yalğandurur, yalğandurma:k): xin(?) Tef. yalğantur-/yalÉandur- meaning obscure, ?'to have false beliefs' (Intrans.), “to believe (something Dat.) to be false” 137. D yılğunlan- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. yılğun. Xak. xı yér yılğunlandı: “the ground produced tamarisks' (axracat . . . al-tarfá') Kaş. HI 117 (yılğunlanu:r, yılğunlanma:k). Dis. YLG S.i.a.m.L.g.; in NE yilik/ yilik “marrov”. Uzb.: SW Az, yilig/cilip: SE Türki: SC Osm. ilik, Tkm. yilik: NC and NW Kk. Jilik; Kumyk, Nog. yilik all mean "marrow  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 972 
     
   
   
     928 DIS bone”, but Kaz. cilek is still *marrow', Türkü vini fT. in a corrupt passage in [rk P 16 yili:ne: (error for yiliki:pe:) yağrı:pan ?means "galled to the marrow': Uy. viti ff. Bud. (in a list of demons) yilik aşlığlar 'those who devour marrow! U 11 61, 3; (we worship the Buddha with deep devotion) yilikimizdin süpükümüzdin berü “right from our marrow and bones' Sut. 159, 13-14; a.0. do. 153, 2-3 (berüki:): Xak. xı yilik Kaş. 7 72, sce Oğuz: xin(?) At, 89 (süpük): Çağ. xv ff, (after elik) and with i- (i.e. ilik), magz-1 ustuxtcán *bone marrow', in Ar. muxx San. rir. 21: Oğuz xi ilik a/-muxy "marrow", in Oğuz, among the 'lurks yilik, the alif substituted for the ya” Kaş. / 72: Xwar. xiv (of the houris) taki süpükleri altindin yilikleri kórüngey *their marrow will be visible inside their bones' Nahc. 6s, 16-317: Kom. xiv "marrov” yilik CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv. yilik al-muxx İd. 97: xv. Tuh. 15b. 1 (ya:ğ). D yólek (yöle:k) Dev. N. fr. yöle:-, 'prop, support”, lit. and metaph. Survives in NE T'el. iyölök R IH[ 451; Khak. çöleğ: NC Kir. jólók. Xak. xı KB bir bayatım mapa tap yölek “my one God is sufficient support for me” 4728; o.o. go (arka:), etc.: Kip. xiv yölek a/-qidda fi'l-sahm “a (reinforcing) thong round an arrow! İd. 97. D yülük Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. yüli:-. Survives in SW Osm. yülük, 'clean-shaven, smooth". Uy£. virt ff. Bud. [gap] öni yülüğ (sic, for -k) kişi ya:lpuk "other clean-shaven men (Hend.)) TT VHİ N.4: Xak. xt KB yüzi kórki körklüğ kerek ham yülük "he must be good-looking and clean-shaven' 2208; 0.0. 2217, 2289 (kaşığ), 2298, 2458, 2663: Kip. xv mahlüq 'clean-shaven' yülük Tui. 48b. 10. D yelgin Dev. N./A. fr. 1 yel-; lit. “one who trots or rides fast, hence more. generally “a traveller, N.o.a.b.. Not connected vv, yelken/ yélken “a sail', perhaps a Den. N. fr. I yél, first noted in Çağ. xv ff, Xwar. xtv; Kip. xit to xv, which s.i.a.m.l.g. except NE, NC. Xak. xı yelgin atlığ al-farisu'L-mugidd “a rider who hurries his horse" Kaş. 111 37; the Turks call “a traveller! (al-musáfir) yelğin and they (the Oğuz and Kip.) elgin 7 31, 5; o.o., translated al-musafir 111 33, 13; 288, 14 (küntüz); 309, ro: Oğuz xı (after Xak.) and the Oğuz call "a traveller elgin substituting an a/if for the yd” Kaş. III 37; 0.0. I 31, 5 (see Xak.); 102, 45 II 242 (tüşlen-): Çağ. xv ff. yélgin (spelt, *with -8-”) harcayi fi'l-i asb-ra güyand ki dar teagt-i lakad parándan bi-cayi ba-rasad “a word for the violent action of a horse which occurs when he lets fly a kick'(?) Sam. 352r. 13: Kap: xiv elgin a/-ğarib “a stranger' (and also al-sà'iqa 'a thunderbol'); Osm. xiv, xv elğin "stranger”, in two texts TTS I 261; /T 371. , Dis. V. YLGPU yilğü:- See yalpu:-. E yilkit- See belğürt- KP. . YLG D yélgür- lap. leg.; Intrans. Den. V. fr. 1 yé:l. Xak. xı K B (the blue-grey cranes . . .) uçar yélgürer “fiy and soar in the wind' 74. Tris. YLG D yóle:gü: Hap. leg.; Dev. N.A, fr. yöle:-. Cf. yölek. Xak. xı yóle:gü: ne: 'something by which something else is supported' (yu'ammad bihi) Kaş. 11 36. D yüli:gü: Dev. N. (N.I.) fr. yüll:-; 'a razor'. N.o.a.b.; cf. kere:y, Uyğ. vif. Bud, TM İV 253, 41 (osğuç): TT VIII Ası (1 bl: and see 2 yeğü:): Xak. xı yüli:gü: “a razor (al-müsd) with which the hair is shaved'; the Oguz do not know this word and call it kere:y Kaş. III 174. D yiliklig P.N./A. fr. yilik; s.i.s.m.l. vv, the same phonetic changes. Xnk. xr yiliklig süpük "a marrow (al-mumixx) bone” Kaş, 111 52. D yölekliğ lap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. yölek. Xak. xı yölekliğ yığa:ç (a/-) xaşabı"l-musnada wa'l-gacaru'l-muraccab "a: timber which is supported”, and “a tree which is propped up” Kaş. 711 52. D yiliksiz Priv. N./A. fr. yilik. N.o.a.b, Xak. xı (in a prov.) oğla:k yiliksiz “a kid has no marrow! (and a child no knowledge) Kaş. 1 119, 23: xın(?) Af. biligsiz yiliksiz sünük teg xali “an ignorant man is as empty às a bone without marrow' gr, Dis. V. YLLD yalal- Tap. leg.; Pass. f. of yaln:-. Xak. xı anar kuruf yala: yalaldı: uthima bi-tuhma hádiba "a false accusation was made against him” Kaş. 11] 82 (yalalu:r, yalalma:k). D yölel- Hap. leg.?; Pass. f. of yóle:-. Xak. xı ta:m yóleldi: “the wall was propped up” (umida) Kaş. HI 82 (yölelü:r, yölelme:k). D yülil- Hap. leg.?; Pass. f. of yüli:-. Xak. xı saç yülildi: "the hair was shaved' (/uliqa) Kaş. 111 82 (yülilü:r, yülilme:k). Dis. YLM ?D yalım N.S.A. fr. 2 *yal-, syn. vv, yalt, q.v.; normally used to qualify kaya:; 'bare', ie. free from vegetation. Survives by itself and vv. kaya: in NE Koib. yalım R //T 169; Khak., Tuv. çalım, and in SW Osm. yalım "a flat, bare, smooth surface; one surface of a blade; a bevelled cutting edge”, dağ yalımı “the steep slope of a mountain' Red. 2192. "Türkü vir ff. yalım kayağ “the bare rock” IrkB 40; a.o. 49 (1mfa:): Xak. xı yalım kaya: al-şüh weafica'l-cabalu'l- sald “a cliff, that is a bare mountain (side)! Kaş. 7II ış (prov.): Osm. xiv ff. yalim in yalim kaya and other phr.; in several texts T'T'S 7 772; II 982; III 258; TV 829. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 973 
     
   
   
         DIS. yelim (?yélim) 'glue, paste", s.i.a.m.l.g. vv. the usual phonetic changes and either -e- or -é-. Uyğ. vii ff. Civ. yelim H II 32, 13: Xak. xi yelim 'glue' (al-girà') with which (arrow) feathers and other things are stuck (yyulşaq), and “fish glue' is called yaru: yelim Kaş. 111 zo, 0.0. (twice yélim) //1 24 (yaru:); 7o (yapış-), 99 (yapsur-), 108 (yapsin-): xiv Muh. (under "implements of the fuller") al-girà' yélim Mel. 61, 5; yéli:m Rif. 159: Kom. xiv “glue” yelim CCI; Gr.: Kip. xiv al-girà' yélim Hou. 23, 19: xiv ditto İd. 97: xv ğird” yelim Tuh. 26b. 7: Osm. xiv ff. yelim 'gluc'; c.i.a.p. TTS 7 814; II 1033; III 797; IV 871. ?D yalma: perhaps Dev. N. fr. 2 *yal-; 'a thick quilted coat; linen armour(?)”. N.o.a.b.; a ].-w. in Pe. as yalma and Ar. as yalmaq both as a specifically "Turkish garment, although actual translations vary. Türkü viu 7 E 33 (ur-): Xak. xı yalma: al-yaimaq; the Persians took (the word) from the "Turks and said yalma (with -4); then the Arabs took it from the Persians and said yaímaq turning the Ad" into qdf, just as they said xandaq for (Pe.) kanda and yaraq (MS. yarq) for (Pe.) yara, yalmaq is mentioned in a verse by 2?/2-rumma (quoted); there is no one who says that the Turks took it from the Persians. I heard it myself used by uncivilized (aclaf) T'urks in the frontier districts (aqşd”/-tuğür), they are more in need of rain-coats (al-mamfar, sic) than other people because there is more rain and snow in their country Kaş. III 34. D yelme: Dev. N. fr. yel-, a technical military term, 'reconnoitring patrol'. N.o.a.b. Cf. yéze:k. Türkü vir uzun yelmeg yeme: 1t(t)m “1: also sent out a long-distance reconnoitring patrol' T 52; a.o. T 34 (edgü:ti:): Uyf. vut (just as the standard, i.e. the main body, was starting) yelme: eri: kelti: “a man from the reconnoitring patrol came in” Şu. E 6; a.o. E 12 (bas-). $ yalman See yamla:n, Dis. V. YLMVUD yılmır- Hap. leg. in a section containing Dis. V.s; the Infin. is given as -me:&amp;, but it is clearly cognate to yılı:- and seems to bea Den. V. fr. *yilim, N.S.A. fr. yılı:-. Xak. xı su:v yılmırdı: káda'l-má' an yasxun "the water almost became hot” Kaş. 111 100 (yilmira:r, yilmirma:k; -me:k). Tris. YLM D yeli:me:n Hap. leg.; der. fr. yel-, but morphology obscure. Xak. xı yeli:me:n a/-gáratu'l-sa'wá' "a disorderly foray” Kaş. 11I 38. Tris. V. YLMD 1 yelimle:- Den. V. fr. yelim, “to glue (something /cc.). S.is.m.l. vv, the usual phonetic changes. Xak. x1 ol ok yelimle:di: translated “he stuck (alşaqa) the feather on the arrow' Kaş. III 343 (2 yelimle:- follows).  YLN 929 D 2 yelimle:- Hap. leg.; cf. yelme:; Den. V. fr. 2 *yelim N.S.A. fr. yel-; the spelling is certain, since it is included in the same para. as 1 yelimle:-, but it is completely unvocalized and the yd” undotted. Xak. xı ol yozluğ yelimle:di: tagaddama (MS. yaqdam) mina'l-'askar. li-yabşara”l-tariq hal fihi kamin mina'l-'adüto am töl"a li-yastaxbir “he went ahead of the army to inspect the route (and see) whether there were enemy ambushes or reconnoitring patrols on it” Kaş. 1H 343 (yelimle:r, yelimle:me:k). D yelimlen- Refl. f. of 1 yelimle:- ; s.i.s.m.l., usually as Pass. Xak. xı ok yelimlendi: translated "the glue stuck (2/taşaqa”l-ğira”) to the arrows', also used when it (the arrow) was stuck with it (MS. fd alşaqa bihi, ?read ida ulşiqa) Kaş. III 115 (yelimlenü:r, yelimlenme:k). Dis. YLN D yalın Intrans. Dev. N. fr. 1 yal-, '*flame'. S.i.a.m.l.g. w. the usual phonetic changes. Cf. ört, ço:ğ. Uyğ. vin ff. Man. TT IX 19 (ço:ğ): Chr. (a dreadful great light) o:t yalın birle *with fire and flames' U 1 8, 13: Bud. U İl 25, 26 etc. (ört), U IV 10, şı etc. (ç0:ğ): Civ. TT I 125 (öç-): Xak. xı yalın /ahabu'l“ndir "a flame of fire”, one says ost yalını: Kaş. Ill 23: KB (Jupiter rose from the horizon) yalin teg bolup 'becoming like a flame' 5675: xui?) Tef. yalın 'flame! 138: Çağ. xvft. yalın (spelt) s1/'la-i ataş "a flame of fire” San. 336v. 24 (quotns., pointing out that the translation “of a dog, to put out its tongue because it is hot, or mad” in Vel. 172 (talm), 409 (yalın) is an error): Kom. xiv 'flame' yalın CCI, CCG; Gr.: Osm. xiv ff. yalip (sic) “flame”, c.i.a.p. TTS 1773; 11 983, 111758, IV 830. D yalın Dev. N./A. fr. 2 *yal-; 'naked'. Survives in SW Az. yalın, Osm. yalın, and in some other languages, e.g. Tkm., as yalay or more often yalapaç (*yalan£fac) vv. the usual phonetic changes. Ciplak the commoner word for 'naked' in Osm. (Az. çılpak) is first noted as Tkm. xv in 7uh. Türkü vri yadafin yalının yana: kelti: “they came back on foot and naked” 7 E 28, TI E 22; a.o. do. 29, 23(tonlá): Uyğ. vırı ff. Bud. (those who are not ashamed of what they ought to be ashamed of) ya:lıp yorima:kta: ula:ti "walking about naked, etc.” TT VIII E.so; ao. TT VI 14 (boğuz): Civ. TT I 162-3 (üz-): Xak. xi yalın kılıç "an unsheathed (al-mucarrad) sword'; yalın er “a naked (a/-"uryön) man”, and anything naked ('ári) is called yalın Kaş. III 373: KB yağıka yalın teg eren teg uruş “attack the enemy (even if you are) naked and fight like a man” 2289; a.o. 3923 (oprak): xm?) At. (what use is wealth?) barursen yalın "you go naked' (to the next world) 287; a.o. 330 (bütür-): Te/. yalın “naked” 138: Çağ. xv ft. yalan çıplak “naked” (quotns.), also dikilmemig qaftanlıh qumöş "cloth for a garment which has not been sewn together” (quotn.) Vel. 399; yalan (spelt) (1) barahna (“naked”) wa 'uryán; (2) qumaş wa matd" nd düxta 'cloth not 8641126 Hh  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 974 
     
   
   
      9306 DIS sewn together' San. 336v. 4 (quotns, the second meaning taken fr. a single quotn. where yalay ton, not yalan by itself has this meaning); (yalanğaç/yalanaç 'naked' (quotns.), also called yalan 336v. r), yalın ("with -1-") syn. vv, yalan 'naked' 337r. 1 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv yalın “naked” Qutb 66: Kom. xiv yalan “bare” (metaph.) CCG; Gr. 110 (quotn.; and “naked” yalagac CC/, CCG; Gr.): Kip. xiv yalın kil- ca'alahu “uryün ya'ni carradahu “to make naked', that is “to strip" İd, 97: (xv "uryün yalanaş (MS. yalanş) Tuh. 24b. 12): Osm. xiv ff. yalıp 'naked'; c.ia.p. TTS I 773: 11 983; III 759; IV 830 (yaltg is also noted as a Sec. f. of yalin (common) and yalim). D yélin 'udder', normally of animals; the word for human beings is emiğ, q.v., and later emgek. S.i.a.m.l.g. (rare in NE). Xak. xt yelin (unvocalized, but follows yulun, so ? yelin) arba”u”l-ramaka “the udder of a mare? and also of any cloven-hoofed animal (gar háfir) Kaş. 111 23: xnt(?) Tef, yelin 'udder' 150: Xwar. xiv koynur yelini “a sheep's udder' Nahc. əz, 8; a.o.o.: Kom. xiv yelin *udder' CCG; Gr. D yelin Den. N./A. fr. 1 yö:l, n.o.a.b. Xak.xt *places in which there are many violent winds' (ibübw'l-ril) are called yelin, and one says bu: yelin kü:n “t is a windy (rö)?) day” Kaş. III 373; (Çağ. xv ff. yélep (spelt) qust tea. (dbuk “agile, brisk, quick" San. 3srv. 28 (quotns.), perhaps the same word used metaph.). yılan (d-) 'snake'; s&amp;i.a.milg. w. the usual phonetic changes; one of the animals of the 12-ycar cycle. İt is generally considered that it is dilom in the Old Bulgar 'Kings' list", sce O, Pritsak, Dre bulgarische Fürstenliste, Wiesbaden, 1955, pp. 43, etc. Türkü vri ff. yılan yıl onung ayk(a:] “in the tenth month of the snake year” HT VII xv (ETY II 112; badly spelt)—altu:n başlı:ğ yılan men 'I am a golden-headed snake' IrkB 8: Man. on yılan başlığ erpekin “vith ten snake-headed fingers' Chuas, 54: Bud. yılan “snake” is common, PP 38, 3 etc. (ağu:luğ), o.o. U İT 31, 54; 35, 21; 84, 12; HI zo, 8 (1): Civ. yılan as a member of the cycle is common in TT VII and VEHI P. (spelt 17a:n), e.g. yalan kişi 'a man born in a Snake Year' U II 100, 4; TT VII 27, 11— yılan kasikin “a snake”s skin” H 7 109; a.0. do. i14 (teri:): Xak. xt ytla:n al-hayya "a snake”, ok yılan al-af'á “a viper', which throws itself at men (ctc.); yıla:n yılı: the name of one of the twelve years in "Turkish Kaş. III 29; 0.0. I 37 (1 ok), 409 (so:ğun), II iss (na:ğ), etc.: xii(?) At. yılan teg bu ajun “this world is like a snake” 213; a.0.0.; Tef. yılan 'snake' 157: xiv. Afuh. al-hayya yılan Mel. 74, 4; Rif. 177; yalan yılı: So, 20; 186: Çağ. xv t. yılan (MS. ya/lan) mür *snake', also ihe name of one of the Turkish years San. 351 v. 25 (and two phr.); 1lan ((1) *with', ie. ilen), (2) màr, also called yılan 112V. io: Xwar. xiv yılan “snake” Quib gi,  . YLN Nahc. 21, 7: Kom. xiv. yılan/ılan "snake" CCG; 'viper' CCI; Gr.: Kip. xit a/-hayya yila:n Hou. 11, 15: xiv yilan al-Aayya İd. 96; Bul. xı, 4: Xv al-tu'bán ('serpent') wa'l-hayya yıla:n Kav. 62, 9. D yulun prob. Pass. Dev. N. fr. yul-, in the sense of something that can be extracted; 'spinal cord”, Survives in SE yulun Tar. R HI $56; "Vürki Jarring, p. 160: NC Kir. jülün (sic); Rzx. juhn: NW Kk. julin; Nog. yuhn. Xak. xi yulun al-iuxàá'! "spinal cord Kaş. ITI əş. (D) yalpu: İlap. leg., but see yalnu:la:-, prima facie an abbreviated Dev. N. (N.I.) fr. *yalin-, but there does not seem to be any such V, w. an appropriate meaning. Xak. xr yalpu: the name of “a girls! game” (Ja'ib [1-cawári); the two ends of a rope are fastened to a trce or cross-beam (erida) and the girl sits in the middle of the rope and kicks with her legs so that sometimes she goes up and sometimes down Kaj. 1/1 380. ?D yalpuk (?yalpok) 'a human being, man'; prob. a crasis of *yalinguk Dev. N. fr. yalin-, lit. 'stripped, naked'. N.o.a.b. Uy$f. viu ff. Man. yalpuklar ara “among men” TT 111 22; . yalpuklarnıp oğlanına(?) "to the children of men” do. 126: Bud. Sanskrit nynüm “for men” ya:lnokla:rka: TT VIII A.15; o.o. yalnoklarka: do. E.31; purugas “man” kişi yalpok E.44; kişi ya:lnuk (s) E.7, N.14; üstün tepri altın yalpuk “heaven above and man below' T'T' X ros, o.o. do. 17, 65; Stem. 135, 5; 384, 22-3; Kuan. 72, etc. (sometimes transcribed valayuhk, prob. in error): Xak. xr yalguk (in a section for Dis., but sometimes misvocalized yafıyuk) the name of “Adam”, God bless him (prov); yalpuk a/-5aşar cami'a(n) “mankind” in general (verse) Kaş. 1II 384; about à dozen o.o.: KB (God) törütti üdürdi seçü yalpukuğ “created man and chose him out (of the rest of crcation)” 148; tiriğ bolsa yalpuk “if a man is alive! 977: xin(?) Tef. and başar “1 am a man” men bir yapluk (s) men; yaphk ditto 141: Oğuz, Kıp., Suwárin xj yalpuk a/-ama “a female slave” Kaş. İTİ 385. yalnu:s “alone, only; solitary”, the evidence for -S, a final so rare as to suggest a foreign origin for a word with no obvious etymology, is overwhelming down to xı, but later it is usually -z. S.ra.mllp. in a wide range of forms; NE Alt., Rüer,, Tel, "Tub. yanıs R III 64; Sag. çalğıs do. 1887; Khak. çağıs/ çalğıs: SE Türki yalğuz: NC Palğız: SC yolğiz: NW Kk. jalgiz; Kaz., Nog. yalğız, Kumyk yanğız: SW Az. yalğız/yalnız, Osm. yalınız, Tkm. yalnız. "Pürkü vri yalnu:s Ix. 23 (uvul-): virt ff... yalgu:su:n yoruyu:r “he walks alone” JrkB 40: Uyf. vin ff. Bud. yalgus bir *only one” U 7/1 69, 23; siz yalpuskiya kalırsiz “you will remain all alone” PP 4o, 3: Civ. yalnus H II yo, 69: O. Kir. ix ft. yalnu:s kizima: “my, ony daughter' Mal. 16, r: Xak. x1 yalgu:s er   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 975 
     
   
   
      'TRIS. al-raculu'l-wahid wa ğayruhu "one man (etc.) only” Kaş. III 384 (prov.); o.o. I 333 (2 suk); III 133, 16: KB özüm kalsa yalpuz üf 1 myself remain alone' 395; (when the king was sitting) özi yalpuzun. “alone by himself' 620, 765 (the MSS. consistently have -z, but are not contemporary): xıı(?) Tef. yalğuz/yalpuz “alone”, yalpuz yalpuz “one by one” 138: xiv Muh.(?) al-wahid yalnu:z Rif. 148 (only): Çağ. xvff. yalğuz tanhá “alone, solitary; yalğuzun ba-tanhá'i San. 336v. 17 (quotn.): Xwar. xin(?) yalğuz (sic?) oldurur erdi “he was sitting alone” Og. 56; calğuz (sic?) oldurur erdi do. 73: xiv yalğuz “alone” Qutb 65; 2.0. 159 (2 8uk); Nahc. 11, 9; 129, 15; 130, etc.; yalğuzun ditto Qutb 65: Kom. xiv “only, alone” yalğız/yalğuz CCI, CCG; Gr. 111 (quotns.): Kip. xır (after 'twin! yikiz) a/-mawlüd mufrada(n) “börn alone” ya:likiz (sic, MS. ya:lıhı:) Hou. 26, 6; xiv yalapuz (sic) fard 'single' İd. 97; al-wahda “solitude” yalğuz Bul. 6, 4; mahdak "by yourself yalğuz do. ıq, 6: xv twahda yalınız, Tkm. yalığız Tuh. 622a. 13; a.o. 38b. 1: Osm. xivxvi yalğuz, xivff. yalpiz/yaluguz; xiv ff. yalnızın “alone”, fairly common T'T.S 7 775; II 987; IV 829-33. Dis. V. YLNyalın- Preliminary note. Yalin- as the Refl. f. of 1 yal- may occur in KB and certainly survives in NE Alt., Tel. yalin- (of lightning) “to flash” RI 167. Yalın- as the Refl. f. of 2*yalfs the only certainly old V., but is pec. to Xah. A third yalın- is first noted only in the medieval period; San. clearly linked it w. yalğa:- and translated it (of a dog) "to lick its master, but this translation seems to be based on this false etymology. The basic meaning seems to be rather “to blead” and the like. 1f so, it is more or less syn. w. yalvar- but cannot be linked morphologically. None of these V.s provides a suitable basis for yalyu:, q.v. . D 1 yahn- Refl. f. of 2*yal-; n.o.a.b. InKB 121 the meaning might be “may the wicked man be stripped”, but the translation suggested below, which is Arat's, is likelier. Xak. xı er yalındı: “the man (etc.) stripped himself' (ta'arrà) Kaş. III 85 (yalınu:r, yalinma:k): KB tirilsüni terken kutr min kutun yalınsunı körmez karakı utun “may the king's majesty live with a thousand favours of heaven; may the wicked man be dazzled so that his eyes cannot see' 121. 2 yalın- “to plead” and the like; see above. Survives as yalın- “to plead, implore”, occasionally “to flatter' in NE Alt, Küer., Tel. R III 167: NC (jalin-): SC Uzb. (yalin-): NW Kk. (jalin-), Kaz., Nog.: SW 'Tkm. Çağ. xv ff. yalin- (spelt) sag zabàán dar àwardan sva şühib mva ágná-rà lisidan "of a dog, to put out its tongue and lick its master and friends”, and metaph. /ába kardan "to implore” San. 336r. 13 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv yalin- “to plead'   YLN 931 Qutb 66: Kom. xiv ditto CCG, Gr.: Osm. Xv, xvi yalin- “to flatter, blandish'; in three texts T TS 11 986; IV 852. S yilin- See İlin-. D yulun- Refl, f. of yul-; s.i.s.m.l, w. the same phonetic changes, usually as a Pass. Uyğ. vir ff, Civ. bağın çuğun yulundi “your bonds and wrappings have been stripped off” TT I 9: Xak. xi saç yulundi: "the hair was plucked out” (murita); and one says kul yulundi: “the slave was freed' ('utiqa), when he paid his master a price for himself; and bulun yulundi: 'the prisoner was ransomed and freed” (iftadá . . . wa ufliqa); and ura:ğut yulundiı: “the woman obtained a divorce (ixtala'at) Kaş. I1185(yulunu:r, yulunma:k): KB (just as a ball is unstable and rolls about) ani te me dawlat özüm yulunur “in the same way I, too, fortune, retain my freedom" 662: (xiv Muh. al-halq “to shave' yü:li:nmek (-mak) Mel. 37, 10 does not belong here, see yüli:-): Çağ. xv ff. yulun- kanda şudan "to be plucked out' San. 345r. 15: Xwar. xiv yulun“to be freed; (of a bird) to be plucked” Qutb 85: Kom. xiv “to be ransomed, redeemed” yulun- CCG, Gr. D yelne:- (yélne:-) Den. V. fr. yelin, pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı bé yelne:di: “the mare's (etc.) udders svvelled (?, aşraqa) at the time of parturition', that is when milk became abundant (arsalat) in them Kaş. III 310 (yelne:r, yelne:me:k); a.o. 319, 18. PU?D yalpu:-. Xak. xi KB 5972 reads (he spent a sleepless night; the dawn broke; in the flower garden a nightingale) sumlıdı üdiklig eşitti and then three alternative readings (Fergana MS.) kópül y.1gü:di:; (Cairo MS.) köpül y.lpu:dı:, (Vienna MS.) turup yığladı, after 'sang an unintelligible song, he heard it with delight', the Vienna text, "and stood up and wept' is obviously wrong. Of the other two texts the Cairo one seems preferable; the Fergana one is the same with -nomitted. Arat took it to be a Den. V. fr. yalın and translated it 'caught fire'; this is possible but not very plausible since the Sec. f. yalın is pec. to Osm. It therefore seems likely that it is a Den. V. fr. yalıp and that the phr. means “his mind became stripped (of care)”. Tris. YLN ?D or F yılınçğa: n.o.a.b.; one of several words ending in -1nc$a: which have a foreign look. Uyf. viri ff. Bud. (in a much damaged description of a girl; her firm but soft breasts) ihnefa (first four letters doubtful) yanları [gap] perhaps "her slender hips' TT X 446: Xak. xı yılınçğa: aş “food (al-fa'àm) which has no fat (dasam) in it, or salt, or taste' (tam) Kaş. III 433. D yalindak Hap. leg.; -dak seems to be a Den., not a Dev., Suff., so ?Den. N./A. fr. *yahn for yalıp. Xak. xı yalindak er “a naked (a/-"uryan) man” Kaş. HI şı.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 976 
     
   
   
       932 TRTIS. D yalınlığ P.N/A. fr. yalın, "İlaming”, S..s.m.]l. Uyğ. vnirfl.. Bud. ot yalınlığ “blazing with fire" TT V 6, 44; o.o. do. 8, 65 (ört): TT IV 10,25-6(Ortlüg); U 1I sə, s (ii) etc. (çoğluğ): (Xak.) xır(?) Tof. yalınlık (sic) ot 'a flaming fire" 138: Çağ. xvf. yalınlığ afrüxta wa müşta"al 'shining, flaming” San. 336v. 28 (quotn.). D yalpuskiya See yalpu:s, D yalınsız Hap. leg.?; Priv. NA. fr. yalın, "without flames, radiance, etc.” Uyğ. vırı ff. Bud. Suv. 299, 10-11 (térinsiz). Tris. V. YLND yalına:- Den. V. fr. yalın, "to flame”. N.o.ab.; cf. yalınla:-. Uyğ. vin ff. Man. yalınayu turğan tamu “the ever-flaming hell” TT HI 135: Bud. ulug yalınadaçı “the great flaming' (Buddha) U 77 so, 1 (ii); yalinayu turur “he goes on flaming” T T X 358: (Xak.?) xiv. Rh. yalinayu turğan yalın R IIIJ iyo (sv. yalın), (Muh.(?) ittaqada “to blaze' yala:n- Rif. 102; ?a mis-spelling of this word). D yalınla:- Den. V. fr. yalın, “to flame". S.L.s.m.l. in NC, NW, SW w. the usual phonetic changes. Uyğ. viuff, Bud, TM IV 252, 34 ff. (tuluk); (XaK; xin(?y Tef. yalinlan'to flame! 138: Xwar. xiv yalınlan- (sic) ditto Qutb 66). D yalnu:la:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. yalpu:. Xak. xı kr:z yalnu:la:dı: “the girl (etc.) played Ga"ibat) on two ropes which were fastened” (MS. fussira, ?correct to tugadd; 'to a trce' implied) Kaş, /II 411 (yalgu:la:r, yalnu:la:ma:k, MS. everywhere valtgu:la:-). Dis. YLR yula:r “a halter'. Survives only(?) in NE Tuv. €ular; SW Osm. yular; in all other languages, even Az., ''km., displaced by the Mong. l.-w. nokto, Xak. xı yular "idáru'l-faras “a horse's halte Kaş. III 9 (prov., yularla:-); yula:r ditto 777 28: xiv Muh.(?) al-afsár “halter” yu:la:r (MS. yuzla:k) Rif. 174 (only): Kom. xiv “rcins” yullar1(?) CCG; Gr. 128: Kip. xıl al-miqwcad “halter” yu:a:r (fnokta:) Hou. 14, $: xiv. yular a/-macarr "leading-rein'(?) d. 97: xv zimüm ("halter”) soa"l-macarr yular Tuh. 18a. 3; macarr yular do. 33b. 12: Osm. xviii. yular (spelt) in. Rümi, mrihàr-i şütür vea afsár-i asb “a camel's nose-peg; a horse's halter” San. 345v. 13. Dis. V. YLRD yılır- Iap. leg. (in a verse quoted twice); syn. vv. yili:- and perhaps only an artificial form devised to rhyme vv, kölerdi: and ilerdi:, Xak. xı ajun tini: yılırdı: saxuna nafsu'l-dünyü "the breath of the world became hot” Kaş. 1 179, 21; 11 283, 4; n.m,e. , (S)D yalrıt- (yaltrit-) a Sec, f. pec, to Kaş., in which yaltrit- is not mentioned. As in the case of other words in this group the vocaliz  YLN ation is chaotic. Xak. xi ol o:t yalritti ( volirtti ) amada l-nár “he made the fire gi gently; and one says ol tu:çuğ yalrıttı: ( yolirtti:) “he burnished and polished the b (amqü rca. aclá' l-gabah sca'l-sufur) until it a brightness and sheen like a burnished co bowl or shield which glisten when the sun on them or (even) if it does not (yalrit yalrıtma:k, MS. y.lir.tuzr,. y.lir.tma:h), one says kirşe:n anın yü:zin yolritti: ( yolratti:) "the: white lead (etc.) made woman's face shine' (abraga), also used of thing that has made something shine (agra and one says Ol kumfa:nió yolritti: rubbed (ac/à) the dirt off the jug, unti acquired a sheen” (Pariq), also used of anyt that has a shcen (yolritu:r, yolritmark, yalr.tu:r, yalr.tma:k); bi-fathi"l-yü” yahün -fi'l aqtcá. mina'l-damm fi hadaynp”l-fiHayn these two V.s yalrit- is stronger than yol Kaş. 11 353 (in. Kag.'s system of arrangen yalrıt- should precede yolrit- and examples show that the first V. is 'stron than the second, although the vocalization the MS. suggest the opposite). Tris. YLR D yularlığ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. yul Xak. xı yularlığ at "a horse on a halter? -mü"addar) Kaş. III 49. Tris. V. YLRD yula:rla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. yul Xak. xı (after yular; hence the prov.) y başın yula:rlap kengeldi: (sic) translate you wish to eat the head of a horse after c ing it put a halter (a[-'idár) on it, and fast first, so that it does not turn over (yartga then cat it^; this proverb is quoted to some| who is being told to keep his horse so th may not get loose Kaş. III 9 (the last wor corrupt and no satisfactory emendation been suggested); n.m.e. D yularlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of yula:r1 Xak. xr at yularlandı: "the horse was tered” ('uddira) Kaş. 11] 114 (yuan yularlanma:k). Dis. YLS E yılsığ See yılışığ. D yo:lsu:z Priv. N./A. fr. yo:l; s.i.s.m.l the usual phonetic changes meaning (1) ( country) "without roads'; (2) (of people) the right road, lost”, (3) ditto abstractly ( of policies, etc.) "lacking direction, uncert "Türkü vir altu:m yışığ yolsizin aş *[ passed cross-country over the Altay m tain forest! T 3s: Xak. xı yolsu:z a/“astray, lost”, originally yo:lsu:z Kaş. III xum?) Tef. yolsuz '(morally) confused" (| yolsizlikfyolsuzhk — al-dalála (mental moral) deviation") 161: Çağ. xvff. yo bi-ràh wa nàágis dar amr-i tarigat wa sulüh “1 deficient in matters of behaviour and cond San. 345v. 26 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv yol  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 977 
     
   
   
      MON. YM . 933 “lost, not knowing the way' Qutb 82: Kom. xiv yolsuz 'without a road” CCG; Gr. 125 (quotn.). Dis. YLS D yulus Dev. N. fr. yul-; n.o.a.b., syn. vv. yulu£ in the sense of 'ransom'. Xak. xi KB asığ kildi erse ólümke kümüş kümüş kılğay erdi er özke yuluş “if silver were an effective (remedy) for death, a man vvould have made silver a ransom for his soul” 1113) xazina bu ner erse başka yuluş "if these precious things are a ransom for your head” 1190; 4.0. 1114. Dis. V. YLŞD yalaş- Hap. leg., Recip. f. of yala:-, entered between yılış- and yuluş-, the vocalization is chaotic. Xak. xı ola:r bi:r ekindi:ke: oğrı: yalaşdı: (MS. yılışdı:) those two falsely accused (rttahama) one another of theft" Kaş. I11 75 (yalaşu:r, yalaşma:k, MS. y.liguzr, y.ligma:k). D yılış- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of yılı:-. Xak. xı suvla:r kamuğ yılışdı: (MS. yaligdi: ?) “the waters (etc.) were (all) heated' (suxinat) Kaş. III 74 (yrilisu:r, yiligma:k, corrected from -noe:k). R D yuluş- Recip. f. of yul-, s.i.s.m.l., usually meaning “to tear out one another's hair” and the like. Xak. xı bodu:n bi:r ikindi:ni: yuluşdı: “the tribes pillaged (ağdra) one another” Kaş. III 75 (yuluşu:r, yuluşma:k). D yöleş- llap. leg.?; Recip. f. of yöle:-, etymologically 'to support one another”, actually “to resemble". This anomaly is perhaps due to an over-literal translation, direct or indirect, of Sanskrit in which mi- means "to erect' and upami-, which should etymologically mean 'to underpin, support', actually means “to resemble'. See yöleştür-, yöleşür-. Türkü vim ff. Man. bu üçünç yaruk kün kün teprike oxşayur yöleşür “this third bright sun(?) resembles (Hend.) the sun god” M IH 18, 5-7 (ii.) Tris. YLS D yöleştürüğ Hap. leg.; N.Ac. fr. yöleştür-. Uy. vii ff. Bud. Sanskrit upamayatu “let him compare! yöle:ştürsün yöle:ştürüğ kılsun TT VIII A.8. D yólestürgülüksüz Priv. N./A. fr. the Gerundive of yólestür-; “incomparable”. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vrrrff, Bud. yöleştürğülüksüz ürlüğ erip "being incomparable and everlasting! Suv. 33, 3; a.o. 45, 3(oxşatğuluksuz). PUD yrlig1$ Hap. leg.; hitherto read yılsığ, for which there is no obvious etymology; the word obviously means “comfortable, prosperous', or thelike and might be a Dev. N./A. fr. yılış-, lit. *warm'. “Türkü virt (Heaven placed me on the throne as xağar) nem yılışığ bodunka: olurmadim “1 did not mount the throne over a comfortable people' (I mounted the throne over a people who had no food in their bellies or clothes on thei: backs, in a bad way and wretched) 7 E 26, II E zı. Tris. V. YLŞD yöleştür- Caus. f. of yöleş-, “to compare”. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vri ff. Bud. tüzünler oğlın yöleştürser “if one seeks a simile for a well-born youth'(thesimile follows) Suv. 71, 11-12; a.o. TT VIII A.8 (yöleştürüg). D yöleşür- n.o.a.b.; a possible Caus. f. of yöleş-, but there is no Caus. meaning, and it may be a scribal error for yöleş-. Türkü viri ff. Man. (the twelve rulers, who are born of the god of the majesty of doctrine) yaruk kün teprike yöleşürü “like the bright sun god” M İİİ 16, 7-8 (ii); (and the bright day conquered and vveakened the dark night) yeme önreki Xormuzda tepri süpüsipe yöleşürü “İike the former battle of the god Hormuzd” do. 19, 11-13 (i). Mon. YM 1 ya:m “a piece of dust” or the like, more specifically one that gets into the eye. N.o.a.b.; cf. yamlığ, yamla:-, etc. Xak. xr yam a/-qadd “a piece of dust”, hence one says kö:zke: yam tüşti: “a piece of dust got into the eye" Kaş. II] 5; ya:m “a piece of dust in the eye or somewhere else” II/ 160: xiv Muh.(?) (between “mucus in the eye” and “tear”) a/-qada yam Rif. 140 (only). F 2 yam “a posting station”, with some extended meanings. The phonetics of this word are obscure. İts origin is Chinese cÁtam (Middle Chinese tyam) 'to stop; a stage on a journey' (Giles 270) which it translates in the Chin.-Uyg. Dict., where it is first noted. It was an early l.-w. in Mong., prob. direct fr. Chinese as cam (Haernisch 85, Kom. 2290, Haltod 561, in the last two translated “road, province"), became a l.-w. in Persian as yam 'posting station; post-horse' and survives in SW Osm. as yam 'post-horse; post-rider' Red. 2192 (now obsolete). It prob. reached Turkish via Mong., but the reason for the sound change c- — y- is obscure. Uyğ. xiv Chin.Uyğ. Dict. i chan “posting station (Giles 5,496 270) yamka (Dat.) R III 298; Ligeti 279: Çağ. xv ff. yam ulak bineceh at 'post-horse" Vel. 398 (quotn.); (yamçı ulak 'post-rider' do.; a compound Pe.- Turkish word for “the officer in charge of horses at a posting station for the post-riders' San. 337v. 7). 1 yem used only in the phr. ot yem; it may be merely a Sec. f. of em, since ot em is also a common phr. and in U 1 7, 4 ot yem follows immediately after otçı emçi, but Kaş. distinguishes between the two words and in KB the two phr. seem to have different meanings. Survives only(?) in NW Kar. T. otyam *balsam, spices” Koro. 241. UYĞ. virt ff, (Chr. U I 7, 3-4 (2 ot)): Bud. TT X 326 (damaged; 2 ot): Xak. xı yem al-afáwih 'fragrant 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 978 
     
   
   
     934 MON. YM flowers; hence one says O:t (sic) yem al-buzür ('spices') wea l-afáwih as a Hend. (ala tariqi'l-itbà'), yem is not used by itself. Kaş. 1H s: KB 973 (2 ap): xin(?) Tef. ot yem “vegetation” 150 (yém): Çağ. xv ff. San. 62v. 19 (2 ot; here taken for 2 y€:m and translated “provisions”): Kip. xn? Hou. 23, 10 (2 0t). D 2 yé:m (?d-) N.S.A. fr. yé-; properly “a single meal”, but actually “food” in general, S.i.s.m.L, usually specifically “animal fodder'. Uy£. vin ff. Bud. TT IV 6, 38 (içim): Xak. xt y€:m al-ta"üm 'food'; hence onc says yé:m keldür 'bring the food” Kaş. III 144; o.o. T 468, 7; 480 (künlük): KB 4402 (içim), 4767 (kavik): xin(?) Tef. yem '(camcel's) fodder'; (ot yem 'vegetation') 150: Çağ. xv ff. yem Şadd sca xwurák-i datwább sca tuyür 'provisions; food for animals and poultry' San. 252r. 26; 3.0. 62v. t9 (2 ot): Xwar. xiv yém 'food' Quib 78: Kap. xin 'alafa min Utd”Pl-faras qadimahá “to feed, in the sense of giving a horse its barley” yem ber-, 'aitqu'l- (fodder”) faras wa qadimuhà yem Hou. 36, 15: xiv yem al-ta"am, also used for "animal fodder” ('alafu'l-dareabb), one says atBa: yemin aş “give the horse its fodder' /4. 98: xv (am "flavour” tatmak) zir “a dish of food” yem (ta'àm aş) Tuh. 23b. 9; from yem, ye- do. 842218; Os. . xvi Pe. pas-i xecdr "food residues! yem sopu TTS IV 891. Mon. V. YM] yum- “to shut', usually "the eyes”, but also “the mouth', and (to. clench” (the fist). S.i.a.m.l.g. w. the usually phonctic variations. Except in Nak, the vowel is consistently -u-, in Kag. the forms are yüm-, yümtür-, yümül-, but yumluş-, and see yumun- ; unless this is a vagary of thescribe's, this must bea dialect form. Uyğ. viir ff. Man. kózüg yumup 'shutting the eyes” TT. HI iz: Xak. xi er kó:z yümdi: "the man shut (amada) his eyes" Kaş, HI 64 (yüme:r, yümme:k): KB yümdi kózin 624-5; (when you look srnilinglv at me) közüm yümdüküm 'I shut my eyes” 663 (rhymes w. erdüküm): xır:(?) 47. yumup kózlerin 424; Tef. köz yumup 163: xiv Rb£. ağzın yummadı “did not shut its mouth' R III $74 (quotn.): Çağ. xv ff. yum- (-ay) "to shut (kapa-) something which is open” Vel. 420; yum- “to shut' (bar-Aiam nihddan) the eves or mouth; this V. is uscd specifically for “to shut' (piisidan) the eyes or mouth, and the word, eyes or mouth, must be mentioned San. 346r. 5 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv yum- “to shut (the eyes) Qutb 85; Nahc. 158, 4: Kom. xiv yum- “to blink! CCG; Gr.: Kip. xurgamada min gamudi'l-'ayn yum- (sic?, - gil) Hou. 38, 4: Xiv yum- damma agábi ahu sva 'aynahu “to shut the fingers or the eyes” Jd. 98. 2 *yum- Sec yumğa:k, yumur, yumurtÉa:, yumuş, yumuz. Dis. YMA ?C yamu: pec. to Kaş., whose etymology is prob. correct. Xak. xı yarnu: a Particle (2ar/) E meaning "did you understand what I said and remember to do what I told you ?'; hence one says sen barğıl yamu: “go, will you?” (a-na"am), its origin is the Particle 2 ya(h) meaning “yes” (na'am) and the Interrogative -mu: Kaş. III 26; a.o. İİİ 236 (tanu:). VU yeme: (?yéme:) with takı:, q.v., one of the two copulas in early "Purkish, used both at the beginning of the sentence, where it normally means “and”, and later, usually in the second place, where it means rather “also, too”, In Syriac and Uvjg. script consistently spelt yme, which suggests that the first vowel was very short, but the evidence, where available, seems to point more to -é- than -e-. N.o.a.b. "Türkü vır (there were wise and tough xagans) buyrukr: yeme: 'their ministers too” (were wise and tough) beğleri: yeme: boduni: yeme: tüz ermis “and both their begs and their people werc orderly” 7 E 3, I1 E 4; o.o. İ S 10-11, /I N 8 (Olsik), etc.; kün yeme: tün yeme: “by day and night! T 27: vii ff. yeme: occurs several times at the beginning of the sentence for 'and', but also later in the sentence, e.g. (of the seven planets) yeme: “and” (five kinds of jewels) in Toy. (ETY II s? ff.) and in the other Toyoh texts (do. 178 f£). In the letter Tn. IV (do. 96) it is the first word even before the date: Man. yeme (spelt y7ne) is common in Cöras. usually as the first word, but in paragraph numbers usually the second, c.g. ikinti yeme C/ras. 1: Uy£. viri yeme: Sv. E 10 (not the first word): ix yeme: //7 4.6; C.A(ET Y 1 37; damaged): virt ff. Man.-A taki yme "and also” M 7 7, r, 84, ctc.: Man. yme is common as the first word of the sentence in Wind.; yana yme “and again" TT LX 58: Bud. yme (yme: even in TT VIII)is common in all usages: Civ, ditto; yeme TT VII 42, 1: Xak. xı rr occurrences in Kaş., 7 of yeme:, 5 of y.me:, r of yéme:; usually as second word of sentence, "and, also”, Ar. ayda(n); yalksa: yeme: ya:ğ edgü “oll is good, even if it nauscates you” /II 435, 19: KB yana sózledir sen yeme sözledim “you spoke again and I spoke” 665; a.o. r64o (Fergana and Cairo MSS. yeme, Vienna yeme): xn(?) KBVP yeme bu kitüb ol idi ök "aziz “and this book is very precious” 9: xırı(?) KBPP (He did what he wished) yeme “and” (does what he wishes) 4; 7. yeme hegins a sentence 31, 63, 293; Tef. y.me “also”, in second place r50: Xwar. xiv y.me 'and' Qutb 78: Kom. xiv (as often as he comes and prays to God) yemese (?crasis of yeme erse) 'and' (gives alms) CCG; Gr. 121. Dis. V. YMAyama:- “to patch (something Ace.), s.ia.m.lg. vv. the usual phonetic changes. Xak. xi ol ton yama:dı: “he patched (zaqa"a) the garment” (etc.) Kaş. IJI 91 (no Aor. or Infin.), bu: to:n ol yama:ğu: “this garment needs to be patched' (an yurdam) III 36: xi(?) Tef. yama- “to patch” (i.e. repair a ship) 138: xiv Muh.(?) raqa'a'l-tarcb yama:Rif. 131 (only): Çağ. xvff. yama- (spelt)   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 979 
     
   
   
     DIS. bina zadan wa wwuslà kardan “to apply a patch, to patch' San. 337r. 5 (quotns.): Kom. xiv 'to patch' CCG, Gr.: Kip. xv and from yamaw, yama- Tuh. 84a. 3. Tris. YMC D yeme:çük Hap. leg.; prob. Den. N. fr. *yéme: Dev. N. fr. yé- meaning 'something eaten”. Xak. xı yeme:çük “a small sack (ğirdra) in which wheat is transported' Kaş. 111 48. Dis. YMD yemet “yes”, as such pec. to Kaş. but apparently the earliest form of other (Western) words meaning “yes”, "Vhe only modern survivals are SW Osm. evet and perhaps "Vkm. xava. Xak. xr yemet a Particle (/;arf) meaning “yes” (na'am); also pronounced emet; the yà' is changed from alıf Kaş. III 8, evet a Particle meaning 'yes'; it has three forms; evet in Yağma:, Tuxsı:, Kıp., Oğuz, emet/evvet/yemet for the rest of the Turks I sı, ewet meaning evet, that is "yes” 7 83: Tkm. xiv ewet na'am İd. 25: xv ewet na"am, used only by Tkm., I never heard it in pure Turkish Kav. 70, 15; na/am (VU arayna) Tkm. ewet Tuh. 36b. ro: Osm. xiv, xv evet/evit(?) “but” in a few texts TS II 408; III 271; IV 315; discussed at length in C. S. Mundy, “Evet, evet ki and geyise', Studia Altaíca, Festschrift für N. Poppe, Wiesbaden, 1957. yemdü: “the pubes; pubic hair”. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı yemdü: al-'àna “the pubes” Kaş. III 31: XIV Muh.( ?) (al—"ana VU çö:ğgre:, Hap. leg.); ja'ru'l-'àna 'pubic hair” yemdk Rif. 142 (only): Çağ. xv ff. yemdü: (spelt), in Rami yemdik, müy-t zahár 'pubic hair” San. 337v. 6: Kip. xiv yemdü: (with front vowels") a/-'üàna .. . yemdi: al-'ána; one says yemdin koparğıl (MS. kap-) 'pluck out your pubic hair” /d. 98: xv al-'àna yemdi: Kav. 61, 6: Osm. xviii yemdik see Çağ. Dis. V. YMD(D) yomut- 'to come together, assemble'; this V. and its Caus. f. yomdar- (an unusual Caus. £,, but cf. tópit-) and yomğiı: are clearly cognate, but it is hard to find a common basis; if it were *yom it would be necessary to assume the existence of a Den. Verbal Suff. -1t- (?for -1d-) parallel to -ad-, and a Den. nominal Suff. - fi: parallel to -Kt:, and there is no other evidence for the existence of these Suffs. N.o.a.b.; the -0- is fixed by the Kom. forms. See yumul- Osm. Xak. x1 kişi: yomutti: “the people (etc.). assembled” (ictama'a) Kaş. II 317 (yomutu:r, . yomitma:k); o.o. 7 69, 9; 214, 17 (sukak); JI 312, 4 (ta'allabü 'assembled”), 777 53, 7: KB yomittı anar beg ájun üdrümi “the begs and élite of the world rallied to him” 417; o.o. 719 (téir-), 1642, 1927, 2706,” 2861 (yl:B), etc.: Kom. xiv "to come together' yomut- (MS: yomuc-(?), an easy corruption of yomut-) CCG; Gr.: Kip. xni ictama"a bi-fulün wa ğayrihi “to rally to YMG : 935 someone (etc.) yomut- (MS. c) Hou. 36, 8. 2D D yomdar- Caus. f. of yomit-, q.v.; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı ol kişi:ni: yomdardı: "he brought together (or collected, cama"a) the people" (etc.) Kaş. III g8(yomdarur, yomdarma:k): KB kelir kut kapuğda kalın yomdarur “good fortune comes (to him) and brings together a crowd at his gate” 5315: ximm(?) Tef. xaşarnühum 'we have picked them out” yomdarğaymız 163 (yumdar-): Kom. xiv "to bring together, collect yomdar- CCG; Gr. D yumtur- Caus. f. of 1 yum-, q.v. for the vocalization; s.i.s.m.l. vv. the same phonetic changes. Xak. xı ol anir kó:zin yümtürdi: “he made him shut (642) his eyes” Kaş. III 97 (yümtürür, yümtürme:k ; s;c). Tris. YMD E yama:ta: See tama:ta:. Dis. YMG D yama:ğ Conc. N. fr. yama:-; "a patch' ona garment, etc. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. the usual phonetic changes. Xak. xı yama:ğ al-ruq'a "a patch' .Kaş. HI 28 (prov.), a.o. I7 21 (1 sök-): xiv Muh. al-ruda yamak/yamaf Mel. öy, 3; yamağ Rif. 166: Çağ. xv ff. yamağ/yamak pina wa pára wa janda 'a patch, a piece of material used as a patch' San. 337r. 28 (quotns.): Kom. xiv 'patch' Eget CCG; Gr: Kap. xiv yama: al-ruq'a İd. 98: xv ditto yamaw Tuh. 16b. ız, a.o. 84a. 3 (yama:-): Osm. xviii yamağ/yamak (after Çağ.) and in Rümi (1) “a drinking vessel (zaşraba) sewn together from leather'; (2) “the cloak' (xirqa) which janissaries on garrison duty wear; (3) “vorkmen who work in factories' San. 337v. 2. (D) yomği: 'collected together in large quantities; a mass of people or things', sometimes almost “all”, cognate to yomit-, q.v. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Man. TT HI ror (özirken-): Chr. yomğiı alı yarlıkadı “he deigned to receive. the (whole) collection” (the three precious gifts) U 7 7, 8-9: Bud. olar barça kalısız yomğuı arızun alkınzun “may all those (sins) without exception and en masse be wiped out and put an end to” Suv. 138, 1-r2) a.o, do. ss3, 7: Civ. TT VII 29, 18-19 (tigl:); 34, 3 (1 bu:t): Xak. xı yomgt: ne:p a/-gay'u'l-muctami'u'l-katrir. “things collected together in large quantities', hence one says kişi: yom£r: keldi: cá'a'I-nàs bi-qaddihim toa qadidihim muctami'in "people came in crowds' Kaş. III 35; uyğur tatın (read tattın) yuvğa: alıp yomğın satar translated. yuğir "ala Uyğür fa-ya” xud minhum cumla aa yabi"uhum “he barters with the Uyğur and receives from them in bulk and sells them”, but the actual meaning must be “he buys from the Uyğur and Persians in small quantities (or cheap ?) and sells wholesale (or dear?)' 77 294, 25; a.o. III 240, 25: KB seving barça yomğuı sapa keisüni * may all kinds of joy. in 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 980 
     
   
   
     9306 abundance come to vou! 944; telim yomgilarığ ölüm saçmış ol “death has scattered many concentrations. of people” 4827; ao. siis: xr(7) KBVP bu çın yomgisi "this collected volume (equivalent to Ar. macmi'a) of true statements! 18: xin(?) Tef. kamuğ yomji “the whole crowd 163 (yumgi): Xwar. xiv yornkt “all together! Qur 86 (yumkt). DOS) yumğa:k "a spherical or globular object' and the like. Dev. N./A. connoting habitual action, fr. 2 *yum-. Survives, usually. meaning “a ball of wool, thread, etc.", in NW Kk. jumak; Kaz. yomğak, Kumyk yummak; (Nog. yumak “a riddle"): SW Az. yumağ, Ösm., Tkm. yumak. Uy£. viu ff. Chr. U 78, ş (0D: Civ. karba tübi yumğakı “a lump of Rarba root” HI. I 162; olo. H II 31, 196-8 (uvşa:k): Xak. xı yumğa:k al-mudahracu'l-mudatwwar “globular or round' of anything, hence in the language of Üç *coriander seed' (al-Ruzbara) is called yumğa:k tana: Kaş. III 44 (see tana:): xiv Muh. hubha ğazl "a ball of thread' yu:ma:k Mel. 60, 12; Rif. 159: Çağ, xv ff. yumak kalafa-i nax ditto San. 346v. 18: Kip. xiv yurnak al-xayniI-mulaffaf ba dul 'alà. bard mudawveara(n) "thread rolled. into a ball" İd. 98: xv ha:áya "a coi yumak Tül. 13a. 139€ seen S yamğur See yağmur. Tris. YMĞ D yomğığun Hap. leg.; Collective f. of yomju. Uy. vini ff, Bud. (all the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas) birgerü yığılıp yomğiğun kelip 'being gathered in one place and coming in a mass” U Sp. s9, 10. D yamağlığ P.N./A. fr. yama:ğ, 'patched'; sis. ml. vv, the usual phonctic changes. Xak. xı yamağlığ to:n “a patched (muraddam) garment” Kaş. HI 49: Kip. xv müraqqa" “patched” yamavvlı Tul. 34b. 2. D yamağlık A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. yama:ğ, n.oa.b. Xak. xi yamağlık bö:z “a patch (ruq"a) of cotton cloth' (etc.), designed for use as a gusset (or gore, al-baniqa) Kaş. III 51: Kip. xv (as an example of Suff. -lik) al-mu'add ii'l-targi'. 'somcthing designed for patching' yamalik Tu). 50a. 5. Tris. V. YMGD yumfakla: Den. V. fr. yumğa:k, n.oa.b. Uyf. vun ff, Civ. (take various ingredients, grind them and knead them with honey, and) it bur[ni]ca yumğaklap “roll them into pills the size of a rose-hip” TT VII 22, 13-14: Kip. Xv kabbaba “to wind into a ball” yumakla- Tuh. 31b. 3. D yumğaklan- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of yumgakla:-, Xak. xi yumğaklandı: ne: "the thing was round or spherical (fadiarorcard ..... tea. tadahraca) Kaş. HII 116 (yumğaklanu:r, yumğaklanma:k). DIS, YMG Dis. YML D yamlığ (ya:mlığ) Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. ] ya: n. Xak. xi yamlığ kö:z al-'aynu'l-qadiya "an eye with a picce of dust in it'; originally ya:mlığ Kaş. /1I 42. yamla:n “the: jerhoa'(?); one of several animal names ending in -la:n, as such 118p. leg,, but survives metathesized in (NC Kzx. at İalman 'hamstcr): NW Başkır yalman; Kk. (77”Vkm.) yalaman: SW 'lkm. yalman, sce Sheherbak, p. işi, Xak. xi yamla:n nat" mina l-cirád "a kind of large rat" Kaş, HT 37: xiv. Muh.(?) (al-yarbü" gelepü: (kele:gü:)), al-fa”ru l-barri 'ficld. mouse” yalama:n (sic) Rif. 157: Kip. xin al-yarbi *jerboa' (also field mouse) yalma:n Hon. 11, 13; also used as a I.N. dol 3o, 4: xiv yalman a/-yarbü" İd. 97; Bul. 10, 9: xv cdrbü' (sí) yalman Tult. inb. 7. Dis. V. YMLD yamal- Pass. f. of yama:- ; “to be patched” and the like, S.i.s.m.l, Xak. xr ton yamaldı: “the garment (etc.) was patched' (ruqi'a) Kaş. II 82 (yamalu:r, yamalma:k): Çağ. xv ff. yamal- pina wa qouşla şudan "to be patched” San. 337r. 16. D yumul- Pass. f. of 1 yum-, q.v.; “to be shut. Sism. Xak. xi bu er ol kó:zi: yümülğe:n (sic) “this man's eyes are constantly shut and closed in sleep! (yandamm (MS. yandam) tarfahu aca tağdi (MS. tağsi) sca tasin) Kaş. HI ss: n.m.e.: KB s674 (*ékkile:-): Çağ. xv fi, yumul- (spelt) bar-ham niháda gudan “to be shut', of the eyes or mouth San. 346r. 15 (quotn,): Kip. xiv (yumak közlü: Sith eyes shut'; and one says allusively of death) közi: yumuldu: "his eyes were closed" (gumidat) İd. 98: Osm. xiv to xvr yumul“(of the eyes) to close; to crouch, cower', and the like; in a few texts TTS 7 849; II 1076; HI 825; İV 906 (in the meaning "to come together, assemble', if this translation can be confirmed, it should be transcribed as yomul-, presumably cognate to yomut-, etc.). D yamla:- Den. V. fr. 1 ya:m; pec. to Kaş. Xak. xt ol evin yamla:dı: hacırcaqa baytahu wa hannasahu “he swept out (Hend.) his house" (i.e. removed the dust) Kaş. //7 310 (yamla:r, yamla:ma:k); közüm yaşın yamfadi: "a/aca qada 'ayni bi-ru' yatili “he cleared out the piece of dust in my eye with his glance ITI 84, 24. D yamlat- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of yamla:-. Xak. xı ol evin yamlattı: "he gave orders for his house to be svvept” (bi-tahtwiq) and it was swept Kaş, II 356 (yamlatı:r, yamlatma:k). D ($) yimlen- (imlen-) Hap. leg.?; Refl. f. of imle:-. Xak. xi KB (when one sees this beautiful face one is honoured) kópül aclur anda bu cün yimlenür “one”s heart is gladdened then and one's soul is heckoned” 2465. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 981 
     
   
   
       D DIS. V. D yamlas- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of yamla:-. Xak. xı ol apar ev yamlaşdı: “hc helped him to sweep out (/£ tahwiq) his house” (etc.) Kaş. II 105 (yamlasu:r, yamlaşma:k). D yumluş- Hap. leg.; Co-op. f. of yumul-, note the back vowels. Xak. xi kó:zle:r yumluşdi: “the eyes shut' (ağdat) Kaş. 111 105 (yumluşu:r, yumluşma:k). Dis. YMN yama:n “bad, evil”, and the like, of persons and things. Not traceahle carlier than xr, and, unlike yavla:k, yavız, w. no other shade of meaning. S.ia.m.lg. vv. the usual phonetic changes. Uyğ. vir ff, Civ. (of an omen) yaman 'it is bad” TT VII 29, 6-22 (a late text; yaman in USp. 22, 47 is a misreading of yeme): xtv Chin.-Uyğ. Dict. “bad” yaman, "a wicked man" yaman kişi Ligeti 28o, R III 301: Xak. xr yaman al-radi' "vicked, bad” of anything; yama:n1:g (“a bad disease”) al-cudám “elephantiasis” Kaş. 11] 3o: xiv Muh. mudbir “in a bad state” (opposite to 'good' yaxşı:) yama:n Mel. 18, 7; 54, 3; Rif. 97, 150; adbar “in a worse state” yama:nrak 18, 7; 97; afsada "to do mischief” yama:n işle- 104 (only); intahasa “to be unfortunate, distressed" yama:n bol- 105 (margin, only): Çağ. xv ff. yaman bad wa zabin "bad, weak' San. 337v. 4 (quotn.; and in Mong. 'goat', i.e. Sec. f. of 1 1mfa:): Xwar. xii(?) yaman (1) (of an animal) “vicious” Oğ. 24; (2) (of a battle) “violent, bloody' do. 165, 303: xiv yaman "'bad', common in several shades of meaning Qutb 66; MN 100, etc.; Nahc. 8, 14; 16, 2; 286, 16 etc.: Kom. xiv "bad, evil” yaman CCI, CCG, Gr. 112 (quotns.; common): Kip. xi al-radi' (opposite to “good” eygi:/key) yama:n (/yawuz) How. 25, 10: xiv yaman al-şirr “bad” İd. 98; a.o. 74 (kilik): xv if you are surprised at someone's bad behaviour (ran qabaha siratuhu) you say ne yaman kişi: dir bu: Kav. 17, 17; al-wahg *wild, savage', ai-radi', and, of a man, al-nahas 'unfortunate, distressed' arc yaman do. 23, 9; a.o. 60, 5 (opposite to “good” yaxşı:), zeaiş yaman Tuh. 38b. 2; a.o.o.: Osm. xiv yaman "bad, often in contrast with eyü/yaxşı, c.i.a.p. TTS I 776; 11 988; 111 761; IV 834. Dis. V. YMND yama:n- Refl. f. of yama:-; s.i.s.m.l,, sometimes as Pass. Xak. xı er to:nin yamandı: (sic) “the man commissioned the patching (raq") of his garment' Kaş. 111 85 (yama:nu:r, yama:nmma:k; sic). D yumun- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of yum-, the Infin. is either -ma:k altered to -me:h or vice versa, prob. the first. Xak. xı ol kö:zin (VU) yumundrt: “he pretended to shut (yuğd?) his eyes” Kaş. III 86 (yumunu:r, yumunma:k?). Dis. YMR (D) yumur basically “something round, globular, coiled'; hence “the bowels', esp. of ^"stantly uprooting (qalla" ...  YMR937 an animal. intrans. Dev. N. fr. 2 *yum-. Survives in one or both meanings in NE Tuv. çumur: NC Kir. fumur, Kzx. jumir: NW Kk. jumir; iKrim yumur R 7II 577; another cognate word yumru and the like s.i.s.m.l. in the first meaning. Cf. yumurla:-, etc. Xak. xi yumur (MS. y.mur) at-mimrağa | fi'l-hayawün "the bowels, or caecum, of an animal” Kaş. II! 9g: Ktp. xv rmfaha 'an animal's stomach”, and “rennet (maya 'rennet'/) yumur Tuh. 5a. 4. D yumruk See yıdruk. "Dis. V. YMRyemir- “to smash, uproot, and the like; s.i.s.m.l. in all groups except SE with the usual phonetic changes. Uy$f. vir ff. Bud. Atavakı yeknip küvençliğ tağın yemireyin “1 will shatter the demon Átavaka's mountain of pride' TT X 200-1; a.o. Sut. 602, 8-11 (2 to:ğ): Xak. xı er yığa:ç yemürdi: “the man uprooted (gaía'a, MS. qata"a) the tree” (etc.) Kaş. 171 69 (yemürür, yemürme:k, a second hand added tomurdt:, tomurma:k belov the line, but 2 tomur-, q.v., has a different meaning), bu su:v ol yığa:çığ yemürğe:n “this water is conmüsta”şil) trees", also used of anything which uproots (musta'gil) III 54: Çağ. xv ff. yémür- xarab kardan “to destroy”, etc. , also pronounced yümür- San. 352r. 1 (quotn.); reverse entry 346v. 7 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv yémür- 'to break down, crush' Qutb So: Kip. xiv yümür- "ada (inter alia) "to do violence! İd. 98: xv marata “to flatten' yümür- Tuh. 35b. 7: Osm. xv, xvi yümür“to destroy'; in two texts T'T.S 7 850; /7 1076 (yumur-, mistranslated in 7); yık- yemir- “to destroy! IV 886 (yimir-). D yemril- Pass. f. of yémir- ; “to be smashed. uprooted', etc.; s.i.s.m.]. Uyf. vri ff. Bud. bu ağız yémrilip “this (canal) mouth having been destroyed' Suv. 602, 14; a.o. U IV 4o, 164-8 (basğuk): Çağ. xv ff. yémrül-/yémrüş- xarab şudan "to be destroyed', etc. San. 352r. 18 (quotns.); yümrül-/yümrüş- ditto, also pronounced yemrül-/yemrüş- 346v. ış (quotn.): Kip. xv mamrtüt 'flattened' yümürülmis Tuh. 34b. 6. D yamraş- Caus. f. of *yamra:- which survives in NC jamira- “to crowd together vigorously', esp. of lambs when they are released to go to their mothers for a meal; the Caus. f. survives in both languages, but Kzx. jamiras- is noted only in R IV 63. Xak. xı kuzr yamraşdı: ixfalafa l-sixdl ma"a"l-ni"ac “the lambs mingled with the ewes' Kaş. III 102 (verse; no Aor. or Infin.). : D yemrüş- Co-op. f. of yémir-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xi ol apar yığa:ç yemrüşdi: "he helped him to uproot ( f: qal") the tree” Kaş. III 103 (yemrüşü:r, yemrüşme:k): Çağ, xv ff. San. 346v. 15; 352r. 18 (yémrül-). . -————— —————Á DS o oo o8 .--..—y——--.. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 982 
     
   
   
     938 Tris. YMR (D) yımırtğa:/yumurtğa: Preliminary note. Kaş, distinguishes carefully between yımırtğa: "green vegetable! and yumurtğa: 'egg'. There is no other trace of such a record meaning "green vegetable, but 'egg" is NE Alt. yımırtka, Khak. nimirxa; Tub. nimirtka: NIV Kar. T. yımırtxa R 111 500; umirtxa Kow, 194, and according to R 111 oo SW. Az. yımırta (but modern dicts. have yumurta), NE Tus. is qu:rfBa. Of/er languages have -u- -u-, büt the -ÉR- has become -k- in NC, SC, NIV; SW Osm. yumurta, Ton. yumurtğa, not noted in SE. Yumurtğa: is clearly cognate to yumğa:k, yumur, etc. in the sense of 'something round" and theoretically Dev. N. in - $a: fr. *yumurtdouble Caus. f. of 2 *yum-. (D?S) yımırtğa: Hap. leg. in this sense, Xak. xı yımırtğa: ya:ş vv. kasras on the yd" and mim “any soft vegetable” (5aq/ (MS. magl?) na'im) like spinach or cauliflower, which does not have (deep) roots; and anything with green leaves (xadr) and cucumbers are called yımırtğa: Kaş. İİİ 433. (D) yumurftğa: 'egg'. Uyğ. vurff.' Civ. takığu yumurğasın (sic) "a hen's egg! H 7 690; takığu yumurtğasınça “the size of a hen's egg” do. 182: Xak. xi yumurtğa: “the egg (bayd) of a hen or other bird; and “the testicle” (xusya) of a man or other animal is called yumurtğa: Kaş. 1I] 433: xiv Müh. al-bayd yu:murta: Mel. 66, 1; Rif. 165: Çağ. xv ff. yumurtğa (spelt) bavda San. 346v. 26 (quotn.); Oğuz/Kıp. x1 Kaş. H 313 (yut-): Kom. xiv 'egg' yumurtka CCG; Gr,: Kip. xui al-bayd yumurtka:; Tkm. yumurda: Hou. 10, 15: xiv yumurtga (MS. yam-) al-bayd, in the Kitab Beylih vv. -k- for -&amp;İd. 98; al-bayd yumurtğa:/yumurda: (MS. yamurtuğa:lyamarda) Bul. 8, 7: xv ditto yumurta: (MS. vam-) Kav. 62, 18; ditto yumrutka 7uh. 7b. s: Osm. xiv to xvi normally yumurda T5 7 849; 1I 1076; III 828; IV 906. Tris. V. YMRD yumurla:- Den. V. fr. yumur, Hap. leg., but. katfala “to knead. (dough) into a ball” yumurlat- is noted as Kip. xir in ZTou. 43, 1r. Xak. xi (flocks and herds of sheep, camels, and horses) yumurlayu: erkenin sütin sağa:r “he rounds them up (yacma'uhá) early in the day and milks them” Kaş. 7 389, 17; n.m.e. D yumurlan- Refl. f. of yumurla:-, pec. to Kag.; the second quotn. in a grammatical passage is not described as Oğuz. Ofuz xi sü: yumurlandı: “the army (etc.) assembled” (zctama"a) Kaş. III 114 (no Aot. or İnfin.), a.o. İl 270, 2. : Dis. V. YMSD yemsin- (d-) Hap. leg.; Simulative Refl. Den. V. fr. 2 y6:m. Xak, x1 er aş yemsindi: TRIS. YMR *the man pretended to eat (ya'kiul) the food but did not actuallv eat it” Kaş. //7 109 (yemsinü:r, yemsinme:k). Dis. YMS D yemiş (d-) 'fruit'; an unusual Dev. Conc. N. in -miş fr. ye:-. A L-w. in lIungarian, presumably via Proto-Bulgar, as gyrmóles (pronounced dymólr), which indicates an original d-. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv, the usual phonetic changes, but in NE “food, fodder”. Uyğ. vun iL Bud. yemiş (so spelt) fruit" TT VIII K.4; 0.0. PP 72, 8; 79, 4-6 (as-), U II 61, 6-7 (1 tüs): Civ. (in a list of offerings; flowers) yémis (milk, wine, beer). TT VH 25, 13; (seven kinds of) tüş yemiş 'fruit (Hend.)' do. 28, 42: Xak. xı yemiş (MS. y.miş but after yumuş, so yemiş) al-fatákih 'fruit', a generic term but normally used of tree fruit (hamlu'l-agcár) Kaş, IHI iz, o.o. usually spelt yémis/yé:mis and translated a/-tamar 'fruit" I 251 (evdin-), 415 (körpe:): HJ r2 (bis-), 95 (teriş-), 146 (térin-), etc.: xui(?) Tef. yemiş 'fruit' 151: Çağ. xv ff. yémls 'umüm fawahkih “fruif in general Sam. 352r. 28: Xwar. xiv yemiş “fruit” Qutb 78: Kom. xiv "frutc yemiş CCI, CCG; Gr. 121 (quotns.): Kip. xii a/-fökiha sea'[-tamar mutlaqa(n) (ün general”) ye:mis /Iou. 7, 13: xiv yemis al-fühiha, and in the Kitáb Beylik al-tamar İd. 98: xv mutlaqu'l-fakiha yemiş Kan, 63, 7; Tuh. 28a. 7, 8sh. 13. (D) yumuş Dev, N. fr. 2 *yum-; lit. something like 'circulating'; originally 'an errand', but survives w. the broader meaning of 'a task, a piece of work' (practically syn. vv. BÀ rs) in NC Kır. jumus; Kzx. Jumis: ;b. yumuş: NW Kk. jumis; Kaz. yomiş: SW "Tkm. yumuş. Cf. yumuşçı:. Uy£. viri ff. Bud. işke yumuşka bardaçı bolsar 4f he is going to a task or on an errand' TT VII 4o, 54: Xak, yumuş al-risála bayna'l-raculayn 'an errand between two men' (etc.); and it is permissible to call 'an angel” (al-malak) yumusct: because a/-malah is derived fr. al-alüh that is al-risála; the Turks as a whole (gátibata(n)) do not know the word a/-malak Kaş. İİ 12; 28.0. 1 484 (birtem): Kip. xiv yumuş al-háca “a necessary task! İd, 98: Osm. xiv to xvj yumuş “crrand, task', sometimes in association vv, 1 t$; in scveral texts; yumuş oğlanı translating Pe. barıcdıa 'messenger'; ditto TTS 7 85o; II 1076; III 828; IV go6. : D yumşa:k (? yımşa:k) Dev. N./A. fr. yumşa:-, “soft” in a wide range of concrete and abstract applications. Occurs six times (three excluding duplicates) in "Türkü, spelt y'mgkly*mpak, both representing yımşak which was prob. the original vocalization. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. the usual phonctic changes. Türkü vri (the Chinese people's words are sweet, i.e. conciliatory) ağı:sı: yımşak “and their valuable (gifts) are soft' (i.c. luxurious) IS s, II N 4 (2 ner-), two o.o.: virt ff. Man. M İll zz, 3-5 (i) (éüglig): Uyğ. vui ff.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 983 
     
   
   
     |              Man.-A (certain divine beings can be recognized by fivesigns; first) yumşakın "by their softness' (i.e. benevolence; secondly their ruthlessness, etc.) M 1 24, 9: Bud. yumsak is common, e.g. Tyallğan yumsak savin “by deceitful mild words! U Yİ 8, 14; yağlığ yumşak köz “a moist soft eye” TT X 437, bürtgeli yumşak İki emigleri “her two breasts soft to touch” do. 445; 0.o. TT VIII G.58 (éliglig); U II 24, 2 (ofla:gu:); III 15, rr (6tle:-); 17, 14 (bürtüğlüg); 38, 3-4 (bürtül-); 73, 15-16 (öpdür) etc.: Civ. yumşak böz “soft cotton cloth' USp. 72, 1; 9t, 8; (take various ingredients and) yumşak sokup 'crush them to a pulp' TT VII 22, 12; H I 131, etc.; 0.o. do. $$ (6gi:-); TT I 178 (yılığ): Xak. xi yumşa:k “soft” (al-layyin) of anything Kaş. III 44; four o.o. translated a/-/ayyin or al-raxto “soft”: KB sözi yumgak erdi *his words were mild' 464; a.o. 703: xin(?) At. (a snake is) yokamakka yumsak 'soft to pick up' 214; a.o. 216 (azil-); Tef. yumşak “soft” (concrete and abstract) 163: xiv Muğ. al-na"im 'soft! (opposite to “hard” iriğ) yumsak Mel, 56, 7, Rif. 154; al-raxio yuşmak (in margin yumşak) 154 (only; ao. riq: (only: Çağ. xv fi, yumşak arm “soft San. 346v. 24: Xwar. xir yumsakrak “softer” ' Afi rg: xiv yumşak 'soft' Qutb 86; Nahc. 105, 12; 210, ro: Kip. xui al-na"im mün kull şay va huwa'l-raxw (opposite to “hard” iri:) yumsak Hou. 26, 17; al-raxto. tva. huwa'l-ná'im (opposite to 'solid, firm! katı:) yumşak do. 28, r: xiv yumşak al-na"im, in the Kitab Beylik al-raxw İd. 98: xv nd'im yumçak (sic) Tuh. 36b. 9; from yumşak, yumşa- 84a. ro. PD yemşe:n n.o.a.b., perhaps an unusual Den. N. fr. yemiş, cf. yavışğu:. Xak.(?) xi yemşe:n "the name of a wild fruit (tamar barri) which grows in the Kipgak country” Kaş. III 37: Çağ. xvff. yemişen “a redcoloured fruit like a wild cherry (dli 5670)” called in Pe. gömeç(?) and in Ar. za'rür (medlar); a note on its medicinal value follows San. 352r. 28. ; Dis. V. YMSD 1 yamaş- Co-op. f. of yama:-; s.i.s.m.l. like yama:-. Xak.xrol apar to:n yamaşdı: “he helped him to patch ( fi raq") the garment (etc.); also used for competing Kaş. III 75 (yamasu:r, yamagma:k). S(E) 2 yamaş- (yamış-) See mayış-. D yumşa:- (?yımşa:-, see yumşa:k) “to be soft” (lit. or metaph.). Den. V. fr. “yumuş, which can hardly be the word listed above, but survives in Cuv. cdmdl (syámál) "light (in weight), easy, quick-witted' sh. XIII 26. S.i.s.m.l. Yumşa-/cumşa- “to send on an errand” occurs in Xwar. xın(?) Oğ. and $.i.s.m.l.' Xak. xı yumşaz:dı: ne: “the thing was (or became) soft” (/dna) Kaş. III 306 (yumsa:r, yumşa:ma:k): KB (their hearts hardened) yumşadı tili “but their tongues softened” 6484; n.o. 4098 (torku:): Çağ. xvff. yumsa-/yumsal- narm şudan “to be   TRIS. V, YMŞ- : 939 soft" San. 346r. 26 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv yumşa-/yumşan- “to be, or become, soft Qutb 86: Kip. xv lána tva na'ama yumsaTuh. 39a. 6. .. D yumşat- Caus. f. of yumşa:-, "to soften (something Aee.)), in a concrete. or. abstract sense. S.i.s.m.]. Xak. xr ol teri: yumşattı: "he tanned (dabaga) the hide”, and one says ol katığ ne:pni: yumşattı: “he softened (layyana) the hard thing”, and ol er só:züg yumşattı: “that man spoke rapidly' (i.e. indistinctly, Jtadrama'l-kalám); also used when he memorized (hadda) the Koran and learnt it by heart (hafizahu, i.e. read it to himself in a low voice) Kaş. JI 3$4 (yumgatu:r, yumşatma:k): xiv Mu. layyaza yumga:tMel. 3o, 13; Rif. 114; na"ama (2na"ama “to soften”) yumşat- 3o, 13; tr6 (adding tea lana): Çağ. xv ff. yumşat- Caus. f., narm hardan "to soften” San. 346v. $ (quotn.): Xwar. xiv ditto Qut5 facsimile rogr. 10: Kip. xr layyana yumşat- (MS. yumjgut-) Hou. 43, 13. Tris. YMŞ D yumuşcı: N.A.S. fr. yumuş, originally "one who runs errands, messenger'. Survives only(?) in NW Kar. T. yumuşçu *workman' R III s8:1, Kom, 205; in a few languages replaced by 'Turco-Pe. yumuşkör. Uyğ. viu ff. Bud. (the 74 vajrakula) yumuşçi tapığçılar “messengers and servants' U İT 72, 3-4 (ii): Xak. xı Kaş. III 12 (yumuş), n.m.e.: KB ólümdin yumuşçı ig ol aşnusı 'disease is the first méssenger from death” 4618; a.o. 5955: Kup. xiv yumuşçi: al-"ulámu'l-mutagarraf fi'l-háca "a servant entrusted with a necessary task” /d. 98; Osm. xiv yumuşçı (rhyming vv. işçi) 'servant' (?, rather than “messenger”) T TS 7 850. S yumuşğa: See yavışğu:. D yémislik (d-) A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. yemiş, *orchard' and the like. S.i.s.m.]. Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A M I 14, 9 (bark); Man. yıparlığ yémislikipiz “your fragrant orchard” M III 25, 11-12 (ii). Dyémissiz (d-) Priv. N./A. fr. yémis;of a tree 'bearing no fruit". S.i.s.m.l. Xak. xi KB 2455 (ığaç): xıır(?) At. 324 (örte:-). : Tris. V. YMŞD yumşaklan- Refl. Den. V. fr. yumşa:k, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı ol mapa: yumşaklandı: taláyana li'l-racul (sic, implying er for ol) toa tamallaqa wa xada'a "the man was kind to me and flattered and soothed me” Kaş. III 116 (yumşaklanu:r, yumşaklanma:k). " Dyemişlen- (d-) Refl. Den. V. fr. yemiş, pec. to Kaş.(?). Xak. xı yığa:ç yemişlendi: “the tree bore fruit! (atmarat) Kaş. III 114 (yemişlenü:r, yemişlenme:k): o.o. II 269, 24; I1 196 (ka:tlan-).  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 984 
     
   
   
     940 PIS Dis. YMZ yanuz 'the groin'; one of several words for parts of the body ending in -Z, Survives onls(?) in NE Tob. yamuz/yambuz 'groin' R HI 309. Cf. kasığ, there is no widely distributed word for 'groin'.. Uyğ. vri ff. Civ. yamizda mer bolsar 'if a man has a mole on his groin' TT VII 37, 2-3; (of à magical sign) yomuz (src?) üze urğu ol “he must put it on the groin” do. 41, 7: Xak. xr yamız canibay”l-"dna — wa. — ru'üsu'l-artkayn — mün bütin the two sides of the pubes and the inner (side) of the heads of the hip-bones' Kaş. IH 10. D yumuz (?yumiz) Hap. ler. , Dev. N./A. fr. 2 *yum-; lit. “round, globular', or the like. Xak. xı yumuz (MS. vumt!uz) er al-raculu'l-buhturu'l-samin “a: short, stout, fat man” Kaş. HI 10. Tris. YMZ PUD yumuzuğluğ this word, which forms part of the name of a constellation. (astrological rather than astronomical), occurs in all three MSS, of this passage and is so transcribed in TT VI; but it is more likely to be yumuşuğluğ P.N./A. fr. a Dev. N. fr. *yumus-, Co-op. f. of 1 yum-, in which case some meaning like "having the (power) to shut* might be inferred. Uy. vi ff... Bud. (after the names of six planets and before four major constellations) yumuşuğluğ beş tórlüg toprak erkligi "the five kinds of . . . rulers of the carth” TT VI 93-4 (the Chinese original, which has mercly 'five carth spirits', gives no guidance). Mon. YN ya:n originally an anatomical term “the hip”, hence more generally “the side, flank” of the body, or in other contexts, S.i.a.m.l.g. w. the usual phonctic changes, but now usually used w. Poss. Suffs meaning “beside” or, more loosely, "in the possession of”, As Ar. al-canb means both “hip” and “side” the exact meaning of the word when so translated is uncertain. Cf. yamız, yancuk, Türkü vir T i: (?, öndün), yantakı: do. 26 (2 to:ğ): Uyü. vitff. Bud, TT. X 446 (yulınçğas): Civ. (in a list of the positions of the soul on various days) takığu künde yanında bolur “on the Fovl Day it gets into the hip” TT VII 19, 11; o.o. do 21, 8 (uvut); aş, 4 (ağrı:-), (in USp. 30, 9 yan sıçısı is a misreading of yér SIÇISI): Xak. xr ya:n ru'üsu Pevarikayn “the heads of the hip-bones'; and a/-zcarik is also called ya:n Kaş, III 160; (the boy spills water and) uluğ ya:nı: sınu:r “the grown man (slips up on it and) his hip-bone is broken' 77 19, 16: xin(?) Tef. yan “side” (lit. and metaph.) 138: xiv Mul.(?) al-warik yam başı: Rif. 143: Çağ. xv ff. yan zaraf “side”, bir yan "on, or to, one side” Vel. 400; yan (1) samt tea cünib 'direction, side” (quotn.); (2) paylı? wa canb “hip” (quotn.) Sam. 338v. 24: Xvvar, xim yanlarınça "by their side” "A/ 22: xiv yan . YMZ “side” (lit. and metaph.) and vv, Poss. Suff.s is common Qutb facsimile 66v. 19, 67r. 6, 75r. $, etc.; MN 439; Nahc. 11, 17; 48, 6 etc.: Kip. xitr (under 'parts of the body") al-canb 'hip' yan Hou. 21, 2: xiv yan al-canb İd. 98: xv (under Advs. of Place) /a canıbih "to your side, in your direction" ya:ninda: Kar. 36, r, (under *parts. of the body") a/-canb yan do. 60, 18; canb yan Tuh. 11a. iz, and (among Advs. of Place) 73b. 10; o.0. 13b. 12; 378. 12. F yan L-w. fr. Chinese. yang (Giles 12,8854) which means both. concretelv "a: pattern, model and abstractly. "kind, sort, manner'. Apparently survives in NE Alt. yan R 7/7 $7; 'Tuv. çap (human) character or disposition; custom, habit. In SW Osm, it became confused w. yan and e.g. in Red. 2190 is described as an alternative spelling. Uy. vri ff. Bud. kşantı kilğuluk yapiB “the way to make confession' Suv. 100, 6—7; 0.0. do. 95, 3; U II 41, zo (osuğ): Hüen-ts. 126-30 (birik-), 2110-1 (ki:b): Civ. él yanınça “in accordance with the practice of the realm” USp. r, 5; 7, 5—6; ro, 7 etc.; a.o. HE 1 171 (usak): Xak. xi yap 'the prototype (or model, markaz) of a thing from which the measurements (a/-aşdar) for something else are taken, and it is made in the same shape" ('a/a Ra”yatihi), hence one says börk yanı: “a model of ə hat”: side flaps or a head-picce are cut out of paper or a spherical object is modelled out of clay, and the brocade of the hat is measured against it and cut out to match it; also used of the prototype of anything else Kaş, H7 361: KB yan is common, c.g. yıparlı biligli teni bir yanı “the values of musk and wisdom are of the same kind' 31:1; kilki yanı “its character and habits' 344; (Aytoldi went about) bu yan “in this way' 498; olo. 569, 70s, 835, 1934, 3581 (yun-): Çağ. xv ff, yapla (spelt) mii] va mánand "like! San. 339r. 18 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv yan “model, manner! Quib 67: Kip. xiv yan (MSS. vor) al-haqq (many meanings, herc perhaps “valuc”) /d. 98 seems to belong here: xv kamı “as, like” yapla Tut. 31a. 8: Osm. xiv, xv. yan 'shape, form, kind', and the like, often associated vv. Pe. rang 'colout'; in four texts. T TS 1819; HI 800; IV 875 (transcribed yeng). yen 'the sleeve" (of a garment); s.ia.m.l.g. vv. the usual phonetic changes. Xak. xı yen (MS. yey, but entered between yun and yin) al-kumm “a slceve” Kaş. III 362; o.0. of y€:D H 109 (salis-), 187 (saltur-); yen 233 (sıtğal-): KB yaka yen tutar “scizes his collar or sleeve” 3541; a.0. 5974 (çüğe:): xiri(?) Tef. yéy 'sleeve' rss: xiv. Mu. al-kumm yep Mel. 66, 14; Rif. 166: Çağ. xv ff. yép yep... dstin ma'násima 'sleeve! Vel. 412 (quotns.); yep (spelt) dstim San. 382v. iş: Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 8o: Kom. xiv 'sleeve' yen CCI; Gr.: Kap. xir al-kumm yen (unvocalized) /7on. 19, 1r: xiv yép ai-kumm İd. 98: xv kumm yep Tuh. 31a. 3: Osm. xiv ff. yen, sometimes spelt yéy; c.i.a.p. T'T'S I 819; II 1038; III 800; IV 874.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 985 
     
   
   
     MON. V. YN- " 41 1 yin “(animal”s) dung'. Survives only(?) as yin in some NE languages and SE Tar. R III $14; Tuv. çin. Cf. kriá, komuk, yundak. Xak. xı yin al-fart 'dung'; hence one says ko:y yini: 'sheep's dung' Kaş. 111 s. S 2 yin/ykn See i:n. 3 yi:n a word of rather indefinite connotation; n.o.a.b. İn some contexts it seems to mean "the (human) body”, in others “a constituent part of the body”, and in others “the skin”. Uy£. viri ff. Bud. eti yini “his flesh and skin (or limbs?)' U Z/I 24, 6 (i) (sóglün-); go, 5; 78, 23; TM IV 254, vor, (the body (etöz) is said to be the body which comes into existence of its own accord) beş tórlüg yini yeme kentün bolmis ol tétir "its five kinds of constituent parts (i.e. head, arms, legs, etc.) are said to come into existence of their own accord' TT VI 448-9; (every hair) altun óplüg yininizde "on your golden-coloured body” Suv. 348, 1-2; a.o, TT IV 8, 68 (ölüt): Xak. xı yl:n badanu'l-insán “a man's body” Kaş, 111 145; twelve o.o., in seven translated a/-5adarı or al-casad 'body', elsewhere usually al-cild “skin”, in JI] 278, 14 et yin is translated abdánu'l-nàs sa. luhümuhum "people's bodies and flesh'; see 7 179 (alar-), 217 (ürper-), 261 (emrit-), 275 (emri:-), 315 (érkeklen-), 463, 12 (emris-); III 109 (yiğren-). yin (for yép) “nasal mucus” or the like; 1.0.a.b., but cf. yipe:d-, yipdeğü:, Cf. lésp. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. (demons) yip aşlığlar *who eat mucus” U 77 66, 43: Xak. xı yin al-muxát “mucus” Kaş. III 362; a.o. III 326 (ylpe:d-): xiv Muh. al-muxdt yl Mel. 46, 14; Rif. 140 (MS. bi:y). VU?F 1 yon pec. to Uy£.; the contexts suggest some such meaning as “efficacity” of medical remedies. Prob. a l.-w. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. (in an exposition of the diseases most prevalent in the various seasons and the appropriate remedies for them; one must give their drugs, without interrupting the series, in these seasons) yarağınça yonınça “according to their value and efficacity(?)' Suv. 59o, 8; (when one is fully familiar with these diseases and their causes, one must administer remedies) iğke yaraşı yonınça 'according to their efficacity for treating the disease' do. 592, 12; (let him give a remedy and cure the disease) otlarnıp yonınça 'according to the efficacity of the (various) remedies' do. 593, 6. VU?F 2 yo:n n.o.a.b.; certainly an Adj. and perhaps a foreign ethnical name, though it would prob. be fanciful to take it as a corruption of Sanskrit yatana 'lonian, Greek", As might be expected there is no native Turkish word for 'peacock'; modern languages use ].-w.s, usually Ar. tà'iis (which has even found its way into Mong. as £o”os/toğos) or Russian pavlin. Xak. xı yo:n kuş al-tà'is; yo: arik the name of a summer station (mugtdf) near Bala:sa:ğu:n Kaş, Hİ 144; a.o. 7 331 (kuş). 1 yun (fi-) properly *wool', but in a limited area in the early period 'cotton', and in some modern languages also 'feathers'. A First Period l.-w. in Mong. as nuy£asun (-sun Mong. Suff.; Haenisch 120; Studies, p. 234). S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE where tük Ttü: ) is ied instead; SE Türki yup: NC Kir., Kzx. Jün: SC Uzb. yup: NW Kk. jün; Kaz. yon; əə Nog. yun: SW Az. yun; Osm., Tkm. yün. Ti forms vv. -ü- prob. arose fr. some confusion 7 yü:ğ properly 'feathers', but used for “vvool” in some modern languages, Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. PP 2, 3(1 çığay), 13, 2-3 (tarr:-) (as yun is mentioned in association vv. hemp and could be cultivated, the meaning is no doubt 'cotton'; as the Turks prob. first came into contact with cotton fairly late in their history, the use of thís word for it is quite understandable): Xak. xı yup al-şüf twa'l-wabar ma'a(n) both *wool' and '(camel or goat's) hair” Kaş. III 361; twelve o.o., all spelt yu: and translated a/-şüf except once al-şa"r “hair”: KB tonum koy yupt “my clothing is sheep's vvool” 4767; a.o. 4442 (azar): Arğu:, Yağma:, Karluk xr yup al-qufn “cotton” Kaş. III 362: xin(?) Tef. yug *wool' 167 (yiig): xiv Rbğ. (Adam and Eve) yup égirdiler “span wool' R III 596; Muh. al-şüf yun Mel. 67, 13 (only): Çağ. xv ff. “yun (spelt) par-i fuyür wa başm-i haywànát feathers, wool' San. 347r. 11 (quotn.): Kom. XIV “hair” yun, “vvool, feathers' yup CCI; Gr,: Kap. xiu al-süf yup Hou. 15, 4: xiv yup al-şüf, in the Kitab Beylik yun al-rig. “feathers” İd. 98; al-riş yun Bul. 12, 6: xv riş yuy (in margin in second hand tüg) Tu“. 16b. r3; şa"r 'hair' (saş/kirpik/) yun (with şöf written below in second hand) zob. 5: (Osm. see yüg). 2 yup Hap. leg.; perhaps a l.-w. fr. Chinese. Xak. xı yup 'lumps(?) of meat (lam ğudadi) attached to the lungs', eaten by women but not men Kaş. İl 361. Mon. V. YN1 yan- “to turn back” (Intrans.) and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NW vv. the usual phonetic changes. Türkü viu (the Kirkiz people submitted and) yantımız “ve turned back” ... kirkizda: yantimiz “vee turned back from the Kırkız” T 28-9; a.o. T 37 (and see 3 yan-): Uy£. viii ff. Man.-A (they took a stone and threw it at Zrusc Burxan) ol tag [one word lost] olarğaru yantı “that stone (stopped?) and turned back on them' (and wounded their heads) Man.-uig. Frag. 400, 10-11: Chr. yana yanıp “come back (to me) and” U 7 6, 2: Bud. kutmndın yanmaksız evrilmeksiz erür "(that man) is not destined to turn back from his blessed state or revolve (in the cycle of rebirths)' U 71 40, 102-3: Civ. TT VII 28, 6 (esen), do. 55 (asığlığ), USSp. 3, 6 (kactur-); 32, 18, 63, 4: Xak. xı er yo:ldin yandlı: “the man turned back (or returned(?), raca'a) from the journey' (etc.) Kaş. III 64 fprov (2 sın), verse (uğra:8), followed by 2, 3, 4 yan-): KB yaşık yandı bolğay “the sun vvill have returned again” 66, (a thing which has risen) 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 986 
     
   
   
       942 énlgke yanar “turns back into a decline" 1050; (the day which you have spent) yana yanğu ermez 'wil not come back again” 1240: xili(?) Tef. yan- “to turn back” r39: xiv. RPŞ. 236r. 21 (uğra:-), Muh.(?) raca"a yan- Rif. 109 (Mel. 26, 9 dón-): Çağ. xv ff. yan-(-d1) dón- “to turn back” Vel. 400 (quotn.); yan- .. . (2) bar gaştan "to turn back, return' San. 337v. 8 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv yan- “to turn back, return” Qutb facsimile Sor. rz, 88v. 8; Nahc. 323, 3: Kom. xiv yan- “to turn away from . . . to... CCG; Gr. 112 (quotn.). D 2 yan- Refl. f, of *ya:-, cf. 3 yak-, 1 yal-; “to burn, blaze up”, and the like, S.i.a.m.].g. except NE w. the usual phonetic changes. Kip. xi (after 3 yan-) o:t yandı: “the fire burnt brightlv' (adá'at); alternative form of yal- (luga fi'l-lam) in the Kip. language Kaş. 117 65 (4 yan- follows): (Xak.) xiv Muh. idrámu'l-nár "of a fire, to hurn' ya:nmak Mel 35, 14; Rif. 121; fttaqada “to burn brightly' ya:n(?; MS. yala:n-) 102 (only): Çağ. xv ff. yan(1) süxtan “to burn' San. 337v. 8 (quotns.): Xwar. xit yap- (sc) “to blaze up” ' Alf 49: xiv yan- ditto Qutb 66; Nahc. 165, 11: Kap. xiv yan- magada “to burn brightly' 1d. 99; igfa'ala "to blaze up” yan- Bul. şiri xv maqada yan- Tuh. 38b. s. 3 yan- “to threaten (someone Aec.)”. Survives only(?) in NE Bar. yanı- R 7/1 85: NW Kaz. yana-, the normal word for “to threaten' is korkit-. Türkü viri (I sent out long-distance patrols, I established a watch-tower at Arku:y (?) and) yanığma: yağı:ğ kelü: bilirtim (stone much damaged, transcription not guaranteed) 'I came and reported (the approach of) the threatening enemy” T 53: Uyğ. vırı ff. Man. M II 11, 21 (iğne:): Bud. yanar erpek “index finger' (an over-literal translation of Sanskrit tarjani “index (lit. threatening) finger', instead of the usual phr. 1 su:k erpek) TT V 8, 57; a.o. do. iz, 119-21 (eğ-): Xak. xı beg anı: yandı: “the beg (etc,) threatened him” Kaş. HI 64 (followed by 2 yan-): KB (keep a guard on your tongue) tilip teáme künde başıpnı yanur “your tongue threatens your head (i.e. life) every day” 967: xiv Muh. al-tahdid "to threaten” yammak Mel. 36, r, Rif. ızı: Xvvar. xiv başınnı yanur Qutb facsimile 52r. 9: Kom. xiv “to threaten” yan(or yan1- ?) CCG, Gr.: Kip. xv haddada yani(sic) Tuh. 38a. 6; tamea "ada “to threaten' yanı- gob. rz. 4 yan- “to vomit'; Kaş. shows this as an alternative form of 4 yantur-, it is perhaps merely an extended meaning of 1 yan-. N.o.s.b. Xak. xı (after 2 yan-) er yandı: “the man vomited” (qà'a) Kaş. III ös (yana:r, yanma:k): Xwar. xiv çeriğ kuşlar alıp kuşlarğa yandı “the army caught (so many) birds that they got sick of (eating) birds” Qutb 66. yafi- “to rout” or the like; as such n.o.a.b., but 1 yay- may be a laterf. Türkü vr (the Oğuz üə ànta: sancdim yafidim “1     nn MON. V. YN(the Türkü people let their feet vvavcr) oza: yana: keliğme: süsi:n ağıt(tım “1 rallied their army which was escaping in disorder” /7 E 31; (the Oğuz attacked us . . .) süpüşdimiz tepri: yarlıkadı: yafidimiz ógüzke: tüşdi: yafiduk yolta: yeme: ölti: “ve fought; heaven favoured us; we routed them; they fell into the river and died on the road of their rout' T 16; o.o, £ E 23, II E 19 (élet-); 1 E 34; T 41-—the word may occur as yay- in Ongin 1; the y- is not quite certain, but this meaning suits, and yafi- is likely to have been yayearlier than yad:- which hardly suits the context. (Our ancestors . . .) tórt bulunığ etmiş yığmış yaymış basmış “organized, assembled, routed, and suppressed the four quarters (of the vvorld)”. yeD- "to conquer (someone Zcc.Y. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv, the usual phonetic changes. Cf. ut-, Ofuz, Kip. xt er ant: yepdi: 'the man defeated him” (falabahu) over something (ft say) Kaş. III 391 (yepe:r, yepme:k): Çağ. xv ff. yeg- mağlüb hardan wa mabhüt hardan "to conquer; to strike dumb' Sam. 352v. r (quotns.): Kom. xiv 'to conquer' yep- CCI, CCG, Gr. 122 (quotns.): Kip. xiv ğalaba tea zafara ta qadara "to conquer, get the better of (someone)' yen- Bul, 67r.: zafara wa ğalaba yep- (/ut-) Tuh. 24b. 1; £alaba ditto 27a. 2. yon- (yo:n-) originally perhaps “to cut” rather generally; in Türkü it seems to mean vaguely “to wound'; but s.ia.m.l.g. w. the usual phonetic changes (SW 'Tkm. yo:n-, Osm. yon-/yont-) more specifically for “to plane (wood); to carve (wood, stone, etc.). Türkü vir ff. Man, Chuas. 88-9 (ur-): Xak. (however sharp a knife is) ö:z sa:pın yonu:ma:s (crasis of yonu: uma:s) “it cannot cut (qaf") its own handle' Kaş. I 384, 25; n.m.e.: xin(?) Tef. yon- “to carve” (an idol) r62: Çağ. xv ff. yon- “to carve” (or plane, tarágidan) wood and the like; but "to cut” (tarágidan) hair, wool, and the like is kirk- San. 346v. 28; reverse entry 294r. 29 (kırk-): Xwar. xiv yon- 'to carve' (stone blocks, figures, etc.) Qutb 82: Kom. xiv “to carve'! yon- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv yon- nahata wa bard 'to carve or trim (wood)' İd. 99: xv nahata yon- Tuh. 372a. 10: Osm. xiv ff. yon-, translated yont-; c..a.p. TTS I 841; II 1066; III 820; IV 897. D yun- (yu:n-) Refl. f. of yu:- “to wash oneself”. S.i.a.m.l.g. w. the usual phonetic changes; often in extended forms like SC Uzb. yuvin-: SW Az. yuyun-; Tkm. yuvun-. Türkü vi ff. Man. M 1 7, 21 (aritin-): Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. bu” yunğuluk tórüg kihp yunzun arıtınzun "let him wash and purify himself carrying out the rules for vvashing oneself” Suv. 478, 19-20; o.o. U Il 42, 31-2 (ar1tin-); TT VIII C.8 (burna:ç): Civ, eckü süti birle yunsar 'if he washes himself with goat's milk' TT VII 23, r: Xak. xı er su:vda: yundr “the man washed himself (ğtasala) in vvater” Kaş. III 66 (Oğuz follows): mliasosuk suvka yunmak anıp yapt ol “it  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 987 
     
   
   
     DIS; YNA 943 is his habit to wash himself in cold water' 3581; o.o. 3584 (katiğ), 5681, etc.: xiv Muh. tağassala "to wash' (Intrans.) yu:n- Mel. 40, 19; Rif. 130: Oğuz xı (after Xak.) er yundt: “the man performed the ritual ablutions' (tawadda'a) Kaş. 111 66 (yuna:r, yunma:k): Xwar. xıv yun- “to wash oneself, perform the ritual ablutions” Qutb 86; Nahc. 10, 12; 44, 2; 243, 6-7; 266, 8: Kom. xiv yu:n- (or yuwun- ?) "to wash' (Intrans.) CCG; Gr. 130: Kip. xim iğtasala yun- (Imperat., in error, -gil) Hou. 37, 2: xiV ditto Bul. 29v.: xv ditto yu:n- Kav. 76, 4; (su koyun-; in margin in second hand) yun- TuA. 6a. 6; yundum 77b. 6: Osm. xiv to xvı yun-, less often yuvun- 'to wash' (Intrans.); in several texts TTS I 8şo, İl 1077-80; 111 826; IV 907-9. S yün- See ün- (Türkü). Dis. YNA D yana: Ger. fr. 1 yan-; fr. the earliest period used both (1)as an Adv. meaning “again”, esp. in such phr. as yana: yan- “to turn back again”, (2) as a Conjunction “and again”, sometimes hardly more than “and”. During the medieval period, and even earlier, perhaps influenced by yeme: which is almost syn., it became yene in some languages. İt survives in SE Türki yana/yéne/yene: NC Kir. jana; Kzx. Jana/jené: SC Uzb. yana: NW Kk. jene; Kaz. yane; Kumyk gene, Nog. yana: SW Az. yene, Osm. gene/yine; Tkm. yene, Türkü vr ff. IrkB. 44 (titn-); Man. (anyone vvho says) tertrü yana iğideyü “perversely and falsely Chuas. 135: UyÉ. vir: ff. Man.-A (just as fire which arises from (friction with) wood) yana ığaçağ örteyür *thereupon burns the wood' M 1 7, 3; similar 0.0. do. 8, 7 etc.: Man. similar phr. M 7 r8, 6 (4): Chr. U 1 6, 2 (yan-): Bud. yana “again, and” is common; in TT VIII spelt yna: in E.48, yne: in G.22, and yine: (sic?) in. K.ro, in U İl 88, 79 yene and in U IV so, 128; TT X 17, 358 yene ök, it usually begins the sentence and means 'and again', sometimes in the phr. yeme (VU) yana or (VU) yana yeme, but sometimes follows an Adv., e.g. kén (VU) yana “and then late! TT IV 4, 5: Civ. yne: 'again TT VIII L.16, 46; (VU) yana “and again” often begins a sentence in H 7: Xak. xi yana: (prob. so pronounced) a Particle meaning (öniya(n) “for a second time, again), hence one says yana: keldi: cá'a tüniya(n) Kaş. III 26; (misplaced in a section for words with -y- as the second consonant, ?a later addition) yana: a Particle connoting “return” (al-rac'a); hence one says yana: keldim raca'tu wa cvin fániya(n) 117 170; eight o.o. translated "and, then, again”: KB yana “and, and then” is common 171, 234; 341, etc.; “again 1240 (1 yan-), 2396 (udit-), etc.: xrii(?) Az. yana “and then” 9, etc.; Tef. yana “again 139: Çağ. xv ff. yana Zeyri sea tehrür "other, again” (quotn. vv. yanalar "other people”): yanayi Zayriyi; yana yene ve bir kerre daxı “once more” (quotn.) Vel. 408; yana (spelt ydnd) (1) rie 'again', in the sense  of repetition (takrar), in Ar. ayda(n); (2) diger 'another'; (3) ğayr 'other'; also spelt ydna(h) and yana(h) (?yene) San. 338v. 29 (quotns.)4 yana (spelt yana(h), yüna(h)) same as yánd, same translation 339r. 25 (quotns.): Xwar. xı yene/gene 'and' "AZ 10; xın(?) gene (usually spelt gre, once gere) “and, and then” is common in Og.: xıv (VU) yana “and, again” Qutb 67; MN şo, Nahe. z, 8; 22, 12 etc.: Kom. xiv "again" yana/yene CCG; Gr. 113, 122 (quotn.): Kip. xit fumma “then, later (VU) yana: Hou. $6, 4 (examples follow): xv kamá annahu "likewise'(?) (VU) yana/ğene (/dağı), also fumma bi-ma"nü ayda(n) Tuh. 31a. 8. , F 1 yana: 'elephant'; pec. to Uyğ.: an obvious 1-vv. of unknown origin, also spelt yağa:n, yaga:n, qq.v. Uyğ. virt ff. Man. (an invocation) yapam “my elephant' M II 8, 13 (i): Bud. Sanskrit nágavat “like sn elephant ya:pa teğ TT VIII B.8; o.o. do. C.s (tişi:), U I 37, 2; III 55, 3 (ürk-) etc.: xiv Chin.Uyğ. Dict. hstang 'elephant' (Giles 4,287) yan Ligeti 280; Rİ s8(yar). : 2 yapa: syn. w. ya:n and perhaps to be explained as an Oğuz form of the Dat., yapa: « yanğa: c ya:nka:, erroneously used as a Nom. lt still survives in SW Osm. (in idiomatic expressions) and Tkm. yana:, Oguz xr yana: “the side (cámib) of a valley, and the bank (gatf) of any river” Kaş. III 369: xiv Muh. al-cánib yana: Mel. 85, 3; Rif. 191 (MS. yabga:): Kip. xiv yaga: al-ciha "side, direction' ; one says bu: yana: “to this side”, ol yana: “to that side" İd. oo, al-şamb “side, direction' yağa: (to be read yaga:?) Bul. 14, 8: xv ciha yana Tuh. rza. r: Ösm. xiv ff. yapa “side, direction'; c.i.a.p. usually in such phr. as bir yanadın “on the one hand”, senden yapa “in your direction! TTS I 776; II 989; İH 761; IV 834: xvii yana (spelt) in Rumi, cünib ma samt ditto San. 339r. 13. : yapı: 'new', both concrete and abstract (e.g. of year). S.i.a.m.l.g. in a wide range of forms; NE yanı/ya:/ça:/na:: SE Türki yépi/yéngi/ yepnt: NC Kir. lanı, Kzx. )apa: SC Uzb. yangi: NW Kk. japa; Kaz. yapa, Kumyk, Nog. yanı: SW Az. yeni, Osm. yeni, Tkm. yanı. Uyğ. viu yanı: “one of the first ten days of the month”, e.g. [ey iliki: ay alti: yapı:ka: “on the sixth day of the first month” Su. N 9; a.o.o.: vr ff. Man.-A M I 14, 8-10 (bark): Bud. yanı kün “the first day” (of a period) TT VI 324-6 (6:4), U İl 21, 7 and 19; a.o. Suv. 609, 16 (enükle:-): Civ. yağı in the same meaning as in viti is common in TT VH, VIII and USp.; o.o. TT 1 85, 117: Xak. xr yapı: ne: 'anything new' (cadid) Kaş. III 369; 2.0. 1 376, ız: KB yanı 'new' is common 349, 492 (yagı kelgüçi 'newcomer"), 686-8, etc.: xın(?) At. 195 (eskir-); Tef. ditto 151 (yeni): xiv Muh. al-cadid (opposite to fold* eski:) yanı: Mel. 54, 3; Rif. 151; al-nayrüx 'new years day” yanı: kün 79, 17; 184: Çağ. xvfi. yanı yegi Vel. 403 (quotns.); yanı (spelt) nato tva taza 'new, fresh', also spelt 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 988 
     
   
   
     944 DIS yan San. 339r. 21 (quotns); yan same translation 339r. rr (quotn.; an error; yap baş here seems to be a Sec. f. of yan baş): yépi same translation 352v. 18: Xwar. xii aynı yanası (sic) “the new moon” "AZ 36: xiv yanı 'new! Qutb 68; Nahc. 253, 7: Kom. xiv ditto CC7, CCG; Gr.; Kip. xii alf-hilal "the new moon! yanı: ay ya"? qamar cadid Hou. s, 4: xiv. YEDİ: (?misvocalization) al-cadid İd. 98: xv al-cadid (opposite to “old” eski:) yanı: Kar. 64, 15; cadid yanı, Tkm. yanğı Tuh. 11b. 9; All yanı ay 327b. 7. E yanu: See tanu:, E yene: See yepge:. Dis. V. YNAyanu:- 'to sharpen'; less specific than bile:“to whet'. Survives, same meaning, in NE Bar. yanı- RI 85; Tuv. çanı-: NC Kir, İanı:-/ jan-; Kzx. jan- : NW Kk. İanı-, Kaz. yana-; Nog. yan-. Xak. xı er bice:k yanu:dı: "the man sharpened (sa/rada) the knife' (sword, and the like), that is when he passed it to and fro (amarra) on (the palm of) his hand after he had sharpened it (sannali) Kaş. HİT 91 (yanu:r, yanu:ma:k). yéni- n.o.a.b.; apparently Intrans:"im- the sense of 'to be, or become, light', cf. yénik; of Kag.s two etymologies the first is correct but inverted, the second impossible. Xak. xı ura:ğut yeni:di: "the woman gave birth and laid down her burden' (realadat . . . tva :wada'at. hamlahá); this V. is used specifically (xássata(nm)) of women only; in the case of other animals the name of the offspring (al-marlüd) is taken and the Suff. -1a:- is added to it to give the concept of parturition (a/-nitàc), e.g. of a cow one says inğe:k buza:ğu:1a:dı: “the cow gave birth to a calf', buza:ğu: with. Suff. -18:- (other examples follow). "There are two possible etymologies (işfiydq) of yeni:-; one is that it is derived fr. the phr. yenik ne:p “a light (a/-xafif) thing", and that when she laid down her burden she became light (xaffat), yeni:di: vv. a kasra on the nün, but the regular form for this meaning would have a damma (i.e. yenü:di:; there is no good foundation for this statement). The other is that it is derived fr. yi:n "a body” (a/-5adan) and that the woman, when she gave birth, ejected (axracat) a body (casad) from herself. Both theories are plausible (Aasam) Kaş. III 91 (yéni:r (sic), yeni:me:k); bu: ura:ğut ol yéni:gü: (sic?, the MS. has ye/éne[ingá:) “this woman is on the point of giving birth” (aşrdfat 'alá'i-viláda) III 36: KB bodun asğı artti yenip yükleri “the people's benefits increased, their burdens becoming light' 1654. yonpa:- “to make false accusations (against someone cc., to someone Dat.) ; survives only(?) in NE yopdo-/yopna- R III 415. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. TT IV 8, 71 (çaşur-): Xak. xı ol anı: begke: yona:dı: "he made false accusations against him (zcagá bihi) to the beg” (etc.) Kaş. III 397 (yona:r, yoga:ma:k); . YNÀ a.0. 376 (yona:ğ): KB yonağlı yonasa bu yalpuk rti “if this dog among men makes a false accusation (against me)' 5869; méni kim yonasa ayıtğıl mapa “if someone accuses me falsely, question me” s871:. E yóne- See ün- "Vürkü. Mon. V. YNCyanç- “to crush, trample on', and the like; survives in. NC. Kir, jang-; Kzx. jangi-; SC Uzb. yang-: NW Kaz., Kumyk yanç-, Nog. yanş-. Uyf.viu ff. Man.-A (just as the hammer and anvil which are made of iron) yana kamağ temireğ kentü yangar 'thereupon themselves crush all (kinds of) iron” M I 18, 12-13: Bud. in confessions of sins it has no Object and seems to mean “to be oppressive' or the like; (if either in my previous or present incarnation) yançdım erser tilin sózleyü ... yançdım erser U II 56, 13; 0.0. do. 85, 30 fL; Suv. 134, 7-8; Civ. satun yançıp 'crushing garlic! H 1 176; alo, IT 10, yz: Xak. xı ol ka:ğu:nuğ yançdı: “he trampled on (xabbata) the melon (etc.) and crushed it (daqqa) beneath his feet'; also used of anything when he bit ('adda) something and pressed (damma) its parts. together Kaş. 1]I 435 (yança:r, yançma:k, MS. in error -me:2), 2.0. III 303, ro: KB yanç- is fairly common, e.g. yağı boynı yançsa “if he crushes the enemy's neck' 1926; o.o. 2016 (örkle:-), 2022, 4015, 4845: Çağ. xv ff. yang- (spelt) narm kardan "to soften' San. 338r. 10 (quotn.): Kom. xiv “to crush! yanç- CCG, Gr. iry (quotn.): Kip. xv darasa 'to wear out, erase' yang- Tuh. 16a. 9; 'afasa "to wring, squeeze" yanş- 26a. 9 (both later revocalized yangi-): Osm. xvi yanc- “to crush'; in one text TT.S I 778 (vancı-). *yinc- See yincfe:, yinçür-, etc. Dis. YNC ?E yeneç See yepğeç. ?F yinçü 'pearl'; no doubt a 1.-vv, from some Chinese phr., but which is uncertain. 'The second syllable is presumably cu 'pearl' (Giles 2,549), but there seem to be insuperable phonetic objections to the theory in R 711 339 that the word reproduces the phr. chén chu *genuine pearl', even though it is quite a common one and actually occurs in the Chinese text of 711, where chén chu ho 'genuine pearl river” occurs in a context which suggests that it is the same river as the yincü: ógüz in 7, I7, T (see G. Schlegel, Die chinesische Inschrift auf dem wigurischen Denkmal in Kara. Balgassun (MSFO IX), Helsingfors, 1896, p. 104). The identity of the first syllable remains a mystery. S.i.a.m.l.g. except NE; SE “Türki ünçe BŞ, lünce Jarring: NC only Kzx. injü: SC Uzb. incu: NW Kk. xinji; Kaz. ence; Kumyk inci; Nog. 1nci (sic): SW Az., Osm. inci; Tkm. i:nci/xünci, "The intermediate Turkish source through which it reached Russian as zhemchug is unknown. Türkü vir yingü: öğüz “Pearl River”, the upper reaches of the 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 989 
     
   
   
       DIS. V. YNCSir Darya (Jaxartes) 183, IN 3; 1E 39; T 44; Ix. 16: Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. erteni yinçü 'jewels and pearls” PP 34, 2; Suv. 446, 16; o.o. PP 6, 7-8 (bonçuk), U IV 3o, sı (tiz-); TT X 450 (tiziğ): Xak. xi yingü: al-lu'lu' 'pearl'; and slave girls (aí-imá') are called yinçü: after it Kaş. IJI 3o (prov.); 1 387 (tizig); 77 9 (tiz-) and nearly 20 o.o. translated al-lu'lu' or al-durr “pearT”: K B 211 (tü:b), 212 (çıkar-), 4427 (tiz-): xim?) 7Tef. yincü (sic?) 154: xiv Muh.(?) al-Iu'!Àu!. yingü: Rif. 181 (only): Çağ. xv ff. linçü/inçi /ncü, dürr ma"nasına (quotn.), incl xátün-i purda-nigin “a court lady” (quotn.; prob. 'pearl' used as a quasi-P.N.) Vel. 82; inçü (spelt) (1) martoürid 'pearl' (quotn.) San. 117v. 15; incl zan 'woman' r17v. 21 (same quotn. as in Vel.): Oğuz, Kip. xı (after Xak.; yinçü: in Oğuz, Kip. is) cinçü: Kaş. III 30: Xwar. xiv yinçü/yünçü/yünçi 'pearl'; metaph. “teeth” Qutb So, 84 (yóngi), 88; MN 112, etc.; Nahc. 62, 5: Kom. xiv 'pearl' inçü CCI; Gr.: Kip. xır al-Iu'ly! y.ncü: Hou. 31, 15; yüncü as a P.N. do. 30, ız: xiv incü: aj-lu'iu' İd. 24; ditto yencü: (sic) Bul. s, 5: xv ditto inci Kar. 64, 12; Tuh. 31b. 11. D yançuk Dim. f. of ya:n; “a purse, or small bag hung from the belt, hence “a pocket”. S.i.s.m.l. vv, the usual phonetic changes, the same meaning in SE Türki: SC Uzb.: NW Kaz., but in SW Osm. “the side-armour of a horse'. Xak. xı yancuk a/-Rfsa "a purse' Kaş. III 45; 0.0. translated al-xarifa "a leather bag (for money)” 77 6 (bür-), 25o (karvan-): Çağ. xv ff. yancuk (spelt) “a purse or pocket” (Risa twa cibi) which is sewn inside the side of a robe" San. 339r. 7: Kom. xiv 'purse' yançık CCI, CCG, Gr.: Kip. xii (under 'clothing") a/-xarita yançu:k (MS. yungu:k) Hou. 19, 4: xiv yançuk ditto; one says ylgit ko:ş (for Pe. xecuş) yançuk boş “the youth is goodlooking (fayyib); the purse empty” İd. 99: Osm. xiv, xv yancuk; xvff. yancik (r) 'purse'; c.ia.p.; (2) xv ff, “a horse's sidearmour'; (3) ditto, “the flank, hip” T'T'S 1778; II 990; İİİ 763; IV 835. D yunçığ N./A.S. fr. yunçı:- , “in a bad condition, weak', and the like; used in Hend. vr. yavız. Pec. to Xak. Xak. xı yunçığ r:ş a/-amru”l-müdiyu”lladila yunfaric (MS. yunfarih?) li-da'fihi “an unsatisfactory affair that cannot be put right because of its weakness'; yunçığ er al-raculu'l-sayyu'l-háli'l-da'if “a man in a bad state and weak'; (in a verse) yunçığ yavuz tovradı: qawiya'l-xamilu'l-da'if. "he obscure, weak man became strong” Kaş. III 41; same verse 7 103, 3; 0.0. / 93, 4; 274, 18: KB (of a man) yavuz yunçığ 413; in 704 Aytoldi says that the man who finds him must be cautious in his behaviour and yavuz yunçığ eşke yakın turmasa “must not be closely connected with obscure, weak comrades'; but the word could be read igke 'unsatisfactory, dubious business'. D yinçğe: Dev. N./A. fr .*yinc-, cf. yinçür-, physically “thin, slim, delicate', and the like,   ' 945 abstractly 'subtle, fine; in Türkü opposite to yoğu:n, q.v., and almost syn. vv. yuvka:. S.i.am.l.g.; NE Alt., Leb., Tel, cicke R III 2146; Kür. yi:çke do. 528; Tob. yipiçke do. sız, Khak. niske: SE “Türki inçike BŞ, yéinclge/yincige Jarring: NC Kir. içke, Kzx. İlpişke: SC Uzb. ipiçka: NW Kk. Jipigske; Kumyk ince; Nog. yipiske: SW Az., Osm. ince; Tkm. L:nce. Türkü viri T 13 (üz-): virt Man. M İİİ əə, 3-5 (ii) (étiglig): Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. Sanskrit süR71a *thin' yincge: TT VIII A.1; anur evam "and a subtle! inçke:ke: ök do. F.14 (Dat. or dittography?); terip yincge savlar “deep, subtile vvords” Hüen-t$. 126—7; yinçğe tözin “their subtle basis” do. 1823; o.o. U 11 24, 1 (ulin-); 41, zo (osuğ), Suv. 71, 14 (St:-): Civ. yincgé (once)Jincge (three times) in the phr. ince sok- “to grind fine' H I 77, etc.; a.o. II 12, 13 (élpe:-): Xak. xr yingge: 'anything thin” (or slender, daqiq), hence one says yinçğe: torku: 'thin silk fabric', and yinçğe: kuz *concubine' (a/-surriya), and "an ascetic devout man” (al-ndsihu”l-müuta"abbid) is called yincge: kişi: Kaş. III 380; a.o. I 326 (1 kiz): KB, yincge ayur “he speaks subtly' 613; yinçge yıp “a thin cord' 748; o.o. 2490 (1 toku:), 6082 (kil): xiv Muh.(?) daqiq (opposite to 'thick' yoğun) ince: Rif. 143 (only); yinçge 153; al-mutaqqi "God-fearing” yincge: 147: Çağ. xv ff. inçike (spelt) (1) názuk “thin, slender' (quotn.); (2) dzör-t mumtadd-i muzmin “a chronic disease' Sam. 117v. 24: Xwar. xiv yincge 'thin, delicate, narrow, meticulous” Qutb 8o; Nahc. 232, 6; 239, 14: Kom. xiv “thin, fine' incke CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xii al-raqiq (sic) 'thin' (opposite to “thick” yoğun) yince: /7ou. 27, 13: xv al-rafi' 'thin, fine' (ditto) inşike: Kav. 64, 16. Dis. V. YNCyungr:- “to be, or become, weak or emaciated” , survives only(?) in NE Tob. yünçi- (sic) R III 598. Xak. xi er yunçı:dı: sö”at hálu'l-racul min fiqr 'the man's state deteriorated owing to poverty' Kaş. IIl 303 (verse, see ting-; no Aor. or Infin.); a.o, // 281, rr (1 tatik-). D yunçıt- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of yunçı:-. Xak. xı «ol» anı: yunçıttı: asd”a ilayhi wa ddühu “he did evil to him and harmed him” Kaş. II 352 (yunçıtu:r, yunçitma:k, corrected fr. -me:R). D yançıl- Pass. f. of yanç-, “to be crushed”, etc. Survives in the same languages. Uyğ. vitr: ff. Man.-A M I ə, 12 (isi:z): Xak. xi ka:ğu:n yançıldı: “the melon (or other similàr thing) was crushed and trodden under foot" (índagata . . wa'nxabata) Kaş. III oy. (yancilu:r, yançılma:k, corrected fr. -me:k); 0.0. £ 188, r (ortu:): xir(?) Tef. yançıl- “to be crushed, trodden under foot” r4o: Çağ. xv ff. yancil- zarm şudan “to be softened' Sar. 338r. ız: Xwar. xiv yançıl- “to be crushed” — Nahc. 338, 3; 339, 14: Osm. xiv ditto in one text TT,S I 991. - ESI 5  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 990 
     
   
   
        946 DIS. V. YNCD yinçür- Caus. f. of *yinc-; cf. yincge:, yinçrün- , “to bovv (the head)”. N.o.a.b. Türkü vin ff. Man. TT) 11 6, 35 (2 sökit-): Uyğ. vini ff. Man. yinçürü yükünü 'bowing (the head) and vvorshipping” TT I7I 16s(?), 175; IX s: Bud. yinçürü yükünürler TT X 272-3; yinçürü töpün yükünüp 'bowing the head and worshipping! U //7 135, 5 (ii); o.o. U 1 33, 10; Suv. 159, 16; 594, 14. D yunçır- Hap. leg.; Inchoative f. of yunçi:-. Xak. xı er rsr yunçirdi: aşqa (?read uşqd) amru"l-racul 'alá'l-si! "the man's affairs were put in a bad way' Kaş. III 98 (yunçıra:r, yunçırma:k). D yinçrün- Hap. leg.?; Refl. f. of yinçür-, “to bow oneself'; Xak. xi KB 5805s (éncrün-). Tris. YNC DF yinçülüğ P.N./A. fr. yinçü, “having pearls”, N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vir ff. Man. altunluğ yinçülüğ 'with gold and pearls” T'T II 15, 9; 2.0. do. 11-12 (boncuk): Civ. TT VIII 117 (asin-). Tris. V. YNCD yinçğe:le:- Den. V. fr. yinçge:: “to refine" and the like. S.i.s.m.l., e.g. SW Az. incel- 'to become thin'; Osm. incele- “to scrutinize meticulously'; Tkm. incele- “to make thin'. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. yinçgeleyü arıtıp 'cleansing meticulously' Suv. 244, 18: Civ. H II 8, 26 (üntür-): Xak. xı ol ne:pni: yinçge:le:di: “he reckoned that the thing was thin' (daqiq), also used when he examined a thing minutely (or made it thin, adaqqa”l-şay)) Kaş, II 411 (yinçğe:le:r, yinçge:le:me:k): Xvvar, xiv yincgel- (sic) “to make (someone) thin' Qutb 8o: Kom. xtv 'minutely, scrupulously' inçkelep CCI; Gr. D yinege:len- Hap. leg., Refl, f. of yincge:le:-; note the semantic connection vv. yinçür-. Xak. xı ol mana: yincge:lendi: tatcáda'a [i tea xada"a “he humbled himself to me and obeyed'; and one says ol kuziğ yincge:lendi: “he made the slave girl a concubine' (surriva); and kul tepri:ke: yinçge:lendi: 'the slave (i.e. pious Moslem) humbled himself, was abstemious, worshipped, fasted, prayed, and obeyed God” Kaş. HI 4so(yinçge:Jenü:r, yinçge:lenme:k). D yingü:le:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. yinçü:, perhaps used only in the Ger. in -ü:, meaning 'like pearls, cf. arslanla:-. Xak, xri(?) KBVP 11 (tiz-). Mon. YND yunt (yund) apparently a generic term for *horse', while 2 at was more specifically “a riding horse'. The -u- is fixed by TT VIII. It was the original word for 'horse' in the twelve-animal cycle, at not appearing in this context till the medieval period, see Pritsnk, Op. cit. s.v. ytla:n, p. 79. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. yond/yont “a wild unbroken mare'.  Türkü vir ff. beg er yunti:paru: barmi:ş "a beg went to (look at) his horses! ]rkB. s, 2.0. do. 24(emig): Uyf. viri bip yunt tümen koü “a thousand horses and ten thousand sheep” (ız. side line and ?IV 9g: vri ff. Man. V"ind. 12 (sürüg): Bud. PP 3, 1 (u:d); Suv. ago, 18: Civ. yunt (so spelt three times in TT VIII P.) as an animal in the twelve-animal cvcle, 'Horse Year, Horse Day”, etc., is common in 7T VIT, VIII, USp.: O. Kir. ix ff. altı: bip yuntim “my 6,000 horses! Mal. 3, 5; 3.0. 45, 8 (bodrak): Xak. xı yund a/-xay/ *horse/horses', both Sing. and Plur. like Ar. al-ibil (camel/camels”), hence one says yund eti: yıpa:r 'horse mcat (smells like) musk', that is when it has been cooked and left until it is cold, a good (hasana) smell rises from it; yund the name of one of the twelve years in 'Turkish, it is called yund yılı: Kaş, IH 7; I 292 (öğürlen-), 235 (okras-), and five o.o. translated. a/-xayl or. al-faras ("horse”): KB yazıda kalın yund “large herds of horses in the steppe” 537o: Çağ. xv ff. yunt madiydn "a mare'; also the name of one of the 'l'urkish years San. 347r. 9; n.o. 297v. 6 (kisra:k): Kip. xır ism. H-macmi'i'l-xayl, a. collective term for 'horses', in the pasture or elsewhere yunt (MS. vunat) Hou. 12, 13: xiv. İd. 97 (2 yılkı:): Osm. xiv ff. yont usually specifically "'mare', in XIV, XV sometimes “horscs”, yont kuşı “vagtail”, c.i.a.p. T'7'S I 8sr, I] 1077; III 829; TV 907. Mon. V. YNDyind- “to search (something Acc.), to seek (something Ace.) , n.o.a.b. Xak. xi (ol) anm evin yindi: (sic in MS.) “he scarched his house”, originally yindti: and then abbreviated (xuffifa) Kaş. III 66 (yinde:r, yindme:k): xıır(?) At. biliğ yind “seek wisdom” 103; a.0. 417. Dis. YND D yanut Active Dev, N. fr. 1 yan-, lit. “something which comes back”, Survives only (?) in NE Alt. yanit 'a woman's dowry, which is returned to her in the event of her husband's death” R IJI 87. Yantut in Uyg. is syn., and perhaps a Dev. N. fr. the Caus. f. *yanit-.. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. (if I have taken or used property belonging to a monastery) yanÉi1sin yantutin bérmedim erser “and have given nothing in return (Hend).' U JI 77, 24; yantut bitiğ .. . yantut beleg “a letter in return . . . a present in return” //üen-ts. 18571859: Civ. (we reccived certain goods; as the original (VU ön) receipt has been lost) tutup torku yanut bitiğ bérdimiz 'we have (hereby) given a duplicate document regarding the receipt of the silk fabric! U Sp. s, a: Xak. xı yanut al-'iwad 'something given in return for, or in place of, something else” Kaş. 111 8, yanu:t a/-carcab "an answer'; hence one says SÓ:z yanu:tı: "the answer to a statement'; yanu:t al[-'eüd svoa'l-taman (value, price") ma'a(n) TT 28: KB yanut berdi hacib “the Chancellor answered' 538 (etc,, a common   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 991 
     
   
   
     DIS. V. phr.); İsiz kilsa isiz yanuti ökünç “if a man does evil, the requital for evil is repentance' 929; 0.0. 5790; 3584 (katığ), (an envoy delivers a letter and) yanuti kolur *asks for a reply to it” 3814: xiri(?) Az. cafa" kildacipka yanut kil vvafA “make good faith the return to the man who injures you” 327; 8.0. 374 (2 kéc-); Tef. yanut (1) 'answer'; (2) “requital' 140: Xwar. xiv yanut 'requital' Qutb 67; Nahc. 286, 17: Kip. xv(?) cawáb (karu; in margin in SW(?) hand) yanut Tu. rza, 2: Osm. xiv, xv yanut 'requital'; in three texts 77S 7 779; 111 766. D yundi: Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. yun-; survives only(?) in SE Tar. yunda same meaning R III 545. Xak. xı yundt: 'water for washing dishes (Zusalatu'l-qigà') after food has been eaten' Kaş. III 31: Osm. xvi yuyundufyuyuntu ditto, in two Dicts. 77 111 831; IV 909. (S) yantut See yanut, (D) yandak the basic meaning and therefore etymology are obscure; in Xak. clearly an Adj.; -dak is certainly a Den. and perhaps a Dev. Suff. Survivesonly(?) in SC Uzb. yantok: SW Osm. yandik; Tkm. ya:ndak 'camel-thorn'. Xak. xr yandak tike:n gawkw'l-qatád “camel-thorn”, yandak çeker a/-tarancim “manna”, yandak (MS. yandik) at “an unsound (al-ahşam) horse” Kaş. III 44: Çağ. xv ff. yantak (spelt) xör-r $utur 'camel-thorn' San. 339r. 3: Osm. xiv yanduk (sic) “camelthorn' TTS I 779; xvi ff. yandik (sic, ot1) used in Ar. and Pe. dicts to translate names of various thorny plants 1/7 763; IV 836. D yundak Hap. leg.; perhaps Dim. f. of yunt. Cf. 1 yin, etc. Xak. xı yundak 'dung' (rawt), esp. of a horse' Kaş. 11I 44; a.o. III 167 (bafiak). PU?D yindem apparently “constant, constantly, always'; prima facie a Den. N./A. in -dem (connoting resemblance) presumably fr. 3 yi:n, but there is no obvious semantic connection. N.o.a.b. Uyf. viu ff. Man. [gap] yintem tutçı yintsigü (?corrupt or misread) 'constantly (Hend.) ?' TT III 41; (may the mortals on earth) yinte[m] nirbanta tuğzunlar 'always be reborn in paradise' (?; nirvana is a purely Buddhist concept) do. 166—7; a.o. do. 74—5: Bud. (the food of leopards, panthers, wild cats, lions, wolves, and foxes) yalanuz yindem isig et kan erür 'is exclusively and always warm flesh and blood' Suv. 610, 15-16. S yandru: See yanturu:. Dis. V. YNDD yanut- Caus. f. of yanu:-; survives in some of the same languages. "The text in Kaş. was consistently altered to y:tit-, for yitit- in a second hand. Xak. xi (after N) ol anar biçe:k yanuttı: “he ordered him to sharpen (bi-tashid) the knife', or “to pass it to and fro (bPl-imrör) on (the palm of) his hand” Kaş.  YND-. 947 TI 317 (yanutur, yanutma:k, partly unvocalized and undotted and later altered). D yénit- Caus. f. of yönl:-, “to lighten (someone's Ace.) burden'; pec. to Xak. Xak. xı er ura:ğutnı: yenitti: "the man delivered the woman of a child” (svallada'l-mar'a svalad Kaş. Il 317 (yönitü:r, yenitme:k, 'unvocalized, but follows yine:d-, so to be transcribed yénit-): KB özün yük yénitti 'you have relieved yourself of a burden' (by quitting this world) sr15; özüm yüklerin yénitmek tiledim 'I have desired to relieve myself of my burdens' 6080; yülküpnl yénit 6082 (fairly consistently yénit-). *yine:d- Hap. leg.; Intrans. Den. V. fr. 3 yin, in the sense of "to grow skin”. Xak. xr ba:ş yinetti: "the wound healed” (indamala) Kaş. II 317 (yinetü:r, yinetme:k, in error, for yinedü:r, yinedme:k, cf. kuta:d-). D *ylpe:d- Hap. leg.; Intrans. Den. V. fr. yip. Xak. xı er yipetti: "the man blew his nose' (rmtaxata); the origin is yi attı: ramd br'l-muxát “he threw out the mucus” Kaş. JI 326 (yipetü:r, yipetme:k, in error for yipedü:r, yipedme:k). : D yepa:t- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of yopa:-. Xak. xı ol ani: begke: yonattı: "he made him make false accusations (azoşd bihi) to the 5eg” (etc.) Kaş. II 327 (yopa:tu:r, yopa:tma:k; cor: rected fr. -me:k). : D 1 yantur- Caus. f. of 1 yan-; “to bring back, turn back, give back”, and the like. S.ia.m.lg. w. the usual phonetic changes, except NW. See also yanturu:. Türkü vri (we reached the Iron Gates and) yantu:rtimiz 'brought (the army) back again” T 45: Uyğ. viri ff Man. yanturtunuz ayığ kilinçtiri “you have turned back (the children of men) from evil deeds' 77 III 127: Bud. famartapatr] sógütnip xwasin yanturup 'drawing back (or giving back?) the flower of the amrtapattra tree TT X 491-2; a.o. do. 495: (Civ. see yanturu:): Xak. xı ol anı: evke: yanturdi (MS. yorturdi:) “he sent him back (racca"ahu) to the house” (etc.) Kaş. III 98 (followed by 3, 4 yantur-): K B 738 (só:ki:): xın(?) Tef. yandur- "to send back, draw back” 139: Çağ. xv ff. yandur- döndür- "to send back” Vel. 4oo (quotn.); yandur- Caus. f. . . . (z) bar gardünidan “to turn back” (Trans.) San. 338r. 3 (quotns.): Xvvar. xıv yandur- “to send back”, etc. Qutb facsimile tır. 5; 84a. z: Kom. xıv “to give back” yandur- CCG, Gr.: Kip. xiv qalabalqallaba "to overturn, etc.” (axtur-/) yandur- Bul. 73v. : D 2 yantur- Caus. f. of 2 yan-; “to light (a fire Acc.) and the like. Not noted before xii(?). S.i.s.m.l. vv. theusual phonetic changes. (Xak.?) xırı(?) Tef. yandur- “to light” (a fire) 139: Xiv. Muh. adrama”l-nör “to light a fire” o:d yandur- Mel. ız, 6; Rif. gs: a"laqa”l-sirüc "to light a lamp” çıra:ğ (Mel. çara:ğ) yandur- 23, r, 104: Çağ. xv ff. yandurCaus. f.; (1) süzánidan "to light, ignite” San. | | i | 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 992 
     
   
   
     948 DIS. V. YND338r. 3 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv ditto. Out 67; Nahc. 41, 17; 66, 8: Kom. xtv ditto CCI; Gr.: Kip. xitr arcqada ditto yandur- ITou. 34, 7 (gil in error): xiv ditto /d. 99; Bul. 23v: Osm. xiv, xv yandur- ; xiv ff. yandir- ditto; c.L.a.p. TTS 1 778; 1l 991; HI 764; IV 836. D 3 yantur- lap. leg.; Caus. f. of 3 yan-. Xak. xı (after 4 yantur-) ta. kadálika fi'l-tahdid also for 'to threaten' (or 'cause to threaten'?) Kaş, 111 98. D 4 yantur- Caus. f. of 4 yan- but syn. w. it, which suggests that this is merely an idiomatic use of 1 yantur- meaning “to send back (one's food)”. Survives in SE "Vürki yandur-/ yandu- Şarring. Xak. xr er yandurdi: (MS. yondurdi:) "the man. vomited' (qd"a), alternative word for (lua fi) yandı: (MS. yondı:) Kaş. II 98 (yandurur, yandurma:k, throughout this para, the first vovvel is given as -0-, prob. carried on mechanically fr. the previous entry yomdar-): Kip. xii faqayya"a "to vomit” (kus-, and also) yandur- (MS. yondur-) Hou. 38, 20. D yindür- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of yind-. Xak. xı (ol) anın evin yindürdi: “he had his house searched' (abhata dürahu), looking for his property which was suspected (of being stolen, mazinnatahu) and his lost property in it Kaş. IH gg (yindürür, yindürme:k). VU(D) yóntüs-n.o.a.b.; theSuff.-tükin points to front vowels, the first syllable is spelt yon-, but this scriptio defectiva is not unusual in Uv. script after y-; as elsewhere in this text the -S- is represented by -s-, but the V. is clearly a Recip. f. The meaning seems to be “to quarrel or the like, but no basic f. seems to be known. Uy£. vir ff. Man.-A yöntüsü okisurlar “they quarrel and shout at one another” M 79, 10-11; 0.0. dö, 15-16(sógüs-); do. 16-18 (kekreş-). Tris. YND D yindegü: Dev. N./A.; can hardly be der. fr. yined-, prob. fr. a cognate Den. V. fr. yin, *yipde:-. N.o.a.b. Uyf. vir ff. Civ. yipdegü: *nasal catarrh” HİT 16, 8 and zo: Xak. xt (under fa'lalii) when a boy is abused (subba) one says ylgdegü: that is yd man yasil min anfih”İ-muxdt "you with the runny nose” Kaş. iH 387. D yanutluğ Hap. leg.(?), P.N./A. fr. yanut. Xak. xı KB (the king has done good to you, a thousand returns (for your services, yanut); in return for that prepare something good) yanutluğ kişi ol kişi edğüsi “the man who returns favours is the best of men” s7gı. D yanturu: Ger. of 1 yantur- used as an Adv.; 'in return, back, again', and the like; often abbreviated to — yantru:/yandru:. N.o.a.b. Türkü vir yanturu: (or yantru:?) sakmtim katığdı: sakıntım “1 thought again and again, I thought deeply' 7 N ır: Uyğ. vir ff. Bud, yantru iqti “he sent him back” PP 3s, 6, (how is it possible, having come so far) yanturu yana [one word] kodup barmak “to give up (this enterprise or the like) and go back?” IHiüen-ts. 97-8; edgü öğlike yanturu övkeleser kakısar “if he is angry (Hend.) with a benevolent. man in return (for his benevolence)” Sut. 595, 9-10; ao. TT VII 40, 53: Civ. yanturu bérip “giving back” USp. 115, 6; yanturup bérürmen do. 6, $: 35, 17 and yanturup altimiz do. 14, 10 are no doubt errors for yanturu:: o.o. T'T I 10s (axtaril-); VII 3o, r: Xak. xi yandru: Kaş. İİİ 406, 4 (yapı:la:-), n.m.e.: KH yandru cikip 'coming out again' 521; o.0. 738 (sözki:), 2656, 5674 (ékki:le:-). Dis. YNG D yapa:k crasis of *ya:nga:k Den. N. fr. ya:n, properly "the cheek-bone', but sometimes used more generally for 'cheek', and metaph. for "the side” of something. S.i.a.m.l.g. often much abbreviated, e.g. NE "Puv, çak: NC Kir. ja:k; Kzx. jak: NW Kk. jak; Kaz. yapak 'cheek'; yak “side”, Kumyk yayak; Nog. yak: SW Az. yanağ, Osm. yanak, "km, yanak, Cf. 2 ep, egek. Xak, xi yana:k “the bone” (a/-'azm) in which the teeth are set (gurizat) either side (cánibay) of the mouth'; yapa:k “the side” (cánib) of anything; and “the side post ('idáda) of a door' is called kapuğ yana:kı: Kaş. III 376 (and see yipak): xiv Muk. (in "parts of the body”, al-xadd "cheek” ep ...) al-'árid “chcek” (?'cheekbone”) yapa:k Mel. 46, ır, Rif. 140: Çağ. xv ff. yanağ/yanak yayak Vel. 404 (quotn.); yanağ/yanak (spelt *with -5-") (r) gihra wa rüxsar face, cheek” Sam. 339r. 14 (quotn.; (2) see yağak): Xwar. xırı(?) on capakta "on the right side” Og. 116; con canakıda “on the left side” 124; tün (?dün) yanğakka “to the north” 324 (?confusion vv. ytpa:k): xiv yagak “cheek” Qut 67; MN 106, etc.: Kom. xiv “cheek, jaw, jawbone' yapak/yaak CCZT, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiii al-xadd yana:k (sic? ; kaf for -9-) Hou. zo, 7; xiv yagak ditto, in the Kitab Beylik yana:ğ 1d. 98; yagak ai-hanak *ower jaw" do. gg: xv al-xadd yanak Kar, 60, 13; Tuh. 14a. 4. D 1 yanığ Dev. N. fr. 1 yan-; syn. w. yanut; n.o.a.b., but ?identical w. 3 yanığ, Xak. xı KB (the good man gives advantages to others but) ol asığdın bu kolmaz yanığ “does not ask for any return for those advantages” 858; (I sent you a message svvceter than sugar) ağuda açığ keldi yanğı mapa “the answer came back to me bitterer than poison” 3913. D 2 yanığ Hap. leg.?; Dev. N. fr. 3 yan-. Xak. xı yanığ ar-tahdid "a threat”, hence one says beğ yanığda: tüşme: "do not expose yourself to the threats of the 5eg” (etc.) Kaş, II a4. : D 3 yanığ Hap. leg.?, but cf. 1 yanığ, Dev. N. fr. 4 yan-, Xak. xı yanığ a/-qay" “vomit”, hence one says ol yanığ yandı: "he vomited profusely” (kafira(ıı)) Kaş. HII 14.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 993 
     
   
   
     2. 'l'RIS. V. YNĞ- 949 yıpa:k 'direction; point of the compass'; very common in Uyğ., both by itself and in the phr. bulup yıpa:k (see bulup), but hardly traceable later, prob. because it became confused w. yapa:k. Cf. sipar. Uyğ. viii ff. Man. ozku kutrulku yol yıpakığ “the way and direction to salvation (Hend.) TT III 63: Bud. yınak by itself is commonest when qualified by a word vv. the Suff. -tun/-tün, etc., e.g. Óptün yrpak 'eastwards' PP 37, 5; TT VI 84; tağtın yınak 'northwards' do. 84; kédin yipak 'westwards' do. 85, but here 'southwards' is küntün sınar, küntin yınak *southwards' U IV 10,65; (the exact meanings, often blurred, seem to be yıpa:k 'direction', bulun 'corner', sınar “side”), tört yipak tört bulun sekiz yınak bolur “the four directions and the four corners make the eight cardinal points' TT V 8, 62: o.o. TT VIII A.1, etc. (bulup); TT X 83, 85, 149, 159; U II 4, 2: Civ. tört yipak “the four directions! TT I 121; öntün, etc. yıpak common in TT VII: Xak. xı yipa:k seems to be the right reading in (r) teğme: yıpa:ktın (MS. unvocalized or yag-?) min hull awb "from all directions” Kaş. I 241 (aklis-); (“ve attacked by night) teg me: yıpak (MS. unvocalized) bustimiz “ve laid ambushes on every side” (mim Rull canib) I 434, 7; n.m.e.: (Xwar. ximm(?) Og. 324, see yapa:k). D yona:k morphologically Dev. N. fr. yon-, but this would mean something like “a carving", which is hardly apposite; 'a saddle-pad'. Survives in NE Alt., Tel. yonok R III 417; ''uv. conak: NC Kzx.: NW Kk. jona. Xak. xı yona:k 'anything placed (ytda') under the saddle (rkaf) of a donkey, ox, or the like” Kaş. III 29: Çağ. xv ff. yona (spelt yonah) tagaltü-yi zin “a saddle-pad”, also called tokum Sar. 347v. 14: Kip. xin. al-mirşaha 'saddle-pad' yona: Hou. 14, 3. 7 D yona:ğ Dev. N. fr. yopa:- ; 'falsc accusation" and the like. Uyğ. vir ff, Bud. U 17 76, 6 (çaşut): Civ. TT I 74 (çaşut): Xak. xı yonpa:ğ al-wagy sea H-s"aya “false accusation and slander” to a beg; hence one says ol yona:ğ yona:dı: “he falsely accused and slandered him to the sultan” Kaş, III 376: KB (a good man) yonağ tıplamaz “does not listen to false accusations” $863; a.o. 4272 (uzunçı:): (xiv Muh.(?) al-£awjá' 'tumult, uproar” yo:na:k Rif. 146 only). D yanğı: Hap. leg.; syn. vv. yanut, 1 yanığ, Dev. N. fr. 1 yan-, but -ğı: is unusual, -ğu: would be expected. Uyğ. virt ff. Bud. U 11 77, 24(yanut). (?D) yanku: “an echo”, morphology obscure, but prob. w. an onomatopoeic basis, cf. yapra:-, yapsa:-. Survives in NE Tuv. çapğı: SW Osm. yankı, Tkm. yapkı, in most other languages “echo” is a der. f. like yapkırık or a l.-w. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. (when your great bell sounds, your herds of horses in the mountains) barça eşitür yapkusın “all hear its echo” Suv. 49o, 19-20; Civ. TT I 95 (oyun), 134 (ığa:ç): Xak. xı yanku: bintu'l-cabal swvahwa'l-sadà “echo” Kaş. III 379 (prov.) Çağ. xv ff. yanku (spelt) is what people hear in reply when they say something in a loud voice in the mountains or a domed structure, in Ar. şadü, in Pe. pajwák ('echo', MS. pajnüh), and in Rumi “the burning of a palace or building”: in both cases der. fr. yan- “to return” (and “to burn') Sam. 239r. 8: Xwar. xiv tağ yapkust “echo” Qutb 68: Osm. xiv ff. yanğı/yanğu/yankı/yanku “echo”, c.ia.p. esp. in Ar. and Pe. dicts. 77 I 779; I1 993; II 765; IV 838. D yunğuk Dev. N.I. fr. yun- ; lit. something to wash oneself with'. N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vi ff. Bud. Sanskrit snáná 'bath' yunğuk TT VIII D.12, 38 (MS. yu:nkuhlyunkuh): Xak. xi yunğuk a/-uşndn 'alkali'; know that -k is attached to V.s and becomes the name of an instrument (ism /i'l-ála) as o:rğa:k the name of “a sickle” was derived fr. o:rdi: “he cut the grass'; and this word is of that (class) because yu:di: is a V. meaning "he washed' and this is what was used for “vvashing (£àstla) clothes'; the -K was attached to the V.s as you see Kag. III 44 (a rugged etymology, but nearly right). Dis. V. YNGD yapkur- Intrans. Den. V. fr. yapku:; “to echo, resound”, etc. S.is.m.l. w. the usual phonetic changes. Uyğ. vrı ff. Bud. U TT 24, 5-6 (étig): Civ. (in countless places the clear sound of water) yapkurar 'resounds' TT I 135: Xak. xı er yapkurdt "the man constantly turned (2/tafata) to the right and left as if.he heard the call of someone unseen or a sound or voice” (hàátif at sawt ato hiss) Kaş. HIT 400 (yapkura:r, yapkurma:k, Hap. leg. in this meaning, but cf. yapku:la:-). D yapkurt- Caus. f. of yapkur-; n.o.a.b.; the survival quoted in TT IX, p. 22, note 84 is of yaprat-. Uy£. vii ff. Man. [gap] arku (sic) tağlarığ yanıkurtur (sic?) “makes the valleys and mountains re-echo' TT IX 84. Tris. YNG D yona:ğçı: N.Ag. fr. yopa:f; “a false accuser'. N.o.a.b. Uy£. viii ff. Bud. Suv. 563, 4-5 (ezügci:): Xak, xı KB (however good... a beg may be) yonağçı yakın bolsa tegrür yoduğ “if a false accuser gets near him, he brings destruction” 5864. D yapkuluğ P.N./A. fr. yanku:, 'echoing, resonant”, etc. Pec. to Uyg. Uy. viui ff. Bud. yankuluğ körkle ününüz “your resonant lovely voice” Suv. 646, 2-3; o.o. TT VIII G.7o (küvrüg); TT X 191-2, etc. (tigilig). Tris. V. YNGD yapku:la:- Den. V. fr. yapku:; “to re-echo' and the like. Survives only(?) in SW yankila-. Xak. xı ta:ğ yapku:la:dr “the mountain echoed” (sadiya), that is that it answers you (yucibak) in the same way as (kamá) you shouted to it; and one says er kula:kız  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 994 
     
   
   
       950 TRIS. V. YNGyanku:la:dı: "the inan's car seemed to hear a sound or voice and constantly turned (falaffata) to the right and left Kaş, 7/T 410 (yanku:la:r, yanku:la:ma:k); KB kókis turna kókte ünün yankular “the grcv crane echoes with its call in the sky” 74: xiv Muh.(?) gatetu'l-sadà "the sound of an echo” yapku:lamak Rif. 125 (only): (Osm. xiv ff. yankulan-/yankılan-, etc. “to echo” c.i.a.p. Z'T.5 1 780; İT 994; HII 765; IV 838. Dis. YNG D yenik N./A.S. fr. yeni:-, "light (not heavy), hence 'easy' and the like. Syn. vv. yépil, q.v., but less common, survives only (7) in NE Khak. nkk; Tuv. çi:k: SE "Tar. yenik R 7/1 330; Türki yenik BŞ: SW Osm. yénik/yéni (spelt vegmk/yeynik yegnilyeyni). Uy£. vir ff. Man. TT 71 8, 44 (uçüz): Bud. TT IV ro, 16 ctc. (uçüz): Civ. (in an unfavourable omen) er ağır tişi yenik bolur “men become burdensome and women flighty' VII 25, 6-7; (the pain) yénik bolur 'becomes tolerable' do. 21; a.o. TT I 125-6 (islet-): Xak. xı yenik “light” (xafif) of anything Kaş. III 18; alo, HI 92 (yeni:-): KB utunluk eveğlik yenik kurğuluk “vickedness, (undue) haste, and frivolous levity” 2078. yenğe: “the wife of one's father's younger brother, or one's own elder brother; junior aunt-in-law, senior sister-in-lav”. S.i.a.m.].g. vv. phonetic changes and some extended meanings, e.g. Kk. 'confidante'; Osm. 'bridesmaid'. Uy£. viti ff. Bud, öz yenğesi Rağağayini "his own elder brother's wife Ragagayini' U 111 835, 11; (in the list of relatives in the third Pfahl) yengemiz (s:c, ?read yepngemiz) "our elder brother's wife! (Arığ Xatun Teprim) Pfahl. 23, 12: Civ. Oğul Tégin yepéemizke USp. 12, 7; a.o. TT I 1535 (eke:): Xak. xi yeDğe: “the word for an elder brother's wife" Kaş. III 380: xiv. Muh. "a brother's. wifc yenge: Mel. 49, 10; Rif. 144: Qaf. xv ff. yénge (spelt) “the woman who adorns the bride in the bridal chamber and presents her to the bridegroom' Sar. 352v. 16 (P. de C., p. 559 quotes two passages from the Büábur nüma in which Babur records addressing a lady as yén£e). ?F yep£gec (?lengec) 'crab; the constellation Cancer'. Prob. a l.-w.; the alternative form lengec, suspiciously like French /angouste 'cray-fish', may be the original one. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. yengec; Tkm. leppec. Cf. kucik; there is no general word for “crab” in Turkish; modern languages use forms of kısğaç or çadan or l.-w.s. Oğuz xi (among words w. four letters, onc -D-) yenğeç (MS. vengec) al-saratan "crab” Kaş, Tİ 384: xiv. Mult. (among aquatic animals) al-saratán lengec Mel. 77, 6 (one MS. yengec); Rif. 180; (among 'signs of the zodiac") ditto 79, 4; 183: Çağ. xv ff. lengec (spelt) xarçang 'crab', in Ar. saratan San. 317v. 9: Xwar. xiv yenğeç “Cancer” Qutb 77: Kip. xiii (among. 'aquatic animals") a/-saratün yenğe:ç Hou. 7, 4: XV sapin denpis (in margin yenğeç, Tkm. kiskas, in margin kısaş) Tu. 19a. 9: Osm. Xvi yenğeç "an iron component in a mill”, in one Ar. dict. T'TS IV 8zş. E yenge:k See yetğe:k. Tris. YNG D yöniklik IHap. leg.?; A.N. fr. yenik. Uyğ. vii ff. Man.-A (just as the bonds of a wicked man) ağırlık yéniklik bar “may have weight or lightness' M 777 12, 19 (i). Dis. YNL (D) yépil presumably abbreviated Dev. N./A. fr. yéni:- ; '"light' (not heavy), hence “easy” and the like. Syn. w. yénik. S.i.a.m.l.g. w. the usual phonetic changes; SW Az. exceptionally yünkül, lacking in Osm. |. Uy£. vin ff. Civ, TT VII 42, 3 (tamar): (Xak.?) xııı(?) Tef. yüpül “light” röz (yógül), 164 (yügül): xiv Muh.(?) al-xafif 'light' (opposite to “hcavy” ağır) yüpül (or yüngül?) Rif. ısı (only): Çağ. xv ff. yenil yeyəi (veni?) Vel. 415 (quotn.); yünül (spelt with -p-") sabuk "light, also pronounced yenil San. 347r. 13; yenil (spelt “vith -p-") 352v. 20 (quotn.): Kom. xiv. “light” yepil/yepül/yüpül CCI; Gr. 122 (quotn.), 131: Kip. xiv yüpiil (with -p-) a/-xafif İd. 99: xv ditto yenil (in margin yüpül/ yuka (yuvka:) glossed raqiq) Tuh. 14a. 7. D yanlık Hap. leg.?; A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. yan, syn. vv. yançük, Xak. xr yanlik qalı l-ra"i 'a shepherd's bag” Kaş. 11H 45. DF yagh£ P.N./A. fr. yan, cina... way, manner; of a... kind', and the like. Survives onlv(?) in SC Uzb. yanlığ a Postposn. meaning “like”, e.g. sér yaplif “like a lion'. Uyğ. vun ff. Bud. Sanskrit ydvacca (properly *and as much as”) né ya:plip yeme: TT VIII 44.2; (you have made yourself loved by all . . .) bir yaplığ 'alike, to the same extent! /Tüen-ts. 1781: Civ. balıkdakı vrhar yanlığ “like the monasterics (Sanskrit eihára) in the town' USp. 88, zg: Xak.xı KB bu yanlığ tapuğka “for service of this kind” ror; ne yanlığ eren “vhat sort of men?” 234; 0.0. 331, 710, etc.: xu(?) KBVP bu yanlığ 47: xin(?) Tef. özge yaplig “of a different sort”, bu yanlığ rar: Çağ. xv ff. yanlığ gibi “like” Vel. 407 (quotn.); yanlığ (spelt) mit! «ca münand "like" San. 339r. zo (quotn.): Xwar. xiv yaglif “like”, usually follows one N. and qualifies another Qut? 67; MN sə, etc. D yapluk abbreviated Intrans. Dev. N./A. fr. yantl-; “error, mistake, fault', and the like. N.o.a.b.; in the medieval period replaced by the cognate Dev. N. yaylis, which s.i.a.m.l.g. except NE, SE. Türkü viri bizine: yanlukıu:n üçü:n ] E :9; prob. a mason”s error, see revised text in /7 F 16 (yapil-): Uyğ. viu ff. Bud. yanluk (U 7] 87, 54 yanıluk) occurs several times, usually qualifying sakınç and sometimes in Hend. w. other words like ters; in this context it means 'erroneous' (thought);   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 995 
     
   
   
     TRIS. YNL “gsr when preceded by a Daz, it means rather “offensive, hostile to” (if I have taken part in civil disturbances and) 1duk kutluğ tüzünlerke yapluk sakınç sakindim erser “had thoughts hostile to good men who are holy and enjoy the favour of heaven” TT IV ro, 18-19; similar phr. but ters yapluk U 77 78, 35; ters yarlığ yanıluk do. 87, 53-4; yanluk sakınç TT VI o23, 216, qoz, ters tetrü yapluk tórüg do. 42; (King Prasenajit) ya:plog (sic) yég erme:z “is at fault and not good” VIII H.2: Xak. xı yapluk “a mistake' (al-xatà') in affairs, spcech, action, etc. Kaş. III 385: KB sözün bolsa yapluk “if what you say proves to be erroneous' 193; (haste is) barca yapluk basi 'the origin of every mistake” 633, a.0.0. (the Vienna MS. sometimes spells it yalguk): (xi(?) Tef. yagluk metathesis of yalpuk). Dis. V. YNL(?D) yapil- “to err, make a mistake, commit a fault', and the like; morphologically a Pass. f., but the only trace of a supposed V. yap- “to lead into error” is in San. 338v. r, which is illustrated by one obscure quotn.; it may be merely a back formation fr. yanıl-. S.i.a.m.l.g. except SE, SC w. the usual phonetic changes, but in some languages displaced by the Coop. f. yanılış-/yanlış-. Syn., and sometimes used in Hend., vv. 2 yaz-. Türkü vir yanıl“to err, misbehave” is fairly common, e.g. (we gave him the title of xağan and our younger sister as bride) özi: yanıltı: “he himself misbehaved” 7 E zo (in I1 E 17 yazıntı:), bizipe: yanıltukı:n yazıntuki:n üçü:n “because they misbehaved against us” /7 E 16 (for I E 19 see yapluk); o.o. 7 S rı, I1 N 8 (ölsik, bód); Ongin 11 (adril-): viri ff. yanı:lmaz bilge: 'a counsellor who does not make mistakes' Tun. III a. 9(ETY II gs), o.o. do. 6-8 (ur-); do. ro (bétke:cl:): Man. yazıntımız yanıltımız erser “if we have sinncd and errcd' Chuas. I 23, etc. , o.o. do. 139 (yükün-), 157-8 (baça:-): Uyğ. vir ff. Bud, Sanskrit avadhyabtibalo *whose strength is forgetfulness” (?) utitmak küçlüg e:rür a:zu ya:pilma:k TT VIII A.12; tört yıpakığ yapilip "losing his sense of direction U IV 4o, 170; yol yapilip kac kün bolti 'I lost my way several days ago” do. şo, 116 (here apparently Trans.); o.0. TT VII əş, 18; U II 77, 16-17 (2 yaz-): Xak. xı yanılğa:n er “a man who forgets and makes mistakes ( yansá wa yuxti”) in everything that he does” Kaş. //I 388; yanılma:s bilge: bolma:s “there is no vvise man vvho never makes a mistake' (là bi'l-hafwa) III şə, 14; yanılma:s bilge: yapku: “the only infallible (al-mugib) wise man is the echo” III 380, 1; n.m.e.: KB yanılmaz kişi kim *who is the man who never makes a mistake? 198; 0.0.:360 (kónilik), 641: xui?) Ar. (if you attain distinction) yanılma özün “do not lose (Trans. ?) your (true) self” 353; Tef. yol yanıl“to lose. the vvay” 141: xiv Muh. al-xatd” "to make a mistake' ya:nfilmak Mel. 37, 10; Rif. 123: Çağ. xv ff. yanıl- xwud ğalat kardan "to admit making a mistake' Sar. 338v. ır (quotns.): Xwar. xii yapıl- “to err! * Ali 36: Xiv yapil- “to make a mistake”, yol yaşıl-, etc. Qutb 68; Nahc. 245, 12: Kom. xiv “to err yapıl- CCI, CCG, Gr.: Kip. xiv. yapil(with -p-, MS. yagal-) ğalita “to make a mistake” İd. 99; ditto yanğıl- Tuh. 67r.: xv ditto (yaplis-, in margin in second hand yağıl- representing yanıl-) Tuh. 27a. 3. D yanul- Hap. leg.?; Pass. f. of yanu:-. Xak. xi biçe:k yanuldı: “the knife (Kaş. has 'sword, etc. was sharpened (guhida) by passing it to and fro (bi'l-imrár) on the (palm of the) hand” Kuş. 7/1 82 (yanulu:r, yanulma:k). D yonul- Pass. f. of yon-, “to be carved”, etc. S.i.s.m.l. as yon-. Xak. xi yığa:ç yonuldi: “the wood (etc.) was hewn' (or carved, nuhita) Kaş. III 82 (yonulu:r, yonulma:k), Çağ. xv ff. yonul- (spelt) taröşida şudan “to be carved (or planed)” Sari. 347r. 7: Ost, xv ff. yonul- “to be carved”, etc.;; common until recently T7TS 7 841; II 1066; III 820; IV 897 (translated yontul-). D 1 yupla:- (ü-) Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. yup; cf. kırk-. Xak. xı ol ko:yun yunla:dı: "he sheared (cazza) his sheep” Kaş. III 4o4 (yupla:r, yupla:ma:k). DF 2 yupla:- Den. V. fr. the Chinese word yung “to use” (Giles 13,449); “to use”, perhaps vv, the implication of using up. Pec. to Uyğ. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. bu etözimin yuplap “using this my body” Suv. 613, 19; o.o. do. 257, 7; 612, 4; TT IV 6, 38-44 (al-), U II 86, 41; Hüen-ts. 2113-14 (küle:-): Civ. üküş ed tavar yuplagil “use much property! TT 7 99. DF 3 yupla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. the Chinese word yung 'harmonious' (Giles 13,448), see Hüen-ts., Briefe, p. 36, note 2000. UYyğ. viii ff. Bud. élin ulusin amırtğurup yuplap 'pacifying the realm and country and making them harmonious' Hüen-ts. 2000—1. D yuplat- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of 1 yupla:-. Xak. xı ol ko:yuğ yuplatti: "he had his sheep (Kaş. adds “and camels”) sheared' (acazza) Kaş. II 359 (yunlatu:r, yuplatma:k). Tris. YNL D yanala: Hap. leg.; if genuine an Adv. formed fr. yana: by analogy vv. yapi:la:, see yanı:la:-. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (you have raised the banner of the law) yanala “afresh” Hüen-ts. 1909. D yanı:la: See yanı:la:-. D yapalduruk Hap. leg.; N.I. fr. yapa:k vv. the -k- dissimilated to -1-, prob. by false analogy vv. kömüldürük. Xak. xı yapalduruk (MS. yag.ldur.k) “a felt hood (Isbda) sewn on to the shoulders of a felt coat (lubada); the head is protected (yagsiya) from snow- storms and rain' Kaş. 111 389. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 996 
     
   
   
     952 PUD yanalığ Hap. leg. ; P.N./A. fr. 1 yapa:. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. yanalığ sü “an army with elephants! Z/üen-ts. 319-20 (bulitculayu:). DF yuplaghg P.N.”A. fr. a Dev. N. fr. 2 yupla:-; 'intended for use”, Pec. to Uyg. Uy. vir ff, Civ. common in USp., usuallv qualifving bóz, c.g. mana Sataka yunlağlığ böz kerğek bolup “as [, Sata, need cotton fabric for mv use” USp. 13, 1-2; but also used with other N.s, e.g. yunlağlığ caw yastuk “a sum of moncy for my usc! do. 15, 7. Tris. V. YNLD yanrla:- Den. V. fr. yagt:; 'to renew, renovatc”, Although it s.is.m.L, ear. SW Az, Osm. yenile- (yenile-), as an ordinary V., the commonest form met with is the Ger. in -u:, yanı:la:yu:, often abbreviated to forms like yanı:la:, used as an. Adv, 'anew, afresh'. Uy£. vir yanı:layu: “afresh”(?) 777 B.8(ETY II 38, fragmentary): Xak. wi ol tomin yanı:la:dı: 'he renovated (acadda) his garment” (etc.) Kaş, III 406 (yagrla:r (MS. vyap:la:di:), yanıla:ma:k), başın yandru: yanı:la:dı: "he reopened (acadda) his wound' III 406, 4; one says ol r:şiğ, yanı:la: kildi: “he reopened (rstacadda) the matter and started afresh” (taniva(m)) 111 381: xiv. Mult. caddada "to renew, etc, yanıla:- Mel. 24, 15; Rif. 107: Çağ. xvff. yanlap veyileytip “afresh" | Vel. 403 (quotn.); yéple (spelt) ha-tázagi wa naui 'freshly, anew'; also pronounced. yeple San, 352v. 17 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv yanıladın 'afresh' Qutb 68; yanla musulmán bolğanlar “recent converts to İslam” Nate. 75, 8-9: Kom. xiv yapla 'afresh, anev” CCG; Gr. 113 (quotn): Kip. srv yapila- (with -n-) caddada İd. 909: Nv ditto (yanırt-: in margin in second hand) yanıla- Tui. rza. 7: Osm. xıv ff... yepile, and later. yepilece, “afresh, recently; c.ia.p.. TTS TI 819; II 1040; III Sor IV 87s. Dis. YNN : F yana:n "elephant; an obvious L-w. of unknown origin, also spelt yağa:n, 1 yapa:, q.v. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı yana:n al-fil 'clephant'; the Oğuz do not know it Kaş, 7/1 376; o.o. 1] 210 (çarlaş-), 205 (garla:-); (and see tana:n): (Çağ. xv ff. yenegen (spelt) kargadan “rhinoceros" Sam. 339r. 17 scems to be a muddled reminiscence of this word). Dis. V. YNND yonin- Hap. leg. ; Refl, f. of yon-. Xak. xt ol yığa:ç yonindi: "he pretended to hew (or carve, vanfiat) the wood' Kaş, III 86 (yoninu:r, voninma:k). Tris. YNN D yanınçsız Hap. leg.; Priv. N./A, fr. a Dev. N. fr. *yanin- Refl. f. of 1 yan-. Uyğ. vin ff. Man. yanincsiz ajunka tegdiler 'they have reached a state of existence from which there is no return” TT //7 116. "PRTS. YNL D yonindi: l!iap. leg; Pass. Dev, N/A. fr. yonın-. Xak. xı yonindi: e/-nehdta tca'l-büurdya "chips, shavings, splinters" Keş, 777 38. Dis. YNR D yanar Sec 3 yan-. D yanrak Dev. N.'A. fr. yapgra:-; İt, “resounding, ringing', and the like. Survives in this sense in NE Alt. R 711 67; Kaş?s translations scems to show it used for “(a place wherc there is) a sound of running water'. Xak. xı yaprak “a winding valley ('aqn/) in thc mountains and a path through it, below which there is a stream of running water, so that a man can traverse it (only) by jumping it constantiy” (hr'T-ecathb) Kaş, IHE 384. Dis. V. YNR(D) yanra:- “to make a sound of some sort'; morphology obscure, but prob. «. an onomatopocic basis, cf. yapku:, yanşa:-, and also çıpra:-, képren-. Survives in NE Alt. “to resound, ring out” £ I77 67: NW Kar. (yanfÉwa-) ditto: SW 'l'km. 'to chatter. nonsensically”, "Pürkiüi virt ff. (a woman let her mirror fall into a lake) yarın yanra:yu:r “in the morning it clatters(2)' (and in the evening makes a grumbling sound) 7/25 22: Xak. xt ol bi:r só:z yanra:dı: rokallama bi-halüm min haqqihf an yuxfá “he blurted out something that he ought to have kept secret” Kaş. 177 404 (vapra:r, yapra:ma:k). D yanrat- Caus. f. of yanra:-, survives in NE Alt.: NW Kaz. (yapğırat-): SW 'Tkm. Mis-spelt vapzat- in the MS. of Kaş. Xak. xr ol agar sö:züğ yanrnattı: "hc urged him to hlurt out something that he ought to keep secret! (nin. haqqih”l-israr bihi) Kag. Il 359 (yagratu:r, yanratma:k). "Tris. YNR D yanırtı: (?yanırdı:) "afresh, anew'; syn. vv yapıla:yu:, apparently a Dev, N./A:, used as an Adv,, in -tt: (as the word is found only in Uv. script, -dir, the usual form, should perhaps be rcad), fr. yanır-, Intrans: Den. V. fr. yanı:, which survives in NE Alt., Kücr., Tel. R HI 61 and NW Kaz. yagar- (the Caus. f. yapirt-. is noted in Kip. xv Tuh. 12a. 7). Yayparu in T'T I 75 is prob. an error for this word. Türkü vru ff. Man. TT II o, 84 (ékkile:-): Uyğ. vir ff. Bud, TT V 22, 30 (uğur): Civ. yanırtı él olurğaysen "you shall preside anew over the realm” TT I 53-4; U Sp. 88, 18-19 (tutuz-). Dis. V. YNS?E yansa:- Hap. İeg.: this is the spelling in two MSS.; the Vienna MS. has tebsegügt, glossed in Pe. hasad hunanda "envying), which gives reasonable sense. Neither reading can be right, but an emendation to *tapsa:-, Desid. Den. V. fr. 2 tap, 'to desire something marvellous” seems reasonable. Xak, xi KB 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 997 
     
   
   
     MON. YR 953 you have put on precious things and covered yourself with silk) seni tapsaguct körüp kamdi kóz 'the envious man(?) sceing you lowered his eyes” 5799. Dis. YNŞ D yapşak Dev. N./A. fr. yanşa:-, 'loquacious; a chatterbox'. Survives in SW Az. yanşağ, Osm. yapşak/yanşak, same meaning. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud, (Sanskrit lost) artok ya:pşa:k sözle:me:k “to be excessively loquacious' TT VIII 4.16: Xak. xı yapşak er “a loquacious (a/-rartür) man Kaş. III 384; yanşak maqdlatu”l-hadaydn 'nonsensical talk" 7 467, 9: KB (if a man talks a lot) atı yapsak başı “he is called a chatterbox' 1027; (the most useless kind of man is) kişi yanşakı 1028: Kip. xv müuqarqi" 'clattering' (in margin in second hand tartár) yanşak Tuh. 33a. 1: Osm. xvff. yanşak 'loquacious'; common esp. in Ar. and Pe. dicts. TTS I 78o, II 995; III 766, IV 839. Dis. V. YNŞD yonus- Hap. leg.?; Co-op. f. of yon-. Xak. xı ola:r bi:r bi:rke: ok yonusdt: “they helped one another to fashion( f? taht) arrows' (etc.); also used of competing Kaş. III 75 (yonuşu:r, yonuşma:k). (D) yanşa:- “to chatter, babble'; morphology obscure but prob. w. an onomatopoeic basis, cf. yapku:, yapra:-, Survives in SW Osm. yanşa-. Xak. xı KB üküş sózlese yanşadı ter biliğ “if a man talks a Jot, wisdom says that he has chattered” 174: xiu(?) Az üküş yanşağan til “a tongue which chatters a lot' 134; a.o. 151: ÇAĞ. xv ff. yapsa- (spelt) bisyar harf zadan “to talk a lot” San. 338v. 16 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv yanşa- “to chatter, babble” Quib 68: Osm. xvi ditto; in two texts TTS II 99s. D(?E) yanşat- İlap. leg.; Caus. f. of yapsa:-; it does not mean *to cause to chatter', although it does take an Object, and is prob. an error for yapga:- which Kaş. does not list. Xak. xt ol anın başın yanşattı: “he talked so much (Ratira(n)) that a humming noise and a headache (al-datwi wa'l-;udd') appeared in his head” (i.e. “he talked his own head of") Kaş. II 359 (yapsatu:r, yapşatma:k). VU(D) yopsur- it seems certain that in spite of the difference of spelling both texts below contain the same V., which is the Caus. f. of a Recip. f., but there is no trace of yopor yup-. Türkü vii (because they caused mutual hostility between brothers (kiksür-, see 1 €çi:) and) begli: bodunlr: yopsu:rtukr:n üçü:n “because they embroiled(?) the begs and common people” I E 6, I] E 6: Xak. xı ol isi:ğ su:vuğ tumluğka: yonşurdı: “he mixed (xalata) the hot water with the cold, so that it became tepid” ( fatir) Kaş. ITI 400 (yopsurur, yonşurma:k, MS. yezşürür, yeyşürme:h). : Dis. YNZ D yanza:ğ N./A.S. fr. yapza:- ; more or less syn. w. mepze:g (begze:g); pec.to KB. Xak. xı K B (I put a ball on the ground ...) özüm yanzağını sana körgitü “to show you my likeness' 66:1; kamuğ nepke yapzağ bu ol söz ult “this is a simile (suitable) for everything and a basis for statements” 4983; o.o. 17 (1 bo:d), 4985. Dis. V. YNZ(D) yapza:- Hap. leg.?, but cf. yanza:ğ, yapzat-. Almost svn. w. begze:- and presumably a Den. V. fr. *yapiz. İt may originally have meant 'to echo', w. the same onomatopocic basis as yanpku:, etc. Xak. xı KB (hear what the xar of the capital city of Ug had to say) tüzü élke yapzap söz aymış köni “he made a true statement, providing an analogy for all realms” 3815. D yanzat- Caus. f. of yapza:- ; practically syn. w. menzet- (bepzet-) and used in association vv, it; in KB 4ozo the Vienna MS. has yanzatıp for megzetü. Pec. to KB. Xak. xı KB (there is a Turkish proverb giving a resemblance to this (munar menzetür)) anı sözledim men munu yanzatur '] have recited it to illustrate this point” 273; similar phr. 471; (hear what the man whose wisdom is as broad as the sea has to say) sózin yanzatu körse kızğu meniz “if a man takes care to echo his words, his face will be ruddy' 480; similar phr. 613. Mon. YR yar Preliminary note. I" addition to the Turhish words below, the Pe. l.-w. yar *friend' is common in Turkish. For yar kanatt 'bat' see (PU) yersigü:. 1 yar 'spittle, saliva'; Survives only(?) in SW Osm. and there more or less obsolete. Of other syn. words tüpürük/tüfürük is not old and silekey/şileğey is a Mong. l.-w. Uyğ. viri ff. sodmış yarça “like spittle which has been ejected' TT I1I 112: Bud. (in a list of demons) yar aşlığlar “those who feed on saliva' U II 61, ro: Xak. xı yar a/-lu"ab 'saliva' ; hence one says anip yarı: aktı: "his saliva flowed' Kaş. III 3; a.o. I1 81 (suğur-): Xvvar. xiv miswükn1 yarım birle ezeyin mü 'shall 1 soften the tooth-stick with my spittle?” Nahc. go, 5: Kap. xı a/-riq “saliva” yar (also al-curuf, see 2 ya:r) Hou. 21, 13; reverse entry do. 5, 18: Osm. xiv ff. yar almost always in the phr. ağız yarı “saliva”, c.i.a.p. TTS I 10, 783; I1 12, 997; 111 768; IV 9. : 2 ya:r “cliff, cleft', and the like; homophonous w. yar- (ya:r-); it seems to mean more precisely *what remains when something has been split off”, e.g. a vertical bank of a river eroded by water or a gorge cut through a mountain side by water. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. the usual phonetic changes; a l.-w. in Russian as yar. Uyğ. vir ft. Civ. yar tuzi “rock salt” H 7 (32), 1135, 142 (bağır), IJ 12, 96: Xak. xr ya:r 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 998 
     
   
   
     954 al-carf (read. al-curuf) "the. vertically eroded bank of a river" Kaş. HI 142; olo. 1 375 (Kidig); 777: 152 (Ka:s); 204 (to&amp;la:-); 355, 16: Kip. xın a/-curuf yar (also al-riq, see 1 yar) Hou. s, 18; reverse entry 21, 13: XIV ya:r al-şaqıq "a precipice', that is a high place from which one can look downwards İd, 92; (between 'hill' sirt and “valley” ayri:) al-sagf “a roof! (?rcad af-şaqiq) ya:r ful. 3, 10: XV curuf yar Tuh. 11a. 9: Osm. xv ff. yar occasionally 'eroded river bank", usually 'gorge'; c.i.a.p. TTS 1 5835; I1 997; IV 842. yér basically 'ground', with a wide range of extended meanings, 'earth (as opposed to sky), land, soil, place”, etc.; for the phr. yer suv "land and water', ie. 'territory', sce Su:v; it survives in NE Khak. ada cir su 'fatherland': SE "Türki yer su "landed property: NW Kk. cer suw ditto. C.i.a.p.a.l. w. the usual phonetic changes. A l-w. in Hungarian as szer (cf. 1 yél) Türkü vir yér (spelt both yer and yer) is common; (when the blue sky above) asra: yağız yer “and the brown carth below (were created) 7 E 1, 11 E 2; barduk yerde: 'in the places to which you went' 7: E 24, I1 E zo, yer suv / E ış, etc. (su:v): vii ff. (the dawn broke) udu: yer yaru:dı: “then the earth became light” /rkB 26; tenri:ke: . . .. yerke: do. zo —sü: yéri:nte: "on the battle-field' do. 55; 0.0. do. 16 (semrit-), 17 (3 ön), ctc.: Man. tepri yériperü . . . bu yerde “to the heavenly country . . . on this carth” C/iuas. 40-1; 2.0.0. meaning “earth”: Uyğ. vitr (we fought : . .) kuluim küpim bodunığ tepri: yer ayu: berti: “heaven and earth declared the people to be my servants. (Hend.)' Su. E 1-2; sançduk yerde: “in the place where we fought! do. IW. 7; olo, S 6, 9: viu ft. Man.-A yérig teprig 'earth and heaven! M 7 14, 4; bu yér suv “this carth” (and the tenfold heavens) do. 14, r4—kop yérde “in all places” do. 9, 5; yübük yerde “in moist(?) ground' do. 17, 15; a.o.0.: Man. tepri yeri TT Il] so, 72:7 Bud. Sanskrit deregt among the gods! te:nri yérénde: TT VIII 4.29; prtlivyam 'from the earth” yértin do. 38: yer tepri tórümiste *when earth and heaven were created' PP s, 8—bu cémbüdvip yér suvdaki *in! this country Jambudvipa' do. 44, 1-2—kuruf yöriğ suvayu "watering the dry ground' do. 1, 3—ölüm yerine “to the land (or place) of death' do. 26, 3-4; many o.o.: Civ. yérke teprike 77 7 ız, yağız yér do. 4-——yér suv iğesi “the ruler of a territory TT VII 29, 4-5 —ırak yerdeki kişi “a man in a distant place” do. 36, 7-8; ağrığ yerke yaksar "if one rubs it on the painful place” H 7 138-9—yérke sidip 'urinating on the ground” do. 74: O. Kir. ix ff. Mal. 11, 4 etc. (su:v); a.0.0.: Xak. xı yér al-ard "earth, ground”, etc. (w. a similar wide range of connotations); yér the word for one of the two components (teachay) of brocade or head-coverings (al-ma'áfiri), it is “the warp! (sadd') or any colour in it which is predominant (aktar); and (threads öf) a different colour are associated (or interwoven, matbi'); one says yaşıl yérlig bargin MON. YR "brocade in which the predominant (colour, a/-ağlab) is green, that isit is the basis (al-ag/) and ” the other colours are superimposed( far) Kaş. HI 142; ét al-ard, dialect form of (Iuga fi) yér ] 45; over 100 0.0. usually translated a/-ard or al-maredi", occasionally by other words like a/-makdn "place": KB yer is common in all the. usual meanings, e.g. (God created) yağız yer 3; a.0. 64; (all things will die and) tósengü yeriğ "make their bed in the ground' 237; 383: xin(?) 4t. nece yer bar erdi "however much land there was' 201; yérdin salıp 'casting to the ground' 265; kişi turğu yér "the place where a man stands" 406; a.0.0.; T7ef. yéir 'earth; place” 15r: XIV Muh. min mawdiihi yérindin Mel. 41, 15; yéri:din f. 132; al-ard yéit 74, 11; 177; al-magám (standing) place" yer 76, r (179 o:ru:n); al-zaft 'petroleum' ye:r yağı: 75, ro, 158; Çağ, xvff. yér “carth” (zamin), and metaph. "place, bed" (ed sca. bistar) San. 349r. 21 (quotns.): Xwar. xr? yer 'earth, ground", etc. Ali 33: xın(?) yer ditto, common in Og.: xiv. ditto Qutb. 78; MN o, ctc.; Nahc. 9, 7 (yerli kökli 'carth and heaven”): ro, ro etc.: Kom. xiv “carth, ground, place” yer CCI, CCG; Gr. 127 (quotns.): Kip. xin al-ard yer, also al-makan, al-buq"a (place) Hou. s, 15; 51, $: xiv. yer al-ard İd. 92; Bul. 3, 10: xv ditto Kav. 58, 11; Tuh. ab, 7 (yer): Osm. xiv, xv yö:r: xiv ff. yer cia.p. in phr. TTS I 820-3; 11 1041-4; III 801-3; 1V 876-7, 888. PU 1 yır “the north; it may originally have had some concrete meaning like kuz "the shady side of a mountain, hence "north”, but if soit is lost, "Tho spelling is erratic; in 'l'ürkü yır, in Uvit. vin dr, vir ff. both ir and (VU) yir. N.o.a.b., but see yirtin, yırya:, Türkü vri yırğaru: .. . ilğerü: .. . bérgerü: 'northwards... eastwards . . . southwards' 7 E 28, II E 23; a0. I.S 2, HI. N ə: UyÉ. viu (I spent the winter) Otüken irin 'north of the Otüken (mountain) Su. E 7; Köğmen irknte: E£ r1: virt ff. Man.-A in a passage about the effect of the winds on the waves a kün ortuda sışar yél “vind from the south” drives the waves İrtin sıpar 'northwards', and a yirte sigarki yel “vind from the north' drives the waves kün ortudun sipar 'southwards' M İİİ o, 7 ff. (1). $2 yir. See lH xr. Mon. V. YRyar- (ya:r-) “to split, or cleave' (with a sharp instrument) and the like; homophonous w. 2 ya:r, q.v. S.i.a.m.l.g. w. the usual phonetic changes; SW 'Tkm. ya:r-. Türkü vri ff. (he walks alone) talim (?error for telim) urr: yarınça: yasugrEn yalhm kayağ yara: uru:pan 'striking and splitting the bare rock with a broad arrow-head until he cleaves many(?) ravines in it" IrkB 40; Uyğ. vtri ff. Bud. kabarmış etin yara biçip 'cutting and splitting his swollen flesh” U 777 45, rz: Civ. H T 146-7 (otura), a.0.0. in 77 I and I7; boş (yer tülz yarip “dividing the vacant land into 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 999 
     
   
   
     DIS (two) equal parts! US. ss, 1:3 (dubious): Xak. xı er yığa:ç yardı: “the man split (şaqqa) the piece of wood' (etc.); also used of other things, e.g. land (al-ard) when he has laid down the lines of its boundaries (awda'a'l-tuxüm haddiha) Kaş. 111 s? (yara:r, yarma:k, and see 1 yér-); başı: ya:rıp “1 cleaved (şadaxtu) his head" 7 399, 24; 11 356, 18 (kak-), (his beauty) yardı: menin yü:rek 'cleaved (şaqqa) my heart” I7I 33, 15: xın(?) Tef. yar“to cleave” 142: xiv Muh. şaqqa ya:r- Mel. 27, 11; Rif. 110; faraqa "to separate! (Rif. adds tva qasama "to divide" ya:r- 3o, r, i13; al-şaqq ya:rmak 36, 9; 122: Çağ. xv ff. yarşıhaftan “to split”, also pronounced yır- San. 327r. 18 (quotns.); reverse entry 348v. 26: Kom. xiv “to decide (judicially)' yarğu yarCCI, CCG, Gr.: Kom. xii şaqqa min şaqqi”l-şay yar- Hou. 41, 6; a.o. $, 18: xiv (after yirt-) yar- şaqqa qalila(n) (a little", ?in antithesis to yırt-) Jd. 93: xv yar- nafa'a (to benefit") aze caraha (both “to profit and “to wound') wa şaqqa Kav. 9, 18 (see yara:-) (under $-) qadga “to slice" (şaqqa, omitted in text, restored in margin; til-/) yar- (Tkm. tegne- Hap. leg.?) Tuh. 21b. r (and see yirt-). VU 1 yér- “to split (gently); almost syn. vr. yar-, but see Kag.'s remarks. "The vocalization is uncertain, but since Kaş. entered it after yör- he must have considered that it was yérnot yer-, and the forms entered under the Pass. f. yéril- and yérük show that it had front vowels. It is difficult to identify modern forms; those V.s w. -1- may be survivals w. the vowel changed owing to a supposed connection vv. ytrt-; these include NE Alt. yır-/yir- "to thread (a needle)! R III 473, 515: SE Tar. yir-(-mak) “to split, divide! R 77I 515; Türki yir- "to tcar off'(e.g. a branch froma tree) BŞ, Jarring: NC Kir, Kzx. jtr- "to dig through, penetrate (c.g. water a river bank), to scratch': SC Uzb. yir- “to separate: NW Kk. Jir“to dig, dig up (ground): SW Osm. yir- “to tear, split” (gently, not violently, which is yar-/iyırt-). Xak. xı (after yór-) er butik yerdi: (sic) “he split (şaqqa) the branch” or anything moist (rajb) when one has split it lengthways without cutting it with a sharp implement (£ida(n) min gayr qaf" bi'l-hadid); the first (ie. yar-) means şaqqa bi-qat' «va 'unf (using force') and this şaqqa bi-lutf (gently”): and in the prov. tapuğ ta:s yere:r ta:ş ba:şığ yara:r '(good) service splits a stone; but a stone splits the head” Kaş. IIl 58 (yere:r, yerme:k): (Çağ. xv ff. San. 327r. 18; 348v. 26 (yar-): Kip. xiv (VU) yér- şaqqa qalila(n) "to split a little” 7d. 93 (and see yérük): xv Tuh. 15a. 9 (yırt-)). 2 ye:r- "to loathe (something, esp. food, //cc.), to criticize, or blame (someone .ec.)”. Survives in NE Alt., Leb., Tel. yeri- R IJI 339: NC Kır. jeri-; Kzx. Jer-: NW Kk. ğeri-: SW Osm. yer-. Uy£. viri ff. Bud. (without feeling pleasure at being praised or) yermişke yeme yérinmedin “distress at being blamed' U . YRA 955 yéryük ol 'has greatly blamed' (illicit love) do. 83, 27; a.o. Hüen-ts. 1798 (müne:-): Xak. xı uruncak alıp yermedi: “he did not object (lam yamall) to receiving deposits' 7 149, 1; yérgü: eme:s (read erme:s) "you must not despise' (yulqir, an enemy because he is small) Kaş. II 29, 12; for main entry see Oğuz: KB (take me into your service) méni yérmedin “do not loathe (or despise?) me" 592; kim edgüg yérer erse isiz bolur, "whoever, being evil, loathes what is good” 922: xıı?(?) At. yérersen zamànapni xalqın kodup “you blame the age in which you live disregarding the people in it”, (do not blame (yérme) the age, blame(yér) the people) 407-8: xiv Muh.(?) al-damm (MS. al-damm) “to blame” yermek Rif. 122 (only ; damma translated s6:8-): Oğuz xi er aşığ ye:rdi: “the man İoathed ("afa) the food”, and one says ol eriğ yé:rdi: "he loathed (damma) the man”, luğa Guzziyaà Kaş. III 185 (y€:re:r, yö:rme:k). S yor- See yör- (and yorı:- Xak.). yör- physically “to unwrap'; metaph. “to interpret (a dream), explain (a doctrine, etc.), and the like. In the early period unquestionably vv, -6-, but in KB the Fergana and Cairo MSS. (but not the Vienna MS.) sometimes have -0and it survives only(?) in NC Kir. joru-; Kzx. jor-: NW Nog.: SW Az., Osm. Tkm. yor- 'to interpret (dreams); to predict (the future)”. “As the vowel is short in Tkm. this is prob. the correct f. Uyğ.vı ff. Bud. yórügin . . . yörmedi “he has not given an explanation" (of a particular doctrine) TT V 22, 22-3: Civ. do. VII 38, 6 (irü): Xak. xr ura:ğut oğlun beşiktin yördi: “the woman released (fallat) her son from the wrappings of the cradle' (min zoataqı l-mahd) Kaş. I1] s8(yöre:r, yörme:k), ura:ğut oğlın beşiktin yö:rdi: same translation, but mina'l-mahd; also used of anything which has been released from its tether (unşita min “"aqdlihi) III 18s (yö:re:r, yö:rme:k); a.o. 7I] 125 (2 tü:ş): KB (millet bran (kavuk sökti) is good enough food for me . . .) şakarda tatığlığ kavuk yór mapa 'husk millet, which is sweeter than sugar for me” 4768; kerek arpa yör “or husk barley' 4769— tilekim söz erdi sapa yördüküm “my desire was speech, as I explained to you” 184; tüşüğ edgü yörse bu tüş yörgüçi 'if the interpreter of dreams interprets this dream well' 4368 (v.l. yorfug1); o.o. 308 (yüksek), 2632, 4366, etc.: xiv Rbg. tüşni yorğan yigit "a young man who interprets dreams” R /// 420: Çağ. xv ff. yor- ta'bir hardan xwàb “to interpret dreams” Sar. 341 v. 11 (quotns.): Xvvar. (VU) yor- “to explain, interpret” Ali 28: xiv ditto Qutb 83: Kip. xiv (VU) yor- 'abbara'l-ru'yá “to interpret dreams! . . . (VU) yorfawwala mina'l-fàl “to interpret omens' Id. 92. S(?E) yür- See 1 ür- (H I). p E: Dis. YRA D yaru: first appears in Kaş., where its logical meaning is obscure. In Tef. and Qut L4 III 73, 21-2; (the divine Buddha) artukrak  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1000 
     
   
   
     ə. 'CCC["7"«——————irtrtu unu 56 DIS. YRA can reasonably be taken as a Dev. N. fr. ar- in the sense of 'something split off” om something else, hence “half, segment', the eaning 'direction' being developed fr. its use one of the four quarters of the world. Xak. yaru: yelim gira'wl-samak "fish glue' aş. III 24; a.o. IİI zo (yelim): xırı(?) Tef. rusında yü eksüğrek yarım tündin alf-vvay or less than half-vvay through the ht”: (the bezel of the ring was rectangular) r yarusında bitiğ erdi “there was an iniption on one side” , (when the sun rose it one into the cave) op yarudın “from the ht side”: menir yarudın “for my part” (you 5excused) 146-7: Xvvar. xiv tört yaru “the r quarters of the world, cardinal points'; adàyin yarı “in the direction of Madayın” tb 72. yöre: 'surroundings, environment”. es in this sense only(?) in SW xx Anat. DD 1546 and Rep. Turkish (the pronuncian yura in Samt and Red. is prob. an error). k. xi (my eyes gush water like the sea) Pre: yóre: kuş uçar “and the birds fly all nd” (my tears, hawàlà miyàh 'ayni) Kaş. II 28; korkma: apar utru: turup teğre: €: “do not fear (your enemy), stand up to all round' (za kun bi-hiyàlihi) ITİ 422, 19; in entry as Oğuz xı yöre: baz) kull şay” wa iruhu "the surroundings or circumference anything! JJ] 24: Kip. xiv (VU) yóre: dlá'l-gay'; one says yörendürü yattı: i (the army slept round him” (fawíahu); e:si hawlahu İd. 92; (and see yörüğ): . XIV yöre “surroundings, environment”, ally in such forms as yöresine, yörede; c.i.a.p. TTS 7 845; İİ 1071; III 824; goz. : Dis. V. YRAla:- “to be successful, advantageous, benejourney was successful (or profitable)" 30; o.o. do. 5 (bo:dluğ, adğırlık), 41 kluk): Uyğ. vini [gap] yeme: yara| yaramaz [gap] “is useless” TT LX 109: . (i£ your son goes there) [yJaraáaymu it be advantageous?' PP 26, 8; (in reply request) yarağay “that will be quite satisry” do. 48, 6; o.o. do. 69, 4 (1 ür), TT V 126 (tapığ): Civ. yarar aş 'suitable (or uate) food” U.Sb. 92, 5-6: Xak. xı ol apar yara:dı: “that thing vvas suitable convenient to him” (wafaqahu wa süğa ; also used when a thing was permissible mina'l-cawáàz) ; prov. "if a father's clothes is son” (oğulka: yara:sa:) he does not his father (to go on living) Kaş. III 87 asr, yara:ma:k); o.o. 7 383, 4 (kuruğ), ever tattered a garment is) yağmurka: sr: “it is useful (yasluh) in the rain' III 38, ^ Oud hic 12042242 Qə.   fitting” (for any one except Thee) 6, yarar “is useful' 484-5; yaruttı sözün ham yaradı özün “your vvords have enlightened me and you yourself have been useful' 751: xı1(?) KBVP yeme bu kitib kör kamuğka yarar 'moreover, this book is useful to everyone” 34: xiv Muh. yasluh ya:rar Mel. 5, 5; yara:r Rif. 75; mà yacüz (Mel. corrupt?) yara:ma:s in Turkistan; yara:ma:z in our country 8, 5; 80: Çağ. xv yara-(-y, etc.) yaraVel. 410 (quotn.), 407; yara-/yaran- pasand wa muwdfig wa süzkàr uftüdan wa şöyasta şudan “to be suitable, appropriate, acceptable, useful' San. 327v. 2 (quotns.): Oğuz xı (after Xak.) hence the Oğuz say yo:l yara:sun “may your journey meet your wishes' (yuwáfiquka muràüduka) Kaş. III 87: Xwar. xiv yara- “to benefit; to be worthy of (something Dat.) Qutb 69; MN yy, etc.; Nahc. 389, 14: Kom. xıv “abominable” yaramaz CCG, Gr.: Kip. xiv yara- şaluha ld. 92; Bul. şşv.: xv ditto Tuh. z2b. 12; nafa'a 'to be useful, beneficial yara- do. 37b. 6; (and Kas. 9, 18, see yar-): Osm. xivíf. yara- “to be suitable, permissible, possible' (esp. in the form yaramaz); c.i.a.p. T TS I 785; II 1000; III 770; IV 844. (?D) yaru:- “to be, or become bright; to shine'; cognate to *ya:- and perhaps Den. V. fr. the Dev. N. *yar. Survives only(?) in NE Kumd.: NW Kar. L. R III 120; Kar. T. Kom. zoo yarı-. Cf. yaruk. Türkü vin ff. yıl yaru:mazkan “before the (new) year dawned' IrkB 21i; (the sun rose) udu: yér yaru:di: “then the earth became bright do. 26: Man. yarın yarudi kün tuğdu “the dawn broke, the sun rose” M I 6, ro: Uyğ. vin ff. Man. (their good thoughts increased daily and) kün tepri teğ yaruti (sic) “shone like the sun” (or, reading yarut(t)ı “illuminated them”) TT III 133: Bud. yaruk yaşuk alku sipardin yarumışın yaşumışın sakınmış kergek “you must imagine that a bright light (Hend.) shines (Hend.) from every direction” TT V 4, 2-3, 6—7, 12-13; 0.0. VI 378 v.l., etc. (yaltrı:-): Civ. (the rays of the sun) açıldı yarudı *were disclosed and shone” TT I 4; o.o. do. 23; VII 30, 5-6: Xak. xı kün yaru:dı: "the sun became bright' (adá'at); also used of any dark place when it has become light Kay. 1I] 86 ((ya)rur, yaru:ma:k), ya:y yaru:pan (MS. “öaru:ban) inbalaca şubhu”l-rabif "the spring davvned” 7 96, 8, a.o. III 89 (yaşu:-): KB (the sun of the sacred majesty) anındın yaruyur 'shines from him” 354; 0.0. 496, 732, 1049, etc.: xır(?) Tef. (when he heard the command) kópli yarıyu başladı "his heart began to shine' (i.e. was gladdened) 144 (mistranslated): xiv Muh.(?) adö”a ya:rı:- Rif. 103: Çağ. xvff. yaru-/yarus- (both spelt) rasışan sudan ta calà yáftan “to shine, become bright! San. 327v. 29 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv yaru- “to shine; (of the dawn) to break” Qutb 72; MN 129; Nahc. 321, 17; 414, 16: Kap. XıV yari- aşraqa “to shine'; and one says tan yarıdı: “the dawn broke'; and they şay in "Turkish tan attı: “the dawn spoke" (nafaq   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1001 
     
   
   
      DIS. YRB S yıra:- See 1ra:-. S yirü:- See iri:-. yorı:- “to walk, march', more indefinitely "to go'; as an Aux. V. vv. preceding Ger. in -p “to go on (doing something)'. “The -o- is established by the spellings in TT VIII and modern forms of yorik, yori:£a: but survives only(?) in NE Tuv. coru-/cor-. In the medieval period the vowels moved forward and downwards, perhaps influenced by yüğür-, and nearly all modern forms, which are often Mon., have -ü-; NE Alt. yür-: SE yürü-: NC jür-: SC yur-: NW Kk. jür-; Kaz. yór-; Nog., Kumyk yürü-: SW Az. yéri-; Osm. yürü-; Tkm. yóre-. Türkü vir yori:dimiz “vve marched” (against the Türgeş) 1 E 37; 0.0. in this sense / E ız (taşra:), 35, II E 27 (toğ-), T ro, 11, etc.; öpdün xağanÉaru: sü: yorulum “let us march as an army eastwards against the xağar” T 29—(those of you who remained in all these countries) kop turu: ölü: yoriyu:r ertig “vvere all going on staying and dying there” T S 9, II N 7: vıu ff. IrkB zo (uda1:-); a.0.0.: Man. yerdeki bağrın yorığma tınlığ “creatures that crawl on their bellies on the ground” Chuas. 84; adakin yorip *walking on our legs” do. 314—etóz sevigince yorij “eading a life of bodily pleasure” do. 197; 0.0. do. 303, 328; TT Il 8, so, ro, 78 (2 öt): Uyğ. vir yorr:dim “1 marched out” Su. N 9, a.o.o., sü: yori:- N 6, Es; (in E 4 yüre: kelti: is not an early occurrence of yür- but an error for kóre: kelti: “came to see"): viri ff. Man.-A kentü ışsız boş yoriyur *leads a life of idleness (Hend.) M 1I 17, 2: Man. adakın yorip TT: 711 97; arığ yollarta yorip '*walking (metaph.) in pure ways' do. 164-5; a.o. do. 141: Bud. Sanskrit ekacàryám *walking alone” ya:lınusı yorimma:ki$ TT VIII B.3; o.o. do. B.1, s, 7; E.so, etc.; suvda yorip “vvalking in the water' PP 36, 5; o.o. do. 32, 5; U I1 24, 2 (akru:); TT VI 324 (kavis-), etc.—köni nomda yorıdaçılar “those who live in accordance with the true doctrine” Suv. 136, 8—9: Civ. (the cold water) yanturu yorıdı “turned back” T'T 1 ros—ötüg savka yorima 'do not act against the advice' (given to you) do. 35—yarh fi yoridi “your commands have been complied vvith” do. 37; in USp. sözleri yorimazunlar “let their statements not be valid' is a stock phr., with minor variations, in clauses declaring contracts irrevocable, 13, 15; 16, 22 etc.: Xak. xı er yorrdr («the man (etc.) walked" (maşd), also used when anything travelled (sára) or walked Kaş. 111 87 (yorır, yoruma:k), kiz ki$i: sa:vı: yo:riğlı: bolma:s “the reputation of a miser is not vvidespread (sayyür) and remains obscure” / 326, 23; yordım (sic, metri gratia in a verse) tala"tu 'I went up” İ 456, r, o.o. İ/ sr, 19; IJI a1 (yağru:), 375 (Sıpa:r): KB yorr-, lit. and metaph., is common, e.g. (God) yorimaz nà yatmaz “does not walk or lie down! 17; (Saturn) yorır . “moves” (above the other planets) 131; a.o. 137; yori “get moving' (you    ignorant man! Q 957 a little” (and then died) 234; 0.0. 2 etc.—(if a beg's conduct ərik) Bəd Me servant) yorığay “vvill behave' (even better) 2114; yoriğıl kóni 4094; a.o. 348 (ökünçsiz): xin(?) At. (God created night and day) yorir “they go” (one after the other) 14; a.o. 410 (borçı:), Tef. (VU) yüri-(-mek, -medük) “to go, move', etc. 167): xiv Muh. maşd yori:Mel. 31, 7; yo:t:- Rif. 115; al-maşd yo:xrimak (sic, but not conclusive) 38, 1; 124; intafá “to be sent away, banished' yo:ri- 104 (only): Çağ. xv ff. yürü- (spelt *with -ü-") rdk raftan *to go, walk' San. 341 v. 20 (quotns.): Xwar. xır (VU) yorı- “to go” ' Ali 49: xin(?) yürü(-gü, -mekte) “to walk, move”, etc. is common in Oğ.: xiv (VU) yüri- (-gil Nahc. 351, 7) İyür- (metri gratia) "to go, walk', etc. Qutb 83 (yor-), 88 (yüri-); MN 11, etc.; Nahe. 21, 1; 373, 14; etc.: Kom. xiv yür-/yürü- 'to go, travel , also an Aux. V. CCI, CCG; Gr. 131 (quotns.): Kip. xii majà (VU) yü:ri:-(-gil sic, but not conclusive) Hou. 35, 9: xiv yürüditto İd. 92; yirü-(-mek) Bul. 81v.: xv ditto yürü- Kan. 34, 5; Tuh. 3sb. 10. Mon. YRB yarp 'firm, solid”, physically and metaph. ; n.o.a.b. Uy£. vin ff. Bud. yarp oluru 'sitting firmiy” TT X 480; o.o. do. 335 (teprencsiz); VIII B.3, 15 (berk): Civ. H 172 (ügre:): Xak. xi yarp ne: “a firm (or solid, al-muhkam) thing”, yarp yü:z rawnaqu'i-wach “a radiant face', when someone is pleased; hence one says anu) yarpr yazıldı: injaraha ğudün wachihi lammà surra “the wrinkles in his face relaxed when he was pleased” Kaş. 711 6 (in the latter meaning “firm”, i.e. smooth); KB yağı boynın egse işin kılsa yarp *when the enemy submits he must act firmly' 5905. Dis. YRB D yarpsız Hap. leg.; Priv. N./A. fr. yarp: “lacking firmness” Uyğ. viii ff Bud. TT VIII D.33 (yegsiz). 1 yarpuz a herb, or herbs ?, of the mint family, usually “pennyroyal, Menta pelagium'. Survives in SE Türki yalpuz (sic) “goosefoot, Chenopodium vulvaria! Sharp, Tarring , “mint” BS: NC jalbiz 'mint': SC Uzb. yalpiz (sic) “mint”: SW Osm. yarpuz 'pennyroyal': "Tkm. narpız (sic). Other languages use l.-w.s and this may be one. Xak. xı yarpuz al-habaq, “pennyroyal”: a herb Kaş. 111 39: Çağ. xv ff. yarpuz (spelt) "a herb which they call büdina 'mint', Arabicized as füdmacş in Ar. also called habaq San. 329r. 21: Ep. xv nammüm, 'wild thyme” yarpuz Tuh. 36b. 3: Osm. xvı ff. yarpuz “pennyroyal, mint ”, etc.; common esp. in Ar. and Pe. dicts. 77S 7 790; I1 1070; Zİ 776; IV 850. 2 yarpuz Hap. leg.; prob. a l.-w., the mongoose is not indigenous in the original Turkish country. In all other languages l.-w.s or phr., like *Pharaoh's rat” in Osm., are used, Xak. xı 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1002 
     
   
   
     958 D1S. V. Dis. V. YRBD yarpa:d- Hap. leg.; Intrans. Den. V. fr. yarp. Xak. xı iğliğ yarpattı: “the invalid became stronger” (inta'aja) and one says oğla:n yarpattı: 'the boy grew' (tara"ra"a), originally yarpa:dtı:, then assimilated Kaş. II ası (yarpatu:r, yarpatma:k, sic, should be yarpadu:r, 15 5 ie 01m. 4 zdi. crus M^ (pi aokifvÉc mcd yurç 'one's wife's younger brother; junior brother-in-law'. Survives in NE Bar. yurdzu; Tel. yurçu R III 551; Khak. curgu; Tuv. gurju "junior brother-in-law; or sister-inlaw'. Other languages use phr. containing kadın. Türkü vr: 7 E 32 (elig): O. Kir. IX ff. (I have been parted from) €çi:m yurçumka “my elder brother(s) and junior brother(s)in-law' Mal. 17, 2; (there is no trace of the word in the five other texts listed in the Index): Xak. xı yurç “a wife's younger brother” ; a distinction is made between a man's brothers and a woman's (ie. wife's) brothers; a man's brother is called ini: if younger than him and éci: if older, and his sister is called sipil if younger and eke: if older, and a woman's (wife's) sister is called baldiz if younger and eke: if older Kaş. III 7: Çağ. xv fi. yüğürçi (MS. yürgügi, but listed under yük . . .) “a woman's (ie. wife's zar) younger brother';. just as her elder brother is called kayn (i.e. kadin) San. 345r. 2. Dis. YRC D yerçi: N.Ag. fr. yé:r; n.o.a.b. in the meaning 'guide'; survives only(?) in NE Tel. yerçi traveller R III 344. Türkü vii yerçi: tiledim 'I looked for a guide' T 23; a.o. T 26: vi ff. Tun. III a. 6-7 (a:z-); a.o.o. Uy£. vir ff. Man. TT II 69 (a:z-): Bud. PP 22, 4-5 (suvçı:), 36, 1 (ékkigü:), etc.; U II s, 13, etc, (yolçı:): Xak. xı yerçi: (MS. yurgi:) al-dalill-xarit "a skilled guide” Kaş. III 3o (not recognized by Brockelmann or Atalay, who spelt it yorçr:). PUD yerçü: Hap. leg.; der. fr. yér, but -çü: is not a recognized Den. Suff. and the form is dubious. Xak, xı yerçü: al-gabr 'a grave” Kaş. III 3o. Tris. V. YRC- ” D yérgile:- Dev. V. fr. yerçi:, “to guide". N.o.a.b. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. men yerçilep élit&amp;eymen “1 will guide and escort you” PP 6o, 2; o.o. Hüen-ts. 1786, 1938 (uduz-). Mon. YRD yurt (?yurd) very rare in the early period, Kag.'s translation “an abandoned campingsite” suits the early occurrences; but in the medieval period it came to mean “dvvellingplace, abode”, vvithout any implication of abandonment, and s.i.a.m.l.g. w.. the usual phonetic changes and a vvide range of meanYRBcommunity, a country, one's own country', etc. Türkü vırı (the enemy attacked our camp (ordu:), but Kül Tégin refused to give it up. If he had, all you, my womenfolk, if you had survived would have become slaves, or) ólügl: yurtda: yolta: yatu: kaltaçı ertiglz “your corpses would have remained lying in the deserted camping-site or on the road” I N 9; (I led the army into the Shantung plain and to the sea; it pillaged twenty-three towns) Usr:n buntatu: yurtda: kalu:r erti: (prob. a Chinese name and title, something like) 'Wu-hsin the fpén-ta-tu remained lying in his deserted camping-site” T 19: viu ff. (a devout old woman) yurt(t)a: kalmi:ş 'stayed behind in a deserted camp” (she found a greasy spoon, and survived by licking it) 7728 13; (the tentative reading yurta: in Miran B.2 (ETY II 65) is very dubious). Uyğ. vırı ff. Civ. olurtuk sayu orun yurt ógüpce 'every place that you live in is to your satisfaction” T'T I 120 (a very late text): Xak. xi yurt al-falal wa'l-rab' wa'[-diman "the ruins of a camp, a dwelling, traces of old buildings! Kaş. 111 7; (passion overcame me; constantly weeping day and night) kördi: közüm tavrakın yurt: kalıp ağlayu: //-m2 ra'at "aynı xalà talalahu wa tarkahu rab'ahu bi-dö”l-sur"a “because my eye saw the emptiness of his abandoned residence and his speedy evacuation of his residence' J1I 258, 16; (yurt in 103 (aput) is a scribal error for bart): Çağ. xv ff. yurt maskan wa ma'wà *residence, mansion” Sam. 342v. 6 (quotn.): Xvvar. xııı(?) bedük bir yurt élgün érdi 'it was a big country and kingdom' Oğ. 262; yurtika öyike düşdi kétti “he went back to his country and home' 309; 8.0.0. of yurt “country”: Xiv (he migrated) ajun yurtindin “from his home in this world'; (you should not forcibly settle people) kişi yurtında “in a strange place” Qutb 86, yerini yurtin1 koyup 'abandoning their homes” Nahe. 27, 2: Kom. xiv 'dwelling place” yurt CCI; Gr: Kip. xiu (between “road” and 'desert) ai-manzila “stopping-place, inn” yurt Hou. $, 20: xiv yurt ai-watan 'native country” İd. 93; (under “military terms”) al-manzila wa 'urriba bi'l-witüq (camp', turned into Ar. for “tent” yurt Bul, 6, 6 (zeitáq is a 1.-vv. in Ar., but comes fr. ota:f, q.v.): xv manzila yurt Tuh. 32b. 4: Osm. xiv ff. yurt (yurd- before vowel Suffs.) “dvvelling place”: c.i.a.p.; yurdu in the phr. iğne yurdusu “the eye of a needle” seems to be a corruption of it (cf. Osm. birisi fr. bi:r) TTS I 851; İH 1078; 111 830; IV 907. Mon. V. YRDyırt- “to tear (something cc.) to pull to pieces! and the like” s.i.a.m.l.g. vv. the usual phonetic changes. Cf. üz-. Türkü virmnff. Man. M I ş, 16 (üz-): Xak. xı ol tonn yırttı: “he tore (mazzaqa) his clothes', or anything else Kaş. 717 435 (yirta:r, yirtma:k); o.o. 1 323 (içir), 341 (tirt): xiv Muh. xaraqa “to tear” yırt- Mel, 25, 15; Rif. 108; mazzaqa yırt- 31, 5; 115 (MS. yarut-); al-tamziq 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1003 
     
   
   
     das emu eae adi ot e .. DIS. V. YRD- 959 prob. a mere scriba] error, but yıprat-, a Sec. f. of oprat- could have this meaning): Çağ. Xv ff. yırt- (spelt) daridan "to tear' San. 349r. I (quotn.): Xwar. xiv ditto Qut? gr, MN 270; Nahc. 81, ır, yırtağan cönvvarlar 'beasts of prey' do. 333, 17; 344, 6: Kom. xiv “to tear” yırt- CCI; Gr.: Kip. xin xarraqa "to tear apart' yırt- (MS. yarat-) Hou. 39, 19: Xiv yırtmazzaga ... yırt- xaraqa, thus in the Kitab Beylik İd. 93; şaqqa “to split” yırt- Bul. sir. (the vocalization is erratic and the Infin. -mek; obviously confused vv. yar- and 1 yer-): XV xaraqa (yır-, in margin in second hand) yırt- Tuh. rsa. 9; mazzaga yırıt- (sic) do. 36a. 1. yort- “to trot, amble” , l.-w. in Mong. as yorçi“to go, set out” (Haenisch 171, Kom. 2106); s.ia.m.lg. except SE vv. the usual phonetic changes; apparently cognate to yorı:-, cf. yorı:ğa:. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. (the king and his retinue) keyik avlap yortup “vhile hunting wild game and trotting along! U IV 34, 64: Xak. xı atlığ yorttı: “(he horseman ambled' (xabba) Kaş. III 435 (yorta:r, yortu:r luğatdn, “both forms", yortma:k); tap ata: yortalım “let us set out (nasir) at dawn! III 356, r: K B (the junior ranks must not mingle with their seniors) yırak taş yorığlı yakın yortmasa “or trot near them when going on lengthy expeditions' 2587: Çağ. xv ff. yort(spelt) harwala hardan wa ba-ta'cil rafian suwára “to trot, to ride fast” San. 342r. 18: Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 86: Osm. xiv ff, yort'to get going, keep going', rather than specifically “to trot'; fairly common T'TS I 842; II 1067; III 821; IV 898. Dis. YRD D yartu: Dev. N. in -tu: (unusual) fr. yar-; Ait. something split off". In Kaş.”s second meaning “long strips of wood', of which many inscribed specimens have been found in Sinkiang. Survives as yartı meaning “board” in NE Kaç., Koib., Tel. R III 145 and “half” in NE Bar.; NVV Kk. (artı), Kaz., Kumyk, Nog.: SVV Tkm. (ya:rti). Xak. xı yartu: al-nuhàta "a chip, splinter'; and by analogy (givása(n)) “a writing tablet” (al-laeohu'lladi -yuktab 'alayhi) is called yartu: Kaş. IJI 30. D yortuğ Dev. N. fr. yort- lit. “trotting”, in practice “a royal escort”: Pec. to Xak. Xak. xi yortuğ markibu'l-sultàn yauma”l-harb awi'l-2a'n "a royal escort in battle or on a long journey” Kaş. III az: KB sü başçı tüze tursa yortuğ kurin “he army commander must constantly keep the ranks of the royal escort in proper formation' 2586. S yartım syn. w., and prob. a Sec. f. of, yarım w. an intrusive -t-, cf. the spellings of yérci: in Uyğ. Man.(a:z-) and yarmak: in Uyg. Bud. and Kaş.”s Uyğ. N.o.a.b.; notconnected w. SVV Az., Osm. yardim ; Tkm. ya:rdam “help” which is der. fr. Pe. ydr “friend”, etc. Uyğ. vıu ff. Bud. bursop kuvrağ iki yartım kıltımız erser “if we have split a religious community (Hend.) into two factions! TT IV 6, 28—9; similar phr. U II 78, 36; 87, 54-5: Xak. xı one says bir yartim bodu:n gö”ifa mina'l-nàs infaradü min bayna'l-cumla "a section of the people which has separated itself from the (rest of) the community” Kaş. III 46. S yartmak See yarma:k. PUD yırtın Den. N./A. vv. the directive Suff. -tin (to be distinguished fr. the Abi, Suff.) fr. 1 yir; “in the north'. N.o.a.b. Cf. yirya: Türkü vii T i: (öpdün): Uyf. vinff. Man.-A (VU) irtin M 17I 1o, 7 ff. (i): Man. (an eastern territory . . . a western territory) berdinki yirdinki yér suv 'southern and northern territories” M III 8, 8 (i): Bud. TT VI 291 (öpdün). D yérdes N. of Assn. fr. ye:r, 'fellow countryman'. N.o.a.b. (Xak. xı see erdeş): Oğuz xı yerdeş kişi: al-baladi mina'l-nàs “a fellow countryman”, that is there are two men from one and the same country (balda), and each of them is called yerdeş to the other fil-Guzziya Kaş. III 40; (in the examples of the Suff. -deş under tü:des) and one says yé:rdes of two persons when they are from one place (mazodi) I 407, 9: Kap. xii (in a note on the Suff. -daş/-deş) 'ground, place” (al-ard wa'l-makàn | wa'l-buga) is yer, and if you say yerde:s it indicates that two people come from one ground or place Hou. 51, 5: XIV yerde:ş “an acquaintance (ai-ma'rifa) from the same country” İd. 93; Bul. 9, 6 (the same fatherland”): xv yerdeş rafiqu'l-mawdi' Tuh. 86b. 9: Osm. xvi Pe. ham-càyi from the same place” yerdeş TT'S IV 876. Dis. V. YRDD yarat- Caus. f. of yara:-; properly “to make, or find, suitable, convenient', and the like, that is “to adapt” or “to approve, agree with (something)”, and the like; but fr. the earliest period also, more vaguely, “to create”, esp. of God creating the world (cf. törüt-). In some individual passages it is not easy to see what the exact connotation is. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. the usual phonetic changes; the only meaning in SC and most SW languages, and a normal one in all the others except NE is 'to create"; the other meanings occur in the rest. Türkü vur yarat- occurs several times; (1) governing bodunığ and meaning “to organize in a fit state” / E 13, JI E 12 (boşğur-): ét- yarat-, same meaning 27 E 19; 1 E 20, II E 17; (2) Bilge: Kağan s full title was Tepri: teg tepri: yaratmış Türkü Bilge: Xağan “the wise xağan of the Türkü, godlike and installed by God” II E ı, S 13; (3) apar adınçığ bark yaratdım “1 erected a special (grave) structure for him” JJ. N 14; ao. 1 N 13 (€t-): vur ff. (if there is pure water 1 will drink it; if there is) €tmi:ş yara:tmı:s tatığlığ a:ş *well prepared (Hend.) appetizing food” (I will eat 1) Toy. HI r. 4-7; (ETY II 178); 2.0. Tun. YI a. 7-8 (a:z-): Man. (if we have said that) edgüg afiigag kop tepri yaratmış ol “God 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1004 
     
   
   
     Dis. v. 1RUed everything good and bad” Chuas. I 28, ;now) yeriğ tepriğ kim yaratmış "who ed earth and heaven” do. 167-8: Uyğ. ix : yaratip [gap] ZI A 1 (ETY II 32; I. Man.-A M I 14, 4-5 (€: it-); do. -); (just as a man) yaratir poat vv orchard or house) do. ro: Man. (you 'ated living creatures . . . from ignorance, bilge biligte yaratdınız 'endowed them knowledge! TT Il] 32: Bud. kemi t(t)! “he fitted out a ship” PP 31, 5; (if a contemplates) étgeli yaratğalı “organizand creating', (a town, a country, or a e) TT VI 80; o.o. do. 100, 290; ertinin tmis ordular 'palaces set with jewels' 243; Slok takşut yaratıp 'composing s' Hüen-ts. 1832; (a religious work) aç tilince yaratmış “composed in the ese language” do. 2151-2; in US. 94, 6 ff. Maitrisimit is described as enetkek tilinoxrı tilince yaratmış 'composed in the arian language on the basis of (a text) in ndian (Sanskrit) language', and translated armış) from 'Tokharian into Turkish: yaratu bér- “to make a due delivery” (of s, etc.) is a stock phr. in contracts in US. ; 16, 21; 107, 15; 108, 16: Xak. xı tepri: uk yarattı: “God created (xalaga) man”, other created things; (Oğuz phr. follows); one says ol ó:zindin sö:z yarattı: aqa l-kadib mina”l-halüm min nafsihi “he cated a statement on his ovvn initiative” Il 315 (yaratu:r, yaratma:k), tepri: ol i£ yaratğa:n “God is the constant creator iq) of the earth”, (etc.) 171 52; a.o. 1330,25: (God created (törütti) the universe) ttı kör evren “he created the firmament” in 127 both törüttu and yarattı, (my je, unceasingly praise) yaratığlını "the tor” 38r: xın(?) KBPP yerli kökli tğan 'creator of earth and heaven” 3; yok erdim yarattıy “1 did not exist and 1 didst create me” 9; a.o.o., Tef. yaratsreate): törütteçi yarattaçı/yaratğuçı tğüci “creator” 143: xiv Muh. al-xàliq :tigli: Mel. 15, 2; Rif. 88; ditto yara:t44, 8; 137; al-maxlüq “created things” atmış (MSS. yari:mi:5) 45, 2; yara:tmış Çağ. xv ff. yarat- afridan “to create” San. . 29: Oğuz xı (within the Xak. entry) Oğuz say ol to:nuğ yarattı: “he fitted lara) the garment”, and say bu: etük a: yarat “fit this boot on me” Kaş. II 315: r. xı yaratkan “the Creator” ' Ali 37: yarat- “to create” Qutb 7o; MN 4, etc., 5, 5 etc.; yaratğan Qutb, MN, Nahc. , yaratğuçi Quzb: Kom. xiv “to create” t- CCI, CCG; Gr. 115 (quotns.): Kip. al-xüliq yaratka:n Hou. 3, 14; xalaga t- do. 34, 19: xiv yarat- xalaga; yaratal-xaliq İd. 93: xv alladi xalaqa yarat. Kav. şı, r, xüliq yaratkan Tuh. 14a. 2; ja yarat- do. 14b. 9: Osm. xiv yaratğan ro texts T'TSS II 1003. arut- Caus. f. of yaru:-; physically “to inate (something 4ce.), make it bright; nh “en &amp;nhohten infnrr'! and the like S.i.s.m.l. in both senses. Türkü viii ff. Man. (the sun and moon) tört bulupuğ yarutir "illuminate the four corners (of the world) Chuas. ız: Uy&amp;. viri ff. Man.-A kim ol ernep kóplin yarutsar 'to enlighten that man's mind” M 1l ış, 3-4; belgürtir yarutir yaşutır “manifests and illuminates (Hend.), do. 21, 4 (ii): Man. M III 24, 9 (ii) (1 kap): Bud. teri) yórügin odğurak yarutı yaşutı ötğürü usar “if he can vividly illuminate (Hend.) and expound its profound interpretation' TT VI 387; o.o. U II 46, 68-9, etc. (yaltrit-); Suv. 348, 7-8 (tegirmile:-): Xak. xı kün ol alunuğ yarutğa:n “the sun constantly illuminates (tunayyir) the world and makes it shine' (tuşarrıquhu) Kaş. III 52; n.m.e.: KB yaruttuy "Thou didst illuminate' (the dark night with the bright day) 22; o.o. ı25, 134 (bakış-)—(the tongue) yaruttaçı erni “enlightens men” 162; a.o. z14—d(the gatekeeper) kapuğda yarutsa karapku tünüg *must see (the day) illuminate the dark night at the gate' 2530: xi11(?) At. (driving away the night, God) báz yarutur tap-a 'makes the dawn shine again' 16; Tef. yarut- 'to cause to shine' 147: xiv Muh.(?) adü"a gayrahu “to make something bright' ya:ru:t- Rif. 103 (only): Çağ. xv ff. yarut-(-kaç) rasan eyle“to make bright” Vel. qor, yarut-/yaruşturCaus. f. ratogan kardan San. 328r. 19 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv yarut-/yarıt- “to illuminate, cause to shine” Quib 72-3; MN sz, “to light” (a lamp) Nahc. 257, 4; Kom. xiv “to illuminate! yaritCCG, Gr. 117 (quotn.): Osm. xiv ditto in one text TT'S 7 788. VU?D yerit- Hap. leg.; this V. follows yırat-, so the first vowel must be 2asra ; the last word of the translation is corrupt and the vocalization is chaotic; perhaps Caus. f. of 2 yé:r- in : the sense of “to lay oneself open to criticism". Xak. xı er i:şke: (sic) yéritti: (MS. ye/ér.tti:) takasala”l-racul fi'l-amr. wa ictalata (?, MS. iclan.fi) the man was negligent in the matter and peculated(?) Kaş. İT 315 (yéritü:r, yéritme:k, MS. yeretü:r, yer.tme:k). S yırat- See 1rat-, D yorit- Caus. f. of yorı:-, survives in the same languages with the same developments of meaning and phonetic changes, Türkü vri bunça: yérke: tegi: yorıtdım “1 made (my armies) march to all these places” 7 S 4; sü: yorıtdım T 25, 35—(the Chinese) yoritmaz ermis 'did not allow freedom of action' (?, to good wise men and good brave men), 17 $ 6, N 4: Uy. vin ff. Chr. (an angel) uduzup andın öpgi yolça yorıtdı “led them back from there by a different road” U I 9, 7-8: Bud. (whoever can thoroughly understand this doctrine and) turkaru üzüksüzün yoritsar isletser 'continuously (Hend.) put it into effect (Hend.? TT VI 192-3: Xak. xı ol meni: telim yorıtdı: “he made me walk (amşüni) a great deal'; and one says ot anu karnın yorıttı: “the drug loosened his bowels' (atlaga batnahu) Kaş. II 315 (yoritu:r, voritma:ly wvoritóa-n kiçi" “a ran uith 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1005 
     
   
   
     TRIS. V. YRDloose bowels' (raddam) 111 s2; alo, I 115 (öpdün): KB (God) yorıttı tilig “activated (man's) tongue' 149; törü tüz yorıttı "he put the customary law into full effect” 291; yorırığ yoritmaz kör esrip ıtıp “your hunting leopards and dogs do not let ground game move away' (i.e. escape) 5379; 0.0. 2300 aşlığ), 5546 (im), 6056 (etel): xiu(?) At. qadálar yorit&amp;an 'who causes destiny to operate' 454; Tef. yürit- “to move' (mountains) 168: Çağ. xv ff. yürüt- rah burdan “to set in motion” San. 342r. 12 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv (VU) yorit-/yorut- ditto Qutb 88 ( yürit-|yürüt-): Osm. xv ff. yürüt- “to set in motion; to make (blood) flow; to make (e.g. a mill) work; to put (currency) into circulation” fairly common T'TS II 1085; IV 916. D yırtıl- Pass. f. of yirt-; s.i.s.m.l, Xak. xı to:;n yırtıldı: “the garment was torn' (inmazaqa) Kaş. III 106 (yırtılu:r, yirtilma:k, verse); emdi: yürek yırtılu:r fa'l-àn yataşadda" minhu'l-qalb asafa(n) “and now the heart is torn asunder by it with grief' 7 41, 17: xm(?) Tef. yırtıl- "to be torn' 158: Çağ. xv ff. yırtıl- darida şudan ditto San. 349r. 9: Kom. xiv yırtıldıp uyat "you have behaved shamelessiy” CCG, Gr. 133 (?corrupt): Kip. 74V ingagga “to be split yırtıl- Bul. aar. D yırtın- Refl. f. of yırt-: n.o.a.b.? Xak. xi ol tomın yırtındı: “he pretended to tear (yumazzig) his garment' Kaş. III 108 (yirtınu:r, yırtınma:k): Kap. xv tamazzaqga “to be torn” yırtın- Tuh. 10b. 5. D yartur- Caus. f. of yar-; s.i.s.m.]. Xak. xı ol apar yığa:ç yarturdi: "he ordered him to split ("ala şaqq) the wood' Kaş. III 94 (yarturur, yarturma:k): Çağ. xv ff. yarüur- Caus. f.; sikáfánidan “to order to split” San. 327v. 1. ı D yértür- Hap. leg.; Caus. of 1 yér- Xak. xı ol apar butik yertürdi: “he urged him to split (alà şaqq) the branch”, and he split it Kaş. İH 95 (yertürür, yertürme:k). D yırtış- Co-op./Recip. f. of yırt- ; survives in SW Osm., 'T'km. “to tear one another's clothes, quarrel violentiy”. Xak. xi ol apar bó:z yırtışdı: “he helped him to tear (/f? mazq) the cotton cloth' (etc.; Ka;., in error “the garment") Kaş. III 101 (yırtışu:r, yırtışma:k): Çağ. xv ff. yırtış- (spelt) Recip. f., "to tear (daridan) one another”, or “to tear (something) together' Sar. 349r. 7 (quotn.). D yortuş- Co-op. f. of yort-; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı ol menip birle: (MS. bile:) yortugdt: “he competed with me in trotting' (fi zaxbib”l1-faras) . III 101(yortugu:r, yortugma:k): ağ. xvff. yortug- (of horsemen) “to ride quickly (ba-ta'cil raftan) together” San. 342r. 24. Tris. YRD D yaratığ Dev. N. fr. yarat- ; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vr ff. Bud. only in the phr. étig yaratığ 7T VII D.13, etc. (étig): (Xak.) xın(?) Tef. Ar. 961 xulg "nature, moral character” yaratuğ r44: Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 7o. D yaratığlığ P.N./A. fr. yaratığ: n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vii ff. Man. M III 22, 3-s (ii) (étiglig): Bud. TT VI 79-8o (ditto). D yartımlık Hap. leg.; A.N. fr. yartim, Türkü viri ff. the letter Tun. IV (ETY H 96) begins by reporting the arrival of four men led by a fifth, and then refers to the arrival of thirty men. Between the two, and obviously referring to the first party, are the words yartımlık erür “they are a separate party(?)'. ?C yertinçü “the world', and more specifically “this world', as opposed to heaven, hell, etc.; in TT VIII spelt yértingó|yérténgó| yértóngó. It is suggested in the Indices to TT VIII and X, perhaps on the basis of the statement in Kot». 2368 that this word as a l.-w. in Mong. is the equivalent of "Tibetan Ajig-rten, that this is a Tibetan l.-w. This is open to several objections; (1) it assumes an eroded pronunciation of the Tibetan phr. which is improbable at this early date; (2) while hfig-rten, lit. 'receptacle of the perishable' is the standard Tibetan phr. for 'the external world', there is no trace in the dicts. of an extended phr. containing the equivalent of -çü: (-çö), (3) there are no known Tibetan 1.-w.s in early 'lurkish and no evidence that the Indian Buddhist terminology in Turkish was obtained through any intermediaries other than Sogdian, Tokharian and, later, Chinese. The word is much more likely to be a purely Turkish compound w. yé:r as the first component. As regards the second it is perbaps significant that in TT I 91 (damaged) there is an antithesis between yerde and tongudaki, and it is ' possible that the second element is tançu: “a lump of earth”, q.v. Common in Uy£., but n.o.a.b. Türkü vir ff. Man. (I am not at all pleased to be) yertinçü yer suvda ev bark İçinde “in the territory of this world in a house” TT II 8, 41-2: Uyğ. viu ff. Man. yertinçüteki tınlığlar "living creatures in this world' TT III 166; yertinçke (sic) umuğ ınağ törütüpüz “you came into existence (to give) hope and confidence to this world' do. 73; a.o.o.: Bud. Sanskrit Joke 'in the world' yertinçöte: TT VIII A.14; ditto bo yérténcóte: do. B.13; jagati “in the world' yörtençöde: do. D.3o; yertünçüdeki (sic) tınlığlar PP 14, 8; o.o. do. 47, 6; 78, 3; üç min uluğ mig yertinçü yer suv 'three thousand million worlds! TT V 6, 25; a.o.o.: Kom. xiv yertinçi “the world. CCG; Gr. (prob. reborrowed fr. Mong.). D yertinçülüğ P.N./A. fr. yörtincü:, n.o.a.b. Uyğ. viürff. Bud. (of these ten definitions the first eight rest on the true doctrine, the last two) yörtinçülüğ yórügke tayağlığ ol “rest on worldly interpretations" TT V 19, 128. Tris. V. YRDD yaratit- Caus. f. of yarat-; 'to have (a memorial stone, etc.) erected”. N.o.a.b. Üvö6. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1006 
     
   
   
     i Şu, E 8 (belgü:); E 9 (órgin); E 9-10 ? taş). | yaratil- Pass. f. of yarat-, s.i.s.m.l., sually for “to be created”. Uyğ. vırı ff. Bud. T VIII A.11 (büt-): (Xak.) xin(?) Tef. aratil- “to be created” 143: xiv Rbğ. R III 368 (tiriğ): Xwar. xiv yaratıl- “to be reated' Qutb 71; Nahc. 225, 11. yaratin- Refl. f. of yarat-, “to organize neself” and the like. N.o.a.b. Türkü vir 4 E ə, İI E 9g (étin-): Uyğ. viu ff. Man. TT III i—5 (tı:d-): Bud. TT VIII D.8, etc. (étin-); X 76: Civ. TT I 212-13 (egsüt-). ) yaratu:r- Caus. f. of yarat-, the cognate yarattir- survives in SW Osm. Türkü ır yaratu:rtum 7 S iz (bark; I7 N 14 as yaratdım). Dis. YRĞ ) yara:ğ Dev. N./A. fr. yara:-, “opporinity ; suitability, opportuneness”, and the like, ss often an Adj. 'opportune, suitable', etc. | j8 doubtful whether this word survives. n extensive range of similar words meaning rms, military equipment', and the like, SE ürki yarağ/yarak: NC jarak: SC yaroğ: VV yarak/larak: SW Az., Tkm. yarağ, sm. yarağ/yarak may be survivals of a ;gnate Dev. N. in -K, but seem rather to be oÜnnected vv. yarik. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. Sus. 90,8 (1 yon): Civ. H 118, 25: Xak. xr yarağ -furşa wa'l-imkàn “opportunity possibility” , tov. rg yara:ğında: (sic) sart asığında: anslated yurzaqab li'l-umür furşa, “a (suitable) oportunity is awaited for doing business, and merchant when trading, if he sees a profit, ves not hesitate to buy when he likes” Kaş. '] 13; yara:É same translation; one says 5 yara:ğı: translated *wait foran opportunity | (doing) business and the (right) method” ihatahu); alternative form of yarag III 28; o. İI go, 9-10 (artukluk), etc.: KB (I wish | see the king;) yarağ körse “if he sees an əportunity” (will the Chancellor put in a word r me?) 529: xiri(?) At. 330 (opra:k); Tef. arağ “opportunity, possibility', and the like ız: Çağ. xv ff. yarağ/yarak (1) asbab wa dt wa adawát 'implements, instruments, ols”, (quotn.); (2) làyiq wa sazáwár 'conenient, worthy'; and yarağlığ has the same eaning (quotns.) San. 329r. 14: Xwar. xiv arağ 'opportunity; possibility; preparations or something); capability Qutb 69; Nahe. |. 17; 12, 7, etc.: Kom. xiv yarov 'equipent” CCG, “to release, let loose” yarak etCl; Gr. 115 (q.v.): Osm. xivff. yarağ/ arak 'preparations, equipment, provisions; "ns, vveapons” common both by themselves id in phr. T'TS I 783; 11 998; 111 768; IV iz. arık "body armour'; a basic word vv. no lausible etymology. N.o.a.b., but see yara:f. ürkü vir 7 E 33 (ur-): vin ff. yarı:k is the ommonest item of military equipment menoned in the list of issues in the Miran document (ETY II 64 fF.), küpe: yarı:k üçü:n bir yarı:k yarliğ boltu: “one set of body armour for(?) chain mail was allocated” ll. 8-9: Bud. Sanskrit varmasannaho '"wearing as armour” ya:rık üze: ya:rıklanmış e:rür TT VIII A.35-6, sü sülep yarık kedip 'fighting campaigns and wearing armour” U I1 78, 30; 86, 48; TT IV qo, ız, a.o. TT X 312; kop ödün nom ertini vajirli$ yarakka (reading doubtful; Uyg.-A form or misreading of yankka?) mepiz etgülük “at all times one must compare the jewel of doctrine to a vajra breastplate' U III 29, 32-35: Xak. xı yarik a generic term for “chain mail” and “plate armour” (a/-durü" wa'[-cawàgin); then a distinction is made between them, and “chain mail” is called küpe: yarık and 'plate armour' sa:y yarık Kaş. III 15; o.o. 158 (2 sa:y), 217 (küpe:): xin (?) Tef. ya:rık “body armour” 144: xiv Muh. al-cawgan ya:rik Mel. 71, 10; Rif. 173 (ya:rak); (and al-zarrád 'armourer' ya:rağçı 57, 13; ya:rakçı: 156): Xwar. xiv yarik (ya:rik) "breastplate” Nahc. 71, 12; 144, 13; yarık yışık 'breastplate and helmet” do. 33, 274; yarık yaşık (ya:şi:k do. 45, 8: Kip. xir al-catojan ya:rik Hou. 13, 15; 24, 9 (and al-cawgani ya:rıkçı:). ] D 1 yaruk Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. yar- , “a split, crack, breach; cracked, split”. S.i.a.m.l.g.; in SE Türki yaruğ/yaruk, elsewhere yarık/ Jarik, etc. Xak. xı yaruk “a crack” (or cleft, al-sad") in the ground, a vvall, the mountains, glass, and the like; hence one says bu ayaknip yarukı: ba:r “this cup is cracked”, (yarık and yorik follow here), yarık (MS. y.rik) “the heads of the thigh-bones in the sockets of the hips” taken fr. the phr. yarıldı: ne: “the thing was split and divided” (şaqqa soa”nfaraca), because the legs are split, one to the right and one to the left of a/-"arof (corrupt ?, perhaps a/-'awg “an obstacle") Kaş. III 15 (the second, misplaced entry must have got into the text from the margin and is misvocalized): xırı(?) Tef. yarak (sic, ?misvocalized) “a cleft! (in the mountains?) 143; yaruk “a crack” 147: Çağ. xv ff. yaruk şkaf “a crack', etc. San. 329v. 11 (quotn.): Kip. xiv yaruk a/-şaqq “a crack”, etc. İd. 92: xv şaqq yarak (sic, /yarim) Tuh. zob. 2; maşqüq “cracked” yarik do. 48b. 8. D 2 yaruk Dev. N./A. fr. yaru:-; “light, gleam; bright, shining”, and thelike. S.i.a.m.l.g. in the same forms as 1 yaruk, Türkü vir ff. (the sun rose) kamağ üze: yaruk boltu: “it became light everyvvhere” IrkB 26; (a hymn) yaru:k ay tepri:ke: “to the shining moon” Toy. I r. 2 (ETY II 176): Man. yaruklı karalı “light and darkness! Chuas. 1 6; yaruk tepri:ler “the gods of light” do. 7 16; o.o. do. 9-10 (adir-); M III 19, 9 (i) 1 6ces-); 23, 2-3 (1) (isig), etc.: Uyğ. vir (we fought) keçe: yaruk batur erikli: in the evening as the light was failing! Su. E 1: vir ff. Man.-A (your gracious, lovely, faultless) yaruk kórküpüz 'bright shape” M 7 ro, 7; yaruk ög “the bright intellect” do. 22, 4 (i); yaruk tepri do. 25, r: Man. TT III 13535 (yaltrı:-): Bud. yaruk is very common both as N. and as M ——À AI — 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1007 
     
   
   
     Adj., e.g. yaruk yula 'a bright lamp' TT V 6, 49; 8, 79; a:y tepri: ya:rokin “the light of the moon TT VIII 1.8; yaruk yasuk *bright light, gleam (Hend.)' TT V 4, 6, etc.; VI 383 v.l.; U II 37, $5; USp. 23, 7; Suv. 137, 10 etc.; a.0.0.: Civ. yaruk is common, e.g. kün ay yarukin tida katığlanur “they strive to obstruct the light of the sun and moon” TT I 27; köz yaruk bolur “the eye becomes bright H 1 86: Xak. xi yaruk yé:r “a bright (mudi) place”, and one says yap yaruk ne:p "a very bright thing! Kaş. JI] 15; kó:züm yarukı: qurra 'ayni “the apple of my eye” I 46, 19; yaruk yuldu:zı: "the shining (a/-tüqib) star” I 96, 10; I11 194,15: KB kün ay teg yaruk 'as bright as the sun and moon' 12; (You illuminated the dark night) yaruk kündüzün "with the bright daylight! 22; 8.0. 5222 (alın): xi(?) Tef. munir "luminous, bright yaruk i47: xiv Muh. yawm şaf “a bright day” ya:ruk kü:n Mel. 8o, 5; Rif. 185; al-daw' “light, brightness! ya:ruk ss, 3 (152 a2ydup); al-zàhir "clean, conspicuous! ya:ruk ss, 5 (only): Çağ. xv ff. yaruğ/yaruk zaroşan 'brilliance; shining' Vel. 400-1 (quotn.); yaruk (1) rawgan wa nürdni (light) San. 329v. 11 (quotn.): Xvvar. xm(?) bir kök yaruk 'a blue light” Oğ. sz, kün teg bir t'aruk (sic) “a light like the sun” do. 139: xiv yaruk “bright, shining light” Quib 72; Nahc. 88, 5; 241, 6-9; 262, 2: Kom. xiv 'bright, clear, light, gleam' yarik/yarix/yarux CCI, CCG, Gr. 116 (quotns.): Kip. xiv yaruk daw'u'l-qamar “moonlight” Id. 93; Bul. 2, 12 (yarık), yarık (MS. yarak) al-barq "lightning' Bul. 3, 2 (yarkın 14. 92): xv şu"d 'sunbeam' yarık (/kuyas) Tuh. zob. r, dav” yarak (corrected to yarık) do. 23a. 5; mür “light” (inter alia) yarık 362. 3. S yırak See 1rak, D yorik Dev. N./A. fr. yorr:-; like that word fr. the earliest period used both for physical “movement” and the like, and metaph. “conduct, behaviour', etc. Survives in NE as yoruk/coruk: NC Kir. joruk; Kzx. jorik; forms w. front vowels do not seern to occur. SE Türki yoruk is a Sec. f. of 2 yaruk, and in some modern languages similar forms are Sec. f.s of yórüg. Türkü viu ff. Toy. 18-20 (1 x9): Uy&amp;. vinff. Bud. (if one enters) bodisatvlar yorikipa “the course (i.e. way of progressing) of the Bodhisattvas” TT V 22, 34; similar phr. TT VI 34, 139; X 3, etc.: Civ. öz konuk yoriki (movements of the location of the soul' (in various days of the month) TT VII 21, 15-16; o.o. do. r, ş and 76 (sakig); TT I 110 (eğri:): Xak. xr yorik til al-lahcatu'l-fasiha “an eloquent tongue' ; yoruk al-xuluq wa'l-sira “character, behaviour”: hence one says anip yorik: neteg kişi: bile: “hovv does he behave with other people?”, yorik al-cirya 1oa'l-sayr *movement, gait'; hence one says at yorıkı: neteg “vhat is the horse's gait like?'; also used of the movement (al-cirya) of water, etc. Kay. III 15; (a side note in an earlier MS. now inserted in the text after barak) yorik al-:ira ewa'l-*igra ma'a'l-nás “behaviour, MN ————————A RMMMUMMMMBUUUHURUUUUT ooo social intercourse' one says beg yorıkı: neteg “hövv does the beg behave?' 7 378; 0.0. 1 27, 9; İI qo, 18-20: KB yorik til 162; (if a man talks a lot they say he chatters, if he is silent they say he is dumb, so) yorik utru ur 'behave naturally(?) to them' 175; (one takes the sword and disciplines the people; one takes the pen and) yorik yol süzer 'clarifies the way in which they should go” 268; karağu yorik yazsa “if a blind man loses his vvay” 493: 0.0. $47, 1504, 2077 (kóndür-), 4300, 4446 (ké:pür-), 5549 (aya:-): xin(?) Tef. (Abu Jahl was a beg in Mecca) ani sözi yorik erdi “his speeches were influential! (?, or eloquent) 162. D yarğu: Dev. N. (N.I.) fr. yar-; lit. “an instrument for splitting', but normally “a legal tribunal” (i.e. an instrument for splitting facts and discovering the truth), hence sometimes “a lawsuit' or “a legal decision'. Not firmly identified earlier than the Mong. period but no doubt older, cf. yarğa:n. A Second Period l.-w. in Mong. as carğu "legal tribunal, lawsuit' (Haenisch 86, Kom. 2305); s.i.s.m.l. in such senses in NE, NW, SW, see Caf.'s discussion of the word in TM IV, p. 3o; SC Uzb. yorği (1) (dialect) 'saw, file”, (2) (folklore”) “punishment”, NW Kk. larğı “file”. Uyğ. vin ff. Civ. tórü yarğu yosunı birle 'in accordance w. the practice (Mong. l.-w.) of the customary law and judicial tribunal” USp. 28, 29: Çağ. xv ff. yarğu ğulü ve jawjàa-i dádxtàh "a dispute, a plea by a litigant' Vel. 406 (quotn.); yarğu (1) muhàkama “a tribunal, court of justice' (quotns.); (2) da'wà wa nizà' 'lawsuit, litigation' (quotns.) San. 329r. 25: Xwar. xiv yarğu “decision, judgement' Qutb 71: Kom. xiv yarğu 'legal decision, judgment; jurisdiction CCI, CCG; Gr. 115 (quotns.; also yargugi “udge”, yarğula- “to judge', and see yar-): Osm. xiv to xvi yarğu “tribunal, judgment; litigation' ; in four texts TTS I 787; II 1003; IJI 778; IV 848. D yarğa:n Dev. N./A. (connoting repeated action) fr. yar-; lit, 'constantly splitting” , cf. yarfu:. N.o.a.b. once as a N., twice as a title; *judge' would suit the context. Türkü vii Inancu: Apa: Yarğan Tarxan / W 2: Uyğ. 1X (I am the son of a Kirkiz, I am) Boyla: Kutluğ Yarğan Suci 2: vin ff. Chr. (then Herod commanded his jailers, executioners and) yarğanlarka 'judges'(?) U 7 9, 18. D yarğu:n apparently some kind of wild quadruped; etymologically it could be a Dev. N. fr. yar-, but there is no obvious semantic connection. N.o.a.b. Türkü vri anı yağıp (VU) Türgi: Yarğun kólte: buzdımız “ve routed them and destroyed them at the Türgi: (?) Yarğun lake” 7 E 34: vu ff. yarğu:n kéyi:k men 'I am a wild yar£un' (I climb the mountains where I spend the summer . . .) İrkB 62. Tris. YRG (S)D yıra:ğu: Hap. leg.; Dev. N. (N.Ag.) fr. a Den. V. fr. 2 yır (1 rr) Xak. xi yıra:ğu:  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1008 
     
   
   
      1b ta i-muğannı a singer                                ığa: Dev. N./A. fr. yori:-, “(a horse) bles or goes at a jog trot'. S.i.a.m.l.g. aflorğa, etc. As in the case of yorik no trace of forms w. front vowels. Xak. ğa: at ai-farasu'l-himlàc "a horse that Kaş. III 174 a.0. 1 458 (munduz): . (under 'horses') himlác yorğa: Mel. Rif. 171 (yow£a:; and harwàl 'trotter' ed akta: (“gelding”) w. yo:rka: in the : Çağ. xv ff. yorğa (spelt) rahwar , San. 342v. ız: Kip. xır al-farasu'l“an ambler” yorğa: Hou. 13, II: XIV : al-möşi xababa(n) 'moving at an (one says yorğaladı: “he ambled") İd. rahwàán (MS. rahwàl) yorğa Tuh. 17a. . XIV ff. yorğa (occasionally yorka) ”: common, esp. in Ar. and Pe. dicts. 841; İİ 1067; 111 820; IV 897. ı:ğu: Hap. leg.(?), Dev. N/A. fr. Xak. xi yorrgu: yér mawdiwl'l-sayr "a place where one walks and ; it is the name of a place ($m makàn); d of time (li-zamán) Kaş. III 36. Ber Hap. leg.?; P.N./A. fr. yara:ğ: e who does what is opportune or usecient'. Xak. xı KB 2372 (yagigr). Ber N.Ag. fr. *yori$, Dev. N. fr. lit. “one who makes journeys' or the o.a.b. Oğuz xı yorığçı: (MS. y.z.ğçi:) "lladi yamşi bayna'l-ahmà | wa'l-aghàr said that yorığçı:, translated as above, Oğuz form, although the Oğuz ent of the general Turkish Participial u:ci is -da:çı:, since the word is an d not a Participle. ux See yórgü:gi:. D güke aşağuka yarağlığ “suitable for (Hend.) Sus. $29, 12-13: Civ. kop rağlığ “all your affairs are satisfactory" 56: Xak. xı yarağlığ ış “a possible ible, al-murkin) business” Kaş. III 49: rağlığ yarağsız “useful or useless” . 2236 (adir-), 2544 (boluğluğ): xu(?) "yarağlığ erenke buyurdi ışı “he - suitable men to do his business” 40: At. yarağlığ aşıpnı kişike yétür eserving) people your suitable food” ef. yarağlığ/yarağlık “suitable, con” (and a/-haqq “the truth' yara) şöhib-i asbáb ma müutacahhız 'equip2) şayista 'suitable' San. 329r. 18 .; a.o. do. 14 (yara:ğ): Xwar. xiv 1$/yaragh 'suitable, convenient! Quib  'equipped' ; in several texts 77. II 1000; Hi 77o). D yarıklığ P.N./A. fr. yarik; “armoured, wearing armour'; n.o.a.b., but see yarağlığ. “Türkü viu 7 E 23, İl E 19 (élet-); 1 E. 32 (elig); T s4 (yeltür-): Xak. xı yarıklığ (MS. yarığlığ but between yamağlığ and yazuklu$, implying -k-) er “an armoured (al-dári') man' Kaş, 171 49. D yarukluğ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. 2 yaruk. Uyğ. viii ff. Man. yxidhg yıparlığ yarukluğ yaşukluğ tan tepri “oh fragrant (Hend.) shining (Hend.) god of the dawn' M II 9, 7-8; IO, 9-10. ı D yarukluk A.N. fr. 2 yaruk, HG brightness'. S.i.s.m.l. as yarıklık and th e lik Xak. xi yarukluk al-nür wa'l-diyà "light, brightness! Kaş. ETİ 51; (entertain a guest well) bulsın atı: yarukluk “let his horse find the brightness of rest” (diyá'a'l-ráha) II 316, ıı: KB ajun xalq1 andin yarukluk bulur 'the people of this world get light from it' (the moon) 732; a.o. 35 (ya:d-): xiri(?) Tef. yaruklük “light” 147: Çağ. xv ff. yaruğluğ/yarukluk row$jani 'brilliance', etc. San. 329v. 15: Xwar. xiv yarukluk “light, brightness! Qutb vz, Nahc. 293, 2: Kom. xiv ditto yariklik/ yarixhk CCG; Gr. S yıraklık See iraklik, D yarıklığdı: Hap. leg.; apparently Adv. in -di fr. yarıklığ: “being in armour”. Türkü viii 7 E 32 (angu:la: -) D yarağsız Priv. N./A. fr. yara:ğ, “inconvenient, inappropriate, useless”, and the like. N.o.a.b.? Uyf. vin ff. Bud, U 2 81, 70-1 (yalçıt-). Xak. xı yarağsızda: fi ğayr mahallihi “in the wrong place” Kaş. EE 355, 11; n.m.e.: KB (if you want to be safe, do not let fall) yarağsız sözün 'inappropriate remarks' 169; (I will tell you about) yarağsızlarığ “the bad characters! 847; 0.0. 314 (kişenliğ), 328 (yarağlığ), 437 (boğ-), 2074, 2236 (ağır-): Xwar. xiv yarağsız "unsuitable” Qutb 7o: D yaruksuz Priv. N./A. fr. 2 yaruk; n. gə İr: Uyğ. viii ff. Civ. köz yaruksuz bolup “fan eye loses its sparkle” (and vvaters profusely) H I 65, 85. Tris. V. YRĞD yariklan- Refl. Den. V. fr. yarik, q.v.; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. TT VIII 4.35-6 (yarık): Xak. xı er yarıklandı: “the man put on a coat of mail” (zadarra"a) also used when he “put on a breastplate” (tacateşana) Kaş. III 114 (yarıklanu:r, yarıklanma:k, sic in MS.): KB (come to terms; if you cannot) yarıklan bel alşıp küreş “put on your ərmour, tighten your belt, and fight” 2360: (Kıp. xim ta”ahhaba “to prepare oneself” yara:kla:n- Hou. 38, 18: xiv yarakla- (sic) cahhaza “to equip' İd. 92: Osm. xiv ff.   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1009 
     
   
   
      yarakla- 'to prepare, equip, etc.;' yaraklan'to prepare or equip oneself', etc.; c.i.a.p. TTS I 384-5; II 999; III 770; IV 844). S yıraklan- See ıraklan-. D yarıklaş- Recip. Den. V. fr. yarık, mentioned only in a grammatical example. Xak. xı “and V.s are formed fr. trilitteral N.s referring to a stake in gambling as in the phr. «ol» anın birle: oyna:dı: yarıklaşu: “he gambled with him making a breastplate (catwgan) the stake', the winner taking it Kaş. İI 258, 16. E yarığsa:- See yazığsa:-. Dis. YRG VUD yerük Pass. N./A.S. fr. 1 yer-, “split, cracked”, and the like. Survives in NC jirik (sic); SC Uzb. yirik (with -q): NW yırık/ lirik: "torn, perforated, split; a hole', and the like. Uy&amp;. vii ff. Civ. (in a miscellaneons inventory) bir bedük bir yerük iki eşiç 'two cooking pots, one large, one cracked” USSp. şs, zs: Xak. xı yerük işle:r 'a woman injured in coitus! (al-mufdàt); yérük ne:p 'something split (inşaqqa) lengthways so that its appearance is spoilt'; yérük a/-tulma, "a split, cleft” Kaş. III 18 (-6- everywhere): (Çağ. xv ff. yırık (spelt) /a5-? sikáfta “a hare-lip” San. 349v. 10): Kip. xiv (after yér-) and “hare-lipped” (ai-a"lam) is called yerük tutaklu: that is *with a split (maşqüqa) lip” ş and, in the Kitab Beylik, al-a"lam is yırık İd. 92. yürek basically “the heart" as a physical object; used metaph. only in a limited range of phr. like 'stout-hearted'; contrast köpül. A Second Period l.-w. in Mong. as ctrüge(s)/ cürüge(n) (Haenisch 91, 95); cürüke(n) (Studies 228); cirüke(n) (Kom. 2363); s.i.a.m.l.g. vv. the usual phonetic changes. Uyğ. vı ff. Bud. (touching the forehead, the throat and) yürekke “the heart” (with the ring finger) TT V, p. 16, note A 54, 6-7; (many women died) yürekleri yarılıp “of broken hearts' TT X 38; (her beauty) kópülimin yürekimin ertipü tepretdi titretdi “greatiy stirred my mind and made my heart beat (faster)' do. 4515 o.o. do. 465, 502: Civ. (on the 27th day) öz konuk yürekde bolur “the position of the soul gets to the heart” TT VII 21, 6, o.o. do. 13; 25, 3, yürek sıkılmak tin buzmak "heart disease and respiratory trouble” H Tr, ş, s: Xak. xı yürek a/-galb “the heart”, yürekliğ a/-bazal dü qalb "brave, stout-hearted” Kaş. IIT18, (his beauty) yardı: menin yü:re:k “cleaved my heart” III 33, 15; o.o. / 41, 17 (yirtil-); 325, 10; II 144, 7 (kağrul-): KB bodun basğuka 5g kerek ham yürek “o suppress a people intelligence and courage are needed” 217; o.o. 58 (té:tik), zo43 (titim): “xı(?) KBVP(a warnor) alp yürek *with astout heart” 51: xırı(?) Tef. yürek “heart” 167: xiv al-qalb yü:re:k Rif. 141 (followed by “ung” ópke:; . . . “bile” ö:t, the text in Mel. 47, Iş is confused; al-galb is translated kópül, *lung' is omitted and yü:re:k moved to a/-mardra  l— — MÀ M Q— «MEI m wem m 47” — DECRE x “bile”): Çağ. xv ff. yürek di! 'heart' San. 342v. $ (quotn.): Xwar. xiv yürek “heart” Qutb 88; MN 64; Nahc. 361, 5: Kom. xiv ditto CCG: Gr.: Kap. xii al-qalbu”l-mahsüs “the tangible heart' yü:rek Hou. 21, 14 (cf. kópül): xrv yürek a/-qalb İd. 93: xv ditto Tuh. 28b. 11: Osm. xiv ff. yürek "heart: courage'; c.i.a.p. TTS 1 856; II 1084-5; İH 834; İV 913-15.. D yórüg Dev. N. fr. yór- ; 'explanation, interpretation' (esp. of dreams). Survives in NW Kk. jorrw; Nog. yoruv *prophecy; omen'. "Türkü vir ff. Man. öp sakinm) ol ozakı sav yörüğlerin “first ponder on the explanations of those previous remarks” M III ış, 9-11 (i); üküş yörüğün “many explanations' do. 15, ız (ii): Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. . . . yórüg ol: bu yórügüg belgülüg kigah “the explanation js. . .; to make this explanation clear” TT V 20, 4-5; o.o. yorügle:ri (sic) TT VIII A.43; yöröği do. 45; yörüğ do. H.6 (ün-); TT VI 148 (ötğür-), Hüen-ts. 2116 (tübger-): Xak. xı yörüğ al-ta"bir “interpretation”, hence one says tü:ş yórüg1: “the interpretation of the dream”, yörüğ fahwà'l-kalàm wa tafsiruhu "the meaning of a vvord and its explanation' ; hence one says Só:z yörügi: “the explanation of a statement” Kaş. III 18: KB yórügin ayayın “1 will tell you the explanation” 353; (there are many kinds of) tüşke yörüğ 'interpretations of a dream” 5994; a.o. 5999 xıı1(?) Tef. yoruğ (sic) 'explanation'; ta” il ditto yörüğ (sic) r62—3:Xvvar. xiv yora/ yorağ “interpretation (of dreams)” Outb 33; yoruk ditto Nahc. 7, 5; 318, 12: Kip. xrv (VU) yöre: al-ta'bir İd. 92; al-tancim voa'l-fa'l “astrology ; omen” yöre: Bul. s, 14. E yergüg See bürgüç. E yórgek See bürkek. D yörğenç Dev. N. fr. yórgen- ; lit. wrapped round' and the like; n.o.a.b. but see yórgey, yörğençü: and cf. sarmaçuk, yörğemeç. Xak. xı yörgenç “like tezginç (tegzing , for curves and bends in the road” ( fi'l-iltiscá' tva'l -'ataf fi'l-tariq; etc.); yörğenç the name. of a plant which wraps itself (yaltazi) round a' tree and causes it to wither (yurituha'l-yubs); it is al-“aşaqa, “bindvveed, Convolvulus arvensis' Kaş. III 387. ?E yórgey Hap. leg.: an improbable form, prob. a misreading of yórgenc. UYĞ. vırı ff. Civil (in a prescription for increasing the milk of nursing mothers) yörğey(?) xwasi beş bakir 'five pennyweights of bindweed(?) flowers' H I 105. i Dis. V. YRGyörğe:- “to wrap (something cc.) up; to swaddle (an infant)', and the like. Survives in NE Tuv. çörğe-: SE Tar, Türki yörğe-. "The Dev. N. yörgek *wrappings; swaddling clothes' (not an ancient word) survives in some NE, NC, NW languages. Uyé. xır ff. Bud. (the demons eat men's flesh . . . and) bağarsukların etözleripe yórgeyürler erdi  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1010 
     
   
   
                                   pped their entrails round their (own) ies” U IV 8, 7 € 39, 7): Civ. H I so vgur-); I] 16, 19: Xak. xı ol ada:kin ge:di: “he wrapped up (/affa) his leg' (etc.) ; used of anything when it has been ud” R III 449. yörğet- Caus. f. of yórge:-; survives in "Tar. Xak. xı ol yip yórgetti: “he had the d wrapped round (alaffa . . . “alü) someng'; also used when he had a bandage ifa) wrapped round a leg, etc. Kaş. 11 354 rgetü:r, yórgetme:k). yörğen- Refl. f. of yórge:-; pec. to Kaş. k. xı uruk yığa:çka: yórfgendi: “the e wound itself round (z/tawàá . . . 'alà) the ” (etc.); and one says er yoğurka:nka: rgendi: “the man wrapped himself (iltahafa) a blanket' (etc.) Kaş. 711 110 (yórgenü:r, rgenme:k); tün kün Wü:ze: yórgenü:r ght and day alternate (yuRarotoar) with one ther” 7 351, 2; İİ 305, 10. yérgür- Hap. leg.?; Caus. f. of 2 yé:rr-. k. x1 K B (a frowning face, rough language, a haughty attitude) kişiğ yerğürür volt people” (sic?, rather than “make a man ed") 2077. yörğeş- Co-op. f. of yórge:-; pec. to . Xak. xı yığa:çka: yip yórgesdi: “the d wrapped itself (i/taffa) on the tree” , also d of anything when it wound itself nd (itawàá . . . 'alZ) something Kaş. III 4 (yörğeşü:r, yorğeşme:k), o.o. 7 395, 5 zkeg-); I 437, 7; II 285, 18. Tris. YRG yerü:ki: See berü:ki:. yórgüci: N.Ag. fr. yör-, “an interpreter' dreams). N.o.a.b. İt occurs several times KB, all MSS. varying between yörgğüçi d yorfuci, Xak. xi KB tüşüg edgü yórse tüş yörgüçi "if the interpreter of dreams erprets the dream well 4368; (a man ams when he lies asleep) an1 yórgüciler 'l-manám “an interpreter of dreams' tü:ş rgü:cl: Mel. 58, rı: Rif. 157. yürekliğ P.N./A. fr. yürek; “stout”. S4.m.m.lg. vv. the usual v. (if a boy hangs a dog's tooth round his ) yüreklig bolur “he becomes brave” TT TI 23, 2-3: Xak. xı yüreklig er “a stoutrted (Hend.; al-rábitu'l-ca'gi'l-qawwiyw'l) man” Kaş. 11] 51; a.o. III 18 (yürek): B sz (1 kür), 2043-5, 6166: xin(?) Tef. irekliğ/yüreklü 'brave' 167: Xwar. xiv üreklig 'brave' Qutb 88: Kip. xiv (after irek) hence yüreklü: sucá' "brave” İd. 93: sm. xiv ff. yürekli “brave”, fairly common D yórüglüg P.N./A. fr. yórüg; 'providing, or having, explanations'. N.o.a.b. Uy£. vir ff. Man.-A M I 26, 16 (adırtlığ): Bud. kértgünç on törlüğ yörüğlüğ bolur 'faith admıts of ten kinds of definition” TT V zo, 1-2, a.o. Suv. 87, zo etc. (tütrüm). D yérgülüg Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. Fyergü:, Dev. N. fr. 2 yér-. Uyğ. viu ff. Bud. (in the end these women's appearance) yérgülüg yarsığuluğ bolup turur 'becomes revolting and disgustıng” U III 79, 9-10 (i). D yórgemec Dev. N. in -meç (usually for some kind of food) fr. yórge:-. Survives in NE Alt., Tel. yörğömöş, etc. (1) 'hops'; (2) “spider”: SE Türki yórgümec 'capers; bindweed'. Cf. yörğenç. Xak. xı yorğemeç “the paunch and intestines wrapped and folded (yulaff £a yudrac) in the smaller intestines and then cooked by roasting” (tugwà wa tufbax) Kaş. III ss. D yörğe:nçü: Dev. N. (Conc. N.) fr. yörgen-, n.o.a.b. Xak. xı yörğe:mçü: aj-lfáfa “bandage” Kaş. II 246 (sarlan-); IJI 296 (sarla:-); n.m.e. D yüreksiz Priv. N./A. fr. yürek; 'cowardly; coward'. S.i.s.m.l. Xak. xi KB (the army commander must be brave) yüreksiz er at alsa andin yürek 'so that cowardly troops may take courage from him' 2044; 0.0. 2045, 2284 (artat-): xiv Muh.(?) al-cabbün (MS. al-cayün) “covvard” yüreksü:z Rif. 151 (only): Kip. xiv (after yürek) and yüreksiz a/-cabbün Id. 93: Osm. xiv ff. yüreksiz 'coward' ; fairly common T'T'S 7 856; 1I 1084; IV 914. D?E yörgeye:k Hap. leg.; the form is implausible, prob. an error for yórgene:k Dev. N./A. fr. yórgen- “something wrapped round" Xak. x1 Kaş. I 135 (öpik), n.m.e. Tris. V. YRGD yüreklen- Refl. Den. V. fr. yürek; “to be stout-hearted, to be in good heart', and the like. S.i.s.m.l. w. the usual phonetic changes. Xak. xi er yüreklendi: 'the man (etc.) was brave' (tagacca'a) Kaş. III 115 (yüreklenü:r, yüreklenme:k): Xwar. xiv yüreklen- “to be stout-hearted” Qutb 88; Nahe. 369, 2: Osm. xv ff. ditto, fairly common TTS II 1084; IV 914. Dis. YRL 1 yarlığ “a command from a superior to an inferior', sometimes with some connotation of a grant of favour from a superior to an inferior. Although morphologically a P.N./A. in -lğ it cannot be so explained etymologically, and this fact, taken with the fact that in Manichaean and Uyğ. script it is habitually spelt yriğ, less often yrlığ, stronly suggests that it is a very old 1.-w. Became a Second Period 1.-vv. in Mong. as carli$ (Haenisch 86)İcarlik (Kon. 2306) as a technical] administrative term for “a government edict'; s.i.a.m.l.g. vv. the usual phonTS I 856; II 834; IV 914. etic changes, w. some extended meanings and    
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1011 
     
   
   
     dı xd CX sometimes, e.g. in SW 'Tkm. the suggestion that it is reborrowed fr. Mong. Türkü viu ff. yarlığ boltu: “vas issued, or allocated' is a stock phr. in the Mizan document (ETY II 64 ff.), e.g. 8-9 (yarik); a.o. Toy 18-19 (1 18g): Man. biz tepri yarlığın adruk kilmaz biz *we do nothing contrary to God's commands' TT II 6, s, (the king. . .) beğke kara bodunka edgü yarlığ yarlikadi inca *gave the following gracious commands to the begs and people” do. 8, 69; a.o. 8, 8o: Uyğ. vili ff. Man. yarlığınznı esitip “hearing your commands! TT III 165; sizip yarlıkamış yarlığığ do. i31: Bud. Sanskrit $ufrüşito “obedient” ya:rlığın ésétép TT VIII D.19; (the Prince, bu yarlığ €şitip, said) yarlığ bolzun 'grant your gracious permission! PP 18, 8 ff.; 0.0. do. 33, 2; TT X 595, etc.—in TT VI zor a Chinese phr. meaning “the satra in twelve sections' is translated iki yegirmi bölük yarlığ: Civ. yarlığıp yorimaz “your orders are ineffective” TT 7 37; erklig xannıy) yarlığı “the orders of the King of the Underworld' do. 25—in USp. xiv documents, yarlığ bolzun “let there be an edict' zz, 59, and bu tuta turğu bitiğ yarlığ bértürü yarlıkadimiz “vve have deigned to order the grant of this strict written edict” 88, 48, the word is prob. the Mong. technical term: Cigil (and Xak.) xı yarlığ kitábu'l-sultàn wa amruhu “a written, or spoken(?) command of the Sultan' in the gn language, the Oğuz do not know it aş. IIl 42: KB bayat yarlığın 'God's commands” 1507; (let the gate-keeper) çıkıp edgü yarlığ teğürse “go out and deliver the (king's) gracious commands” 2546; a.o. 5580: xm(?) Tef. yarlığ '(divine) command, or revelation' 145: xiv Muh. farmàn “royal decree' yarlı:ğ Mel. sı, 2; Rif. 146: Çağ. xv ff. yarlığ (1) raqam wa farmán-i bddışdhün-i turk, “an edict or decree of the Turkish emperors” ; also used in the sense of fu£rà-i raqam "the royal sign manual on an edict' (quotns.); ((2) yári “help” Turco-Pe. fr. Pe. yar “friend”, etc.) San. 329v. 3: Xwar. xiv yarlığ “(divine, or royal) command” Qutb 71; Nahc. 40, 13: Osm. xv ff. yarlığ “royal command”: in a few texts. TTS I 789; Iİ 1006 (yarlik xvi “a child's bib” is a Conc. N. fr. 1 yar). ?D 2 yarlığ “poor, destitute', and the like; prima facie a P.N./A. in -lığ, but not obviously connected w. 1 or 2 ya:r. Survives in NC Kir. jardi; Kzx. jar: NW yarlı/larlı. Türkü vii kalmış ölü:gi: yarlığ ermiş (if correctly read, perhaps) “his corpse was abandoned and was wretched' Ix. A b. : (ETY II 122): Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. irinç yarlığ tınlığlarif 'miserable, destitute mortal! TT IV Yo, 13-14; similar phr. U II 4,6—7 (anagsiz); 78, 32; 87, 49; PP 48, 1 (the footnote here is erroneous); Kuan. 185, etc.: Xak. x1 yarlığ al-marhümu'l-fagir "pitiable, poor; hence one says yarlığ er “a pitiable man” Kaş. III 42; yarlığ bolup (a guest) *who is shabby' (or tattered, ra/tu”l-hal) 193, 4:xiv Muh. maskin"poor” ya:rluğ Mel. 52, 3; Rif. 148: Çağ. xvf. yarlı (si) fagir wa muflis ('destitute") San. à Aat às 329v. 3: Xwar. xiv yarlığ/yarli 'poor, miserable” Qutb 71: Kom. xiv 'poor' yarlı 2 CCG, Gr.: Kip. xiv yarlu: maskin d. 93. D yé:rlig P.N./A. fr. yér; s.i.m.m.]. w. the usual phonetic changes, usually for 'land owning; native, indigenous'. Uy. vin ff. Man.-À bu adın yerliğ er “this man from another country” M I 34, 18-19: Civ. (in an inventory) al yérlig töşek “a mattress (covered with fabric) with a crimson ground' U.Sp. 79, 2; a.o.o.: Xak. xı Kaş. III 142 (yé:r). Dis. V. YRLD yara:l- Hap. leg.; Pass. f. of yara:-; irregular, since yara:- is Intrans.; perhaps a scribal error for yaratil- Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. Sanskrit dhurisamyukta “fitted to the load” yükke: yara:lmış TT VIII A.34. D yarıl- Pass. f. of yar- ; “to be split; to split (Intrans.)', and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. the same phonetic changes. Türkü vı ff. IrkB 6 (karın): Man. ólüg yarıltı “the corpse was lacerated' M I 5, 8: Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. yer yarilzun “let the ground be split” U 7 37, 17; (that wicked demon”s head) yeti ópi yarılğay *will be split into seven different (pieces TT VI 375; a.o. X 38 (yürek): Civ. H I 188-9 (1 ü:r-): Xak. xı ka:b yarıldı: “the wineskin (etc.) split” (nışaqqa) Kaş. ITI 77 (yarılu:r, yarılma:k, corrected fr. -me:2), törlüğ çeçek yarıldı: “all sorts of flovvers burst into bloom” (tafattarat) I 119, 4; a.o. İİİ 15 (1 yaruk): xiu(?) Tef. yarıl- “to be split” 144: xiv Muh. inşaqqa ya:rıl- Mel. z3, 9; Rif. 104: Xwar. xiv yaril- 'to be split, to split' Qutb 72; Nahe. 12, 16; 36, 15, etc.: Kom. xiv ditto CCI, CCG; Gr. 117 (quotns.). i D yéril- Pass. f. of 1 yér-; n.o.a.b. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (it is rather a long time) adrılğalı yerilgeli “since we parted (Hend.)' Hüen-ts. 2039: Xak. x1 butik yerildi 'the branch split (ingagqa) off the tree'; also used of anything moist (ratb) when it cracked (in/aşama) Kaş. III 78 (yerlü:r (si), yerilme:k; corrected from -ma:k); bu butik ol tutçı: yerilğe:n (sic) “this branch is constantly splitting” (yangaqq) İİİ ss: (xin(?) At. yéril- in 128, 247 (1 sógül-), 268 (kilik) is the Pass. f. of 2 y€:r-). D yörül- Pass. f. of yör-, q.v., "to be unwrapped', etc. S.i.s.m.l. vv. back vowels yorul-/joril-, etc. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. Suv. 165, 21-2 (seşil-): Xak. xı oğul beşiktin yörüldi: “the boy was unwrapped (Rulla) from the cradle! Kaş. III 78 (yörlür (sic), yörülme:k; MS. -ma:k, the scribe substituting his own pronunciation for the original one). S yürül- See ürül- Uyğ. Civ. D yarla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr.1 yar. Cf. 80:d-. Xak. xı ol anın yü:zipe: yarla:dı: “he spat (bazaqa) in his face” Kaş. 111 308 (yarla:r, yarla:ma:k). : 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1012 
     
   
   
                                   untry' R III 342; SW 'Tkm. yerle- ; (Az., yerleş-) “to settle in a place”. Türkü fl; Yen. élimke: erdem ücün men ledim “because of my manly virtues I blished myself in my realm' Mal. 29, 7 (a ious text): O. Kir. ix ff. Kara: Sepirig ledim “1 made Kara Senir my home” |. 24, s: Çağ. xv ff. yerle- (spelt *with ) cd hardan “to establish oneself'(?) San. İr. 10. irla:- See ırla:-. Tris. YRL arlıkançuçı: N. Ag. fr. a Dev. N. fr. rlıkan- ; 'compassionate, gracious” and the . N.o.a.b. Uy£. viu ff. Man.-A M 1 10,3 1): a.o.o. (sometimes spelt yarlakançuçı): , uluğ yarlıkançuçı köpülüp üze *with r great compassionate mind” TT III 99; do. 133-4 (ükli:-), etc.: Bud. yarlikancuci üllerin TT IV ız, 35 and 56; o.o. TT X —6 (kopüllüg), etc.; Kuan. 160, etc. arlıkançsız Priv. N./A. fr. a Dev. N. fr. rlikan-. Pec. to Uyğ. Bud. UYĞ. viri ff. . yarlıkançsız köpülin *with a merciless d' TT IV 8,63; TM IV 252, 6. arılınçığ Hap. leg.; Dev. N./A. fr. the . f. of yaril- Uyğ. viii ff. Bud. yürek ılınçığ emğek emgenürler “they endure rtbreaking sufferings” TM IV 255, 134-5. Tris. V. YRLarlıka:- crasis of *yarli$ka:-, Den. V. in :- fr. 1 yarlif; basically “to issue orders' to inferior, esp. in the phr. yarlığ yarlıka:-, ce, owing to some connotation of graciouss in 1 yarlığ “to be gracious, compassion; to commiserate”, thence used as an Aux., orific, V. w. Ger. in -u:/-ü: “to be pleased deign to (do something)”. Became a Moslem ical term for (of God) “to forgive (sins)'; s.i.s.m.l., e.g. SW Osm. yarlığa-,i in this se. Türkü vui yarhka:- is used almost lusively vr, tepri: and it is not clear whether . like tepri: yarlikadukr:n ücü:n 7 S 9, 7 means 'because heaven so commanded' because heaven was gracious”—üze: tepri: : yer yarlıkaduk üçlü:n) “because ven above and earth below were gracious”(2) 11; (saying "you have done good service”) lrkamış şad atığ anta: bermiş “he was cious and thereupon gave (me) the title of ” Ongin 6: vini ff. Toy. 18-20 (1 1:9): Man. lığ yarlıkadı “he commanded' TT II ; ro, 8o; siz dindarlar yarlıkasar 'if , the Elect, command” (I will carry out r orders) do. 8, 49; a.o.o.—sİZ méni lika$ay nomka tutğay dındar kiljay u wil be gracious to me, take me to the e) azar and make me one of the Elect” 8, 39 ff.: Uyğ. vin ff. Man. yarlıkamış nii TT Hun 31—yaruk tepriler Iikazunin (Instr. f. of Imperative!) “by the le-[yérle- "to travel through, or settle in, 15-16 (1 e yar n deigned to distribute TT /// i65: Chr. (Herod) ınça tép yarlıkadı olarka “gave them the following orders! U 7 5, 3, etc.— sakınçın bilü yarlıkap 'deigning to know their thoughts! do. 7, 7: Bud. ınça tép yarlika- followed by oratio recta is common; when this is a statement, not a command, ?'to say graciousiy” PP 4, 4; 5, 7: 8, 3, etc.— bu su:darığ yarlıkadı "he preached this sutra' TT VIII H.6, tepri burxan yarlıkamış köni kertü nom “the true (Hend.) doctrine preached by the divine Buddha” X 556; 2.0. U III 68, 25 (adırtlığ)—yazukumuzni bosuyu yarlıkazunlar “may they deign to release us from out sins” 77 JV 12, 36; a.o.o. (the commonest usage): Civ. USp. 88, rr (uk-); do. 48 (1 yarlığ): O. Kir. ix ff. Mal. 32, 5 (üze:): Xak. xı KB kamuğ mu”mınığ sen tüzü yarlika 'pardon (the sins of) all believer 397; yatığ yarlıkağıl “treat a stranger kindly" 495; €liğ yarlıkadı bu sözler köni “the king has graciously spoken these true vvords” 896; o.o. 959, 5835: xıı(?) KBPP, bérü yarlıkamış turur “deigned to give” 27; Tef. yarlıka- “to command; to pardon (sins) ı45: xiv Muh. rahima “to pardon, have mercy on” yarlığa:- Mel: 26, 9; Rif. xog: Çağ. xvff. yarlığa- dmurzidan ditto San. 338v. ro (quotns.): Xvvar. xmi yarlıka- “to be gracious” "AZ 53: xiv yarlıka“to be gracious; to pardon” Qutb 71; Nahc.3,ı Kom. xıv “to pardon, to have mercy on” yarlığa-/yarılğa- CCI, CCG; Gr. 116 (quotns.): Kip. xim rahıma yarla:ğa:- (sic) Hou. 34, 19: xiv yarlığa- ğafara (to pardon”) wa rahima İd. 93: XV rahima (esirge-[) yarılğa- (in margin in SW(?) hand, yarlıka-) Tuh. 17b. 3: Osm. xiv ff. yarlığa- (of God) “to pardon”), c.i.a.p. 77 7 789; IJ 1005; İH 775; IV 849. Dis. YRM D yarım N.S.A. fr. yar-, lit. “a single act of splitting, hence “a half”. S.i.a.m.Lg. vv. the usual phonetic changes. Uyğ. vinff. Bud. Sanskrit mötrakari “making measures (or sizes?) (PU) ülüg (or ülügüg?) kılta:çı yarımda: kıltaçı TT VIII 4.45; a.o. do. 4.7 (ülüş), (a disease affecting) yarım etözi “half the body” U IJ 68, s (di), yarimh tolul nomlarığ “the half and complete doctrines' Hüen-ts. 1923, 2088 (see note): Civ. yarım 'half' is common in USp., e.g. yarım kab bor "half a skinof wine' 7, 3; yarım bakir “half a pennyweight! H T ro, 167: Xak. xı yarım “half” (nisf) anything; hence one says almıla: yarımı: “half an apple” Kaş. 711 19: xıı(?) Tef. yarım kün "half a day” 144: Çağ. xv ff. yarım msf San. 329v. 23; a.o. do. 21 (as alternative form of yarı, “half”, not an old word): Xwar. xiv yarım nalf” Qurb facsimile 29v. 6; gör. 20; MN 12; Nahc. x 12; 324, 14: Kom. xiv ditto CCI; Gr.: xiv yarim al-şiqq min küll şay” wa ons naf *a part of anything that is a half İd. 93; al-şiqq yarım, al-nişf (PU) yo:sım (?error for  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1013 
     
   
   
      al-nişf (busuk and some say) ya:rum, but this word is used only in pairs (mudáfa(n)) while busuk may be used either by itself or in pairs; there is no word for 'quarter', they can only say “half a half” (nisfu'l-nisf) busuk wa ya:rum (sic? read buşuk ya:rumu) or yarısı: Kav. 64, 19; sigg (yarak/) yarım Tuh. zob. 2; ni;jf (buçuk/) yarım do. 36b. 6; 62b. 5. D yerim (yérim) Hap. leg.; follows yarim, and no doubt to be distinguished from it; N.S.A. fr. 1 yer-. Xak. xı yerim şa/öz wahida (?sic, MS. wahadila) min kull şay” “a single fresh strip of anything'; hence one says butik yerimi: nisfu'l-&amp;ugn “half a branch” (sic?), its origin is al-inşiqdq “to split off” (Intrans.) Kaş. III 19. D yarma: Pass. Dev. N./À. fr. yar-, “split, something split”, and the like. S.i.s.m.l. as yarma/jarma, etc. “split, easily split; groats (i.». split grain); the act of splitting”, etc. Cf. yarmış. Uy£. vin ff. Civ. H I 71-2 (ügre:; *groats'), 149 (evin, 'split'): Xak. xı (VU) yarma: yu:ğa: (or yuvvğa:?) “a kind of puff pastry' (al-mugaddan); also anything split lengthways (fuliqa tula(n) Kaş. III 34 (the translation suggests that this should be read yerme:, Dev. N. fr. 1 yér-, cf. yerim): Çağ. xv ff. yarma (spelt) “grain (dàna) of which part has been broken by the millstone, while fhere are also small grains left”, in Ar. cari; (roughly milled groats”) San. 329v. ro: Kom. xiv yarma “a split piece of wood' CCG, Gr.: Kip. xv cari; (burğun/) yarma Tu. rıb. 11; qamhiya 'parched grain” yarma (/köçe) do. 29a. s. yarma:k properly "a coin”, also, more generally, “money”, not easily explained semantically either as a Dev. N. in -ma:k fr. yar- or a Dev. N.- in -k fr. yarma:- ; possibly a Tokharian 1.-w., cf. Tokh. B yarm; A yárm “a measure'. Survives only(?) in SE Türki “a small copper coin worth 2 böl BŞ, “a false copper coin' Jarring. Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. altun yartmak (sic) “a gold coin' U III 67, ır, 68, ız etc.: Civ. yarmak kümüş occurs several times in USp. and seems to mean “in coin' (as opposed to çavv, 'paper currency"), e.g. bés otuz sitir yarmak kümüş 'twenty-five sitir in coin” 51, 4-55 0.0. 57, 3-4; 61, 4-5; 114, 3: xi yartma:k an Uy£. form (luğa Üyğür) of yarma:k al-dirham (Greek drakhma, the standard Moslem silver coin) Kaş. III 432: Xak. xı yarmak (sie) al-dirham "a dirham, money” Kaş. İTİ 43, over 6o o.o. of yarma:k (sic) translated a/-dirham, either “a dirham coin”, e.g. bi:r yarma:k "one dirham” /IT 121, 21, or *money', e.g. yarma:k yığıldı: *money was collected' 777 So, 5: KB (how many intimacies are) yarmak üçün “for the sake of money' 6470; (everyone has become) yarmak kul "a slave to money” (and bows to anyone that has cash (kümüş)) 6476: xin(?) Tef. yarmak “money” 146: Çağ. xv ff. yarmak “silver coin' (ağça) Vel. 400 (quotns.): yar(4? nl   mə T EN kn ə ə əəə San. 329v. 9 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv yarmak 'coin; money” 'Ali 53: xiv ditto Qut zı, MN 265; Nahc. əş, 10; 252, 16: Kip. xui dirham yarmak Hou, ss, 10: xiv ditto Jd. oz, Bul. 4, 8; al-sawdà "black (i.e. copper) coin' kara: yarmak do. 4, 9: xv al-diráhimul-madrüba 'minted coins” (axşa:/) yarmak Kav. 58, 13; dirham yarmak (lakça, see ağrığ) Tuh. 15b. 9. VUD yarmış Hap. leg.; vocalized yarmaş, prob. by analogy w. yerdes which it follows, but no doubt Dev. N./A. fr. yar-, Xak. xı yarmış al-cariş 'roughly milled groats'; yarmış u:n al-dagiqu'l-hawári 'finely ground flour'; this is one of the words with two opposite meanings (a/-addad), but by origin they are in fact identical Kaş. /TI 40. Dis. V. YRMyarma:- Hap. leg., but see yarman-. A Coop. f. yarmaş- is noted in Kip. xv tasallaga “to scale (a wall) Tu. 10a. 9 and sàbafa “to hold on by the finger nails'(?) do. zob. 3, and survives in SE "Türki BŞ 626. UYğ. vin ff. Bud. (if the sinners who have fallen into the river of ashes in hell, in an effort to get out) ógüz kıdığın yarmasarlar 'pull themselves up the bank of the river” TM IV 253, 62. D yarman- Refl. f. of yarma:- survives vv. the same meaning in NE Alt, Tel. R 7II 152. Uy£. vin ff. Bud. tuta yarmanğalı sakinurlar 'they contemplate holding on and climbing up (to them)” Maitrisimit frag. in TT I, p. 19, note 46: Civ. TT I 46 (yaskag): Xak. xı er ta:mka: yarmandı: "the man scaled (tasallaqa . . . "ala) the vvall” (etc.) Kaş. III 111 (yarmanu:r, yarmanma:k): Çağ. xv ff. yarman-(-ıp) bir yüksek yere tırman- "to claw one's way up to a high place” Vel. 406 (quotns.), yarman-/yarmaş- “to cling (gasbidan) onto a tree, rope, vvall, and the like, and climb up” (54/2 raftan) San. 328v. 19 (quotns.) Tris. YRM S yarmağa:n See armağa:n. D yermeksiz Hap. leg.: Priv. N./A. fr. the Infin. of 2 yé:r- Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (receive the flower sent to you) yérmeksiz kópülin 'without feelings of revulsion” TT X 488. Tris. V. YRMD yarmaklan- Refl. Den. V. fr. yarma:k; pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı er yarmaklandı: “the man became possessed of money” (dà dirham) Kaş. III 116 (yarmaklanu:r, yarmaklanma:k), a.o. İT 279, 9. D yarımla:- Hap. leg.; Den. V. fr. yarım. Xak. xı ol yo:luğ yarımla:dı: “he completed half (nzaşafa) the iourney” (etc.) Kaş. 111 343 (yarimla:r, yarımla:ma:k). D yarımlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. f. of yarımla:-. Xak. xı yarımlandı: ne: “the thing fell into  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1014 
     
   
   
                                            inu:r, yarımlanma: k). yaramsın- Refl. Simulative Den. V. fr. N.S.A. of yara:- ; mentioned only in a gramtical passage. Cf. yaran-. Xak. xı there is ly one V. with five consonants w. this Suff. msin-); it is er mapa: yaramsındı: “he rried favour with me” (tamallaqa li) Kaş. II 3 (yaramsınu:r, yaramsınma:k). Dis. YRN yarın “shoulder-blade”, in this form .o.a.b. A syn. vvord yağrın appeared in the edieval period, it can hardly be the original rm of yarın, a much older vvord, and may a mispronunciation due to a supposed ological connection vv. yağır, q.v. Surives in NE Alt., Kumd., Leb., Tel. yarın R I 122; Khak., Tuv. carin; "Bar. yawrun W 'Tkm. ya:ğrın. See yarinla:-. Uyğ. ıı ff. Man.-A (of a demon being suppressed; e west country presses down his internal rgans; the north and south countries press own) yaranın başının (sic) “his shoulder lades and head' (Mount Sumeru presses down is trunk(?), özin) M III 8, 3-10 (ii): Xak. 1 yarın 'azmu'l-katif “the shoulder-blade'; e Turks say about it (fihi) yarın bulansa: €:1 bulğanu:r idà tagavwwaga ('azmu'ltif tagaswwaga»'l-wilaya 'if the shoulder blade irregular, the realm is in disorder” Kaş. Z/I 1 (presumably a refce, to scapulomancy of the hinese kind): xiv Muh. mugtu'l-zahr 'shouler blade” yağrın Mel. 47, 14; Rif. I4I (MS. ağrık): Çağ. xv ff. yağrın (spelt) şüna wa tif *shoulder-blade, shoulder”, also called agir and kebze San. 333r. 27; 0.0. 300r. 10; 33v. 4 (yağır): Xwar. xın yağrın 'shoulderlade” “42 48: xiv ditto Nahe. 33, 11: Kap. un lawhwil-katif 'shoulder-blade' yağram ic) Hou. 20, 10: xiv yağrın 'azmwu'l-katif d. gs: xv lawhu'l-katif yawrun Kas. 60, 7; lawh yağrın Tuh. 31b. 5: Osm. xiv ff. ağrın ditto; c.i.a.p. 7773 I 766; II 976; III 54; IV 825. 2 yarın Dev. N. fr. yaru:-, lit. "becoming right' or the like; originally it meant in the arly morning', thence tomorrow morning” nd thence, more generally (tomorrow' and ven “next year”, Survives in NC Kzx.; NW . ların “next year”: SW Osm. yarın “toorrow'. Cf. erte:. Türkü vır ff. yarın ... ece: *'early in the morning . . . late at night” rkB 22; o.o. do. 1 (3 keçe:), 2 (1 eş-): Man. hey had a great entertainment . . .) yarinka egi “until the morning” TT İT 8, so (damged), a.o. M I 6, 19 (yaru:-): Uyğ. vil ff. an. yarın kéce M 7 31, 4 (1); İl 36, 5 (iii): k. xı kalsun cavi) yarınka: “may your e endure until tomorrow' (/i-ğad) Kaş. II 50, 5; n.m.e.: KB (if a man lives for the leasures of the day, he sins and) yarin yér akınç 'will suffer anxiety to-morrow' 913; .0. 232, 587 (Oküng), 915-6, 5309: xın(?) 4t. (let praise go from me today) yarın elig   tomorrow" 29-30; 2.0.0.; y morrow' 145: xiv Muh.(?) " pada(n) yarin Rif. 94, 184. (only): Çağ. xv ff. yarın fardà 'tomorrow' San. 329v. 24 (quotn.): Kip. xim al-adaà ya:rın Hou. 28, ız: xiv ğada(n) (érte:/tanda:/) yarın Tuh. z6b. 6. S yirip See irin. yurun “patch, scrap”, and the like. Survives in NE Ait, Tel. R IJI 546; (Khak. curux). Uyğ. viu ff. Bud. yuruparu pisa kelmiş etin “meat cooked to rags” U III 45, 14: Xak. xı yurun quf"atıc l-dibdc, "a scrap of brocade”, hence one says yurun yuka: Kaş. III 22: Çağ. xv ff. yurun qaftan yaması "a patch on a robe” Vel. 417; yurun (spelt) pára wa latta *scrap, patch', which they sew on a garment San. 342v. 15 (quotn.): Kip. xiv yurun 'clippings (al-qasàsa) of anything' İd. 92. S yürüp See ürüp. Dis. V. YRND yaran- Refl. f. of yara:- ; s.i.m.m.l.g. vv. the same phonetic changes and sometimes the same meanings as yara:- but Kaş.”s first meaning belovv seems to survive in some NE languages, and both in SVV Osm. Cf. yaramsın-. Uy£. vr ff. Bud. (if a man sings . . . or has letters vvritten) kunçuylarka yaranÉali “in order to curry favour with vvomen” U HI 75, 10 (ii): Xak. xı at yarandı: “the horse vvas slimmed on the exercise ground” (dummira . . . fi'l-midmàr) to make it hard and fit to race; and one says ol mana: yarandı: “he ingratiated himself with me” (tamallaqa 1) Kaş. III 83 (yaranu:r, yaranma:k); o.o. I 394, 19; III 20, 17: Çağ. xv ff. yaran(spelt) syn. vv. yara-, pasand şudan “to be suitable! San. 327v. 16; a.o. do. 2 (yara:-): Kip. xiv yaran- tadammara ' to be, or become, slim” İd. 93. VUD 1 yerin- (yérin-) in spite of the Infin., the translation suggests that this is the Refl. f. of 1 yér-, not yar-. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı ol butik yerindi: “he set to work to split (Büşara şaqq) the branch for himself” Kaş. 111 83 (yerinü:r, yerinme:k, MS. -ma:k): Kap. xv ff. inxaraqa s come apart, tear (Intrans.) yérin- Tuh. a. 8. VUD 2 yérin- Refl. f. of 2 yér-; this seems to be best explanation of the words listed below, but in one case the y- is absent, and this might be a Sec. f. of irin-. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. kimke nen yerinğü ermez “one must not be disgusted with anyone” TT VI 452 (see note thereon); ner kimke yeme éringülük (sic?) övkeleğülük ermez “one must not be disgusted or angry with anyone' Suv. 228, 14— 15; 0.0. TT VI 18 (öpkele:-), U III 73, 22 (2 ye:r-): and see PP 68, s üirin-): Osm. xıv ff. yerin- “to be distressed, miserable, to feel regret , c.i.a.p. T7TS 7 822; İİ 1042; III Soz: IV 877.     
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1015 
     
   
   
     yorınçğa: 'clover' (or “lucerne”?), one of several animal and plant names ending in -nçğa:. Survives in NC Kir. jopáucka; Kzx. jopiriska/jopiska: SC Uzb. yüpficka: NW Kk. jopiska: SW Osm. yonca, Tkm. yorunca. Uy£. viii ff. Civ. yorunçğa 'clover' H II 16,8; 24, 69: Xak. xı yorinc£a: al-qatt “clover” Kaş. İİİ 433; a.o. I 431 (b1igrma:): xırı(?) Tef. yorınçğa “clover” 162: xiv Muh. (?) al-ratba “green clover' yo:nıçka: Rif. 182 (only): Çağ. xv ff. yorunçğa (spelt) “a fresh green plant (nabát) which the oftener one cuts it the oftener it grows again' (quotn.); also called yonca, in Ar. fesfişa ('fresh green clover”), in Pe. aspist (ditto) San. 342v. 17; yonca “a fresh green herb which they give to horses'; also called yorunçğa do. 347r. 10: Oğuz xı yorınça: al-gatt Kaş. III 375: Kip. xıl al-fuşşa sea huwa'l-qadba “lucerne, clover' yonca: Hou. 9. 4. D yerinçiğ Hap. leg.?; Dev. N./A. fr. 2 yérin-; 'displeasing' and the like. Xak. xi KB 687 (erincig). D yérindi: Hap. leg.; Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. 2 yerin-, “disgusting, hateful”. Xak. xı KB 5327 (süründi:). D varindak Den. N. (Conc. N.) fr. 1 yarin, lit. 'something which passes over the shoulderSlades'(?) (cf. bağırdak), “a strap; cf. kadis, sıdrım. Xak. xr yarındak “a Turkish strap' (al-qidd), it is cut (yugadd) out of goatskin Kaş. III 51; o.o. II 23 (til-); 108 (tiliş-), 175 (tiltür-). PU(D) yóründek pec. to Uy£.; obviously “a remedy'; often used in the Hend. em yöründek, prima facie a Den.(?) N. in -dek, but vv. no obvious etymology. Uy£. vr i ff. Man. TT III 29 (0D): Bud. em yóründek TT IV, p. 14, note A, rı, 8 (1 a:l), Suv. 15 II, etc.; yöründek by itself U 1I 44, 1 (iii) etc. Civ. TT I 109 (anut-). D yarınkı N./A.S. fr. 2 yarın, survives in SW Osm. Xak. xı KB yarinki künün “tomorrow' g18; o.o. 397, 5307: Çağ. xv ff. yarınkı fardá'i 'tomorrow's ” San. 329v. 26: Xwar. xiv yarınğı/yarınkı ditto Qutb 73. D yarınlık AN. fr. 2 yarın, “that which belongs to tomorrow'; n.o.a.b. Xak. xı KB yarınlik iş ét “do tomorrow's work' 1208, 1278; yanut bérge tepri yarınlık sapa “God will give you your reward tomorrow' 5131: xin(?) At. 187 (1 azuk). D yurunluğ P.N./A. fr. yurun; n.o.a.b. Xak. xi yurunluğ ura:ğut “a woman who owns scraps (qità'at) of brocade” Kaş. III şo: Çağ. xv fi. yurunluk (sic) banıbadür “made of cotton” (here perhaps “patched vvith cotton fabric” ?) San. 342v. 19 (quotn.). Tris. V. YRND yarınla:- Hap. leg. ; Den. V. fr. 1 yarın: so spelt originally, but altered by a second 1a:dı: “he struck him on the shoulder blade' (Çala "azm katifihi) Kaş. İH 343 (yarinla:r, yarınla:ma:k). S yürüper- See ürüper-. Dis. YRS (D) yarsğa:ğ Hap. leg.?; see yaskağ, in the same section as yartma:k, so certainly a Dis., but distinguished fr. it as a/-mudd"af *with a repeated consonant”. There does not seem any possible etymology, -ğa:ğ is not a known Suff. Xak. xı yarsğa:ğ “a slippery place” (al-mazlaqa)'in the mountains or elsewhere Kaş. III 433. Dis. V. YRSD yarsı:- “to be revolted, disgusted by (something .Acc.)”, prob. a Simulative Den. V. in -Sr- fr. 1 yar, lit. “to have a flow of saliva'. Survives in the same sense in NE Tel. R III 148 and perhaps NW Kaz. yars(1)- “to fly into a rage'. Cf. yalk-. Türkü vri ff. Man. M 1 7, 13 (ança:) and see ?E ersi-: Uyğ. vir ff. Man.-A (when a man sees a louse sucking his blood) yarsıyur M 18,17: Bud. (when a man has a revolting disease) alku kişi yarsıyur yakmaz bolur 'everyone is disgusted and begins not to go near him' TT VI 445; a.o. U III 79, 9-10 (i) (yYérgülüg): Civ. TT VIII I.8 (kus-): Xak. xı ol yarsı:dı: ne:pni: istaqdara”l-şay” wa "dfahu “he was revolted by the thing and loathed it” Kaş. İTİ 305 (yarsrr, yarsısma:k): xiv Muh.(?) ankara wa abd “to disapprove, feel aversion” ya:rsı:- Rif. 104: (Kip. xv(?) Tuh. 24a. 7, see bez-). "D yarsıt- Caus. f. of yarsı:-, Kag.'s etymology is impossible, but the connection w. 1 yar seems valid. Perhaps survives in NW Kaz. yarsıt- “to infuriate'. Xak. xı ol anı: yarsıttı: “he disgusted him (qaddarahu, MS. qaddarahu) about something, so that he loathed (“afa) to accept food from him”, originally the phr. ya:r so:dti: “he spat out saliva”, because he revolted him, and then assimilated Kaş. /7 353 (yarsıtu:r, yarsıtma:k): Kip. xiv yarsit- 'to provoke, stir to anger' CCG; Gr. D yarsik- Hap. leg.; Emphatic Pass. f. of yar- Xak. xı er oğlundın yarsıkdı: “the man parted (infarada) from his son'; that is when one of them lost his way (daila) in the desert, and one of them reached one place and the other another, or fell into the hands of the enemy Kaş. II] ıos (yarsıka:r, yarsıkma:k). D yérsin- Hap. leg.; Refl. Simulative Den. V. fr. yér. Cf. yerle:-. Xak, xı er yérig yersindi: “the man made the place his home and became accustomed to it” (tawattana . . . soa” tüdahu) Kaş. III 109 (yersinü:r, yersinme:k). Tris. YRS S yarasa/yerise: See yersiğü:, 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1016 
     
   
   
     which is Hap. leg., 1s uncertain; if aitered, to uya: yersiğü: it could be interpreted as a Turkish phr. vv. a Dev. N. fr. *yérsi:- (cf. yersin-), “making its home in a nest”, but the vvide range of forms suggests that they are all different representations of a l.-w., the form yar kanat, presumably 'with split (2 ya:r) wings! being an attempt to give it a Turkish etymology. Yarasa survives in SW Az., Osm. and yar kanat in NE Alt yarğanat, Khak. çarkanat: NC Kır., Kzx. jarkanat/jarganat: NW Kk. farğanat, Kaz. yarkanat; Kumyk varkanat, Nog. yarğanat, SVV "Tkm. yarğa:nat. Çiğil xi “the bat” (a/-xufyaş) is called (PU) aya: yer.sğü and some of them call it (VU) yerise: Kaş. /İ/ 433: Çağ. xv ff. yarasa/yarasık (both spelt) şabrak 'bat', in Ar. xuffiş San. 329r. 10; yarkanat “bat”, it is an abbreviation of yarğağ kanat, that is bül-? püst 'with a wing made of skin” do. 329v. 2: Tkm. xin al-watwát 'alarge bat' (VU) yarasa: Hou. 10, 11: xiv yaraşa ditto İd. 93: xv ditto yaraşa, also the compound (words, murakkab) yarkanat/ teri kanat Tuh. 38a. 12. D yarsınçığ Dev. N./A. fr. the Refl. f. of yarsı:-, n.o.a.b. Türkü vı ff. Man. ol yarsınçığ etözteki kan irin “that blood and pus in her revolting body” M 7 5, 8-9: Uyğ. viri ff. Bud. (his corpse...) yarsınçığ bolur “becomes revolting' TT VI 444: Xak. xi yarsınçığ ne:p “a thing by which one is revolted” (yustagdar) Kaş. III 56. Dis. YRŞ D yaris Dev. N. (connoting reciprocity) fr. yar- ; s.i.a.m.l.g. vv. the usual phonetic changes for 'race, competition”, and the like. Xak. xı yarış sıbdqu”l-xayl "a horse race'; hence one says ol at yarıştı: “he horse-raced” (sábaga'l-xayl), yarış “a division” (muqdsama) of property between two men Kaş. III ro, (in II 191 (kaltur-) the translation suggests that yarışda: is an error for barışda:): Çağ. xv ff. yarış asb tüxtan “a horse race” Sam. 329V. 22. : D yarşı: Dev. N./A. fr. yarış-, pec. to Xak. Xak. xı yarşı: the word for 'someone who divides something in half” (munàásif f”l-şay)) and the word for 'the division of something' (n.sifu'l-say'); hence one says anın yarşı:sı: bu: “this 1s the man who divides it”, and ol menip birle: ta:m yarşı: “he is my neighbour (cári) who shares a house with me” (müuşdtara”l-bayt), that is “that which divides us (a/-hayil) is a vvall” Kaş. III 32: KB yarşı “divergent” 5311 (ékkigü:). D yarsim Hap. leg.; abbreviated N.S.A. fr. yarış- xı one says bi:r yarşım yé:r ard qadr sibüqı l-xayl fi'l-halba “sufficient land for a set of starters to race in” Kaş. 111 47. Dis. V. YRŞD yaraş- Recip. f. of yara:-; s.i.m.m.l.g. vv. the usual phonetic changes, usually for 'to be VI11 1. iVlan. /Vİ ili 19, 6—0 (11) (Şad11-). Uye. vi ff. Man.-A dindar kişike sevük köpül yaraşur 'loving thoughts become an Elect” M I 23, 17-19: Bud. (the two breasts on her broad chest) artukrak yaraşıp turur erdi *were exceptionally symmetrical” U IV 30, 54; yaraşurın yaraşmazın . . otlı suvh yaraşmazı 'points of agreement and difference... the difference between fire and water' TT VI 341-2: Civ. in medical texts yaraşur means that (a particular remedy), “is appropriate, or beneficial' (sometimes, for something Dat.) H I 95, 145 (w. Dat.), 167 (transcribed yaruşur), TT VIII M.23, 27 (ya:zra:şutr, vv. Dat.);in TT VII 39 yaraşmaz (occasionally yaramaz) “it is inappropriate' (to do certain things on certain days) is common; a.o. do. 12, 7-8 (1 karşı:): Xak. xı ola:r ikki: yaraşdı: “those two agreed with one another (rodfaqd) about something! Kag. II] yi (yaraşu:r, yaragma:k; verse); (the cat that cannot reach the fat says) kişi: nepi: yaragma:s men's things do not agree with me” (/4 yuwáfiquni) II 105, 25; a.0. İİİ 11, 3: KB (enemies who did not actually fight) yaraştı için “have “come to terms with one another” 145; yaraşğu yarağı bar erse yaraş “if there is an opportunity to come to terms, do so” 2360; o.o. 411, 681, 2270, 4299 (1 öçeş-): xin(?) Tef. ixtalafa “they disagreed” yaraşumadilar (for yaraşu: umadılar) 144: xiv Muh. wàfaqa ya:raş- Mel. 32, 1; (wa şaluha “to fit, suit”, sa:kla:j- ?read anla:ş- Rif. 112); şalaha “to make peace, be reconciled” ya:ra:ş- (?, ya:rla:ş- 42, 6, ba:rla:g- 133): Çağ. xv ff. yaraşa layiq “suitable” Vel. 404 (quotn.), yaraşRecip. f.; sulh kardan “to make peace”, sázkàr şudan “to agree”, and metaph. öardzanda şudan “to be becoming” San. 327v. 18 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv yaraş- “to be suitable, to fit, to agree”, etc. Qutb 70; MN öz, etc.; Nahc. 175, 9: Kom. xiv yaraş- “to agree; to be suitable" CCI; Gr.: Osm. xiv ditto, common TTS II 1002; III 772; IV 847. -. D yarış- Recip. f. of yar-, s.i.m.m.l.g. vv. the usual phonetic changes, normally “to race, compete”, but in SC Uzb. “to chop (e.g. wood) together'. Xak. xı ol anın birle: at yarışdı: he had a horse race (sdbaqa /-faras) with him”, and one says ol anın birle: tava:r yarışdı: “he divided (zásafa) the property with him”, this word is also used of dividing property under a will (qismatu'l-mawarit) Kaş. III 72 (yarışu:r, yarigma:k); o.o. 1 367, 24; 474,6; İl 226, 15; III 10 (yarış): xiv Muh.(?) sabaqa ya:rış- (?; MS. ya:rşa:-) Rif. 11o (only): Çağ. xv ff. yarış- (consistently spelt yeriş-) asb taxtan “to race a horse” San. 32gr. z (quotn.): Kip. xin sabaqa mina'l-musábaga bi'l-xayl :a ğayrihi yarış- (MS. yarag-) Hou. 40, 16. D yeriş- Recip. f. of 1 yer- , pec. to Xak. Xak. xı yerişdi: ne: taqd"asa”İ-şay” wa daliha nahwa'l-infirác “(he thing fell short of requirements(?), that is, for example, by coming 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1017 
     
   
   
        apart'; and one says er yérisdi: 'the man (etc.) smiled” (tabassama, i.e. parted his lips); similarly one says 1t tışı: yerişdi: “the dog's teeth lost their strength' (aftara) Kaş. 111 72 (yerişü:r, yérigme:k): KB (he woke, and looked up raising his head) kalık kız küler teg yéristi tigin 'the sky parted its teeth like a girl when she smiles! 5827. D yorış- Co-op. f. of yorı:- s.is.m.l., usually as yürüş- and the like. Uyğ. vr ff. Bud. birök akru akru manın yorışdılar “if (the Buddhas) walked at a gentle pace” U III 72, 17: Xak. xı ol menin birle: yorışdı: “he competed with me in walking'(fi'l-magy); and one says torku: yorışdı: “streaks appeared (5adat'l- taráyiq) in the silk fabric' (etc.), that is when it is on the point of disintegration (qaruba mina'l-bilà) Kaş. III 72 (yorisu:r, yorigma:k): Çağ. xvff. yürüş- “to walk (ràh raftan) with one another' San. 342r. 14. Tris. YRS D yaraşı: Dev. N./A. fr. yaraş-, 'suitable, beneficial, attractive', etc.; cf. yaraşık. N.o.a.b. Uy£. vii ff. Man. (showing to mankind) yaraşı kórk “an attractive shape” TT IH 127; yaraşı tüzgerincsiz “attractive and insurpassable' do. 153; o.o. Wind. 29-30 (kil-), 42-3 (iciglig): Bud. körki yaraşı TT X 441; ertipü yaraşı közünüp “appearing very attractive” do. 447; (various drugs) iğleriye yaraşı “beneficial for their diseases' Suv. 597, 23; o.o. U III 39, 1; TT VII 16, 24; VIII 4.36 (éncgülüg); Kuan. 144: Civ. TT VIII I.20 (igle:gü:). D yarasik Dev. N./A. fr. yarag-; syn. w. yaraşı:. S.is.m.. vv. the usual phonetic changes. Xak. xı KB (there was no remedy that they did not try) yarastk ne erse ani berdiler “they gave him whatever was beneficial' 1061; a.o. 1053 (için): xiv MuA.(?) baligu' I-husn “most attractive, beautiful” yara:şık Rif. 147 (only): Çağ. xv ff. yaraş/yaraşık (1) sulh wa sázkàri 'peace, agreement (quotns.); (2) metaph. bardzandagi 'comeliness! San. 329r. ıı: Osm. xiv ff. yaraşık 'suitable, becoming, attractive'; c.i.a.p. TTS I 786; IJ 1002; 111 771; IV 846. D yaraşıklık Hap. leg.?; A.N. fr. yaraşık. Xak. xı KB kayuda yaraşıklık erse yakın “vhoever has suitability ready to hand” (he is useful for work) 3210. Tris. V. YRSD yarastur- Caus. f. of yaraş-: s.i.s.m.l. Uy$£. vit ff. Bud. kezigce sanın tutup yüz ulatı ódke yaraşturup ótüngü ol "he must pray on a hundred, etc. occasions, keeping the number (of prayers) in the right order” Up. 44, 3-5: Xak, xı KB (my God, vvho set all things in order, himself set (the stars) in order) éte berdi tüzdi yaraşturdı tüz “he set them in order, organized them and made (their movements) harmonious' r46: Xwar. xiv yaraştur- "to set in order, make ready' Qutb yo, Nahc. 48, s: Kom. xiv “to set in order, harmonize” CCI, CCG, Gr.: Osm. xiv ff. ditto; fairly common TTS II 1003; //1 772; IV 847. Dis. YRY VUD yırya: Den. Adv./Adj. fr. 1 yir; cf. bérye:; “in the North”. Pec. to "Türkü. Türkü vu 7. S. 1 (sadaprt); 7 E 14, II E 12, etc. (bérye:). Tris. YRY VUD yıryakı: Hap. leg.; N./A.S. fr. yırya:, “situated in the North”, Türkü viu T. 17 (beryeki:). Mon. YS ya:s 'damage, harm, destruction, loss', etc. Prob. no longer surviving, in modern times indistinguishable fr. the Ar. l.-w. ya's “despair, grief', in some languages, ya:Ş and ya:z. Cf. 1 ko:r. Uyğ. vii ff. Bud. Kuan 35 (1 ko:r); TT VI 63 (e$sü:-): Xak. xı ya:s al-wadi'a wa'l-xusrán '(trading) loss; loss (in general)'; hence one says anın telim ya:sı: tegdi: “he has suffered many losses! Kaş. EE 159: KB biri asğı yası telim “they have one profit and many losses' 309; mapa yas Kkilur “they inflict loss on me” 684; o.o. 915, 983 (kork-), 2161, 4226 (yağılık), 6368: (Çağ. xv ff. yas “azd” wa mütam 'mourning, lamentation' (Ar. l.-w.) San. 331v. 5): Oğuz xi ya:s al-mavwt wa'l-halák “death, destruction'; hence one says anıp oğlı: ya:s boldi: (or buldi:?) “his son perished, or died” Kaş. III 159: (Xwar. xiv yas “mourning” Quib 78: Kip. XIV ya:ş al-'azà' İd. ga). Mon. V. YSyaS- basically 'to loosen', with some connotation of allowing something under tension to become flat; in its extended meanings more or less syn. w. 1 yaz- and, to some extent ya:d-, and therefore difficult to identify in some modern languages; but certainly survives in SE Türki yasi-: SW Osm. yas- and perhaps, NC Kir. jas-. Xak. xı beğ sü:sin yasdı: “the beg disbanded ( farraqa) his troops (and sent them) to their homes'; the origin is the phr. er ya:sin yasdı: “the man unstrung (naza'a . ... al-matar 'an) his bow'; and one says Xa:n çovva:ç yasdı: “the xa:n loosened the fastening (halla . . . “uqda) of the royal parasol which was raised over his head” Kaş. 1I] 59 (yasa:r, yasma:k): Kip. xii fakka min *akki'l-qaws min watarihi "to unstring (a bow) yas- Hou. 43, 1: xiv yaş- ditto İd. 94: Osm. XIV ff. yas- "to unstring (a bow)', and (xvi ff.) “to flatten'; common T'TS 7 792; 1I 1009; Zİ 777; IV 852: xvni (“Rümi? San. 331 v. 14. Dis. YSA D yası: Dev. N./A. fr. yas- ; “flat, flattened'. The translation *broad' prob. implies “flattened out so as to be broad”, see yası:la:-, and contrast ke:p. Survives in SC Uzb. yassi: NW Kaz. yassı (R JI] 223 yastı): SW Az.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1018 
     
   
   
     yastı, Osm., Tkm. yası, all 'flat, flattened'. Uyğ. viri Su. E 9 (2 ta:ş): Xak. xı yası: ne:p *something broad” (a/-"arid) Kaş. III 24: KB (1 saw a ladder with fifty steps) jüz utru uruğluğ ediz ham yası 'erected facing me, high and broad' 60335: xını(?) Tef. yüzi yası "with a flat (or broad ?) face' 147: xiv Muh. Mel. 46, 11; Rif. r4o (alınlığ): Kip. xin 'arid yası: Hou. 25, 16: xiv yaşşı: (sic) 'flat' (a/-şafih) of iron, stones, etc. İd. 94: xv “arid yaş (later altered to yassı) Tu). 25a. 4; in özb. 1 yassı is described as one of the very few Turkish words w. a double consonant. Dis. V. YSAF yasa- “to construct, arrange, set in order', and the like is a Mong. V. which did not appear in Turkish until late xir or XIV. İt is first noted in xıı1(?) Tef. 147, and is also listed in Çağ. xv ff. San. 331r. 2 and Kip. xv. Tuh. 25b. 7. İt has been incorrectly read in Türkü viii 7. N 10 where the right reading is öd tepri: aysar (not yasar) kişi: oğlı: ólgeh: tórü:miş “(all) sons of men have been born to die when heaven prescribes the time”. The Dev. N. yasak is a Mong. l.-w., which is first noted in the Uy£. xiv Civ. petition, USp. 22, 43; the supposed occurrence in viri ff. Bud. Pfahl. 6, $ is a misreading of yağak, q.v. D y€:se:- Desid. f. of y€:-: pec. to Kaş. Xak. xı ol etme:k yé:se:di: “he wished to eat bread” (etc.) Kaş. 111 304(yé:se:r, yé:se:me:k); a.o. I zo, 10. : Dis. YSC D yasıç Dim. f. fr. yası:, lit. 'rather flat and broad” : “a broad arrow-head'. N.o.a.b. Türkü vin ff. PB 40 (yar-): Xak. xı yasıç al-mübala mina ?l-nişdl “a broad long arrovv-head” Kaş. III 8: Kap. xiv yaşıç nasl ma'rüf “a vvellknown (kind of) arrow-head' İ4. 94. Dis. YSD D yastuk Pass. Dev. N. fr. yasta:-; lit. *something propped up'; 'pillow' and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. w. the usual phonetic changes, and the same and some extended meanings. Uyğ. vin ff. Civ. yastuk, no doubt originally “a pillow-shaped ingot of silver”, perhaps the Chinese tael, was the largest currency. unit mentioned in the documents in US. and Fam. Arch (see sitir) and phr. like yarım yastuk kümüş sı, 3 no doubt mean not “half an ingot of silver”, but "half a yastuk (tael) in cash”, in such phr. as altı yüz yastuk çavv I2, 5 it clearly means “6oo yastuks in paper currency'; for further refces. see USp., p. 274 and Caf. 224 (s.v. yastuk); Xak. xı yastuk al-wisáda '*pillow' Kaş. III 43; o.o. do. 107 (yastal-), 302 (yasta:-): xırı(?) Tef. ditto 147: xiv Muh. al-mixadda *pillow' ya:stuk Mel. 67, 13; yastuk Rif. 168: Çağ. xvff. yastuk (spelt) muttakà toa bali; “cushion, pillow" San. 332r. 7 (quotn. in Rumi): Xwar. xii yastığ/ yastık/yastu “bed-time” “Al ız (cf. Osm. yatsı, of vvhich the earlier form is prob. a metathesis): xiv yastuk “pillov” Nahc. 159 11; 394, 11: Kom. xiv ditto CCI; Gr.: Kip xın al-wisáda wa'l-mixadda ya:stuk Hou. 17 2; Xiv yaştuk al-mixadda İd. ga: xv ditt yastik Kav. 64, 6; Tuh. 35b. 2. Dis. V. YSDyasta:- survives in Kaş.”s first meaning ir SW Osm., but yasta- in NE is a Sec. f. ol yaşla:- or yazla:-. Xak. xi ol apar yastuk yasta:dı: “he propped him up on a pillow (wassadahu bi-wisáda); and one says ol maya: sö:z yasta:dı: “he hinted to me ('arrada li orally, but did not speak clearly' (sariha(n). Kaş. III 302 (yasta:r, yasta:ma:k): a.o. I1. 320, 8-9 (contrast yası:la:-): KB tobik yastadip emdi oldurğuka “you have now put a ball in place to sit on” 647: Çağ. xv ff yasta- takya düdan "to prop (someone) on s pillovv” San. 331r. 28 (quotns.): Osm. xiv, xü yasta- 'to give (something) as a pillow; tc prop (something Zcc., on something Dat.)': in three texts TT'S II 1009; III 778. D yastal- Hap. leg.?; Pass. f. of yasta:Xak. xı yastuk yastaldı: “the pillow wa: propped” (wusidat); and one says ok amacka: yastaldı: “the arrow hit the side (daraba . . . bi-cànib) of the target” Kaş. III 107 (yastalu:r, yastalma:k). . D yastan- Refl. f. of yasta:- , “to prop onesel! up on (something Zcc.)'. Survives in some NE languages (R I1] 222) and SW Osm. Xak. xi KB (Aytoldi produced a ball and put it down) ani yastanip ótrü oldurdi kór 'and then sat down, propping himself on it” 622; a.o. 5974 (cüge:): Çağ. xv ff. yastan- takya kardan “te make (something) a pillow or support” Sar. 331V. 9 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv yastan- “to prop oneself against (something Acc.)” Qutb 73: Kip. xv yastin- (so vocalized in a later hand) :nwasada "to prop oneself! Tuh. 58b. rr: Osm. xivff. yastan-/yasdan-/(once, xvi) yassan- “to prop, or rest (something Aec., on something Dat.); to put (something cc.) as a pillow or support for (one's head Dat.)'; 579 TTS I 792; II 1009; III 778; IV 51. Tris. YSD D yastukluğ Hap. leg.?; P.N./A. fr. yastuk; “to the value of (so many) yastiks'.. Uy. vini ff. Civ. USp. 62, 7 (e:d). Dis. YSG F yasak See yasa:-. D yasık Hap. leg., but see yasıklığ “a bowcase”, perhaps Dev. N. fr. yas-, “unstrung”, in the extended sense of 'a case for an unstrung bow'. Cf. 2 kuruğluk, kurma:n. Xak. xi yasik a[-miqwas "a bow-case', in the language of the Turks, the Oğuz and Kip. do not know it, and use kurma:n Kaş. III 16 (prov., see to:zlug). E yosuk See yosuk. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1019 
     
   
   
       D yasğa:ç N.I. fr. yas-, “a rolling-board'; Kaş.”s etymology is erroneous; -ğa:ç is a normal .Dev. Suff. for N.Ls. Survives only(?) in SW Osm. yastığaç. Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. TT 1 11 (başğar-): Xak. xı yasğa:ç xiwanu'l-'acin "a rolling-board for dough"; its origin is yası: yığa:ç “a broad piece of vvood” Kaş. III 38: Osm. xvı ff. yastığaç (and the like) *rolling-board'; common in Ar. and Pe. dicts. TTS I 793; II 1010; İİİ 778, IV 852. PU?E yaskağ Hap: leg.; almost certainly an error for yarsğa:ğ, q.v. Uyğ. vin ff. Civ. (in an unfavourable omen; the mountains have become precipitous and the ground high) yarmanayın tésersen yaskağ (?yarsğağ) turur “if you say "I will climb up it”, it is slippery(?)” TT I 46. Tris. YSG D yasıklığ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. yasik; MS. yasığlığ, but between two words vv, -k- as the third consonant. Xak. xı yasıklığ ya: 'a bow with a bow-case' (al-miqwas) Kag. III şo. Dis. YSL D yasul Hap. leg.; Pass. Dev. N./A. fr. yas-; lit. 'loosened, relaxed', etc. Xak. xı yasul ta:ğ al-hadba mina”l-cabal “a flat-topped mountain'; also any “sloping ground” (şaöab müna”l-ard) is called yasul Kaş. III 18. Dis. V. YSLD yasil- Pass. f. of yas-; survives in SW Osm. for “to be flattened, levelled”. Xak. xı ış yasıldı: turika'l-amr wa furriqa asbübuhu “the business vvas abandoned and its assets divided up”, and one says ya: yasıldı: “the bow was unstrung' (muzi'a'l-watar); and sü: yasıldı: “the army (etc.) demobilized” (tafarraga); also used when anything scattered (tafarraga) Kaş. III 78 (yasilu:r, yasılma:k): Osm. xiv yasıl- (of a bow) “to be unstrung'; in several texts 7 7S I 792; II 1009; IV 852. Tris. V. YSLD yası:la:- Dev. N. fr. yası:, survives in SW Az. yastila-; Osm., Tkm. yasila- “to flatten' Xak. xı ol yasrla:dr ne:pni: “he made the thing broad' ("arig), e.g. dough which is rolled out (yubsat) on the rolling-board or the like; and one says ol só:züg yası:la:dı: “he made a plain statement! (şarraha bi'l-kalàm), and did not use hints or implications (lam yu'arrid (MS. yu'rid) bi'l-kinàya) Kaş. III 328 (yasr:la:r, yası:la:ma:k, contrast yasta:-). Dis. or Tris. YSM PU?D yasimuk (or yasmuk?) fentil, Erva lens; -muk (but not -1muk) is a Dev. Suff.; perhaps Dev. N. fr. yas- in the sense of “a flat (seed)'. Survives in SE Tar., Türki yésimuk: NC Kir. jasmik: SC Uzb. yosmuk: NW Kk. jasmik; Kaz. yasmik; Nog. yasmok: SW Osm. yasmık (in Tkm. yasmık is “an insect which preys on crops". Uyğ. viu ff.  Civ. yasımuk méni “lentil flour” H 7 119: Çağ. xv yasmuk 'ada: 'lentil' San. 332r. 7: Xwar. xiv (two stones) yasmukdin uluğrak *bigger than lentils” (and smaller than chick peas) Nahe. 43, 1: Kap. xiv (in a list of seeds and pulses; al-'adas marcama:k (Pe. L-vv.)) al-qirtim “safflovver seed, Carthamus tinctorius” yasmık Bal. 7, 1. D yası:ma:n Den. N. fr. yası:, lit. “flattish object(?)'; prob. “a flattish portable bottle, pilgrim bottle. N.o.a.b. Xak. xi yası:ma:n al-mugargir mina'l-kizan "bottle which gurgles when it is poured out” Kaş. IJI 38: Xwar. xiv yasman *'bottle, flask' Qutb 73: Kip. xiv ditto CCI, Gr. Dis. YSN F yosun 'manner, custom', and the like; a Mong. l.-w. first noted in late Uyg. Civ. documents (USp. 12, 15 etc.) and also noted in Çağ. xv ff. San. 243r. 16. Dis. YSZ D yassız Hap. leg.?; Priv. N./A. fr. ya:s, “harmless, without loss. Xak. xı KB 106 (asığ). Mon. YŞ ya:ş (?fi-) basically “fresh, moist'; from this extended meanings developed: (1) 'fresh' to “green vegetables” , (2) “moist” to “running with moisture; tears”, and perhaps also (3) 'fresh every year” to “a year of one's life”, but this might be a different word. There is no reasonable doubt that in the last sense it became an early l.-w. in Mong. as nasu 'a year of one's life'; the phr. harban niken nasutu 'eleven years old' (Haenisch 114) is exactly parallel to bir yégirmi: yaşlığ, same meaning; but the theory that Mong. milbusu(n) “tears” (actually a Dev. N. fr. nilbu- (Haenisch 117) *to spit', etc.) is also connected is untenable. S.i.a.m.l.g. w. the usual phonetic changes in one or more of these meanings, in SW 'lTkm. ya:ş (all meanings). Türkü vii yaş “tears I N ir1—yas 'year of one's life! is common, usually in such phr. as yeti: yegirmi: yaşıma: “in my 17th year” // E 24; altı: yegirmi: yaşına: “in his 16th year” 1 E 31: vil ff. yaş "fresh" IrkB 17, 53 (2 o): Yen. yaş “year of one's life” Mal. 32, 16 (adir-): Uyğ. vir alt: otuz yaşıma: 'in my 26th year Su. N 4: vin ff. Chr. iki yaşda altın oğul kızlar “boys and girls below the age of two' U I ro, 1-2: Bud. yaş süpükleri 'moist bones! Suv. 625, 10; o.o. TT V 28, 124 (2 ot): VI 14 (ekin)—yaş “tears” USp. 106, 46—7 (iğla:-)—yertinçüdeki özüğ yaşığ “life in this world' TM IV 252, 4; a.o. U II 49, 20-1 (16:z): Civ. yaş tananı “fresh sesame seed” H I 126; o.o. do. 168 (yuldurga:); TT I 56 (kur:-)—yas “tears” H 7 65 (ak-)—yaş “mild” TT VII 17, 22 (kilik)—kirk yasta 'atthe age of forty! do. 17, 24; o.o. do. 28, 31-2 (ul&amp;a:d-); 33, 6 (Kisil-): O. Kur. ix ff. yaş, usually in the form yagumda:, is common, e.g. altmış yaşımda: “in my sixtieth year” Mal. 1,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1020 
     
   
   
     tables; yaş ot 'alaf tari 'fresh forage ; and one says yag yoş as a jingle ('alà tariqr'l-itbà') Kaş. İTİ 4; ya:ş al-'abra “tears”, hence one says kö:züm ya:şı: akdı: “my tears streamed'; ya:ş al-bagl; hence one says ya:ş ye:dim “1 ate green vegetables”: ya:ş al-tari of anything; hence one says ya:ş et “fresh meat! 111 159; one says ya:ş yo:ş as a Jingle for a/-baql wa'l-xudar (greens”) İTİ 143 —ya:ş “life” 7 316 (ortu:la:-); a.o.o. in the first three meanings: KB kózi yag saçar “his eyes stream with tears” 80; a.0. 1500— uzatıldı yaş “your life has been lengthened' 176; o.o. 261, 293, 348: xii(?) Tef. yaş “fresh” (vegetables, etc.)—yaş “year of life” 1:48: Muh. al-ratb 'fresh' (opposite to 'dry' kuru:) ya:ş wa öl Muh. 54, 13 (Rif. 151 corrupt); (under “plants”) a/-raftb ya:ş 78, 7, 182 (al-bhaşişu” l-ratb "fresh herbage')—al-dam' "tear ya:ş 46, 15; 140—d(under 'ages of man”) a/-şağir wa'l-farx “small, young” ya:ş oğla:n 143 (only): Çağ. xv ff. yaş tifl “a child” Vel. 397 (quotn.); yas (1) “a young child”, (2) agk-z çaşm 'tear' (quotns.); (3) 'umur wa sinn wa zindagüni “life, years, age” (quotns.); (4) metaph. farzand sa awlád 'son' (quotn.); (5) tar 'fresh', opposite to xugk 'dry' San. 332v. 13: Xwar. xiv yaş (1) “young, fresh'; (2) 'tears'; (3) “year of age” Quib 74; MN 46, etc. ((2) and (3); Nahe. zı, 8, etc. (2); 4. 15 (3)—takı teri içine yış (sic?) katğıl “stufi grass into the skin” Nahc. 421, 11 (error, or Sec. f.?; cf. yasuk); a.o. do. 17: Kom. xiv yaş 'fresh, young” (CCI only)—yas yaşından “from childhood” (CCG only)—'tear'— life, age” CCI, CCG, Gr.: Kip. xır al-dam" ya:ş ta huwa'l-umur wa huma hull şay) ratb Hou. 21, 12; reverse entry 26, 21: xiv ya:ş al-“umur . . . ya:S al-axdar 'green' . . . yaş al-dam' ayda(n) İd. 94 (and see ya:şıl): al-cubnu'l-tari 'fresh cheese! ya:ş peynir Bul. 8, 1; al-"umur ya:ş do. 12, 13: xv al-dam' ya:s Kav. ör, 16; Tuh. 15a. 12 (ta l-'umur); ratb yaş do. 16b. 11; “umur yaş do. 25a. 3; layyin “soft, tender” yaş (/bos) do. 31b. 7. yı:ş 'mountain forest”, the upper parts of a mountain covered with forest, but also containing treeless grassy valleys (see K. Czeglédy, 'Coyay-quzi, Qara-qum, Kök-öng”, Acta Orient. Hung. XV 1-3, p. 55). Survives in the same sense in NE Alt., Leb., Tub. R III 497; Khak. cis. Türkü vir mainly occurs in geographical names, Altu:n yış T zo, etc.; tüken yış 7 S 3, etc., and others; (eastwards to the sunrise, westwards to the sunset, southwards to China) yırya: yışlka: tegi:] *northwards to the mountain forests! Ongin 2: virt ff. IrkB 17 (kör-): Xak. xı a/-şa"üd “high ground' is called yış, one says art yış sa'üd wa habüt "high ground and descending ground'; ém (sic) al-habüt, art al-"aqaba “a Steep mountain road, a pass” Kaş. IJI 4 (clearly corrupt); yış al-habut; hence one says art yış sa'üd wa habta (sic) III 143 (both entries are confused; Kaş., who had prob. a meant hign barren areas and yuş “the more fierule valleys” between rocky ridges): Kom. xiv yış “open uncultivated ground” CCG, Gr. VU 1 yos Hap. leg in Kaj.'s meaning; yoş is noted in SW xx Anat. as meaning (1) "tvvilight” (2) 'wild, rough' (perhaps a Sec. f. of yoz, not an old word, but very conunon in this dialect) SDD 1541; there is no obvious semantic connection. In Kaş. the word is entered between yaş and yış and vocalized both yog and yış. Oğuz xı yos al-zahma 'pressure, discomfort”, one says bodu:n yos boldi: “the people were crowded together” (izdahama) Kaş. Ill 4: Osm. xiv to xvi yos (of the eyes) “dazzled” (by the sun); “dimmed” (by weeping) in several texts; in Pe. dicts. translates xira, same meaning (and several others) TTS I1 842; II 1068; Ill 821; IV 898: xvii yos in Rümi, xira toa lacüc (stubborn, obstinate") Sar. 343r. 22. 2 yo:ş See ya:ş (Xak.). Mon. V. YŞyaş- “to hide (oneself, Intrans.)'; n.o.a.b., in modern languages displaced by the Refl. f. of yasur-. UyE. viii ff. Man.-A ol ida yaşdı: “hid in that bush” Manm.-uig. Frag. 400, 6: Bud. (the evil spirits) alku yaşarlar yokadurlar “all hide and disappear' TT VI 97-8: Xak. xı ol meni: kórüp yaşdi: “he hid (inkamd) when he saw me” Kaş. III 60 (yaşa:r, yaşma:k, in prov. yagma:s cannot hide himself” (yaktum nafsahu)); o.o. I1 425, 19; İİİ 208, 25: KB (after a life of pleasure) kara yer katinda yaşıp yatğu tüz "he will lie down flat, hiding in the black earth” 1427: xiv Muh. ixtaba'a “to hide" ya:ş- (Rif. 102, in margin ya:şu:n-, Mel. 22, 3 ya:şur- in error): Kip. xiv yaş- taxabba'a wa xafiya “to hide” İZ. 94: Osm. xiv nécesi . . . ğözüm yaşam "why should I hide my eyes?” (sic) TTS II 1012. *yiS- (or iş-?) See yışığ, işil-, yışım. VU(?D) yuş- Hap. leg., but see yuşul-, perhaps Co-op. f. of yu:-; if so, survives in NE Alt., Tel. yus- (sic) “to wash away! R 111 566; but the semantic connection is not close. Xak. xı ol beğni: yuşdı: “he poured out (asála) the beer from a tap in the cask” (m / şanbüril-dann), it (beer) is a drink made of” wheat, barley, and millet Kaş. TT 6o (yuşa:r, yuşma:k, corrected frem -me:k). Dis. V. YSAD yaşa:- Den. V. fr. ya:S; “to live (for so many years, or an unstated period, usually long)”, contrast tiril-. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. the usual phonetic changes. "Türkü vr: (Küli Çor) sekiz on yaşap yok bolltu:) 'died at the age of eighty” İx. 3; a.o. 1 N 2 (otuz): Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. uzun yaşayur tınlığlar az “people who live long are scarce' TT VI o21; o.o. PP 24, 4 (1 karı:), TT VII 40, 129 (adasiz); Hüen-ts.  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1021 
     
   
   
     51, 1956; USp. 97, 16: Civ. üç yaşar kara ud “a three-year-old black ox” H I 46: Xak.xi er uzu:n yaşa:dı: “the man had a long life” ('ummira . . . tawila(n)) Kaş. III 89 (yaşa:r, yaşa:ma:k), one says bu: er uzu:n yaşa:ğu: "this man is destined (mimmà haqquhu) to have a long life'; and (yaşa:ğu:) is also a N./A. of time and space (ismu'I-zamán toa'l-makàn) HIT 36: KB yaşasunı Luqmin yılı “may he live as long as Luqmàn' 123; a.o. 23oz: Çağ. xv ff. yaşa- (spelt) zistan wa zindagöni darax kardan 'to live, have a long life' San. 332r. 9 (quotns.): Xwar. xii ditto “AF 29: xiv ditto MN 96, etc.; Nahc. ror, 8: Kip. xiv yaşata'ammara "to live long” İd. 94: xv haydt "to live” yaşamak (/tirilmek) Tuh. 12b. 7, “and from yaşal(?), yaşa-” do. 84b. s-6. (?D) yaşu:- “to flash, shine”, and the like, cognate to *ya:- and perhaps Den. V. in -u:- fr. a Dev. N. *yas, cf. yaru:-. Although sometimes used in Hend. w. yaru:-, it can also, contrary to Kaş.”s statement, be used in other contexts. — N.o.a.b.; the medieval soundchange -a- x. -1- is puzzling, but cf. ya:ş, 1 yaşuk, etc. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. U İT 37, 56 (yaltri:-); TT V 4, 3 etc. (yaru:-): Xak. xı (under S) er yaru:dr yasu:dr “the man was delighted and joyful' (irtàha wa surra min farah); yaşu:dı: is not used by itself (yufrad) but (only) in the Hend. (yuzdawac) yaru:di: yaşu:dı: Kaş. III 89 (yaru:r yaşu:r, yaru:ma:k yaşu:ma:k): xiv Muh.(?) lüha wa lama"a “to gleam, glisten” y.şız- Rif. 114 (only): Xvvar. xiv yüzleri yaruk yılduz té yışığay (sic) “their faces will shine like bright stars” Nahc. 241, 6: Kap. xiv yışı- lama'a İd. 94. Dis. YSD D yaşut Dev. N./A. fr. yaş- ; lit. "hiding oneself”, pec. to Xak.? Xak. xi yagut ne: “a hidden (maxbu') thing”, and one says as a Hend. (fr'i-itbà') yaşut beküt Kaş. III 8, 2.0. I] 228 (bilsik-): KB ana ofrihk suv alınsa yaşut “if a (man's) mother secretly takes in the water (i.e. semen) of thievery' (and a child is born, it is disastrous for the realm) 5768. Dis. V. YSDD yasut- Caus. f. of yagu:- ; n.o.a.b. in Hend. w. yarut-. Uy. vir ff. Man-AM I21,4 (ii) (yarut-): Bud. TT VI 387 (ditto). Tris. YSD D yaşutluğ Hap. leg.?; P.N./A. fr. yasut. Xak. xi KB (do not judge people by their exteriors) kisinip için kör yaşutluğ ışığ “look at a man”s inner (thoughts) and his secret affairs” 5109. Dis. YSG D 1 yaşuk Dev. N./A. fr. yagu:-; "bright, gleaming; brightness, gleam”, and the like. "There was a medieval sound-change -a- — -1similar to that in yaşu:-. Survives only(?) in SVV Az. işığ, Osm., Tkm. 181k “bright, light, a light, lamp”. Uy£. vir ff. Bud. fairly common, but only in the Hend. yaruk yasuk TT V 4, 6 etc. (2 yaruk): Xak. xi KB yagik is a commoner word for 'sun' than 1 kün, e.g. yaşık boldi törtinç “the sun became the fourth (planet)! 134; o.o. 66, 4893, 6211: (xiv Rbğ. yaşık “sun” occurs only(?) in the passage taken fr. KP): Çağ. xvíff. yasik (lagar wa da'if 'lean, weak', and) Firaği translated it aftàb “sun” San. 332v. 26 (yaşık “can” also occurs in Kom. xiv CCG, Gr. and survives in some NC, SC, and NW languages; it may be a l.-w.); işığ/ışık rawgan wa munatovar 'shining, bright! 106v. zo: Kip. xiv işik al-daw' wa'l-gu'à' "light, brightness; rays of light d. 14; al-durri wa'l-mawdr'w'l-durri "bright; a bright place” işik (MS. sik) Bul. 3, 2. S 2 yaşuk See yoşuk. PUD yışığ (?7ışığ) apparently Dev. N. fr. *y1$- (?18-); “cord, rope', or the like, perhaps some particular kind of rope; n.o.a.b.; it is not certain whether the y- is prosthetic or original. Cf. 1 uruk, órgen, yip. Uy£. vırı ff. Bud. işığ bap “tie a cord” (to each bell hung on the fruit-trees in the orchard) PP 8o, r (Pelliot transcribed :sığ), (on the seventh day he loosened the iron chain (80:) which held the ship to the shore) temir ışığ yorıdı “the iron cable moved” (and the ship vvent off ) do. 33, 4) a.o. USb. 88, 46-7 (tirgük): Xak. xi yışığ al-nis' "a strap, thong', and more specifically “the thong of a camel's girth, or one fastening its load” Kaş. III 13; o.o. I 126 (esri:), 165 (2 es-), etc., all translated ai-habl “rope”. VU yoşuk “a helmet'; the vocalization is quite uncertain; the only modern trace is in Red. 125 aşık “an iron helmet', a word not mentioned in other Osm. authorities; otherwise İ.-vr.s are used, sometimes Mong. duğulğa (see. tuğlığ), it is unlikely that this is a.Sec. f. of yaguk vv, the connotation of “a shining object'. Türkü vil ff. in the Miran document (ETY 1I 64) relating to the issue of equipment to individuals, usually yarık “body armour' or kiliç 'sword', yosu:k is mentioned twice in contexts in which “helmet” seems appropriate (and the suggestion that it is a Sec. f. .of yasık *bow-case' unconvincing); Beçe: Apa: içreki:ke: bir yarik yoşu:k birle: (yarlığ boltı:) “one breastplate, with a helmet, was issued to Beçe: Apa: the Chamberlain A 21-2; Kü:lü:&amp; Sanu:nka: yoşu:k yarlığ boltu: Br. 7-8: Xak. xı (VU) oşuk baydatv'l-hadid “an iron helmet'; the alif is changed fr. yö, as one says alma"i and yalma'i (quickwitted") Kaş. 1 67 (the alif is unvocalized, but it follows usak so could not be aşık): xiv Muh. al-xüda "helmet” yaşı:k Mel. 71, 10; yışek Rif. 173: Xwar. xiv yarik yaşık üze “in breastplate and helmet! Nahe. 45, 8: Kip. xu al-xüda (VU) işık Hou. ış, 16.(alif unvocalized): xiv yışık a/-xüda İd. 94 (followed by VU yosuk a/-mücin “impudent”, Hap. leg.): XV xüda yaşık (in margin aşık) Tuh. rab. 5: Osm. xvin işığ/ışık in Rümi, hulah-i xüd *helmet' Sar. 106v. 20. 5 ə:  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1022 
     
   
   
       phatic 1. 1. “the eye vvas dazzled - Hap. leg.; Xak. xı kó:z yaşıktı: (hárat) by the sun and its rays” Kaş. III 76 (yaşıka:r, yaşıkma:k). Tris. YŞĞ D yaşa:ğu: See yaşa:- (Xak.). D yaşukluğ Hap. leg.?; P.N./A. fr. 1 yaşuk. Uyğ. vinff, Man. M Il o, 7-8 (yarukluğ). D yışığlığ Hap. leg., P.N./A. fr. yışığ. Xak. xı yışığlığ er 'a man who owns a rope' (Babl) Kaş. III 49. VUD yoşuklığ Hap. leg.; P.N./A. fr. yoşuk, vocalized yışıklığ, clearly by a later hand, originally there was a sign, prob. a damma, above the yö” and no sign on the şin. Xak. xı yoşuklığ er “a man protected (lit. veiled, al-muqarına") by an iron helmet” Kaş. III so. Dis. YŞL D yaşıl (?ya:şıl) der. fr. ya:Ş, prob. crasis of Fyaşsıl vv. the Den. Sufi. -s1l; properly “of the colour of fresh vegetation”, i.e. green”, but Hke 4 kö:k not very precise and sometimes used for “light blue” , this lack of precision still survives, in SE Türki yésil is “green”, but "green grass” is kök ot. S.ia.m.lg. vv. the usual] phonetic changes, generally vv. back vowels, but SE 'Türki yesil/yésil/yisil; SW Az. yaşıl, Osm. yeşil: "Tkm. ya:şıl. Türkü vil ff. (if the precious stone's colour is) yaşıl “green” (or light blue?; prob. turquoise) Toy. 26-2? (ETY II sə), a.o. IrkB si (yayla:ğ): Uy$£. vin ff. Civ. yaşıl burçak “green beans” TT VII 14, 69; a.o.o.: Xak. xı yaşıl “green” (al-axdar) of anything, and “bright green” (al-axdaru'l-nádir) is called yap yaşıl and, in a jingle (fr'l-itbà?) yaşıl yoşul Kaş. III 19; III 162 (qcü wit), and five o.o., twice as ya:şıl, for 7II zo see yipgil: KB (the brown earth and) yaşıl kök “the blue sky” 3, zz, 127, 1002; (the dry trees) tonandı yaşıl “have clothed themselves in green” 67; o.o. 68, 120, etc.: Xin(?) Tef. yaşıl “green” 148: xiv Muh. al-axdar ya:şı:l, şadidu”l-xudra yam ya:şıl Mel, 68, 2-6; Rif. 168; (under “places”, etc.) xadir nadir 'grassland' ya:şı:l 76, 9; 180: Çağ. xv ff. yaşıl rang-i sabza “green”, yaşıl baş “the name of a kind of duck' San. 332v. 27: Xwar. xiv yaşıl “green” Qutb 74, Nahc. 37, 16: Kom. xiv ditto CCI; Gr.: Kip. xit al-axdar ya:şıl, intensified form ya:m ya:şıl Hou. 31, 3-8: xiv ya:gil al-axdar mina'l-alwün and ya:ş is used of “green plants” İ4. 94: xv “bright green” yam yaşıl, more correctly yap yaşıl Kav. s, 8; al-axdar yaşıl do. 64, 15; Tuh. 48. 2; 83b. 7: Osm. xiv to xvi yaşıl (in spellings indicating back vowels) 'green'; in several texts T TS 1 793; II 1011; III 779; IV 855. D ya:şlığ P.N./A. fr. ya:ş in all its meanings; s.i.s.m.l., often for 'filled with tears; in SE "Türki yaşlık means both “age, aged” and  Bud. uzun ózlüg yaşlığ “ong-lived” Suv. 474,21; kısğa özlüğ yaşlığ 'short-lived' U II 42, 27-8—yaşlığ kózin 'with eyes filled with tears! U III 23, 2 (1); 35, 34; TT X 297 (ığla:-), etc.: Civ. (a slave girl) iki yegirmi yaşlığ “aged twelve! USp. 110, 2-3: Xak. xi yaşlığ kö:z “a tearful (al-'abri) eye”, yaşlığ er 'an aged (al-musinm) man”, also “aged” of any animal; originally ya:şlığ Kaş, IIl 42; a.o. III 157 (mam): KB kisga yaşlığ 964; a.o. 348 (ökünçsüz): Çağ. xv ff. yaşlığ çufüliyat 'childhood, youth' (quotns., for A.N. yaşlık), and they say kiçik yaşlığ xurd sál “young”, and biyik (so read) yaşlığ kuhan sal 'aged' San. 332v. 21: Xwar. xiv uluğ yaşlığ 'elderly Qutb 74; Nahe. $6, 7; other phr. do. 65, 12; 340; 8: . Kom. xiv “a tearful eye” yaşlı köz CCG; Gr Dis. V. YSLS yışıl- See 181l-. VUD yuşul- Pass. f. of yuş-, pec. to Kaş. but the entry in xiv Muh.(?) insakaba'l-mà' “of water, to be poured out' yu:sla:- (sic), Rif. 105 (only) may be a muddled reminiscence of it. The text of XKaş. is in some confusion and this has led to multiple entries in Atalay's Index. Xak. xı ka:n yuşuldı: “the blood gushed (na'ara) from the vvound” (etc.) (yusulu:r, yusulma:k; yigil- follows here); and also when vinegar and beer (al-mizr, MS. al-muri) have been poured (suyyıla) out of the tap of a large jar one says yuşuldi: Kaş, III 79; bu: ba:ş ol ka:nı: yuşulğa:n 'blood is constantly streaming (yasil) from this wound' III 535; o.o. II 128, 4; III 102, zo. D ya:şla:- Den. V. fr. ya:ş: s.i.s.m.L, but meaning “to be moist, to pour with tears”, etc. Xak. xı at yaşla:dı: “the horse (etc.) grazed on fresh vegetation (ibtagala) in the spring”, original ya:şla:dı: but with a shortened vowel like other V.s of similar form (axasıdtihi) Kaş. III 308 (yaşlar, yaşla:ma:k). Dis. YŞM D yışım prob. N.S.A. fr. *yis- (?18-), cf. yışığ, which seems to have a .cognate meaning; lit. perhaps “a single act of twisting or winding"; the semantic connection w. yışıl- (1511-) is less obvious. Survives only(?) in NE Bar. yişim “stockings” R III 529, but a l.-w. in Pe. as işim “the leather breeches worn by wrestlers' and in other languages, see Doerfer ll 647. Xak. xı yışım “the gaiters (al-ránat) worn on the lower part of the legs in cold vveather” Kaş. III 19: xiv Müh. al-ránay yışım Mel. 67, 9 (MSS. yaşım), Rif. 165: Kap. xui al-ránát vgrrm ya “ni rafiqu'l- (MS. ragiqu'l-) -siráwil that is “a sort of trousers! Hou. PM 13: xiv işim al-ránát İd. 14; yışım ditto 94. E Tris. V. YSMD yışımlan- Hap. leg.; Refl. Den. V. fr. yışım, Xak, xı er yışımlandı: “the man wore  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1023 
     
   
   
     gaiters. (di-ranan), they are at-Jarahican (Pe. L-vv. der. fr. faráhixtan “to suspend") Kaş. III 115 (yışımlanu:r, yışımlanma:k, corrected fr. -me:k). Dis. YSN D yaşın Dev. N. fr. yaşu:-, "lightning". S.i.s.m.l. in NE, SC, NW. Uy£. vii fft. Man.-A yasin teprice 'like the god of lightning' M I 25, 34: Man. yaşın tepri M II qo, 3: Bud. (Sanskrit lost) ne:p yaşın yaşna:ma:z “the lightning does not flash” TT VIII A.8 (mistranslated): Xak. xı yaşın al-barq “lightning” Kaş. III 22 (prov., see 1 ka:ş), o.o. I 236, 1 (at-); JI 356 (yasnat-); IJI 310 (yaşna:-): KB 86 (tu:ğ): Çağ. xv ff. ışın barq San. 106v. 24 (quotns.), yaşın barq 332v. 27 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv ditto MN 227: Kip. xin al-barq ya:şın (; Tkm. yuldirim) Hou. 5, 10: xiv yaşın al-sá'iga “thunderbolt” İd. 94; Bul. 3, 2. S yüsep See üsep. Dis. V. YSND yaşna:- Den. V. fr. yaşın (of lightning) “to flash”: s.i.s.m.l. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. TT VIII 4.8 (yaşın): Xak. xı yaşın yaşna:dı: “the lightning flashed” (5ariqa), also used of a polished brass basin, mirror, and the like when they shone (/ama"a) Kaş. III 310 (yaşna:r, yaşna:ma:k), o.o. 7 236, 1 (at-); İİİ 319, 14: KB 86 (tu:ğ): xin(?) Tef. yaşna- “to shine' 149: Çağ. xv ff. işne- (sc) duruxşidan "to shine” San. xosv. 9 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv (VU) işne- “to shine” MN 141. D yaşnat- Caus. f. of yagna:-; s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı tepri: yaşın yaşnattı: “God made the lightning flash” (aima'a'I-barq); also used of a man when he polished (a/ra"a) a sword or anything that has a bright surface or high polish (barig wa tald”lu”) Kaş. II 356 (verse; no Aor. or İnfin.): Çağ. xv ff. işnet- (sic) duruxşün kardan “to polish' San. 1osv. 28. Tris. YSN D yaşınlığ Hap. leg.?; P.N./A. fr. yaşın. Xak. xı yaşınlığ bulit sahaba dát barq "a thunder-cloud” Kaş. III so. Tris. V. YŞND yaşa:pur- Hap. leg.; presumably crasis of *yasa:ngur-, an Inchoative f., but it cannot, as Kag.'s translation suggests, be connected both vv. ya:ş and vv. yaşu:-. Xak. xı anın kö:zi: yaşa:purdı: “his eyes were dazzled by the brightness of the sun (ismadarra . . . min gu'ü'i'l-gams) and tears (al-'abra) streamed from ma III 407 (yaşa:purur, yaşa:purma:k). Dis. YŞR D yaşru: (yaşuru:) Ger. of yaşur- used as an Adj./Adv.; 'secret(ly), furtive(ly)'. As such n.o.a.b., but cognate forms vv. the same meaning survive in NC Kir. Şaşırın: Kzx. jasirin: Uzb. yaşirin: NW Kk. laşırın, Kaz. yageren; Kumyk yaşırtğın: SW Tkm. yasirrn, Uyğ. vini ff. Bud. yaşuru “secretly” U II 23, 13; İH 85, 18 (tancu:la:-): Xak. xr one says ol yaşru: keldi: “he came secretly' (muxtafiya(n)); and yagru: 1:5 “a secret (a/ladi yusarr fihi) matter' Kaş. III 31: KB éligke baka kördi yaşru közin "he looked furtively at the king” 770: xın(?) Ar. Kamuğ yaşru işin bolup öşkör3 “vrhen all your private affairs become public” ızı: Tef. yaşru “secretİy, a secret” 149: (Çağ. xv ff. yaşurun maxfi 'hidden, secret! Vel. 403 (quotn.), yaşurun (spelt) maxfi wa pinhàn ('secret") San. 332v. 25 (quotn.)): Xwar. xiv yaşru/yaşrun *secretly, privately! Qutb 74: Kom. xiv ditto yaşırı CCI; Gr. Dis. V. YSRD yaşar- (yaşa:r-) Intrans. Den. V. fr. ya:$; s.i.s.m.l. vv. the usual phonetic changes, and several meanings of which "to be, or become, green” and “to be, or become, moist are the commonest. Türkü vii ff. Man. evin (so read) yaşarur yadılur “the crops become green and spread” M III 20, 10-11 (i): Uy£. vı ff. Civ. yağız yer yüzi yaşardı “the surface of the brown earth became green” TT 1 4; bu sögüt yaşarıp amtı kurımış “this tree was once green but has now become dry” VII 28, 8: Xak. xı ot yaşardı: “the vegetation was, or became, green” (zixdarra) Kaş. III 68 (yaşardı:, yaşa:rur, yaşarma:k, sic); a.o. II 79, 18: KB (wherever Mars looks) yaşarmus kurir 1535: xilr(?) Tef. yaşar- “to become green” 148: Çağ. xv ff. yaşar- of the eye, “to shed tears' (aşk rixtan) and “to be tear-stained” (aşk-dlüd şudan), in this meaning the word “eye” must be mentioned; also namnák şudan “to be moist' Sar. 332r. 19 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv yaşar- “to become green Quib 74: Kip. xiv ya:şar- ixdarra . . . közi: yaşardı: “his eyes shed tears” (dami'at) İd. 94: xv dami'a yaşar- Tuh. 16a. 2; from yaşıl, yasar- 83b. 7; from yas, yaşar- 84a. 4. D yaşur- Caus. f. of yag- , “to hide (something Acc.) and the like. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. the usual phonetic changes; in SW only 'Tkm. yasir-. See yaşru: and cf. kizle:-. Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. Suv. 138, 1-2 (ört-): Xak. xı ol ne:y yaşurdi: “he hid (katama) the thing” Kaş. III 68 (yaşurur, yaşurma:k), ol er ol nepin yaşurğa:n “that man is in the habit of hiding (kitmün) his property! III 53; a.o. İl 79, 19 (amara “to cover over): xiv Muh. xaba'a “to conceal ya:şur- Mel. 25, ır, Rif. 108; (al-ixtifd "to hide” (Intrans.) ya:şurmak 37, 8; yasunmak (correctly) 123): Çağ. xv ff. yaşur- (-ay, etc.) gizle- “to hide” Vel. 404; yaşur- (spelt) pinhàn kardan "to hide” Sam. 332v. 1 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 74: Kom. xiv “to hide” yaşır- CCI, CCG; Gr. 118 (quotns.): Kip. xiv yagur- katama, originally yaşdur- /d. 94: xv Kav. 74, rz (sakla:-); Tuh. 14b. 9 (kizle:-): Osm. xiv to xvi (only) yaşur- “to conceal'; fairly common TTS I 794; Hl 1012; IV 854. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1024 
     
   
   
      yaşarttı: “ (xaddara) Kaş. III 436 (yaşartur, yaşartma:k): (xın(?) Tef. yaşartdır- same meaning 148): Çağ. xv ff. yaşart- (spelt) Caus. f., aşh-dlüd hardan çaşm wa namnák süxtan “to make the eyes tear-stained; to moisten” San. 332r. 29. D yaşruş- Hap. leg.?; Co-op. f. of yaşur-. Xak. xı ola:r (ikki:) só:züg yaşruşdı: "those two agreed to conceal (tatcáfa'à hatmün) the statement” Kaş. III 101 (yaşruşu:r, yaşruşma:k). Tris. YŞR D yaşuru: See yagru:. D yaşurukı: Hap. leg.?, N./A.S. fr. yasuru:; “secret, private”. Uyğ.vın ff. Civ. TT 1 215218 (üpür-). Dis. V. YSSD yaşsa:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of yas-. Xak. . xı ol mendin yaşsa:dı: “he wished to hide (yaxtafi) from me" Kaş. III 3os5 (yaşsa:r, yasgsa:ma:k; later misvocalized yaşısa:-). Mon. YY ya:y there is utter confusion in the Turkish languages about the words for “spring” and “summer”. Since ya:z, q.v., must originally have meant “summer”, ya:y must originally have meant “spring”, which is Kaş.”s translation in the main entry and is confirmed by its use in antithesis to kü:z “autumn” in one passage. But yayla:-, q.v., always meant “to spend the summer (somewhere), and already in Kaş. ya:y is used for 'summer', in antithesis to kış *winter,' in some verses. In modern languages the position is even more confusing; ya:z s.i.a.m.l, but ya:y has disappeared fr. some, and in others the meanings of the two words have become inverted. "The following is a representative selection of the words for 'spring' and “summer,, in that order, in modern languages:—NE Khak. casxı, çayxı, Tuv. cas, çay: SE Türki erte yaz, yaz: NC Kır. )az, jay: Kzx. jazfituri, jaz: SC Uzb. bahor(Pe.)/ küklam, yoz: NW Kk. bahar/kóklem, jaz; Kaz. yaz, cey; Kumyk yazbas, yaz; Nog. yazlık, yaz: SW Az. bahar/yaz, yay; Osm. ilk bahar (yay being a Sec. f. of ya: 'a bow"), yaz, Tkm. bahar[ya:z, tomus. See yaykx.. "Türkü vir yayın süledim “1 made an expedition (against him) in the spring” II E 39; yay bolsar '*when spring comes! I] W 3: Uy£. vir yay anta: yayladım “1 spent the spring (or summer?) there' Su. W 8 (the next sentence refers to autumn): vir ff. Bud. ötrü yaylı kışlı tört öd bolur 'thereupon the four seasons come into existence, (beginning with) spring and (ending with) winter' (or 'summer and vvinter”?) TT VI 324-5; (in a list of the four seasons of three months each) yazk1 ód . yay öd ... küz ód . . kışkı öd Suv. 589, 9 ff.: xiv CAin.-Uyğ. Dict. “summer” yay  the rain made th« vegetation green” ipid Pt d ya:y al-rabi" I gö, 8; but in I 13, 3: 82, 13; etc., most of which are quotns. fr. the »um” between summer and winter, it is translated a/-sayf “summer” and stands in antithesis to kış: K.B 367 (kış), 1052: xru(?) Tef. yay kış 135: xiv Muh. al-rabii ya:z, al-şayf ya:y Mel. 79, 17; Rif. 184: Çağ. xv ff. yay ((1) 'bow' (ya:)); (2) fasl-i tabıstün 'summer” (3) z/m-: yada “the science of using rainstones' (see 2 ya:t) because the principal need for this science is in the e San. 340v. 26: Xwar. xiv kış yay. . küz yaz Qutb 64: Kom. xiv 'summer' yay CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv ya:y faslu'l-gayf İd. 94; al-qayz “the hot season' (summer) ya:y Bul. 13, 16: xv al-rabi" ya:y Kav. 36, 15; sayf yay/lyaz Tuh. 22b. 3: Osm. xrv ff. yay is the standard word for “summer” till xvı and survived till xvrm TTS 1 893; II 1021; İİİ 787; IV 861. Mon. V. YY?S 1 yay- “to shake' and the like; it is very possible that this is merely a Sec. f. of yan-, q.v.; in Türkü it certainly is. N.o.a.b.?; all modern forms of yay- seem to be Sec. f.s of ya:d-. Türkü vır ff. Man. yaruk kelip tüneriğiğ yayduk üçün “because the light has come and routed the darkness” M 1II 6, 2-4 (v): Xak. xı ol su:vda: to:nuğ yaydı: “he rinsed (ğarraka) the garment in the water'; and one says ol menip köpül yaydı: mayyala qalbi “he moved my heart (etc.) to sympathy”, and yél yığa:çığ yaydı: “the wind. shook (harrakat) the tree' Kaş. III 246 (yaya:r, yayma:k); a.o. III 245, 17: Çağ. xv ff. yay(spelt) ((1) see ya:d-), (z) möst barham zadan “to beat up curdled milk' Sar. 340V. 1 (ct. yayığ): Kip. xiv yay- harrada 'alá'L-say" “to incite (someone) to do something" ld. 100: Osm. xiv ff. yay- (1) “to stir” (the heart and mind) in one xiv text; (2) translating “to churn' in three Pe. dicts. T T5 II 1023; III 791; IV 863. $ 2 yay- See ya:d-. S yoy- See yo:d-. Dis. YYA VU yaya: pec. to Kaş.: perhaps a quasionomatopoeic. Osm., etc. yaya is a Sec. f. of yada:ğ. Xak. xı yaya: alyatu'l-insán xaşşata(n) “the buttocks', especially of a man Kaş. İH 26; 170 (both main entries). Dis. V. YYD- / ?E yayıt- See yayıl- Uy. E D yaytur- Hap.leg.; Caus.f. of 1 yay-. Xak. xı ol to:nın suvda: yayturdi: “he ordered that his garment should be rinsed (5:-xadxada) in the water' , also used for anything that is rinsed or shaken (yuharrak) Kaş. Il] 100 (yayturur, yayturma:k).  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1025 
     
   
   
     PEE D yayığ Dev. N./A. fr. 1 yay-; lit. “shaking” or the like, used metaph. for 'unstable, fickle'. In the MS. of Kaş. the second syllable of both the words quoted was originally unvocalized ; the second was later vocalized yayık, but there is no reasonable doubt that it was actually yayuk, Pass. Dev. N./A. lit. 'shaken'; this is no doubt the word quoted, w. the usual vocalic change, in Çağ. The vocalization of the parallel quoted was no doubt the same. "The latter word survives in SW Osm., Tkm. yayık “a churn'; yayık “spread out; flood vvater” in NE Alt. R III 75 is a Sec. f. of *yaduk; Yayık, a name for the Ural River, is a local, pre- Turkish name, see Studies, p. 124. Xak. xi yayığ (MS. yalıy.ğ) kişi: al-raculu'l-mudtaribu”İ-xuluq törata(n) yamil ila hàdà wa fawra(n) ila dálika "a man of unstable character vvho inclines sometimes in this direction and sometimes in that”, yayuk (MS. yayı) kişi: alternative form for yayığ, this is like the phr. bışığ et 'cooked (al-matbüx) meat', biguk (MS. bigik) alternative form Kaş. III 23: KB yayığ *fickle' (often corrupted to yatığ, fayığ, etc. in the Vienna MS.) is the stock epithet of kut and dawlat “luck, fortune' 91, 690, 695, 716, etc., and dunyà and ağun “this world" 398 (uktur-), 399 (érsel), 1075, etc.; (do not believe in the luck of this world . . .) kiling1 yayığ “its behaviour is fickle' 5175; similar phr. of a man 3542: Çağ. xv ff. yayık (spelt) “a vessel (zarf) into. which they pour milk, which they then beat up and fresh butter emerges'; Pe. nahra, Ar. mimxada 'churn' San. 341r. 11. D yayık (yayuk) See yayığ. D yaykı: N./A.S. fr. ya:y. Survives in NE "Tuv. cayğı “summer” (season, etc.). Uyğ. vir ff. Civ. (in an enumeration of the four seasons, each of three months; yazkı “spring”) yaykı “summer” (küzki, kışkı) TT VII 38, 1 ff.: Xak. xı KB (of the signs of the zodiac, three are spring (yazkı) constellations) üçi yaykı “three summer ones” (three küzki and three kışkı) 142: xıı1(?) ( At. (luck is) yayınkı buhit teg ya tüş teg xali “as unsubstantial as a summer cloud or a dream” 223); Tef. yaykı yemiş “summer fruit” (does not come in the cold of winter) 136. S yayğuk See yadğuk. - Dis. V. YYĞD yayık- Intrans. Den. V. fr. ya:y, s.i.s.m. NE 1 yayık- “to become hot, turn to summer” R III 76. Xak. xı ö:d yayıktı: şöra”)-zamün rabi' "the season of spring arrived” Kaş. 111 191 (yayıka:r, yayıkma:k). D yayka:- Den. V. fr. yayuk, not noted before the medieval period, but see yaykal-, yaykan-. Survives, usually meaning “to shake”, esp. “to shake the head” in NE yayka-/ yaykka- F 77] 6-8: NC Kir., Kzx. (here "ro butt) jayka-: SW Tkm. yayka-; in Osm. yika- (sic) originally *to rinse' (cf. 1 yay-) now means, more generally, “to wash'. Kip. to ShaRe, Set Hi IDOlUIOD. Şayka- Iun. 14D. 13: Osm. xviff. yayka- 'to wash', in several texts, mainly dicts. 773 1804; 11 1022; III 789. D yaykal- Pass. f. of yayka:-: s.i.s.m.l., usually for "to be shaken, to sway'. Uyğ. viii ff. Man. [gap] ógüz bolup yaykalulgapl ?meaning TT LX 68: Xak. xi su:v yaykaldi: “the water was disturbed" (idtaraba) ; also used of any liquid when it was disturbed; and one says metaph.! (bihi yuşabbah) of a man who is inclined towards (a/-mayydl) anything er kópli: yayıldı:, yaykaldı:, /u£a da'ifa fihi "a weaker expression for this” Kaş. III 108 (yaykalu:r, yaykalma:k): Çağ. xvíff. yaykalbahn pahn raftan wa ba-nüz xirümidan “to walk haughtily, strut proudly' San. 340v. 17 (quotn.): (Kip. see yaykan-). D yaykan- Refl. f. of yayka:-; s.i.s.m.l. Uyğ. vini ff. Man.-A M III vo, 5-6 (i) (bulğa:-): Bud. (the bright light of the Buddha...) yaykanu yaltırıyu kararığ alku kéterdi “shimmering(?) and shining, has driven away all the darkness! TT VI 422 (v.1.): Kip. xiv yaykan- (one MS. yaykal-) idtaraba'l-makàn bil-möl-muğarriq "of a place, to be flooded' İd. 100: Ösm. xiv, xv yaykan- (of the sea) “to be rough'; (of a ship) 'to be tossed about'; (of a man) 'to be disturbed'; in three texts T T.S 7 804; xviii yaykan- (spelt) in Rümi, tan gustan wa iğtisal “to wash oneself! San. 340v. 23. Tris. YYG D yayığlık Hap. leg.?, A.N. fr. yayığ. Xak. xı KB yayığlık yok erse bu érsellikip “if this lethargy of yours is not (mere) instability” (i.e. a passing phase; what was the point of your coming ?) 715. Dis. YYL D yayla:ğ Dev. N. (Conc. N.) fr. yayla:- ; "a place where one spends the summer, in antithesis to kigla:B. S.i.a.m.l.g. w. the usual phonetic changes. A cognate word yaylık, A.N. (Conc. N.) fr. ya:y vv. müch the same meaning, is n.o.a.b. Türkü vırı ff. (I am an eagle) yaşıl kaya: yaylağım “my .summer station is a green rock” JrkB sı, o.o. do. 56 (yağa:k), 62 (1 a:ğ-): Uyğ. vurff. Bud. (when building a house, you must build) İkidin tep yaylık “an identical summer rooms on both sides! (north and south) TT VI 84; 2.0. Hüen-ts. 1967 (ağtur-): Xak. xı yayla:ğ al-muştüf “a summer residence” Kaş. III 47; o.o. 1 13, 3: II 355 (yazlat-), ITİ 265 (küze:-): xiv Muh. al-maşif “summer residence' ya:yla:k Mel. 76, 1; ya:yla:ğ Rif. 179: Çağ. xv ff. yaylak ditto San. 17r. 23: Kip. xiv yaylak al-maşif İd. ıoo. D yaylık See yayla:ğ Uyğ. Dis. V. YYLD 1 yayıl- Pass. f. of 1 yay-, n.o.a.b. Uyğ. vur ff. Bud. (may the task which I ought to 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1026 
     
   
   
       formance) /7 1 VIII E.42; (in the tollowing line, where the same Sanskrit words are used in the sentence *may the task which I ought not to perform not miscarry (sic) at the time of performance” the MS. has yayıtmağay, this 1s prob. a scribal error, but a Caus. instead of a Pass. form at this point is not impossible); (the brown earth shakes like this) ógüzler köller yayılıp “the (waters of the) rivers and lakes are disturbed' Suv. 621, $: Civ. (your illnesses have become more severe) edin tavarıp yayıldı “your property (Hend.) has been upset” TT 7 5o (this might be a Sec. f. of yadıldı “has been dissipated”): Xak. xı yığa:ç yayıldı: “the tree svvayed” ('áfat) in the wind, etc. , also used of anything which rocked or shook on itself with a swaying motion (ihtazza wa taharraka "ald nafsiht bi-tamáyul ; followed by an example of 2 yayıl-) Kaş. 111 191 (yayılu:r, yayilma:k); yayılğa:n kişi: “an irresolute man vvho does not persist in a consistent line of conduct” (mudtaribu'l-'azm là yatbut 'alà amr wàlid) III 55; o.o. I 412, zz, III 108 (yaykal-): Kip. xiv yayıl- taharrada huma soa'nba'ata “to be incited or roused' . 100. S 2 yayıl- See yadıl-. D yayla:- Den. V. fr. ya:y; 'to settle (somewhere) for the summer; to spend the summer (somewhere)'. S.i.m.m.l.g. w. the usual phonetic changes. Türkü vırı ff. yaylayu:r turu:rmen 'I stay there for the summer” İrkB 62; a.o. do. 64 (yağaklığ): Uyğ. vin yayladım “1 spent the summer (there) Şu. E9; S2; W 3(?); a.o. VV 8 (ya:y): Xak. xı er ta:ğda: yayla:dı: “the man spent the summer (taşayyafa) in the mountains! Kaş. 7I] 311 (yayla:r, yayla:ma:k): xiv Muh.(?) qadda'l-sayf “to spend the whole summer” ya:yla:Rif. 114: Çağ. xv ff. yayla- “to go to a yaylak (1.-w. in Pe.)”, that is “to spend the summer in cool places” San. 340v. 25: Kom. xiv “to spend the summer! yay yayla- CCG; Gr.: Kip. xiv şayyafa ya:yla- Bul. 53v.: Osm. xiv ff. yayla- 'to spend the summer', also metaph. “to live in an agreeable place” , common T'T'S 1 805; II 1023; İİ 789; IV 862. D yaylat- Hap. leg.?; Caus. f. of yayla:-. Xak. xı ol anı: ta:ğda: yaylattı: “he settled him for the summer (aqdmağhu wa şayyafahu) in the mountains” Kaş. I] 357 (yaylatu:r, yaylatma:k). Dis. YYM VUD yayım Hap. leg.; the second consonant is undotted, but must be -y- as it is in the same section as yayığ and yayuk, completely unvocalized. Presumably N.S.A. fr. 1 yay-, although the semantic connection is obscure. Xak. xı yayım “cotton seed” (5azrı”/-kattün), it is a seed like sesame-seed except that it is red; its oil is burnt in lamps (yusrac bi-duhnihi) Kaş. 111 24.  xı oi suvda: to:n yayındı: "he made it his business to rinse (hadhada) his garment in water' Kaş. III 86 (yayınu:r, yayınma:k). Mon. YZ ya:z (ü-) originally “summer”, later sometimes “spring”: see ya:y for its history and modern forms and meanings. A very early l.-w. in Hungarian as nyár. Türkü vii (after spending the winter (kışlap) at Amğa: korığı:) yazi:pa: “in the summer” (we attacked the Oğuz) 2 N 8 (and I7 E 31); kisin . . . yazın “in the winter .. . in the summer” J/ S 2: Uy£. vir ff. Civ. (I will pay the outstanding debt) yaz küz "in the summer or autumn” US. 12, 7: xiv. Chin.-Uyg. Dict. “spring” yaz Ligeti 282: Xak. xı ya:z al-sayf “summer” Kaş. III 159 (prov.); o.o. 17 172, 4 (kelig); Z/7 16 (1 yazuk): KB yaruk yaz 'the bright spring' (sic, has strung its bow) 65: xin(?) At. kelür küz keçer yaz “autumn comes and summer passes! 471: xiv Muh. al-rabi" “spring” ya:z Mel. 79, 15; Rif. 184: Caf. xv ff. yaz 'the first six months of the year' (i.e. one starting at the vernal equinox); also 'the three months of spring” (bahár) San. 330v. 19 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv yaz Qutb 76, MN 83, etc. (the contexts suggest “spring”, not “summer”: Kom. xiv “spring” yaz CCG; Gr. rg (quotns.): Kip. xiv. ya:z faslu'l-rabi' İd. 93; Bul. 13, 15: xv al-sayf ya:z Kav. 36, 15; sayf (yayf) yaz Tuh. 22b. 3: Osm. xiv ff. yaz, normally “summer”, is noted in several texts, mainly dicts., down to XVII as meaning “spring” TTS II 1025; III 790; IV 863. 1 y€:z a kind of plant; the contexts suggest that this word rather than 2 yez (Arat's choice) should be read in the Uyğ. texts below. N.o.a.b. in Turkish but perhaps a l.-w. in the Pe. word yaz 'a thorny plant set round tents as a fence; the plant fumöm” Steingass 1530 (Red. translates tumám “the grass Panicum dichotomum”). | UyB. vinff. Civ. yez occurs in two almost identical lists of things to be offered to demons, several of them unidentified Chinese l.-w.s, bracketed words being peculiar to one list only, “seven Zasuy, seven handfuls of barley flour, seven pieces of raw and cooked meat, (three fowls), green beans, (one reed, two flowers, one vessel of (?) water, one handful(?) of) mingig (?flour), one yéz, a torch (or lamp, yula), paper, copper (bakır, or "liver bağır), elan, wheatmeal, flowers, fruit, milk, wine, beer' TT VII 24, 911.;25,9ff.; Kas.'s translation would suit well here: Xak. xı yé:z a/-qayşüm 'southernwood, Artemisia abrotonon', a plant thinner (adaqq) and more delicate than a reed (al-qasab); curtains and screens (al-qirüm swa'l-sutra) are made from it by the nomads Kaş. /II 143. ?F 2 yez some kind of copper alloy, perhaps *brass'; as this is not recorded before xiv it is prima facie a 1.-vv., but it occurs in Mong. as ces the standard word for “copper”, which is   
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1027 
     
   
   
       and, according to Dr. Kóna-1as, in Ugrian) Mordvin as $erd, which would show that it existed at a very early period. It survives in NE Alt., Koib., Küer., Leb., Tel. yes/yés; Khak. çis, Tuv. ces “copper”. Cf. bakir, tu:ç. Kom. xiv yez 'pinchbeck' CCI; 'brass' CCG, Gr.: Kip. xiv al-nuhásu'l-agfar “brass” yez Bul. 4, 9; (yüz “a hundred'; yüz “a face") yüz al-nuhásu'l-agsfar ayda(n) Id. 93; the ayda(n) should follow the second entry and the third be corrected to yez. 1 yü:z “a hundred', sometimes used less precisely for “a great many”. C.i.a.p.a.]l. vv. the usual phonetic changes; in Quv. çör (ie. Syér), Ash. XIII 105. Türkü vır yüz artuk oku:n *with more than a hundred arrows! 7 E 33; yüzçe eren “about a hundred men” 77 E 37: VIII ff. (one spiraea) yüz boltu: “became a hundred” IrkB 32; yüz altu:n “a hundred gold coins! Toy. IV r. 3-4 (ET Y II 18o): Man. yüz artukı kirk tümen '1,400,000' Chuas. I ız: UyĞğ. vir yüz yıl “a hundred years” Su. N 3: vin ff. Man.-A beş yüz artukı eki otuzunç lağzın yılka “in the 522nd, a Swine, year” M I 12, 15-16; Bud. beş yüz “five hundred” PP 22,8; a.o.o.: Civ. yüz törlügin “ina hundred (i.e. very many) vvays” TT I 165; a.o.o.: O, Kir. ix ff. yüz “a hundred' Mal. 9, 3(?); ro, 2: Xak. xı Kaş. 1 8o (11a:8), n.m.e.: KB asğı yüz ol “t has very many advantages' 270: XIV. Muh. müa '100' yü:z Mel. 81, 15; Rif. 187: Çağ. xv ff. yüz .. . (2) “adad şad *100' San. 343r. 5 (quotn.): Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb facsimile sov. 9; MN 78, etc.: Kip. xii müva yüz Hou. 22, 17: xıv İd. 93; Bul. ız, 14: Xv Kav. 38, 19; 65, 10; Tu. 6ob, 11. 2 yü:z (f-) “the face”, C.i.a.p.a.l. vv. the usual phonetic changes; in Çuv. nér, “appearance, beauty”, Ash. LX $9; a First Period l.-w. in Mong. as nur (Haenisch 117)/mifur (Kore. 649, Haltod 139); in some modern languages w. extended meanings like “surface” and in Osm. 'effrontery; cause', etc. Exceptionally in NE Tuv. çüs is “a joint', and “face” şıray (Mong. l-w.) Cf. bet, yüzegü:. Türkü vri (of the arrows) yüzine: (so read) başına: bir te[gmedi:] “not one reached his face or head” 1 E 33: vı ff, (it is better to know one man by his name) mip kişi: yüzi:n biligi:nçe: "than a thousand men by sight” Tun. 1 IIa. 4-S (ETY II ga): Man. (sufferings) yüzümüz utruluğ *which confront us” TT II 6, 6: Uyğ. vin ff. Man.-A (I wish to see your lovely, shining, warm) yüzüpüzen “face” M I ro, 9: Man. köğ (sc) kalığ yüzinte “facing the firmament' TT III 129: Bud. munuy yüzin “this man's face” PP 63, 1; o.o. U III 14, iz (külçir-), etc.: Civ. yağız yer yüzi “the surface of the brown earth” TT 7 4; o.o. VII 23, 1 etc.: Xak. xı yü:z al-wach “the face” Kaş. III 143 (prov.), over 50 o.o., same translation: KB evipe. yüz urdı “he faced homewards' 951; evrer yüzin “he turns away his face” 403; a.o.o.: xıu(?) At. rasüllar ürüp yüz “the prophets (have) white (i.e. pure) faces” 25; o.o. 159 (at-), etc.; Tef. yüz “face” 165: xiv Muh. (quotn.): Xwar. xim ditto “A/ 14, etc.: xiv ditto Qutb 89; MN 41, etc.; Nahc. 9, 8 etc.: Kom. xiv ditto CCG; Gr.: Kip. xit macmü'u'l-wach "the face as a whole! yüz Hou. 20,8: xiv yüz al-tach İd. 93: xv Kav. 60, 13; Tuh. 38a. ro a.o.o.: Osm. xiv ff. yüz common in phr. and idioms TT'S 7 856 ff.; 1I 1085 ff.; III 835 ff.; IV 917 ff. Mon. V. YZ1 yaz- the general connotation is 'to reduce (something cc.) to a simpler form”, with such particular applications as “to untie; to unfold; to dissolve', and the like. Its extended meanings tend to converge w. those of ya:d- and yas-, in the SC Uzb. dict. yoz- (1 yaz-) and yoy- (ya:d-) have several common meanings; but this V. prob. s.i.a.m.lg. vv. the usual phonetic changes. Uyğ. vı ff. Civ. isig suvka yazip 'dissolving it in hot water' H I 115; suvta yazıp do. 118: Xak. xı ol tüğü:n yazdı: “he untied (halla) the knot Kaş. III 59 (3, 2 yaz- follow); tilin tüğmiş tışın yazma:s “vhat has been tied by the tongue you cannot untie with the teeth' 77 zo, 19; a.o. III 111 (yazlın-): KB çeçek yazdı yüz “the flowers unfolded their faces! 80; yaz “untie” (with a single word a knot of countless words) 172; o.o. 283 (berk), 561, 791, 1809, etc.: Xill(?) At. 222 (kug-); Tef. yaz- “to untie, loosen” 133: Çağ. xv ff. yaz. . . (3) kugüdan “to open”, (4) şurü" kardan “to begin” San. 329v. 26 (quotns.): Kom. xiv yaz- “to disentangle CCG, Gr.: Kip. xiv yaz- habaga “to break wind' İd. 93; arxd "to İoosen” yaz- Bul. 27v.: Osm. xiv to xvi yaz- “to loosen, to dissipate', etc.; in a few texts T TS 1 808; II 1026. 2 yaz- (ya:z-) basically Intrans., “to make an error or omission', hence more precisely 'to lose one's way; to offend; to sin', etc.; in a limited range of phr. e.g. yo:l yaz- 'to lose one's way' a quasi- Trans. V.; in this meaning only, syn. vv. &amp;:Z-. As an Aux. V. vv. preceding Ger., usually in -u:, it originally meant “İust to fail to (do something)' but later it sometimes came to mean rather 'to be on the point of (doing something)”. In the sense “to sin', etc. more or less syn., and often used in Hend., w. yapil-, q.v.; the Hend. jaz- japil- survives in NC Kzx. S.ia.m.g. except SE(?) vr. the usual phonetic changes as a main V., but as an Aux. V. only in a few languages including NW Nog., SW Osm.; in Tkm., unlike 1, 3 yaz-, it is ya:z-. Uyğ. vii sózipe: yazmayın tedi: ylapıllmlayı:n ?) tedi: "he said “1 will not offend against or transgress(?) your commands” ” Su. W 5: viri ff. Bud. (if you meditate thus every night) öd yazmatin(?) “vithout missing the (right) time” TT V 1o, ro8; öğke kapka baxşılarka yazdım yapitum . - . erser “if I have sinned (Hend.) against my mother, father, and teachers! U /İ 77, 16-17; 2.0. (evinlig): Civ. yazmış yazukka “the sin which he has committed” USp. 98, 3o; (my  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1028 
     
   
   
     dZ-J OI SO.ZIIIU C. yazdı: “he made a mistake (axto'a) in his statement”, and one says ol anı: uru: yazdı: kada an yadrubahu "he yust failed to hit him”, and ol keyikni: yazdı: “he missed his shot (axta'a . . . fi ramyihi) at the wild animal”: prov. yazma:s atım bolma:s yapilma:s bilge: bolma:s “there is no such thing as a marksman who never misses or a sage who never makes a mistake! Kaş. IJ] 59 (yaza:r, yazma:k); a.o. 7 92, 8: KB sözüğ sózlegüci azar ham yazar 'a speaker goes astray and makes mistakes' 205; (may God) ködezsü sanar öz tapuğ yazğuka “keep you from failing in your duty” 6oo, biliğ yazmadın “you did not lack wisdom' 2175: o.o. 2514-15 (uvsat-): xin(?) At. ne yazdı ajunka bu sáhib hunar *how did this master of skill offend against the world ?' 445; Tef. yaz- “to offend, sin against; just to fail to”, etc. 134: xiv Muh. axta'a ya:zMel. 22, 3; Rif. 102: Çağ. xv ff. yaz- .. . (2) xat” hardan "to make a mistake' San. 329v. 26 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv yaz- “to offend, be wanting; just to fail to” Qutb 76: Kom. XIV yaz- “to miss (a target) CCG ; Gr. 119 (quotn.): Kip. xim axía'a mina'l-xatà' ya:z- ^ Hou. 38, s: xiv. axfa”a yaz- Bul. 27v.: xv al-mugáriba "almost to do (something) is expressed by yaz- following a Ger. in -a:f-e:, e.g. “he almost fell” yıkıla: yazdı:, “he was on the point of death” öle: yazdı:, etc.; an alternative idiom is az kaldı: vv. the Dat. of the İnfin., yaz- is also used for axfa'a “to miss” esp. of a shooter, but not for axta'a in other senses, and in this sense only in a limited number of phr. Kav. 29, irf; wa ll -muqdriba yaz- ay kàda Tuh. 67b. 8; qüraba wa kada yaz-, e.g. tüşe yazdı "he almost fell” 69a. 4; a.o. 89a. 3: Osm. xiv yaz- “to sin; to miss”, in one text TTS II 1026: xvi yazyapil- 1 8o7. 3 yaz- “to vvrite” , basically Oğuz, but a very old word; a Second Period 1.-vv, in Mong. ciru“to draw, paint” ("to vvrite” is bigi-) and an early Turkish 1.-vv. in Hungarian (?through ProtoBulgar) as ír- “to write'; s.i.a.m.l.g. except NE, Quv. çır- (syır-) “to write" Ash. XII rır. Cf. biti:. Oğuz xı (after 1 yaz-) ol bitig yazdı: “he wrote a document” (or letter; kataba'l-kitàb) Kaş. III sg (2 yaz- follows): xıı(?) Tef. yaz- “to vvrite:: yazduk ("ve vvrote”) yani bitilmiş turur i35: Çağ. XV fİ. yaz- (1) miwigtan “to vvrite” San. 329v. 26 (quotns.): Xwar. xim ditto "AZ 34: xiv Quib 76: Kom. xiv ditto CCT, Gr.: Tkm. xıl kataba ya:z- (Kip. çız-) Hou. 33, ız, xatta mina'l-xatt "to vvrite” ditto 39, 20: XIV yaz- kataba İd. 93 (after yazu: « "yazığ al-kitaba), ditto Bul. 27v.; yör.: xv Kav. 10, 4; Tuh. 31a. rr, xatta yaz- 13b. ro: Osm. XIV ff. yaz- “to write', hence “to ornament, decorate' (e.g. a wall); common T'T'S 7 808; II 1026; III 791; IV 864. 1 yüz- “to swim'; s.ia.m.lg. vv. the usual phonetic changes, but SE Türki: SW Az. V 1. iVlan.-A Vi 17, 14 balı XAK. xı er suvda: yüzdi: “the man swam ("dma) in the vvater”, and one says irip yüzdi: “the matter and pus svvelled up (nafagat) in the body or wound' Kaş. [II 59 (2 yüz- follows); ka:nı: yüzüp turukti: “the blood in his wound congealed and hardened' (aqrana . . . wa taqula) 1192, 4:xıv Mu. al-sabaha "to swim' yüzmek (MSS. -mak) Mel. 34, 14; Rif. 120: Xwar. xiv yüz- “to swim' Qutb 89; MN 287: Kom. xiv ditto CCI; Gr.: Kip. xii sabaha yü:zHou. 35, 18; 'áma mina'l-'awm yüz- 42, 10: Xiv yüz- 'áma wa sabaha ld. 93: xv "üma mina'l-'awm fi'l-mà' yüz- Kas. 78, 9; Tuh. 25b. 12. 2 yüz- “to flay (a beast /cc.)' ; survives only(?) in SW Az. üz-: Osm., 'Tkm. yüz-. Cf. soy-. Xak. xı er tokum (MS. toğum) yüzdi: “the man slaughtered the beast and flayed it” (cazara . . . wa kagatahu—MS. kaşafahu) Kaş. III sş (yüze:r, yüzme:k), tokum yüzüp kudrukta: biçek sı:ma: 'when you flay (kaşatta) a beast, do not break your knife on its tail T 472, 26: (xını(?) Tef. yüz- “to disobey (one's father's directions)” is prob. an error for 2 yaz- 165). Dis. YZA D yazı: Dev. N. fr. 1 yaz-; “a broad open plain”. S.i.m.m.l.g. vv. the usual phonetic changes. Semantically close to yası. Türkü vin usually in geographical names; Santup yazı: “the Shantung plain” 7 S 3, 7 E 17, IT E 15; T 19: (VU) Yarış yazı: T 33, 365; a.o. 7 S 7; Il N s: Uyğ. vin (I routed them) yazı: kıltım “and scattered. them” (?) Şu. E 4: viri ff. Bud. (you must i ine that the place where you are sitting 1s) körkle yazı “a beautiful plain TT V 12, 123: Civ. (PU) Sıkap öğenteki yazılar “the open ground on the banks of the Sikap(?) brook” U3Sö. 55, 18; a.o. TT VII 42, 8 (be: Xak. xı yazı: al-fadà' “a large plain” Kaş. III 24; 0.0. 1 94, 3 (kerük); I 155 (alap), a/-fadö” is yazı: and when you wish to say “a very extensive plain'( fadà' afyak) you say yap yazı: 1 329, 8, yazın fi'l-barr “in the open country” 77] ır, 4; yazıda: /f?/-falàt “in the waterless plain” 255, 23: KB 21 (oprı:), 69, 96, 5370 (yunt): xin(?) Tef. yazı "open plain! 134: xiv Muh. ard wajfi'a "level ground' ya:zi: Mel. 74, ır, Rif. 177: Çağ. xv ff. yazı dagt-i xalà az sabz "a plain devoid of vegetation" San. 331r. 1 (quotn.): Xwar. xııı(?) tarlağusuz bir yazı yer érdi “it was an uncultivated plain” Oğ. 261 (or read yası?): xiv yazı “a plain” Qutb 76: Kom. xiv “meadovv” yaz (sic) CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kip. xii al-sahrá' “a broad plain” ya:zı: Hou. 5, 19; XIV ditto Jd. 93; al-falát yazı: Bul. 3, 8; xv ditto yazı yer Tuh. 27a. 3; şahrö” (kaya, which should translate şaxr/) yazı yer do. 22a. r: Osm. xiv ff. yazı “large plain, desert), etc.; commen TTS I 806; II 1024; III 79o; IV 63. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1029 
     
   
   
        yaza:- Den. V. fr. ya:Z; survives only(?) in NE Tuv. caza-, same meaning. Xak. xı er kışla:ğda: yaza:dı: “the man spent the spring (aqdma”l-rabi") in his winter quarters' (or somewhere else) Kaş. IJI 88 (yaza:r, yaza:ma:k).  yéze:- Hap. leg., but see yéze:k; follows yoza:-, which suggests that the text abways had yéze:-. Xak. xı yeze:k kamuğ yé:rig yéze:di: “the advance guard (a/-£al/"a) patrolled (tafat) the whole area to see whether there were any enemy in it” Kaş. III 88 (yéze:r, yéze:me:k; MS. here yeze:-). VU?D yoza:- Hap. leg., perhaps Den. V. fr. *yo:z Dev. N. fr. *yo:-, q.v. Xak. xı ko:y yoza:dı: “the ewe was barren” (hálat) and did not lamb, also used of any animal vvhen it is covered by the male and does not conceive, except the mare, of which one says bé: kisir boldi: when it was barren Kaş. III 88 (yoza:r, yoza:ma:k). Dis. YZC E yüzçi: See borçı:. Dis. V. YZDD 1 yaztur- Caus. f. of 1 yaz-; survives in SE Türki yazdur-: SC Uzb. yozdur-: NW Kk. jazdir- but in most modern languages such forms are Caus. f.s of 3 yaz-. Xak.xr ol apar tüğü:n yazturdı: "he ordered him to untie (ahallahu) the knot” Kaş. III 95 (followed by 2 yaztur-). D 2 yaztur- Caus. f. of 2 yaz-: survives in NW Kk. jazdir-; in Çağ. the Caus. f. was yazğur- (San. 330v. 7) and this survives as lazğır- in NC Kur, Kzx. Xak. xı ol anı: okta: yazturdı: “he made him miss (aroqa"ahıu fi'l-xafà") his arrow shot”, kadülika frrl-halam, also 'to make (someone) make an erroneous ə Kaş. III 95 (yazturur, yazturma:k). S 1 yüztür- Caus. f. of 1 yüz- : s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı ol anı: suvda: yüztürdi: “he made him swim (a'ámahu) in the vvater” Kaş. III 95 (yüztürür, yüztürme:k). D 2 yüztür- Caus. f. of 2 yüz-: survives in SVV Osm., Tkm. yüzdür-. Xak. xı ol apar ko:y yüztürdi: “he made him flay (aslaxuhu) the sheep” (etc.) Kaş. III 95 (1 yüztürfollows). Dis. YZG D yazak Hap. leg.;.Conc. N. fr. 1 yaz-; presumably w. the same general connotation as yazı. Yağma:, Tuxşı: xı yazak al-marta' “grazing land, pasture” Kaş. İİİ 16. 1 yazığ describes the colour of a horse”s coat, perhaps “dark brown'; no obvious etymology unless it is a metathesis of yağız, which is practically syn. N.o.a.b. Türkü wir ff. in IrkB 11 there is an antithesis between sarığ   nvoy on a dar brown(?) horse' and in do. 5o between tif at “a bay horse' and yazığ (Çat), in both cases w. marked alliteration: xiv Muh.(?) (under “horses” coats") al-kamit “dark browt! yo:zağ (sic) Rif. 171 (only). D 2 “yazığ See yazığlığ, yazığsa:-. D 1 yazuk Pass. N./A.S. fr. 1 yaz-, lit. *reduced to a simpler form, loosened', etc.; in its second meaning the connotation seems to be one of a lump of meat reduced to a simpler form by slicing it; Kaj.'s etymology is nonsense. Modern forms yazık/lazık, etc. in some NE, NC, SC, NW languages generally mean “flat, level,' and the like which would be more appropriate for *yasuk but may have been influenced byyazr. Xak.xı yazuk at “a horse freed from its halter' (mahlül min vwatágihi); also used of anything freed from its fastenings (gaydih:) or halter; yazuk et 'meat cut into slices (muqaddad) in the autumn (and preserved) with herbs' (bi-afaswih), which is left and eaten in the spring; derived fr. the phr. ya:z ok yé: *eat it only in the spring'; because the cattle are lean in this season, but he eats fat meat Kaş. III 16. : D 2 yazuk Intrans. Dev. N. fr. 2 yaz-; a standard word for 'sin' in the early period, but with some wider meanings 'failing, defect', etc. S.i.a.m.l.g. vv. these meanings, but in SW Osm. yazik means 'a pity; deplorable', i.e. more 'sinned against” than sinning. Türkü viii ff. Man. yazuk kilsar 'if he commits a sin TT II 10, 94; a.o. Chuas. 135 (boşunçsuz): Uyğ. vurff. Man.-A suy yazuk boimazun “may there be no sin (Hend.) M I 30, 26; yazukda boşunmak *liberation from sin” do. 28, 23: Bud. yazukka tüşe "being exposed to censure' PP 8, 1: tsuy yazuklarında oztü “they were freed from (the consequences of) their sins (Hend.)” TT IV 4, 14; 8.0.0.: Civ. yazukka tegip “committing an offence” USp. şs, 33: Xak. x1 yazuk al-danb “sin, offence" Xaş. III 16 (prov.); o.o., same translation, 7 203 (ökün-), 220 (ertür-); 521 (kecür-), etc.: KB keçürgil yazukın kamuğ “pardon all his sins” 28; a.o. 638: xu(?) At. 337 (kecür-); Tef. yazuk 'sin' 135: Çağ. xv ff. yazuk gunah ma ma'siya “sin, offence”, etc. San. 330v. 27 (quotns.): Xwar. xiv ditto Qutb 76; Nahc. 83, 17;.86, 11 etc.: Kom. xiv “sin” yazı yazuk, etc.: common CCI, CCG, Gr. 119 (quotns.): Kip. xın (after 2 ya:z-) hence a/-danb wa'l-xafi'a mistake") yazuk Hou. 38, 5$: xıv yazuk al-danb wa'l-carima ( crime") İd. 93; ditto Bul. 5, 12: xv xağ”a yazık Tuh. 14a. 8: Osm. xiv ff. yazuk meaning “sin common to xvii, sporadic to xix 77S 7 807; JI 1027; III 791; İV 864. D yazkı: N./A.S. fr. ya:z; survives in NC Kir, Kzx. Jazpi “spring” (Adj): SC Uzb. yozğu “summer” (Adj): NW yazğı/lazğı ditto. UyB. vin ff. Bud. Suv. 589, 9ff.  (ya:y): Civ. TT VII 38, x ff. (yaykt): Xak,  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1030 
     
   
   
      sign «^: ihe zodiac' 139; o.o. 6z “5: iuçiğ), 142, 5639 (orut). S yazğuk See yağğuk Dis. V. YZĞ20 yazık- Intrans. Den. V. fr. ya:Z; survives in NE Alt. “to spend the s»ong' (somewhere) R III 230; cf. yaza:-, yazla:-. Xak. xi yıl yazıktı: şöra”) zamón vabi" "the year (i.e. season) turred to spring” Kaş. III 76 (yazıka:r, yazıkma:k). Tris. YZĞ E yazığçı: See yorığçır. D yazığlığ P.N./A. fr. 2 “yazığ, Dev. N. fr. 1 yaz- which would mean 'freeing, release”, and the like, a rather different connotation fr. 1 yazuk, which is Pass. N.o.a.b. Xak. xı yazığlığ at “a horse (or something else) released from its tether” (al-mungat min "iqalihi) Kaş. III 49; a.o. 50, 19. D yazukluğ P.N./A. fr. 2 yazuk, 'sinful, sinner”, etc. S.is.m.l. Türkü vırı ff. Man. Chuas. 308 (egsüklüg): Uyğ. vı yazukliğ atlığlığl “the men of distinction who were to blame” (in antithesis to “the common people”) Su. E 2: vin ff. Man.-A M III 12, 19 (i) (buka:ğu:): Bud. yazukluğ bolmalım “may we not be held guilty' (for our sins) TT IV 14, 65; (if anyone) beglerde ağır yazukluğ Iup “is convicted of serious offences before the begs! Kuan. 26; yazukluğun yazuksuzun 'whether guilty or innocent' do. 36: Xak. xı yazukluğ a/-mudnib "a sinner” Kaş. III so: KB yazukluğ bolur işte buşsa kişi “if a man is irritable at his vvork he is blamevvorthy” 324: xıı(?) At. 337 Tef. yazukluk (sic) al-mucrim “a criminal”, also “blameworthy! 135: xiv Muh. al-mudnib ya:zukJug Mel. 52, 9; Rif. 149: Xwar. xiv yazukluğ 'sinful; sinner” Qut? 76; Nahc. 38, 15 etc.; yazuklı ditto Quib 76: Kom. xiv ditto yazuklu/yazuklı CCI, CCG; Gr. 120 (quotns.): Osm. xiv, xv yazuklu ditto; Seen TTS I 808; II 1027; III 791; IV 5. D yazuksuz Priv. N./A. fr. 2 yazuk; 'innocent, guiltless'. S.is.m.l. Türkü vir: ff. Man. Chuas. 103 (kovla:-): Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. yazuksuz kişiler “innocent people” U II 78, 32; 0.0. do. 87, 49; TT IV 10, 14; Kuan. 36 (yazukluğ): Xak. xı yigit ya:zuksuz (sic) bolma:s “there is no such thing as a young man who is free from sin” (illà bi-danb) Kaş. III 16, 18; a.o. I 400, 20; n.m.e.: Xwar. xiv ditto Nahc. 86, ır: Kom. xiv. "innocent yazuksuz/yazıksız CCG, Gr. Tris. V. YZĞD yazukla:- Den. V. fr. 2 yazuk; n.o.a.b. (Türkü vin [gap] yazuklat[gap] 7I E 36, if correctly read, must be the Caus. f. otherwise not noted): Xak. xı beg anı: yazukla:dı: “the   bi-cınğya) Kas. 177 342 (yazukla:r, yazukla:iDs:k): X war. xiv yazukla- “to accuse (someone) of an offence! Qutb 76: Kom. xiv “to be guilty yazukla- CC?F, Gr.: Kip. xiv yazukla- agraba 'to commit an offence' İd. 93. D yazığsa:- Hap. leg.; Desid. Den. V. fr. 2 “yazığ. Xak. xı (the enemy wished to sell his home and household goods) yuluğ bé:rip yazığsa:dı: (MS. yarığsa:dı:) li-yufádiya bihà nafsahu "in order to (lit. and wished to) pay a ransom and free himself” Kaş. III 333, 10; n.m.e. : Dis. YZG D yéze:k Conc. N. fr. yéze:-; 'advance guard'. Pec. to Xak.; cf. yelme:. Xak, xi yeze:k zali"atı”l-cund "the advance guard of an army” Kaş. III 18; a.o. III 88 (yéze:-): KB (of these stars, some are ornaments, some guides) bir ança yezek “and some advance guards' 128; (when he gets near the enemy) yezekin alu tüşürse toyuğ "he should pick his advance guard and pitch camp' 2349; a.o. 2342 (tutğak). yüzük (?d-) “finger-ring” , s.i.a.m.l.g. vv. some unusual forms, e.g. NE yüstük, cüstük: SE "Türki, SW Az. üzük, Cuv. géré (syér&amp;); an early 1.-vv. in Hungarian gyüri (pronounced dyü:ri:), which perhaps points to an original düzük; and a later l.-w. in Pe. and other languages, see Doerfer II $96. Xak. xı yüzük al-xütim “a signet ring” Kaş. III 18: xin(?) Tef. yü:zük/yü:zu:k ditto 166: xv Muh. al-xötim yü:zü:k Mel. 53,8: Rif. ıso: Çağ. xv ff. üzük .. . so xdtım Vel. 106; üzük (1) anguştar “ünger-ring” San. 741. 8: Xwar. xiv yüzük ditto Quzb 89; Nahc. 77, 16: Kom. xiv ditto CCG, Gr.: Kip. xır al-xátim yü:zü:k Hou. 17, zo: xiv yüzük ditto İd. 93: xv ditto Tuh. rab. s, Kar. 64, 11 (a.o. 2 ka:ş do.) Dis. V. YZGPUD yüzkeş- (?or yüzgeş-) Hap. leg.; the MS. has yürüheş- but this is clearly an error (damma for cazm), there is an obvious antithesis betvveen “to turn their backs on one another” in the first line and “to turn their faces to one another” in the second, so this can be taken as the Recip. f. of a Den. V. fr. 2 yü:z, but it might be a scribal error for yüzleş-, see yüzlen-. The translation, which says that the verse describes spring and relates to flovvers, is defective, the translation of this word having fallen out. Xak, xı kizil sarığ arkaşıp yipgin yaşıl yüzkeşip bir birine: yörğeşip yalpuk anı: taplasu:r “the red and yellow (flowers) turn their backs on one another; the purple and green face one another; they intertwine with one another, and a man is amazed by them” Kaş. I 395, 3 fF., n.m.e. Tris. YZG D yüze:gü: Den. N. fr. 2 yü:z vv. the Collective Suff. -e:gü:, used only in the phr. yüz  
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1031 
     
   
   
     yüzegü, which (as pointed out by L. Ligeti in Sur an passage du Ràjàvavádaka Sütra Ouigour, Nemeth Armağanı, Ankara, 1962, PP- 319 ff.) means “the face and other external organs” in antithesis to iç içe:ğü: “the inside and internal organs. Uyğ. vf. Man. yükünürbiz sizipe yüz yüzegğütin berü kértgüncin 'we worship you with a faith (which extends) from our external organs (invvards)” TT TII s: Bud. (in a description of a dying man) yüz ylüzegüsinte marımlarınta barça ölüm yadılıp anta ok ögğ ıçğınur “as death spreads all through his face, external organs, and limbs he thereupon loses consciousness” T'T TI, p. 26, note 5, 11; o.o. U III 64, zı, Radloff, Kuan-$i-im Pusar, St.Petersbourg, 1911, 7o, 7-11 (quoted by Ligeti). Dis. YZL D yazlığ P.N./A. fr. ya:z, “belonging to the summer” (or spring). S.i.s.m.l. Uy£. vir ff. Civ. yazlığ küzlügi [gap] “belonging to the spring and autumn” US?. 66, 4 (fragmeftary). D yüzlüg P.N./A. fr. 2 yü:z; lit. “having a face”, in the early period usually “a person of distinction” (prob. based on the Chinese concept of “face”), later usually, vv. a preceding Attributive, e.g. 'two-faced'. S.i.s.m.]l. Türkü vıu ff. yüzlü:ğ “a person of distinction' Tun. İTV 8 (ETY II 96, 1 a:thi$): Man. M III ro, 3 G) (1 a:tlığ)—yaruk [yasuk?] yüzlüg nomka *to the bright (Hend.)-faced doctrine' do. 7, 15 (i): Man. [gap] yüzlüğüm “my (beautiful?) faced one” M 11 8, 2: Bud. PP 12, 5 etc. (1 a:tlığ), TT VII 4o, 75-6 (eren)—U III 17, 17 etc. (tumlığ): Xak. xı iki: yüzlüg er al-raculu”l-mudühin “a dis-sembler, hypocrite'; iki yüzlüg kózpü: al-manáwiya “a two-sided mirror”(?) Kaş. Hİ 45; a.o. I 426 (kamgi): xm(?) Tef. körklüğ yüzlüğ “beautiful” 166: X war. xiv pari yüzlüg “fairy-faced” , yığlağ yüzli *with a tearful face” Qutb 89; kórklüg yüzlüg Nahc. 22, 15; 439, 10. Dis. V. YZLD yazıl- Pass. f. of 1 yaz-; “to be untied, loosened', etc. S.i.m.m.]l. Xak. xi tügü:n yazıldı: “the knot (etc.) became loose' (inhallat) Kaş. 111 78 (no Aor. or Infin.); o.o. 7 195, 27 (alkin-); //T 6 (yarp); 112, 6: KB tümen tü cécekler yazildi küle 'countless flowers have opened and smile” 70; o.o. r18, 150 (tügün), 813 (sevinclig): xrıı(?) Tef. yazil(of flood waters) 'to break loose'; (of a man after eating) “to relax” 135 (also “to be written"): Çağ. xv ff. yazıl- ((1) “to be written'; (2) “to be missed"); (3) Ruşüda şudan "to be opened'; (4) şurü" şudan “to be begun” San. 33or. 22 (quotns.): Kom. xıv yazıl- “to be disentangled' CCG; Gr.: Osm. xiv to xvi yazil- 'to be relaxed, spread out'; in three texts TTS II 1024; IV 864. D yazla:- Den. V. fr. ya:z; not noted before xiv, butsee yazlat-. Survives in SW Osm. 'to spend the summer (somewhere)'. Cf. yaza:-, yazik-. (Xak.) xiv Muh. irtoba'a mina'l-rabi' *to spend the spring' ya:zla:- Mel. 22, 7; Rif. 103: Osm. xv ki yaz bir cécek ile yazlamaz hiç “for spring does not come. with one flower' TTS. II 1025; a.o. xvi IV 862. D yazlat- Hap. leg.; Caus. f. of yazla:-. Xak. xı ol ko:yın yayla:ğda: yazlattı: “he put his sheep for the spring (arba'a ğanamahu) on the summer pasture” Kaş. 1] 355 (yazlatu:r, yazlatma:k). D yazlın- Refl. f. of yazil-; pec. to Kaş. Xak. xi tüğü:n yazlındı: “the knot (etc.) became loose' (imhallat) Kaş. III 110 (yazHnu:r, yazlınma:k), (after a note on the formation of the Intrans. ([ázim) from the Trans. (muta'addi) in Ar.) thus ın this language (Turkish) you say er tügü:n yazdı: “the man loosened (Aal/a) the knot', then -1nis attached and one says tügü:n yazındı: (sic, later altered in the MS. to yazlind::) "the knot became loose' (inhallat) and the V. becomes Intrans. (lázim) by the attachment of -ın-, and one says, with -11-, tügü:n yazıldı: “the knot was loosened' (Aullat) and also when it has become loose one adds -1n- to -(1)1- and says tügü:n yazlındı: “the knot became loose of its own accord” (bi-tab'ihi) ; (another example using 1 yuv- follows) 111 112, 2 ff.; a.o. 228, 15 (yalgil). D yüzlen- Refl. Den. V. fr. 2 yü:z; the basic V. yüzle:- occurs in several modern languages, SE Türki “to bring about a meeting”, SW Osm. 'to accuse (someone) to his face'; this Refl. f. meaning “to face one another” survives in SC Uzb. and one or two other languages; the Recip. f. yüzleş- “to face one another” also s.is.m.l; see yüzkeş-. Uyg. vr ff, Bud. küngerü yüzlenip “facing south” TT V8,71; 2.0. do. 10, 89 (ortu:), etc.: Xak. x1 ol mapa: yüzlendi: (MS. yezlindi:) 'he came towards me” (or “faced me” ?, tasvaccaha ilayya) ; and one says er yüzlendi: “the man enjoyed respect (wacuha, altered (?) to twuciha) among the people'; also used when he demanded their respect (talaba minhumu'l-cah) Kaş. III 110 (yüzlenü:r, yüzlenme:k, corrected fr. -ma:k): xııı(?) Tef. yüzlen- “to face towards (something Dat.) 165: (xiv Muh.(?) ráà'à wa nafaqa “to be a hypocrite” yü:zle:- Rif. 109): Çağ, xv ff. yüzlen- (-di) yüz tut- . . . tawaccuh ma"ndsına "to turn towards! Vel. 419; yüzlenrü kardan wa mutawaccih şudan "to turn, or go, tovvards” San. 342v. 20 (quotns.): (Kip. xiv yüzle- “tə blame or criticize! ('ataba toa lama) as if this was conveyed (manqul) by a slap in the face İ4. 93). D yazlış- Hap. ieg.; Co-op. f. of yazıl-. Xak. xı tügü:nle:r yazlışdı: “the knots (all) came loose (inhallat) together” Kaş. İL os (yazlışu:r, yazhsroa:k). Dis. YZM S yüzüm See üzüm. 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1032 
     
   
   
     yezne: t ie husband of one's elder sister, or ur one's father's younger sister. Surv/ves in NE Khak. císie; Tuv. geste: NC jezde: NW Kk. jezde; Kaz. cizni; Nog. yezde: SW Az. yézne. Cf.rUde:ğü. Xak.xı yezne: the worc fot *t^c husband of an elder sister! Kaş. Z7 35: Çağ. xvff. yézne (spelt) 'one's sister's or daughter's husband' San. 349v. 10: Kom. xiv *brother-in-law' yezne/yizne CCI, CCG; Gr.: Kap. xui al-şihr wa'l-'aris 'son-in-law; bridegroom' (kit:ye:gü:/)yézne: Hou. 32, 3. D yazınç Dev. N. fr. yazin-; “sin”, only one (?) occurrence and that uncertain, but cf. yazınçsız. Uyğ. vir ff. Bud. üküş yazınç (-inç uncertain) ért(t)iler “they have persisted in commiiting many sins” TT IV 4, 11-12. Dis. V. YZND 1 yazın- Refl. f. of 1 yaz-; s.i.s.m.l. Xak. xı er ku:rın yazındı: “the man set himself to loosen (fail) his belt” (etc.) Kaş. I1I 84 (yazınu:r, yazinma:k); a.o. “to become loose" İTİ 112, 2 ff. (yazlın-). D2 yazin- Refl. f. of 2 yaz-: n.o.a.b. Türkü viii pec. to JJ; yanlukın (? for yanıltukı:n) üçü:n in 7 E 16 replaced by yanıltukı:n yazintukrn üçü:n “because he misbehaved (Hend.)”, and özi: yanıltı: in / E zo by özi: yazıntı: II E i7: vii ff. Man. Ckaas. J 23, etc. (yapil-); 7 35 (boşunçsız) and several occurrences of yazın- vr. Dat. “to sin against”: Uyğ. vin ff. Bud. ev yutuzuya yazıntımız erser “if we have sinned against (i.e. violated) a housevvife” U 11 76, s: 8s, 22: TT IV 8, yo, (then because King Brahmadatta) tişi bars birle yazınmışda “had sexual intercourse with the tigress! U III 65, 12-13. : . Tris. YZN D yavınçsız Priv. A. /A. fr. yazing; 'innocent, fixe İrom sin”, n.o.a.b. Cf. yazuksi:z, Əy. vin £. Man. TT III 134 (çaxşa:pat): Bud. Suv. 255, 15-16 (ditto). Dis. YZR D yüzer Di:tributive f. of 1 yü:z, “a hundred each”. N.o.a.b., but px-haps still in use. Uyğ. Ix marima: yüzer toru$ bertim “1 gavc my vi i büd. Xala oiu Po) Ae, pies məna kirip beşer ;iüzerin barıp “had o5en been to ses, going some five hundred, tinses” (and had come back safe) PP z3, 5 &amp;. ga. xv ff. yüzer 'adad-i sad "the number 100' Sun. 3437. 8 (quotn., xalqdın. yüzer yüzer kişi ayırıp *dividing the people into groups of a hundred each): Xwar. xiv yüzer Yuicr téveler bérdi “he gave (the notables of Niecca) a hundred camels each” Nahe. 75, 12. Tris. YZR D yü:ze:rlik “the plant rue, Pegarion harmala' ; Den. N. (Conc. N.) fr. yü:ze:r, but there is no obvious semantic connection. w. yüzer or l or 2 yüz-. Survives only(?) in SW Az. üzerlik, Osm. yüzerlik/üzerlik. Cf. ildrük. Oğuz xı Kaş. III ız (yıdığ): K*p. xiv. al-harmal “rue” yüzerlük Bul 7, 3: Osm. xiv to xvi yüzerlik occurs in several texts, mostly dicts. translating Ar. harmal or Pe. siband (and the like) “vild rue” TTS I 851; JI 1086; Hİ 831; IV 015. is. V. YZSD yazsa:- Hap. leg.; Desid. f. of 1 yaz-. Xak. xı ol ku:rin yazsa:dı: “he wished to loosen (vahull) his belt” (etc.) Kaş. Il] 3os (yazsa:r, yazsa:ma:k). Tris. YZS D yüzsüzlük A.N. fr. a Priv. N./A. fr. yü:z; n.o.a.b. Xak. xi KB (this frown d ugly look of mine) küçemçi kelirke bu yüzsüzlüküm “and my unfriendly mien are for the man who comes as an oppressor' 816: Çağ. xv fI. yüzsizlik b;-ruyi 'shamelessness' San. 343r. 11 (quotn.) : Dis. v. YZŞD yazış- Hap:leg.?; Co-op. f. of 1 yaz-, all inodern forms of yazış- seem to be Co-op. f.s of 3 yaz-. Xak. xı ol apar tügü:n yazışdı: “he helped him to loosen (or untie, fi hail) the knot'; also used for. competing (yazışu:r, yazigma:k); and orc says (ol 2 maa: ya: yazışdı: “he helped me to unstring( f? naz'i'1-watar) the bow' (etc. ) Kaş. HI y3 (yazışu:r, yazışma:k). 
   
 

 
 
 
   
     Page 1033 
     
   
   
       Z Preliminary:note. No genuine Turkish soords, except one or two onomatopoeics, begin zoith z-. A few Sogdian or Middle Iranian words, none of tohich surcived long in Turkish, occur in Uy$. ,e.g. zahağ 'emanation' U li 95, 2; zmuxtuğ “zhe 28th day of the movth” "UT VII 9, 29; zmuran “myrrh” U 1 $, 14. Later &amp; few Ar. and Pe. L.-w.s found their way into late Uyğ., Pe. zira *aniseed' in H 11 22, 123 and Ar. zaküt “alms” in some texts in USp., as well as all the similar evards. sohich were adopted by Moslem Turks. Kaş. /ists the words set out belo:w as eurrert 3n Xak. Mon. ZB VU zep zep an onomatopoeic of a common kind; the closest analogy is SW Osm. zıp zip *suddenly, unexpectedly'. Cf. sep. Xak. xi zep zep onomatopoeic (harf hikaya) connoting speed in walking or running; hence one says zep zep barğıl “hurry up! (asri*) Kaş. I 319. Mon. ZG zak zak onomatopoeic. Xak. xı zak zak ar inciting Interjection (Barf :1?rà'), used to incite ràiis to copulate Kaş. 7 333. Dis. ZNB VUF za:nbr (or ze:nbi:?) Hap. leg.; Ta Chinese l.-w.; the first syllable might be ching  (Giles 2,136; Middle Chinese, Pulleyblank tsyeg) in certain combinations 'cricket'. Xak. xi Za:nbı: sarráru'l-layl “the field cricket, Gryllus campestris ; Za:nbir: art the name of a pass between Koçna:r Ba:şı: and Bala:sa:ğzun Kaş. III 441. Dis. ZNG PUF züngüm (MS. züng.m) Hap. leg.; no doubt a Chinese l.-w. Cf. bergin. Xak. xi züngüm “a kind of Chinese brocade' ((75dz) Kaş. I 485. Tris. zun CF zarğunçmu:d pec. to /laş,ş a Sogdian l-w. zrytné “vegetable), and prob. mwrcG “myrtle”, see J. Benveniste in fourni asotique, CCXXXVI 2, p. 184. Xak. xizarBungmu:d al-sincilat, called in Pe. ^alang müşk "the wild tamarisk” (Stefngass) or “a kind of basil, Basilicum glabratum (?)' (Red.) Kaş. 1 $30; a.o. I 17, 8 (mentioned as one of very few words containing seven consonants). Tris. ZRN PUF zaranza: (MS. zar.nza:) Hap. leg.; no doubt a l.-w., ?Sogdian. Xak. xı zaranza: al-"uşfur 'safflower Carthamus tinctorius' ; and al-qirtim 'safflower seed”, is called 2aranza: urugi: Kaş. 1 449.   
   
 

 
 
 
   
      
   
   
     
        
       
     
   
 
