
LEXICON OF RECONSTRUCTED PRONUNCIATION IN
EARLY MIDDLE CHINESE, LATE MIDDLE CHINESE,
AND EARLY MANDARIN
Known for his pioneering work in Chinese historical phonetics, Edwin
Pulleyblank has compiled this Lexicon to present in convenient dictionary
form the result of his researches on the phonology of Middle Chinese and
its evolution to Mandarin.
The Lexicon complements Pulleyblank's earlier book, Middle Chinese,
by providing reconstructed pronunciation for approximately 8,000 Chi-
nese characters at three historical stages. Early Middle Chinese is the
language of the Qieyun rhyme dictionary of A.D. 601, which codified the
standard literary language of both North and South China, the preceding
period of division. Pulleyblank's reconstruction is a thorough reworking
of that of Bernhard Karlgren, completed in the twenties, and in some
respects differs radically from it. Late Middle Chinese is the standard
language of the High Tang Dynasty, based on the dialect of the capital,
Chang'an. It has not been reconstructed previously as a separate stage but
is of special importance, since it is the ancestor of most modern dialects.
Early Mandarin represents the speech of the Yuan capital, Dadu (present
Beijing), around the year 1300, for which Pulleyblank's reconstruction
differs considerably from that of Hugh M. Stimson. The sources and
methods used in these reconstructions were fully discussed in Middle
Chinese, but recent developments in phonological theory have led to some
modifications in detail.
The entries are arranged alphabetically according to the Pinyin system
with an index by the traditional Kangzi radical and stroke numbers. The
Morohashi number is also given for each character, enabling easy refer-
ence to this important Chinese thesaurus. Another useful feature of the
Lexicon is the inclusion of the numbers in Karlgren's Grammata Serica for
characters that are included in that work. Concise English equivalents for
the Chinese words are also provided. Reconstructed forms are given in
the International Phonetic Alphabet. Though this requires a number of
phonetic signs and diacritical marks, these are carefully explained in the
introduction.
Every effort has been made to provide a useful tool for students of
Chinese literature and China's relations with foreign countries as well as
for specialists in Chinese linguistics.
EDWIN G. PULLEYBLANK is Professor Emeritus of the Department of
Asian Studies at the University of British Columbia. He is the author of
Middle Chinese: A Study in Historical Phonology (1984).

This page intentionally left blank 
EDWIN G. PULLEYBLANK
Lexicon of Reconstructed
Pronunciation in Early Middle
Chinese, Late Middle
Chinese, and Early Mandarin
UBC Press
Vancouver

©UBC Press 1991
All rights reserved.
10090807060504 5432
Printed in Canada on acid-free paper
National Library of Canada Cataloguing in Publication
Pulleyblank, Edwin G. (Edwin George) 1922-
Lexicon of reconstructed pronunciation in early Middle Chinese,
late Middle Chinese, and early Mandarin
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 0-7748-0366-5
1. Chinese language - Middle Chinese, 1200-1919 - Pronunciation.
2. Mandarin dialects - Pronunciation. I. Title.
PL1081.P84 1991 495.IT52 C91-091252-1
Canada
UBC Press gratefully acknowledges the financial support for our
publishing program of the Government of Canada through the Book
Publishing Industry Development Program (BPIDP), and of the
Canada Council for the Arts, and the British Columbia Arts Council.
This book has been published with the help of a grant from the
Canadian Federation for the Humanities and Social Sciences, through
the Aid to Scholarly Publications Programme, using funds provided
by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada.
UBC Press
The University of British Columbia
2029 West Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z2
604-822-5959 / Fax: 604-822-6083
www.ubcpress.ca

Contents
Acknowledgments / vii
Introduction /1
Lexicon / 23
Index / 427
Bibliography / 487


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The beginnings of this book go very far back and many people have
contributed along the way. K'ai-ying Po T'ang, then a graduate student in
the Department of Asian Studies, was employed with the help of a grant
from the UBC President's Research Fund during one summer in the early
seventies preparing index cards. The contribution of Dr. W. G. Boltz, now
of the University of Washington, who spent a year at UBC in 1976-77,
paid for by a grant from the Canada Council (now the Social Sciences and
Humanities Research Council of Canada) entering translation glosses (since
much revised) on to the cards, should especially be mentioned. The next
stage was the transfer of this material from cards to the UBC mainframe
computer, using radical-stroke order and Morohashi numbers as the key to
the Chinese characters, which it was not yet possible to input directly. This
was done by Eliza Ko, a student in Computer Science, employed under the
British Columbia/Canada Summer Employment Program, Challenge 85,
and the Work-Study Program of the B.C. provincial government in 1985-
86. An important breakthrough came with the transfer from the mainframe
to a Macintosh personal computer which provided much greater flexibility.
Kenneth Szto was employed under the Work-Study program in 1986-87 to
assist in the reformatting that this required. The final step was the obtaining
of a Chinese font, the Qiyi program produced by the Great Eastern
Software Company Limited of Taipei, which has made it possible to input
Chinese characters directly into the computer and to produce photo-ready
copy for the production of the book. The tedious task of inserting the
Chinese characters and converting my hand-made phonetic font to the
Postscript font, IPATimes, was carried out by a research assistant, Elsie
Arbuckle, with the assistance of a grant from the Social Sciences and
Humanities Research Council of Canada. I am also grateful for the
assistance in formatting and proofreading the text that I have received from
George Maddison and Jean Wilson of UBC Press.
The editing of the text at all stages and final preparation of the text for
printing have, in the end, fallen to me and errors that remain are my own
responsibility.

This page intentionally left blank 
INTRODUCTION
The sounds of spoken language vanish as soon as they are uttered. Since
the invention of the phonograph and more sophisticated electronic means of
recording sound, it has become possible to overcome this limitation so that
we can hear voices from the past speaking in their own accents. For earlier
times, however, written records provide our only means of access to past
utterances. Even for languages with syllabic or alphabetic scripts, this
provides a very imperfect and incomplete mirror of what was said. Such is
the coded nature of language that its message can be translated into written
form even without the actual sound, so that the words of an ancient Greek
bard or a Chinese philosopher which would seem utterly strange to us if we
could actually hear them can reach us and convey their meaning across the
centuries. Nevertheless, much is inevitably lost and there are many reasons
why it is desirable to get closer to the contemporary sound of the speech of
past centuries.
Even for languages written in phonetic scripts recovery of the
pronunciation of bygone days is by no means easy. Language is in a
constant state of flux and spellings become conventionalized and come to
reflect obsolete usages. Moreover, in every culture written language
develops its own conventions that move away from those of the vernacular.
The written norm tends to become a separate code accessible only to the
educated elite. The classical Latin of a Tacitus or a Pliny in the first century
of our era was very different from the vulgar Latin that we find reflected in
Petronius. The actual speech of Tacitus and the Plinys was presumably
much closer. The problem of reconstructing the pronunciation of a
language like Chinese whose script, though containing phonetic principles,
has never corresponded in a simple and direct way to the sounds of the
language is of a different order of magnitude. Some would say that it is an
impossible task. Nevertheless, there are means available and through the
efforts of scholars progress continues to be made.
The most important kind of evidence for getting access to the linguistic
standards of specific historic periods of Chinese is provided by rhyming
dictionaries that, without the use of alphabetic notation of any kind, were
designed to give a key to contemporary pronunciation. This they did both
by arranging the words according to their rhymes and by distinguishing
within each rhyme words which were exact homophones, that is, which
also had the same non-rhyming parts. The compilation of such dictionaries
began in the period of division between Han and Tang but the earliest
surviving example is the Qieyw completed in 601 by Lu Fay an
with the advice of a group of eminent scholars of the time. It is not
quite accurate to call it a surviving example, since there is no complete text
of the Qieyun in the form in which it left the hands of its compiler. It went

Lexicon
through manv re-editions and enlargements before it took final shape in the
Guangyun . or 'Enlarged Qieyun,' of 1008 which is now taken to
represent it. Nevertheless, surviving manuscripts and manuscript fragments
of dictionaries in the Qieyun tradition before the Guangyun make it clear that
the basic structure of the rhymes and homophone groups of the original
dictionary was maintained, so that it does provide a key to the phonological
structure of the language that Lu Fayan and his colleagues intended to
codify.
There has been much controversy as to what this language was that
underlay the Qieyun. Since the work was compiled in Chang'an
shortly after the founding of the Sui dynasty, Bernhard Karlgren, who
first made a phonetic reconstruction of it on modern scientific principles,
assumed that it must represent the contemporary dialect of that city. He
thought that it became a koine for the whole country during the following
Tang dynasty and hence the ancestor of most modern Chinese dialects.
Others have argued that it did not reflect an actual single coherent spoken
dialect but was a mixture of dialect forms current at that time. My own
conclusion put forward in my book, Middle Chinese, following especially
the work of Zhou Zumo was that it did indeed represent a single,
coherent, form of the Chinese language, namely the elite standard common
to educated speakers from both north and south in the period of division that
came to an end with the Sui reconquest of the south in 589. Ultimately this
standard went back to the dialect of Luoyang in the second and third
centuries. Though significant divergencies had developed by the sixth
century between the speech of those who had remained in the north
(particularly the northeast) and the descendants of the refugee aristocrats
who had moved south at the fall of Western Jin early in the fourth
century, it still constituted a recognized 'Mandarin' that was regarded as
normative by such scholars as Yan Zhitui and Lu Fayan. I call
this standard underlying the Qieyun Early Middle Chinese (EMC).
The prestige of Early Middle Chinese survived the reunification of the
country for a time but soon began to be undermined by the growing prestige
of a new standard based on the speech of the Sui-Tang capital, Chang'an,
situated in an area that had been a cultural backwater during the time of
division. While the rhymes of the Qieyun, somewhat simplified to take
account of distinctions that were already becoming obsolete when the
dictionary was completed, retained their authority for poetry written as part
of the official examination system and have remained in use by those who
write Regulated Verse (liishi ) down to the present day, evidence of
the new Tang standard begins to appear already in the seventh century and it
is clear that it was well established by the eighth. It led to the introduction
of the new form of Sino-Japanese known as Kan'on (Chinese
sounds) as opposed to the older way of pronouncing Chinese characters
 2 
Introduction 3
which became known as Go'on : (Wu sounds). Wu (Go) here refers
to the old southern capital at Jiankang (Nanking) and its surrounding
territory, which had been the most prestigious cultural centre in the time of
division and where the old EMC standard was presumably most persistent.
In China itself Wu yin pronunciation of Wu, now regarded as
provincial and substandard, was contrasted with Qin yin
pronunciation of Qin, that is the region of Chang'an.
Dictionaries incorporating the new standard, which I call Late Middle
Chinese (LMC), were compiled but unfortunately none has survived.
Nevertheless, we have even better evidence for its phonological categories
than we have for EMC. This comes not only tromfanqh spellings
based on such dictionaries found in the great compendium of glosses on the
Buddhist canon, the Yiqiejing yinyi — of Huilin but
also from the rhyme tables, a more sophisticated form of phonological
analysis than that provided by dictionaries of the Qieyun type, which seems
to have developed in Buddhist circles in late Tang times. Though the
earliest complete rhyme table, the Yunjing survives only in
redactions of Southern Song date, there are manuscript fragments from
Dunhuang dating from the ninth or tenth century that are clearly in the
same tradition. The fact that the distinctions made by the Yunjing
correspond closely to those of Huilin 'sfanqie and to other mid and late
Tang evidence such as colloquial rhyming in poetry also testifies to the fact
that Yunjing was based on LMC. It is this Tang standard that spread to the
whole country and constituted the koine that Karlgren identified as the
ancestor of modern dialects. It differed quite considerably from EMC,
making many fewer distinctions. It is for this reason that one must insist on
reconstructing it separately from the Qieyun.
After the fall of Tang, the capital again shifted and the standard language
continued to evolve. Unfortunately, evidence for the language of Northern
Song and its northern and southern successors, Jin and Southern Song, is
sporadic and fragmentary. Dictionaries in the Qieyun tradition retained their
prestige and though rhyme tables of the Yunjing tradition do show some
evolution reflecting changes in the language, their basic structure remained
that of LMC. A skeletal rhyme table reflecting eleventh-century phonology
can be extracted from the Huangji jingshi :>f Shao Yong
but it is insufficient, even with the help of evidence from the rhyming of ci
poetry, to make a satisfactory full reconstruction of the language of that
period.
The situation changed dramatically with the advent of the Yuan dynasty.
The coming of the Mongols, who established their capital in China at
present Beijing, saw a great decrease in the prestige of the literary elite and
the emergence of a vigorous literature based on the current vernacular
language. Two important dictionaries were produced that reflect this form

4 Lexicon
of speech. The first was the Menggu ziyun a rhyme
dictionary making use of the hPhags-pa alphabet. Though it contains some
artificial features that show the influence of the Chinese rhyme table
tradition, it is clear that it basically reflects the current standard of the capital
(Pulleyblank 1970). The second is the Zhongyuan yinyun
which was designed to be a guide for the rhyming of the form of poetry
known as qu which was in use in popular drama of the period. A careful
comparison of the two dictionaries shows that, although the Zhongyuan
yinyun is slightly later and reflects a slightly more evolved form of language
than the Menggu ziyun, the two are based on the same underlying dialect,
which can be recognized as ancestral to the present dialect of Beijing,
especially in its colloquial layer. I call this Early Mandarin (EM).
The reconstruction of Early Middle Chinese and Late Middle Chinese
was treated in detail in my book Middle Chinese and that of Early Mandarin
was presented in more summary fashion. The present work is designed to
provide a key to these three reconstructions in the form of a Lexicon in
which reconstructed forms are given for these three important stages of the
language for some 8000 characters. It is hoped that this will be of use, not
only to specialists in Chinese historical phonology, but also to non-
specialists who wish to know the pronunciation of the language at various
times in the past for other purposes such as appreciating the rhymes and
other phonetic aspects of poetry or interpreting the transcriptions of foreign
words transcribed in Chinese.
Phonetic transcriptions
Forms in present-day Mandarin (putonghua ) are given in the
standard piny in romanization, with one modification. Because of the
difficulty of combining the umlauted vowel ii, which only occurs after /-
and «-, with tone marks, it is replaced by the digraph yu.
Reconstructed forms are given in the International Phonetic Alphabet
(IPA) and are intended to express as closely as possible the phonological
structure in order to show the diachronic development from one historical
stage to the next. Since IPA uses symbols and diacritics which do not form
part of the regular English alphabet, I list below the special symbols that
appear in my EMC, LMC, and EM reconstructions, as well as some English
letters that have special uses in IPA, with explanations as to their phonetic
meaning.
a stands for a nonsyllabic form of the vowel [a]. The theory behind
this is discussed in Middle Chinese. In Pulleyblank (1986a) it is called a
laryngeal glide. I now think that pharyngeal is more accurate. It is found as
the second element in diphthongs such as the off-glides in words like dear
[dis], fair [fed], as pronounced in Southern British and other 'r-less'
dialects of English. Similarly, the vowels in fur [fa] and far [fa] are

Introduction
considered to be structurally diphthongs /sa/ and /aa/, ending in pharyngeal
glides. The same structures are assumed for the vowels [Y] and [a] of
Mandarin, as in ge 'song' and fang ~)j 'direction,' and have also been
reconstructed for earlier forms of the language. While this is an important
theoretical concept from the point of view of tracing the history of
diachronic changes, there is a possibility of confusion, particularly in the
case of the distinction between -ia, -ia, -ua, -ya, which stand for VV
diphthongs in which the nuclear /a/ vowel retains its full value, and -ia, -ia,
-ua, -ya, in which -ft is phonetically a shwa-like off-glide. I have therefore
eliminated a as a symbol in the forms given in the Lexicon. Following the
vowel -a, where its phonetic effect is to produce the back unrounded vowel
[a], it is simply omitted. In other cases, that is, after mid or high vowels
where it is phonetically realized as a shwa-like off-glide, it is replaced by 3.
This change in symbols is intended merely as a practical help for indicating
the probable phonetic output and I continue to use a when discussing
phonological theory.
a: In Middle Chinese vowel length, which is a feature in both EMC
and LMC, was indicated by doubling: aa, ee, oece. In the Lexicon I have
used instead the standard IPA symbol. This is largely a matter of
convenience and doubling could be used if preferred.
C This modified form of c, which also occurs in the combinations tq
and tqh, represents a palatal fricative as in Mandarin xT [pi] 'west.' A
typographical alternative, used, for example, by Karlgren, is s.
e Greek epsilon representing the lower-mid-front vowel of Mandarin
nan [thjen] 'heaven'. From a theoretical point of view it is important to
distinguish it from the higher-mid-front vowel [e] found, for example, in
Mandarin gli [kei] 'give.' While the latter arises, both in Mandarin and
Cantonese through the assimilation of a shwa vowel to a following high
front glide: /aj/ —> [ei], e has the intrinsic feature [+low]. Diachronically it
has arisen through the fronting of the vowel /a/, as in the shift of EM kjan
'space' to Mandarin jian [tqjen], or the fusion of the diphthong /ia/ in
LMC thian 'heaven,' EM thjen (see below). Since it never contrasts with
e in the forms of Chinese under discussion, it would be possible for
practical purposes to substitute e for it without ambiguity in EMC or EM
forms but I have retained e for the sake of uniformity in representing the
distinctive features involved.
e: See a: above.
3 The inverted e, or shwa stands for the central vowel in Mandarin
gen [kan] 'root.'
3 The off-glide found in the combinations s§, is, is, u3, y§. See
above under a.
Y Voiced velar fricative, reconstructed as an initial in EMC. N.B. y
must be distinguished from the symbol Y (not used in the reconstructed
5
Lexicon
forms in the Lexicon) which stands for the vowel in Mandarin ge [kv]
'song.'
h The diacritic ' was used in Middle Chinese to represent voiceless
aspiration but is replaced here by raised h, the preferred IPA symbol. It
avoids possible confusion with ', the sign for glottalization. Besides its
occurrence in the voiceless aspirates kh, th, ph, tsh, etc., h is used in EMC
to represent the final aspiration which I believe characterized the Departing
Tone at that period.
fi Voiced fi is reconstructed as a component of the 'muddy' initials kfi-
, xfi-, tfi-, trfi-, pfi-, ffi-, tsfi-, sfi-, tsfi-, sfi- of LMC, which are assumed to
have been similar to the corresponding initials in some present-day Wu
dialects, that is, having voiceless onset with voiced aspiration or murmur at
their release, spreading through the following syllable. Alternatively one
could adopt a convention of writing these initials as gh-, yh-, dh, bh-, vh-,
dzh-, zh-, dz_h- (or dzh-), z_h- (or zh), like the 'voiced aspirates' of Indian
languages which resemble them phonologically.
H Fully voiced laryngeal onset functioning phonologically as a
consonant in syllable structure as in French /z-aspire (Pulleyblank 1986a).
In Beijing Mandarin this underlying initial is frequently replaced by a
frictionless velar continuant or glide [mj (which is sometimes written as [y]
though the latter is strictly speaking a voiced fricative) or, less frequently,
the velar nasal [rj], and in many Mandarin dialects it is always represented
by [rj]. Present-day Cantonese also regularly substitutes [rj] for this 'zero
initial.' Though it is an important structural feature of LMC and EM, as
well as modern Mandarin, for the sake of simplicity H is omitted in the
transcriptions in this Lexicon.
i Barred i stands for a high central unrounded vowel as found, for
example, in Vietnamese. In Middle Chinese it is reconstructed for EMC
contrasting with the high front vowel i and the high back-rounded vowel u
both as an independent nucleus and as the first element in the diphthong ia.
In the present work it is also reconstructed in place of retroflex -r as the
second element in the diphthongs -si and -ai (see below), replacing the
retroflex vowels -er- and -ar-. Such diphthongs are found in Tai dialects
and other Southeast Asian languages. For discussion see below.
j This stands in IPA for a high front glide, like consonantal y- in
English which is often used in place of it in North American linguistic
usage. It is important to distinguish clearly between ja, which is a sequence
of the glide j + the vowel a, and the diphthong ia, which is a sequence of
two fully syllabic vowels, equivalent in timing to the long vowel a:.
o A lower mid back rounded vowel like that in Cantonese [to:]
'many' or that in English long (though this is unrounded for many
American speakers), reconstructed for EMC and the new version of EM
presented here. Like the corresponding front vowel e, it contains the
 6
Introduction
feature [+low] and arose historically in Chinese from the fusion of the
diphthong /ua/ or the rounding of the low vowel /a/. It is therefore
important to distinguish it clearly from the higher mid vowel [o] in
diachronic statements. There is, however, no contrast between o and o in
EMC or EM and one could substitute o for o without ambiguity for practical
purposes.
cei A lower mid front rounded vowel like that in Cantonese . [tshce:rj]
'long,' reconstructed for the late, northern, form of EMC in use in early
Tang. It has no short counterpart in EMC.
r In LMC and EM r corresponds to the retroflex r of Modern
Mandarin. It may have had slightly more friction than the retroflex [i] of
American English, since it is represented by z in Tibetan transcription but it
was phonologically a sonorant, not an obstruent. Compare the use of j,
phonetically [3], in the standard French romanization system for Chinese,
also adopted in the English Wade-Giles system. It is also found in EMC
and LMC as the second element in the affricates tr, trh, dr, trfi, nr, which
were single segments and not biphonematic clusters. Compare tr as
pronounced in Southern Vietnamese or English tr- as in train, which is
phonetically an affricate. During Song times tr- and trh- merged with the
sibilant retroflex affricates ts- and tgh-. Compare the merger of tr- with ch-
[tf] in Northern Vietnamese and the substitution of [tj] for [tr] in childish
pronunciation of English. The affricated pronunciation of nr- persisted in
some varieties of LMC, in which nasals were regularly pronounced as
prenasalized stops, but in most modern dialects nr- has merged with n- and
the retroflex feature has left no trace. It is likely that such a merger had
already occurred in some varieties of LMC.
r Raisedr was used in the EMC reconstruction as presented in Middle
Chinese as a mark of retroflexion for vowels. In the present work this is
replaced by i as the second element of the diphthongs si and ai. See below.
§ Retroflex fricative as in Mandarin shan [san] 'mountain.' May also
be written s. It is also found in the affricates ts, tsh, tsfi.
u A labiodental frictionless approximant, as found, for example, in
Dutch where it is distinct from the voiced labiodental fricative [v]. It is
found in Mandarin as a frequent variant of initial [w] and is reconstructed as
an initial phoneme for LMC and EM. One could write v- instead of u-
without ambiguity provided that the muddy labiodental obstruent of LMC is
written ffi- or vh-.
x A voiceless velar fricative as in Mandarin hdo [xaw] 'good.'
y The high front rounded vowel of Mandarin nyu 'woman' or
German Niiss 'nut.'
q The corresponding glide (semivowel) in French huit [qi] 'eight' or
Cantonese [n0q] 'woman.'
7
Lexicon
7 Voiced counterpart of the palatal fricative 9 found in EMC, also as
the fricative component of the affricate dj. Written z by Karlgren.
% Voiced retroflex fricative found as a marginal phoneme in EMC and
as the second element in the affricate dz.. Written z by Karlgren.
? Glottal stop, initial in EMC and LMC.
' Sign of glottalization used to mark the Rising Tone in EMC.
As noted above, the Rising and Departing Tones of EMC are marked by
syllable final -' and -h respectively. For LMC tones are marked by ' (Rising
Tone) and" (Departing Tone) placed after the end of the syllable. For EM,
which had essentially the same tonal system as modern Mandarin, a similar
convention is used, using ' for the Yangpmg Tone (Mandarin Tone 2),v for
the Rising Tone (Mandarin Tone 3) and" for the Departing Tone (Mandarin
Tone 4).
Changes in Reconstruction (a) Early Mandarin
In Middle Chinese it was assumed that the long vowel -a:- of LMC (there
written -aa-) shortened to -a- in EM and the corresponding VV diphthongs
-ia-, -ua-, -ya- also reduced to a single syllabic element, either by changing
the first V to a glide (in syllables ending in -arj, i.e. a pharyngealized velar
nasal), or by changing the second V, syllabic -a-, to a glide -a-. In a later
article (Pulleyblank 1986a) it was argued that a better solution, more in
keeping with evidence of contemporary pronunciation, was to assume that,
when closed by -n, -m and -w, the diphthongs fused to corresponding low
vowels, -ia—> -e-, -ua—> -o-, -ya—> -ce-, a stage reflected in hPhags-pa
orthography. Thereafter, -e- developed a palatal onglide, merging with -je-
from LMC -jia-, while -ce- became -ue-, also merging with LMC -jya-
which had already developed to -ue- at the hPhags-pa stage. This is the
stage represented by the Zhongyuan yinyun.. This solution was not,
however, extended to corresponding syllables ending in -t and -p, which
lost their stop endings between LMC and EM, nor to the syllables
reconstructed as ending with -a with which they merged.
On further reflection it has become clear that a simpler solution that
agrees better with the contemporaneous evidence for the pronunciation of
EM is to assume that there was no final -a glide in EM and that the VV
syllables reconstructed for LMC in -a (as well as those in -t, and -p which
were also lost in EM) followed the same course as the corresponding finals
in -n, -m, -w: -a: —> -a, -ia -> -e, -ua —> -o, -ya—> -ce —> -ue. After
coronal initials, finals in short -aa, -at, -ap merged with -o from LMC -ua
and remained distinct from EM -a derived from LMC -aaa, -aat, -aap. This
implies that short -a rounded to -o before the shortening of VV syllables. It
is also necessary to suppose that LMC -ua labialized preceding velar stops
and fricatives: LMC kuaa —> kua —> EM kwo, which remained distinct from
  8
Introduction
LMC kaa -> ka -» EM ko. These changes in EM reconstruction have been
incorporated into the Lexicon.
A further detail about the reconstruction of EM that must be mentioned
is that I now assume that the glide -j- was everywhere lost after retroflex
initials and that the glide -q- was depalatalized to -w- in the same
environment. I therefore write, for example, EM gem" (not sjem ) for shan
(compare the old transcription Shensi of the name of the province of
Shaanxi ) and EM swe" (not sue") for shuo
The open front and back rounded vowels, -e and -o, of EM are still
found in southerly Mandarin dialects but in the Beijing dialect a structural
requirement for a final -a glide after non-high vowels has reappeared. EM
open -je and -qe have become structurally -jaa and -qaa, while -o has
become -aa after velars and -waa after coronals. A fuller discussion must
be reserved for another occasion.
The following is a summary of the initials and finals of the Zhongyuan
yinyun as presented in this Lexicon.
INITIALS
k kh (rj) x (H)
ts tsh § r
ts tsh s
t th n 1
p ph m f i)
FINALS
1. Rhyme Dongzhong '. -urj, -jurj
2. Rhyme Jiangyang .. -arj, -jarj, -warj, -qarj
3. Rhyme ZhlsT _ ., -r, -z
4. Rhyme Qiwei -i, -uj, -aj
5. Rhyme Yumo -u, -y
6. Rhyme Jielai -ai. -jaj, -waj
7. Rhyme Zhenwen ... -an, -in, -un, -yn
8. Rhyme Hanshan -an, -jan, -wan
9. Rhyme Huanhuan ._ „„ on
10. Rhyme Xiantian . -en, -jen, -wen, -qen
11. Rhyme Xiaohao -aw, -jaw, -waw, -ew, -jew, -ow
12. Rhyme Gege .. , o, -jo, -wo
13. Rhyme Jiama „ .... a,-ja,-wa
14. Rhyme Chezhe . _ -E, -je, -we, -qe
15. Rhyme Gengqmg -srj, -irj, -warj, -yrj
16. Rhyme Youhou . -aw, -iw
17. Rhyme Qlnxin -am, -im
18. Rhyme Jianxian -am, -jam
 9 
10 Lexicon
19. Rhyme Lianxian -em, -jem
TONES
Upper Level - unmarked; Lower Level - '; Rising -v; Departing - \ The
old Entering Tone had been lost in EM and the syllables were redistributed
over Lower Level (LMC voiced aspirate initials, Rising (LMC voiceless
initials, except ?), and Departing (LMC sonorant initials and ?).
Changes in Reconstruction (b) Late Middle Chinese
As noted above, the final -a glide in the Guo and Jia rhyme groups is
omitted in the forms given in the Lexicon. It must, in any case, have been
lost quite early in the evolution towards EM. Since such a final glide is
required to account for the parallel between these rhyme groups and the
Dang groups in the history of Cantonese (Pulleyblank 1991), it seems likely
that there were different dialectal varieties of LMC. The glide a is also
omitted as a mark of pharyngealization before the velar finals of the Dang
group. It is retained before the velar endings of the Zeng group, where it
accounts for the Kan'on representation of the finals -iarj and -iak (now
written -iSrj, -iak) as -you and -yoku.
Final -a (rewritten as -3) is retained in the Yu rhyme group, where it
must have been present as long as the kaikou and hekou finals were distinct
and constituted a single rhyme group, since otherwise -ia would have
merged with the -i rhyme group. Some colloquial rhyming from the ninth
century suggests that this did in fact occur in some dialects. There is other
evidence that in another form of LMC which eventually became dominant
the kaikou finals -sa, -ia were already not distinct from the corresponding
hekou finals -ua, -ya in Tang times (Middle Chinese p. 108). Modern
dialects are almost all descended from this latter variety of LMC and I have
therefore indicated this as an alternative LMC reconstruction in the Lexicon,
thus: -99/-U3, -is/yd.
SYLLABLE STRUCTURE
Ci(C2)Vi(V2)(Cs), where Ci is any of the INITIALS; €2 is a MEDIAL GLIDE;
Vi is one of the vowels a, a, i, u, y; V2, which cannot occur after a, is the
vowel a; and Cs is a FINAL CONSONANT or GLIDE.
x xfi (H) ?
1
s sfi
ts ?fi r
f ffi i)
INITIALS
k
t
tr
ts
tg
P
kh
th
trh
tsh
tsh
Ph
kfi
tfi
trfi
tsfi
tsfi
pfi
rj
n
nr
m

This page intentionally left blank 
12 Lexicon
(a) Open -a
The final glide -a as a syllable closure after the vowel -a in the absence
of another consonant or glide is omitted in transcription for EMC as well as
LMC. The extent to which such a glide was actually present at this, and
earlier, stages of the language remains to be determined.
(b) Retroflex vowels
The retroflex vowels -er- and -ar- were reconstructed for EMC
corresponding to Grade II of the rhyme tables of the Yunjing tradition. In
LMC these vowels merged as long -a:-. The reconstruction of such a long
vowel for LMC is supported by the overall syllabic structure of that
language, which is assumed to have also had the VV diphthongs -ia-, -ua-,
-ya- as well as the single V nuclei, -a-, -a-, -i-, -u-, -y-. The same basic
syllable structure is also postulated for EMC, which also had the VV
diphthongs -ia-, -ia-, -ua-. It was assumed that in the penultimate stage of
the form of EMC out of which LMC developed the two retroflex vowels
had merged as long -ej-, which developed a preceding palatal glide and then
defronted to -ai-. Direct evidence for such a front vowel at this stage is
found in colloquial Min dialects, as well as Go'on and the pre-Sino-
Vietnamese strata of loanwords in Vietnamese.
The question at issue is the nature of the Grade II finals at the earlier
stage of EMC when the two types of rhymes were still distinct. Since they
gave rise to VV finals in LMC, we should expect them to have already had
such a structure, which is not implied simply by the marking of the retroflex
feature. One way to account for this would be to suppose that the retroflex
feature constituted, not a feature modification of a single V element, as
implied by the transcriptions -er- and -ar-, but a second V element which
could be symbolized by writing vocalic -r- on the line instead of raised -r,
thus: -er-, -ar-. This would not be an economical solution, however, since
syllabic r does not occur otherwise in EMC phonology. To write simply -r-
would also be objectionable, since it would imply the possibility of CC
clusters in syllable codas, something that is otherwise excluded.
I now think that a better solution is to identify the 'retroflex' feature with
the vowel i, which already plays a role in EMC phonology, both as an
independent nuclear vowel and as the first element in the diphthong ia.
Diphthongs of the type ai with this vowel as the second element are found in
the Tai dialects of Lungchow and Po-ai and are reconstructed for Common
Tai by F. K. Li (Li 1977). Common Tai, like Vietnamese, has strong
typological similarities to EMC probably resulting from the areal influence
from China to which it was subjected before and during the first millennium
of the present era (Pulleyblank 1986b). I now replace the retroflex vowels
-er- and -ar- with the diphthongs -si-, -ai-. I assume that -si- first lowered
to -ai- after which -i- was subject to the same fronting rule that has already
been assumed for changing EMC -i- and -ia- to LMC -i- and -ia-: -ai—>

Introduction 13
-ai-. Note that Lungchow and Po-ai ai correspond to ai in Siamese (Li
1977: 289). The VV diphthong -ai- then fused to the long monophthong
-e:-.
There is a strong acoustic affinity between retroflexion and back
unrounded vowels (Pulleyblank 1989) and it makes good sense to suppose
that the r-umlaut in Type A syllables which had the effect of throwing the r-
feature from initial r-clusters forward to the end of the syllable should have
resulted in this type of diphthong. A back unrounded element in the nucleus
would also have been acoustically appropriate for representing retroflexion
in transcriptions of Sanskrit, which provided one of the principal pieces of
evidence for reconstructing retroflex vowels. A further point is the merger
of *-riaj from the Old Chinese *-aj rhyme category and *-iaj from the Old
Chinese *-al category to form the EMC final -ia (Grade HI) that is discussed
in Middle Chinese, pp.171 ff. It was there suggested that, before -i-,
medial -r- was replaced by a velar onglide: -ri—> -i- which was later lost
but not before it had prevented the emergence of a palatal onglide by the
general rule that applied to front vowels in EMC: *-i- -> EMC -ji-, but *4i-
-» EMC -i-, resulting in the chongniti contrast between Grade IV and Grade
IE. While in the Inner finals a three-way contrast survived in EMC among
the reflexes of the Old Chinese *-aj and *-al groups between -i, -ji, and -ij,
there was a merger in the corresponding Outer finals between *-iaj from the
*-al group and 4iaj from the *-aj group which both became EMC -ia (Grade
in) in contrast to -jia (Grade IV) which came exclusively from *-iaj in the
*-aj group.
(c) The vowel o
In Middle Chinese the LMC finals -aw, -awrj, -awk were reconstructed
as -ow, -owrj, -owk. This vowel does not occur otherwise in EMC and
comparison with other forms of Chinese suggests that -aw- would in any
case have been pronounced with a rounded vowel by assimilation of the
shwa vowel to the following glide. The arguments that led me to think that
there was a stage at which the underlying vowel was rounded (p. 182 ff.) no
longer seem compelling. The surface rounding, together with the following
glide, was no doubt what led to the rhyming with -uw, -uwrj, -uwk. The
development of these finals from Old Chinese will be discussed more fully
elsewhere.
(d) Rhyming in EMC
There are a number of ways in which the forms as reconstructed here
may not appear to give good exact rhymes within the tongyong categories.
(i) The finals aw, uw, and iw rhyme freely together. So also do the
pairs of finals awrj, uwrj and awk, uwk which are included within the same
Qieyun rhymes. This may be compared to the rhyming of [arj] [irj] [urj] in
Mandarin. In EMC, however, it contrasts with the separate rhyming of an,
in, and un. It is probably to be explained by the acoustic effect of the

14 Lexicon
following w-glide, which would have rounded a preceding shwa vowel to
[o].
(ii) Finals with nuclear /a/ and final palatalized velars also matched
differently in rhyming from corresponding finals in -n, -t, -m, -p, -j. For
many poets all such finals could rhyme together, presumably because of the
preponderant acoustic effect of the following palatal glide. The treatment of
ejrj and ejk as a separate duyong category that is specified in the Guangyun
remains unexplained. Perhaps the short vowel [e] was phonetically
somewhat higher, closer to [e], when followed by a palatal glide.
(iii) Unrounded i and back rounded u could, in general, rhyme freely
together. Hence in and un, ian and uan, iat and uat, iam and uam, iap and
uap, could interrhyme. The Guangyun is inconsistent in specifying it and ut
as duyong but we seldom find this exemplified in actual rhyming practice of
the seventh century or earlier. The nuclear vowel /a/ was probably
somewhat raised phonetically by a preceding i or u, hence the interrhyming
of ian and uan with an, and iat and uat with 9t.
(iv) In the case of the diphthong ia (except when followed by
pharyngealized velars) there was no doubt fronting as well as raising.
Hence the rhyming of -ej, -ew, -en, -et, -em, -ep with -iaj, -iaw, -ian, -iat,
-iam, -iap. Compare Mandarin [-jen] which rhymes with [-an] [-wan]
[-u.an] and is written -ian inpinyin. While one could unambiguously write
iej, iew, ien, iet, iem, iep for these finals if rhyming were the main issue,
the spellings iaj, iaw, etc. correspond better to the underlying structure and
are therefore better for representing the diachronic development.
(v) The interrhyming of the Grade II final -ai/e: and the Grade HI final
-ia that are all included in the Qieyun ma rhyme is confirmed by poetic
practice at all periods. Up to the latter part of the fifth century, these finals
also rhymed with the finals -a, -wa, -ia, -ua, of the ge rhyme but this is
consistent with the general rule that the retroflex, or centralized, finals of
Grade II did not yet form separate rhyming categories. After the fronting of
-ai to -e:, interrhyming can be accounted for by allophonic fronting of -ia to
[iae] or [ie], as in the case of -ian [ien], etc.
(vi) Rhymes __ and reconstructed here as arj and in, and the
corresponding Entering Tone rhymes, are treated as tongyong in the
Guangyun, though they are kept apart in pre-Tang rhyming practice and
even in the seventh century by many poets. Their merger probably reflects
the shift towards LMC in which the final velars were pharyngealized, giving
an audible off-glide to the vowel which brought the finals closer together:
99rj, ask, iSrj, i§k. I have not thought it necessary to indicate this late
change in my EMC reconstruction.
The following is a summary of EMC as it is presented in this Lexicon.

Introduction 15
INITIALS
?
k kh g rj x Y
tq tqh d? ji Q ? j
t th d n 1
tr tr11 dr nr
ts tsh dz s z
t§ tsh dz. s z.
p ph b m w
MEDIAL GLIDES
j in contrast to zero after non-coronal (velar, laryngeal and labial)
initials in finals with the high front vowel -i in words that were later placed
in Grade IV in LMC
w in contrast to zero after all initials, other than labials, in words that
were hikou in LMC
FINALS in Level and Entering Tones arranged by tongyong and duyong
groups of the Guangyun. For the sake of clarity medial glides are included
with the finals. Forms after slashes show the mergers that had taken place
by the beginning of Tang when the tongyong and duyong groups came into
use in poetic rhyming. Finals in Rising and Departing Tones correspond to
those in Level Tone, except in the case of rhymes - ajh, wajh, iajh/jiajh,
jiajh/jwiajh, aijh(s)/e:jh, waijh(s)/w£ijh, iajh, uajh, which only
occurred in Departing Tone. All these rhymes still ended in -s in the
southern dialect at the beginning of the sixth century (Pulleyblank 1979).
Though -s was lost by the time of the Qieyun, it is placed in parentheses in
rhyme aijh(s)/e:jh, waijh(s)/we:jh to distinguish it from rhyme aij/e:j,
waij/we:j with which it was otherwise identical.
awrj, uwrj
awrj, uawrj
aiwrj/ceiwrj
i§/i, jia/ji, wia/wi, jwiS/jwi, i, ji, wi, jwi, 2C i/i
*j»uj
13
u3, -o
ajh, wajh
ej, wej, iajh/jiajh,jiajh/jwiajh
aij/erj, waij/we:j, sij/eij, waij/weij, aijh(s)/e:jh, waijh(s)/w£:jh
W9J, P£ 3J
iajh, uajh
in, jin, win, jwin, in
un, in

16 Lexicon
ian, uan, i wan, • an
an, wan
ain/e:n, wain/wein, ib sin/em, wain/wem
en, wen, illi ian, jian, wian, jwian
ew, law, jiaw
aiw/eiw
aw
a, wa, ia, ua
ai/ei, wai/wei, ia
am/am, am
iag, uarj, ^ an, wag
aijn/eijn, waijrj/weijn, iajn, wiajn, aijn/eijn, waijrj/weijn, iajn,
jiajrjjwiajn.
ejn, wejrj
in, 31]
UW, 3W, J1W
im, jim
iam, jiam, em
aim/eim, aim/eim
iam, uam
swk, uwk
awk, uawk
aiwk/oe:wk
it, jit, wit, jwit, it
ut
it
iat, uat, at, wot
at, wat
ait/e:t, wait/weit, sit/eit, wait/weit,
et, wet, iat, jiat, wiat, jwiat
iak, uak, ,, ak, wak
aijk/e:jk, waijk/we:jk, iajk, wiajk, sijk/eyk, waijk/werjk, iajk,
jiajk. iwiajk
'ejk
i ik, jik, ak
ipjip
sp/ap,: ap
iapjiap, " e:p
aip/eiD, . sip/e:p
iap, . uap

Introduction 17
TONES
Level, unmarked; Rising, '; Departing, h; Entering, syllables ending in -p,
-t, -k.
Modern Readings
The Lexicon is intended as a key to pre-modern readings, not to current
pronunciation. Nevertheless it is obviously desirable to record modern
readings as accurately as possible, not only because the entries are arranged
according to them but also because it is of interest from a historical point of
view to note cases in which modern readings show irregular development.
In the majority of cases the current pronunciation is well established and
easily ascertained in standard dictionaries but there is a sizeable minority of
cases in which problems arise. These are of several different kinds.
One such case is where a graph traditionally had a reading pronunciation
that differed from the corresponding colloquial word. In other cases a
pronunciation showing the expected regular development may be recorded
in dictionaries as an 'old reading' or 'alternative reading' along with a more
common reading that differs from it, often only in tone. My practice has
been to include both pronunciations, distinguished by the letters a and b
after the Morohashi number. It would, no doubt, have been desirable to
mark the reading and colloquial pronunciations as such but evidence for
establishing this is not always readily available and it has only been done in
a minority of cases.
Another related but slightly different case is where two old readings of a
graph that were still kept apart until recent times have merged in current
usage. For instance, 1$L formerly had two readings, shi as the verb 'to
send; cause, make to do' and shi as the noun 'envoy.' In current usage shi
is used for both. The reading shi is given as an alternative reading for the
latter meaning in the Hanyu cidian, based on the Guoyu cidian, published
by the Commercial Press in 1937, but has disappeared from more recent
dictionaries such as the Xiandai Hanyu cidian (1978), the Chinese English
Dictionary of the Commercial Press (1979), or the Ciyuan (1987). The new
multivolume Hanyu dactdidn distinguishes the two words, giving their
Guangyunfanqie, but reads both as shi without comment. Only the Hanyu
dazidian gives shi as an 'old reading' for the meaning 'envoy.'
Another example is 7p which had two EMC readings, dri/dri (Level
Tone) and drih/drih (Departing Tone). The first, which gives Mandarin chi
by regular development, was a transitive verb 'set in order, govern.' The
second, which gives Mandarin zhi, referred to the resultant state, 'well-
ordered, governed.' In current usage zhi is used for both meanings. The
reading cht is recorded in its old meaning as a reading pronunciation in the
Hanyu cidian but is not found in the Xiandai Hanyu cidian or the Chinese
English Dictionary and in the Ciyuan (1987) it is recorded only as a

18 Lexicon
surname and the name of a river. The same is true of the Hanyu dazidian.
The new Hanyu dacidian lists the level tone and departing tonefanqie from
the Guangyun under the single modern reading zhi without reference to the
distinction in meaning. Since it seems more important in a work directed
towards the history of language to record what was until recently the living
tradition than to be up-to-date, I have generally used the Hanyu cidian as an
authority for modern readings in spite of the fact that it is over fifty years
old.
Paradoxically, though the large new dictionaries omit readings that were
current at least for some people within living memory, they have no
hesitation in supplying modern Mandarin pronunciations on the basis of
ancient sound equations or fanqie for words that have been obsolete for
centuries. The graph ^ standing for an old word which meant a horse's
head ornament is read/drt in 1965 edition of the Cihai, apparently on the
basis of the statement in the Shuowen that the right hand part was 'read like
fan $L.' On the other hand, the Ciyuan reads it as wdn which is the
expected modern reading corresponding to the fanqie of the Guangyun. It
is, of course, necessary to have some way of giving a modern reading to
obsolete words found in old texts but one can be sure that neither
pronunciation of ^represents a living tradition. From a historical point of
view it would be desirable to distinguish such artificial readings from those
that are truly inherited through the spoken language. It would, however, be
very difficult to do so in a consistent and reliable way. There is, in fact, no
clear dividing line between such extreme cases of readings invented or
recreated by dictionary makers and readings of words from the old literary
language that may have a certain currency among the educated in set phrases
but seem clearly to be based on graphic analogy rather than natural evolution
through the vernacular.
A special kind of problem is presented by readings of graphs used in old
transcriptions of foreign words. Ideally one wishes to use such
transcriptions as clues to the pronunciation of the foreign word at the time
the transcription was made and the modern Mandarin pronunciation is
strictly irrelevant. Establishing the ancient pronunciation of the graph in
Chinese is only the first step in the process, though it may be as far as one
can go in many cases, especially when the transcription is from a language
that is otherwise unknown. The matter is not infrequently complicated by
commentaries that give special sound equations or fanqie spellings for
graphs used in such transcriptions. The general question of how to deal
with Chinese transcriptions of foreign words is a complicated problem that
deserves a much more extended discussion than can possibly be attempted
here. It arises in the present connection, however, through the need to
assign Mandarin readings to graphs in old transcriptions that have a certain

Introduction 19
currency, at least among academics. Let me give a few illustrative
examples.
The graph , now pronounced jia, is found almost exclusively in
Buddhist transcriptions where it represents the Indian (Sanskrit or Prakrit)
syllables ka or ks. In the Guangyun it has the reading E. kia which
according to the expected regular development ought to give Mandarin jie.
Compare qii 'eggplant' from E. gia. It is very likely that the modern
reading jia is analogical, based on the phonetic component, jia JW. The
Guangyun does include a second reading for , homophonous with that of
jia /&P, in Jiaye , originally a transcription of Kasyapa, the name of
one of Buddha's disciples, but known in Tang China as a two-character
surname. It is likely that even here it was an analogical reading resulting
from the fact that there was no native word in current use pronounced E.
kia. An even clearer case is that of \&, the corresponding transcription
character for Indian kha or khd, read E. khia in the Guangyun, which is
now pronounced qu instead of the expected qie, evidently by analogy with
qu . It would, of course, be highly artificial to insist on reading . and
i& as jie and qie.
A reverse situation arises when modern scholars invent readings with
little or no ancient authority in order to fit a theory. Thus it has recently
become the practice in China to read the Tang dynasty name of Tibet,
; , as Tubo instead of the traditional reading Tufan still found, for
instance, in the Xiandai Hanyu cidian (1978). I assume that the motivation
behind this innovation is to find a reading which will be closer to the
Tibetans' own name for their country, Bod. As far as I can discover,
however, there is no early authority for a Middle Chinese reading for the
character that could give rise to a modern reading bo. The Hanyu
dazidian gives a reading bo confined to the name but provides no
fanqie. It merely quotes a passage from the Xin Tangshu which states that
the Tufan were originally descended from the Western Qiang
including, among others, the Fa Qiang It then goes on to say that,
because the sounds offan and fa were close the descendants
were called Now it is true that fa EMC puat looks very much like
a transcription of the word Bod and it seems clear that the Song Qi or
whoever was responsible for the Xin Tangshu passage, recognized this and
sought to use it as an explanation for the name _. , but the problem of
accounting for the substitution of for as claimed, remains.
According to the Guangyun, has the EMC readings puan and buan, the
first of which, especially, could be called 'close' to EMC puat. But
neither nor any of the graphs in the same phonetic series has a Middle
Chinese reading in -t. without the grass radical, which is normally read
fan from EMC phuan, does have a reading bo, representing EMC pa, in the
expression bo bo 'with a martial air' from the Shijing, and this seems to be

20 Lexicon
the source of the supposed reading bo for in but an EMC reading
pa is neither as close to EMC puat as the normal readings of nor a
plausible transcription of Bod. The origin of the name Tuf§n and its relation
to Bod (or Bon ?) is an intriguing puzzle but it is difficult to see how
changing the modern reading to Tub5 contributes to its solution. The whole
enterprise seems to be on the same level as the scholastic invention of
special readings of characters to improve the rhyming of the Shijing that
was practised in the Song dynasty.
Old Chinese
No reconstruction for Old Chinese is included in this Lexicon. This is
because I do not believe that it is possible at present to offer any complete
reconstruction for stages of the language earlier than the Qieyun. The
rhyming in early poetry provides a set of categories for the finals but they
are subject to many more ambiguities than the rhymes of a rhyming
dictionary. For the initials there is not even this much in the way of a closed
system. Nevertheless, there are promising developments, especially, in my
view, the hypothesis that the twenty-two calendrical signs known as the
Heavenly Stems and Earthly Branches originated as phonograms for the
initial consonants of the language. Progress is also being made in
unravelling the morphological processes that lie behind the phenomenon
known as 'word families,' that is, sets of words related both in sound and
meaning that is such an obvious feature of the Old Chinese lexicon.
Exploitation of such evidence to compile a proper etymological dictionary of
the language still lies in the future, however.
Key to the Lexicon
1. Entries are arranged in alphabetical order by the modern pronunciation in
pinyin romanization.
2. Each character is followed by the number of its radical and the
number of additional strokes according to the Kangxi zidian and by its serial
number according to the Morohashi Dai kanwajiten preceded by the letter
M.
3. If more than one ancient reading is included for the character, this is
indicated by the addition of a capital letter after the Morohashi number, e.g.
chang 168:0 M4i iQOA. Separate entries will be found at the appropriate
places for zhang 168:0 M41100B and zhang 168:0 M41100C. Each of
these entries has different EMC and LMC readings.
4. If two or more modern readings have to be referred to the same
ancient reading, this is indicated by the addition of a lower case letter after
the Morohashi number, e.g. chang 32:9 M05278a and chang 32:9
M052785, which have different meanings in modern usage but both have to
be referred to the only attested EMC reading driarj.

Introduction 21
5. Reconstructed readings come next, in the following order: Early
Mandarin (prefixed by the letter Y for Yuan), Late Middle Chinese (prefixed
by the letter L), Early Middle Chinese (prefixed by the letter E). As far as
possible modern homonyms are arranged so as to place together words
which were also homophones at earlier stages in the order EM, LMC, and
EMC, though this may be disturbed by irregular developments.
6. Yuan readings are based, where possible, on the Zhongyuan yinyun.
This sometimes entails the inclusion of alternative readings separated by
commas. Where a graph does not appear in the Zhongyuan yinyun, the
reconstructed reading is placed in square brackets.
7. For L readings of words beginning with labial fricatives two readings
are given separated by a slash. The first represents the earliest stage,
attested by some Sino-Vietnamese and, more rarely, Sino-Japanese forms,
in which medial -y- was retained. The second represents the stage
represented by modern dialects and by most of the other early evidence in
which this medial was already lost. E.g. fa L. fjyat/faat, feng L.
fjywrVfuwrj,/e/ "I L. fjyj/fji. Similarly words in the kaikou division of the
Yu rhyme group (corresponding to the Yu rhyme category of the
Qieyun), which had already shifted to hekou in many LMC dialects (see
above) are given two readings separated by a slash, e.g. shu. L. sss/sua,
yu L. rjis/rjyS.
8. Where two E readings are given separated by slashes, the first
represents the stage at which the full range of distinctions of the Qieyun was
applicable. The second represents the later stage in the seventh century that
is implied by the tongyong rhyming categories, e.g. chl , E. trhi/trhi
(from rhyme ), chJ E. trhi3/trhi (from rhyme ), and chl E. ti^i
(from rhyme which were distinct rhymes in the Qieyun but were treated
as a single rhyme in Tang lushi poetry.
9. If the character is included in Karlgren's Grammata Serica Recensa,
the serial number in that dictionary is given, preceded by the letter K.
10. It should be emphasized that the aim of the Lexicon is to given
reconstructed pronunciations, not to compile a dictionary of literary
Chinese. The English glosses that are provided are not intended to be
exhaustive nor are they distinguished by date or reference to texts in which
they occur. Strictly modern colloquial meanings have generally been
omitted as irrelevant to the historical purpose of the Lexicon but have been
referred to occasionally where it seems desirable for the sake of clarity.
L.

This page intentionally left blank 
23
LEXICON
170:5
170:5
30:6
30:7
32:7
76:7
94:10
106:10
187:7
76:7
80:3
140:16
173:16
111:8
61:9
72:13
96:13
1 Af\- 1114U.IJ
173:17
112:6
112:8
M41599b
Kim
M41599c
Kim
M03580
K550h
M03701
K938a
M05107
K938b
M16090A
K938d
M20599a
M22765
M44780
M16090B
K938d
M16727
M32397
K313a'
M42526
M23995
M10947
K508a
M 14206
K508b
M21267
X/f3Tr\QTMj/Uo /
K508c
M42540
M24170
K937t
M24283
Y. o L. ?a E. ?a
familiar prefix to names and terms of
relationship. See also e, a
Y. o L. ?a E. ?a
old reading for a See also e, a
Y. aj L. ?aj E. ?oj
mourn, grieve
Y. aj L. ?aj E. ?aj
exclamation; also other readings
Y. aj L. ?aj E. ?aj
dust
Y. [aj] L. ?aj E. ?aj
sigh (of affirmation). See also ai
Y. [aj'] L.rjaj E.rpj
stupid; rigid, inflexible. Now written
See also dai
Y. aj' L. rjaj E. rpj
snow-white
Y. aj' L.njaij' E.naij'/rjey
ignorant, stupid
Y.[aj"] L.?aj' E.?3j'
sound indicating agreement. See also ai.
Y. ajv L.?aj' E.?3J'
proper name
Y.ajv L.?ajx E. ?ajh
flourishing vegetation; friendly
Y. ajv L. ?ajv E. ?ajh
mist, haze
Y.jaj" L.?jaij' E.?aij'/?e:j'
low, short; dwarf
Y. af L. ?ajx E. ?ajh
love; begrudge
Y. [ajs] L. ?ajv E. ?9jh
dim, obscure; conceal
Y. [ajv] L. ?ajv E. ?9jh
Aihun : place name
Y oiv 1 ?aix T7 9/>ih. aj !_.. /aj c,, /aj
screen, conceal
Y. [aH L. ?ajs E. ?sjh
aida overhanging clouds
Y.[af] L.rjaj^ E. najh
same as .,.
same as
a
a
ai
ai
ai
ai
ai
ai
ai
ai
ai
ai
ai
ai
ai
ai
ai
ai
ai
ai
ai

24 Lexicon
ai
ai
ai
ai
ai
an
an
an
an
an
an
in
Sn
an
an
an
an
an
an
112:14
140:2
184:9
170:4
170:10
40:3
177:6
53:8
64:6
75:6
46:5
94:3
153:3
M24542
K956g
M30648A
K347c
M44278
K313y
M41559B
K844h
M41791B
K848h
M07072
K146a
M42815
M09369
140:8
149:9
180:11
30:8
72:8
203:9
M31227
M35736
M43312
K651H1
M03770
M14013
K614e
M48159
M12038
K146d
M14762
K146e
M08009
K139e'
M20250
K139c'
M36501
K139d'
Y.[af] L.ijaf E. rpjh
obstruct, impede, block up
Y. af L. gaf E. rjajh
mugwort, Artemisia. See also yi
Y. af L. Tjaif E. ?aijh(s)/7e:jh
food gone bad. Also E. ?at, ?iajh
Y.jaf L.?jaif E. ?aijh/?£jjh
narrow straits, pass, defile; narrow;
constrained. See also e
Y.jaf L.?jaijv E. ?aijh/?eijh
narrow straits, pass, defile; narrow;
constrained. See also e
Y. an L. ?an E. ?an
peaceful, at ease, content, secure; how?
where?
Y. an L.?an E.?an
saddle
Y. am L. ?am E. ?3m/?am
small thatched cottage; small Buddhist
convent
Y. amL. ?am E. ?3m/?am
same as,
Y. am L. ?am E. ?9m/?am
memorize, know by heart
Y. [am] L. ?am E. ?3m/?am
murmur, mumble
Y. [anT] L. ?am' E. ?am'
used for Sanskrit om
Y. am" L. ?am' E. ?9m'/?am'
dark
Y.jarrf L. ?jaim' E. ?3im'/?e:m'
deep black; dejected, gloomy. Modern
reading is probably borrowed from
Y. an L. ?anv E. ?anh
press down, control; according to
Y. an L. ?anv E. ?anh
stool; table, desk; law case; record,
file; plan, proposal
Y. anv L. rjanv E. rjanh
bank, shore
Y. anv L. rjan"E. rjanh
prison; wild dog, same as
Y. [an] L.rjanv E. rjanh
small wild dog of the steppe resembling
a fox; also E. rjan and yanh

Lexicon 25
72:9
169:9
26:2
72:4
108:5
167:11
167:13
17:3
32:5
86:11
167:11
30:11
66:7
86:11
94:11
124:12
128:11
142:11
149:11
162:11
187:11
205:11
M14065
K653h
M41421
K6531
M02841A
K699a
M13783
K699b
M22981
K7181
M40799a
M40922
MOlSlOa
M04988
K1115J
M19352b
K1130h
M407995
M04142
K1130e
M13226
K1130a
M19352a
K1130H
M20646
K1130J
M28810
K1040H
M29159
M33496
K1130k
M35896A
K11301
M39073
K1130c
M44963A
K1130m
M48301
K1130o
Y. am L. ?amv E. ?3mh/?amh
dark
Y. anf L. ?airf E. ?3mh/?amh
dark, hidden
Y. arj' L. qarj E. rjarj
I, me. See also ySng
Y. arj' L. rjaq E. rjarj
hold up one's head; high
Y. arf L. ?arf E. ?arjh
bowl; full, tubby, swollen
Y. aw L. ?aw E. ?aw
kettle, cooking pot; boil food; also ao
Y. aw L. ?aw E. ?aw
kettle, cooking pot; boil food
Y. jaw L. Tjaiw E. ?aiw/?e:w
concave, hollow, cavity; also yao
Y. jaw L. Tjaiw E. Taiw/Teiw
hollow, cavity
Y. aw' L. rjaw E. rjaw
seeao
Y. aw L. ?aw E. ?aw
kettle, cooking pot; boil food; also ao
Y. aw' L. rjaw E. naw
aoao cry of distress
Y. aw' L. rjaw E. rjaw
saunter about, stroll, roam; place name
Y. aw' L. rjaw E. rjaw
fry; boil, stew
Y. [awl L. rjaw E. rjaw
large dog
Y. [aw'] L. rjaw E. rjaw
aoxiang hover, soar
Y. aw' L. rjaw E. rjaw
stubborn, unwilling to listen
Y. [aw'] L. rjaw E. rjaw
pincer of a crab
Y. aw' L. rjaw E. rjaw
vilify. Also E. rjaiw/rjeiw. See also ao
Y. aw' L. rjaw E. rjaw
saunter, roam, amuse oneself
Y. aw' L. rjaw E. rjaw
superior horse; proud, arrogant. See also
ao
Y. aw' L. rjaw E. rjaw
huge fabulous turtle
an
an
£ng
ang
&ng
ao
ao
ao
ao
ao
ao
do
ao
ao
ao
ao
ao
ao
ao
ao
ao
do

26 Lexicon
37:1
38:10
145:13
198:4
37:10
61:13
85:13
170:13
9:11
37:9
149:11
167:11
187:11
M05838C
K1141a
M06588
K1244e
M34629
M47594
K1141k
M05985
K1045a
M11332
M18412A
K1045b
M41872A
K1045c
M01015
K1130d
M05962
M35896B
K11301
M40782
M44963B
K1130m
Y. [aw"] L. ?aw' E. ?aw'
newborn birds or animals. See also yao,
vao
L. ?aw'Y. aw L. ?aw'
old woman
Y. aw" L. ?aw'
padded coat
Y. [awv] L. ?aw'
young deer
Y.awv
E. ?aw'
E. ?aw'
E. ?aw'
E. ?awhL. ?awv
southwest corner of house; interior;
profound
Y. awv L. ?awv E. ?awh
repent; regret
Y. aw* L. ?awN E. ?awh
deep-water bay; anchorage for ships. See
also yu
Y. [aws] L. ?awv E. ?awh
deep gorge; deep. See also yu
Y. awv L. rjawh E. rjawh
haughty, arrogant
Y. awv L. rjawv E. rjawh
haughty, arrogant; proper name
Y. [awv] L. rjawv E. rjawh
banter, joke. See also ao
Y. awv L. rjawv E. rjawh
griddle
Y. aw' L. rjawv E. rjawh
superior horse; proud, arrogant. See also
ao
ao
ao
ao
ao
ao
ao
ao
ao
ao
ao
ao
ao
ao

Lexicon 27
49:1
118:4
140:4
152:4
12:0
140:5
130:5
157:5
159:5
194:5
64:5
64:4
32:7
32:21
64:4
M08745
K39a
M25865
M30730
K39c
M36356
K39d
M01450
K281a
M30839
K276g
M29357
K276f
M37446
K276b
M38266
K276e
M45806
K276c
M11959
K276H
M11874A
K39b
M05098
M05630
M11874B
K39b
ba
ba
ba
ba
bai
bai
75:21
85:21
173:13
122:10
106:0
64:8
M15971
M18814
M42490A
K772b
M28336B
K26a
M22678a
K782a
M12200
K874r
Y. pa L. pa: E. pai/pe:
snake; ancient people in Sichuan
Y. pa L. pa: E. pai/pe:
basket woven of bamboo or willow
Y. paL. pa: E. pai/pe:
bajiao' banana
Y. pa L. pa: E. pai/pe:
sow, female pig
Y. pa" L. pa:t E. psit/pe:t
eight
Y. [po'] L. pfiuat E. bat
roots of grass; camp in the open
Y. [po'] L. pfiuat E. bat
body hair
Y. po', po" L. pfiuat E. bat
trample; go against; postscript, colophon
Y. [po'] L. pfiuat E. bat
sacrifice to the god of the road. Also E.
bajh god of the road
Y. pa' L. pfiuat E. bat
drought demon
Y. pa' L. pfia:t E. bsit/be:t
pull up by the roots; select; capture a city
Y. pa" L. pa:' E. pai'/pe:'
hold, grasp. See also ba
Y. pa" L. parE. paih/pe:h
embankment, same as
embankment, same as iH
E. paih/pe:h
E. paih/pe:h
E. pai/pe: ,h
handle. This reading is not found in the
Guangyun but corresponds to See
also ba
Y. pa" L. par
handle
Y. [pa"] L. par
river name
Y. pa" L. par
hegemon, overlord; hegemony; rule by
force. See also po
Y. pa" L. pfia:jv E. baij'/be:j'
stop; finish; dismiss. See also pi
Y. paj' L. pfiarjk E. baijk/be:jk
white; plain; state, explain; also bo
Y. [paj"] L. pay' E. psij'/peij'
open
ba
ba
ba
ba
ba
ba
ba
ba
ba
ba
ba
ba
ba
ba
ba

28 Lexicon
64:15
75:5
106:1
9:5
64:5
119:8
66:7
30:7
66:7
115:8
64:10
137:4
104:10
67:9
64:4
67:8
96:6
137:4
181:4
170:4
75:4
M12910
M14617a
K782J
M22679a
K781a
M00466a
K7821
Ml 1969
K328a
M26988
K874t
M13227A
K320f
M03694
M13227B
K320f
M25113
K874s
M12507
M30388A
K182a
M22405
M13471
M11837B
K262m
M13470
K190c
M20976
K190a
M30388B
K182a
M43378A
K471p
M41562
K262g
M14518
K262J
Y.paf L.pa:j' E. psij'/pey'
place, arrange, set forth; wave
E. paijk/peijk
E. paijk/peijk
E. paijk/peyk
)rother; also
E. paijh/peijh
E. baijh/beijh
E. paijh(s)/p£ijh
Y. paj L. paijk
cypress; also bo
Y. paj" L. paijk
hundred; also bo
Y. paj" L. paijk
father's or husband's elder brother; also
bo
Y. paj" L. pa:jv
bow, salute
Y. [pajv] L. pfiaij"
polished rice
Y. pajs L. paijv
defeat. See also bai below
Y. [pajl L. pfiaijv E. baijh(s)/beijh
Buddhist chanting
Y. pajv L. pfia:jv E. baijh(s)/beijh
go down to defeat. See also bai above
Y. pajv L. pfiaijv E. baijh/beijh
barnyard millet; weed
Y. pon
vulgar form of ban move
Y. pon L. puan E. pan
move, remove; sort, class, category
(modern usage). See also ban below and
bo, pan
Y. p^n' L. pfiuan E. ban
scar
Y. [panl L. pam E. psin, pain/pein
banian multicoloured, gorgeous
Y. pan L. pam E. pain/pern
pull. See also pan
Y. pan L. pam E. pain/pern
variegated, dappled
Y. pan L. pam E. pain/pein
divide, distribute; classify, arrange; class
Y. pan L. pam E. pain/pein
return, go back, turn around. See also
ban above and bo, p£n
Y. pan L. pam E. pain/pern
distribute, promulgate. See also fen
Y. [panv] L. pfiamv E. bain'/bem'.
slope or side of a hill, bank
Y. pan" L. pam' E. pain'/pern'
board, block, tablet
bai
bai
bai
bai
bai
bai
bai
bai
bai
bai
ban
ban
ban
ban
ban
ban
ban
ban
ban
ban
ban

Lexicon 29
91:4
167:4
24:3
120:5
177:5
9:5
91:14
160:9
50:14
163:4
75:10
140:10
149:10
3:10
75:8
142:4
145:9
145:11
20:3
130:5
140:5
M19817
K262k
M40224
K2621
M02707
K181a
M27376
M42766
K181b
M00475
K181c
M21425
M38655
K219f
M09125
M39310
K1197e
M15241A
K740p
M31572
K740r'
M35817
K740k'
M00948B
K740m'
M14929
M32851
K1197d
M34437
M34552
K1057H
M02506
K1113a
M29396
K1113b
M30789
K1113c
Y. [parT] L. pain' E. pain'/pem'
board, block, tablet
Y. pan" L. pain' E. pain'/pem'
metal plaque
Y. pon" L. puanv E. panh
half
Y. pons,panv L. puanv E. panh
hobble for a horse; hobble
Y. [pon"] L. puanv E. panh
harness strap
Y. ponv L. pfiuan" E. ban'
companion
Y. panv L. pfiaar E. b3inh/bemh
melon seed; section of a fruit; petal
Y. panv L. pfiamv E. bainh/bemh
deal with, manage, handle
Y. parj L. parj E. parj
upper of a shoe; help; gang clique
Y. parj L. paiwrj E. paiwrj/pceiwrj
state, country
Y. parf L. parj' E. parj'
placard, notice; list of names posted. See
also beng
Y. [parfl L. parj' E. parj'
niubang great burdock, Arctium
lappa
Y. parf L. parf E. parjh
slander, vilify
Y. parf L. pfiarf E. barjh
alongside, close to. See also pang
Y. parf L. pfiaiwrf E. baiwrj'/bceiwrj'
stick; club, cudgel
Y. parf L. pfiaiwrf E. baiwrjh/bceiwrjh
freshwater clam, mussel
Y. pow L. uuaw E. paw
vulgar form of
Y. [pow] L. puaw E. paw
wide, flowing gown; praise
Y. paw L. paiw E. paiw/peiw
wrap; bundle
Y. paw L.paiw E. paiw/peiw
afterbirth, amnion, caul. Also E. phaiw
Y. paw L. paiw E. paiw/peiw
bud; kind of rush for weaving mats or
sandals; dense growth;
ban
ban
ban
ban
ban
ban
ban
ban
ban]
banj
banj
banj
banj
banj
banj
banj
bao
bao
bao
bao
bao

30 Lexicon
18:8
140:13
173:5
9:7
32:9
40:17
140:9
145:9
196:4
184:5
32:9
64:5
72:11
85:15
86:15
153:3
195:5
18:5
167:5
61:8
112:8
170:5
M02049a
K1228a
M32083a
K771p
M42248a
K1113n
M00702
K1057a
M05254
M07376
K1059a
M31381
K1057f
M34438
K1057g
M46730
K1060b
M44109
K1113d
M05275
K1058a
M11917
K1113J
M14137A
K1136a
M18609
K1136c
M 19540
M36499
K1244k
M46074
K1113H
M01929
M40292
M 10720
K579u
M24289
K874d
M41603A
K25i
E. paw'
L. puaw' E. paw'
E. paw'
E. paw'
E. paw'
E. paw'
E. paiw'/peiw'
Y. paw" L. paiwk E. paiwk/poeiwk
flay, peel, shell; also bo
Y. paw', po' L. pfiak E. bak
thin; weak; also bo
Y.[paw' po'] L. pfiaiwk E. baiwk/boeiwk
hail; also bo
Y. pow" L. puaw'
protect
Y. pow
small fort
Y. pow L. puaw'
treasure; precious
Y. pow" L. puaw'
luxuriant vegetation; cover for a carriage;
cover, preserve
Y. pow" L. puaw'
swaddling clothes
Y. [pow"] L. puaw'
bustard, Otis dybowskii
Y. paw" L. paiw'
eat to capacity, to satiation
Y. pawv L. puawv E. pawh
report back; pay back
Y. pawv L. pfiuaw" E. baw'
embrace; carry in the arms
Y. paw" L. pfiuawv E. bawh
sudden and violent; savage, cruel. See
also pu
Y. paw" L. pfiuawv E. bawh
sudden rain
Y. pawv L. paiwv E. paiwh/pe:wh
explode. Also E. paiwk
Y. paws L. pa:wv E. paiwh/pe:wh
leopard
Y. paws L. pfia:wv E. baiw'/beiw'
abalone
same as bao
Y. [pawv] L. pfia:wv E. baiwh/be:wh
plane down; plane
Y. puj L. pi
sad
Y. puj L. pi
monumental stone, stele
Y. puj L. pi E. pia/pi
dike; slope, slant, embankment. See also
bi
E. pi
E. pis/pi
bao
bao
bao
bao
bao
bao
bao
bao
bao
bao
bao
bao
bao
bao
bao
bao
bao
bao
bao
bei
bei
bei

Lexicon 31
24:6
75:4
21:3
61:11
9:10
37:15
145:5
145:5
177:5
130:13
38:8
130:5
159:8
94:7
M02738
K874a
M14497
K999o
M02574a
K909a
Ml 1195
K984H
M00967
K984d
M06025
K1237r
M34222A
K25e
M34222B
K25e
M42776
K25f
M29944b
K853s
M06428a
K8741
M29363A
K909e
M38398
M20433
154:0
9:8
140:10
39:4
61:7
86:8
M36656
K320a
M00760
K999c'
M31663
M06949A
K491a
M10663
K491d
M19099
Y. puj L. pji E. pjia/pji
low, humble
Y. puj L. puaj E. paj
cup
Y. puj" L. puak E. pak
north; turn the back on; run away; be
routed, defeated; also bo
Y. pajv L. pfiaif E. b3ijh/beijh
exhausted, modern reading from
Y. pujx L. pfiiv E. bin
prepare; provide; be provided with; fully
Y. [pujl L. pfii" E. bih
angry, enraged
Y. puj" L. pfii" E. bia'/bi'
blanket, cover. See also bei below and
PI
Y. puf L. pfii" E. biah/bih
cover; be covered by, suffer; mark of the
passive. See also bei above and pT.
Y. [puj"] L. pfii" E. bioh/bih
carriage strap
Y. puj" L. pji" E. pji3h/pjih
gebei arm. See also bi
Y. puj" L. ph"ji" E. bjia'bji'
female slave; also bi
Y. puj" L. puaj" E. psjh
back. See also bei below
Y. puj" L. puajv E. pajh
class of people, category
Y. pujv L. puajv E. pajh
langbei; mythical animal with short
front legs ana long hind legs; in a difficult
position, in a dilemma
Y. pujv L. puaj" E. pajh
shellfish; cowrie
Y. pujv L. pfiuajv E. baj'
turn the back on; double; times, n-fold
Y. [pujv] L. pfiuajv E. bsj'
beilei bud
Y. [pufj L. pfiuajv E. b9Jh
comet. See also bo
Y. phuf [sic] L. pfiuaj" E. bajh
contrary, perverse
Y. puj" L. pfiuaj" E. bsjh
dry over heat
bei
bei
bei
bei
bei
bei
bei
bei
bei
bei
bei
bei
bei
bei
bei
bei
bei
bei
bei
bei

32 Lexicon
130:5
37:6
154:6
75:1
102:5
37:6
46:8
120:6
120:11
113:4
140:8
96:8
177:8
75:10
162:8
9:9
162:9
209:0
M29363B
K909e
M05921A
K438a
M36734C
K437a
M14421
K440a
M21809
K439a
M05921B
K438a
M08212
K886m
M27429
K8241
M27852
K886o
M24643
K740J'
M31233
K1197f
M21068
K1197e'
M42881
K999f
M15241B
K740p
M38929
K824m
M00887
K933n
M38973
K933p
M48498
K521c
Y. pujv L. pfiuajv E. bajh
turn one's back on, desert. See also
bei above
Y. pun L. pun E. pan
run, hurry, flee. See also ben
Y. pun L. pun E. pan
courageous, brave. See also bi, fen
Y. pun" L. pun' E. pan'
base, foundation; trunk; origin;
fundamental
Y. pun" L. pun" E. pan'
basket for earring earth, hod
Y. [punv] L. punv E. panh
run, flee; go straight towards. See also
ben
Y. parj, purj L. purj E. parj
collapse of a mountain; death of an
emperor
Y. [parj, purj] L. paijrj E. paijn/peijrj
cord for stringing shells; to sew
Y. parj, purj L. paijrj E. paijrj/peijrj
bind around; stretch, draw tight
Y. [parj, purj] L. paijrj E. paijrj/peyrj
sacrifice at the side of a temple gate
Y. [purf] L. pawrj' E. pawrj'
bSngb&ng luxuriant, fruitful
Y. [purj"] L. pawrj' E. pawrj'
ornament on a scabbard
Y. [purjv] L. pawrj' E. pawrj'
jewel at the top of a scabbard. Compare
beng
Y.[parj\ purjv] L.paijrjv E. paijrjh/pe:jrjh
oar; to row; whip See also b&ng
Y. parj\purf L. paijrjv E. paijrjh/peijrjh
dispel, repel, drive off
[Y. puj'] L. piak E. pik
encroach on; close; urge, press, coerce.
Same as
Y. puj' L. piak E. pik
encroach on; close; urge, press, coerce
Y.pi' L.pfijiN E. bjih
nose. The Yuan and modern Mandarin
readings, as well as those in many other
modern dialects (e.g. Taiyuan pia',
Amoy literary pit), imply E. bjit, L. pfijit.
This is not found in the Guansvw but is
bei
ben
ben
ben
ben
ben
beng
beng
beng
beng
beng
beng
beng
beng
beng
bT
bT
bi

Lexicon 33
163:11
60:5
118:6
21:0
38:4
81:0
9:8
177:8
115:4
118:10
53:4
140:4
81:0
102:3
104:8
145:8
53:8
140:12
M39597
K983e
M 10066
K25g
M25987
K502d
M02570
K565a
M06103
K566n
M16743A
K566g
M00740
K874c
M42889B
K874x
M24958
K566q
M26356.
M09239
K566p
M30693B
K566z
M16743B
K566g
M21748
K521a
M22270
M34338B
K874e
M09359
K874m
M31888
K341h
supported by a transcription in Khotanese
Brahmi as phira
Y. puf L. pi' E. pi'
border-town, outlying district; rustic,
low, vulgar
Y. pujv L. pi' E. pis'/pi'
that, those; the other, another
Y. puf L. pit E. pit
writing brush, stylus
Y. pf L. pji' E. pji'
spoon; bTsh6u dagger
Y. pf L. pji' E. pji'
deceased mother
Y. pi" L. pji' E. pji'
compare. See also bi, pi. Also E. bjit
next in order
Y. [pf] L. pji' E. pjiS'/pji'
cause, enable
Y. [pf] L. pji' E. pjiSYpji'
scabbard. See also bTng
Y. phujv L. pji' E. pji'
unfilledX, kernel-less grain; worthless
Y. pi L. pjiaj E. pej
double-edged fine-toothed comb; to
comb
Y. pf L. pji* E. pjih
cover, shelter, protect
cover, same a: See also pi
Y. pi- L. pji*, pfiji* E. pjih, bjih
be side by side, by; by the time that.
The distinction between the two E.
readings is not clear. Now usually read
bT in this sense
Y. pi* L. pji* E. pjih
give, present
Y. [pi*] L. pji* E. pjih
pain caused by cold or damp; rheumatism
Y.[pi*] L.pji* E.pji3h/pjih
supplement, augment; benefit, advantage.
See also pi
Y. [pi*] L. pfiji* E. bjiS'/bji'
low, modest; short
Y. pf L. pjiaj* E. pjiajh
cover, screen, hide
bi (continued)
b!
bl
bT
bl
bT
bT
bT
bT
bT
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi

34 Lexicon
Y. [pi-] L. pjiaj- E. pjiajh
kind of pheasant. See also bie.
Y. piv L. pjiaj- E. pejh
favourite
Y. pi" L. pjiaj- E. pejh
bar a door; shut. Also E. pet, see bie
Y. [pi-] L. pfijiaj- E. bjiajh
wear out; damage, ruin; worn out, bad
Y. pi" L. pfijiaj- E. bjiajh
die
Y. [pi-] L. pfijiaj- E. bej'
thigh, femur. Also E. pjis'
Y. pi" L. pfijiaj- E. bej'
steps up to the throne
Y. [pi^] L. pfijiaj- E. bejh
bill climbing fig, Ficus pumila.
See also bo
Y. [pi-] L. pi- E. pih
secret; also mi
Y. pi- L. pi- E. pih
vulgar form of $&
Y. pi- L. pi- E. pish/pih
ornate. See also ben, fen
Y. [phi-] L. phjiaj- E. phejh
bini look at disdainfully out of the
corner of one's eye; also pi
Y. pi L. piajk E. piajk
green jade; bluish green, blue
Y. pf L. pjiajk E. pjiajk
pierced flat circular piece of jade used
for ceremonial purposes
Y. [pf ] L. pjiajk E. pjiajk
pleats, folds in garment
Y. [pf] L. pjiajk E. pjiajk
lame
Y. [pf ] L. pjiajk E. pjiajk
ruler; ward off. Also E. bjiajk law,
rule. See also pi
Y. pi L. pjiajk E. pejk
wall
Y. pf L. pjit E. pjit
necessarily, certainly
Y. [pf ] L. pjit E. pjit
ornament at the lower end of a scabbard
Y. pf L. pjit E. pjit
hand net; finish
196:12 M47326B
K341i
38:13 M06770
K853v
169:3 M41222
K412a
66:8 M13245
K341a
66:14 M13417
K341f
188:8 M45205
K874f
170:7 M41654
K566c'
140:13 M32125B
K853x
113:5 M24663b
K405m
115:5 M249775
154:6 M36734A
109:8 M23459a
112:9 M24334
K782s
96:13 M21269
K853d
145:13 M34645
157:13 M37913
K853h
160:6 M38642A
K853a
32:13 M05516
K8531
61:1 M10299
K405a
96:5 M20919
K405c
102:6 M21829
K407a
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi

Lexicon 35
118:11
120:11
122:11
148:9
157:11
178:11
61:5
75:5
163:5
184:5
81:5
85:5
154:5
169:5
178:5
149:5
157:5
170:5
190:5
130:13
38:8
M26393
K407J
M27808
K407k
M28352
K407d
M35131
K1257g
M37783
K4071
M43197
K407m
M10489
K405d
M14661
K405J
M39339
M44092
K405h
M16750
K405k
M17279
K4051
M36717C
K500s
M41283
K405n
M43116
M35384
K25h
M37479B
K25m
M41603B
K25i
M45411
M29944a
K853s
M064285
K8741
Y. pi" L. pjit E. pjit
intertwined branches, wattle; brushwood
Y. [pi] L. pjit E.pjit
sew; seam of a cap
Y. [pf ] L. pjit E. pjit
small net with a long handle, same as
Y. [pf] L. pjitE. pjit
pipe, flageolet; bifa •; cold wind; bifei
spring welling up
Y. pi" L. pjit E. pjit
clear the road, prohibit traffic
Y. [piv] L. pjit E. pjit
knee-cover
Y. [pi'] L. pfijit E. bjit
bibi nonchalant, rude
Y. [pi'] L. pfijit E. bjit
handle; lath for holding a bow in shape
Y. [pi'] L. pfijit E. bjit
place name
Y. [pi'] L. pfijit E. bjit
fragrant, savoury (food). Also E. bet
Y. [pujv] L. piv E. pih
weary from toil; guard against, caution,
admonish
Y. [puf ] L. piv E. pih
bubble up (as water from a spring)
Y. [pujs] L. pi
place name. See also fei
Y. [puf] L. piv
shut
Y. [puf] L. p^
device for shaping a bow
Y. puf L. piv
one-sided, partial, prejudiced
Y. [puf ] L. pi^ E. pish/pih
standing on one foot. See also bo
Y. [pujv] L. pi^ E. piah/pih
slanting, on a slope. See also bei.
Y. puj^ L. pfiY E. bi3h/bih
hair; false hair
Y. pujv L. pjiv E. pjish/pjih
arm; also bei
Y. puf L. pfijiv E. bjia'/bji'
female slave; also bei
t^'
E. pih
E. pih
E. pih
E. pi§h/pih
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi

36
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bi
bian
bian
bian
bian
bian
bian
bian
bian
bian
bian
bian
bian
bian
bian
bian
Lexicon
162:13
50:12
55:12
75:9
106:7
51:9
57:9
118:19
120:9
140:9
142:9
162:15
177:9
112:5
13:9
53:5
145:9
154:5
i!6:5
49:16
62:9
iO:9
M39163
K853u
M09088
K341d
M09644
K341e
M15105
M22735
M10920
K1034k
M09826
K406e
M26801
K224f
M27665
K246e
M31358
K2461
M33271
M39216
K224c
M42937
K221c
M24110
M02689
M11724B
K216a
M34420
K246g
M36707
K641d
M25459
K641c
M36117
K178o
M39001
M10174a
K246b
Y. puj" L. pfiji" E. bji3h/bjih
avoid, shun; keep away, prevent
Y. puj" L. pfijiaj" E. bjiajh
silk used as currency; money
Y. puj" [sic] L. pfijiaj" E. bjiajh
ruin; spoiled
Y. [puj ] L. piak E. pik
piece of wood placed across a bull's
horns; stand for arrows
Y. [puj"] L. pisk E. pik
two hundred
Y. [puj-] L.pfiiSk E. bik
obstinate, wilful
Y. [puj'] L.pfiit E. bit
assist
Y. pjen L. pjian E. pen
stand for sacrificial offerings
Y. pjen L. pjian E. pen, pjian
plait, weave; compile, edit
Y. [pjen] L. pjian E. pen
Polygonum aviculare. Also E. pen',
phjian
Y. [pjenl L. pjian E. pen
bianfu bat
Y. pjen L. pjian E. pen
side, margin, edge, border
Y. pjen L. pjian E. pjian
whip
Y. [pjen] L. piam E. piam
stone needle, acupuncture
Y. pjen" L. pjian' E. pen'
thin, flat; inscribed board
Y. pjen L. pjian' E. pen'
thin, flat. See also pian
Y. [pjen"] L. pjian' E. pjian'
narrow
Y. pjen" L. piam' E. piam'
demote; reduce, devalue; censure
Y. [pjen"] L. piam" E. piamh
lower into the grave, bury
Y. pjen" L. pian" E. pianh
change, transform, become, turn into
Y. pjen" L. pjian" E. penh
all around, everywhere, same as
Y. pjen" L. pjian" E. penh
all around, everywhere; also pian. So

Lexicon 37
bian (continued)
160:9
160:14
25:2
55:2
61:4
64:4
85:4
9:7
120:14
120:9
130:15
167:15
198:4
75:3
75:11
182:12
187:20
190:0
4:11
59:8
M38657
K219b
M38677
K219e
M02778
K220b
M09588
K220a
M10372
Ml 1860
K220c
M17165
M00659B
K221a
M27991
M27693B
M30003
M41022
K1170e
M47598B
K1170a
M14466B
K1120b
Ml 5442
K1157d
M43963
M45094
K1156a
M45355A
K1154a
M12651A
K11571
M09993
K1106a
read in the Kanmiu buque Qieyun.
Guangyun places in the -ianh rhyme but
thefanqie implies -enh
Y. pjen" L. pfiian' E. bian'
discriminate, distinguish, divide
Y. [pjenv] L. pfiians E. bian'
distinguish; dispute, argue
Y. pjenv L. pfiianv E. bianh
law; impetuous; a surname
Y. pjenv L. pfiian" E. bianh
man's cap of the Zhou period
Y. [pjens] L. pfiian- E. bianh
delighted, elated
Y. pjenv L. pfiianv E. bianh
clap the hands; slap
Y. pjenv L. pfiianv E. bianh
river name
Y. pjenN L. pfijian" E. bjianh
convenient; then, thereupon. See also
plan
Y. pjen" L. pfijian" E. ben'
plait, braid
same as See also pian
Y. pjew L. piaw E. piaw
fat (referring to an animal)
Y. [pjew] L. piaw E. piaw
horse-bit
Y. [pjew] L. piaw E. piaw
to weed; biaobiao bold, warlike. See also
pao
Y. pjew L. pjiaw E. pjiaw
handle of the Big Dipper. Also E.
phjiaw. See also shao, shuo
Y. pjew L. pjiaw E. pjiaw
small branch, twig, tip; mark, sign
Y. pjew L. pjiaw E. pjiaw
whirlwind
Y. pjew L. pjiaw E. pjiaw
descriptive of a running herd of horses.
Also E. pjiw
Y. [pjew] L. pjiaw E. pjiaw
long hair. Also E. pjiw. See also shan.
Y. [pjew] L. pjiaw E. pjiaw
wave away. See also biao
Y. piw L. pjiw E. pjiw
stripes on a tiger; young tiger
bian
bian
bian
bian
bian
bian
bian
bian
bian
bian
biao
biao
biao
biao
biao
biao
biao
biao
biao
biao

38 Lexicon
145:3
195:11
64:11
61:12
195:12
196:12
205:12
157:12
18:5
18:5
104:14
9:4
59:8
67:8
152:10
163:4
75:14
85:14
154:7
167:14
M34105
K1153a
M46447
M12651B
K11571
Ml 1197
K3411
M46472
K341k
M47326A
K3411
M48305
K341J
M37846
K341m
M01924B
K292a
MO 1924 A
K292a
M22588
M00418A
K471u
M09996
K474c
M13468
M36448
M39296
M157345
M18537
K389J
M36788
K389a
M40983
Y. pjew" L. piaw' E. piaw'
outside; expose, display
Y. pjewx L. pfijiaw" E. bjiaw'
swim bladder, air bladder; fish glue
Y. [pjewv] L. pfijiaw' E. bjiaw'
fall down; drop, shed; strike. See also
biao
Y. pje" L. pjiat E. pjiat
speedily, hastily. Also E. phjiat irascible.
Now used for 'suppress, hold back,
suffocate' which Ding Shengshu
identifies with in the reading E.pet.
Seebi
See bie
Y. [pjev] L. pjiat E. pjiat
golden pheasant. See also bi
Y. pje" L. pjiat E. pjiat
soft-shelled turtle, Amyda sinensis
Y. [pje'] L. pfijiat E. bet
tread, march
Y. pje' L. pfiiat E. biat
separate; other. See also Me" below
Y. pje" L. piat E. piat
separate, divide. See also bie above
Y. [pje'] L. pfijiat E. bet
shrunken, wizened
Y. [pin] L. pin E. pin
same as See also fen
Y. pin L. pin E. pin
having both substance and refinement
Y. [pin] L. pin E. pin
same as
Y. [pin] L. pin E. pin
place name, same as #P
Y. [pin] L. pin E. pin
place name, same as
Y. [pin] L. pjin E. pjin
see bing
Y. pin L. pjin E. pjin
river bank, shore
Y. pin L. pjin E. pjin
guest
Y. pin L. pjin E. pjin
wrought iron
biac
biac
biac
bie
bie
bie
bie
bie
bie
bie
bie
bin
bin
bin
bin
bin
bin
bin
bin
bin

Lexicon 39
120:14
142:14
9:14
64:14
78:14
190:14
130:14
188:14
75:14
M27999
K3891
M33741a
K389p
M01214
K389g
M12880
K389h
M16596
K3891
M45607
K389k
M29977
K389r
M45298
K389q
M15734a
Y. [phin] L. phjin
full, numerous
Y. [phin'] L. pfijin
pearl oyster; also pin
Y. [pinv] L. pjiir
guest receiver; introduce
Y. [puT] L. pjur
reject, discard
Y. pin" L. pjirT
E. phjin
E. bjin
E. pjinh
E. pjinh
E. pjinh
lay in a coffin to await burial
Y. pin" L. pjinv
hair on the temples
Y. pinv L. pfijin"
knee-cap
Y. [pin"] L. pfijin"
knee-cap
Y. fpinl L. piin
E. pjinh
E. bjin'
E. bjin'
E. piin
binglang; areca, betel palm; also
bin
15:4
12:5
51:5
115:8
177:8
1:4
86:5
115:3
163:5
44:8
184:8
75:5
75:5
M01612
K899b
M01462
K759a
M09175A
K824b
M25127A
K668a
M42889A
K874x
M00035
K757a
M18960
K7571
M24932
K758a
M39341
K757J
M07734B
K824f
M44220
M14603a
M14603b
K757H
L. piarj E. pirj
E. piajrj
E. pjiajrj
Y.pirj
ice
Y. pirj L. piajrj
weapon; soldier
Y. pirj L. pjiajrj
combine; place name. See also bing
Y. [pin"] L. pirn' E. pirn'
receive from above; be endowed with;
report to a superior. See also iTn
Y. [pirj"] L. pjiajrj' E. pejrj'
scabbard, sheath. See also bT
Y. pirj L. piajrj' E. piajrj'
third Heavenly Stem
Y. pirj" L. piajrj'
bright, splendid; to light
Y. pirj" L. piajrj'
grasp; handful; sheaf of grain
Y. pirj" L. piajrj' E. piajrj'
place name. Also E. piajrjh
Y. pirj" L. pjiajrj' E. pjiajrj'
reject, remove, abandon. See also ping
Y. pirj" L. pjiajrj' E. pjiajrj'
round flat cake
Y. [pirj"] L. piajrj" E. piajrjh
handle; power, authority; also bing
Y. pirj" L. piajrj" E. piajrjh
handle; also bTng
E. piajrj'
E. piajrj'
bin
bin
bin
bin
bin
bin
bin
bin
bTng
bTng
bing
bTng
bTng
bTng
bTng
bTng
bTng
bTng
bTng
bTng
bTng
bing

40
bing
bing
bing
bing
bing
bing
bo
bo
bo
bo
bo
bo
bo
bo
bo
bo
bo
bo
bo
bo
bo
Lexicon
75:8
9:8
51:5
1:7
117:5
104:5
85:5
102:7
137:4
64:12
96:5
64:12
167:5
18:8
19:7
39:4
85:7
85:9
145:12
167:5
9:12
M14915
K758d
M00746
K824d
M09175B
K824b
M00054
K840b
M25752
K840a
M22127
K757k
M17308
K251
M21858C
K195b
M30388D
K182a
M12747a
K195p
M20899
M12727
K275d
M40317
M02049b
K1228a
M02351
K491b
M06949B
K491a
M17467
K491c
M17769
M34599
K275e
M40271
M01134
Y. [pirf ] L. piairf E. piajrjh
handle, same as ;
Y. [pirjv] L. pjiajrf E. pjiajrjh
together, all
Y. pirjv L. pjiajr/ E. pjiajrjh
together, all. See also blng
Y. pirf L. pfijiajrj" E. bejrj'
side by side, equally, both
Y. pirjs L. pfijiajrf E. bejrj'
side by side; equally, both, same as
Y. pirf L. pfiiajrj" E. biajrjh
illness, disease; extreme illness, crisis
Y. po L. pua E. pa
wave
Y. po L. pua E. pa
bobo bold, martial. See also fan, fan
Y. [r*-»i L. pua E. pa
borg , Sanskrit, prajna. See also
ban, pan
Y. pos L. puas E. pah
sow; disseminate, broadcast. See bo
Y. [p1^ L. phua E. pha
boli glass, from a Prakrit form of
Sanskrit sphatika.
Y. po" L. puat E. pat
turn, stir; distribute, arrange; allocate
Y. po" L. puat E. pat
Buddhist monk's begging bowl, from
Sanskrit patra
Y. paw L. paiwk E. paiwk/pce:wk
flay, skin, peel; also bao
Y. po' L. pfiut E. bat
sudden
Y. po' L. pfiut E. bst
comet; used for be sudden. See also
bei
Y. [po'] L. pfiut E. bst
burst forth.
Y. po ' L. pfiut E. bat
Bohai sea
Y. [po"] L. puat E. pat
boshi -aw rain-coat
Y. [po'] T pfiuat E. bat
see naob<3
Y. [puj'] L. pfiusk E. bsk
southwestern people in early times

Lexicon 41
bo
bo
bo
bo
b6
bo
bo
bo
bo
bo
bo
bo
bo
bo
bo
bo
157:8 M37649
K999e'
85:5 M17275a
K782r
118:8 M26142
140:13
112:17
167:17
173:5
24:10
130:10
M32083b
K771p
M24597
K771q
M41049
K771r
M42248b
K1113n
M02761
K771a
M29782
K7711
188:10 M45241
64:10 M12466
K771d
118:12 M26495
K771n
145:15 M34705
K1136d
167:10 M40718
K771g
187:4 M44619
K1127a
187:6 M44726
K1127c
50:5 M08855
K782f
106:0 M22678b
K782a
137:5 M30402
9:5 M00466b
K782i
Y. [puj'J L. pfiuak E. bsk
fall prostrate; fall down dead
Y. paw', po' L. pfiak E. bak
anchor or moor a boat; also po
Y. paw', po' L. pfiak E. bak
reed screen; bamboo tray for rearing
silkworms; foil, tinsel
Y. paw', po' L. pfiak E. bak
thin; also bao
Y. [paw', po'l L. pfiak E. bak
pangb6 vast, boundless; fill
Y. [paw', po'] L. pfiak E. bak
kind of large bell. Also E. pak, cf. bo
Y.[paw' po'] L. pfiaiwk E. baiwk/bceiwk
hail; also bao
Y. paw' L. pak E. pak
broad, extensive; ancient board game
Y. [phawv] L. phakE. phak
dismember. Now used for shoulder,
hence the modern reading, see gebo
arm
E. pakY. [paw ] L. pak E. pak
shoulder-blade
Y. [paw"] L. pak E. pak
beat, strike; grasp seize
Y. [paw"] L. pakE. pak
ancient board game; cf.
Y. [paw"] L. pak E. pak
embroidered collar; outside; expose
Y. [paw ] L. pak E. pak
hoe; kind of large bell
Y. paw" L. paiwk E. paiwk/pceiwk
dappled, piebald; refute, contradict
Y. [paw"] L. paiwk E. oaiwk/poeiwk
fabulous animal; used for
Y. paj' L. pfiaijk E. baijk/beijk
silk cloth
Y. paj' L. pfiaijk E. baijk/beijk
white, reading pronunciation; also bai
Y. paj' L. pfiaijk E. baijk/beijk
ocean going vessel
Y. paj" L. paijk E. paijk/peijk
father's elder brother, uncle; count, earl;
also bai

42
bo
bo
b6
b6
bo
bo
bo
bo
bo
bo
bo
bu
bu
bu
bu
bu
bu
bu
bu
bu
bu
bu
Lexicon
75:5
106:1
118:13
157:5
64:12
118:13
8:8
21:3
64:13
75:13
140:13
M146175
K782J
M226795
K781a
M26609A
K25n
M37479A
K25m
M12747b
K195p
M26609B
K25n
M00312
K773a
M02574b
K909a
M12835
K853p
M15669
M32125A
K853x
72:7
162:7
184:7
164:12
145:7
25:0
30:7
64:7
9:5
50:2
61:5
M13952
M38871
K102d'
M44173A
K102e'
M40023
M34320
K102c'
M02774
K1210a
M03676
K1021'
M12157a
K102J1
M00497
M08778
K102J
M10450
K102m
E.pa'
E. pa'
E. pah
Y. paf L. paijk E. paijk/peijk
cypress; also bai
Y. paj" L. paijk E. paijk/peijk
hundred, reading pronunciation; also bSi
Y. po" L. pua'
winnow. See also bo
Y. po" L. pua'
lame. See also bi
Y. po" L. pua:
sow; disseminate, broadcast; also bo
Y. po" L. pua" E. pah
winnowing basket. See also bo
Y. [paw', po'] L. pfiak E. bak
ancient place name
Y. puj L. puSk E. psk
north, reading pronunciation; also bSi
Y. paj" L. paijk E. psijk/peijk
thumb; split, break open, cleave
Y. pajv L. paijk E. psijk/peijk
huangbo Phellodendron amurense
Y. [paj"] L. paijk E. paijk/peijk
Angelica sinensis; mountain hemp. See
also bi
Y. pu L. pu§ E. po
evening, dusk; 4 p.m.
Y. pu L. pus E. po
escape, flee
Y. pu L. pu5 E. po
eat; evening meal. See also bu
Y. [pV] L. p'bwk E. phawk
mould on the surface of sauce, vinegar
Y. pu" L. pus' E. po'
mend, patch; add to, supplement
Y. pu" L. pswk E. pswk
divine by cracking a bone or shell
Y. pu" L. pfiua" E. boh
food in the mouth; feed (a baby), nurse
Y. pu\ phu' L. pfius"
catch, arrest; also bu
Y. pu" L. pus"
spread
Y. pu" L. pu3"
cloth; spread
Y. pu" [sic] L. phu§"
fear
E. boh
E. poh
E. poh
E. pV

Lexicon 43
bu
bu
bu
bu
bu
bu
bu
163:8
64:7
77:3
118:13
184:7
140:11
1:3
M39460A
K999z
M121575
K102J'
M 16264
K73a
M26623
K771o
M44173B
K102e'
M31748A
K999g'
M00019B
K999a
Y. piT L. pfiu5v E. bo'
part, section, department. See also p6u
Y. pu\ pV L. pfiusx E. boh
catch, arrest; also bu
Y. puv L. pfiuSx E. boh
step, pace; walk, go on foot
Y. pir L. pfiu§v E. boh
notebook, register
Y. [piT] L. pfiuS^ E. boh
feed. See also bu. Cf. bu
Y. [paw"] L. pfiawv E. baw'
screen. See also p6u
Y. p\f L. put E. pot, put
The hypothetical reading puat (= E. pat)
reconstructed by Karlgren to account for
modern dialect forms is not attested in
any early dictionary. The Guangyun
does, however, recognize a reading E.
put (= Karlgren piust) for this character
in the sense of fu . See also fou, f6u

44
cai
cai
cai
cai
cai
cai
cai
cai
cai
cai
cM
cai
cai
can
can
can
can
can
can
can
can
Lexicon
94:8
64:0
75:3
120:17
145:6
154:3
59:8
64:8
120:8
165:0
140:8
140:11
165:0
184:7
28:9
187:11
62:4
78:8
142:18
61:11
61:11
M20499
K12405
Ml 1769
K943a
M14463
K943g
M28070
M34258
K943c'
M36664
K943h
M09992
M12274
K942d
M27580
M40116A
K942a
M31184
K942e
M31818
K3371
M40116B
K942a
M44160
K154c
M03098A
K647a
M44965
K647c
Ml 1559
K155a
M16506
K155c
M33890
K660i
Ml 1095
K611c
Ml 1096
E. tSh9J'
E. tSh9J'
E. tSH3J'
Y. tshaj L. tshaj E. ts^j
envy; suspect, doubt; guess, estimate
Y. tshaj' L. tsfiaj E. dzsj
ability, talent
Y. tshaj' L. tsfiaj E. dzaj
timber, lumber; ability, talent
Y. tshaj' L. tsfiaj E. dzaj
barely, minimally; only just
Y. tshaj' L. tsfiaj E. dzaj
to tailor, cut and measure cloth; regulate;
decide. Also E. dzajh
Y. tshaj' L. tsfiaj E. dzaj
goods, material wealth
Y. tshaj" L. tshaj' E. tsh9J'
decorated, coloured, variegated
Y. tshajv L. tshaj'
pick, gather
Y. tshajv L. tshaj'
coloured, variegated silk
Y. tshajv L. tshaj'
pick, gather; variegated. See also cai
Y. tshajv L. tshajs E. tsh9Jh
vegetables, edible green plants
Y. tshajv L. tshajN E. tshajh
grass-land; ancient state; a surname
Y. [tshajv] L. tshajs E. tshojh
appanage, benefice. See also cai
Y. tshan L. tshan E. tshan
eat; meal
Y. tsham L. tsham E. tsh9m/tsham
take part in; refer, consult; visit a superior.
See also cen, shen, san
Y. tsham L. tsham
team of three horses
Y. tshan' L. tsfian
injurious, same as
Y. tshan' L. tsfian E. dzan
injure; kill; cruel; fragment, remnant;
deficient
Y. tsham' L. tsfiam E. dzsm
silkworm
Y. tsham' L. tsfiam E. dzam
ashamed, same as
Y. tsham' L. tsfiam E. dzam
ashamed
E. tsh3m/tsham
E. dzan

Lexicon 45
61:11
61:12
86:13
119:7
9:8
85:10
140:10
196:10
140:14
64:13
119:11
30:11
73:7
75:11
85:11
142:11
61:13
140:6
61:11
64:13
162:7
Ml 1094
K647e
Ml 1260
K660e
M19468
M26966
K154b
M00756
K703a
M18007
K703d
M31627
K703e
M47164
K703f
M32264A
K727g'
M12806A
K1134m
M27087
M04175
M 14297
K1053a
M15393
M18131A
K1053e
M33493
K1053d
Ml 1325
K11341
M30945
K1049b
M11114a
KlOSld
M12806B
K1134m
M38898Bb
K1051a
Y. tshamv L. tsham' E. tsh9m7tsham'
miserable, tragic; cruel
Y. [tshamv] L. tsham' E. tsh3m'/tsham'
miserable, tragic; a particle, compare ceng
Y. tsharf L. tshanv E. tshanh
flaming, blazing, resplendent
Y. tshanx L. tshanv E. tshanh
fine food; bright; smih'ng; see cuTcan
t
E. tsharj
E. tsharj
E. tsharj
Y. tsharj L. tsharj
storehouse
Y. [tsharj] L. tsharj
dark blue (of the sea)
Y. tsharj L. tsharj
dark green (vegetation); blue (sky); grey
Y. [tsharj] L. tsharj E. tsharj
crane; canggeng oriole
Y. tsharj L. tsfiarj E. dzarj
conceal; store. See also zang
Y. tshaw L. tshaw E. tshaw
grasp, hold; handle; operate. See also cao
Y. tshawv L. tshawv E. tshawh
rough, coarse
Y. tshaw' L. tsfiaw E. dzaw
noise, din
Y. tshaw' L. tsfiaw E. dzaw
class of people; bureau; a surname
Y. tshaw' L. tsfiaw E. dzaw
horse trough
Y. tshaw' L. tsfiaw E. dzaw
transport by water; place name. See also
zao
Y. tshaw' T. tsfiaw E. dzaw
see qfcao
Y. tsawv [sic] L. tshaw' E. tshaw'
ca"oc&o sad, sorrowful
Y. tshawv L. tshaw' E. tshaw'
grasses, herbs
Y. tshaws L. tshawv E.tshawh
caocao sincere; also zao
Y. tshawv L. tshawv E. tshawh
tenets, principles. See also cao
Y. tshawv L. tshaws E. tshawh
arrive, go to, reach; also zao. See also zao
c5n
can
can
can
cang
can^
cang
cang
can§
cao
cao
cao
c^o
cao
cao
cao
cao
cao
cao
cao
cao

46 Lexicon
27:9
53:9
9:9
61:9
85:9
13:3
118:6
118:7
28:9
46:4
85:7
44:12
73:8
163:12
29:1
48:7
75:3
64:9
134:3
167:9
140:6
140:7
M02981
M09410b
K906g
M00897a
K906c
M10869
K906e
M17780
K906f
M01515a
K845a
M26009
K8681
M26079
K846a
M03098C
K647a
M07937
K65U
M17542
M07798
K884i'
M14299B
K884a
M39643
M03116
M08732A
K5f
M14451
M12346
K631b
M30180
K631a
M40634
M30915
M31008A
E. tshih/tghih
Jb. tghih/tshih
E. tgik
E. tshik
E. tshik
Y. tgV L. tghr E. tshih/tghih
lean-to; latrine. Cf. ce
Y. ts¥ L. tg¥ fc- tghih/tshih
lean-to; latrine; also ci, si
Y. tsaj" L. tS9§k
side; also ze
Y. [tgVl L. ts^ak
sorrowful, sad; pity
Y. tshajv L. tg^Sk
fathom; estimate
Y. tghaf L. tgha:jk E. ts^ijk/tg^ijk
writing tablet; register, document; volume
of a book; alsochSi
Y. tghajv L. tghaijk E. ts'bijk/tg^yk
whip; writing tablet; plan, strategy
Y. [tghajv] L. tghaijk E. ts^ijk/tg^yk
divination stalks; used for ce
Y. [tgh9m] L. tgham E. tghim
cencT irregular, uneven. See also
can,shen,sSn
Y. tgh9m' L. tgfiam E. d^im
small, high hill; bank; a surname
Y. [tgh9irT] L. tgfism
continuous rain; puddle
Y. tsharj' L. tsfiasrj
layer, tier, stratum; storey
Y. tsharj' L. tsfissrj
once, past tense marker. See also zeng
Y. [tsirj'] L. tsfiiarj
place name
Y. tgha L. tghai
fork; forked; cross
Y. tsha L. tsha:
error; difference. See also cha, CT, chai
Y. tgha L. tsha:
fork, pitchfork
Y. tghav
insert
Y. [tgV]
L. tghaip
L.tgha:p
L. tgha:p
K82x
pestle
Y. tsV
spade
Y. tsha' L. trfia: E. drai/dre:
tea, vulgar form of
Y. tgha' L. trfia; E. drai/dre:
tea. See also tii
E. dz_im
E. dzsrj
E. dzsrj
: also zer
E. dzirj
E. tghai/tgh£i
E. tghai/tshe:
cha, CT, chai
E. tshai/tshe;
E. tg'bip/tg^p
E. tg^ip/tg1^:?
E. tg^ip/tg^ip
ce
ce
ce
ce
ce
ce
ce
ce
cen
cen
cen
ceng
ceng
ceng
cha
cha
cha
cha
cha
cha
cha
cha

Lexicon 47
cha
cha
cha
cha
cha
cha
cha
cha
cha
chai
chai
chai
chai
chai
chai
chai
chai
chai
chai
75:5 M14643B
75:9
75:10
140:5
40:11
149:6
48:7
142:8
18:6
48:7
167:3
64:5
9:14
153:3
75:5
113:5
140:6
M15094B
K5h
M15320
K5h
M30813A
K46t
M07283
K337J
M35431
M08732B
K5f
M331505
K798y
M01967
M08732D
K5f
M40191
M11943a
M01227
M36500
K943t
M 14664
K358x
M24677
K358v
M30876A
K960i
ch&
cha
13:3 M015155
K845a
142:13 M33694
K326a
Y. t§ha' L. tcfia: E. dzai/dze:
log raft, same as In modern usage the
graph is borrowed for another word, cha
investigate. See also zha
Y. tsV L. tsfia: E. dz_ai/dze:
log raft, same as See also zha
Y. tgV L. ts.fia: E. dz_ai/dzE:
chop wood; by confusion sometimes used
for cha" raft
Y. [tsV] L. tsfia: E. dzai/dze:
straw floating on water. See also ju, qu, ju
Y. tgV L. tsha:t E. ts^it/ts^it
examine, scrutinize
Y. tsV, tsV L. trV E. thraih/trhe:h
wonder at; boast
Y. [tsV] L. tsV E. tshaih/tsh£ih
differ, fall short; wrong (qtisheng reading
in the Jiyun ). See also cha, CT, chai
Y. [tsav] L. t^fiar E. dzaih/dze;h
pre-Han year-end festival; also zha
Y. [tsV] L. tshait E. tshait/tsheit
transcription character for Sanskrit ksa(t)
Y. tshaj L. tsha:j E. tshsij, tshaij/tshe:j
select, choose; different, unequal. See
also cha, cha, CT
Y. tshaj L. ts.ha:j E. tshaij/t§hEij
ornamental hairpin
Y. [tshajv] L. trVjk E. ti^aijk/tr^ijk
tear open; pull down, dismantle; also che
Y. tshaj' L. tgfiaij E. dzpij/dze:j
company; class, category; colleagues
Y. tshaj' L. tgfiaij E. dzpij/dzey
jackal, dhole
Y. tghaj' L. tsfiaij E. dz.ajj/dzeij
firewood; hedge, obstruct.
Y. ts.haj' L. tgfiaij E. dz_aij/dze:j
burnt offering
Y. [tshaf] L-t§haj(?) E.tp^j'C?)
kind of iris. Ih&fdnqie is quite
anomalous and the L. and E. readings are
irregular and uncertain. See also zhT
Y. tsha.f L. tsha:jk E. tsaijk/ts^Erjk
writing tablet; register, document; volume
of a book; also ce
Y. tsajv[sic] L. t^aij E. trhaijh(s)/trhe:jh
scorpion

48 Lexicon
104:10
75:7
64:17
147:5
50:13
145:8
145:13
39:9
85:12
53:12
85:15
120:15
30:9
157:15
38:12
85:13
113:12
142:12
167:7
149:17
M22412B
K51
M14887
K203d
M12991
M34840
K618g
M09103A
K619d
M34336
K617g
M34641
K619e
M07000
K965k
M18298
K208b
M09483
K204a
M18602
M28043
K204c
M03993B
K147a
M37970
K204b
M06738
K147y
M18416
K148f
M24835B.
K147b'
M33616
K147z
M40446B
M36137
K612d
Y. [tshajv] L. tsha:jv E. tshaijh/tse:jh
recover from illness. See also cu6
Y. [tgNm] L. ti^ian E. ti^ian
long (timber)
Y. tsham L. tshaim E. tshaim/tsheim
support by the arm; mix
Y. ts^m L. tr^iam E. ti^iam
spy; observe, survey
Y. [ts^m] L. ts'Ham E. tp^am
carriage curtain. See also chan
Y. [ts^m] L. ts^am E. tp^am
carriage curtain, fringe. Also E. tphiamh
Y. ts^m L. ts'Ham E. tp'Ham
apron. Also E. t§hiamh
Y. [tshan'] L. tsfiain E. d^pin/d^Ein
frail, weak, timid. Also E. d^wian and
d^sin'/d^em'
Y. t§han' L. tgfiain E. d^in/d^em, d^ian
cha'ncha'n water flowing gently
Y. tgken' L. trfiian E. drian
household plot; market-place
Y. [ts^en'] L. trfiian E. drian
river name
Y. tghen' L. trfiian E. drian
entwine, wrap around, wind around. Also
E. drianh, L. trfiian", Y. t§ens cord
Y. [ts^n-l L. sfiian E. cfeian
chanyu Xiongnu ruler's title. See
also dan, shan
Y. tghen' L. trfiian E. drian
animal track; path of a celestial body
Y. [tgen'] L. sfiian E. cfeian
chanjuan lovely
Y. [ts^n'] L. sfiian E. cfcian
calm water; an ancient swamp; place name
Y. tghen' L. sfiian E. d?ian
transcribes Sanskrit dhyana; Chan
Buddhism, Zen. See also shan
Y. ts^n' L. sfiian E. tfcian
cicada
Y. [ts^n'] L. gfiian E. cfeian
short spear. See also yan
Y. tgham' L. tgfiaim E. d^3im/d^e:m
defame, vilify, malign, slander. Also E.
d^3imh/d^Eimh
chai
chan
chan
chan
chan
chan
chan
chan
chan
chan
chan
chan
chan
chan
chan
chan
chan
chan
chan
chan

Lexicon 49
chan
chan
chan
chan
chan
chan
chan
chan
chan
chan
chan
chan
chan
chan
chan
chan
chan
chang
chang
chang
chang
184:17
46:17
M44479
M08618
167:17
81:13
142:13
18:8
167:11
100:6
140:12
86:12
169:12
149:8
123:15
181:13
9:17
61:17
50:13
9:8
9:8
72:4
94:8
M41052
K612e
M16767
K975k
M33676
M02036
K155i
M40810
M21684
K194a
M31925
K202a
M19388
K1471
M41489
K147x
M35616
K6721
M28594
M43706Ab
K148s
M01296
K612c
M11478
M09103B
K619d
M00742
K721k
M00783A
K724c
M13803
K724a
M20490
K724e
E. dzpim/dzeim
E. d^aim/dzeim
E. tsh9in'/tshem'
E.
E.
E. trhian'
E. tphian'
Y. tsham' L. tgfiaim
gluttonous, greedy
Y. tsham' L. tsfiaim
steep, precipitous
Y. t§ham' L. tgfiaim E. d^aim/d^eim
sharp; gimlet; spade. Also E.
dz.aimh/dzeimh
Y. tsham' L. tsfiaim E. dzpim, dz.aim/dz£im
cunning, crafty.
Y. ts'tin' T,. sfiiam E. djiam
ch£nchi toad; the fabulous toad in
the moon; the moon.
Y. tshanv L. tsham'
shave off, plane
Y. tsW L. tsha:n'
shovel, spade
Y. t§han" L. sain'
give birth to, produce
Y. ts^n" L. trMan'
finish, complete
Y. ts^n" L. tshian'
heat, cook. Also E. tpian'
Y. tshenv L. tshian'
open, lay open; explain
Y. tshenT L. tPHam'
flatter
Y. [tshanv] L. tshams E. tshainh/tshemh
mix, confuse
Y. tsen" L. t$ian" E. to?ianh
shiver; tremble, shudder. See also zhan,
shan
Y. [tshamv] L. tshaimv E. ts^im^ts^im11
uneven, mixed
Y. tshamv L. tshairrT E. ts'bimVt^eim11
repent, feel remorse
Y. [tskerrT] L. tshiamv E. tsphiamh
overcoat. See also chan
Y. [tsharj] L. ti^iarj E. tr^iarj
changchang reckless
Y. [tsharj] L. tshiarj E. tp^arj
prostitute, now written See also chang
Y. tsharj L. tshiaq E. H&arj
flourishing, prosperous; shining, splendid
Y. tsharj L. tshiarj E. tp^arj
rash, reckless; be rampant, run wild
E.
E. t^iam'

50 Lexicon
chang
chang
chang
chang
chang
chang
chang
chang
chang
chang
chang
chang
chang
ch&ng
chang
chang
chSng
chang
chang
140:8 M31174
K724f
169:8 M41367
K724g
195:8 M46255
32:9
130:9
140:8
168:0
9:15
30:11
42:5
M05278a
K720x
M29721
K720y
M31256
K721f
M41100A
K721a
M01245
K725y
M04205
K725f
M07493B
K725a
50:8 M08955
K725e
145:8 M34357
K725d
195:14 M46563
K725v
72:5 M13867
53:12 M09490
66:8 M13246
K725m
82:12 M16973
32:9 M052785
K720x
61:8 M10727
K7211
Y. tsharj L. tshiarj E. tp^ar)
sweet flag, Acorus calamus
Y. tgharj L. tshiarj E. tp^arj
changhe gate of heaven
Y. [tsharj] L. tshiarj E. tp^arj
silvery pomfret, butterfish, Stromateoides
argenteus
Y. tgharj' L. trfiiarj E. driarj
level open space for threshing, sacrificing,
etc.; also chang
Y. tsharj' L. trfiiarj E. driarj
intestines
Y. tsharj' L. trfiia" E. driai]
a surname; changchu: starfruit,
Averrhoa carambola
Y. tgharj' L. trfiiarj E. driarj
long; long lasting, always
Y. tgharj' L. sfiiarj E. d?iarj
repay, compensate.
Y. tgharj' L. sfiiarj E. d?iarj
taste, try; once, in the past.
Y. [tsharj'j L. sfiiarj E. cfciarj
cha'ngyang ramble, roam. The
graph also had this reading in now
pronounced shangshu, imperial secretary,
Master of Documents. See also shang
Y. tsharj' L. sfiiarj E. cfeiarj
constant, usual
Y. tgharj' L. sfiiarj E. d?iarj
lower garment, skirt
Y. [tsharj'] L. sfiiarj E. cfciarj
kind of fish
Y. tsharjv L. ti^iarj' E. t^iarj'
long day
Y. [tsharf] L. tshiarj' E. tp^arj'
horse stable; structure without walls;
factory
Y. tsharf L. tghiarj' E. tp^arj'
high level ground, open, spacious
Y. tsharjv L. tshiarj' E. tp^arj'
feathers of a crane; cloak, overcoat
Y. t§harj' L. trfiiarj E. driarj
meeting place, arena; also chang
Y. tshatf L. ti^iarp E. ti^iarj11
disappointed

Lexicon 51
72:10
178:8
192:0
9:8
30:8
18:11
19:11
64:4
167:4
149:4
156:5
57:5
30:12
47:8
72:6
74:8
85:12
205:5
30:4
86:4
M14095
K720v
M43160
K721m
M45661
K719a
M00783B
K724c
M03765
K724d
M02164A
K1169b
M02426A
K1169c
M11863
M40227A
K1158d
M35292
M37096
K1131J
M09758
K1131s
M04254a
M08696
K1169a
M13889
M14374B
K1143a
M18277
K1143d
M48274
K1147a
M03368
M18915
Y. tsharf L. tr^atf E. t^iarj11
penetrate; smooth, unimpeded; ample
Y. [tsharjv] L. tihiar)v E. tfiisaf
bow case
Y. tsharf L. tr^iarf E. ti^iarj11
aromatic spirits used in saacrifice
Y. tsharf L. tshiarjv E. tphiarjh
initiate, advocate, take the lead. See also
chang
Y. tsharp L. tshiarjv E. tphiarjh
sing
Y. [tshaw] L. tsha:w E. tshaiw/tsheiw
snatch; plagiarize. Reading ofJingdian
shiwen and Jiyun. Guangyun reads E.
dz.aiw in this sense. See also jiao.
Y. [tshaw L. tsha:w E. t^aiw/ts^iw
snatch; plagiarize. See also ji&o
Y. tshaw L. tsha:w E. tshaiw/tshe:w
seize, grab; copy out; abridge, excerpt;
plagiarize
Y. [tshaw] L. tshaiw E. t^aiw/ts^iw
seize, same as . paper money. See also
chao
Y. [tshaw] L. tsha:w E. t^aiw/ts^iw
disordered, excited, stirred up, agitated
Y. ts^w L. ti^Haw E. trhiaw
leap over; surpass, exceed; transcend
Y. [tshew] L. tshiaw E. tphiaw
relaxed bow
Y. tgaw L. traiw E. traiw/treiw
ridicule, mock. See also zhao
Y. tshaw' L. tsfiaiw E. dz.aiw/dzeiw
nest
Y. [tshew'] L. trfiiaw E. driaw
surname; same as
Y. tsh£w" L. trfiiaw E. driaw
court; go to court; dynasty. See also zhao
Y. tshew' L. trfiiaw E. driaw
tide
Y. tshew' L. trfiiaw E. driaw
marine turtle; morning; surname; same as
Y. [tsW] L. tshaiw' E. t^aiw'/ts^iw'
make a noise; clamour, quarrel
Y. tshaw" L. tsha:w' E. ts^aiw'/ts^iw'
fry, stir-fry
chang
chang
chang
chang
chang
chao
chao
chao
chao
chao
chao
chao
chao
chao
chao
chao
chao
chao
chao
chao

52 Lexicon
167:4
159:0
112:7
64:12
149:5
60:12
60:12
64:12
85:12
159:12
64:8
32:5
64:5
30:10
109:10
96:8
163:8
32:11
170:8
M40227B
K1158d
M38172A
K74a
M24226
M12728
M35346B
M10245A
K286c
M10245B
K286c
M12726
K286b
M18319
M38524b
K286e
M12277
K335c
M05006
K792d
M11943b
M04074 A
K375q
M23568
K375g
M21049
K666e
M39484
M05388
K374a
M41698A
K373a
Y. tshawv L. tshaiwv E. tg^iwVt^iw11
rob, plunder; paper money. See also chao
Y. tshe L. tshia E. tphia
cart, carriage, vehicle. See also ju
Y. [tshe] L. ts^a E. tphia
chequ giant clam, Tridacna
Y. tshe L. tshia' E. tphia'
drag; tear
Y. [tsVl L. tshiap E. tphiap
chezhe whisper. See also zhan
Y. [tsV] L. tAat E. ti^iat
penetrate. See also che below
Y. [tse'J L. trfiiat E. driat
penetrating, clear, discerning. See also che
above
Y. [ts£'] L. trfiiat E. driat
remove, get rid of. Also E. ti^iat
Y. tsV L. trfiiat E. driat
clear, translucent
Y. tsV L. trfiiat E. driat
wheel ruts; also zhe
Y. tsV L. tshiat E. tphiat
pull, trail, drag behind. Also E. tphiajh
Y. [tshaf ] L. trha:jk E. thraijk/trheijk
split open; rip
Y. [tshaf ] L. thra:jk E. t'Vaijk/trheijk
tear open; pull down, dismantle; also chai
Same as
Y. tshin L. tshin E. tphin
be angry, displeased. See also tian
Y. tshin L. tshin E. tphin
open the eyes wide, glare
Y. tshim L. trhim E. trhim
treasure
Y. tshim L. trhim E. trhim
place name
Y. tshin' L. trfiin E. drin
dust
Y. tshin' L. trfiin E. drin
arrange, set out in order, array; stale, old.
40:7 M07171
K455k
72:7 M13962
K455h
See also zhen
Y. tshin' L. sfiin E. d?in
eaves; region of the pole star, imperial
palace
Y. tshin' L. sfiin E. d?in, ?in
morning
chao
che
che
che
che
che
che
che
che
che
che
che
che
chen
chen
chen
chen
chen
chen
chen
chen

Lexicon 53
131:0
161:0
85:4
61:4
149:9
75:12
112:11
161:12
115:9
75:16
145:16
211:2
104:4
156:5
149:17
169:10
157:5
109:11
64:12
75:12
M30068
K377a
M38682
K455a
M17189A
K656b
M10382
K656h
M35739
K658c
M15552b
M24438
M38694
K455t
M25180Ba
K894g
M15851
K382s
M34712
M48587
K454a
M22044
K452a
M37083
M36144
M41458A
K659a
M37470
K725u
M23651
K725f
M12693
M15543
167:13 M40954B
Y. ts^n' L. gfiin E. <fein
slave; subject; minister
Y. ts^n' L. sfiin E. d?in
fifth Earthly Branch; time, season,
morning; celestial body
Y. tshim' L. trfiim E. drim
submerge, sink. See also shen
Y. sim' [sic] L. sfiim E. cfeim
trustworthy, sincere
Y. [ts'Hm'] L. sfiim E. d?im
reliable, trustworthy; a surname
Y. ts'brj' L. trfiaijrj E. drsijrj/dreijrj
orange, Citrus sinensis; also cheng
Y. ts^irf L. tshsm' E. tshim'
sand; grit in food
Y. [tshnT] L. trhin' E. t^in'
laughing. Also E. trM
Y. tshirjv L. tshi3rjs E. fc^11
match, suit; equal to; also cheng. See also
cheng
Y. [tshsnv] L. tsW E. tshinh
inner coffin
Y. tshanv L. tsW E. tshinh
liner, lining; to line
Y. tshsr L. tshsnN E. tshinh
lose one's milk teeth and cut one's adult
teeth. Also E. tshin'
Y. tshins L. tr^n^ E. d^in11
fever
Y. tshinv L. tr11!^ E. t^mh
take advantage of, avail oneself of; follow
Y. ts^rrf L. tsh3nT E. tshimh
prophecy, augury
Y. [tshimv] L. trhiirf E. uh:nih
burst forth. See also chuang
Y. tsharj' L. trfiaijrj E. draijq/dreijrj
serve as a stay or support to. Modern
reading borrowed from the related word
Y. tg'brj L. ti^aijrj E. feijryt^eyrj
look straight at, stare
See
Y. tsftsrj L. ti^ayrj E. t'Vaijij/ir^ijr)
prop up, support; pole a boat; prop stay
Y. tshsrj L. t^aijrj E. t^aijrj/ti^eyr)
shallow flat pan, griddle. See also dang
chen
chen
chen
chen
chen
chen
ch&n
ch£n
chen
chen
chen
chen
chen
chen
chen
chen
cheng
cheng
cheng
cheng
cheng

54 Lexicon
115:9
75:13
142:13
155:9
155:7
75:8
75:12
61:15
85:12
85:12
1:5
64:4
4:9
32:10
30:4
96:7
115:7
145:7
164:7
32:7
62:3
108:7
M25180A.
K894g
M15650
K835c'
M33664
M37016
K834m
M37008
K831x
M14936
K721n
M15552a
Ml 1424
K891b
M18313
M18315
K883m
M00040
K896g
Ml 1852
K896c
M00154A
K895a
M05323
K893n
M03363
K835r
M20988
K835s
M25081
K835t
M34292
K835u
M39865
K835v
M05120
K818e
Ml 1544
K818a
M23005A
K8181
Y. tghirj L. tghi§rj E. tphirj
weigh; lift up; praise; call, name; say,
declare. See also chen, cheng.
Y. ts11!!) L. ti^iajrj E. tr^ajrj
Chinese tamarisk, Tamarix sinensis
Y. tgkirj L. t^iajrj E. d^iajrj
razor clam
Y. tghirj L. ti^iajrj E. ti^iajrj
red
Y. [tghirj] T ti^iajrj E. rAajrj
red, same as L,
Y. tsharj' L. trfiaijrj E. droijrj/dreijrj
door post
Y. tgharj' L. trfiaijrj E. drsijrj/drEijrj
orange, Citrus sinensis; also chen
Y. tshirj' L. trfiiSrj E. drirj
warn; reprove
Y. [tghirj'] L. trfiisrj E. drirj
clear , same as :
Y. tshirj' L. trfiiSrj E. drirj
clear and still (water). Also E. draijrj/dreijrj
Y. tghirj' L. sfiisrj E. cfeirj
assist; assistant official
Y. tghirj' L. sfiiarj E. d?irj
lift, raise up; receive (from above); inherit
Y. tg'Hrj' L. sfiiSrj E. ?irj
ride (in a vehicle). See also sheng
Y. tghirj' L. gfiiarj E. ?irj
raised path between fields
Y. tghirj' L. trfiiajrj E. driajrj
manifest, show; report, petition
Y. [tshirj'] L. trfiiajrj E. driajrj
kind of precious stone
Y. tshirj' L. trfiiajrj E. driajrj
norm, rule; set distance
Y. [tghirjx] L. trfiiajrj E. driajrj
naked
Y. tghirj' L. trfiiajrj E. driajrj
hangover
Y. tghirj' L. sfiiajrj E. djiajrj
wall; city wall; city
Y. tghirj' L. sfiiajrj E. djiajrj
complete, accomplish, achieve
Y. tghirj' L. gfiiajrj E. driajrj
put into a vessel, fill; hold, contain. See
also sheng
cheng
cheng
cheng
cheng
cheng
cheng
cheng
cheng
cheng
cheng
cheng
cheng
cheng
cheng
cheng
cheng
cheng
cheng
cheng
cheng
cheng
cheng

Lexicon 55
149:7
163:7
162:7
187:7
115:9
120:7
163:7
104:14
118:5
64:11
114:6
142:11
194:11
196:5
M35537
K818H
M39409
M38896
K835x
M44778
K817a
M25180Bb
K894g
M27471
K1237k
M39413
M22591
M25921
K976b'
M12587
M24888A.
K23a
M33494
K23c
M45901
K23b
M46805
K590s
30:10
142:4
85:11
162:12
32:5
32:11
142:5
M04110
M32902
K962d
M18160
K1237q
M39113A
K596d
M05001
K5901
M05404
K596c
M32922
K590m
Y. tshirj' L. gfiiajrj E. d^iajrj
sincere; really, actually
Y. [tshirj'] L. sfiiajrj E. cfeiajr)
place name
Y. tshirf L. tr^ajn' E. t^iajq'
give free rein to, gratify oneself
Y. ts^r/ L. tr^ajrj' E. t^iajrj'
gallop; give free rein to
Y. ts^ L. tshi3rf E. tphirjh
match, suit, equal to, corresponding to;
also chen. See also cheng
Y. tshi L. tr11! E. trH
fine cloth; ancient place name
Y. ts^ L. tr11! E. t^i
Zhou dynasty city in Henan; a surname
Y. tshi L. toft E. trtyttft
silly, idiotic
Y. tshi L. tt^i E. tr^/tr11!
whip, flog
Y. [tshi] L. ti^i E. ti^iSM
lay out, spread out
Y. [tshi] L. trH E. tr^SM
Same as . See also If
Y. tshi L. trhi E. ti^iaM
hornless dragon; demon
Y. [tshi] L. trhiE. ti^ia/tr11!
kind of demon; chimei mountain
demon
Y. tshi L. tshi E. tphi
sparrowhawk; kind of owl; chTyi
leather wine bottle
Y. [tshi] L. tshi E. tp^/tp11!
laugh at, ridicule, sneer
Y. tshi L. t§hi E. tphi/tphi
ignorant, stupid
Y. [tsV] L. sfir E. q/TJ.
dragon spittle, some modern dictionaries
read li based on phonetic
Y. tshf L. trfii E. dri
dilatory, tardy, slow; late. See also zhi
Y. [tshi'] L. trfii E. dri
small islet
Y. tshi' L. trfii E. dri
stairway; landing; porch, courtyard
Y. [tshi'] L. trfii E. dri
ant egg
che"nj
chenj
ch&nj
ch&ij
chenj
chT
chT
chT
chT
chT
chT
chT
chT
chT
chT
chT
chi
chi
chi
chi
chi

56 Lexicon
64:6
85:5
M12019
K961p
M17256A
K976z
Y. tshi' L. trfii E. dri/dri
hold; support, maintain; be locked in a
stalemate
Y. [tshi'] L. trfii E. dri/dri
put in order, govern, now usually read
zhi in this meaning. See also zhi
85:3
118:10
157:8
187:3
21:9
M17141
K4t
M26360
K870c
M37645
K863e
M44593
K4x
M02590
Y. tshi' L. trfii
pond
Y. tsV L- a*"
reeded flute
Y. [ts^'l L. trfii
chichu hesitate, waver
Y. tgV L. trfii
gallop
Y. sr' L. sfii
E. driS/dri
E. dris/dri
E. dris/dri
E. dria/dri
E. cfeiSAfei
spoon. Also read shi in yaoshi key
57:3
61:6
145:10
211:0
9:6
44:1
151:4
M09724b
K4a'
M10585
K959a
M34504
K870b
M48583
K9611
M00583
K3i
M07632
K794a
M36253a
Y. gr L. si'
slacken, release; also shT
Y. tshiv L. tr11!'
shame
Y. [tshO L. trfii'
strip, deprive. Also E. driS'
Y. tsV L. tshi'
tooth
Y. tshf L. tshi'
extravagant
Y. tshf L. tshiajk
foot measure
Y. grN L. sfiiv
E. qis'/qi'
E. tr^'/ti^i'
E. tr^S'/trV
E. tphi7tphi'
E. tphi9'/tiehi'
E. tphiajk
E. d?iah/d?ih
fermented soya beans; also shi
30:9
124:4
124:9
M03886
K877k
M28642
K864e
M28759
K866f
Y. [sr] L. si^
only
Y. gr(?) L. si^
wing
Y. [gri L. &
E. pi3h/gih
E. qi9h/Qih
E. pi§h/Qih
name of an official in the Zhouli, probably
the same as M wing. Also explained as
fierce bird or base of a feather. Also E.
kji3h
109:5 M23227B Y. [tshiv] L. trhiv E. ti^iVt^i11
K976a' stare. See also yi
184:12 M44391 Y. [tshiv] L. tshiv E. tphih/tphih
K955m cooked grain; food and drink, provisions
86:12 M19385 Y. tgix [sic] L. ts*V E. tphih/tphih
K9201 burn, blaze; blazing
chi
chf
chi
chi
chi
chi
chi
chi
chl
chl
chl
chl
chl
chl
chi
chi
chi
chi
chi
chi

Lexicon 57
19:7 M02354
K917b
19:8 M02380A
K9441
66:7 M13225
K917a
184:4 M44057
K921g
69:1 M13535
K792b
155:0 M36993
K793a
30:2 M03247
K400e
61:4 M10354
K1007n
108:4 M22958A
K10070
10:4 M01344
KlOlla
61:12 Ml 1242
K1188b'
122:12 M28377B
K1188c'
144:9 M34069
K1188J
61:11 M11172
K1192d
64:11 M12565
K1192c
134:5 M30195
K1192a
85:4 M17209
K1007p
124:4 M28632
46:8 M08152
K1003h
115:4 M24942
142:12 M33633
K1009c
Y. [ts1^] L. trhi3k E. ti^ik
imperial edict
Y. tshf L. tr^Sk E. tAk
imperial edict. See also lai
Y. tshf L. tAsk E. t^ik
imperial decree
Y. [t§¥] L. trMSk E. trHk
make solid; put in order; orderly, well-
behaved
Y. [t^i] L. ts^ajk E. tp^ajk
rebuff, repel, drive away; reconnoitre,
scout
Y. tshf L. ts^ajk E. te^ajk
red
Y. tshf L. tshit E. tehit
scold, curse
Y. tshurj L. ti^iwrj E. tAiwrj
troubled, agitated
Y. [tshun] L. t^iwrj E. ti^uwrj
empty. Also E. druwrj. The modern
reading zhong teacup is a different word.
Y. tshurj L. ts^wrj E. tphuwrj
fill; serve as, act as
Y. [tshurj] L. tshywrj E. tphuawrj
undecided, hesitant
Y. [thurj'] L. tshywrj E. tqhuawrj
bird net. See also tong
Y. tshurj L. t§hiwrj E. tphuawrj
butt, run against, run into; thoroughfare
Y. [tshurjl L. sywrj E. quawrj
foolish, stupid
Y. tshurj L. gywrj E. puawrj
strike, beat
Y. tshurj L. sywrj E. Quawrj
grind grain with mortar and pestle
Y. [tshurj] L. trfiiwrj E. druwrj
empty; boil up, surge, rise; pour hot water
on
Y. tghurj L. trfiiwrj E. druwrj
fly upwards, soar, compare
Y. tshurj' L. tgfiswrj E. d^uwrj
high, lofty; honour, esteem
Y. t§hurj L. trfiiwrj E. druwrj
a surname
Y. t§hurj' L. trfiiwrj E. druwrj
insect, worm
chi
chi
chi
chi
chi
chi
chi
chong
chong
chong
chong
chSng
chOng
chong
chong
chong
chOng
chong
chong
chong
chong

58 Lexicon
142:0
166:2
40:16
64:10
54:5
104:11
51:9
9:2
51:8
9:14
102:14
115:8
118:14
120:5
120:8
145:8
157:14
149:16
164:6
1:3
75:4
M32804B
K1009a
M40132A
K1188a
M07368
K1193p
M12453
M11930
K1079f
M22453
K1069k
M10885
K10921
M00355b
K992p
M10757
K1083k
M01224
K1090k
M21967
K10901
M25130
K10831
M26675
K1090m
M27338
M27546
K1083m
M34349
K1083n
M37941
K1090n
M36124
K1091a
M39850
K 10861
M00023
K1076a
M14512A
same as See also huT
Y. tshurj' L. trfiywrj E. druawrj
double, pile on, replicate, duplicate
Y. tshuif L. trhywrj' E. trNiawrj'
favour, dote on
Y. tshaw L. tshow E. tshuw
pluck (a stringed instrument)
Y. tshiw L. ti^iw E. trhuw
pull out, draw out
Y. tghiw L. t^iw E. trW
recover from illness; benefit; diminish
Y. tshaw' L. tsfisw E. d^uw
grieve; worry, be anxious
Y. khiw' L. kfiiw E. guw
enemy. See qiu. The reading chou
properly belongs to
Y. tshiw' [sicl L. trhiw E. tr^w
chouchang disconsolate, melancholy
Y. tghiw' L. trfiiw E. druw
colleague, comrade
Y. tshiw' L. trfiiw E. druw
ploughed field; who?
Y. tshiw' L. trfiiw E. druw
thick; numerous
Y. tshiw' L. trfiiw E. druw
arrows used as counters; game where
arrows are thrown into the mouth of a
bottle; counter; calculate, plan
Y. tshiw' L. trfiiw E. druw
silk fabric
Y. tshiw' L. trfiiw E. druw
wind around, wrap; dense, thick
Y. [tshiw'] L. trfiiw E. druw
bed sheet; bed curtain
Y. tshiw' T trfiiw E. druw
chouchu hesitate
Y. tshiw' L. sfiiw E. dguw
personal enemy; grievance, enmity
Y. tshiw' L. sfiiw E. cfcuw
propose a toast; reward, repay
Y. tshiwv L. tr^iw' E. trhuw'
second Earthly Branch
Y. [tshiwv] L. ti^iw' E.
 manacles, fetters. See also niii
chong
chong
chong
chou
chou
chou
ch6u
chou
chou
chou
chou
chou
chou
chou
chou
chou
chou
chou
chou
ch6u
chou

Lexicon 59
164:10 M39969
K1089a
118:11 M26444
KlOSle
132:4 M30108
K1088a
18:5 M01911
K87a
153:11 M36624
K122r
17:3 M01811
K496a
140:4 M30744
K132a
127:7 M28927
K46o'
167:5 M40297B
K46a'
167:7 M40480
K46p'
172:10 M42121
K132d
196:10 M47186
K132e
142:7 M33110
9:16 M01284a
K451'
118:10 M26358
K82c'
157:13 M37925A
K45o'
170:7 M41669
K82m
53:12 M09479
K127m
157:15 M37972
K127n
Y. tshiw" L. tshiw' E. tphuw'
unsightly, foul, ugly
Y. [ts^W] L. tshaws E. tshuwh
assistant, additional
Y. tshiwx L.ts.hiwv E. tphuwh
malodorous. Graph is now also used for
xiu mell
Y. ts"u L. tsh33/tshua E. tshi5
at the beginning; first; for the first time;
originally
Y. khy [sic] L. t^yS E. trKiS
wild cat
Y. tshy" L. tshyt E. tphyt
go out; send out; produce. Also E. tphwih
bring out, take out
Y. [tshu] L. tshu§ E. tshus
hay, fodder
Y. [tsV] L. tsfisS/tsfiua E. d#3
jointly cultivate a public field. Also E.
/-1-M.XhQ2f3
Y. [tshu'l L. tsfias/tsriua E. d^ia
hoe, same as a surname. See also ju
Y. tsV L. tsfi9o/t§fiu9 E. d^iS
hoe
Y. tshu' L. tsfius E. d^u§
chick, fledgling
same as
Y. tshy' \. gfiis/gfiya E. d?iS
chanchu toad; the fabulous toad in
the moon; the moon
Y. tshy' L. trfiiS/trfiyS E. dri5
collect, store up; heir to the throne; also
chu
Y. tsV L. trfiia/trfiys E. dria
see qiichi
Y. [tshy'] L. trfiia/trfiys E. dris
see chouchu See also chuo
Y. tshy' L. trfiig/trfiyg E. driS
eliminate, get rid of, remove. Also E.
dri3h
Y. tshy' L. trfiya E. drua
kitchen
Y. tshy' L.trfiy9 E. drua
see chouchu Ji| ^
chdu
chou
chou
chu
chu
chu
chu
chu
chu
chu
chu
chu
chu
chu
chu
chu
chu
chu
chu

60 Lexicon
75:9
112:13
75:9
145:9
9:16
141:5
75:4
141:5
102:5
109:19
130:13
149:8
120:5
61:5
203:5
148:13
64:9
30:12
47:0
116:4
9:11
75:9
M15141
K88a
M24522
M15172
K45i
M34457
K45g
M01284b
K4511
M32697A
K85a
M14503
K86a
M32697B
K85a
M21814B
K1018a
M23836
M29950
K1224f
M35655
K103H
M27370
K496g
M10498
M48076
K496f
M35181
K1224g
M12371
K168q
M04238a
K325d
M08673
K462a
M25436A.
K232a
M01019A
K231f
M15087
K171e
Y. ts L.
stone foundation, plinth
Y. tsV L.
Y. tsV L. tsh93'/tshu3' E. tshi3'
thicket of trees; thorny; an ancient state
E. tshi3'
E. tr^g'
paper mulberry
Y. tsV L. tr^'/trV' E. tr^a'
clothes bag; store away; surname
Y. tshy' L. trfiiS/trfiyS E. dris
collect, store up; heir to the throne; also
chu
Y. tsV L. tshi3'/tsV E.tp1^'
be located, placed. See also chii
Y. tsV L. tshy3' E. tphu§'
pestle
Y. t§V L. tshi5Ytshy^ E. fchi3h
place, location. See also chu
Y. tshyv L. ts^wk E. tt^uwk
domestic animals. Also E. ti^uw11. See
also xu
Y. [tsVl L. d^iwk E. tt^uwk
luxuriant growth; eminent, lofty; straight
Y. [tsV] L. tshywk
fat from a wolf's breast
Y. [tsV] L. tshywk
lie, deceive
Y. [tsyl L. tryt
sew; bend; demote
Y. [tsV] L. r^yt
be afraid, alarmed, anxious
Y. tshyv L. trhyt
expel; demote
Y. tshuv ? L. tshywk
butt into, knock against; touch
Y. tshwajv, tshwaj L. tshuj' E. tshwi3'/tshwi'
guess
Y. [tshwajv] L. tshwa:jv E. tshwaijh/tshwe:jh
bite, eat greedily; eat at one gulp; also zuo
Y. tshwen L. t§hyan E. tphwian
river, stream
Y. tshwen L. tshyan E. tphwian
bore through. See also chuan
Y. tshwen' L. trfiyan E. drwian
transmit, hand on. See also zhuan
Y. tshwen' L. trfiyan E. drwian
rafter
E. tphuawk
E. tphuawk
E. trwit
E. trVit
E. trNvit
E. tphuawk
chii
chu
chii
chu
chu
chu
chii
chu
chu
chu
chu
chu
chu
chu
chu
chu
chuai
chuai
chuan
chuan
chuan
chuan

aexicon
159:9
162:9
137:5
30:9
136:0
140:6
2:6
116:4
167:3
18:10
104:10
116:7
53:4
90:4
50:12
64:12
64:10
169:10
18:6
18:10
61:10
30:4
M38427
K1681
M38988
K168m
M30407
K229e
M03946
K168J
M30338
K23a
M30943
M00080B
K159e
M25436B
K232a
M40176
M02127A
K7031
M22404
K703n
M25517
K11991
M09242
M 19763
K727r
M09087
K1188e'
M12717A
K1188f
M12525C
K703g
M41458B
K659a
M01953
M02127B
K7031
Ml 1008
K703m
M03373A
K30a
Y. [ts.hwen'] L. gfiyan E. d^wian
funeral carriage with solid wheels
Y. [tshwen'] L. gfiyan E. (fcwian
quickly, hasty, speedy
Y. t§hwen' L. gfiyan E. ?wian
boat, ship
Y. t§hwen" L. tghyan' E. tphwian'
pant, gasp for breath; asthma
Y. tshwenv L. tshyan' E. tphwian'
error, mishap; run counter to
Y. [t§hwenv] L. tshyan' E. tphwian'
dried out tea leaves; tea picked late
E. tphwianh
E. tghiarj
E. tghiarj
string together, same as 8. See also
guan
Y. tshwenN L. t§hyanv E. tphwianh
string together. See also chuan
Y. tshwenv L. tshyanv
arm bracelet
Y. [tshwarj] L. tshairj
wound. See also chuang
Y. tshwarj L. tshairj
boil, sore; wound
Y. tshwarj L. tshwa:wrj E. tshaiwrj/tshce:wrj
window
Y. tghwarj', t§hwarj L. tsfiairj E. d^iarj
bed, same as fft
Y. tghwarj' L. tsfiazrj E. d^iarj
bed
Y. tghwarj' L. trfiwaiwrj E. draiwrj/drceiwrj
pennant, banner. Also E. draiwrjh/drce:wrjh
Y. tshwarj' L. trfiwa:wrj E.draiwrj/drceiwrj
strike (as a bell). See also zhuang
Y. [tsVarj^] L. tsha:rj' E. tshiarj'
strike the head on the ground, now read
qiang in this sense. See also qiang, qi&ng
same as • See also chen
See chuang
Y. tshwarf L. tsha:qv E. ts^arj11
create; initiate. See also chuang
Y. tshwarf L. tsha:rf E. t^imf
sad, grieved; cold
Y. tshuj L. tshyj E. tehwi5/tphwi
blow, puff. See also chui
chuan
chuan
chuan
chulin
chu&n
chuan
chuan
chuan
chuan
chuang
chuang
chuang
chuang
chuang
chuang
chuang
chuang
chuiing
chuang
chuang
chuang
chuT
61
62 Lexicon
chui
chui
chui
chui
chui
chui
chui
chui
chui
86:4 M18904
K30b
167:8 M40547
K31g
167:10 M40715
75:8 M15024
K575r
75:10 M15318
32:5 M05012
K31a
170:8 M41694
K31b
64:8 M12215
K31i
be
118:8 M26158
K31j
chui
chun
chun
chun
chun
chun
chun
chun
chun
chun
30:4
75:4
75:9
159:9
72:5
85:8
120:4
140:11
164:8
167:8
M03373B
K30a
M14504
K4271
M15090
K463e
M38432
K465d
Ml 3844
K463a
M17690
K464e
M27277A.
K427n
M31734
M39901
K464f
M40557A
K464g
Y. tghuj L. tghyj E. tphwi5/Cphwi
cook
Y. [tgujv] L. trfiyj E. drwig/drwi
sledge-hammer. Also E. drwi3h/drwih
Y. tshuj' L. trfiyj E. drwi
hammer, mallet
Y. [tghuj'] L. trfiyj E. drwi
mallet, hammer; to hammer
Y. [tshuj'] L. trfiyj E. drwi
mallet, hammer; to hammer. Same as
Y. tghuj' L. gfiyj E. cfewis/dfwi
hang down, droop, let fall; border, frontier
Y. tshuj' L. gfiyj E. d?wia/d?wi
border, frontier
Y. tsuf L. tgyj' E. tpwia'/tewi'
beat, hammer. The modern reading must
borrowed from E. drwis, or E.
drwi hammer, to hammer
Y. tguf L. tgyj' E. tpwiaVtewi'
horse-whip. The modern pronunciation
seems to be based on a reading E. d?wis
found in the Jiyun, though it is there said
to mean a kind of bamboo
Y. tghujv L. tshyjx E. tphwi3h/tehwih
guchui musical performance. See
also chul
Y. [tghyn] L. tr^yn E. trNvin
same as chur
Y. tghyn L. t^yn E. ti^win
tree of heaven, Ailanthus; Chinese toon,
Cedrela chinensis
Y. [tghyn] L. ti^yn E. ti^win
carriage for transporting a coffin; sledge
Y. tghyri L. tghyn E. tphwin
spring
Y. tghyn' L. gfiyn E. d?win
pure, simple, honest
Y. tghyn' L. gfiyn E. d?win
pure. See also zhun
Y. tghyn' L. gfiyn E. djwin
watershield, Brasenia purpurea
Y. tghyn' L. gfiyn E. d^win
clear, pure; mellow wine
Y. tghyn" L. gfiyn E. d?win
kind of bell. See also dui

Lexicon 63
196:8
130:7
142:15
62:14
157:8
64:13
61:8
159:8
30:8
76:15
162:8
157:13
38:9
120:8
48:7
172:5
104:5
98:6
140:6
184:6
61:10
140:6
M47057
K464J
M29526
K455u
M33797
K463d
Ml 1684
M37617
K1126f
M12799
K1224r
M10810
K295d
M38374
K295e
M03832
K295c
M16228
K2951
M38947
K1126c
M37925B
K45o'
M06464A
K777k
M27590
K1126g
M08732C
K5f
M41998
K358f
M22089a
K358p
M21491
M30896
K5551
M44137
K555J
Ml 1048
K966J
M30911B
K966b
Y. tghyn' L. gfiyn
quail
Y. tghyn' L. gfiyn
HPY. tghyn L. tghyn'
wriggle; stupid
E. dfwin
E. ?win
E. tphwin'
Y. tghwaw" L. trNvaiwk E. t'Vaiwk/ti^ceiwk
poke, jab; stamp, seal
Y. [tghwawv] L. trVaiwk E.
limp. Also E. t'Vaiwtytr^iw11
Y. [tghwawv] L. tghwa:wk E.
spear fish
Y. [tgwev] L. tryat
worn out, weary; sad
Y. tgwe" L. tryat
stop
Y. tghwev L. tghyat
sip, taste, suck
Y. [tghwev] L. tshyat
sip, drink
Y. [tghwaw~] L. trNvaiwk E.
^raiwk/ti^oeiwk
tghaiwk/tghceiwk
E. trwiat
E. trwiat
E. tqhwiat
E. tphwiat
^raiwk/ti^oeiwk
distant, remote. Also E. ti^iak
Y. [tghewv] L. tAak
jump over, pass over
Y. [tg^w"] L. tt^iak
proper name. See also re
Y. tghew" L. tghiak
E. trhiak
E. tr'Hak
E. tehiak
ample, spacious; indulgent, easy-going
Y. tghr L. tghr E. tghi3/tghi
unequal, graduated. See also cha, cha,
chai
Y. tshz L. tshz
female
Y. tshz' L. tsfiz
defect, blemish, flaw; also ci
Y. [tshz'] L. tsfiz
ceramic
Y. tshz' L. tsfiz
thatch
Y. tsV L- tsfiz
rice or millet cake
Y. tshz' L. tsfiz
love, affection
Y. tshz' L. tsfiz
Qiuci H ^ Kucha, in Xinji;
E. tshis/tshi
E. dzia/dzi
E. dzi
E. dzi
E. dzi
E. dzi/dzi
E. dzi/dzi
ang. Alsozl
chun
chun
chun
chuo
chuo
chuo
chuo
chuo
chuo
chuo
chuo
chuo
chuo
chuo
CT
CT
CT
ci
C1
C1
Cl
Cl

64
ci
ci
ci-
cf
ci-
cf
cT
cT
cT
cT
ci
ci
ci
ci
ci
ci
ci
ci
cong
cong
Lexicon
112:10
196:10
104:5
113:5
149:5
160:12
77:2
85:5
96:5
157:5
53:9
9:6
76:2
120:6
140:8
18:6
9:5
154:8
61:7
128:11
M24382
M47203
M22089b
K358p
M24676
K972h
M35394
K972J
M38671
K968a
M16259
K358a
M17297
K358H
M20900
K3581
M37459
K961g
M09410a
K906g
M00571
K555c
M15992
K555a
M27412
K555d
M31134
K868e
M01969B
K868d
M00483a
K972f
M36809b
K850t
M 10693
K1199c
M29154
K1199f
Y. tshz' L. tsfiz E. dzi/dzi
Icxiestone; magnet; porcelain, same as
Y. tshz' L. tsfiz E. dzi/dzi
see lucf
Y. tshz' L. tsfiz E. dzia/dzi
defect, blemish, flaw; also CT
Y. sz' L. sfiz E. zi/zi
sacrifice
Y. sz' L. sfiz E. zi/zi
word; phrase; utterance
Y. sz' L. sfiz E. zi/zi
word; phrase; make excuses, decline,
refuse; take one's leave
Y. tsV L- tshz' E. tshi3'/tshi'
this, these
Y. [tsV] L. tshz' E. tshi§'/tshi'
clear, limpid; drops of sweat. Also E.
ts^j'
Y. tsV L. tshz' E. tshi§'/tshi'
lustrous. Also used for CT, ci blemish,
flaw
Y. tsV L. tshz' E. tshi5'/tshi'
step, tread
Y. tsV L- tgV E. t?hih/tshih
lean-to; latrine; also ce, si
Y. tshzs L. tshzs E. tshih
well-ordered; second, assist
Y. tshzv L. tsV E. tshih
next; second; arrange in order; order,
sequence; stay three nights; lodging
Y. [tsV] L. tsV E. tshih
carded but unspun textile fibre; ancient
market tax
Y. tsV L. tshzv E. tshi9h/tshih
to prick
Y. tshzv L. tshzN E- tshiah/tshih
sharp point, needle; stab; kill (by
stabbing); criticize; investigate. See also qi
Y. [sz:] L. sp E. sih/sih
wait on, serve; spy on; also si
Y. szv L. szv E. si3h/sih
bestow; also si
Y. tshurj L. tsh9wq E. tshawrj
hurried; bright, intelligent
Y. tshurj L. tshawrj E. tshawrj
hear; hear well; intelligent, bright

Lexicon 65
140:11
187:11
50:8
75:11
167:11
19:16
?6:8
51:8
*5:8
154:8
50:8
156:8
35:9
130:9
140:11
M31825
K1199g
M44967
M10152B
K1191d
M15404B
K119H
M40822
M03220
K1178a
M21071
K1003g
M10718
M17643
M36831
M10152A
K1191d
M37207C
K131g
M17822
K1229b
M29670
K1229c
M31815B
K1206f
E. ts^wn
cou
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
159:9 M38429
119:5
198:22
60:5
78:5
164:8
M26898
K46h'
M47714
K66a
M10078
K46i'
M16408
K46j'
M39911
K798t
E. tsh9wrj
E. tshuawrj
E. dzawrj
E. dzawrj
Y. tshurj L. tshawq
onion; scallion
Y. tshurj L. tshawrj
variegated, dappled horse
Y. [tsjurj] L. tshywrj
congr6ng at leisure, casually. See
also cong, zong
Y. [tshjurj] L. tshywrj E. tshuawrj
fir, Abies firma. See also zong
Y. [tshjun] L. tshywrj E. tshuawrj
short spear
Y. tshurj' L. tsfiawrj E. dzswrj
crowd together; clump, thicket
Y. tshun/ L. tsfiawrj E. dzswrj
tube-shaped jade object
Y. [tshurj'] L. tsfiswrj
feeling, sentiment
Y. [tshurj'] L. tsfiswrj
congcong sound of flowing water
Y. [tshurj'] L. tsfiawrj E. dzawrj
tribute or tax offerings of southern tribes
Y. tshjurj' L. tsfiywrj E. dzuawrj
follow; from. See also cong, zong
Y. [ts^w"] L. tshsw' E. tshsw'
cdumS manager of horses, groom
See also qiu, cu
Y. tshawv L. tshaw^ E. tshswh
gather together, collect; pool
Y. [ts^w*] L. tshswv E. tshswh
fine lines on the skin
Y. [ts^w^] L. tshswv E. tshawh
Taicou [ name of a pitch-pipe. See
also cu
Y. tshawv L. tshawv E. tshowh
hub, centre of a wheel; converge
Y. tshu L. tshu§ E. ts'b
coarse, rough, crude. Also E. dzo'
Y. tshu L. tshu§ E. ts'b
coarse, rough, same as
Y. tsV L. tsfiua E. dzo
advance, go to; pass away
Y. tshu' L. tsfiua E. dzo
pass away; die
Y. tsV L. tshu§v E. tsV
vinegar
cong
cong
cong
cong
cong
cong
cong
cong
cong
c6ng
cong
cou
cou
cou
cou

66
cii
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cu
cuan
cuan
cuan
cuan
CUT
CUT
CUT
CUT
CUT
CUT
Lexicon
104:11 M22443
K1206e
118:11 M26437
140:11 M31815A
K1206f
24:6 M02740C
K490a
94:8 M20500
157:8 M37656A
K1031k
157:11 M37790
K10311
157:12 M37876
K1093b
9:7 M00664
K1219d
156:8 M37207B
K131g
64:19 M13030
K1531
86:25 M19648
K177a
116:13 M25679
K176a
118:10 M26330
K174e
75:10 M15276
K355d
9:11 M01005
K575J1
46:8 M08178
K575d'
120:10 M27761
K355e
145:4 M34127B
K355a
64:11 M12609
K5751
Y. [tshu] L. tsh9wk E. tshawk
scab
Y. tsV L. tshswk E. tshawk
to cluster, pile up; cluster, bunch
Y. [tsV] L. tsh9wk E. tshswk
bird's nest; mat for raising silkworms.
See also cou
Y. [tsV] L. tshut E. tshwat
suddenly, abruptly. See also zu
Y. [tshuv] L. tshut E. tshw9t
sudden, abrupt
Y. [tsyv] L. tsiwk E. tsuwk
cuji respectful unease. See also di
Y. tshy L. tsiwk E. tsuwk
trample; pressed, cramped
Y. [tshyv] L. tshiwk
kick; tread. Also E. tsuwk
Y. tshy" L. tshywk
press, urge
Y. [tsV] L. tshywk
press, urge, same as
c6u
Y. ts^n' L. tsfiuanv
gather, collect. The level tone reading E.
dzwan is given in the Guangyun for
another graph, with the tree radical, with
similar meaning
Y. tshons L. tshuanv
stove; to cook
Y. ts'bn^ L. tshuanv
flee; scurry; expel, exile
Y. tshwanv L. tshwamv E. tshwainh/tshwemh
take forceably; usurp
Y. tshuj [sic] L. suj
rafter
Y. tshuj L. tshuaj
urge; hasten
Y. tshuj L. tshuaj
place name; a surname
Y. [tshuj] L. tshuaj
mourning dress
Y. tshuj L. tshuaj
mourning dress. See also shuai
Y. tshuj' L. tsfiuaj E. dzwaj
break, destroy; repress
E. tshuwk
E. tshuawk
E. tshuawk
See also qiu,
E. dzwanh
E. tshwanh
E. tshwanh
E. swi
E. tShW3J
E. tshwsj
E. tshwsj
E. tshwaj

Lexicon 67
156:8
85:11
96:11
124:8
61:8
104:8
140:8
181:8
86:8
85:8
82:8
130:6
130:6
119:8
75:3
107:7
157:7
39:3
157:12
61:3
41:0
64:10
M37194
K575e'
M18183
K575k'
M21193
M28732
K490i
M10726
K490J
M22294
K490k
M31251
K490m
M43557
K4901
M19111
K490g
M17679
K490f
M16872
K345a
M29464
K296c
M29468
K296d
M26987
K490p
M14464
M22866
M37574
K468b'
M06943
K432a
M37874b
K430n
M10326
K431d
M07411
K43la
M12476
Y. [tshuf] L. tshyj' E. tshwi'
move, run; ancient place name
Y. [tshuf] L. tshuaj' E. tsNvsj'
deep
Y. [tshufl L. tshuaj' E. tsNvaj'
cuTcan lustrous, brilliant
Y. tshujs L. tshyjv E. tshwih
kingfisher; emerald green
Y. tshujs [sic] L. tsfini^ E. dzwih
distressed; qiaocui withered, thin
and pale
Y. [tshujv] L. tsfiyf E. dzwih
fatigue, weariness
Y. tshujv L. tsfiyjv E. dzwih
gather, come together, assemble
Y. tshujv L. tsfiyjv E. dzwih
weary, worn out
Y. tshujs L. tshuajv E. tshwajh
temper by plunging in liquid, quench
Y. tshujv L. tshuajv E. tshw3Jh
temper by plunging into water
Y. tshujs L. tshyajx E. tshwiajh
fine hair, down, fleece
Y. [tshujv] L. tshyajs E. tshwiajh
fragile, brittle; crisp, same as
same at
Y. suj" L. syjv E. swih
refined, purified; essence
Y. tshun L. tshun E. tshwan
village
Y. tshyn L. tshyn E. tshwin
chapped, cracked skin
Y. [tshyn] L. tshyn E. tshwin
squat
Y. tshun' L. tsfiun E. dzwan
exist, remain, survive; preserve
Y. tshun' L. tsfiun E. dzwsn
squat; also dun
Y.tshunv L. tshunx E. tshwsn'
ponder; guess
Y. tshunN L. tshunv E. tshw9nh
thumb; inch
Y. ts^ L. tsha E. tsa
rub or crumble between the hands
cuT
cuT
cuT
cui
cui
cui
cui
cui
cui
cui
cui
cui
cui
cui
cun
cun
cun
cun
cun
cun
cun
cuo

68 Lexicon
cuo
cuo
cuo
cuo
cuo
cuo
cuo
cuo
cuo
cuo
cuo
cuo
cuo
cuo
cuo
cuo
cuo
cuo
cuo
cuo
96:10
112:10
157:10
64:12
197:10
104:10
46:10
163:19
104:7
111:7
130:7
18:7
140:7
167:7
64:7
27:8
64:8
167:8
27:8
167:8
M21170
K5i
M24395
K5j
M37745
M12748A
K325e
M47563
K5m
M22412A
K51
M08363
M39752C
K153g
M22221
K12b
M23975
M29508
K12f
M01999
K12e
M31062
M40429
M12087
K12c
M02961B
K798p
M12286
K798x
M40579B
K798s
M02961A
K798p
M40579A
K798s
Y. ts'b L. tsha E. tsha
white and gleaming
Y. tsS L. tsha E. tsha
rub, file, polish
Y. ts'bL. tsha E. tsha
cuotud stumble, trip; waste time
Y. tsV L. tshuat E. tshwat
gather together; scoop up; pinch with the
fingers
Y. ts'b [sic] L. tsfia E. dza
salty; brine
Y. ts^ [sic] L. tsfia E. dza
contagion, epidemic. Also E. tsia. See also
chai
Y. [tsVl L. tsfia E. dza
cuoe high and craggy
Y. [ts"o'J L. tsfia E. dza
ancient place in Henan. See also zan, zu5n
Y. [tsV] L. tsfiua E. dzwa
ulcer, acne
Y. tsV L. tsfiua
short
Y. tsV L. tshua'
small, fine; mincemeat
Y. tsV L. tshuav
to file
Y. tsV L. tshuav
cut fodder; straw, hay
Y. tsV L. tshuav
file, rasp; to file
Y. ts^ L. tsuaN
push; break; frustrate, defeat
Y. [tsV] L. tshu§^
to place. See also cuo below
Y. tsV L. tshu§v E.
establish, place; arrange, manage
Y. tshuv L. tshuav E. ts1^11
place, arrange, manage. Same as
See also cuo below
Y. [tshawv] L. tshakE. tshak
whetstone, same as See also cuo
above
Y. tshawv L. tshak E. tshak
grindstone; mixed. See also cuo above
E. dzwa
E. tshwa'
E. tshwah
E. tshwah
E. tshwah
E. tswah
E. ts'b11

Lexicon 69
64:10
118:6
162:9
85:4
61:5
118:6
64:2
37:0
94:10
62:14
50:8
157:11
M12508
M26006b
K676a
M39011A
K271b
M17206a
K677a
M10458
K149g
M26006a
K676a
M11781
M05831a
K317a
M20599b
Ml 1685
K943e'
M08950
K315a
M37808A
i
i
i
i
i
60:6
61:5
78:5
162:5
187:5
9:3
96:5
96:9
46:5
145:5
M10083
K961g
M10469
K976k'
M16430
K9761
M38791
K976n'
M44675B
K976J'
M00386
K9181
M20889
M21102
M07997
K918q
M34171
Y. ta~ L. tap E. tap/tap
hit; touch; join; put up, build
Y. ta" L. tap E. tap/tap
answer, respond, reply; also da
Y. ta' L. tfiat E. dat
extend to; reach to, come to. See also ta
Y. ta' L. tfiap E. dap/dap
crowded; repeated; pile; babble; also ta.
Y. [ta] L. tat E. tat
sad; fear
Y. la" L. tap E. tap/tap
answer,.respond, reply; also da.
Y. ta" L. taijrj' E. tajrj'
to beat
Y. tax, to% tajv L. tfiV, tfiaf E. da', dajh
big, great; also dai
seeai
Y. taf L. tajx
carry on the head; wear
Y. tajv L. tajv
belt, girdle
Y. taf L. tajv
dailfn j?f $• Xiongnu place name. See
also zhi
Y. tajv L. tfiajv
wait for; wait on, entertain
Y. [tajv] L. tfiajv
idle, negligent
Y.[taj1 L.tfiaj'
danger; nearly, almost
Y. tajx L. tfiaf
come to, until
Y.[taj%] L.tfiajE. daj'
worn out, dull, daidang
unrestrained. See also tai
Y. tajN L. tfiaj E. dsjh
substitute, replace
E. tajh
E. tajh
E. tajh
E. daj'
daimei, daimao same as :
Y. [taf ] L. tfiajv E. dajn
daimei, daimao liawk's bill turtle
Y. tajx L. tfiajv E. dsjh
mountain name, Taishan
Y. tajv L. tfiajs E. dgjh
bag,sack
da
da
da
da
d£
da
dS
da
dai
dai
dai
dai
dai
dai
dai
dai
dai
dai
dai
dai
dai
dai

70 Lexicon
dai
dai
162:8
162:10
M38931A
K509c
M39044B
K678e
dai
dai
dai
dai
dai
dai
dai
dai
dan
dan
dan
dan
dan
dan
dan
dan
dan
203:5
173:16
37:0
159:3
167:3
120:5
149:5
154:5
3:3
30:9
78:12
104:12
118:12
145:12
163:12
85:9
128:4
M48075
K918r
M42530
M05831b
K317a
M38186
K317h
M40187A
K3171
M27369
K976m'
M35376A
K976v
M36709
K918p
M00099
K150a
M03993A
K147a
M16581
K147g
M22521A
K1471
M26509
K147H
M34593
K1471
M39659
K147J
M17846A
K6581
M29024
K6561
Y. [tajl L. tRajv E. dajh
reach to, come to; until
Y. [tajv] L. tfiaj^ E. dsjh
reach to, come to, until, same as
This reading is not found in early
dictionaries but is implied by use in the
sense of n early texts including Mozi
and the Fangyan and the interchange with
_ on the Han stone classics (Hanyu Da
Zidiari). See also ta
Y. tajv L. tfiajv E. dajh
kohl, eyebrow make-up
Y. [tajl L.tfiaj' E. dsj'
aidai descriptive of scattered,
scudding clouds
Y. tajN, ta\ & L. tfia\ tfiajv E. dah, dajh
daifu (medical) doctor; also da
Y. [tajs] L. tfiajv E. daj
axle-cap. Also E. d£Jv
Y. tajv L. tfiajx E. dajh
foot shackle. See also di
Y. taf L. tfiajv E. dsj'
cheat
Y. taf L. tfiajN E. daj'
cheat, deceive. See also yi.
Y. [thajv] L. thajv E- thsjh
borrow, lend
Y. tan L. tan E. tan
red; cinnabar
Y. tan L. tan E. tan
single; great. See also chan, shan
Y. tan L. tan E. tan
exhaust
Y. [tan] L. tan E. tan
huddan erysipelas. See also dan
Y. tan L. tan E. tan
food basket
Y. tan L. tan E. tan
unlined garment
Y. tanT, tan E. tan
Handan place name
Y. tarn L. tarn E. tarn/tarn
steeped in pleasure. See also zhan
Y. tam L. tarn E. tam/tam
long, pendulous ears; addicted to pleasure

Lexicon 71
164:4
64:13
128:4
128:5
8:11
104:5
203:4
120:4
130:13
72:1
104:12
M39792A
K656e
M12828A
K619k
M29021
K622n
M29039
K622m
M00328
K148a
M22094
M48057
K656n
M27298
K656k
M29933
K6191
M13734
K149a
M22521B
K1471
142:7
149:3
149:7
9:5
57:12
61:12
64:13
190:4
30:8
M33119
M35235A
K4q
M35516
K203g
M00495
K149e
M09865B
K147n
Ml 1222
K147c
M12828B
K619k
M45378
K656m
M03824
K617n
Y. tarn L. tarn E. tarn
addicted to wine. See also zhen
Y. tarn L. tarn E. tarn
carry on a shoulder pole. See also
dan
Y. tarn L. tham E. tham
long pendulous ears; ancient place name.
Same as
Y. tarn L. tham E. tham
long pendulous ears; ancient place name
Y. tan" L. tan' E. tan'
sincere
Y. [tan"] L. tan' E. tan'
jaundice. Also E. tanh
Y. [tanf] L. tarn' E. tam'/tam'
dirt, dregs; black
Y. tarn" L. tarn' E. tarn'
silk pendants on a ceremonial cap
Y. tarn" L. tarn' E. tarn'
gall bladder; courage, determination
Y. tanv L. tanv E. tanh
sunrise, dawn, morning
Y. [tanN] L. tanv E. tanh
suffering, exhaustion. Also E. tah. See
also dan.
Y. [tan^] L. tfianv E. dan'
southern non-Chinese people
Y. [tanv] L. tfianv E. danh
same as See also yi
Y. tanv L. tfian" E. dan'
great words; boast; vast; deceive; give
birth; a particle
Y. tanv L. tfianv E. danh
only; but
Y. tanv L. tfians E. danh
crossbow pellet; ball, bullet. See also
tan
Y. tanv L. tfianv E. danh
fear, dread
Y. tamv L. tanr E. tamh
carrying pole; burden, load. See also
dan
Y. [tanT] L. tfiam" E. dam'/dam'
dangling hair
Y. tanT L. tfianr E. dam'
eat, feed; entice. Also E. damh
dan
dan
dan
dan
dan
dan
dan
dan
dan
dan
dan
dan
dan
dan
dan
dan
dan
dan
dan
dan

72 Lexicon
184:8
30:8
30:12
61:13
85:13
85:8
116:8
140:8
102:8
145:13
167:13
10:8
149:20
203:8
102:8
108:12
118:12
140:12
40:5
M44229B
K617p
M03825
K672k
M04299
K617n
Ml 1305
K619m
M18421
K619n
M17660
K617o
M25551
K6721
M31270
K672J
M21890A
K725q
M34649
M40954A
M01381
M36168
M48132
K725r
M21890B
K725q
M23062A
K720n'
M26503
K720o'
M32002
K720p'
M07103
K701a
E. dam'
E. dam'
rippling, flowing.
E. damh
same as See also tan
Y. [tamv] L. tfianr E. dam'
eat, swallow. Also E. damh
Y. [tairr] L. tfianr E. dam'
eat, same as
Y. [tanr] L. tfiairr
calm. Also E. damh
Y. [tarrr] L. tfianr
calm; dandan rippling, flowing.
Also E. damh
Y. tarrr L. tfiamv
thin, bland, insipid
Y. t^am" L. tfiairr E. d3mh/damh
recess in the bottom of a pit
Y. thanT L. tfiarrr E. dam'/dam'
handanlotus
Y. tarj L. tarj E. tarj
match, correspond to; at; ought, should;
undertake, act as. See also dang
Y. tarj L. tarj E. tarj
crotch of a pair of trousers
Y. tarjL. tan E. tarj
see langdang See also cheng
Y. [tarf] L. tarj'E. tarj'
surname. D&ngxiang northwestern
people, the Tangut. Now used for
Y. tarf L. tarj' E. tarj'
straight, direct (words)
Y. tarf L. tarj' E. tarj'
party, faction; group of 500 families;
partial
Y. tarf L. tarp E. tarjh
right, appropriate; regard as; pawn. See
also dang
Y. [tarf] L. tfiarjv E. dan,'
wash; shake, agitate, compare See
also tang
Y. [tarf] L. tfiarf E. darj'
kind of large bamboo
Y. tarjv L. tfiarjv E. darj'
immense, widespread; clear away;
reckless, dissolute; shake, swing, sway
Y. tarjv L. tfiarjv E. darjh
cave dwelling; procrastinate; unrestrained
dan
dan
dan
dan
dan
dan
dan
dan
dang
dang
dang
dang
dang
dang
dang
dang
dang
dang
dang

Lexicon 73
112:9
18:0
61:2
137:2
9:8
46:7
64:14
75:14
113:8
113:14
41:13
9:8
18:6
115:10
162:9
162:9
41:13
61:8
108:7
120:19
124:14
157:10
M24342
K720f
M01845
K1131a
M10305
K1131c
M30353
M00767A
K1132c
M08108
K1116e
M12853
K1090r
M15713B
K1090t
M24744
K1083y
M24852
K1090s
M07465a
K1048d
M00767B
K1132c
M01950
K1132a
M25216
K1078H
M39010A
K1048a
M39010B
K1048a
M07465b
K1048d
M10738
K11261
M23006
K1133a
M28093B
K1016b
M28827.
K1090z
M37744
K10781
Y. tar/ L. tfiarf E. darjh
patterned stone; exceed; overflow
Y. taw L. taw E. taw
knife
Y. taw L. taw E. taw
daodao, daoda" sad, sorrowful
L. taw E. tawY. taw
small boat
Y. taw" L. taw" E. taw'
fall over. See also dao
Y. tawv L. taw' E. taw'
island
Y. taw" L. taw' E. taw'
beat with a pestle, pound; harass
Y. [tawv] L. taw' E. taw'
block of wood, blockhead. See also tao
Y.[taw"] L. taw' E. taw'
prayers over sacrificial animals
Y. taw" L. taw' E. taw'
seek blessings, recite prayers, pray.
Also E. tawh
Y. taws L. tfiaw" E. dawh
lead
Y. tawv L. taw E. tawh
overturn; upside down. See also d^o
Y. tawv L. taws E. tawh
reach, arrive at
Y. tawv L. tfiaw" E. daw'
rice, paddy
Y. tawv L. tfiawv E. daw'
road; way; doctrine, principle
Y. tawv L. tfiawv E. dawh
lead, same as ; say, tell
Y. tawv L. tfiaw" E. dawh
lead. Now usually read d&o
Y. tawv L. tfiawv E. dawh
grieve, mourn; apprehensive
Y. tawv L. tfiawN E. dawh
steal, rob; robber
Y. tawx L. tfiaws E. dawh
yak-tail banner. See also du
Y. [tawv] L. tfiaws E. dawh
feathered banner held while dancing,
compare Also E. daw
Y. tawv L. tfiaw" E. dawh
stamp on, tread
dang
dao
dao
dao
dao
dao
dao
dao
dao
dao
dao
dao
dao
dao
dao
dao
dao
dao
dao
dao
dao
dao

74 Lexicon
60:8
60:12
60:8
86:12
105:7
118:12
151:6
167:12
118:6
M10137a
K905d
M10243
K919k
M10137b
K905d
M19402
K883J
M22668
K883e
M26530
M36264
K883a
M40904A
K883i
M25992
K9611'
16:12
16:12
112:12
167:12
170:12
163:12
109:12
):5
52:9
M01797
M08482
M24478
M40904B
K883i
M41850
K883k
M39630
K8831
M23689
M00504
K590e
M05259A
K866k
64:9
83:1
M12344B
K866n
M17027
K590a
Y. tajv L. taak E. tak
get, obtain; manage to, be able to; also del
Y. taj" L. taak E. tak
inner power; virtue
Y. taj" L. taak E. tak
must, need (colloquial); also de
Y. tag L. taag E. tag
lantern; lamp
Y. tag L. taag E. tag
ascend, rise, climb
Y. tag L. tsar) E. tag
large umbrella with a handle
Y. [tag] L. taag E. tag
sacrificial vessel
Y. [tag] L. taag E. tag
kind of ritual vessel with a high foot;
lamp. See also deng
Y. tag" L. taag' E. tag'
equal; class, rank; grade; wait. Also E.
taj'
Y. tagv L. taag E. tagh
bench, stool
Y. tagv L. taagv E. tagh
path or steps up a mountain
Y. tagN L. taagv E. tagh
stone stairway on a mountain
Y. tagv L. taagN
stirrup
Y. tagv L. taags
slope, rise; stone steps
Y. tagx L. tfiaagx
place name
Y. [tsigl L. trfiiag^
stare at, glare
Y. ti L. tiaj
low
Y. ti L. tiaj E. tej
embankment, dam, dike, same as ^ .
See also ti. Guangyun also reads E. tej'
block up and E. d?ia raised earth at the
edge of afield
Y. [ti] L. tiajE. tej
dam, dike, same as See also ti,
dT, shi
Y. ti L. tiaj E. tej
a western people in the Han period
E. tagh
E. tagh
E. dagh
E. drigh
E. tej
de
de
del
deng
deng
deng
deng
deng
deng
deng
deng
deng
deng
deng
deng
deng
dl
dT
dl
dT

Lexicon 75
123:5
170:9
177:9
85:11
66:11
94:4
118:5
118:11
119:16
124:8
140:7
147:15
157:8
162:5
85:11
38:11
157:11
162:11
167:11
177:3
53:5
M28470
K590h
M41740A
K866g
M42940
K866h
M18084
M13354
K877q
M20290
K856a
M25917
M26396
K1022d
M27191
K1124c
M28727A
K1124a
M31005
K856d
M34984
K1023e
M37656B
K1031k
M38795
K1079q
M18069
K1077x
M06656
K877m
M37821B
K877o
M39076B
K877s
M40790
K877n
M42718
K1120J
M09262
K590c
Y. ti L. tiaj E. tej
three-year-old ram; ram
Y. [ti] L. tiaj E. tej
dike. See also ti
Y. [ti] L. tiaj E. tej
kind of leather shoe
Y. tf L. tiajk E. tejk
drip; drop
Y. ti' L. tfiiajk E. dejk
be a match for; oppose; enemy
Y. ti' L. tfiiajk E. dejk
northern non-Chinese people
Y. ti' L. tfiiajk E. dejk
horizontal flute
Y. [ti'] L. tfiiajk E. dejk
horizontal flute, same as
Y. ti' L. tfiiajk E. dejk
buy grain
Y. [ti'] L. tfiiajk E. dejk
pheasant, pheasant's feather; used for
$(.. See also zhai, zhe
Y. ti' L. tfiiajk E. dejk
kind of rush, Miscanthus sacchariflorus
Y. [ti'] L. tfiiajk E. dejk
see, meet
Y. [ti'l L. tfiiajk E. dejk
didi level and smooth (roadway).
See also cu
Y. [ti'] L. tfiiajk E. dejk
advance; go along a road; guide; promote
Y. thf L. tfiiajk E. dejk
wash, cleanse
Y. ti~ L. tiajk E. tejk
legitimate heir, son of principal wife
Y. [tf ] L. tiajk E. tejk
hoof. Alsozhi
Y. [tiv] L. tiajk E. tejk
regard single-mindedly, exclusively. See
also shi
Y. [tf] L. tiajk E. tejk
barb, point
Y. lT L. tiajk E. tejk
horse reins
Y. tf L. tiaj' E. tej'
bottom; foundation
dT
dT
dT
dT
di
di
di
di
di
di
di
di
di
di
di
di
di
di
di
di
d!

76 Lexicon
57:5
64:5
64:9
75:5
93:5
112:5
148:5
149:5
163:5
32:3
50:6
140:11
142:8
142:11
149:9
162:11
38:7
M09751
K590f
Ml 1921
K590g
M12344C
K866n
M14640
K590d
M19988
M24093B
K590o
M35051
M35356
K590J
M39347
K590I
M04890
K4b'
M08856
K877a
M31789
K315c
M33216
K295k
M33495
M35716
K877f
M39090C
K315e
M06329
K591d
57:4
162:10
75:3
75:8
M09737
K591a
M39045
K870e
M14468
K317J
M14957
K509f
Y. [tf] L. tiaj' E. tej'
bow of the emperor Shun
Y. [tf] L. tiaj' E. tej'
resist, push back; prop up; reach, arrive
at
Y. tf L. tiaj' E. tej'
throw, hit with a stone. See also dl, tf,
shf
Y. tf L. tiaj'
base, root
Y. [tf] L.tiaj'
butt against, resist
Y.[tf] L.tiaj'
whetsone. See also zhT
Y. toL.tiaj'
butt, same as
Y. tf L. tiaj'
scold; slander, defame
Y. tf L. tiajv
residence of a prince
Y. fr L. tfiiv
earth; land; ground
Y. tiv L. tiajv
god; emperor
Y. tiv L. tiajv
base of a flower or fruit
Y. [tn L. tiai^
didOng, didongrainbow
same as
Y. tix L. tiajv E. tejh
examine closely
Y. [tis] L. tiajv E. tejh
go away from, avoid. See also di, shi
Y. tix L. tfiiajN E. dej'
younger sister of the same mother;
younger secondary wife; younger
brother's wife
Y. tiv L. tfiiajN E. dej'
younger brother
Y. ti^ L. tfiiajv E. dej'
substitute, alternate Also E. dejh
Y. [tiN] L. tfiiaf E. dejh
isolated, or outstanding, tree
Y. tiv L. tfiiajs E. dejh
kerria
E.tej'
E. tej'
E. tej'
E.tej'
E. tej'
E.tej'
E. dih
E. tejh
E. tejh
E. tejh
dr
d!
dr
dr
dr
dr
dr
dr
dr
di
di
di
di
di
di
di
di
di
di
di
di

Lexicon 77
109:7
113:9
118:5
120:9
157:9
162:8
162:11
167:3
181:9
106:3
140:8
9:10
46:19
85:10
104:10
104:19
157:10
181:10
12:6
96:5
203:5
37:9
M23360
K591k
M24778
K8771
M25943
K591e
M27651
K877J
M37688A
K866q
M38931B
K509e
M39090A
K315e
M40187B
K3171
M43584B
K866p
M22692
K1120h
M31138
M00951
K375J
M08644
K375n
M18010
M22420
K3751
M22643
M37760
K375k
M43629
K375m
M01474
K476a
M20895b
K6181
M48083
K618n
M05960
K363a
Y. [tis] L. tfiiajv E. dejh
look at from the side; look askance,
glance at
Y. [tiv] L. tfiiajv E. dejh
kind of major sacrifice
Y. tis L. tfiiajs E. dejh
order in a sequence; grade; mansion
Y. tiv L. tfiiajv E. dejh
to tie, knot; form (friendship)
Y. [tiv] L. tfiiaj^ E. dejh
kick. See also zhi
Y. [til L. tfiiaj^ E. dejh
alternative reading, see dai
Y. [tn L. tfiiajv E. dejh
tiaodi distant. See also di, shi
Y. [tis] L. tfiiaj^ E. dejh
foot shackle. See also dai
Y. [tiN] L. tfiiaj^ E. dejh
look at, observe. See also ti
Y. tf L. tiajk E. tejk
bright, brilliant; target
Y. [ti"] L. tiajk E. tejk
fruit body of the lotus
Y. tjen L. tian E. ten
upset, upside down
Y. tjen L. tian E. ten
mountain top, summit
Y. [tjen] L. tian E. ten
place name; Yunnan
Y. tjen L. tian E. ten
illness; madness
Y. [tjen] L. tian E. ten
same as
Y. [tjen] L. tian E. ten
stumble, fall down
Y. tjen L. tian E. ten
crown of the head; top, summit; tumble
Y. tjen" L. tian' E. ten'
standard, rule, norm; regulate; preside
over
Y. tjemv L. tiam' E. tern'
flaw in jade; flawed; also dian
Y. tjem L. tiam' E. tern'
dot, point, spot
Y. tjenv L. tianv E. tenh
establish, settle; make a libation
di
di
di
di
di
di
di
di
di
di
di
dian
dian
dian
dian
dian
dian
dian
dian
diSn
dian
dian

78 Lexicon
79:9
9:5
32:10
79:9
85:8
102:2
167:5
173:5
174:8
96:5
32:5
32:11
53:5
104:5
118:12
170:5
15:8
18:0
59:8
96:8
153:5
M16651B
K429d
M00492B
K362d
M05355B
K375u
M16651A
K429d
M17610
M21732A
K362g
M40279B
M42253
K385m
M42577
M20895a
K6181
M04979
K618k
M05420
K685o
M09267
M22121
K618J
M26510
K646J
M41595a
K618e
M01688
K1083o
M01846
K1131a
M09995
K1083r
M21074
K1083p
M36528
K1131c'
Y. tjerT L. tian" E. tenh
rear of an army. See also dian below
Y.tjeif L. tfiiarT E. denh
tenant farmer; rent. See also tian
Y. tjenv L. tfiian" E. denh
fill up; make good; now written . See
also tian
Y. tjenv L. tfiian" E. denh
palace, hall. See also dian above
Y. [tjenv] L. tfiian" E. denh
shallow lake; form sediment, settle
Y. tjenv L. tfiian" E. denh
royal domain. See also sheng
Y. tjenN L. tfiian" E. denh
inlay. See also tian
Y. tjenv L. tfiian" E. denh
lightning
Y. tjenv L. tfiian" E. denh
indigo dye
Y. tjenT L. tiam' E. t£m'
defective jade; flawed; alsodiSn. Also
read E. temh in the Jiyun.
Y. tjerrT L. tiam" E. temh
earthen shelf in a room
Y. tjenT L. tianT E. temh
throw down; A-~— n; overwhelm. Now
used for dian 11 up, make good
Y. tjenT L,. tianT E. temh
shop; inn
Y. tjeirf L. tiarrf E. temh
ague, malarial fever. Also E. qiam
Y. [tjenv] L. tfiianr E. dem'
bamboo mat
Y. jem' L. jiam E. jiam
on the verge of, in danger; also yan
Y. tjew L. tiaw E. tew
wither
Y. tjew L. tiaw E. tew
flutter; surname; tricky, cunning
Y. tjew L. tiaw E. tew
carve, engrave, incise
Y. tjew L. tiaw E. tew
carve, engrave
Y. tjew L. tiaw E. tew
marten, sable
dian
dian
dian
dian
dian
dian
dian
dian
dian
dian
dian
dian
dian
dian
dian
dian
diao
diao
diao
diao
diao

Lexicon 79
167:8
172:8
196:8
57:1
167:3
64:8
140:11
149:8
167:6
88:6
17:3
32:6
97:5
120:6
125:6
157:5
159:5
162:5
32:9
91:10
102:18
142:9
M40577
K1083s
M42080
K1083t
M47012
K1083u
M09698
K1165a
M40172
K1120k
M12243
K1126m
M31712
K1077v
M35609B
K1083x
M40387B
K1145H
M19727
M01809A
M05061
K413n
M21380
K4021
M27445
K413q
M28861
K413r
M37450
K402J
M38275B
K402d
M38800
K402k
M05248
K633f
M19871
K633g
M21982
K1255a
M33333
K633h
Y. [tjew] L. tiaw E. tew
engrave, incise. Also E. daw blunt
Y. [tjew] L. tiaw E. tew
carve; eagle
Y. tjew L. tiaw E. tew
eagle; carve, incise, engrave
Y. tjewv L. tiawv E. tewh
bring condolences
Y. tjewv L. tiawN E. tewh
angle, fish with hook and line
Y. tjewv L. tfiiawv E. dew'
shake, move; drop, fall. Also E. dewh
Y. [tjew*] L. tfiiawv E. dewh
basket for carrying seed. Also E. dejk
Y. tjews L. tfiiawv E. dewh
tune, air; transfer; investigate. See
also tia"o, zhou
Y. [tjewv] L. tfiiawv E. dewh
small cooking vessel. See also yao,
tiao
Y. tje L. tia E. tia
father, dad
Y. tje' L. tfiiat E. det
convex
Y. tje' L. tfiiat E. det
anthill; mound
Y. [tje'] L. tfiiat E. det
small melon
Y. tje' L. tfiiat E. det
hempen band worn in mourning
Y. [tje'] L. tfiiat E. det
very old, 80 years old
Y. tje' L. tfiiat E. det
fall down, stumble
Y. [tje'] L. tfiiat E. det
alternate; overtake. See also yi
Y. tje' L. tfiiat E. det
alternate
Y. [tje'] L. tfiiap E. dep
parapet
Y. tje' L. tfiiap E. dep
writing tablet, document
Y. tje' L. tfiiap E. dep
double, pile up; fold
Y. tje' L. tfiiap E. dep
butterfly
diao
diao
diao
diao
diao
diao
diao
diao
diao
die
die
die
die
die
die
die
die
die
die
die
die
die

80 Lexicon
145:9
145:11
149:9
1:1
30:2
167:2
164:2
181:2
206:0
40:5
112:2
167:2
149:2
167:7
40:5
15:3
75:4
142:8
61:13
140:9
142:8
M34425
K6331
M34525B
K690g
M35697
K633J
M00002A
K833a
M03244
M40159A
M39764
M43335
K833e
M48315
K834a
M07109B
K833z
M24029
M40159B
M35211
M40447
K835o
M07109A
K833z
M01610
K1002a
M 14499
K1175a
M33213A
K1175H
Ml 1320
M31433
K11881
M33213B
K1175H
Y. [tje'] L. tfiiap E. dep
unlined gown
Y. [tje'] L. tfiiap E. dep
lined garment. See also XT
Y. tje' L. tfiiap E. dep
spy, secret agent
Y. tig L. tiajq E. tejg
fourth Heavenly Stem; adult male. See
also zheng
Y. [tin] L. tiajrj F. tejq
ask repeatedly; dmgnmg ' urge,
exhort
Y. tirj L. tiajrj E. tejrj
nail. See also ding
Y. tirj" T tiajrj' E. tejrj'
mlngdlng _ . ., intoxicated
Y. tirf L. tiajrj' E. tejrj'
crown of the head
Y. tirf L. tiajrj' E. tejg'
three-footed cauldron, tripod
Y. tirf L. tiajrf E. tejrjh
star name; forehead. See also ding
below
Y. tirf L. tiajrf E. tejrjh
anchor stone, killock
Y. tirjv L. tiajrj" E. tejrjh
to nail. See also ding
Y. tig" L. tfiiajrf E. dejrj'
settle, arrange; revise. Also E. tejrjh stay
Y. [tig*] L. tfiiajg" E. dejrj'
metal shaft
Y. tig" L. tfiiajg" E. dejrjh
establish, settie; settled
Y. turj L. tswrj E. tawrj
winter
Y. turj L. tswrj E. tswrj
east
Y. turjv L. tswrj E. tawrj
didoni rainbow. See also dong
Y. turj" L. tswrj' E. tawrj'
understand
Y. turf L. tawrj' E. tswrj'
oversee, manage, regulate
Y. turjv L. tawrj' E. tswrj'
didong i^. ^[ rainbow. See also dong
die
die
die
ding
ding
ding
ding
ding
ding
ding
ding
ding
ding
ding
ding
dong
dong
dong
d6ng
d6ng
dong

Lexicon 81
75:8
15:8
19:9
46:6
9:6
61:6
85:6
10:9
64:4
68:0
142:4
170:7
191:0
191:14
116:15
130:7
149:15
151:0
162:7
163:9
169:9
M14949
K1175f
M01670
K1175a
M02390
K1188m
M08038B
M00601B
K1176J
M10594B
K1176k
M17386
K1176H
M01386
K117a
Ml 1888
M13489
K116a
M32903
M41663
M45632
K1234a
M45657
K1235c
M25695
K1023s
M29544
K118d
M36088B
K1023m
M36245
K118a
M38887
M39497
K45e'
M41434A
K45h'
Y. turf L. towrf E. towrjh
ridge pole
Y. turf L. towrjv E. towrjh
freeze
Y. turf L. tfiowrf E. dowrj'
move
Y. [tury] L. tfiowrf E. dowrjh
cavern; southern non-Chinese people
(now written . See also t6ng
Y. [turjv] L. tfiowrp E. dowrjh
southern non-Chinese people, same
as See also long
Y. [turjx] L. tfiowrf E. dowrjh
fear. See also t6ng
Y. turjv L. tfiowrf E. dowrjh
cave, grotto
Y. tow L. taw E. taw
helmet; pocket, bag
Y. taw" L. tow' T7 tow'
tremble, shake; ddusdu irouse
Y. towv L. tow' E. tow'
ladle, dipper; measure of capacity
Y. tovT L. tow' E. tow'
keddu tadpole
Y. tow" L. tow' E. tow'
steep; sudden, abrupt
Y. [towv] L. towv E. towh
fight, wrangle
Y. towx L. towN E. towh
fight, wrangle
Y. tows L tfiowv E. dowh
hole; drain
Y. towx L. tfiowv E. dowh
head, neck
Y. [tow^ L. tfiowv E. dowh
clause, sentence, segment of text set off
by pauses. See also du
Y. towv L. tfiowv E. dowh
bean
Y. towv L. tfiowv E. dowh
stop, stay in a place, remain; tease
Y. tu L. tuo E. to
capital city
Y. tu L. tuo E. to
watchtower on a city wall. See also she
dong
dong
dong
d6ng
dong
dong
dong
dou
d6u
d6u
d6u
d6u
dou
dou
dou
dou
dou
dou
dou
du
du

82 Lexicon
109:8
145:8
75:15
78:15
80:4
85:15
91:13
93:15
94:13
145:13
149:15
149:22
177:15
178:13
188:13
203:15
120:19
32:9
109:9
130:3
147:9
154:9
118:10
M23457
K1031n
M34374
K10310
M15821
K1023H
M16601
K10231
M 16730
K1016a
M18591
K1023J
M19906
K1023k
M20196
K10231
M20725
K12241
M34650B
K1224J
M36088A
K1023m
M36179
K1023n
M43077
K1023q
M43217
K1224k
M45281
K1224m
M48234
K1023r
M28093A
K10165
M05279
K45y
M23519
K45c'
M29270B
M34913
K45d'
M36847
M26344
K1019g
Y. tu L. tawk E. tawk
oversee, control
Y. [tiT] L. tawk E. tawk
seam in the back of a garment
Y. [tu'] L. tfiawk E. dawk
coffer, box, coffin
Y. [tu'] L. tfiawk E. dawk
stillborn, abortion
Y. tu' L. tfiawk E. dawk
poison
Y. tu' L. tfiawk E. dawk
ditch, canal, drain
Y. tu' L. tfiawk E. dawk
tablet, writing slip, document
Y. tu' L. tfiawk E. dawk
calf
Y. tu' L. tfiawk E. dawk
alone
Y. [tu'j L. tfiawk E. dawk
wrap, sheathe. See also shu
Y. tu' L. tfiawk E. dawk
recite texts, read. See also dou
Y. [tu'] L. tfiawk E. dawk
displeased, discontented; vilify
Y. [tu'] L. tfiawk E. dawk
quiver
Y. [tu'] L. tfiawk E. dawk
bow case. Also E. d?uawk, tpuawk
Y. [tu'L _ L. tfiawk E. dawk
dulou skull
Y. [tu'j L. tfiawk E. dawk
blacken, defile; outrage
Y. tu' L. tfiawk E. dawk
yak-tail banner. See also dao
Y. uf L. tua' E. to'
unit length of wall; obstruct, impede
Y. [tuv] L. tua' E. to'
see, observe
Y. [tuv] L. tua' E. to'
tripe. See also du
Y. uf L. tua' E. to'
see, observe, same a
Y. uf L. tua' E. to'
bet, gamble
Y. tu~ L. tawk E. tawk
firm, solid; reliable, trusty, honest
du
du
du
du
du
du
du
du
du
du
du
du
du
du
du
du
du
du
du
du
du
du
du

Lexicon 83
38:4
38:5
66:13
142:18
130:3
53:6
75:3
85:9
167:9
117:9
126:3
111:7
69:14
69:14
79:5
79:12
167:9
32:8
162:6
41:11
66:8
M06082
K795o
M06121
K795n
M13406A
K790d
M33896
K795r
M29270A
M09313B
KSOla
M14477
K62g
M17765
KSOlb
M40607
M25806
K168d
M28880
K168a
M23978
K169a
M13611B
K170a
M13611A
K170a
M16619
K172a
M16681
M40625
K172c
M05211
K575z
M38836B
K543d
M07457
K511a
M13276B
K464p
Y. tiT L. tu5v E. toh
jealous
jealous, same as „
Y. tu- L. tu9v E. toh
ruin. See also yl
Y. tus L. tu3- E. toh
wood-boring insect, bookworm; vermin
Y. ur L. tfiua' E. do'
stomach. See also dfi
Y. tus L. tfiu^ E. doh
measure; degree, rule, standard. See
also duo
Y. tu" L. tfiu^ E. do'
kind of pear; stop up, block; surname
Y. UT L. tfiu5v E. doh
to ford, cross
Y. UT L. tfius- E. doh
inlay, gild; metal plating
Y. ton L. tuan E. twan
point; tip; starting point; extremity
Y. ton L. tuan E. twan
same a;
Y. ton" L. tuan' E. twan'
short
Y. ton- L. tuanv E. twanh
decide
Y. tonv L. tfiuan- E. dwan'
cut off. Also E. twan'
Y. tonv L. tfiuan- E. dwanh
forge, hammer; break; cut off; section
Y. [ton-] L. tfiuan- E. dwanh
addled egg
Y. tonv L. tfiuanv E. dwanh
to forge
Y. tuj L. tuaj E. twsj
mound, pile, heap; pile up
Y. [tuj] L. tuaj E. twsj
carve, engrave; ring for suspending a bell
See also zhm
Y. tujv L. tuajv E. twajh
reply; correspond to
Y. [tujv] L. tuajv E. twajh
grain vessel. See also dun
dii
du
du
du
du
du
du
du
du
duan
duan
duan
duan
duan
duan
duan
duan
dul
duT
dui
dui

84 Lexicon
dui
dui
dui
dui
dui
dui
dui
dui
dui
dui
dui
dun
dun
dun
dun
dun
dun
dun
dun
dun
dun
112:8 M24294
159:14
61:12
140:14
149:12
167:8
167:12
170:9
113:4
10:5
61:14
32:12
61:8
66:8
157:12
181:4
M38568
K511h
Ml 1227
K464u
M32193
M35945
K464v
M40557B
K464g
M40891
K464h
M41750A
K526f
M24645
K323a
M01356
K324a
Ml 1376
K5111
M05470
M10759
K464n
M13276A
K464p
M37874a
K430n
M43381
K427J
31:4
85:4
109:4
162:11
162:9
M04704B
M17193
K427H
M23171B
K465a
M39089
K428d
M38982
K465e
Y. tujv L. tuaj^ E. twajh
treadle-operated tilt-hammer for pounding
rice
Y. [tuft L. tuaf E. tw3jh
railing at the front of a carriage box
Y. [tujv] L. tfiuaf E. dwajh
resent, hate
Y. [tujx] L. tfiuajv E. dwajh
aidui 3£ I5F thick, flourishing vegetation
Y. [tujv] L. tfiuajx E. dwajh
resent, hate
Y. [tujv] L. tfiuajv E. dwajh
metal cap on the butt of a weapon. See
also chun
Y. [tujv] L. tfiuajv E. dwajh
metal cap at butt of weapon, same as
Y. tujx L. tfiuajs E. dwajh
row or line of people; troop
Y. [tujv] L. tuajx E. twajh
stick, baton
Y. tuj" L. tfiuajv E. dwajh
glad; open a passage; Yijing hexagram
Y. tsujv L. trfiyj" E. drwih
hate
Y. tun L. tun E. twan
mound
Y. [tun] L. tun E. twsn
generous, ample
Y. tun L. tun E. twan
solid, thick; honest, sincere. See also dui
Y. tshun' L. tsfiun E. dzwsn
squat; also cun
Y. tunv L. tunv E. twonh
pause; sudden, immediate; knock one's
head on the ground; tired out, exhausted
Y. tuns L. tfiunx E. dwsn'
grain bin. See also tun
Y. tunv L. tfiunv E. dwsn'
hiindunchaos
Y. tun", ran L. tfiun" E. dwsn'
proper name. Now used instead of shun
for 'shield.' See also shun
Y. [tuns] L. tfimr E. dwsn'
withdraw. Also E. dwsnh
Y. tunx L. tfiunv E. dwsn'
withdraw. Also E. dwsnh

Lexicon 85
167:4
36:3
37:11
53:6
145:13
157:9
167:13
18:8
64:8
32:8
75:2
190:9
32:6
75:5
137:5
170:6
187:3
18:6
32:6
32:12
51:9
M40219
K427i
M05756
K3a
M05994
K274a
M09313A
KSOla
M34630B
M37676
M40951
K790p
M02055
K295g
M12241
K295h
M05190
K311
M14429
KlOa
M45519
Kllj
M05048a
M14599
M30400
M41614
K3o
M44589B
MO 1957
M05048b
M05481A
Kile
M10855
Kill
Y. tunv L. tfiuiT E. dwsnh
dull, blunt
Y. to L. ta E. ta
many
Y. to' L. tfiuat E. dwat
seize; take away, deprive; rob
Y. taw', to' L. tfiak E. dak
to measure. See also du
Y. [taw, to'] L. tfiak E. dak
undergarment. See also ii
Y. taw L. tfiak E. dak
walk slowly, stroll
Y. taw, to' L. tfiak E. dak
kind of bell
Y. [to"] L. tuat E. twat
cut out; remove; prick
Y. to" L. tuat E. twat
gather, pick up; select
Y. [to"] L. tua' E. twa'
dike, embankment; air tube on a bellows
Y. to" L. tua' E. twa'
hang down (of flowers); cluster; classifier
for flowers; move
Y. to" L. tua' E. twa'
hanging tufts of hair
Y. [tol L. tfiuav E. dwa'
battlement; also duo
Y. to* L. thV E. da'
rudder, helm, same as
Y. to* L. thV E. da'
rudder
Y. [to*] L. tfiV E. da'
fall down
Y. & L. thV E. da1"
pack (on a pack animal). See also tuo
Y. tov L. tuav E. twah
chop, mince
Y. [to*] L. tfiua* E. dwa'
pile up, stack; target; also du6
Y. to* L. tfiua* E. dwa'
fall. See also hui
Y. to* L. tfiua* E. dwi.', dwah
lazy
dun
duo
duo
du6
duo
duo
duo
duo
duo
du6
duo
du6
dud
du6
duo
duo
duo
duo
duo
duo
duo

86 Lexicon
170:5
9:7
38.7
46.7
109:7
140:7
142:7
196:7
30:4
31:4
149:4
149:12
181:9
184:7
32.8
61:8
30:6
30:13
61:9
140:9
149:9
162:9
M41599a
Kim
M00665
K2h
M06331
K2i
M08071
K2k
M23386
K21
M31077
K2m
M33082
K2q
M46954
K2p
M03348
K19d
M04715
M35256
K19e
M35951
K27m
M43586
M44168
K2o
M05215
K805g
M10824A
K805h
M03529
K788g
M04377
K768a
M10939
K788h
M31361
M35713
K788k
M39000
K7881
Y. o L. ?a E. ?a
high mound, hill; river bank; slope; show
partiality; insinuating, servile; also a, a
Y. o' L. rja E. rja
suddenly; very soon; presently
Y. o' L. rja E. rja
graceful, beautiful; pretty young woman
Y. o' L. rja E. rja
high, lofty
Y. [o'] L.rja E.rja
look at closely, examine
Y. o' L. rja E. rja
kind of plant
Y. o' L. rja E. rja
moth
Y. o' L. rja E. rja
domestic goose
Y. [o'] L. rjua E. rjwa
move, change
Y. [o'] L. qua E. rjwa
decoy
Y. o' L. rjua E. nwa
wrong, false; deceive; same as
Y. [o'] L. rjua E. nwa
wrong, false; deceive; same as
Y. jajN, njex (?) L. rjjaijk E. rjaijk/rjeijk
forehead; specified number, quota
Y. os L. rjav E. rjah
hungry
Y. [awv] L. ?ak E. ?ak
chalk, whitewash; plaster
Y. aw% os L. ?ak , E. ?ak
bad, repulsive. See also wu, wu
Y. [aw'J L. rjak E. rjak
argue, contend; advise frankly
Y. [awx] L. rjakE. rjak
startle, shock. Cf.
Y. awN L. rjak E. rjak
startle, shock
Y. awx, ON L. rjak E. rjak
calyx, perianth
Y. [awv] L. rjak E. rjak
speak frankly
Y. [awv] L. rjak E. rjak
come across unexpectedly
e
e
e
e
e
e
6
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e

Lexicon
163:9
167:9
162:9
169:8
181:6
195:9
195:16
196:9
27:2
53:1
54:4
54:10
159:4
159:5
170:4
170:5
170:10
51:6
126:0
M39520
K7881
M40617
K788m
M39004
K3131
M41380A
K270a
M43447
K146H
M46337
M46597
M47105
K788n
M02893
K844b
Ml 1697
K844a
Ml 1848
K844f
M12497
K849e
M38207
K844e
M38264
K844d
M41559A
K844h
M41590
K844g
M41791A
K848h
M10591
K370J
M28871
K982a
126:3
128:6
M28878
M29059
K982d
Y. ov L. qak E. qak
place name; Hubei province
Y. ov L. qak E. qak
blade of a sword
Y. tr] L. ?at E. ?at
put a stop to; check, hold back
Y. [D\J L.?at E.?at
obstruct, stop up. See also yan
Y. [ol L. ?at E. ?at
stalk or stem, ridge of the nose
L. qak E. qak
E. qak
E. qak
E. Taijk/Teijk
Y. aw\ o
crocodile
Y. aw\o" L. rjak
crocodile, same as §§
Y. awv,ov L. rjak
osprey, fish hawk
Y. jajv L. Tjaijk
strategic point; in straits, in difficulty
Y. [jajv] L. Tjaijk E. Tsijk/TEijk
strategic point; in straits, in difficulty,
same as
Y. [jaj] L. TjaijkE. Tsijk/Teijk
grasp, hold; yoke, same as
Y.jajN L.?ja:jk E. Tsijk/Teijk
grasp, hold
Y. [jajv] L. ?jaijk E. Tsijkfleijk
yoke
same as
Y. [jajN] L. ?ja:jk E. Tsijk/Teijk
strategic point; in straits, in difficulty.
See also ai
Y. [jaj^] L. ?ja:jk E. Tsijktfeijk
strategic point; straits, difficulty
Y. |jajv] L. Tjaijk E. Tsijk/Teijk
strategic point; straits, difficulty. See
also ai.
Y. on L. Tan E. Tan
benevolence, grace, favour
Y. rr' L. ri E. jii/jii
connective particle between verbs in
series, then, and; you, your
Y. [rr'] L. ri E. jii/jii
facial hair
Y. [IT'] L. ri E.jii/jii
bring together, harmonize. Also E. jiih.
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
en
er
er
er

Lexicon88
er
er
6r
er
e"r
er
er
er
6r
er
er
er
er
er
er
er
130:6
170:6
195:6
196:6
10.6
38.9
128:0
184:6
96:6
89:10
162:14
9:6
18.6
7:0
75:12
154:5
M29444
K982e
M41629
M46105
K982g
M46844
K982f
M01365A
K873a
M06464B
K777k
M28999
K981a
M44146
K981H
M20964
K981d
M 19750
K359a
M39193
K359c
M00560
K981f
M01960
K981c
M00247
K564a
M15486
K5641
M36703
K564g
Y. [rr'] L. ri E.jii/jii
cook thoroughly, boil
Y. [rr'] L. ri E.jii/jii
mountain name
Y. [rr'] L.ri E.jii/jii
fish roe
Y. [rr'] L.riE.jii/jii
swallow. See also yier
Y.rr' L.ri E.jiiS/jii
child. See also ni.
Y. [rr'] L.ri E.jiiS/jii
erqiang people in northern Tibet
in the Han period, also E. jiia, L. ria.
See also chuo.
Y.rrv L.ri' E.jii'/jii'
ear; contraction of er yl W & only
Y. XT' L.ri' E.jii'/Jii'
cakes, sweets, delicacies; bait;
entice. Also E. jiih, L. ri\ Y. rr
Y. rrv L. ri* E.jiih/jrih
ear ornament, ear-ring; sword-guard
Y.if L.ri' E.jiiS'/jii'
you; thus, so
Y. rrv L. ri'
near; draw near to
Y. frr] L. it
to second, assist
Y.[rr] L.ri^
cut off the ears
Y.rr L. rt E.jiih
two
Y. rrv L. rt E. jiih
sour jujube; wild jujube
Y. if L. riv E. jiih
double; in two minds, doubtful; disloyal;
second, assistant; two
E.jiiS'/Jii'
E.jiih/nih
E. iih/iih

Lexicon 89
105:7
9:4
32:6
109:9
118:6
122:9
169:6
4:4
85:5
190:5
140:12
140:15
50:12
70:14
102:7
120:12
124:12
159:12
50:3
75:11
86:9
86:12
M22669
K275c
M00439
K307a
M05056
M23544
K276J
M26000
M28315
K308a
M41308
M00133
K641a
M17290
K642k
M45400
K2761
M31906A
K195m
M32346A
K195s
M09086
K195d
M13700
M21858A
K195b
M27901A
K195h
M28814
M38541
K195g
M08787a
K625d
M15414
K263b
M19229
K264a
M 19426
K1951
Y. fa" L. fjyat/fait E. puat
send out; emit; start; open
Y. fa' L. ffijyat/ffiait E. buat
hew, cut down; strike, attack
Y. [fa'] L. ffijyat/ffiait E. buat
turn up the soil, till
Y. [fa'] L. ffijyat/ffiait E. buat
shield
Y. fa' L. ffijyat/ffiait E. buat
raft
Y. fa' L. ffijyat/ffiait E. buat
punish
Y. [fa'] L. ffijyat/ffiait E. buat
powerful family
Y. fa' L. ffijyap/ffiaip E. buap
lack; tired, weary
Y. fav L. fjyap/faip E. puap
pattern, model, law
Y. fav L. fjyat/fait E. puat
hair of the head; formerly read fa
Y. fan L. fjy an/fain E. puan
hedge, fence. See also fan
Y. fan L. fjyan/fain E. puan
hedge, fence; frontier; foreign country.
See also fan
Y. [fan] L. fjyan/fain E. phuan
banner, flag; wave, turn, change
Y. fan L. fjyan/fain E. phuan
banner, streamer. Also E. buan
Y. fan L. fjyan/fain E. phuan
in rotation, time, turn. See also pan, bo
Y. [fan] L. fjyan/fain E. phuan
turn over; translate, same as See also
fan
Y. fan L. fjyan/fain E. phuan
turn over; translate
Y. fan L. fjyan/fain E. phuan
screens on the sides of a carriage
Y. fan' L. ffijyam/ffiaim E. buam
sail; also fan
Y. fan' L. ffijyan/ffiain E. buan
fence, hedge; cage
Y. fan' L. ffijyan/ffian E. buan
trouble, troublesome
Y. [fan'] L. ffijyan/ffiain E. buan
burn; roast
fa
fa
fa
fa
fa
fa
fa
fa
fa
fa
fan
fan
fan
fan
fan
fan
fan
fan
fan
fan
fan
fan

90
fan
fan
fan
fan
fan
fan
fan
fan
fan
fan
fan
fan
fan
fan
fSn
fan
fan
fan
fan
fan
fan
96:12
112:15
120:11
120:12
130:12
140:12
140:15
140:17
145:5
157:12
32:12
16:1
50:3
85:2
29:2
162:4
154:4
184:4
184:4
85:2
85:3
M21247
K195J
M24573
M27849A
K265b
M27901B
K195h
M29882
K195k
M31906B
K195m
M32346B
K195s
M32512
K265d
M34210
K181m
M37865
K1951
M05467
M01739
K625a
M08787b
K625d
M17101A
K626c
M03127
K262a
M38758
K262e
M36679
K262f
M44064A
K262i
M44064B
K2621
M17101B
K626c
M17120
K625f
Lexicon
Y. [fan'] L. ffijyan/ffiam E. buan
kind of precious stone; fanyu •
same as yufa"n
Y. fan' L. injyan/ffiam E.buan
metallic sulphate; alum'
Y. fan' L. ffijyan/ffiain E. buan
abundant, numerous; propagate,
multiply. See also pan, po
Y. [fan'] L. ffijyan/ffiam E. buan
confuse; disorderly. See also fan
Y. [fan'] L. ffijyan/ffiain E. buan
cooked sacrificial meat
Y. [fan'] L. ffijyan/ffiain E. buan
luxuriant growth. See also fan
Y. [fan'] L. ffijyan/ffiain E. buan
medicinal herb, Anemarrhena
asphodeloides. See also fan
Y. [fan'] L. ffijyan/ffiain E. buan
Artemisia stellariana
Y. fan' L. ffijyan/ffiain E. buan
white inner garment worn in summer
Y. [fan'] L. ffijyan/ffiain E. buan
paw
Y. fan' L. ffijyan/ffiain E. buan
grave mound
Y. fan' L. ffijyam/ffiaim E. buam
all; ordinary
Y. fan' L. ffijyam/ffiaim E. buam
sail; also fan
Y. [fan'] L. ffijyam/ffiaim E. buam
place name; a surname. See also fan
Y. fan" L. fjyan'/fain' E. puan'
turn over; turn back, return; on the
contrary; go counter, oppose; rebel
Y. fan" L. fjyan'/fain' E. puan'
turn back, return
Y. fan" L. fjyair/faar E. puanh
barter, trade
Y. fans L. ffijyanYffianr E. buan'
meal; eat, feed
Y. fan" L. ffijyans/ffiainv E. buanh
cooked rice, food
Y. [fans] L. fjyairr/faiirf E. phuamh
overflow, flood; extensive. See also fan
Y. [fan"] L. fjyamVfainr E. phuamh
float

Lexicon 91
85:5
94:2
118:9
140:5
159:3
75:7
22.0
32:4
70:0
75:4
130:4
163:4
38:4
140:4
38:4
32:4
130:4
63:4
170:4
195:4
66:4
M17298
K640b
M20238
K626a
M26253
K626d
M30834
K626e
M38189
K625e
M14888
M02595
K741a
M04924B
K740x
M13620
K740a
M14532
K740k
M29302A
M39300
K740o
M06111a
K740q
M30736
K740s
M06111b
K740q
M04924A
K740x
M29302B
M11714A
K740y
M41576
K740z
M46022
K740b'
M13133A
K740i
Y. fanx L. fjyamVfaimv E. phuamh
float; to flood; extensive
Y. fan" L. ffijyamYffiainT E. buam'
transgress, violate
Y. fan" L. ffijyamYffiainT E. buam'
mould, pattern, standard
Y. fan" L. ffijyamYffiainr E. buam'
kind of plant; bee; mould, pattern,
same as a surname
Y.[fajT] L.ffijyamYffiairrf E. buam'
cross-piece at front of a carriage
Y.[fanv] L.ffijyamVffiairrf E. buamh
transcription of Sanskritbrahma
Y. [farj] L. fjyarj/farj E. puarj
box
Y. farj L. fjyarj/farj E. puarj
quarter of a city; lane. See also fang
Y. farj L. fjyarj/farj E. puarj
square; quarter, region; direction;
method, pattern; just then
Y. farj L. fjyarj/farj E. puarj
kind of tree
Y. farj L. fjyan/farj E. puarj
fat, tallow. See also fang
Y. [farj] L. fjyarj/farj E. puarj
place name
Y. farj L. fjyarj/farj E. phuarj
harm; injure; also fang
Y. farj L. fjyarj/farj E. phuarj
fragrant
Y. farj L. fjyarj/farj E. phuarj
hinder; also fang
Y. [farj'] L. ffijyarj/ffiarj E. buarj
dike, same as Bfr. See also fang
Y. [farj'] L. ffijyarj/ffiarj E. buarj
fat, tallow. See also fang
Y. farj' L. ffijyarj/ffiarj E. buarj
room, house. See also pdng
Y. farj' L. ffijyarj'/ffiarj' E. buarj
dike; ward off, protect against, hold
off. Also E. buarjh
Y. farj' L. ffijyarj/ffiarj E. buarj
triangular bream, Megalobrama terminalis
Y. farf L. fjyarj'/farj' E. puarj'
conform to; imitate. See also fang
fan
fan
fan
fan
fan
fan
fang
fang
fang
fang
fang
fang
fang
fang
fang
fang
fang
fang
fang
fang
fang

92 Lexicon
72:4
9:8
9:4
60:4
120:4
190:4
137:4
149:4
66:4
63:8
120:8
142:8
175:0
183:0
187:8
38:3
140:8
173:8
187:8
130:4
Ml 3796
K740J
M00785
M00420
K740v
M10052B
K740e
M27305
K740r
M45371
K740u
M30386
K740g
M35284
K740t
M13133B
K7401
Ml 1750
K579d
M27604
M33138B
K579r
M42585
K579a
M44000
K580a
M44824A
K579k
M06061A
K581a
M31220A
K5791
M42323
K579J
M44824B
K579k
M29290
K582a
Y. farf L. fjyarj'/farj' E. puarj'
just then
Y. far/ L. fjyarj'/farj' E. puarj'
imitate, copy
Y. [far/] L. fjyarj'/farj' E. phuarj'
resemble
Y. [farfi T fjyarj'/farj' E. phuarj'
fSngfu like, resembling. See also
pang
Y. [far/] L. fjyarj'/farj' E. phuarj'
spin (thread)
Y. [farjvi T fjyarj'/farj' E. phuarj'
f&ngfu like, resembling
Y.farjv[sicj L,. fjyarjYfarf E. puarjh
boat
Y. far/, farjx L.fjyarjVfarj" E. puarjh
ask after, enquire, pay a visit
Y. farjv L. fjyarjYfarjv E. puarjh
release, let go; banish, expel. See also
fang
Y. fi L. fjyj/fji E. puj
leaf of a door
Y. fi L. fjyj/fji E. puj
bright red, crimson
Y.ffi] L. fjyj/fji E.puj
to fly. See also fei
Y. fi L. fjyj/fji E. puj
is not, negator of nouns; wrong; blame,
censure
Y. fi L. fjyj/fji E. puj
fly
Y. fi L. fjyj/fji E. puj
outer horses of a team of four. See also
fei below
Y.fi L. fjyj/fji E.phuj
wife; princely consort; first-ranking
imperial concubine
Y.fi L. fjyj/fji E.phuj
fragrant. See also f£i, fei
Y.fi L. fjyj/fji E.phuj
feifei heavy snowfall
Y. fi L. fjyj/fji E. phuj
feifei descriptive of horses running
nonstop. See also fei above
Y. fi' L. ffijyj/ffiji E. buj
fat, corpulent; rich, fertile
f&nj
f&nj
fan*
finj
ftnj
f5n|
f&nj
fan^
an|
fei
fei
fei
fei
fei
fei
fei
fei
fei
fei
fei

Lexicon 93
ffi
fei
fei
fei
f£i
fei
fei
fei
fei
fei
fei
fei
fei
fei
fei
fei
fei
fei
fei
fei
fei
*
130:8 M29629 Y. [fi'] L. ffijyj/ffiji E. buj
K579q calf (of the leg)
22:8 M02629 Y. [ff] L. fjyj'/fji' E. puj'
K579c is not; wrong, bad; bandit, brigand
75:8 M14927 Y. [ff] L. fjyj'/fji' E. puj'
K579e lath for keeping a bow from warping;
support, assist; (is) not
75:10 M15258 Y. ff L. fjyj'/fji' E. puj'
Chinese torreya
118:10 M26314 Y. [ff] L. fjyj'/fji' E. puj'
K579f round basket
142:8 M33138A Y. [ff] L. fjyj'/fji' E. puj'
K579r noxious, evil-smelling insect; f&ilicin 1
cockroach. See also fei
149:8 M35601 Y. [ff] L. fjyj'/fji' E. puj'
K579g slander. Also E. puj, pujh
61:8 M10719 Y. [ff ] L. fjyj'/fji' E. phuj'
K579h be at a loss for words
67:8 M13469 Y. [fi"] L. fjyj'/fji' E. phuj'
K5791 ornate, elegant
74:5 M14351 Y. [ff] L. fjyj'/fji' E. phuj'
K530a new moon, third day of the moon
140:8 M31220B Y. ff L. fjyj'/fji' E. phuj'
K5791 kind of radishor turnip; poor, insigni-
ficant. See also fei, fei
124:1' M28733 Y. fi" L. ffijyjVffijr E. bujh
K579p feicui kingfisher; jadeite
85:5 M17251 Y. fi* L. fjyjv/fjiN E. pujh
K500q bubble up; boil
140:4 M30748A Y. fi" L. fjyjVfji* E. pujh
KSOlc small, minute. See also fu
154:5 M36717A Y. fi" L. fjyjVfji" E. phujh
KSOOs squander, waste
44:8 M07738 Y. [fr] L. ffijyjVffiji* E. bujh
K579o straw sandal
140:8 M31220C Y. [fr] L. ffijyjVffijix E. bujh
K5791 straw sandal. See also fei, ffci
104:8 M22252 Y. [fr] L. ffijyjVffijr E. bujh
rash, prickly heat
154:5 M36717B Y. fr L. ffijyjVffijr E. bujh
KSOOs surname. See also fei, bi
53:12 M09492 Y. fr L. fjyajv/fjr E. puajh
K275f abolish
104:12 M22520 Y. [fr] L. fjyajx/fjr E. puajh
incurable disease; abolish

94
fei
fei
fen
fen
fen
fen
fen
fen
fen
fen
fen
fen
fen
fen
fen
fen
fen
fen
fen
fen
fen
Lexicon
130:4
30:4
18:2
184:13
75:8
184:9
84:4
120:4
124:4
140:4
173:4
85:4
32:12
75:4
75:8
85:4
85:13
86:8
123:13
140:12
152:13
M29328
K501g
M03331
K348a
M01853A
K471a
M44435
K437J
M14995B
K471r
M44285
K438e
M17048
K471n
M27295
K471h
M28636
K471e
M30728
K4711
M42231
K471J
M17178b
M05488A
K437m
M14534
K471m
M14995A
K471r
M17178a
M18446
K437o
M19100
K474a
M28571
K437p
M31987
K437q
M36467
K437r
Y. fr L. fjyajVfjis E. phuajh
lungs
Y. fr L. ffijyajVffijiv E. buajh
bark (of a dog)
Y. fun L. fjyn/fun E. pun
divide. See also fen
Y. fun L. fjyn/fun E. pun
steam rice
Y. [fun] L. fjyn/fun E. phun
fBnfen troubled, disordered. See also
fe"n
Y. [fun] L. fjyn/fun E. pun
steam rice
Y. fun L. fjyn/fun E. phun
vapour
Y. fun L. fjyn/fun E. phun
mixed; confused; many and various
Y. [fun] L. fjyn/fun E. phun
fenfen zhizhi flutter,
descriptive of weak flying
Y. fun L. fjyn/fun E. phun
fragrant
Y. [fun] L. fjyn/fun E. phun
fenfen heavy rain or snow
Y. fun [sic] L. ffijyn/ffiun E. bun
river name; also fe"n
Y. fun' L. ffijyn/ffiun E. bun
mound; high bank; great; grave; See also
fen
Y. [fun] L. ffijyn/ffiun E. bun
elm
Y. fun' L. ffijyn/ffiun E. bun
rafter; hempen cloth. See also fen
Y. fun [sic] L. ffijyn/ffiun E. bun
river name; also fen.
Y. [fun'] L. ffijyn/ffiun E. bun
high river bank; used for pen gush
Y. fun' L. ffijyn/ffiun E. bun
burn
Y. [fun'] L. ffijyn/ffiun E. bun
fenyang earth demon or god
Y. [fun'] L. ffijyn/ffiun E. bun
rich in fruit; hemp stalk; hemp seeds
Y. [fun'] L. ffijyn/ffiun E. bun
castrated pig

Lexicon 95
f6n
fen
fen
fen
fen
fen
fen
fen
fen
fen
fen
feng
feng
feng
feng
feng
feng
feng
feng
feng
feng
154:6 M36734B
K437a
159:12 M38540
K437s
181:4 M43378B
K471p
119:4 M26872
K471d
37:13 M06012
K473a
119:11
61:4
32:12
61:12
9:4
18:2
M27102
K472a
M10408
K471g
M05488B
K437m
Ml 1239
K437n
M00418B
M01853B
K471a
75:9 M15126
K625n
182:0 M43756A
K625H
85:18 M18739
151:11 M36304
K1014a
163:18 M39749
41:6 M07426
K1197i
2:3 M00075
K1197a
86:7 M19059
K197r
46:7 M08093
140:9 M31400A
K1197k
Y. [fun'] L. ffijyn/ffiun E. bun
great. See also bi, ben
Y. [fun'] L. ffijyn/ffiun E. bun
kind of war chariot, fenwen
Y. [fun'] L. ffijyn/ffiun E. bun
big-headed. See also ban
Y. funv L. fjyn'/fun' E. pun'
powder; white; pink
Y. fmr L. fjyiT/fuir E. punh
spread the wings, fly up; be aroused,
exert oneself
Y. funv L. fjynv/funv E. punh
excrement, ordure, manure
Y. funs L. fjyiT/fuir E. phunh
angry. Also E. phan'.
Y. [funv] L. ffijynVffiun^ E. bun'
rich soil. See also fen
Y. [fair] L. ffijynVffiunv E. bun'
indignation, anger
Same as ^ B. See also bin
Y. funv L. ffijynVffiun^ E. bunh
division, portion, lot. Now written &
for some specialized meanings with this
reading. See also fen
Y. fur) L. fjywrj/fuwrj E. puwrj
maple; Chinese sweet gum
Y. furj L. fjywrj/fuwrj E. puwrj
wind; style; practice, custom. See also
feng
Y. [furj] L. fjywrj/fuwrj E. phuwrj
river name
Y. furj L. fjywrj/fuwrj E. phuwrj
rich, flourishing, luxuriant
Y. [furj] L. fjywrj/fuwrj E. phuwrj
place name
Y. furj L. fjyawrj/fawrj E. puawrj
mound, raise a mound; earth up;
boundary wall, boundary; enfief; fief
Y. furj L. fjyawrj/fawrj E. phuawrj
flourishing, beautiful
Y. furj L. fjyawrj/fawrj E. phuawrj
beacon-fire, beacon
Y. furj L. fjyawrj/fawrj E. phuawrj
peak, summit
Y. furj L. fjyawrj/fawrj E. phuawrj
rape turnip. See also feng

96 Lexicon
142:7 M33088 Y. fug L. fjyawg/fswg E. phuawg
Kll97s bee, wasp
142:13 M33687 Y. [fug] L. fjyawrj/fawg E. phuawg
Kll97t bee, wasp, same as
167:7 M40455 Y. fug L. fjyawg/fswg E. phuawg
Kl 197u point, tip of a weapon
187:2 M44579A Y. fun' L. ffijywrj/ffiuwg E. buwg
K899d surname. See also pfng
120:11 M27809A Y. fug' L. ffijyawg/ffiawg E. buawg
Kll97x sew. See also feng
162:7 M38901 Y. fug' L. ffijyawg/ffiawg E. buawg
Kl I97o meet, run into
146:5 M34775 Y.[fugv] L. fjyawg'/fswg' E. puawg'
topple over; throw (of a horse)
149:9a M35741 Y. fugv L. fjywgv/fuwgx E. puwgh
K625o probe; criticize, find fault with. Old
reading feng
149:9b M35741 Y. fugv L. fjywgv/fuwgv E. puwgh
K625o chant; satirize. Now read feng
182:0 M43756B Y. [fugv] L. fjywgVfuwg" E. puwgh
K625g blow; influence; satirize. See also feng
154:9 M36865 Y. [furf] L. fjywgVfuwgv E. phuwgh
K1253a burial gifts
196:3 M46671 Y. fifff L. mjywgVffiuwgv E. buwgh
K625J fabulous bird, phoenix
140:9 M31400B Y. fugv L. fjyawgVfswg" E. phuawgh
Kll97k wild rice stem. See also feng
37:5 M05894 Y.fugN L.ffijyawgYffiswg^ E. buawg'
Kll97z present (to a superior); receive (from a
superior); esteem, respect
9:8 M00734 Y.[fugN] L.ffijyawgYffi9wgN E. buawgh
Kll97c' salary
120:11 M27809B Y. furf L.ffijyawgVffiswg^ E. buawgh
Kll97x seam. See also feng
9:5 M00517a Y. fo', fu' L. ffijyt/ffiut E. but
K5001 great; resist, oppose; Buddha; also fu.
120:10 M27771B Y. [fos] L. ffijyaVffiay E. buah
K771m tie up, bind. See also fu
1:3 M00019A Y. [faw] L. fjyw/fuw E. puw
K999a not. See also bii, f6u
85:7 M174875 Y. fu' L. ffijyw/fmiw E.buw
K12331 float; also fu
140:4 M30710 Y. [fuw'l L. ffijyw/ffiuw E. buw
K999I fouyl plantain, Plantago major
1:3 M00019C Y. fuv,fsw L. fivw'/fuw' E. puw'
K999a not so, same as B
feng
feng
feng
feng
feng
feng
feng
f6ng
feng
feng
feng
feng
feng
feng
feng
feng
fo
fo
fou
fou
fou
fou

Lexicon 97
f6u
fdu
f6u
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
30:4 M03340B Y. fow', fiT L. fjyw'/fuW E. puw'
K999e not so. See also pi.
121:0 M28108 Y. faw" L. fjyw'/fuw' E. puw'
KllOVa earthenware vessel; pottery
140:4 M30710 Y. [fW. fiTl L. fjyw'/fuw' E. puw'
K999i see pif6i
37:1 M05835A Y. fu L. fjya/fuS E. pus
KlOla male person. See also fu
75:5 M14616 Y. [fu] L. fjyS/fuS E. pus
Kl36d calyx; foot of a vessel; raft
130:11 M29829 Y. fu L. fjy3/fu3 E. pus
K69g skin
157:4 M37392 Y. fu L. fjvs/fuS E. pus
instep, same as
157:5 M37473 Y. [fu] L. fjy3/fu§ E. pua
K136e instep
167:4 M40213 Y. fu L. fjyS/fu§ E. pu§
KlOle axe
66:11 M13359 Y.fu L. fjy§/fu5 E. phuS
Kl02t' spread, spread out
75:7 M14807 Y.fu L. fjv§/fu5 E. phu§
K1233k raft; used for fti drumstick
163:11 M39604 Y.fu L. fjya/fua E. phu§
place name
199:4 M47739 Y.fu L. fjya/fuS E. phu§
grain husks, bran
39:4 M06948 Y.fu L. fjya/fuS E. phua
K1233a hatch; trust, confidence
163:7 M39428 Y.fu L. fjys/fua E. phua
Kl233g outer city wall
140:7 M31076A Y.fu L. fjys/fus E. phu§
Kl233f white pellicle lining the stalks of a sedge
or reed. See also pi&o
9:7 M00697 Y. [fu'] L. ffijy§/ffiu§ E. bus
K1233d prisoner
37:1 M05835B Y.fu' L. ffijyS/ffiuS E. bus
KlOla that; topic marker; final particle like
modern -ba 'is it not?' See also fu
64:4 Ml 1840 Y.fu' L. ffijys/ffiuS E. bus
KlOlf support
118:5 M25935 Y. fu' L. ffijys/ffiuS E. bus
Kl36m token, tally
140:4 M30694 Y.fu' L. ffijya/ffiua E. bus
KlOlh fuqu lotus; furong hibiscus

98
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fii
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
Lexicon
140:5 M30825 Y. [fu'] L. ffijys/ffiua E. bu5
Chinese trumpet creeper, Campsis
grandiflora
142:4 M32900 Y. fu' L. ffijyS/ffiua E. bu§
qlngfu ' kind of beetle; cash, money
196:2 M46643 Y. fu' L. ffijyS/ffiua E. bus
K137a wild duck
75:5 M14589 Y. fu [sic] L. ffijyw/ffiuw E. buw
K1113k drumstick
85:7 M17487a Y. fu' L. ffijyw/ffiuw E.buw
K12331 float, also fdu
122:4 M28224 Y. [fu'] L. ffiivw/ffiuw E. buw
K999h rabbit net; fusT screen across a
doorway
122:5 M28243 Y. [fu'] L. ffijyw/ffiuw E. buw
K11131 same as
122:7 M28279 Y. [fu'] L. ffijyw/ffiuw E. buw
K1233J net on a carriage for catching birds. Also
E. phu§, same meaning. FUST a
screen across a doorway
142:7 M33104 Y. [fu'] L. ffijyw/ffiuw E. buw
K1233n fuy6u mayfly, Ephemerida
120:10 M27771A Y. faw', fb' L. ffijyak/ffiak E. buak
K771m wrap, bind, tie up. See also fo
50:9 M08995 Y. fif L. fjywk/fuwk E. puwk
K933k width of cloth
113:9 M24768 Y. fif L. fjywk/fuwk E. puwk
K933d blessings, prosperity, good fortune
142:9 M33288 Y. fif L. fjywk/fuwk E. puwk
bat
159:9 M38442 Y. [fif] L. fjywk/fuwk E. puwk
K933J spokes of a wheel
9:4 M00438A Y. fu' L. ffijywk/ffiuwk E. buwk
K935a lie prostrate; hide, lie in ambush; submit.
See also fu
20:9 M02545 Y. [fu'] L. ffijywk/ffiuwk E. buwk
K933m pufu crawl. Also E. bak
40:5 M07098B Y. [fu'l L. ffijywk/ffiuwk E. buwk
K405o FuxT legendary prehistoric ruler
Also spelled with etc. See also
mi
74:4 M14345 Y. fu' L. ffijywk/ffiuwk E. buwk
K934d submit; clothing
118:8 M26148 Y. [fu'] L. ffijywk/ffiuwk E. buwk
K934g quiver

Lexicon 99
140:6 M30906 Y. [fu'] L. ffijywk/ffiuk E. buwk
fuling China root, Poris cocos
140:8 M31170 Y. [fu'l L. ffijywk/ffiuwk E. buwk
laifu radish
141:5 M32702 Y. [fu'l L. ffijywk/ffiuwk E. buwk
FUXT legendary prehistoric ruler
196:8 M46999 Y. fu' L. ffijywk/ffiuwk E. buwk
kind of owl
57:2 M09708 Y. [fiT] L. fjyt/fut E. put
KSOOa not
120:5 M27345 Y. [fu] L. fjyt/fut E. put
K276k silk band for attaching a seal
120:5 M27364 Y. [ftT] L. fjyt/fut E. put
K500e rope, cable
120:7 M27499 Y. [fif] L. fjyt/fut E. put
K49lf rope, cable
140:4 M30748B Y. [fu'] L. fjyt/fut E. put
KSOlc dense vegetation. See also fei
178:5 M43121 Y. [fif] L. fjyt/fut E. put
K2761 knee-cover
204:5 M48250 Y. [fif] L. fjyt/fut E. put
K276m ornamental embroidery
60:5 M10071 Y. [fif] L. fjyt/fut E. phut
K5001 fangfu like, resembling
64:5 Ml 1936 Y. fif L. fjyt/fut E. phut
K500H brush away
113:5 M24658 Y. [fu'] L. fjyt/fut E. phut
K276o exorcise, drive off noxious influences.
Also E. puajh
139:5 M30606 Y. fif L. fjyt/fut E. phut
KSOOp furan annoyed, angry. Also E. bat
140:5 M30831 Y. [fu ] L. fjyt/fut E. phut
KSOOk undergrowth; to clear; carriage screen
190:5 M45414 Y. [fif] L. fjyt/fut E. phut
KSOOj fangfu resemble
9:5 M00517b Y. fo',fu' L. ffijyt/ffiut E. but
K5001 great; resist, oppose; Buddha; also fo
9:8 M00722 Y. fif L. fjyS'/fuS' E. pus'
Kl36r bow the head
181:6 M43463B Y. [fif] L. fjys'/fua' E. puo'
Kll45m same as fu See also tiao
53:5 M09283 Y. ftf L. fjya'/fua' E. pus'
Kl36c repository, treasury
69:4 M13539 Y. fu' L. fjy§'/fu§' E. pus'
K102h axe
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu

100 Lexicon
ffl
fu
fu
ffl
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
ffl
fu
ffl
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
88:0 M19721B Y. fu L. fjya'/fus' E. pus'
Kl02a honorific suffix to names. See also fu
101:2 M21706 Y. fif L. fjyS'/fuS' E. puS'
Kl02n begin; just then; honorific suffix to a
man's name, cf. fu 3£
130:7 M29543A Y. fu L. fjy3'/fu5' E. pus'
Kl02r dried meat. See also pu
130:8 M29626 Y. fiT L. fjyS'/fus' E. pua'
bowels, viscera
204:7 M48252 Y. fu L. fjy§'/fu3' E. puS'
Kl02t embroidered with axe figures
64:5 M11947 Y. fir [sic] L. fjys'/fua' E. phu§'
Kl36g pat; slap; clap
64:12 M12743 Y. fu L. fjyS'/fuS' E. phua'
Kl03p stroke, lay the hand on, pacify
85:10 M18027 Y. [fu"] L. ffijy3v/ffiu9s E. bus'
river name
130:8 M29625 Y. [fir] L. ffijy3N/friu3N E. bus'
Kl36n spoiled, rotten
159:7 M38342 Y. fus L. ffijySYffiuS* E. bus'
Kl02v assist, aid
167:2 M40164 Y. ftT L. ffijyaVffiuQ^ E. bus'
cooking pot
193:7 M45690 Y. [fuv] L. ffijy5v/ffiu3v E. bus'
Kl02y pot; unit of capacity
9:2 M00354A Y. fu" L. fjy§Vfu3v E. phush
Ki2lOg fall prostrate. Also E. phuwh. See also pu
9:3 M00373 Y. fu" L. fjy3Yfu9N E. pu3h
K136a hand over, give
9:10 M00939 Y. fu" L. fjy§Vfu9v E. pu5h
Kl02u' assist; tutor
154:7 M36800 Y. fu" L. fjygVfu§s E. puah
Kl04g tax, to tax; type of rhymed literature
149:2 M35214 Y. fu" L. fjy3Vfu3v E. phu3h
K1210h announce a death
156:2 M37040 Y. fu" L. fjy3Vfu9v E. phuoh
K1210I hurry to, hasten to
88:0 M19721A Y. fu" L. ffijy5Vffiu9x E. bus'
K102a father. See also fu.
113:5 M24662 Y. [fir] L. ffiy9Vffiu9N E. buah
K136J joint burial; joint sacrifice to recent and
remote ancestors
142:5 M32929 Y. [fir] L. ffijySVffiuS^ E.bu3h
K136p scales on the underside of a snake
154:10 M36881 Y. fu" L. ffijyaYffiu^ E. bu§h
Kl02x' contribution to the cost of a funeral

fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
fu
Lexicon 101
170:5 M41606 Y. fiT L. ffijy9x/ffiu9v E. bu5h
K136k attach, append
187:5 M44677 Y. [fiT] L. ffijy5v/ffiu9N E. bu3h
K1361 additional horse; 1ft ^f fuma imperial
son-in-law
195:5 M46075 Y. fiT L. ffijy5Vffiu3v E. bu3h
Kl36q crucian carp
18:9 M02097 Y. [fuv] L. fjywN/fuwv E. puwh
K933s aide, assistant, deputy; kind of headdress
40:9 M07230 Y. fus L. fjywYfuwv E. puwh
K933r rich, wealthy
146:12 M34789B Y. fawv L. fjywYfuwv E. phuwh
Kl034m cover over. See also fu below.
38:8 M06432 Y. fuv L. ffijywVffiuw^ E. buw'
KlOOla wife, married woman
154:2 M36660 Y. fuv L. ffijywYffiuw^ E. buw'
KlOOOa carry on the back; bear a burden; owe; be
defeated
170:0 M41534 Y. fuv L. ffijywVffiuws E. buw'
KllOSa mound, tumulus; abundant
9:4 M00438B Y. [ftT] L. ffijywVffiuwv E. buwh
K935a hatch. See also fu
60:9 M10183B Y. [fir] L. ffijywYffiuwv E. buwh
Kl034d again. See also fu below
146:12 M34789C Y. faws L. ffijywv/ffiuwv E. buwh
Kl034m ambush. See also fu above and below
130:9 M29722 Y. fu L. fjywk/fuwk E. puwk
K1034h stomach
145:9 M34417 Y. [fu] L. fjywk/fuwk E. puwk
K10341 doubled; repeat Also E. buwh
159:9 M38440 Y. [ftf] L. fjywk/fuwk E. puwk
Kl034g housing for the axle of a carriage
142:9 M33309 Y. [ftf] L. fjywk/fuwk E. phuwk
K1034J snake, serpent; pit-viper
146:12 M34789A Y. fu L. fjywk/fuwk E. phuwk
K1034m turn over, overturn. See also fu above
60:9 M10183A Y. fu', ftf L. ffijywk/ffiuwk E. buwk
Kl034d return, resume, restore, reply. See also
fu above
186:9 M44545 Y. [fu'] L. ffijywk/ffiuwk E. buwk
fragrance
195:9 M46340 Y. [fu'] L. ffijywk/ffiuwk E. buwk
abalone, Haliotis gigantea. Also E.
baiwk
ttft

102 Lexicon
32:6 M05040 Y. kaj L. kaj E. kaj
K937k whole territory; boundary, limits
130:6 M29433 Y. kaj L. kaj E. kaj
K937o big toe
149:6 M35445 Y. kaj L. kaj E. kaj
K937p all, complete; the aforesaid; should, ought
154:6 M36746 Y. [kaj] L. kaj E. kaj
K937q all, complete; provide
170:6 M41633 Y. kaj L. kaj E. kaj
K937r step, stair
66:3 M13114 Y. kaj~ L.kaj' E. kaj'
K936a change
1:3 M00022 Y. kajv L. kajN E. kajh
K247a beg
20:3 M02504 Y. kajv L. kajv E. kajh
K3l3a beg, same as ^
75:11 M15364 Y. kajv L. kajN E. kajh
K515j strickle; in general, overall,roughly
85:11 M18123 Y. [kajN] L. kajv E. kajh
K5151 irrigate
140:10 M31652A Y. kajs L. kajN E. kajh
K642q cover; canopy; to cover, overtop;
approximately; for, it is because, in fact.
See also he, g£
140:4 M307155 Y. kjajv L. kja:jv E. kaijh(s)/keijh
K327j mustard; also jie
5:10 M00204B Y. kan L. kan E. kan
Kl40c dry. See also qi£n
51:0 M09165 Y. kan L. kan E. kan
K139a shield; knock against, infringe, importune
96:3 M20845 Y. kan L. kan E. kan
Kl39g langgan jade-like stone
118:3 M25854 Y. kan L. kan E. kan
Kl39k pole, staff, rod
130:3 M29273 Y. kan L. kan E. kan
K1391 liver
32:5 M04975 Y. [kam] L. kam E. kam
ganguo crucible
75:5 M14619A Y. kam L,. kam E. kam
K606j tangerine, Citrus reticulate. See also qian
85:5 M17289 Y. kam L. kam E. kam
K606c water from washing rice; cook
99:0 M21643 Y. kam L. kam E. kam
K606a sweet
115:7 M25074 Y. kan" L. kan' E. kan'
K139j grain-stalk
gai
gai
gai
gai
gai
gai
gai
gai
gai
gai
gai
gai
gan
gan
gan
gan
gan
gan
gan
gan
gan
gan

Lexicon 103
gan
gan
gan
gan
gan
gan
gan
gan
gan
gan
gan
gan
gan
gang
gang
gang
gang
gang
gang
gang
118:5 M25951B Y. [kanv] L. kan' E. kan'
Kle arrow shaft. See also g£
118:13 M26592 Y. kan" L. kan' E. kan'
K140k arrow shaft, slender bamboo same as
61:9 M10953 Y. kanT L. kam' E. kam'/kanr
K6711 move (emotionally); be moved, feel
66:8 M13260 Y. kam" L. kam' E. kam'
K607a dare
75:12 M15512 Y. [kanT] L. kam' E. kam'
gSnlSn Chinese olive, Canarium
album
51:10 M09183 Y. kans L. kanv E. kanh
Kl40d stem, trunk; manage
75:10 M15257
K140e same as
72:3 M13751 Y. anv [sic] L. kan^ E. kanh
K139f evening, sunset, dusk
85:8 M17667 Y. kanT L. kanT E. k9mh/kamh
river name
85:24 M18842 Y. [kanT] L. kanT E. k9mh/kamh
river name
120:5 M27362 Y. kanT L. karrT E. k3inh/kamh
K606k dark purple
154:14 M36960 Y. kanT L. kam' E. ksm'/kam'
river name, same as
154:17 M36984A Y. kanT L. kanT fc. k3mh/kamh
river name, same as ; Jiangxi
province. Also E. kam'/kam'
8:2 M00288A Y. karj L. karj E. karj
K698a throat. See also kang
18:8 M02042 Y. karj L. karj E. karj
K697b hard; firm
46:5 M07962a Y. karj L. karj E. karj
K697a hill, ridge of a hill
120:8 M27576 Y. karj L. karj E. karj
K697e guide-rope of a net; guiding principle,
rule
167:8 M40509 Y. karj L. karj E. karj
K697h steel
64:3 Ml 1798 Y. karj L. kja:wrj E. kaiwrj/kceiwrj
lift a large object with both hands. Now
also used for kang carry on the shoulder
75:3 M14481 Y. kjarj L. kjanvrj E. kaiwrj/koeiwrj
Kll72u cross-bar; single-plank bridge; flagstaff

104 Lexicon
gang
gang
g&ng
gang
gao
gao
gao
gao
gao
gao
gao
gao
gao
gao
gao
gao
gao
gao
gao
gao
gao
167:3 M40183B Y. kjarj L. kjazwrj E. kaiwrj/kceiwrj
kind of lantern; also E. kawrj, same
meaning. See also gong
46:5 M07962b Y. karj L. karj E. karj
K697a hill; ridge of a hill
85:9 M17783 Y. kjarj" L. kjaiwrj' E. kaiwrj'/koeiwrj'
port, harbour
142:3 M32830Bb Y. kjarf L. kja:wrjv E. kaiwrjh/kce:wrjh
Kll72j rainbow; also jiang. See also h6ng
75:10 M15345 Y. kaw L. kaw E. kaw
Kl040c jiegac veil-sweep
75:15 M15818 Y. kaw L. kaw E. kaw
Kl068f bowcase
106:5 M22714 Y. [kaw] L. kaw E. kaw
Kl040a marsh; announce; high
118:10 M26313 Y. kaw L. kaw E. kaw
pole for punting a boat
119:10 M27069 Y. kaw L. kaw E. kaw
cake, pudding
123:4 M28447 Y. kaw L. kaw E. kaw
K1244a young sheep or goat, lamb, kid
130:10 M29800A Y. kaw L. kaw E. kaw
K11291 fat, grease, oil
184:10 M44308 Y. kaw L. kawE. kaw
cake, pudding, same as
189:0 M45313 Y. kaw L. kaw E. kaw
K1129a high
207:8 M48364 Y. kaw L. kaw E. kaw
K 1068e kind of large drum
75:4 M14500 Y. kaw" L. kaw' E. kaw'
K1244c bright, shining
106:7 M22732B Y. kaw" L. kaw' E. kaw'
K1039H gSogao purely white. See also
hao
75:10 M15299 Y. kaw" [sic] L. khaw' E. khaw'
Kll29k dry, dried up, withered
115:10 M25220 Y. [kaw"] L. kaw' E. kaw'
K1129f straw; draft, sketch
120:10 M27777 Y. kaw" L. kaw' E. kaw'
Kl I29h undyed silk, white silk
140:14 M32222 Y. kaw" T,. kaw' E. kaw'
same as g&o :
64:10 M12489 Y. [kjaw"] L. kjaiw' ? E. kaiw' ?
do, carry on, be engaged in. Ding
Shengshu identifies as a by-form of ji«k>
disturb, upset

Lexicon 105
30:4
130:10
149:7
163:7
30:7
76:10
90:5
149:10
196:5
62:0
130:6
18:10
196:6
169:6
170:10
177:0
130:10
193:0
75:6
130:6
M03381B
K1040a
M29800B
K11291
M35549
K1039e
M39429
K1039f
M03641
Kip
M16167
Klq
M19767
M35797
M46791
Ml 1530
K7a
M29434A
K766d
M02112
K314d
M46884
M41300
K766f
M41783
K855f
M42710A
K931a
M29772
K855e
M45672A
K855a
M14749
K766z
M29434B
K766d
Y. kawN L. kawv E. kawh
report, proclaim. See also gu
Y. [kaws] L. kawN E. kawh
lubricate
Y. kawv L. kawx E. kawh
announce, inform; imperial edict
Y. kawx L. kaws E. kawh
place name; surname. Also E. kawk
Y. ko L. ka E. ka
elder brother
Y. ko L. ka E. ka
song
Y. ko L. ka E. k?
mooring post for a boat; Zangge
place name.
same as i
Y. ko L. ka E. ka
kind of goose. Cf. jia \
Y. kwo L. kua E. kwa
dagger-axe
Y. [kawv] L. kak E. kak
armpit, gebei urn; gebc
arm. See also ge
Y. lo" L. kat E. kat
cut
Y. ko" L. kap E. ksp/kap
pigeon
Y. kaw", ko" L. kak E. kak
shelf; hall; council chamber, council,
cabinet
Y. kjaj L. kjayk E. ksijk/key'k
separate, partition; at a distance from; also
jie
Y. kjaj" L. kjayk E. ksijk/key'k
animal hide, leather, change. See also ji
Y. [kjaj"] L. kjayk E. ksijk/keijk
diaphragm
Y. [kjaj"] L. kjaijk E. ksijk/keyk
handful; separate, same as . See
also li
Y. kjaj" L. kjayk E. kaijk/keyk
reach to, arrive; ascend; reach the utmost
point, exhaust; rule, pattern, standard
Y. [kjaj"] L. kjayk E. kaijk/keyk
hindleg, haunch. See also ge
g&>
gao
gao
gao
ge
ge
ge
ge
ge
ge
ge
ge
ge
ge
ge
ge
ge
ge
ge
ge

106 Lexicon
ge
ge
ge
ge
ge
ge
g£
g*
ge
ge
ge
gS
ge
ge
ge
ge
ge
gei
gen
gen
148:6 M35063 Y. [kjaf ] L. kjaijk E. kaijk/keijk
K766b' mature antler, without down
188:6 M45175 Y. kjaf L. kjaijk E. kaijk/keyk
K766c' bones, skeleton
140:9 M31420a Y. ko" L. kat E. kat
K313i kudzu vine, Pueraria thunbergiana; coarse
cloth made of its fibre; also gS
142:6 M33023 Y. kf L. kapE. ksp/kap
K675H bivalve, clam, oyster; geli ;lam
169:6 M41301 Y. ko" L. kap E. ksp/kap
K675i small gate
177:6 M42805A Y. to" L. kap E. ksp/kap
K6751 leather chest armour. See also jia
30:7 M03685a Y. ko" L. ka' E. ka'
K15i happy
118:5 M25951A Y. [kov] L. ka' E. ka'
Kle arrow shaft. See also g5n
137:5 M30404 Y. ko" L. ka' E. ka'
barge
140:9 M31420b Y. ko" L. kat E. kat
K313i surname; also ge
30:3 M03287A Y. [ko~] L. kap E. kap/kap
K675a bring together, join (now read he in this
sense); tenth of a sheng . See also he
140:10 M31652C Y. [ko"] L. kap E. kap
K642q place name; a surname. See also gai, he
169:5 M41263B Y. [IcT] L. kap E. kap
close a gate. See also zha
1:2 M00070 Y. kov L. kaN E. kah
K349a classifier for arrows; general classifier,
same as'
):8 M00758 Y. kov L. kav E. kah
one unit, one piece; general object
classifier, same as 'f"
118:8 M26116 Y. kov L. kax E. kah
K49f one unit, one piece; general object
classifier
J0:3 M03281 Y. kaw" L. kak E. kak
K766a each
120:6 M274325 Y. ki L. kip E. kip
K675p give; for; also jl.
75:6 M14745 Y. kan L. ksn E. kan
K416b root
[57:6 M37491 Y. ksn L. kan E. kan
heel: follow: with, and

Lexicon 107
gen
gen
geng
geng
geng
geng
geng
geng
geng
geng
geng
geng
geng
geng
geng
geng
geng
gSng
geng
geng
7:4 M00262 Y. karf L. k3§rjv E. ksrj11
K881a extend across
138:0 M30596 Y. [kaiT] L. ksiT E. kanh
K4i6a obstinate, resistant; Yijing hexagram
120:6 M27416 Y. [ksrj] L. koarj E. ksrj
K881f strum a musical instrument
120:9 M27670 Y. [karj] L. koSrj E. ksrj
K881g large cable; strum a zither
123:13 M28584 Y. kirj L. kjaijrj E. ksijrj/keyrj
K747a thick soup, meat broth
127:4 M28907a Y. kirj L. kjaijrj E. kaijrj/keijrj
K808a plough; also jTng
53:5 M09278 Y. kirj L. kjaijrj E. kaijrj/keijrj
K746a seventh Heavenly Stem
73:3 M14283Aa Y. kirj L. kjaijrj E. kaijrj/keijrj
K745a change, replace; watch of the night;
also jing. See also geng
115:4 M24954b Y. [kirj] L. kjaijrj E. kaijrj/keijrj
round-grained, non-glutinous rice; also
jing
115:7 M250755 Y. [kirj] L. kjaijrj E. kaijrj/keijrj
round-grained non-glutinous rice, same
as fjt; also jing
119:7 M26967b Y. kirj L. kjaijrj E. kaijrj/keijrj
round-grained, non-glutinous rice, same
asfji; alsojing
154:8 M36819 Y. kirj L. kjaijrj E. kaijrj/keijrj
K746g continue, succeed
196:8 M47059 Y. kirjT 'cjaijrj E. kaijrj/keijrj
canggeng oriole
120:7 M27489 Y. kuf L. kjaijrj' E. kaijrj'/keijrj'
K745f well-rope
128:4 M29026 Y. kuf L. kjaijrj' E. ksijrj'/keijrj'
K809a bright; devoted, honest, upright
30:7 M03680 Y. kuf L. kjaijrj' E. kaijrj'/keijn'
K745c choke
75:7 M14849 Y. kirjv L. kjaijrj' E. kaijrj'/keijrj'
K745e stalk, stem; obstruct
188:7 M45195 Y. kirf L. kjaijrj' E. kaijrj'/keijrj'
fishbone; choke on a fishbone
195:7 M46171 Y. kirjv L. kjaijrj' E. kaijrj'/kEijrj'
K745d fishbone in the throat
73:3 M14283B Y. kirjv L. kjaijrjv E. kaijrjh/ke:jrjh
K745a more, even more; further, furthermore.
See also geng, jlng

108 Lexicon
130:4 M29315 Y. kurj, kwsrj L. kuarj E. kwarj
K887f upper arm
148:6 M35069 Y. kwsrj, kurj L.kwaijrj E. kwaijrj/kweijrj
K706i drinking horn; kind of bronze vessel
12:2 M01452 Y. kurj L. kswrj E. kawrj
Kll73a public; common; just; father, prince; duke
19:3 M02295 Y. kurj L. kowrj E. kawrj
Kll72d work, achievement, merit
48:0 M08714 Y. kurj L. kswrj E. kswrj
K1172a work; workman; skill
142:4 M32892 Y. kurj L. kswrj E. kswrj
wugong centipede
167:3 M40183A Y. [kurj] L. kswrj E. kawrj
metal lining of wheel hub. See also gang
66:3 M13120 Y. kurj L. kawrj E. kawrj
Kl I72e work at, apply oneself to; attack
40:7 M07156 Y. kurj L. kiwrj E. kuwrj
Kl006a dwelling house, palace
57:0 M09682 Y. kurj L. kiwrj E. kuwrj
K901a bow
158:3 M38038 Y. kurj L. kiwrj E. kuwrj
Kl006f body, self
9:6 M00605A Y. kurj L. kywrj E. kuawrj
Kll82f supply, provide. See also gong
12:4 M01458B Y. [kurj] L. kywrj E. kuawrj
Kll82c place name. See also g6ng, g6ng
61:6 M10596 Y. kurj L. kywrj E. kuawrj
Kl 1821 show respect, reverence
212:6 M48837 Y. kurj L. kywrj E. kuawrj
Kll82k show respect; surname
112:15 M245645 Y. kwsrj" L. kwaijrj' E. kwaijrj'/kweyrj'
mineral ore; mine; also kuang
85:3 M17139a Y. xurjv L. xrtowrf E. yawrj'
mercury; also hong
12:4 M01458C Y. kurf L. kywrj' E. kuawrj'
K1182a join the hands, present with both hands,
same as See also gong, gong
64:6 Ml 1994 Y. kurf L. kywrj' E. kuawrj'
Kl 182e join the hands in front of the chest
96:6 M20945 Y. [kurf] L. kywrj' E. kuawrj'
large ceremonial jade
159:6 M38288 Y. [kurf] L. kywrj' E. kuawrj'
K1182n gdngzhudevice for transporting a
coffin
177:6 M42819 Y. kurjv L. kywrj' E. kuawrj'
Kll72c' bind with leather thongs; firm, solid; fear
gong
gong
gong
gong
gong
gong
gong
gong
gong
gong
gong
gong
gong
gong
gong
gong
gong
gong
gong
gong
gong
gong

Lexicon 109
154:3 M36665 Y. kurf L. kawrj" E. kawrjh
Kll72g tribute
154:17 M36984B Y. [kiiif] L. kawrjv E. kawrjh
tribute. Compare
9:6 M00605B Y. kurjv L. kywrf E. kuawrjh
Kll82f offer as a sacrifice; offering. See also
gong
12:4 M01458A Y. kurf L. kfiywrf E. guawrjh
Kll82c together. See also gong
20:2 M02500A Y. kaw L. kaw E. kaw
hook; bent, same as ^/. See also gou
30:2 M03234A Y. kaw L. kaw E. kaw
KlOSa hook; bent. See also gou, ju
75:5 M14588C Y. kaw L. kaw E. kaw
K108o bent (wood). See also ju, gdu
85:10 M17944 Y. kaw L. kaw E. kaw
K109h ditch, drain, moat
118:10 M26320 Y. kaw L. kaw E. kaw
K109I bamboo basket or cage
167:5 M40319 Y. kgw L. kaw E. kow
K108c hook
178:10 M43190 Y. kow L. kaw E. kaw
leather arm guard
75:5 M14588B Y. ksv/ L. ksw' E. kaw'
K108o gouqi Chinese wolfberry, Lycium
chinense; g6ugu Chinese holly.
See also ju, gou
94:5 M20345 Y. ksv/ L. kaw' E. ksw'
K108d dog
118:5 M25948 Y. [k3wv] L. ksw' E. ksw'
K108e bamboo fish trap
125:5 M28856 Y. kav/ L. ksW E. kow'
K108f old, wizened
140:5 M30790 Y. kawv L. kaw' E. kaw'
careless, negligent; if (by any chance); if
32:6 M05058 Y. ksw" L. kaw' E. kaw'
Kll2d dirt; disgrace
149:6 M35433 Y. kawv L. kaw' E. kaw'
Kl I2f shame; revile, malign, calumniate
20:2 M02500B Y. kawv L. kawv E. kawh
business, same as ^/. See also gou
30:2 M03234B Y. kawv L. kawv E. kawh
KlOSa goudang business. See also gou,
ju
36:8 M05777 Y. [kawv] L. kawv E. kawh
enough, sufficient
g6ng
gong
gong
gong
gou
gou
gou
gou
gou
gou
gou
g6u
gdu
g6u
g6u
gou
gou
gou
gou
gou
gou

110 Lexicon
gou
gou
gou
gou
gou
gou
gou
gou
gou
gu
gu
gu
go
gu
gu
gu
gu
gu
gu
gu
gu
38:6 M06215 Y. kgwv L. kswv E. kawh
Kll2e Yijing hexagram; meet
38:10 M06597 Y. kswv L. kswN E. kawh
Kl09e marry; conclude a pact or treaty
57:10 M09844 Y. kswv L. kswv E. kswh
Kl226p draw a bow to the full
64:10 M12447 Y. [kawv] L. kawv E. kswh
K109f cross, join (weapons in combat)
75:10 M15317 Y. kswv L. kswN E. kswh
K109g construct
147:10 M34937 Y. [kawx] L. kaws E. kswh
K109j come across, meet
154:10 M36885 Y. kswv L. kawv E. kswh
Kl09k offer a reward; buy
162:10 M39031 Y. kawv L. kswv E. kswh
K1091 meet with
172:5 M41992 Y. kswv L. kawv E. kswh
K1081 call of a pheasant
38:5 M06174 Y. ku L. ku§ E. ko
K49g husband's mother, father's sister;
temporary, for the time being
39:5 M06966 Y. ku L. ku§ E. ko
K4lc orphan; alone
85:5 M17258A Y. ku L. kus E. ko
K49k river name; buy, sell. See also gu
122:5 M28241 Y. [ku] L. ku3 E. ko
K41d kind of fish net
140:5 M30827 Y. [ku] L. kuS E. ko
K4le wild rice, Zizania caduciflora, same a;
140:8 M31217 Y. ku L. ku§ E. ko
wild rice, Zizania caduciflora
142:5 M32960 Y. kuL. kua E. kr>
K49o lougu mole cricket; huigu a
kind of cicada
148:5 M35043 Y. ku L. kus E. ko
K4lf ritual wine vessel
159:5 M38253 Y. [ku] L. kua E. ko
K4lg large bone
160:5 M38636 Y. ku L. kua E. ko
K49p crime, guilt
164:5 M39829 Y. ku L. kua E. ko
K49b' sell or buy wine. Also E. koh
196:5 M46814 Y. ku L. kuS E. ko
zhegi partridge, Francolinus
chinensis

Lexicon 111
gu
gu
gu
gu
gfi
gu
gfi
gu
g*
gu
gu
gu
gfi
gu
gu
gfl
gu
gfi
gu
gu
gu
9:5 M00467b Y. W L. kua' E. ko'
estimate, reckon; market tax; also gu
9:5 M00467a Y. W L. kus' E. ko'
estimate, reckon; market tax; also gu
30:2 M03233 Y. W L. kua' E. ko'
K49a olden times, former times
85:5 M17258B Y. kif L. kus' E. ko'
K49k buy or sell wine. See also gu
93:5 M19981 Y. ku" L. kua' E. ko'
cow; steer
108:13 M23076 Y. ku" L. kua' E. ko'
K49q ancient salt marsh; salt; slack, remiss
109:13 M23745 Y. W L. kus' E. ko'
K50g eyeless, blind
122:5 M28248 Y. W L. ku§' E. ko'
K49m net, fishnet
123:4 M28450 Y. kif L. kua E. ko'
K51b ram
130:4 M29284 Y. ku~ L. kua' E. ko'
K51a thigh
149:5 M35347 Y. ku" L. kua' E. ko'
gloss, explain words in a text
154:6 M36755A Y. ku~ L. kus' E. ko'
K38b merchant; engage in trade; sell. See also
jiajia
207:0 M48330 Y. kif L. ku3' E. ko'
K50a drum
115:10 M25221 Y. ku" L. kawk E. kswk
K12261 grain, cereal; good
150:0 M36182A Y. W L. kowk E. kawk
K1202a valley. See also yu, lu
159:10 M38479 Y. ku^ L. kawk E. kawk
K1226J wheel hub
196:7 M46961B Y. [W] L. kowk E. kawk
Kl039n centre of a target. See also hu
85:4 M17153A Y. [ku^] L. kut E. kwat
K304f regulate; bring into disorder; gugu
gurgling (water). See also yu
85:10 M18032B Y. [ku^ L. kut E. kwst
K486e same as . See also hua
188:0 M45098 Y. hT L. kut E. kwst
K486a bone
31:5 M04745 Y. kuv L. ku§N E. koh
K49f solid, firm, certain

112 Lexicon
gu
gu
gu
gu
gu
gu
gu
gua
gua
gua
gua
gua
gua
gua
V
gua
gua
gua
gua
gua
guai
guai
66:5 M13161 Y. kiT L. kuS^ E. koh
K49i former; old friend; precedent, fact; cause,
reason; therefore
104:8 M22285 Y. kuN L. ku5v E. koh
chronic illness
167:8 M40578 Y. kiT L. ku5v E. koh
K49e' obstruct, prevent, stop
172:4 M41976B Y. kuv L. ku3x E. koh
K53d hire. See also hu
181:12 M43689 Y. kuv L. ku5v E. koh
K53g look back over one's shoulder; on the
other hand, however
30:4 M03381A Y. ku~ L. kawk E. kawk
Kl039a proclaim. See also gao
75:7 M14841 Y. [ku] L. kawk E. kawk
K1039k fetters
18:6 M01943 Y. kwa" L. kwait E. kwait/kwe:t
K302n scrape
75:6 M14706 Y. [kwo"j L. kuat E. kwat
K302i kind of tree, Chinese juniper
97:0 M21371 Y. kwa L. kwai E. kwai/kwei
K41a melon
142:9 M33338b Y. wa L. kwai E. kwai/kwei
Kl8c snail; usually wo. Also E. kwaij
187:9 M44878 Y. [kwa] L. kwai E. kwai/kwe:
K18b yellow horse with black mouth. Also E.
kwaij/kweij
13:4 M01525 Y. kwa" L. kwai' E. kwai'/kwef
Kl8a cut the flesh from the bone; dismember,
same as
18:9 M02094 Y. kwav L. kwa:' E. kwai'/kwe:'
cut the flesh from the bone; dismember
40:11 M07286 Y. kwa" L. kwai' E. kwai'/kwe;'
K42a few; solitary; widowed
25:6 M02798 Y. kwav L. kwaijN E. kwaijh/kwe:jh
K879s trigram of the Yijing
64:6 M12020 Y. kwav L. kwa:jv E. kwaijh/kw£ijh
K879t hang, suspend, same as
64:8 M12267 Y. kwav L. kwaijv E. kwaijh/kweijh
K879u hang, same as
120:6 M27403 Y.jxwaf] L.xfiwaijv E. Ywaijh/yweijh
K879v entangle. Jiyun also reads kwaijh
4:7 M00149 Y. kwa L. kwaij E. kwaij/kweij
K1240h perverse, contrary
75:5 M14584 Y. [kwaf] L. kwaij' E. kwaij'/kweij'
walking stick, crutch; turn, corner

Lexicon 113
61:5 M10483 Y. kuaf L. kwayx E. kw9ijh/kwe:jh
K99la strange, grotesque, monstrous; blame
37:1 M05836 Y. kwaf L.kwaij" E. kwaijh(s)/kweijh
K312a divide; Yijing hexagram
9:8 M00759 Y. [kon] L. kuan E. kwan
K157 1 servant, groom
14:7 M01580A Y. kon L. kuan E. kwan
Kl60a cap, hat. See also guan
40:5 M07107 Y. kon L. kuan E. kwan
K157a office; official
75:8 M14993 Y. kon L. kuan E. kwan
Kl57e coffin. Also E. kwanh encoffln
140:7 M31063A Y. [kon] L. kuan E. kwan
K257q rush, Scirpus tabernae montani. See also
w&n
147:18 M34993A Y. kon L. kuan E. kwan
K1581 watch, view, observe. See also guan
110:4 M23852B Y. [kwan] L. kwam E. kwoin/kwein
K369a widower, wifeless, same as See also
Jin
120:8 M27583B Y. kwan L. kwam E. kwsin/kwem
K470e kind of turban. See also lun
195:10 M46382 Y. kwan L. kwam E. kwoin/kwem
K481a large fish; wifeless, widower
104:10 M22394 Y. [kwan] L. kwam E. kwain/kwem
K481c illness, distress
169:11 M41470 Y. kwan L. kwam E. kwain/kwem
Kl87b bar, barrier, pass; to close; concern,
involve
96:8 M21072 Y. konv L. kuan' E. kwan'
Kl57i tube; flute
104:8 M22250 Y. konv L. kuan' E. kwan'
K157g guSngu&i worn out, exhausted
118:7 M26057 Y. [konv] L. kuan' E. kwan'
K257r tube, flute, same as
118:8 M26162 Y. konv L. kuan' E. kwan'
K157H hollow tube; flute; key; be in charge of,
manage
167:8 M40570 Y. [kon"] L. kuan' E. kwan'
Kl57j axle-cap. Also E. kwanh
184:8 M44237 Y. konv L. kuanv E. kwanh
Kl57k guest-house; to lodge
14:7 M01580B Y. konv L. kuan E. kwanh
Kl60a to cap. See also guan
85:18 M18759 Y. kons L. kuanv E. kwanh
Kl58f pour; irrigate
guai
guai
guan
guan
guan
guan
guan
guan
guan
guan
guan
guan
guan
guan
gu&n
guan
guan
guan
guan
guan
guan

114 Lexicon
86:18 M19617 Y. [koir] L. kuanh E. kwanh
K158g start a fire
96:18 M21357 Y. korT L. kuaiT E. kwanh
K158H jade tablet, or jade vessel
108:11 M23041 Y. konv L. kuanv E. kwanh
K161a wash (the hands or face). Also E. kwan'
113:8 M24738 Y. korT L. kuanv E. kwanh
K351m pour a libation; pour
121:18 M28194 Y. [konv] L. kuanv E. kwanh
jar, pot
147:18 M34993B Y. kons L. kuanv E. kwanh
K158i look-out, watch tower, Daoist temple.
See also guSn
154:4 M36681A Y. konv L. kuans E. kwanh
K159a pass through, perforate; string of
cash. Also E. kwan. See also wan
167:18 M41064 Y. [konv] L. kuanN E. kwanh
jar, pot, same as
172:10 M42120 Y. [kon^] L. kuanv E. kwanh
K158a stork
196:18 M47500 Y. konv L. kuanv E. kwan
K158e stork
2:4 M00077 Y. kwanv L. kwa:nv E. kwainh/kwe:nh
Kl87a child's headdress with two tufts
2:6 M00080A Y. kwans L. kwa:nv E. kwainh/kwe:nh
Kl59e accustomed, same as See also
chuan
61:11 Mlllll Y. kwans L. kwauT E. kwainh/kwe:nh
K159d accustomed, familiar with, used to
10:4 M0l350a Y. kwarj L. kuarj E. kwarj
K706a light, bright. See also guang
85:6 M17419 Y. [kwarj] L. kuarj E. kwarj
K706F rushing water
130:6 M29432 Y. kwarj L. kuarj E. kwarj
pangguang (urinary) bladder.
53:12 M09493 Y. kwarf L. kuarj' E. kwarj'
K707H wide, broad
10:4 M01350B Y. [kwarjv] L. kuarjv E. kwarjh
K706a make shine, polish. See also guang
213:0 M48847A Y. kuj L. kyj E. kwi
K985a tortoise, turtle. See also qiu
38:12 M06720 Y. [kuj] L. kyj E. kwia/kwi
K27g river name; clan name
85:12 M18238 Y. [kuj] L. kyj E. kwi5/kwi
river name
guan
guan
guan
guan
guan
guan
guan
guan
guan
guan
guan
guan
guan
guang
guang
guang
guSng
guang
gul
guT
gul

Lexicon 115
guT
gUT
gUT
gUT
gUT
gUT
gUT
gUT
guT
guT
guT
guT
guT
guT
guT
gut
gui
gui
gui
gui
gui
147:4 M34810 Y. kuj L. kjyj E. kjwia/kjwi
K875a compasses; rule, standard, measure
77:14 M16349 Y. kuj L. kyj E. kuj
K570a return, go home
9:10 M00928A Y. [kuj] L. kuaj E. kwaj
K569d great, remarkable. See also kuT
96:10 M21164 Y. khuj [sic] L. kuaj E. kwsj
K569e beautiful stone; rare, marvellous
32:3 M04887 Y. kuj L. kjyaj E. kwej
K879a long, pointed jade tablet, sceptre
169:6 M41312 Y. kuj L. kjyaj E. kwej
K879e small gate inside a palace; women's
quarters
195:6 M46132A Y. [kuj] L. kjyaj E. kwej
K879g blowfish; salmon. See also xie, wa
172:10 M42125Ab Y. [xuj'] L. xfijyaj E. ywej
K880a alternative reading for XT. See also
suT.
22:9 M02639 Y. [kuf] L. kyj' E. kwi'
K9921 box
40:2 M07058 Y. kuf L. kyj' E. kwi'
K992f traitor
72:8 M14005 Y. kuj" L. kyj' E. kwi'
shadow cast by the sun; sundial
159:2 M38176 Y. kuj" L. kyj' E. kwi'
K992k cart-ruts; course, path
118:11 M26448 Y. kuj" L. kyj' E. kwi'
K986a an ancient ritual food vessel, round-
mouthed with two or four loop handles
105:4 M22660 Y. kuf L. kjyj' E. kjwi'
K605a tenth Heavenly Stem
149:6 M35434 Y. kuj" L. kyj' E. kwia'/kwi'
K29b deceptive; weird, eerie
194:0 M45758 Y. kuj" L. kyj' E. kuj'
K569a ghost
75:14 M15757 Y. kuf L. kyjv E. gwih
K540h box, chest
157:6 M37516 Y. kujv L. kfiyjN E. gwia'/gwi'
K29f kneel. AlsoE. khwia'
154:5 M36704 Y. kujv L. kyj* E. kujh
K540b noble; honoured, valuable; expensive
18:13 M02225a Y. [kujv] L. kuajv E. kwajh
cut off; executioner; also kuai
73:9 Ml4306Bb Y. [kuM L. kuajs E. kwajh
K321a guijl mountain in Zhejiang; also
kuai. See also hui

116 Lexicon
75:13 M15676a Y. kujs L. kuajs E. kwajh
K3211 Chinese juniper
145:13 M34632 Y. [kujs] L. kuajv E. kwajh
K32lh point where two sides of a garment meet
in front
18:13 M02227 Y. [kujv] L. kyaf E. kwiajh
K346k to wound
64:12 M12676C Y. [kujv] L. kyajv E. kwiajh
K3011 lift the skirts. See also jue, jue"
157:12 M37880B Y. [kujv] L. kyajv E. kwiajh
K30lg move hastily. See also jue
195:12 M46501A Y. kiv L. kyajv E. kwiajh
mandarin fish, Siniperca chuatsi. See
also jue
75:6 M14755 Y. kujx L. kjyajv E. kwejh
K879d cassiabark tree; laurel, bay tree; sweet-
scented osmanthus
145:4 M34121 Y. kun" L. kun' E. kwsn'
K4l8a imperial robe
159:8 M38391 Y. [kun"j L. kun' E. kwsn'
K417g evenly formed (nave of a wheel)
195:5 M46067 Y. [kun] L. kun'E. kwan'
K3661 fabulous huge fish, same as
195:7 M46168 Y. [kun~] L. kun' E. kwsn'
K4l9a fabulous huge fish
32:9 M05247 Y. [kwo] L. kua E. kwa
ganguo crucible
85:9 M17771B Y. [kwo] L. kua E. kwa
river name. See also wo.
162:9 M39002A Y. kwo L. kua E. kwa
K18e pass by. See also guo
167:9 M40603 Y. kwo L. kua E. kwa
cooking pot
193:3 M45674 Y. [kwo] L. kuaE. kwa
K352a earthware pot. Compare
163:8 M39474 Y. kwaw" L. kuak E. kwak
K774a outer city wall; surname
142:11 M33545 Y. [kwajv] L. kwaijk E. kwsijk/kweyk
K929t louguo ^ind of frog
128:6 M29062 Y. kwo L. kuat E. kwat
K302j noisy, clamorous
31:8 M04788 Y. kuf L. kuak E. kwak
K929o country
50:11 M09057 Y. [kwajv] L. kwaijk E. kwsijk/kweyk
married woman's head-dress
gui
gui
gui
gui
gui
gui
gui
gun
gun
gun
gun
guo
guo
guo
guo
guo
guo
guo
guo
guo
guo

Lexicon 117
54:11 M12572 Y. kwaf L. kwaijk E. kwsijk/kweijk
to slap, smack.
128:8 M29100 Y. [kwaf 1 L. kwaijk E. kwaijk/kweijk
K929v same as
130:11 M29816 Y. [kwaf] L. kwaijk E. kwaijk/kweijk
K929s hollow of the knee
185:8 M44507 Y. [kwaf] L. kwaijk E. kwsijk/kweijk
K929u cut off the ear of a slain enemy
141:9 M32742 Y. [kwaj"] L. kwaijk E. kwaijk/kweijk
K783a an ancient state
75:4 M14556 Y. kwo~ L. kua' E. kwa'
K35la fruit; result; in the end, really; courageous
142:8 M33208 Y. kwo" L. kua' E. kwa'
K351c gu61u6 solitary wasp
145:8 M34372 Y. kwo" L. kua' E. kwa'
K35ld wrap around
159:8 M38380A Y. [kwo"] L. kua' E. kwa'
K3511 lubrication hole on a wheel. See also
hua, hui
75:8 M15003 Y. [kwaw~] L. kuak E. kwak
K774f outer coffin
162:9 M39002B Y. kwos L. kuas E. kwah
Kl8e pass, exceed, surpass; transgress. See
also guo
guo
guo
guo
guo
guo
gu6
gu6
gu6
gud
gu6
guo

118 Lexicon
M
hai
hai
hai
hai
hai
hai
hai
hai
hai
han
han
han
han
han
han
han
han
han
han
han
han
142:9 M33299b Y. xjaL. xfija: E. yai/ve:
K33i hama frog. See also xia
30:5 M03492 Y. [xajj L. xaj E. xaj
K1240a laugh
39:6 M06977 Y. xaj' L. xfiaj E. yaj
K937h baby; baby's smile
181:6 M43456b Y. xaj' L. xfiaj E. ysj
chin; also ke
188:6 M45164 Y. xjaj L. xfijaij E. YMJ/yerj
K937z bones of the body, skeleton
85:7 M17503 Y. xaj~ L. xaj' E. xaj'
K947x sea
164:10 M39981 Y. xaj" L. xaj' E. xsj'
K995n pickled mincemeat
8:4 M00292 Y. xajv L. xfiajv E. yaj'
K937a twelfth Earthly Branch
40:7 M07165 Y. xajv L. xfiajv E. yajh
K314a injure, harm
187:6 M44725 Y. xjaj" L. xfijaif E. Y»j'/Yey'
K937y be alarmed, shocked
209:3 M48505 Y. [xan] L. xan E. xan
snore. Also E. yanh
61:12 Ml 1244 Y. xam L. xam E. xam
silly, foolish
142:5 M32925 Y. [xam] L. xam E. xam
kind of clam, ark-shell
164:5 M39825 Y. xam L. xfiam E. yam
K606g merry with drink, tipsy
40:9 M07239 Y. xan' L. xfian E. yan
K143a cold
85:3 M17130B Y. [xan'l L. xfian E. yan
Kl39t k&hanqaghan, supreme ruler of
the TUTKS. see also han
142:3 M32823 Y. [xan'] L. xfian E. yan
Kl39u mosquito larva
163:3 M39279 Y. [xan'] L. xfian E. yan
Kl39v river name. Also E. kan
163:5 M39330A Y. xan' T xfian E. yan
Handan name of a city. See also
han below
178:8 M43159 Y. xan' L. xfian E. yan
K1401 place name; surname
17:6 M01826A Y. [xam'] L. xfiam E. Y^m/Yam
K643b container, envelope. See also han below
30:4 M03350 Y. xam' L. xfiam E. Y^m/Yam
K6511' hold in the mouth

Lexicon 119
han
han
han
han
han
han
han
han
han
han
han
han
han
han
han
han
han
han
han
han
85:8 M17595 Y. xam' L. xfiam E. yam/Yam
K643g contain; culvert
163:5 M39330B Y. xam' L. xfiam E. yam
alternative reading. See also ha"n above
17:6 M01826B Y. xjam' L. xfijaim E. Y3irn/Y£jm
K643b envelope; place name, HangC Pass.
See also han above
30:9 M03916 Y. xam" L. xam' E. xam'
shout
122:3 M28217 Y. xan" L. xan' E. xan'
K139f small long-handled bird net; rare, scarce
85:16 M18652 Y. xan* L. xan*E. xanh
hanhan vast; Hanhal Gobi Desert
72:11 M14138 Y. [xan*] L. xanN E. xanh
Kl44a hot, sun-dried, parched. Also E. xan'
dry in the sun
85:11 M18153 Y. xan* L. xan* E. xanh
Kl44c name of a river; Han dynasty; Chinese
72:3 M13752 Y. xan* L. xfian' E. yan'
K139s drought
61:7 M10643 Y. xan* L. xfian* E. yanh
Kl39h' brave; violent, fierce
64:3 Ml 1802 Y. [xan*] L. xfian* E. yanh
K139q ward off; protect
64:7 M12143 Y. [xan*] L. xfian* E. yanh
K139i' ward off; protect
85:3 M17130A Y. xan* L. xfian* E. yanh
Kl39t sweat. See also han
124:10 M28780 Y. xan* L. xfian* E. yanh
Kl40f plume of a pheasant; soar; quill, pen.
Hanlfr name of a literary academy.
Also E. yan, L. xfian, Y. xan', but now
read han in all senses
167:3 M40182 Y. [xan*] L. xfian* E. yanh
K139y archer's arm-cover, cuff
169:3 M41221 Y. an* L. xfian* E. yanh
K139z gate of a lane
187:7 M44767 Y. [xan*] L. xfian* E. yanh
wild, untamed horse
109:6 M23351a Y. [xwan*] L. xfiwain* E. ywain'/ywein'
Kl39j' protruding eyes; also huan.
64:13 M12775 Y. xam* L. xfiam* E. yam'/yam'
shake, move
140:8 M31193 Y. [xam*l L. xfiam* E. yam'/Yam'
K643h handan lotus

120 Lexicon
han
han
han
han
hang
hang
hang
hang
hang
hang
hang
hang
hao
hao
hao
hao
hao
hao
hao
181:7 M43512 Y. xairf L. xfianT E. yam'/Yam'
K651n' jaw
61:13 Ml 1312 Y. xamN L. xfianf E. Y9mh/Yamh
K67lp resent; dissatisfied
96:7 M21007 Y. xairT L. xfianT E. Y9mh/Yamh
piece of jade placed in the mouth of a
corpse
181:8 M43541B Y. [anT] L. rjam' E. rpm'/nam'
K652j nod the head. The modern reading may
be borrowed from which sometimes
interchanges with §1 in this meaning.
See also qln
75:4 M14494 Y. xarj' L. xfiarj E. Yarj
K698e travel by boat; place name
75:6 M14754B Y. [xarj'] L. xfiarj E. Yarj
K748f foot chains, fetters. See also heng
85:4 M17187A Y. [xarj'] L. xfiarj E. Yarj
K698f to cross. See also hang
137:4 M30385 Y. xarj' L. xfiarj E. Yarj
boat; sail, navigate
144:0 M34029C Y. xarj' L. xfiarj E. Yarj
K748a line, row, rank. See also hang, xi'ng,
xing
181:4 M43371 Y. xarj' T xfiarj E. Yarj
K698g xiehdng descriptive of birds flying
up and down
85:4 M17187B Y. xarj" rsinl L. xfiarf E. Yarj'
K698f hangxie dew; evening mist.
See also hang
144:0 M34029D Y. xarf L. xfiarj- E. Yarjh
K748a ordered, hanghang strong,hard. See also
hang, xing, xing
140:10 M31634 Y. xaw L. xaw E. xaw
Kll29q wormwood, Artemisia; waste away
140:13 M32085 Y. xaw L. xaw E. xaw
Kl244d to weed
30:12 M04264 Y. xaw' L. xfiaw E. yaw
K1040d howl
32:14 M05559 Y. xaw' L. xfiaw E. yaw
K1129y moat
82:7 M16831 Y. xaw' L. xfiaw E. yaw
Kl 129m long, fine hair
85:14 M18502 Y. xaw' L. xfiaw E. Yaw
moat
141:7 M32726A Y. xaw' L. xfiaw E. yaw
Kl041q shout, cry out. See also hao

Lexicon 121
149:14 M36053 Y. [xaW] L. xfiaw E. yaw
K1129z shout
152:7 M36406 Y. xaw' L. xfiaw E. yaw
Kl 129n porcupine; hair; bold and unrestrained;
eminent
153:6 M36549Aa Y. [xaw'] L. xfiak E. yak
K766h raccoon dog, Nyctereutes procyonoides;
also he. See also mo, ma
38:3 M06053A Y. xaw" L. xaw' E. xaw'
Kl044a good. See also hao
163:7 M39430a Y. [xaw"] L. xak E. xak
place name, a surname; also he
38:3 M06053B Y. xawx L. xawv E. xawh
Kl044a love, be fond of, like. See also hSo
115:4 M24946 Y. xaw^ L. xawx E. xawh
Kl I37j kind of millet; reduce, diminish
127:4 M28909 Y. hawx L. xaws E. xawh
Kll37k reduce, diminish, waste
72:4 M13799 Y. xawv L. xfiawv E. yaw'
Kl042a epithet of the sky, bright, splendid
72:7 M13961 Y. xawv L. xfiawN E. yaw'
K1039i bright, white, same as
85:7 M17479 Y. xawv L. xfiawv E. yaw'
K1039J vast, boundless
85:21 M18811 Y. xawv L. xfiaws E. yaw'
broad, vast (water)
106:7 M22732A Y. xawv L. xfiawv E. yaw'
K1039H shining, bright, white. See also g&o
106:10 M22769 Y. [xawv] L. xfiawv E. yaw'
white
106:10 M22771 Y. xawv L. xfiaw^ E. yaw'
Kl040f, g bright; haohao easy, comfortable
163:10 M39576B Y. kaw" L. xfiawv E. yaw'
ancient place name, same as , See also
qiao
167:10 M40741 Y. kaw" L. xfiaws E. yaw'
K H29o ancient place name. Y. kaw" probably
for gSo pickaxe, not found in earlier
dictionaries
181:12 M43682 Y. xawv L. xfiaw* E. yaw'
K1043a bright shining
30:2 M03256 Y. xawv L. xfiawx E. yawh
K104lp call; command; name, same as hao
141:7 M32726B Y. xawv L. xfiawv E. yaw"
K104lq call; command; name; order, number.
See also hao
hao
hao
hao
hao
hao
hao
hao
hao
hao
hao
hao
hao
hao
hao
hao
hao
hao
hao
hao
hao

122 Lexicon
85:8 M17601b Y. xaw' L. xfiak E. yak
K1258a become dry; also he
30:5 M03459 Y. xo L. xa E. xa
Klj scold; breathe out
149:5 M35328 Y. xo L. xa E. xa
Klk scold
30:9 M03960 Y.[xov] L. xat E. xat
K313k shout
9:5 M00511 Y. xo' L. xfia E. ya
Klf carry; what? how? why?
85:5 M17245 Y. xo' L. xfia E. ya
Klg river, the Yellow River
140:5 M307855 Y. xo' L. xfia E. ya
Kli small grass; severe, exacting; scold,
rebuke; itch. Now read ke
140:7 M31000a Y. xo' L. xfia E. ya
Klo lotus. See also he
30:5 M03490Aa Y. xwo' L. xfiua E. ywa
K8e harmonious, mild; together with, and;
also huo mix with water. See also he,
huo
115:0 M24906 Y. xwo' L. xfiua E. ywa
K8a standing grain
214:5 M48886 Y. [xwo'] L. xfiua E. ywa
K8g harmony, harmonious
19:6 M02342 Y. xsj' L. xfisSk E. yak
K937x investigate, impeach
169:6 M41289 Y. [ajN] L. rjajx E. rpjh
K937u obstruct, hinder. The modern reading
belongs to a reading E. yak found in the
Jiyun . The reading E. rj9jh is the same
word as ai
85:8 M17601a Y. xaw' L. xfiak E. yak
Kl258a become dry; also hao
153:6 M36549Ab Y. [xaw'] L. xfiak E. yak
K766H raccoon dog, Nyctereutes procyonoides,
also hao. See also mo, ma
75:6 M14743a Y. [xjaj'] L. xfijaijk E. yaijk/yeijk
K937a' pit (of a fruit), kernel, stone; also hu
124:10 M28776 Y. [xjaj'] L. xfijaijk E. ysijk/yEijk
K855g stalk or spine of a feather
146:13 M34791 Y. [xjaj'] L. xfijaijk E. yoijk/yeijk
Kl260a kernel; seek out, investigate, get to the
bottom of; compare _ Also E. yet
120:3 M27246 Y. [?] L. xfiotE. yst
proper name; Huihe Uighur
hao
he
he
he
he
he"
he
he
he
he
he
he
he
he
he
he
he
he
he

Lexicon 123
211:3 M48590 Y. [?] L. xfiat E. yst
K517o to bite. Also E. yet
196:9 M47124 Y. [xo'] L. xfiat E. yal
K313h kind of bird
73:5 M14290 Y. xo' L. xfiat E. yat
what, how
142:9 M33254A Y. [xo'] L. xfiat E. yat
K313f wood grubs. See also xie
30:3 M03287B Y. xo' L. xfiap E. yop/yap
K675a be joined together, fit. See also ge
108:6 M22988 Y. xo' L. xfiap E. yap/yap
box, case
108:5 M22980 Y. xo' L. xfiap E. yap
K642n join, unite; door leaf; fusion of he bu
^ why not?
140:10 M31652B Y. [xo'] L. xfiap E. yap
K642q why not? , same as See also gai, g&
169:10 M41452 Y. [xo'] L. xfiap E. yap
K642s leaf of a door; to shut
140:7 M31000B Y. xo\ xov L. xfia' E. ya'
Klo bear, carry on the back. See also he
154:5 M36725 Y. xox L. xfiav E. yah
K15j congratulate
30:5 M03490Ba Y. xwov L. xfiuav E. ywah
K8e mix, blend, harmonize with; also
hub. See also he, huo
203:0 M48038b Y. xof L. X99k E. xak
K904a black; also hei
32:14 M05554 Y. xaw" L. xak E. xak
K767a ditch, gully, pool
86:10 M19291A Y. xaw" L. xak E. xak
Kll29u blaze; hot. See also xu
163:7 M39430b Y. [xawv] L. xak E. xak
place name, surname; also h&o
196:10 M47185 Y. xo', xaw' L. xfiak E. yak
Klll7b crane
172:2 M41940 Y. [xu'] L. xfiswk E. yawk
Klll7a high, high-rising
30:14 M04459B Y. xjaj\ xje" L. xjaijk E. xaijk/xeijk
K779b scare, frighten. See also xia
155:7 M37010 Y. [xjajv] L. xjaijk E. xaijk/xe:jk
K779a fiery red; brilliant, awesome; terribly
angry
124:10 M28778 Y. [xjaw'] L. xfijaiwk E. yaiwk/yoeiwk
K1129v hehe glossy white. Also E. xaiwk, yawk
h6
he
he
he
he
he
he
h6
he
he
he
he
he
he
he
he
he
he
he
he
he

124 Lexicon
he
hei
hen
hen
hen
hen
heng
heng
heng
heng
heng
heng
hdng
heng
h6ng
hong
hong
hong
hong
hong
hong
hong
145:9 M34435 Y. [xo'j L. xfiat E. yat
K313g coarse clothing of animal hair or hemp
203:0 M48038a Y. xaj" L. xssk E. xak
K904a black; also he
104:6 M22171 Y. xsn' L. xfian E. yan
K416g scar, mark
60:6 M10093 Y. xan" L. xri3nv E. yan'
K4l6e fractious; quarrelsome; hate; very
94:6 M20362 Y. xsn L. xrtenx E. yan'
ruthless, relentless
61:6 M10588 Y. xsnv L. xfisnv E. ysnh
K416f hate
8:5 M00295A Y. xarj L. xjaijrj E. xaijrj/xeijrj
K7l6b penetrate; fit. See also peng, xi&ng
61:6 M10527 Y. xsrj' L. xfisarj E. yarj
K881d constant
96:6 M20971 Y. xirj' L. xfijaijrj E. ysijrj/yeijrj
K748g kind of girdle pendant
75:6 M14754A Y. [xirj'j L. xfijaijrj E. yaijryyeijrj
K748f crossbeam, purlin. See also hang
140:16 M32422 Y. [xirj'i L. xfijaijrj E. Yaijrj/yeijrj
K748j duhenjwild ginger, Asarum
144:10 M34078 Y. xirj' L. xfijaijrj E. yaijryyEijrj
K748h crosswise; balance arm of a steelyard;
weigh, measure, judge
75:12 M15594A Y.xw9rj',xurj'L.xfiwa:jrj E.ywaijrj/yweijrj
K707m crosswise; horizontal. See also heng
75:12 M15594B Y.xwarjN,xurjN L.xfiwaijrj" E.ywaijrjh/yweijrjh
K707m harsh; perverse; unexpected. See also heng
140:13 M32147 Y. xwsrj, xurj L. xusrj E. xwarj
K902g die (of a feudal lord)
149:2 M35219 Y.[xwsrj, xurj] L. xwaijrj E. xwsijn/xweijrj
K1252b loud noise
159:14 M38577 Y. xwsrj, xurj L. xwaijrj E. xwoijrj/xweijrj
loud noise, rumble
86:6 M19012 Y. xurj L. xawrj E. xawrj
Kl I82r burn; dry or warm by the fire
57:2 M09709 Y. xurj', xwarj' L. xfiuSrj E. ywsrj
K887g great
177:5 M42780 Y. [xurj'] L. xfiuSrj E. ywsrj
K887m hand-rest on the leaning board of a
carriage
85:5 M17288 Y. wsrj, urj L. ?wa:jrj E. ?w3ijrj/?weijrj
deep water
40:4 M07086 Y.xwarj'.xurj' L.xfiwaijrj E.ywgijryyweyrj
K887h great, vast

Lexicon 125
hong
hong
hong
hong
hong
h6ng
hong
hong
hong
hong
hong
hou
hou
hou
hou
hou
hou
h6u
hou
hou
hou
hou
117:4 M25735 Y. [xurj'] L. xfiwaijrj E. yw3ijrj/YweiJi)
K8871 to measure
120:4 M27289 Y.xw9rj',xurj'L.xfiwa:jrj E. Ywsijrj/Ywerjrj
K887j cord on a ceremonial cap
169:4 M41241 Y. xwarj'L. xfiwayrj E. Ywaijrj/Yweijrj
K887k gate to an alley or lane
201:13 M47985 Y. [xurj'] L. xfiwaijrj E. Ywaijrj/Yweijrj
school
85:6 M17402 Y. xurj' L. xfiswrj E. Yawrj
Kll82o inundation, flood; great, greatly
120:3 M27243 Y. xurj' L. xfiawrj E. Y»wrj
K1172i red
142:3 M32830A Y. xurj' L. xfiawrj E.Yawrj
Kll72j rainbow. See also gang, jiang
149:3 M35228 Y. [xurj'] L. xfiswrj E. YSWTJ
Kll72k confusion, disorder
196:6 M46874 Y. xurj' L. xfiswrj E. YSWTJ
Kll72g' swan-goose; great, vast
85:3 M171395 Y. xurf L. xfiswif E. Y^Wrj'
mercury; also gang
191:6 M45641 Y. xurf L. xfiswrjv E. Y3wrjh
Kl 182p wrangle, quarrel. Also E. Yaiwrj
9:7 M00633 Y. xsw' L. xfiaw E. Y3W
Kl I3a target; feudal lord; marquis; Shijing
particle
30:9 M03913 Y. xaw' L. xfisw E. YSW
Kll3f throat
94:9 M20553 Y. X9W' L. xfiow E. Y»w
Kll3g monkey
118:9 M26272 Y. xsw' T, xfisw E. Y»w
konghou
167:9 M40644 Y. [xaw'] L. xfiaw E. Y»W
K113I kind of arrow. Also E. Y^wh
184:9 M44277 Y. xsw' L. xfisw E. Y»w
Kl 13j dried food, provisions
30:4 M03377 Y. xaw" L. X3W' E. xaw'
bellow; roar. Also E.xowh
27:7 M02949 Y. X9WX L. xfiawv E. yaw'
K114a thick
30:3 M03298A Y. xswv L. xfisws E. Y^W
Kl I2a ruler. See also hou below
60:6 M10098 Y. xswv L. xfisw' E. YSW'
KllSa behind, rear; after, afterwards
9:8 M00775 Y. xawN L. xfiawv E. Y^wh
Kl I3e wait; watch, look out for

126 Lexicon
hou
hou
hou
hou
hu
hu
hu
hu
hu
hu
hu
hu
hu
hu
hu
hu
hu
hu
hu
hu
hu
30:3 M03298B Y. xsw^ L. xfiswv E. yawh
Kll2a empress, queen. See also hou above.
32:9 M05253 Y. X9WN L. xfiawv E. yaw11
mound of earth used as a distance marker
162:6 M38848 Y. X3WN L. xfiswv E. ygwh
Kl I2c xiehbu: free and easy, carefree and
relaxed
195:13 M46528 Y. [x3wx] L. xfiswv E. ygwh
king crab, Limulus longispinus
30:5 M03471 Y. xu L. xus E. xo
K55h shout, call
61:12 M11259B Y. [xu] L. xua E. xo
K103J startled, flustered (Jiyuri). See also wu
62:13 M11681B Y. [xu] L. xuS E. xo
K22b call, same as , . See also xi
130:12 M29895A Y. [xu] L. xua E. xo
Kl03o large slice of dried meat. See also wu
149:11 M35905 Y. [xu] L. xuSE. xo
call, shout, same as . . Also E. xoh
141:5 M32698 Y. [xu'] L. xfiuo E. yo
K55e same as
4:4 M00131 Y. xu' L. xfiuS E. yo
K55a final question particle; allomorph of yu
in, at, to, from
61:4 M10405 Y. xu" L. xut E. xwst
K5031 suddenly; hasty; overlook, forget
61:8 M10811 Y. [xu"] L. xut E. xwat
K503p huSnghu befuddled; bewildered;
confused; in a trance
33:9 M05662 Y. xu' L. xfiuaE. yo
K56a wine bottle, pot; hulu >ottle gourd
57:5 M09757 Y. xu' L. xfius E. yo
K4lh bow; arc
85:9 M17836 Y. xu' L. xfius E. yo
K49j' lake
94:5 M20333 Y. xu' L. xfiua E. yo
K41i fox
96:9 M21126 Y. xu'T,. xfius E. yo
shanhu coral
97:6 M21392B Y. xu' L. xfiusE. yo
K43j bottle gourd (Cf. hulu ).
Now read hu. See also hu
119:9 M27037 Y. xu' L. xfius E. yo
paste
130:5 M29400 Y. xu' L. xfiua E. yo
K49a' dewlap; interrogative adverb, why?,

Lexicon 127
hu (continued)
hu
hu
hu
hu
hu
hu
hu
hii
hu
hu
hu
hu
hu
hu
hu
hu
hu
hu
hu
d) how?; general name for horse-riding
nomads (Han); for Iranians from Central
Asia (Tang); foreign, western
140:9 M31443 Y. [xu'] L. xfiuS E. yo
K49k' garlic; huh bottle gourd, calabash
142:9 M33328 Y. [xu'] L. xfiua E. yo
hudie butterfly
164:9 M39930 Y. xu'L. xfiua E. yo
tihu clarified butter; cream; essence
184:9 M44255 Y. [xu'] L. xfiua E. yo
K491' gruel; supply with food, feed; eat
196:9 M47098 Y. hu'L. xfiua E. yo
K49m' tihu pelican
75:6 M14743b Y. [xjaj'] L. xfijaijk E. yaijk/yeijk
K937a pit (of a fruit), kernel, stone. See also
he. The reading hu seems to belong tc
read E. ywat in the Guangyun .
68:7 Ml3508 Y. xu' L. xfiawk E. yswk
Kl225f measure of capacity equal to ten d6u
4, picul
75:11 M15375 Y. xu L. xhswk E. yawk
Mongolian oak, Quercus dentata
120:10 M27780 Y. [xu'] L. xffowk E. yowk
K1226k kind of silk gauze
148:10 M35144 Y. [xu'] L. xfiawk E. yswk
K12261 measuring vessel; husu .. fearful,
trembling
196:7 M46961A Y. xu' L. xfiawk E. yawk
Kl039n swan, Cygnus bewicki. See also gu
64:10 M12511 Y. [xu'] L. xfiut E. ywat
K486c dig out
85:11 Ml8089 Y. xu~ L. xua' E. xo'
K60k river bank
96:8 M21061 Y. [xuv] L. XUQ' E. xo'
K57f hupo amber
141:2 M32675 Y. xu" L. xu§' E. xo'
K57b tiger
63:4 Ml 1711 Y. xuv L. xu§v E. xoh
bail out; bailing bucket
46:5 M08003 Y. xuv L. xfiu§s E. yo'
K49v wooded hill
61:5 M10454 Y. xuv L. xfiu3v E. yo'
K49x rely on
63:0 Ml 1696 Y. xuv L. xfiu3N E. yo'
K53a door; household

128
hu
hu
hu
hu
hu
hu
hu
hu
hu
hu
hu
hu
hua
hua
hua"
hua
hua
hua
hua
hua
Lexicon
63:7 Ml 1746 Y. xiT L. xfiu5v E. yo'
K53c ancient place name; stop; groom, retainer;
retinue; bird resembling a quail
85:11 M18072 Y. [xiT] L. xfiu§N E. yo'
river name; Shanghai
113:5 M24671 Y. [xux] L. xfiu3s E. yo'
K49y blessings, favour
140:3 M30680A Y. [xuv] L. xfiu3v E. yo'
K35d kind of grass, Rehmannia. See also xia
172:4 M41976A Y. [xuv] L. xfiu§vE. yo'
K53d kind of bird , same a$ , See also gu
7:2 M00255 Y. xuv L. xfiu3v E. yoh
K54a mutual
15:4 M01613 Y. xuv L. xfiu3v E. yoh
freezing cold
97:6 M21392A Y. [xuv] L. xfiu9v E. yoh
K43j bottle gourd, calabash. See also hu
149:14 M36048 Y. xuv L. xfiu^ E. yoh
K784k protect
177:14 M43068A Y. [xuv] L. xfiu5N E. yoh
K784e strap for carrying a sword; bind. See
also huo
86:10 M19291B Y. [xuv] L. xawk E. xawk
Kll29u blaze; hot. Also E. xswk. See also xe
118:4 M25882 Y. xu" L. xut E. xwst
K503m long narrow tablet carried by court
officials
140:4 M30734 Y. xwa L. xwa: E. xwai/xwe;
flower
149:12 M35928 Y. xwa' L. xwai E. xwai/xwe:
K44d shout, noise, clamour
18:4 M01893 Y. xwa' L. xfiwa: E. ywai/ywei
K7e to punt; paddle, row
140:8 M31214A Y. xwa' L. xfiwa: E. ywai/ywe:
K44a flower, blossom; flourishing, splendid;
Chinese. See also hua
187:12 M44982 Y. xwa' L. xfiwa: E. ywai/ywe:
K44c hualii one of the eight famous
steeds of King Mu of Zhou
85:10 M18032A Y. xwa L. xfiwait E. yw9it/ywe:t
K486e slippery, smooth; cunning, crafty. See
also gu
94:10 M20583 Y. xwa' L. xfiwart E. ywait/yweU
K486d cunning, crafty
21:2 M02572 Y. xwaN L. xwaT E. xwaih/xweih
K19a change, transform

Lexicon 129
hua
hua
hua
hua
hua
hua
hua
hua
hua
huai
hu£
huai
huai
huai
huai
huan
huan
huan
huan
huan
157:8 M3764lb Y. [xwav] L. xfiwa:s E. ywai'/Ywe:'
K35lj ankle; also huai
159:8 M38380B Y. xwav L. xfiwar E. Ywai'/ywe:'
K35H turn (as a wheel). See also gu6, hui
75:12 M15497 Y. xwav L. xfiwar E. Ywaih/vwe:h
birch, Betula japonica
140:8 M31214B Y. xwav L. xfiwar E. Ywaih/Yweih
K44a name of a mountain. See also hua
102:7 M21859B Y. xwav L. xfiwaij E. Ywaijh/Yweijh
K847a drawing, picture, painting. See also hua
below
120:12 M27918 Y.[xwajv] L. xfiwa:jN E. Ywaijh/Yvve:jh
K847e cord; tie up, embarrass; obstinate,
perverse. Also E. xwaijk
149:6 M35441 Y. xwav L. xfiwa:js E. Ywaijh(s)/Ywe:jh
K302o speech, talk
18:12 M02193 Y. xwajs L. xfiwayk E. Ywsijk/Yweyk
mark; delimit, divide; plan
102:7 M21859A Y. xwaj' L. xfiwaijk E. Ywsijk/Yweijk
K847a delineate, plan, same as . See also
hua above
157:8 M37641a Y. [xwav] L. xfiwar E. Ywai'/YWEi'
K35lj ankle; also hua
60:6 M10095 Y. xuj' L. xfiuaj E. YWSJ
K542d paihuai move to and fro; irresolute
61:16 Ml 1456 Y. xwaj' L. xfiwaij E. Ywaij/Yweij
K600c hold in the bosom; cherish
75:10 M15323 Y. xwaj' L. xfiwaij E. Ywsij/Ywey
K5691 scholar tree, Sophora japonica
85:8 M17682 Y. xwaj' L. xfiwaij E. Ywsij/Yweij
K60la name of a river
32:16 M05590 Y. xwaj L. xfiwaijN E. YW3ijh/Yweijh
K600d collapse, go to ruin; corrupt, bad. Also
E. kwaijVkweij destroy.
61:18 M11496 Y. [xon] L. xuan E. xwan
Kl58k joyous, same a
76:18 M16242 Y. xon L. xuan E. xwan
Kl58j happy, joyous
149:18 M36157 Y. xon L. xuan E. xwan
K158n shout
153:18 M36653 Y. xon L. xuan E. xwan
badger
187:18 M45086 Y. xon L. xuan E. xwan
K1581 rejoice

130 Lexicon
huan
huan
huan
huan
huan
huan
huan
huan
huan
huan
huan
huan
huan
huan
huan
hu&n
huan
huiin
huan
huan
75:6 M14774 Y. xon' L. xfiuan E. ywan
Kl64f pillar; martial looking; turn around,
turn back, hesitate; surname
85:6 M17421 Y. [xon'] L. xfiuan F, ywan
Kl64g name of a river; huanhuan big flow of
water. Also E. wuan
140:6 M30930 Y. [xon] L. xfiuan E. ywan
K164k kind of violet
140:8 M31257 Y. [xon'] L. xfiuan E. ywan
K165a kind of goat
140:8 M31272 Y. [xon'] L. xfiuan E. ywan
Kl66a kind of sedge
153:6 M36543A Y. [xon'] L. xfiuan E. ywan
K1641 small raccoon dog. See also xuan
31:13 M04851 Y. xwan' L. xfiwam E. ywain/ywem
K256y round; encircle
40:13 M07344 Y. xwan' L. xfiwam E. ywain/ywem
K256s royal domain
96:13 M21287 Y. xwan' L. xfiwam E. ywain/ywem
K256n ring, bracelet; encircle
159:13 M38551 Y. xwan' L. xfiwam E. ywain/ywEin
K256v put to death by tearing asunder between
chariots
162:13 M39174A Y. xwan' L. xfiwam E. ywain/ywEin
K256k return, turn around. See also xuan
167:9 M40648 Y.[xwan'] L. xfiwam E. ywain/ywem
K255m unit of weight
167:13 M40946 Y. xwan' L. xfiwam E. ywain/ywem
K256r metal ring
169:13 M41506 Y. xwan' L. xfiwam E. ywain/ywem
wall round a market-place; market-place
190:13 M45596 Y. xwan' L. xfiwam E. ywain/ywem
chignon, bun
85:7 M17470a Y. [xonv] L. xfiuanv E. ywan'
K257o wash clothes, also huan
85:13 M18382 Y. xonv L. xfiuanv E. ywan'
K140m wash
120:9 M27669 Y. xonv L. xfiuanv E. ywan'
K255 1 slow; relaxed, indulgent; remiss;
postpone
109:7 M23352 Y.[xwans] L.xfiwam" E. ywain'/ywem'
K257t brilliant (stars); beautiful (fruit);
huSnhuSn staring, or as if asleeep
30:9 M03953 Y. xonv L. xuans E. xwanh
call out

Lexicon 131
huan
huan
huan
huan
huan
huan
huan
huan
huan
huan
huan
huan
huang
huang
huang
huang
huang
huang
hua"ng
huang
huang
huang
37:6 M05916 Y. xoiT L. xuarT E. xwanh
Kl67a ample
86:9 M19224 Y. xoiT L. xuaiT E. xwanh
K167c bright, shining
85:7 M17470b Y. [xon^] L. xfiuan" E. ywan'
K257o wash clothes; also huan
64:9 M12358 Y. xonv L. xfiuanv E. ywanh
Kl67f change
85:9 M17757 Y. xonv L. xfiuanx E. ywanh
K167b disperse, melt, vanish
162:8 M38930 Y. xonx L. xfiuanv E. ywanh
K157m escape, avoid
109:6 M23351b Y.[xwans] L.xfiwa:nv E. ywain'/Ywem'
Kl39j' protruding eyes; also han
40:6 M07138 Y.xwan" L.xfiwa:nv E. Ywainh/Ywe:nh
K188a official; eunuch
52:1 M09190 Y.xwanv L.xfiwanr E. YW3inh/YWEJnh
K1248c illusion, magic
61:7 M10691 Y.xwanv L. xfiwa:nv E. Ywainh/YW£Jnh
K159f trouble, anxiety, worry
64:13 M12813 Y.xwan" L. xfiwain" E. Ywainh/YW£:nh
K256u put on (armour)
152:6 M36380 Y.xwanv L. xfiwamv E. Ywainh/Ywejnh
K226o feed domestic animals
130:3 M29259 Y. xwarj L. xuarj E. xwarj
K742y diaphragm
140:6 M30953 Y. xwarj L. xuarj E. xwarj
K742e' wilderness, open spaces, wastelands
143:3 M33969 Y. xwarj L. xuarj E. xwarj
K742z blood
61:10 M11057 Y. [xwarf] L. xuarj' E. xwarj'
K742g' confused, flurried, flustered. Level tone
reading is found in theJiyun .
16:9 M01784 Y. xwarj' L. xfiuarj E. Ywarj
K7081 female phoenix
60:9 M10178 Y. [xwarj'] L. xfiuaq E. ywarj
K708d panghuangicsitant, irresolute
61:9 M10863 Y. xwarj' L. xnuarj E. Ywarj
frightened, anxious
85:9 M17850 Y. [xwarj'] L. xfiuarj E. ywarj
K708f stagnant water; name of a river
85:12 M18251 Y. xwarj' L. xfiuarj E. Ywarj
K707e pool; name of a river
86:9 M19181 Y. [xwarj'] L. xfiuarj E. ywarj
K708g brilliant

132 Lexicon
huanj
huanj
huanj
huanj
huanj
huanj
huanj
hua"nj
huanj
huSnj
huSn]
huSnj
huT
huT
huT
huT
huT
huT
huT
huT
huT
96:12 M21242 Y. [xwarj'] L. xfiuarj E. ywarj
K707c semiannular jade pendant
106:4 M22701 Y. xwarj' L. xfiuaq E. ywarj
K708a august; sovereign
118:9 M26249 Y. xwarj' L. xfiuarj E. ywarj
K708h bamboo grove
118:12 M26541 Y. xwarj' L. xfiuarj E. ywarj
K707g reed or tongue in a musical instrument;
reed organ
142:9 M33267 Y. xwarj' L. xfiuarj E. vwarj
K708m locust. Also E. ywarj11
162:9 M39006 Y. xwarj' L. xfiuarj E. ywarj
K708i leisure
170:9 M41754 Y. xwarj' L. xfiuarj E. ywarj
K708j moat
195:9 M46323 Y. xwarj' L. xfiuarj E. ywarj
sturgeon
201:0 M47926 Y. xwarj' L. xfiuarj E. ywarj
K707a yellow
61:6 M10546 Y. xwarj" T,. xuarj' E. xwarj'
K706j huinghiconfused, indistinct
50:10 M09022 Y. xwarj i^. xfiuarjv E. ywarj'
shop sign; fa?ade
72:6 M13891 Y. xwarjx L. xfiuarjv E. ywarj'
dazzle
64:12 M12716 Y. [xuj] L. xyj E. xwia/xwi
K271 tear open; to wave, signal
200:4 M47899 Y. xuj L. xyj E. xwiS/xwi
Kl7i signal flag; to signal, command (an army)
32:12 M05481B Y. [xuj] L. xjyj E. xjwiS/xjwi
Kile destroy, ruin. Same as See also
duo
170:15 M41895 Y. [xuj] L. xjyj E. xjwis/xjwi
Kllf destroy, ruin
109:8 M23450B Y. [xuil L. xjyj E. xjwi
K1237u hulxustaring, rude. See also
SUT
60:14 M10267 Y. xuj L. xyj E. xuj
K584H rope; beautiful, fine; flag; emblem, badge
64:9 M12394 Y. xuj L. xyj E. xuj
K458i shake, wave, wield
72:9 M14038 Y. xuj L. xyj E. xuj
K458j light, brightness; shine
86:9 M19174 Y. [xuj] L. xyj E. xuj
K458k flaming, glowing, bright

Lexicon 133
huT
huT
huT
huT
huT
huT
huT
huT
hui
hui
hui
hui
hui
hui
huT
huT
huT
huT
huT
hui
hui
hui
124:9 M28769 Y. xuj L. xyj E. xuj
K458n kind of pheasant
145:9 M34453 Y. [xuj] L. xyj E. xuj
K57lr queen's ritual robe; knee-covers
159:8 M38372 Y. xuj L. xyj E. xuj
K4581 bright, shining, splendid
61:6 M10577 Y. [khuj] L. khuaj E. khwaj
K950b great, vast; complete
149:6 M35462 Y. [khuj] L. khuaj E. khwoj
banter, ridicule, taunt
86:2 M18858 Y. xuj L. xuaj E. xwsj
K950a ashes
142:3 M32833B Y. [xuj] L. xuaj E. xwsj
K572a exhausted, debilitated. Also
E. xwaij/xweij. See also hul.
152:3 M36341 Y. xuj L. xuaj E. xwaj
clash, dispute
31:3 M04690 Y. xuj' L.xfiuaj E. ywaj
K542a revolve, go round; return
54:6 M09575 Y. xuj' L. xfiuaj E. yw3J
K542b revolve, return
85:6 M17353 Y. [xuj'] L. xfiuaj E. ywaj
K542e swirling water
140:6 M30913 Y. [xuj'] L.xfiuaj E. ywaj
fennel, Foeniculum vulgare
142:6 M32990 Y. [xuj'] L.xfiuaj E. ywsj
K542f roundworm, intestinal worm
162:6 M38818 Y. xuj' L.xfiuaj E. ywaj
return
79:9 M16654 Y. xuf L. xyj' E. xwiS'/xwi'
K356a destroy; defame
86:13 M19478 Y. xuf L. xyj' E. xwia'/xwi'
K356b blazing fire; destroy
142:0 M32804A Y. [xuj~] L. xyj' E. xuj'
Kl009a poisonous snake, viper, same as . See
also chong
142:3 M32833A Y. xuf L. xyj' E. xuj'
K572a poisonous snake, viper. See also huT.
61:7 M10659 Y. xuj" L. xuaj' E. xwaj'
K947s regret, repent
58:8 M09927 Y. sujv L. sfiyjv E. zwih
K527a broom; comet. Also E. swiajh, zwiajh
61:6 M10566 Y. [uf] L. ?jyjv E.?jwi5h/7jwih
K879m anger, resentment
24:4 M02720 Y. [xujx] L. xyjv E. xujh
Kl239a grass; plants in general. Also E. xuj'

134 Lexicon
149:9
58:10
154:6
72:7
149:7
159:8
176:12
181:7
22:11
61:8
61:11
85:12
120:12
140:12
142:12
169:12
140:13
124:13
73:9
120:13
30:9
M35733
K571s
M09936
K524a
M36745
K995z
M13960
K947t
M35553
K947u
M38380C
K3511
M42689
K540f
M43491
K988b
M02644
K601d
M10822
K533a
M11116
K527d
M18281b
K540d
M27914
K540e
M31968
K533f
M33610
K533e
M41488
M32093
K321n
M28823
K346g
M14306A
K321a
M27939
K321k
M03951
K17H
Y. xujx L. xyjx E. xujh
avoid, taboo; taboo name
Y. [ujv] L. yjs E. wujh
kind, category; classify
Y. xujv L. xuaj' E. xwsj'
valuables, goods, commodities; bribe
Y. xujs L. xuajv E. xwajh
last day of the waning moon; dark,
obscure
Y. xujv L. xuajv E. xw9Jh
teach, instruct
Y. xwav L. xfiuajs E. ywsj'
turn a wheel. See gu6, hua
Y. [xujv] L. xuaj" E. xwajh
wash the face
Y. [xujv] L. xuaj"E. xwsjh
wash the face, compare
Y. [xuf] L. xfiuajv E. yw3Jh
converge; gather together
Y. xujx L. xfijyaj" E. ywejh
grace, benevolence
Y. xujv L. xfijyajv E. ywejh
intelligent
Y. xujv L. xfiuaj" E. yw9Jh
break through a bank or dike; scatter, be
scattered; also kui
Y. [xujv] L. xfiuaj" E. yw3Jh
remnant; paint, painting; figured silk
Y. xujv L. xfijyj" E. ywej11
kind of orchid, Cymbidium faberi
Y. [xujv] L. xfijyajv E.ywejh
huigu a kind of cicada
Y. xujv L. xfiuaj" E. yw3Jh
market place entrance-way
Y. [ujv] L. ?uajv E. ?wajh
luxuriant growth; gather, assemble
Y. [xujv] L. xuajx E. xwajh
huihui sound of flapping wings
Y. xujN L. xfiuajx E. ywajh
come together, meet; meeting;
encounter; happen. See also kuai, gui
Y. kujv [sic] L. xfiuajs E. ywajh
draw, paint; painted silk, figured silk
Y. [xuf ] L. xyajv E. xuajh
beak, snout; mouth. Also Y. tshujv L.
tshyajv E. tphwiajh in the same sense
hui
hui
hui
hui
hui
hui
hui
hui
hui
hui
hui
hui
hui
hui
hui
hui
hui
hui
hui
hui
hui

Lexicon 135
hui
hui
hun
hun
hun
hun
hun
hun
hun
hun
hun
hun
him
hun
him
hun
hu5
huo
huo
huo
hu6
181:13 M43705 Y. [xujv] L. xyajx E. xuajh
K346f beard
115:13 M25331a Y. ujv L. ?yajx E. ?wiajh
K3461 dirt, filth; also wei
38:8 M06418 Y. xun L. xun E. xwsn
K457m marriage
61:8 M10812 Y. xun L. xun E. xwsn
K457n confused, stupid
72:4 Ml3806 Y. xun L. xun E. xwan
K457k dusk, evening; dark; benighted, stupid;
eunuch; marriage
169:8 M41383 Y. xun L. xun E. xwan
K457q gatekeeper
140:9 M31461 Y. xun L. xyn E. xun
K458H pungent vegetables, garlic, onions; non-
vegetarian food
85:9 M17800 Y. xun' L. xfiun E. ywsn
K458b muddy, turbid, chaotic; stupid; whole
184:8 M44202 Y. [xun'] L. xfiun E. ywsn
huntunwonton, dumpling soup
184:9 M44254B Y. [xun' I L. xfiun E. ywsn
K458e same as See also yun
194:4 M45787 Y. xun' L. xfiun E. ywan
K460g spiritual soul
149:9 M35709 Y. unN L. rjuns E. rjw3nh
word-play, jests
85:8 M17694 Y. xunv L. xfimTE. ywan'
K4l7k mix, confuse; hundunchaos
31:7 M04773 Y. xunx L. xfiun' £. yw3nh
K425a pigsty, latrine
61:10 M11035 Y. [xmT] L. xfiunv E. yw3nh
K425c disturb, be troubled; suffer, grief
85:10 M17986 Y. [xunv] L. xfiunv E. yw3nh
K425d troubled, disorderly; pigsty, latrine
150:10 M36221a Y. [xwo^] L. xuat E. xwat
K3l4g slit, break, crack; also huo
18:14 M02237 Y. [xwawv] L. xwak E. xwak
slit open with knife
30:5 M03490Ab Y. xwo' L. xfiua E. ywa
K8e mix with water; also he together with,
and. See also huo, he
85:6 M17423 Y. xwo' L. xfiuat E. ywat
K302m live; living, alive; lively
86:0 M18850 Y. xwo" L. xua' E. xwa'
K353a fire

136 Lexicon
hu6
huo
huo
huo
huo
huo
huo
huo
huo
huo
huo
huo
huo
huo
huo
huo
huo
huo
huo
huo
36:11 M05808 Y. [xwo~] L. xfiuav E. ywa'
many (Shuowen: says Qi dialect;
Fangyan: says between Chu and Wei)
113:9 M24766 Y. xwo L. xfiiuT E. ywa'
Kl8f disaster, catastrophe, misfortune
154:4 M36678 Y. xwov L. xuav E. xwah
Kl9c goods, commodity; money; sell
30:5 M03490B5 Y. xwov L. xfiua" E. ywah
K8e mix, blend, harmonize with; also he.
See also, he", huo
61:8 M10789 Y. xuj' L. xfiusk E. ywak
K929q confused, puzzled; delude, mislead
62:4 Ml 1563 Y. [xuj'] L. xfiuak E. ywsk
K929a someone , some; perhaps
142:14 M33752 Y. [wawv] L. ?uak E. ?wak
K784n caterpillar
140:16 M32406 Y. [xwaw"] L. xuak E. xwak
K775e leaves of bean plants
173:8 M42321 Y. [xwaw"] L. xuak E. xwak
K775a suddenly, quickly; surname
64:14 M12876 Y. [xwaw'] L. xfiuak E. ywak
K7841 trap for animals; catch
85:14 M18517 Y. [xwo'] L. xfiuak E. ywak
K784j to boil
115:14 M25346 Y. [xwaw'] L. xfiuak E. ywak
K784H to harvest
167:14 M40981 Y. xwaw', XWD' L. xfiuak E. ywak
K784i cooking pot, cauldron
94:14 M20758 Y. [xwaj'] L. xfiwaijk E. ywsijk/yweijk
K784d catch, capture; get; manage to do, be able
111:14 M24020 Y. [xwaj'] L. xfiwaijk E. y wsijk/y weijk
K784g measure, estimate
112:4 M24056 Y. [xwajv] L. xwaijk E. xwaijk/xweijk
K1260f sound of ripping. Also E. xwejk.
149:10 M35796 Y. [xwaf ] L. xwaijk E. xwaijk/xweijk
K1259a sudden
177:14 M43068B Y. [xwaj'] L.xfiwaijk E. ywaijk/yweijk
K784e strap for carrying a sword; bind. Also E.
?waijk. See also hu.
85:13 M18454 Y. [xwo"] L. xuat E. xwat
K346H huohuo splash
150:10 M36221b Y. [xwo"] L. xuat E. xwat
K3l4g open; empty; clear; open-minded,
generous

Lexicon 137
12:6 M01472B Y. [ki] L. ki E. ki/ki
K952a preclassical question particle. See also qi
32:8 M05197 Y. ki L. ki E. ki/ki
K952g base, foundation
38:6 M06230 Y. ki L. ki E. ki/ki
K960f royal surname of the Zhou dynasty
74:8 M14378B Y. ki L. ki E. ki/ki
K952k complete cycle of time; year. See also qi.
74:8 M14377 Y. ki L. ki E. ki/ki
K952j complete cycle of time; year, same as
$B
Y. ki L. ki E. ki/ki
winnowing basket
Y. [ki] L. ki E. ki/ki
kind of plant. See also qi
Y. ki L. ki E. ki
flesh, muscle; skin
Y. ki L. ki E. ki
hunger, famine, crop failure
Y. ki L. ki E. kia/ki
odd number. See also qi
Y. [ki] L. ki E. kiS/ki
odd; left over; remainder; irregular,
lopsided; wing of an army
Y. ki L. ki E. kiS/ki
sojourn, lodge; lodging
Y. ki L. ki E. kia/ki
bridle, harness, halter; restrain
Y. ki L. ki E. kij
little, few; nearly. See also jl.
Y. ki L. ki E. kij
latch, mechanism, spring; turning point,
pivot; chance, opportunity
Y. ki L. ki E. kij
baroque pearl; ancient astronomical
instrument
Y. ki L. ki E. kij
stones beaten by running water
Y. [ki] L. ki E. kij
good luck omen; omen. See also ji
Y. ki L. ki E. kij
ridicule, slander, vilify; examine, inspect
Y. [ki] L. ki E. kij
bridle
Y. ki L. ki E. kij
famine
JT
JT
JT
JT
ji
JT
JT
ji
ji
ji
ji
ji
ji
ji
ji
ji
ji
ji
ji
ji
j'

138
j'
JT
j'
JT
j'
JT
JT
JT
jl
j'
JT
JT
JT
JT
j'
JT
JT
j'
JT
JT
Lexicon
102:10 M21925a Y. [khi'] L. kfii E. gij
K5471 royal domain; also qf
115:10 M25218A Y. ki L. kjiaj E. kej
K552o cultivate; calculate; consult; examine. See
also qT
118:6 M26005 Y. [ki] L. kjiaj E. kej
K586a hair-pin
172:10 M42124 Y. ki L. kjiaj E. kej
K876n chicken, fowl
46:9 M08272 Y. [xi'j L. xfijiaj E. yej
mountain name; surname
157:14 M37949 Y. tsi L. tsiaj E. tsej
K593p climb, ascend, rise
170:14 M41885 Y. [tsi] L. tsiaj E. tsej
K593r rise; rainbow
179:10 M43252 Y. [tsi] L. tsiaj E. tsej
K555k to pickle
210:7 M48575 Y. tsi L. tsiaj E. tsej
K593u property, means; give, bestow, supply.
Also E. tsi.
210:9 M48578 Y. tsi L. tsiaj E. tsej
K593t pickled vegetables
44:7 M07708 Y. [ki'] L. kfiiajk E. giajk
K12595 wooden sandals, clogs
64:13 M12800 Y. kf L. kjiajk E. kejk
K854b strike, beat
85:13 M18438 Y. kf L. kjiajk E. kejk
Kl I62e surge, dash (of water); arouse, excite;
sharp, violent. Also E. kewh
19:11 M02423 Y. tsf L. tsiajk E. tsejk
achievement, merit. Same as
120:11 M27845 Y. tsf L. tsiajk E. tsejk
K868v spin thread, twist; achievement, merit
115:11 M25266 Y. tsf L. tsiajk E. tsiajk
K868t collect, accumulate, pile up. Also E.
tsi5h
157:6 M37493 Y. tsf L. tsiajk E. tsiajk
KSOOg footprint; trace
157:11 M37814 Y. [tsf] L. tsiajk E. tsiajk
K868u footprint; trace
162:6 M38827 Y. tsf L. tsiajk E. tsiajk
K800h footprint; traceB
120:9 M27645a Y. [tshf ] L. tship E. tship
K688b to hem; sew up, bring together;
continuous; pursue, arrest; also qi, qi

Lexicon 139
75:9 M15181 Y. ki' L. kfiiak E. gik
K910e ridge-pole; pole, extremity; exhaust,
reach the end; extremely, exceedingly
18:12 M02218a Y. kiv L. kfiiajk E. giajk
K8031 intense, severe; play; also ju
7:7 M00279A Y. [kf ] L. kiak E. kik
K910a urgent, haste. See also qi
75:8 M14938 Y. kf L. kiak E. kik
K911a sour jujube; thorn bush, brambles
78:9 M16517 Y. kf L. kiSk E. kik
K910d Ml
145:12 M34585 Y. [kf] L. kiak E. kik
K9llc coat collar
177:0 M42710B Y. [kf ] L. kiSkE. kik
K93la extreme. Compare See also g6
104:10 M22401 Y. [tsi'] L. tsfiiajk E.dziajk
K852c emaciated, thin
118:14 M26676 Y. [tsi'] L. tsfiiajk E. dziajk
K798a' document, written record; register
127:8 M28945 Y. [tsi'] L. tsfiiajk E. dziajk
K798i sacred field ploughed by the king
140:14 M32242B Y. [tsi'] L. tsfiiajk E.dziajk
K798b' sacred field ploughed by the king. See
alsojie
157:8 M37621A Y. [tsi'] L. tsfiiajk E. dziajk
K798k tread, step on. See also ji above
26:7 M02872 Y. [tsf ] L. tsiak E. tsik
K923a go up to; immediately; then, thereupon;
namely
142:9 M33253 Y. [tsf 1 L. tsiak E. tsik
K923b jiju centipede
130:6 M294725 Y. tsi L. tsiajk E. tsiajk
K852a spine; also jl
157:8 M37621B Y. [tsf ] L. tsiajk E. tsiajk
K798k jiji walk) reverently. See also ji
below
157:10 M37766 Y.ftsf] L. tsiajk E. tsiajk
K852b take small steps
196:9 M47115 Y. [tsf] L. tsiajk E. tsiajk
K923d jiling wagtail, Motacilla chinensis
(now written). Also E. tsik
196:10 M47197 Y. [tsf] L. tsiajk E. tsiajk
jiling \ wagtail
30:3 M03280 Y. [ki j L. kit E. kit
K517g stammer. The modern reading chT eat
is a new colloquial use of the graph
ji
ji
jl
ji
jl
jl
jl
jl
jl'
jl'
ji
jl
jl'
jl
jl
jl
jl
jl'
jl
jl

140 Lexicon
jl'
jl'
ji
ji
ji
jl
ji
ji'
ji
ji
ji
ji
ji
ji
ji
JT
JT
j'
JT
JT
jr
j*
30:3 M03289 Y. kf L. kjit E. kjit
K393a auspicious, fortunate, favourable
38:10 M06611 Y. tsi' L. tsfiitE. dzit
K494e hate, jealousy, same as
104:5 M22112 Y. tsi' L. tsfiit E. dzit
K494a hurried, urgent; feverish, illness; hate
140:10 M31622 Y. [tsi'] L. tsfiit E. dzit
K494d jflf : puncture vine, Tribulus
terrestris
29:2 M03118 Y. ki' L. kfiip E. gip
K681a reach; coming to the point that, when; and
118:4 M25869 Y. [ki'] L. kfiip E. gip
K681o box for carrying books on the back. Also
E. giap, giap, ts^ip, same meaning
9:4 M00433 Y. [kf ] L. kip E. kip
proper name, grandson of Confucius
61:5 M10475 Y. kiv L. kip E. kip
K681g hasty, urgent, pressing
85:4 M17163 Y. kf L. kip E. kip
K681H draw water
120:4 M27294 Y. kf L. kip E. kip
K68li step, stage; level, grade, rank
46:4 M07929 Y. [jiv] L. rjip E. rjip
K6811 lofty, precipitous
159:9 M38420 Y. [tsi'] L. tsfiip E. dzip
K688d bring together, accumulate
172:4 M41974 Y. tsi' L. tsfiip E. dzip
K69la to flock, group together, gather
62:9 Ml 1617 Y. [tsr"] L. tssp E. tsip
K688e collect, store; stop
75:9 Ml5168 Y. tsje" L. tsiap E. tsiap
K688h oar
49:0 M08742 Y. kf L. ki' E. kiYki'
K953a self; sixth Heavenly Stem
120:3 M27234b Y. kf L. ki' E. kj'/ki'
K9531 also ji, now read jT only as a surname
16:0 M01737 Y. kf L. ki' E. ki'
K602a small table, stool
75:2 M14435 Y. [kf ] L. ki' E. ki'
K602c small table, stool
198:2 M47589 Y. kf L. ki' E. ki'
Chinese musk deer, Moschus chinensis
64:8 M12250 Y. kf L. ki' E. kia'/ki'
Kly pull aside, pull back
157:8 M37655B Y. [kf ] L. kf E. kia'/ki'
Klc' leg, shin. See also qT

Lexicon 141
JT
JT
JT
JT
JT
j'
JT
ji
ji
•N
JI
ji
ji
ji
•V
JI
ji
ji
ji
ji
•X
JI
ji
ji
52:9 M09208B Y. kf L. ki' E. kij'
K547a how many?. See also JT
142:12 M33596 Y. kT L. ki' E. kij'
K547h louse egg, nit
64:14 M12848 Y. tsf L. tsiaf E. tsej'
K593n squeeze, press; push. Also E. tsej, tsejh
85:14 M18498A Y. tsi" L. tsiaj' E. tsej'
K593o river name; jTjT abundant. See also ji
62:8 Ml 1606 Y. ki" L. kiajk E. kiajk
K785b lance, halberd
130:6 M29472a Y. tsf L. tsiajk E. tsiajk
K852a spine; also ji
120:6 M27432a Y. ki L. kip E. kip
K675p provide, supply, give, furnish; also g&i
120:3 M27234a Y. kf L. ki' E. ki'/ki'
K953I guide-thread; regulate; rule, norm;
sequence, cycle of years; to record; also
JT
149:3 M35244 Y. kiv L. kis E. kih/kih
K953j record, note down; remember
149:7 M35500 Y. [kiv] L. khT E. gi'/gi'
K953u warn
157:7 M37549 Y. [kiv] L. kffr E. gi'/gi'
K953x kneel
61:3 M10310 Y. kix L. kfiiv E. gih/gih
K953s avoid, abstain from, taboo; dread; envy,
resent, hate
61:8 M10776 Y. [kiv] L. kfiiv E. gih/gih
K952c' harm; hate, despise; warn
12:14 M01500 Y. kiv L. kiv E. kih
K603a ancient name for Hebei; hope for
147:10 M34934 Y. [kiv] L. kiv E. kih
K548j long for
187:17 M45076 Y. kis L. ki E. kih
K603c superior horse
72:12 M14165 Y. [kiv] L. kfiiv E. gih
K515o and
85:6 M17369 Y. [kix] L. khT E. gih
K1237a pour out; together with, and
39:5 M06965 Y. kiv L. kjyjv E. kjwih
K538a youngest (of brothers); last; season of the
year
61:8 M10733 Y. kujN L. kfijyjv E. gjwih
K538e throb, palpitate
40:8 M07203 Y. kiv L. kis E. kiah/kih
Klx lodging; to lodge; entrust; communicate

142
ji
ji
ji
ji
•s
Ji
ji
•v
Ji
ji
ji
ji
ji
ji
ji
ji
ji
ji
ji
ji
•X
JI
ji
ji
Lexicon
9:4 M00436 Y. kf L. kfiiv E. gia'/gi'
K864j skill, talent
38:4 M06083 Y. kis L. knT E. giS'/gi'
singing girl, geisha, courtesan
64:4 Ml 1855 Y. ki^ L. kfiiv E. gis'/gi'
K864k skill, art
140:4 M30733 Y. [kiv] L. kfiiv E. giah/gih
K8641 water-chestnut
187:8 M44817B Y. kis L. kfiis E. gi9h/gih
Klu horseman. See also qi
71:7 M13724 Y. kiv L. kiv E. kijh
K5l5c to complete; already; after having...,
when
113:12 M24832B Y. [kiv] L. kis E. kijh
K547f stimulating drink after a bath. See also JT
32:11 M05423A Y. [kiv] L. kfiiN E. gijh
K515H plaster; collect; rest. See also xi
120:4 M27275 Y. [kiv] L. kiaf E. kejh
K327k knot
120:13 M27940A. Y. kiN L. kjiajv E. kejh
K854d tie, attach, connect. See also xi.
120:14 M27997 Y. ki^ L. kjiajv E. kejh
K124lb continue, connect
140:13 M32095 Y. kiv L. kjiajv E. kejh
setose thistle; place name
149:2 M35220 Y. ki^ L. kjiajv E. kejh
K1241a calculate, compute, reckon
190:6 M45442 Y. kiv L. kjiajv E. kejh
K393t tie the hair in a knot
85:14 M18498B Y. tsiv L. tsiajv E. tsejh
K593o to ferry, carry across; help across, save.
See also jl
115:14 M25342 Y. [tsiv] L. tsiajv E. tsejh
K593m sheaf. Also E. dzejh
173:14 M42499 Y. tsis L. tsiajv E. tsejh
K593s clearing sky
104:14 M22589 Y. [tsiv] L. tsfiiajv E. dzej'
K593k emaciated, stunted
140:14 M32208 Y. [tsiv] L. tsfiiaj' E. dzej'
K5931 shepherd's purse
18:14 M02241 Y. tsiv L. tsfiiaf E. dzejh
K593H cut, divide, apportion; dose of medicine
210:0 M48560B Y. [tsiv] L. tsfiiajv E. dzejh
K593a arrange, blend, combine; pharmaceutical
preparation, dose of medicine; same as
See also qi, ZT, zhai

Lexicon 143
ji
ji
ji
ji
ji
ji
ji
ji
jia
jia
jia
jia
jia
jia
jia
jia
jia
jia
jia
jia
jia
122:12 M28367 Y. [kiv] L. kiajN E. kiajh
kind of hair cloth, woollens
9:9 M00836A Y. [kiv] L. kfiiajv E. giajh
K3l3p Buddhist hymn, gatha. See also jie
113:6 M24700A Y. tsiv L. tsiajv E. tsiajh
K337a sacrifice. See also zhai
115:11 M25248 Y. [tsiv] L. tsiaf E. tsiajh
K337e kind of millet
170:11 M41820 Y. tsiv L. tsiajN E. tsiajh
K337f border; juncture, connection; occasion
115:10 M25207 Y. tsf L. tsiSk E. tsik
K922b millet
195:9 M46304 Y. tsf L. tsiSk E. tsik
bastard carp, sand perch. Also E. tset,
tsiajk
40:8 M07210 Y. tsi' L. tsfiiajk E. dzejk
K10311 quiet, still, silent; lonely
19:3 M02297 Y. kja L. kja: E. kai/ke:
K15a apply something to, add
30:11 M04176 Y. kja L. kja: E. kai/ke:
Kl5g good, welcome; praise, commend
40:7 M07169 Y. kja L. kja: E. kai/ke:
K32a family
75:5 M14587 Y. kja L. kja: E. kai/ke:
K15c flail; wooden collar, cangue
96:5 M20915 Y. kja L. kja: E. kai/ke:
K15d woman's head ornament
104:5 M22122 Y. kja L. kja: E. kai/ke:
scab, crust
118:5 M25950 Y. kja L. kja: E. kai/ke:
reed whistle
140:9 M31449 Y. kja L. kja: E. kai/ke:
K33e reeds, rushes, sedge
145:5 M34166 Y. kjaL. kja: E. kai/ke:
jiashaBuddhist monk's robe,
Sanskrit Kasaya
152:9 M36435 Y. kja L. kja: E. kai/ke:
K33f male pig, boar
196:5 M46763 Y. [kja] L. kja: E. kai/ke:
kind of wild goose
162:5 M38789 Y. [kje] L. kia E. kia
transcription character for Sanskrit ka,
ka. AlsoEkai
9:6 M00557 Y. kja L. kja:j E. kaij/ke:j
K879n beautiful

144
jia
jia
JM
jia
jia
jia
jia-
jia
jia
jia
jia
jia
jia
jia
jia
jia
jia
jia
jia
jia
jia
jia
Lexicon
37:4 M05867 Y. kja" L. kjaip E. ksip/keip
K630a be on both sides of; pinch, clasp
85:7 M17506a Y. [tsje"] L. tsiap E. tsep
K630m permeate, all around; also jia
62:7 Ml 1598 Y. [kja"] L. kj?"E. kait/keit
K504a kind of spear, jiajidiifficult
115:6 M25039a Y. [kjav] L. kjait E. koit/keit
K393u straw, grain stalk; also jie
181:6 M43452B Y. [kja"] L. kjait E. ksit/keit
K393r rob, misappropriate. See also ji6, xie
140:7 M31069 Y. kje~ L. kjiap E. kep
K630g pea or bean pod
167:7 M40450 Y. kjV L. kjiap E. kep
K6301 kind of sword; fire tongs
142:7 M33077 Y. [kje^l L. kjiap E. kep
jiadie kind of butterfly, Vanessa
xanthomelas
181:7 M43496 Y. kje" L. kjiap E. kep
K630h cheek
85:7 M17506b Y. [tsjev] L. tsiap E. tsep
K630m permeate, all around; also jia
145:6 M34240B Y. [kja~] L. kjaipE. ksip/keip
K675o lined garment, same as See also jie
145:7 M34288 Y. [kja"] L. kjaip Efkoip/keip
lined garment
163:7 M39433 Y. [kja"] L. kjaip E. ksip/keip
K630d place name
177:6 M42805B Y. [kja"] L. kjaip E. ksip/keip
K6751 leather chest armour. See also ge
9:9 M00835A Y. kja" L. kjai' E. kai'/kei'
K33c false, sham; borrow; suppose, if. See
alsojia
68:8 M13512 Y. kjav L. kjai' E. kai'/kei'
K34a kind of ritual wine vessel
75:13 M15680 Y. [kja"] L. kjai' E. kai'/kei'
K38d mountain catalpa
154:6 M36755B Y. kja" L. kjai' E. kai'/kei'
K38b surname. See also jia, gu
102:0 M21725 Y. kja" L. kjaip E. kaip/keip
K629a first Heavenly Stem; shell; armour
130:5 M29392 Y. kja" L. kjaip E. kaip/keip
shoulder blade
167:5 M40280 Y. [kjav] L. kjaip E. kaip/keip
shield, armour
9:9 M00835B Y. kjav L. kjar E. kaih/keih
K33c leave of absence. See also jia

Lexicon 145
jia
jia
jia
jia
jia
jia
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
9:13 M01163 Y. kjav L. kja:v E. kaih/ke:h
K38c price
38:10 M06602 Y. kjav L. kjar E. kaih/keih
K32e many (of a woman)
75:5 M14586 Y. kjav L. kjar E. kaih/k£ih
frame, shelf, rack, stand
115:10 M25217 Y. kjax L. kjar E. kaih/ke:h
K32f sow grain; grain, crops
154:6 M36755C Y. [kjav] L. kjar E. kaih/ke:h
K38b evaluate, put a price on. See also gu, jiS.
187:5 M44667 Y. kjax L. kjar E. kaih/ke:h
K15e to yoke, harness; yoked carriage; drive a
chariot
138:11 M30600 Y. kjan L. kjam E. kain/kem
K480c difficult
169:4 M41248A Y. kjan L. kjam E. kain/kem
K191a between, among. See also jian, xian
169:4 M41249A Y. kjan L. kjam E.kain/kem
K191b vulgar form now used for R| in the
readings jian and jian
140:8 M31142 Y. kjan L. kjam E. kain/kem
Kl57n kind of coarse grass, Themeda gigantea
38:6 M06217 Y. kjan L. kjam E. kain/kem
Kl84a adulterous, treacherous, wicked
93:9 M20078 Y. [kjen] L. kian E. kian
bullock
177:3 M42714 Y. [kjen] L. kianE. kian
dried leather; Lijiar country in
the west in the Han period, Hyrkania.
Also E. khanh
177:9 M42934 Y. kjen L. kian E. kian
K249c bow and arrow case. Also E. gian'
98:9 M21557B Y. kjen L. kjian E. kjian
K1251H make pottery; distinguish; surname; now
read zhen
85:9 M17833 Y. tsjen L. tsian E. tsian
K245f wash; river name
86:9 M19184 Y. tsjen L. tsian E. tsian
K245g fry in shallow oil; simmer in water
32:8 M05210 Y. kjen L. kjian E. ken
K368c hard, firm
130:4 M29299 Y. kjen L. kjian E. ken
K240a shoulder
152:6 M36386 Y. [kjen] L. kjian E. ken
K239b large pig;three-year-old pig

146 Lexicon
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
ji&n
jian
jian
ji&n
85:15 M18557B Y. tsjen L. tsian E. tsen
K155s jianjian swiftly flowing. See also jian
91:8 M19849 Y. [tsjen] L. tsian E. tsen
same as
118:8 M26122 Y. tsjen L. tsian E. tsen
annotation, commentary; notepaper
177:17 M43089 Y. tsjen L. tsian E. tsen
saddle blanket
120:9 M27638 Y.kjam L. kjaim E. kgim/keim
K67li rope; tie up; seal
108:9 M23032A Y. kjam L. kjaim E. kaim/keim
K609a observe, inspect; superintend. See also
jian
42:3 M07480 Y. tsjem L. tsiam E. tsiam
pointed, tapering; point, tip; sharp
78:17 M16608 Y. tsjem L. tsiam E. tsiam
K620f annihilate
85:11 M18179A Y. tsjem L. tsiam E. tsiam
K61lf moisten, soak, imbue, influence. See
also jian
85:17 M18706 Y. tsjem L. tsiam E. tsiam
K620g moisten, enrich, benefit
86:12 M19379 Y. [tsjem] L. tsiam E. tsiam
K660m go out, be extinguished (of a fire)
12:8 M01483 Y. kjem L. kjiam E. kern
K627a combine; hold office concurrently
120:10 M27750 Y. kjem L. kjiam E. kem
fine silk woven with double threads
140:10 M31621 Y. [kjem] L. kjiam E. kem
K627b kind of reed
195:10 M46359 Y. kjem L. kjiam E. kem
kind of flat fish, rock fish, spiny-rayed
flounder. Also E. \em
64:9 M12315 Y. kjan" L. kjam' E. koin'/kein'
Kl85e select, choose
75:5 M14655 Y. kjan" L. kjam' E. ksin'/kein'
K185a distinguish, select
118:12 M26520 Y. kjan" L. kjam' E. ksin'/kem'
Kl9ld slip of bamboo, writing slip; select,
choose; simple
157:10 M37741 Y. kjen" L. kian' E. kian', kian'
K143f limp; lame
149:10 M35791 Y. [kjen"] L. kian' E. kian'
K143e stammer; speak frankly
64:9 M12319 Y. [tsjen"] L. tsian' E. tsian'
K245e cut off, clip

Lexicon 147
18:9 M02088 Y. tsjerT L. tsian' E. tsian'
K245j cut off, clip; scissors, same as
124:9 M28752 Y. tsjerT L. tsian' E. tsian'
K245i cut off, clip; completely
167:8 M40563B Y. [tsjerT] L. tsian' E. tsian'
Kl55j hoe, weeder. See also qia"n
190:9 M45516 Y. [tsjen"] L. tsian' E. tsian'
K245k cut the hair
118:7 M26059 Y. kjen" L. kjian' E. ken'
bamboo pipe for conveying water
120:13 M27944 Y. kjen" L. kjian' E. ken'
K1250a silk worm cocoon
145:19 M34740 Y. [kjen'] L. kjian' E. ken'
K1250b robe padded with silk floss
157:6 M37527A Y. [kjen"] L. kjian' E. ken'
K239c callus on the skin. See also yan
85:9 M17759 Y. kjanV L. kjaim' E. ksim'/keim'
K67lg reduce, decrease, subtract
197:10 M47564 Y. kjarrT L. kjaim' E. kaim'/keim'
alkaline, saline
75:13 M15684 Y. kjerrT L. kiam' E. kiam'
K6l3d label; restrain oneself; regulate; inspect
109:13 M23744 Y. kjenf L. kiam' E. kiam'
eyelid
9:13 M01190a Y. kjerrT L. kfiiairT E. giam'
K613e thrifty, frugal; also jian
109:12 M23702 Y. [kjanv] L. xjams E. k9inh/kemh
K191H spy on, watch. Also E. y^n a surname
169:4 M41248B Y. kjanv L. kja:nv E. k3Jnh/ke:nh
Kl9la space between, interval; sow discord.
See also jian, xian
169:4 M41249B Y. kjanv L. kja:nv E. ksinh/ke:nh
K191b vulgar form now used for PQ in the
readings jian and jian
85:12 M18253 Y. kjanv L. kjam^ E. kainh/ke:nh
K1911 ravine
149:9 M35724 Y. kjans L. kja:nx E. kainh/kemh
Kl85b remonstrate (with a superior), admonish
54:6 M09574 Y. kjenv L. kianv E. kianh
K249a establish, set up, erect
167:9 M40654 Y. [kjenv] L. kfiianv E. gian', gian'
K249i bolt, linch-pin; key. Also E. gian
130:9 M29708 Y. [kjenv] L. kfiians E. gianh
K249f tendon, sinew. Also E. kian.
9:9 M00875 Y. kjenv L. kfiianv E. gianh
K249g strong, healthy
jian
jian
jiSn
jian
jian
jian
jian
ji<m
jiSn
ji&n
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian

148 Lexicon
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
jian
9:4 M00410 Y. kjeiT L. kfiiarT E. gian'
item
118:9 M26193 Y. tsjeiT L. tsians E. tsianh
K245h arrow; kind of bamboo
85:15 M18557A Y. tsjerT L. tsianv E. tsianh
Kl55s gush; splash, splatter. Also E.tsenh. See
alsojian
149:8 M35654 Y. [tsjerT] L. tsfiiaiT E. dzian'
K155m glib, insincere. Also E. dzianh
157:8 M37608 Y. tsianv, tsjenv L. tsfiianv E. dzian'
Kl55o step on, tread; walk; come to
184:8 M44214 Y. tsjenv L. tsfiiatf E. dzian'
K155p farewell banquet. Also E. dzianh
154:8 M36826 Y. tsjenv L. tsfiiar E. dzianh
K155n base, lowly; cheap
147:0 M34796A Y. kjen^ L. kjianv E. kenh
K24la see; call on, meet; mark of the passive.
See also xian
140:13 M32143 Y. tsjenv L. tsianN E. tsenh
K477a grass, fodder; straw mat; recommend,
present
75:6 M14724 Y. [tsian^] L. tsfiian* E. dzenh
K432c to fence, fence in
85:6 M17362 Y. [tsjenv] L. tsfiian* E. dzenh
K432d repeat, a second time
140:6 M30951 Y. [tsjens] L. tsfiianN E. dzenh
K432b grass, fodder;
108:9 M23032B Y. kjanf L. kjainT E. kaimh/ke:mh
K609a mirror; inspector; inspectorate. See also
jian
167:14 M40988 Y. kjairf L. kja:mv E. kaimh/keimh
K609c mirror
75:14 M15745a Y. xjams L. xfija:mv E. Yaim'/Yzim'
K609g balustrade, banister; cage. Now also used
for kSn threshold
159:14 M38573 Y. xjamv L. xfija:m' E. Yaim'/Yeim'
prisoner carriage
137:14 M30571 Y. xjamv L. xfijairrf E. Yaimh/Y£Jmh
warship
18:13 M02228 Y. kjenT L. IdanT E. kiamh
K613i sword
9:13 M011905 Y. kjerrT L. kfiiam^ E. giam'
K613e thrifty, frugal; poor; alsojian
85:11 M18179B Y. tsjemv L. tsfiiamv E. dziam'
K6llf gradually, by degrees. See alsojian

Lexicon 149
9:12 M01128 Y. tsjerrf L. tsiairT E. tsemh
K6601 overstep one's authority, usurp
9:13 M01158 Y. kjarj L. kiarj E. kiarj
K7lOc stiff, numb
38:6 M06205 Y.kjarj L. kiarj E. kiarj
K7lla a surname
78:13 M16588 Y.kjarj L. kiarj E. kiarj
stiff (of a corpse)
102:14 M21961 Y.kjarj L. kiarj E. kiarj
K710h border, frontier
120:13 M27949 Y. [kjarj] L. kiarj E. kiarj
reins, halter
140:13 M32110 Y.kjarj L.kiarj E. kiarj
K710d ginger
41:8 M07438A Y. tsjarj L. tsiarj E. tsiarj
K727f take, bring, undertake, support; about to.
See also jiang
85:11 M18185 Y. tsjarj L. tsiarj E. tsiarj
K727v rice water; thick liquid, syrup
140:11 M31820A Y. [tsjarj] L. tsiarj E. tsiarj
K727x plant name, wild rice. See also jiang
142:11 M33530 Y. tsjarj L. tsiarj E. tsiarj
kind of cicada
85:3 M17140 Y. kjarj L. kjaiwrj E. kaiwrj/kceiwrj
Kl 172v river; the Yangtze River
151:3 M36247 Y. kjarj L. kjaiwrj E. kaiwrj/koeiwrj
cowpea
120:11 M278575 Y. [kjarf] L. kiarj' E. kiarj'
K713c cord for stringing cash; string of cash;
now pronounced qi&ng
145:11 M34545b Y. [kjarfl L. kiarj' E. kiarj'
K713d jiangbao straps for carrying babies
on the mother's back, now pronounced
qiangbao
37:11 M05997 Y. tsjarj" L. tsiarj'E. tsitrj'
K727u assist, encourage, same as
55:11 M09639 Y. tsjarf L. tsiarj' E. tsiarj'
assist, encourage
75:11 M15378 Y. tsjarj" L. tsiarj' E. tsiarj'
oar
94:11 M20637 Y. tsjarjv L. tsiarj'E. tsiar.'
assist, encourage, same as
140:11 M31820B Y. tsjarj L. tsiarj' E. tsiaij'
K727x a surname. See also jiang
149:10 M35824 Y. kjarj" L. kja:wrj' E. kaiwrj'/Kceiwrj'
Kll98a discuss, talk about, tell
jian
Jiang
Jiang
Jiang
Jiang
Jiang
Jiang
Jiang
Jiang
Jiang
Jiang
Jiang
Jiang
Jiang
Jiang
Jiang
Jiang
Jiang
Jiang
Jiang
Jiang

150 Lexicon
Jiang
j&ng
Jiang
Jiang
Jiang
Jiang
Jiang
Jiang
Jiang
Jiang
jiao
jiao
jiao
jiao
jiao
jiao
jiao
jiao
jiao
jiao
57:9 M09822C Y. kjarjv L. [kiaif] E. [kiarjh]
K713a stubbrtrn, unyielding. Y. and E. readings
from C. See also qiang, qi&ng
57:13 M09872C Y. kjaqv L.kiar/ E. kiarjh
K710e stiff, rigid. See also qiang, qi&ng
57:8 M09813 Y. [kjanv] L. kfiiarf E. giarjh
trap, snare
41:8 M07438B Y. tsjarf L. tsiarp E. tsianh
K727f lead (an army); general. See also jiang
164:11 M40011 Y. tsjarf L. tsiarp E. tsiarjh
K727y kind of sauce made from grains or beans;
sauce, pickle
22:4 M02605 Y. tsjanv L. tsfiiar/ E. driarf1
K729a carpenter, artisan
85:6 M17382 Y. kjarf L. kjaiwrf E. kaiwrjh/kceiwrjh
K1015d inundate, overflow the banks
120:6 M27449 Y. kjarjs L. kjaiwrf E. kaiwrjh/kceiwrjh
deep red, crimson
142:3 M32830Ba Y. kjarjv L. kjaiwrjv E. kaiwrjh/koe:wrjh
Kll72j rainbow, also gang. See also hong
170:6 M41620B Y. kjarf L. kjaiwr/ E. kaiwrjh/koeiwrjh
K1015a go down, fall, drop, descend. See also
xiang
8:4 M00291 Y. kjaw L. kjaiw E. kaiw/ke:w
Kll66a cross, intersect; associate with; mutual,
reciprocal
30:6 M03543A Y. kjaw L. kjaiw E. kaiw/kejw
Kll66g bird's cry; also E. ?aiw. See also y&o
66:7 M13212A Y. kjaw L. kjaiw E. kaiw/keiw
K1167H teach, instruct. See also jiao
130:11 M29841 Y. kjaw L. kjaiw E. kaiw/keiw
Kl069s glue. Also E. kaiwh to glue, paste
140:2 M30646B Y. [kjawl L. kjaiw E. kaiw/kejw
K992s qinjiao Gentiana macrophylla. See
also qiu
140:6 M30904 Y. kjaw L. kjaiw E. kaiw/keiw
Kl 1661 hay, straw; kind of plant; cable
142:6 M33009 Y. kjaw L. kjaiw E. kaiw/keiw
Kl 166m kind of dragon
163:6 M39392 Y. kjaw L. kjaiw E. kaiw/keiw
K1166n suburbs
195:6 M46127 Y. kjaw L. kjaiw E. kaiw/keiw
Kll66o shark
38:12 M06739 Y. kjew L. kiaw E. kiaw
tender; lovely; fragile, delicate; pamper;
squeamish

Lexicon 151
61:12 Ml 1201 Y. [kjew] L. kiaw E. kiaw
K11381 proud, haughty, arrogant
187:12 M45008 Y. kiaw L. kiaw E. kiaw
Kl I38o untamed horse; proud, arrogant
196:12 M47341 Y. [kjew] L. kiaw E. kiaw
Kll38n kind of pheasant. Also E. giaw
9:12 M01127B Y. tsjew L. tsiaw E. tsiaw
Kl I48c jiaoyab country of the pigmies.
See also jiao
30:12 M04306B Y. [tsjew] L. tsiaw E. tsiaw
Kl 148k jiaoshai descriptive of a cry of
mourning, distressed and broken. See
also jiao, jiu
75:8 M15029 Y. tsjew L. tsiaw E. tsiaw
Kl03lq pepper
86:8 M19119 Y. tsjew L. tsiaw E. tsiaw
K1148a roast, scorch
86:12 M19410 Y. tsjew L. tsiaw E. tsiaw
K1148b roast
140:12 M31937 Y. tsjew L. tsiaw E. tsiaw
Kl 148e various broadleaf plants; xiangjiao
banana
196:12 M47312 Y. [tsjewl L. tsiaw E. tsiaw
Kll48g jiaoliao wren
60:13 M10261A Y. [kjew] L. kjiaw E. kew
Kll62d seek; pry out. See also jiao
85:12 M18317 Y. [kjew] L. kjiaw E. kew
Kl 164c pour water on; water; irrigate
30:18 M04602a Y. tsjew' L. tsfiiak E. dziak
chew; also jue
9:6 M00570 Y. [kjaw~] L. kjaiw' E. kaiw'/keiw'
Kll66e beautiful, handsome
38:6 M06214A Y. kjaw~ L. kjaiw' E. kaiw'/keiw'
Kl I66f beautiful, handsome. See also xiao
64:20 M13041 Y. kjawv L. kjaiw' E. kaiw'/keiw'
K1038i disturb, upset; stir, mix
94:6 M20365 Y. kjaw" L. kjaiw' E. kaiw'/keiw'
K1166J cunning, crafty; injure; young dog;
strong; handsome
118:6 M25993 Y. kjaw" L. kjaiw' E. kaiw'/keiw'
bamboo cable
120:6 M27421 Y. kjaw" L. kjaiw' E. kaiw'/keiw'
Kll66k twist; wind; strangle; hang by the neck
167:6 M40346 Y. kjaw" L. kjaiw' E. kaiw'/keiw'
scissors, cut with scissors; ream, reamer.
Also E. kaiwh, Y. kjawv
jiao
jiao
jiao
jiao
jiao
jiao
jiao
jiao
jiao
jiao
jiao
jiao
jiao
jiao
jiao
jiao
ji&o
jiao
jiao
jiao

152
j&o
jiSo
ji&o
ji&o
ji&>
ji£o
jiSo
jiSo
ji£o
j&o
jiao
jiao
jiao
jiao
jiao
jiao
jiao
jiao
jiao
jiao
jiao
Lexicon
34:12 M12719 Y. [kjew~] L. kiaw' E. kiaw'
K1138J lift
111:12 M24015 Y. kiaw" L. kiaw' E. kiaw'
K11381 straighten; falsify, forge
18:11 M02164B Y. [tsjew~] L. tsiaw' E. tsiaw'
Kl I69b cut off, exterminate. See also chao
19:11 M02426B Y. [tsjew"] L. tsiaw' E. tsiaw'
K1169c to weary. See also chao
106:6 M22724 Y. kjew" L. kjiaw' E. kew'
Kl 166y bright and clear
106:13 M22792 Y. [kjewv] L. kjiaw' E. kew'
Kl 162b bright and clear
120:13 M27960B Y. kjew" L. kjiaw' E. kew'
K1258e pay, hand over, hand in. See also zhuo
35:9 M17867B Y. [tsjewv] L. tsiaw' E. tsew'
Kl092f low-lying; place name. See also jiu
130:9 M29712a Y. kjawv L. kiak E. kiak
K776g foot, leg; also jue
148:0 M35003a Y. kjaw" L. kja:wk E. kaiwk/koe:wk
K1225a horn; corner; also jue
56:7 M13212B Y. kjawv L. kja:wv E. kaiwh/ke:wh
Kl 167h teaching, instruction; doctrine. See also
jiao
75:6 M14713A Y. kjawx L. kjaiwN E. kaiwh/ke:wh
K11661 foot fetters; examine, compare. See also
xiao
116:5 M25470 Y. [kjawx] L. kjaiwx E. kaiwh/keiwh
Kl 114i excavated cellar, same as Also read
E. phaiwh in the same sense
116:7 M25516 Y. kjawv L. kja:wv E. kaiwh/ke:wh
K1039o cave, cellar
147:13 M34973B Y. kjawv L. kja:ws E. kaiwh/keiwh
Kl038f sleep. See also ju6
159:6 M38297A Y. kjawv L. kjawv E. kaiwh/keiwh
K1166b' compare. See also jue
164:7 M39868 Y. kjawv L. kjaiws E. kaiwh/keiwh
yeast, ferment
159:12 M38532 Y. kjewv L. kfiiawv E. giawh
sedan chair; also E. giaw
3:12 M01127A Y. [tsjewv] L. tsiawv E. tsiawh
Kll48c jiaojiao hasty, undignified; discerning,
understanding. See also jiao
S5:12 Ml8223 Y. [tsjewx] L. tsiawx E. tsiawh
K1148d exhaust, understand thoroughly
164:12 M40031 Y. tsjewv L. tsiawx E. tsiawh
Kl 148f ancient ritual of pledging a cup of wine at

Lexicon 153
jiao (continued)
jiac
jiac
jiac
jiac
jiac
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
ji6
jie
1) a capping ceremony or wedding; Daoist
ritual
164:18 M40104 Y. [tsjewv] L. tsiawv E. tsiawh
Kl 121h drain a cup, drink dry
30:12 M04306A Y. [tsjewv] L. tsfiiawv E. dziawh
Kll48k chew. See also jiaojiu
30:2 M03240 Y. kjewv L. kjiawx E. kewh
Kl064g shout; call
30:13 M04392 Y. [kjews] L. kjiawN E. kewh
Kll62c shout; cry, wail
60:13 M10261B Y. kjaw% [sic] L. kjiawv E. kewh
Kll62d narrow road; limit, boundary, frontier.
See also jiao
30:10 M04102b Y. tsje L. tsia E. tsia
K5n sigh; also jue
122:5 M28245b Y. tsje L. tsia E. tsia
K46h net for rabbits; also ju
9:9 M00855a Y. kjaj L. kjay E. ksij/key
K599b accompany; also xi6
170:9 M41755 Y. kjaj L. kjaij E. kaij/key
K599d step, stair, rank
106:4 M22699 Y. kjaj L. kjay E. ksij/key
K599a all
144:6 M34051 Y. kjaj L. kjay E. kaij/ke:j
K879o street, roadway
170:10 M4l783b Y. kjaj" L. kjayk E. kaijk/keyk
K855f to separate; partition; at a distance from;
colloquial pronunciation, also ge
64:9 M12389A Y. [kje"] L. kiat E. kiat, kiat
K3l3n raise, lift up; expose. See also qi.
120:6 M27398b Y. kje' L. kjiat E. ket
K393p form seed, bear fruit; also jie
115:6 M25039b Y. [kja"] L. kjait E. ksit/keit
K393u grain stalk, straw; also jia
104:15 M22601 Y. tsje" L. tsiat E. tset
boil, furuncle
64:8 M12280 Y. tsje" L. tsiap E. tsiap
K635e join, connect, make contact
75:15 M15817 Y. [tsr"] L. tsot E. tsit
K399g comb
181:6 M43452Ab Y. [xje'] L. xfijiatE. yet
Alternative reading for xie See also
jia
75:9 M15169A. Y. [kje'] L. kfiiat E. giat, giat
K3l3o commemorative pole over a grave. See
also qia

154
jfc
ji6
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
Lexicon
112:9 M24326 Y. kje' L.kfiiat E. giat, giat
K313q standing stone, monolith; stone tablet
117:9 M25803 Y. kje' L.kfiiat E. giat, giat
K3l3r use up, exhaust
9:9 M00836B Y. [kje'] L. kfiiat E. giat
K3l3p robust, martial; swift. See also ji
9:10 M00955 Y. kje' L.kfiiat E. giat
K284b hero
75:6 M14753 Y. [kje'] L. kfiiat E. giat
K284a hen-roost; the bad last ruler of the Xia
dynasty
62:10 M11639 Y. tsje' L. tsfiiat E. dzet
K310b cutoff
109:8 M23469 Y. tsje' L. tsiap E. tsiap
K636d eyelash; blink
64:8 M12216 Y. [tsje'] L. tsfiiap E. dziap
K636b victory; quick, nimble
149:6 M35440 Y. [khi"] L. khjit E. khjit
K393j to question, examine
19:6 M02338 Y. [khja"] L. khjait E. khsit/khe:t
K393x firmly, with all one's strength
145:6 M34240A Y. [kje"] L. kiap E. kiap
K675o collar. See also jia
123:9 M28537 Y. [kjev] L. kiat E. kiat
castrated ram; people subject to the
Xiongnu
149:3 M35234 Y. [kje"] L. kiat E. kiat, kiat
K300a denounce, expose
39:0 M06931 Y. [kje"] L. kiat E. kiat
K283a alone, solitary
64:6 Ml 1990 Y. [kje"] L. kjiat E. ket
K393n jieju clutch with difficulty; in
straitened circumstances. Also E. kjit
75:6 M14777 Y. [kje"] L. kjiat E. ket
K393o jiegfcng root of the balloonflower,
Platycodon grandiflorum; jiegao
well-sweep
85:12 M18231 Y. [kje"] L. kjiat E. ket
K279j pure, purify; clean
120:6 M27398a Y. kje" L. kjiat E. ket
K393p tie; knot; also jie
120:6 M27419A Y. kje" L. kjiatE. ket
K279d clear, pure, same as . See also xie
145:6 M34247 Y. [kje"] L. kjiat E. ket
K393q lift up the skirt in order to carry
something. Also E. kait

Lexicon 155
jie
jie
jie
jig
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
jie
JTn
118:9 M26243 Y. tsje" L. tsiat E. tset
K399e joint of bamboo; joint; juncture; degree,
rank; division, section; regulate,
moderate; rule, law; moral principles,
chastity; festival
19:5 M02316 Y. kje" L. kiap E. kiap
K642H rob, plunder
38:5 M061645 Y. tsz" L. tsz' E. tsi'
K554b elder sister (reading borrowed from );
also zT
38:5 M06172 Y. tsje" L. tsia' E. tsia'
elder sister
148:6 M35067A Y. kjajv L. kjay' E. kaij'/keij'
K86la untie, undo; analyze, explain; dispel,
dismiss. See also jie, xie
9:8 M00781 Y. tsje^ L. tsiaN E. tsiah
K798u borrow; lend. Also E. tsiajk borrow
140:14 M32242A Y. tSJ£v L. tsfmT E. dziah
K798b' straw mat on which offerings are placed;
to present, aid; rely on, depend on.
Seealsoji
9:2 M00359 Y. kjajv L. kjayv E. k9ijh/ke:jh
K327a lie between; shell; armour; upright
9:4 M00412 Y. [kjajv] L. kjaijv E. k3ijh/keijh
K327d great; good; man in armour; serving man
44:5 M07666 Y. kjaj^ L. kjaijv E. k3ijh/ke:jh
K510b reach, arrive at; set time, term
62:3 Ml 1548 Y. kjaf L. kja:jv E. k3ijh/k£ijh
K990a take precaution; warn against; monastic
discipline
102:4 M21775 Y. kjajv L. kjaijv E. k9ijh/keijh
K327e boundary
104:4 M22057 Y. kjajv L. kja:jv E. k3ijh/keijh
K327f itching sore, scabies
149:7 M35538 Y. kjajv L. kja:jv E. ksijh/keijh
K990c warn
53:13 M09510a Y. kjajv L. kja:jv E. kaijh/ke:jh
government building, office; also xie
140:4 M30715a Y. kjajv L. kja:jv E. kaijh/keyh
K327j mustard; also gai
148:6 M35067B Y. kjajv L. kjaijv E. kaijh/kejjh
K86la remove; idle, remiss; send under guard.
See also jie, xie
110:4 M23852A Y. kirj L. kisrj E. kirj
K369a pity, pitiable;reserved, dignified;
boastful. See also guan

156
JTn
JTn
JTn
JTn
jm
JTn
JTn
JTn
JTn
j'n
JTn
JTn
JTn
JTn
JTn
JTn
JTn
JTn
JTn
JTn
JTn
JTn
Lexicon
69:0 M13534 Y. kin L. kin E. kin
K443a axe; measure of weight, catty, pound
118:6 M25994 Y. kin L. kin E. kin
K445b muscle; tendon, sinew
50:0 M08771 Y. kin L. kin E. kin
K482a kerchief, headband, towel
85:6 M17396 Y. tsin L. tsin E. tsin
K38lg ford; moist
9:2 M00358 Y. kim L. kirn E. kim
K651a now; today
113:8 M24743A Y. kim L. kim E. kim
K655k control, restrain; restrain oneself, bear,
endure. See alsojin
120:4 M27299A Y. [kim] L. kim E. kim
K65lf sash. See alsojin
145:4 M34149 Y. kim L. kim E. kim
K65lg lapel; collar; front of a garment, bosom
145:13 M34647 Y. kim L. kim E. kim
K6551 overlap of a garment, lapel, same as
167:0 M40152 Y. kim L. kim E. kim
K652a metal; gold
113:7 M24713 Y. tsims L. tsim E. tsim
K661n halo, numinous aura. Also E. tsimh,
which accounts for the Y reading
9:14 M01234 Y. tsin" L. tsin' E. tsin'
to the utmost, all
167:8 M40569 Y. kim" L. kim' E. kim'
K652e brocade
49:6 M08758 Y. kin" L. kin' E. kin'
K444a nuptial wine cup
75:11 M15395 Y. kin" L. kin' E. kin'
hibiscus
140:8 M31207 Y. [kin"] L. kin' E. kin'
K480e violet (flower) used as a vegetable
149:11 M35900 Y. kin" L. kin' E. kin'
K480u careful, circumspect
120:8 M27603 Y. kin" L. kjin' E. kjin'
K368g tense, taut, tight; strict; stringent
9:11 M01048 Y. [kinv] L. kfiinv E. ginh
K480m only, merely, barely
32:11 M05427a Y. [kiiT] L. kfihr E. ginh
K480n plaster with mud; bury; also jin
78:11 M16551a Y. [kin*] L. kfmT E. ginh
K480o bury; starve to death; also jin
96:11 M21187 Y. kin" L. kfiinv E. ginh
K480p kind of precious stone

Lexicon 157
184:11 M44366 Y. [kins] L. kfiinv E. ginh
K480r famine
19:7 M02349B Y. kirf L. kjiajrjv E. kjiajqh
K831m strength, energy. See also jing.
According to Ding Shusheng, the reading
jin properly belongs to jfjf.
19:4 M02304 Y. [kinv] L. khr E. kinh
strength, energy
177:4 M42728 Y. [k«T] L. kinv E. ldnh
K443e breast strap of a bridle; stingy, grudging;
surname
162:4 M38752A Y. kinv L. kfiiiT E. gin'
K443g near, draw near to. See also jin below
162:4 M38752B Y. kinv L. kfiinx E. ginh
K443g be next to, close to. See also jin above
32:11 M05427b Y. [kinv] L. kfiinv E. ginh
K480n plaster with mud; also jln
78:11 M16551b Y. [kins] L. kfihr E. ginh
K480o starve to death; also jTn
147:11 M34952 Y. kinv L. kfmT E. ginh
K480q have audience with a superior
64:10 M12494 Y. [tsiiT] L. tsins E. tsinh
K378f insert; shake
72:6 M13898 Y. tsinv L. tsinv E. tsinh
K378a advance; ancient state in Shanxi
120:10 M27737 Y. tsins L. tsinv E. tsinh
K378g pale red
162:8 M38943 Y. tsinv L. tsinx E. tsinh
K379a advance, move forth; enter; present
108:9 M23029 Y. tsinv L. tsfiinv E. dzin'
K38la exhaust; entirely, complete, all
86:14 M19515 Y. sins L. sfmT E. zinh
K381c ashes. The phonetic leads us to expect E.
dzinh, which is consistent with the
modern reading. The reading E. zinh
(which is supported by the Zhongyuan
yin yun) may be from the southern dialect
of EMC
140:14 M32262 Y. [tsinv] L. sfiir E. zinh
K381d Arthraxon hispidus. For the E. reading
see
154:9 M36850 Y. sinv L. sfiinv E. zinh
K381f parting gift. For the E. reading see
154:14 M36956 Y. sinv L. sfiinvE. zinh
K38le farewell gift, same as
jTn
Jin
Jin
Jin
Jin
Jin
Jin
Jin
Jin
Jin
Jin
Jin
Jin
Jin
Jin
Jin
Jin
Jin

158 Lexicon
Jin
Jin
Jin
Jin
j'ng
j'ng
j'ng
j'ng
j'ng
j'ng
j'ng
j'ng
j'ng
j'ng
j'ng
j'ng
j«ng
j'ng
j'ng
j'ng
j'ng
113:8 M24743B Y. kinr L. kirrT E. kimh
K655k prohibit; prohibition; forbidden area;
detain, imprison. See also jln
30:13 M04364 Y. kiirr L. kfiinT E. gimh
K655m shut the mouth, keep silent; shut
120:4 M27299B Y. [kinr] L. kfiirrf E. gimh
K65lf single shroud. See also jrn
85:7 M17505 Y. tsirrT L. tsirrf E. tsimh
K66lm soak, steep; gradually
10:12 M01395 Y. kirj L. kiSrj E. kirj
K888a cautious, fearful
127:4 M28907b Y. kin L. kjaijrj E. ksijrj/keijrj
K808a to plough; also geng
73:3 M14283Ab Y. kirj L. kjaijrj E. kaijrj/keijrj
K745a change; watch of the night; also geng.
See also geng
115:4 M24954a Y. [kirj] L. kjaijrj E. kaijrj/keijrj
round-grained, non-glutinous rice; geng
115:7 M25075a Y. [kirj] L. kjaijrj E. kaijrj/keijrj
round-grained non-glutinous rice; also
geng. Same as
119:7 M26967a Y. kirj L. *ja;jrj E. kaijrj/keijrj
round-grained, non-glutinous rice; also
geng. Same as
140:7 M31052 Y. xsrj' L. xnjaijrj E. \3qq/\eijq
K831u stalk, stem
8:6 M00299 Y. kirj L. kiajrj E. kiajrj
K755a mound, hill; capital city
140:6 M30940 Y. kirj L. kiajrj E. kiajrj
K8081 thorn, briar
187:13 M45029 Y. kirj L. kiajrj E. kiajrj
K8l3g startle, alarm
195:8 M46257a Y. khirj' L.kfiiajrj E. giajrj
K755f whale; also qi'ng
70:7 M13658 Y. tsirj L. tsiajrj E. tsiajrj
K812v yak-tail banner on a feather-decked pole
72:8 M14000 Y. tsirj L. tsiajrj E. tsiajrj
K820a crystal; sparkling
109:8 M23438 Y. tsirj L. tsiajrj E. tsiajrj
eyeball
119:8 M26997 Y. tsirj L. tsiajrj E. tsiajrj
K8l2g' fine and pure; essence; sperm
140:8 M31136 Y. tsirj L. tsiajrj E. tsiajrj
K812f leek blossom; lush, luxuriant
142:8 M33203B Y. [tsirj] L. tsiajrj E. tsiajrj
K812e' JTnglie cricket. See also qing

Lexicon 159
j'ng
j'ng
j'ng
jing
j'ng
j'ng
j'ng
jfng
j'ng
j'ng
j'ng
j'ng
j'ng
jing
jing
jing
jing
jing
jing
jing
jing
jing
208:8 M48454 Y. [tsirj] L. tsiajrj E. tsiajrj
qujing ;hrew
85:7 M17526 Y. kirj L. kjiajrj E. kejrj
K831 g flow through, communicate; river name
120:7 M27508A Y. kin. L. kjiajrj E. kejrj
K83lc warp; pass through; plan, direct; rule,
norm; standard; classic. See also jing
9:13 M01187 Y. kirf L. kiajrj' E. kiajrj'
K8l3h warn
72:8 M13983 Y.kirf L. kiajrj' E. kiajrj'
K755d bright; reflection, image; view, scenery
149:13 M36009 Y. kirjv L. kiajrj' E. kiajrj'
K8l3j warn; alert, vigilant; police
181:7 M43515 Y. kirjv L. kjiajrj' E. kjiajrj'
K831n neck. Also E. gjiajrj
61:12 M11256 Y. [kirf] L. kyajrj' E. kwiajrj'
K755h awaken
96:12 M21246 Y. kirf L. kyajrj' E. kwiajrj'
lustre of jade
7:2 M00258 Y. tsirf L. tsiajrj' E. tsiajrj'
K819a well
116:4 M25433 Y. tsirf L. tsfiiajrjv E. dziajrj'
K8l9h trap, pitfall
170:4 M41574 Y. [tsirf ] L. tsfiiajrf E. dziajrj'
K8191 pit, hole
18:7 M01990 Y. [kirjv] L. kjiajrj' E. kejrj'
K831e cut the throat
32:11 M05409 Y. kirf L. kiajrj' E. kiajrj'
K752b boundary, border
66:9 M13303 Y. kirf L. kiajrjv E. kiajrjh
K813a respect; respectfully
117:6 M25757 Y. kirf L. kiajtf E. kiajrjh
K752a in the end, finally
167:11 M40812 Y. kirjv L. kiajrf E. kiajnh
K752c mirror
19:7 M02349A Y. kirf L. kjiajrjv E. kjiajrjh
K83lm strong. See also jin
117:15 M25831 Y. kirf L. kfiiajrf E. giajrjh
K754a contend, struggle; zealous
117:8 M25791 Y. [tsiif] L. tsfiiajtf E. dziajrj'
K8lle quiet, subdued, same as:
174:5 M42570 Y. tsirjv L. tsfiiajrjv E. dziajrj'
K8l2m' quiet, calm, tranquil
174:7 M42575 Y. [tsirf ] L. tsfiiajrjv E. dziajrj'
K812s' apply cosmetics. Also E. dziajrjh

160 Lexicon
174:8 M42578 Y. tsirf L. tsfiiajrjv E. dziajrj'
K812n' quiet, tranquil, serene
85:8 M17669 Y. tsirjv L. tsfiiajrj- E. dziajrjh
K811d clean; clear, pure
60:7 M10118 Y. kirp L.kjiajrp E. kejrjh
K831f way across; footpath; directly,
straightaway; diameter
120:7 M27508B Y. kirf L. kjiajrf E. kejrjh
K831c set up a warp; weave. See also jlng
162:7 M38883 Y. [kirjx] L. kjiajrf E. kejrjh
K83H same as
130:7 M29504 Y. xiif L. xfijiajrj' E. yejrj'
K831k shin. AlsoE. yejr/1
32:5 M04985 Y. kyrj L.kjyajrj E. kwejrj
K842c outlying area, wilderness
63:5 Ml 1728 Y. kyrj L. kjyajrj E. kwejrj
K842d bolt of a door, bar of a gate; rod for lifting
a cauldron; weapon rack on a chariot
187:5 M44637 Y. [kyrj] L. kjyajrj E. kwejrj
K842e jiongjiong sturdy (horse)
86:5 M18956 Y. [kyrf] L. kjyajrj' E. kwejrj'
bright
13:5 M01528 Y. kyrf L.kyajrj' E.kwiajrj'
K763a bright; proper name
85:5 M17265 Y. [kyrf] L. kyajrj' E. kwiajrj'
K842h distant
120:5 M27375 Y. [khyrf] L. khjyajn' E. khwejrj'
K842f unlined garment of hemp
145:10 M34499 Y. [khyrjv] L. khjyajrj' E. khwejrj'
K809c unlined garment of hemp
162:5 M38786 Y. xyrf L. xfijyajrf E. vwejrj'
distant, remote
116:7 M25519a Y. kyn" L. kfiynx E. gwin'
K4591 distressed, in straits; also jun
191:16 M45659 Y. kiw L. kiw E. kuw
lot (for deciding by chance)
196:2 M46648 Y. kiw L. kiw E. kuw
K992n turtledove
116:2 M25409b Y. kiwv L. kiwv E. kuwh
K992o penetrate, probe; to the end; also jiu
30:9 M03892 Y. tsiw L. tsiw E. tsuw
K1092e jiujiu chirping of birds, babbling of a
small child
30:12 M04306C Y. [tsiw] L. tsiwE. tsuw
Kll48k jiujiu twitter. Same as See also jiao,
jiao
jing
jing
jing
jing
jing
jing
jion
jion
jion,
jidnj
ji6n]
jidnj
ji6n]
ji6n:
jidnj
ji6n]
jiu
jiu
jiu
jiu
jiu

Lexicon 161
64:9 M12385 Y. tsiw L. tsiw E. tsuw
K1092g gather, clutch
85:9 M17867A Y. tsiw L. tsiw E. tsuw
Kl092f river name. See also jiao
2:1 M00068 Y. [kiw] L. kjiwE. kjiw
K1064a twist, now written Also E. kuw
120:2 M27227B Y. [kiw] L.kjiw E.kjiw
K10645 twist together, entangle; bring together;
same as i|. See also jiu
75:11 M15445 Y. khiw' [sic] L.kjiw E.kjiw
K1069H down-curving (branch); twist
4:2 M00118 Y. kiw" L. kiw' E. kuw'
K993a for a long time
5:1 M00167 Y. kiw" L. kiw' E. kuw'
K992a nine
86:3 M18872 Y. kiw" L. kiw' E. kuw'
K993b cauterize; moxibustion
96:3 M20846 Y. kiw" L. kiw' E. kuw'
K993c kind of precious stone
179:0 M43236 Y. kiw" L. kiw' E. kuw'
Kl065a Allium, leek, onion; fragrant-flowered
garlic; (Chinese) chives
164:3 M39776 Y. tsiw" L. tsiw' E. tsuw'
K1096k alcoholic drink; wine; liquor
120:2 M27227A Y. kiw" L.kjiw' E.kjiw'
Kl064b examine, rectify. See also jiu
156:2 M37038 Y. [kiw"l L. kjiw' E. kjiw'
K1064d jiujiuvaliant
30:5 M03493 Y. kiw- L. kiwv E. kuwh
K1068a fault, blame
53:11 M09453 Y. kiwv L. kiwv E. kuwh
K987g stable
66:7 M13221 Y. kiws L. kiwN E. kuwh
Kl066m rescue, save
104:3 M22033 Y. kiw" L. kiw^ E. kuwh
K993d chronic illness; remorse
116:2 M25409a Y. kiwv L. kiwv E. kuwh
K992o penetrate, probe; to the end; also jiu
134:0 M30173 Y. kiw^ L. kfiiwx E. guw'
K1067a mortar
134:7 M30208 Y. kiwv L. kfiiwv E. guw'
Kl067b mother's brother, maternal uncle;
husband's father, father-in-law;
(colloquial) husband's brother
75:5 M14650 Y. kiwv L. kfiiwv E. guwh
K993g coffin
JiQ
jiu
jiu
jiu
jiu
jiu
jiu
jiu
jiu
jiu
jiu
jiu
jiu
jiu
jiu
jiu
jiu
jiu
jiu
jiu
jiu

162
jiu
jiu
jiu
jiu
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
JQ
ju
ju
Lexicon
134:12 M30249 Y. kiwv L. kfiiwv E. guwh
K1067c old
9:12 M01115 Y. [tsiw^] L. tsiw* E. tsuwh
hire, rent
43:9 M07599 Y. tsiwv L. tsfiiwv E. dzuwh
K1093a go to, approach; accomplish
196:12 M47345 Y. tsiwv L. tsfiiwv E. dzuwh
vulture
122:5 M28245a Y. tsje L. tsia E. tsia
K46h net for rabbits; also jie
44:5 M07663 Y. ky L. ki3/ky3 E. kiS
K49c' sit down; dwell in; rest
64:8 M12204 Y. [ky] L. kis/kyo E. kiS
K49o' jieju $ $1. Now used for jii occupy,
seize; rely on
96:8 M21047 Y. ky L. kiS/kys E. kia
K49p' girdle pendant
130:8 M29627 Y. [ky] L. ki3/ky3 E. kiS
K49u' dried meat of birds. Also E. giS
145:8 M34382 Y. ky L. ki$/ky3 E. kiS
K49q' overlap of a garment, full front of a
Chinese gown; jflju wide, ample
159:0 M38172B Y. ky L. kia/kya E. ki§
K74a chariot, carriage; also che
1:4 M00029B Y. [tsy] L. tsia/tsyS E. tsis
K46a Shrjing particle. See also qi6
140:5 M30813B Y. tsy L. tsia/tsya E. tsiS
K46t straw as the bottom of a shoe, straw
wrapping See also cha, ju. qu
142:5 M32963A Y. [tsy] L. tsiS/tsys E. tsia
K46m jiju centipede. See also qu
94:5 M20347 Y. tsy L. tshi3/tshy9 E. ts'Hs
K46o monkey
104:5 M22106 Y. tsy L. tshiS/tshy3 E. ts^s
K46p deep-rooted ulcer
85:5 M17238B Y. tsy L. tshi§/tshyS E. ts'Ha
K46k river name; su™amf>i stop, prevent. Also
E. tsia in juqu Xiongnu title and
surname. See also ju, ju
172:5 M42001 Y. [tshvl L. tshi§/tshy3 E. ts^a
K46r jujiu kind of aquatic bird, osprey,
fishhawk
9:8 M00724 Y. ky L. kya E. kuS
K121d both, together, all

Lexicon 163
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
64:5 Ml 1963 Y. ky L. kys E. kus
KlOSp grasp; restrain; restrict, limit; arrest,
detain
104:5 M22120 Y. [ky] L. ky§ E. kua
K108q julyu .„ crooked spine, hunchback
187:5 M44663 Y. ky L. kya E. kua
K108r colt
64:8 M12290 Y. [ky"] L. kiwk E. kuwk
KlOlVc grasp with both hands, double handful
157:8 M37627 Y. ky" L. kiwk E. kuwk
K1017g football. AlsoE. guwk
177:8 M42892a Y. [kyv] L. kiwk E. kuwk
KlOl7h football; nourish, rear, bring up; also ju
177:9 M42931 Y. [kyv] L. kiwk E. kuwk
K1017J exhaust, go to the extreme
196:9 M47144 Y. [?] L. kyjajk E. kwejk
K860b shrike
20:6 M02523 Y. [ky"] L. kiwk E. kuwk
K1017a fistful
118:17 M26779 Y. [ky"] L. kiwk E. kuwk
Kl017k go to an extreme, utmost, exhaust,
same as
140:8 M31153 Y. kyv L. kiwk E. kuwk
K1017e Chrysanthemum
140:17 M32487 Y. [kyv] L. kiwkj E. kuwk
Kl017f Chrysanthemum, same as
177:8 M42892b Y. [kyv] L. kiwk t. kuwk
K1017H football; also ju
159:6 M38289 Y. [ky"] L. kywk E. kuawk
Kll82t large wagon
9:7 M00648 Y. [ky] L. kfiywk E. guawk
jucu narrow, cramped, short
44:4 M07653 Y. ky', ky" L. kfiywk E. guawk
Kl2l4a bend, curl up; bent, compressed; office,
bureau; chessboard; game; situation
157:7 M37548 Y. [ky] L. kfiywk E. guawk
K12l4b bent, cramped
75:12 M15551 Y. [ky"] L. kjyt E. kjwit
K507g tangerine, Citrus reticulata
120:12 M27900A Y. [ky"] L. kjyt E. kjwit
K507H well rope. See also yu
75:5 M14631 Y. [ky"] L. kia'/kya E. kia'
K95f kind of willow; gutter
75:17 M15883 Y. ky" L. kia'/kya E. kia'
Zelkova

164
JO
jfi
ju
ju
jfi
JO
jfi
• v
JU
ju
ju
ju
ju
jfl
ju
ju
ju
ju
j*
ju
ju
Lexicon
118:7 M26051 Y. [kyv] L. kia'/kys E. ki$'
K76j round basket; measure of grain
118:17 M26777B Y. [ky~] L. ki3'/ky5 E. kiS'
K803j round basket. See also qu
134:10 M30238 Y. ky" L. kio'/kyS E. ki3'
K75a lift, raise; all
140:7 M31046 Y. ky" L. ki3'/ky§ E. Ida'
K761 plant name; place name
75:5 M14588A Y. [kyv] L. kya'^ kus'
KlOSo Hovenia dulcis; juyua"n : citron,
Citrus medica. See also g6u, gOu
111:4 M23947 Y. kyv L. kya' E. ku3'
K95c carpenter's square; rules, regulations
140:9 M31340 Y. [kyv] L. ky3' E. kua'
K99f surname; used for $i carpenter's square
140:10 M31566 Y. [kyv] L. ky§' E. ku§'
betel pepper
157:9 M37713 Y. [ky~] L. kya' E. kua'
K99g juju walking alone, solitary. Also
E. khu3'
140:5 M30813D Y. [tsyv] L. tsy3' E. tsis'
K46t straw used in the sole of a shoe. See also
cha, ju, qu
30:5 M03476 Y. tsy~ L. tsfiiaVtsfiy^ E. das'
K46u juju€ chew; mull over, ruminate
85:5 M17238A Y. [tsyv] L. tsfiiSVtsfiy^ E. daa'
K46k stop, prevent. See also ju, ju
167:5 M40297A Y. [tSUvl L. tsfi39Vtsfiu9v E. d^is'
K46a' juyu ill-fitting, discordant
9:8 M00790 Y. [ky^J L. ki^/ky^ E. ki§h
K49n' arrogant
64:13 M12839 Y. ky* L. ki3v/ky3v E. kiSh
K803f seize, occupy; rely on, depend on;
according to
157:8 M37642 Y. kyx L. ki3s/kySs E. ki§h
K49r' squat
167:8 M40505 Y. kyv L. ki9N/ky9N E. ki9h
K49s' saw; to saw
167:13 M40957C Y. [kyv] L. ki§N/ky5v E. kiah
K803g musical instrument. See also qu and ju
below
48:2 M08722 Y. kyv L. kfiiSVkfiy^ E. gia'
K95a great, huge, gigantic
64:5 M11957 Y. kyv L. kfii5v/kfiySv E. gia'
K95i oppose, resist

Lexicon 165
JU
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
ju
115:5 M25002 Y. kyv L. kfiiSv/kfiy3x E. gia'
K95j black millet
119:5 M26889 Y. [kyv] L. kfii§v/kfiy9v E. gia'
K95n ju'nyu rice cake made with honey
141:8 M32734 Y. [kyv] L. kfii^/kfiy^ E. gis'
K78e drum or bell frame
149:5 M35370 Y. kyv L. kfii3s/kfiy9v E. gia'
K95p rhetorical interrogative'how?1 AlsoE.
giah
157:5 M37481 Y. kys L. kfii3v/kfiy9N E. gi§'
K95q spur of a cock; be at a distance from
167:5 M40286 Y. [kyN] L. kfii§v/kfiy3v E. giS'
K95r hard iron; great, huge
167:13 M40957B Y. [kyv] L. kfii9x/kfiy9N E. gia'
K803g drum or bell frame. See also ju above
andqu
187:5 M44658 Y. [l~Nl L.kfii^/kfiy^ E. gia'
juxu offspring of a stallion and a
she-ass, ninny
162:13 M39161 Y. [kyv] L. kfii^/kfiy^ E. gi3h
K803c hurriedly, hastily
164:13 M40055 Y. [kyv] L. kfii3v/kfiy3s E. gi3h
subscription feast. Also E. giak
30:2 M03234C Y. kyv L. ky§v E. ku3h
KlOSa sentence. See also gou, gou
44:14 M07811 Y. kyv L. ky§N E. kush
Kl23q sandal, straw shoe
86:5 M18949 Y. kys L. ky§v E. ku§h
torch
109:13 M23747A Y. kys L. ky§v E. ku5h
K96c frightened glance; anxious, careful;
flurried. See also qu
116:11 M25628 Y. [kyv] L. kfiy^ E. gu§'
Kl23o in need, impoverished
12:6 M01473 Y. kyv L. kfiy3v E. gu5h
K12la provide, furnish; implement, utensil;
complete
61:18 M11488 Y. kyv L. kfiy9v E. guoh
K96i fear
85:5 M17238C Y. tsv^L. tsiSVtsy§N E. tsi§h
K46k juriimarshy ground. See also ju,
ju
157:0 M37365B Y. [tsyv] L. tsy5v E. tsuah
Kl2l9a add to, supplement, make good. See
also zu

166 Lexicon
ju
ju
juan
juan
juan
juan
juan
juan
juSn
juan
juan
juan
juan
juan
juan
juan
juan
juan
juan
juan
juan
128:8 M29093 Y. tsyv L. tsfiy§v E. dzus'
Kl3lk amass, collect, bring together. Also E.
dzuSh
18:12 M02218b Y. kiv L. kfiiajk E. giajk
K8031 intense, severe; play; also ji
38:7 M06321 Y. kqen L. ?jyan E.Tjwian
beautiful, graceful
64:7 M12150 Y. qen' L.jyan E.jwian
K228g abandon, relinquish; contribute, aid
167:13 M40924 Y. tsqen L. tsyan E. tswian
K235e chisel; engrave
85:7 M17541 Y. kqen L. kjyan E. kwen
K228H small (stream); cleanse
142:17 M33873 Y. kqen L. kjyan E. kwen
K1250f millipede; cleanse; remit taxes
196:7 M46924 Y. kuen L. kjyan E. kwen
dujuancuckoo; azalea
26:6 M02860A Y. kqen L. kyan' E. kwian'
K226a roll up. See also juan
64:8 M12208A Y. kqen' L. kyan' E. kwian'
roll up. Same as ^. See also quan
26:6 M02860B Y. [kqenv] L. kyanv E. kwianh
K226a scroll. See also juSn
109:6 M23311 Y. kqenv L. kyanv E. kwianh
K226c be fond of, attached to; family, dependent
109:8 M23447 Y. [kqenv] L. kyans E. kwianh
K226b See ^
94:7 M20426 Y. kqenv L. kjyanv E. kjwianh
K228e reserved, cautious
120:7 M27470 Y. kqenv, kjenN L. kjyanv E. kjwianh
K228f silk fabric; thin, tough silk
163:9 M39523 Y. [kqens] L. kjyanv E. kjwianh
place name
109:7 M23376 Y. [kqenv] L. kjyanv E. kwenh
K2281 juanjuan glance at, look askance
122:13 M28386 Y. [kqenv] L. kjyanv E. kwenh
net, same as
122:7 M28277 Y. kqenv L. kjyanv E. kwenh
net. Also E. kwen' hang up, suspend
31:8 M04789A Y. kqenv L. kfiyan% E. guan'
K226k pen for animals. See also juan below and
quan
31:8 M04789B Y. kqenv L. kfiyanv E. guanh
K226k place name. See also juan above and
quan

juan
juan
jue
jue
jue
jue
jue
jue
jue
jue
jue
jue
jue
jue
jue
jue
jue
jue
jue
jue
jue
Lexicon 167
9:8 M00788 Y. kqeiT L. kfiyarT E. gwianh
K226I tired, weary
172:5 M41996 Y. [tsuens] L. tsfiyanN E. dzwian'
K235a fat, rich (meat)
30:10 M04102a Y. tsje L. tsia E. tsia
K5n sigh; also jie
64:12 M12676A Y. [ki^] L. kyat E. kuat
K3011 dig up; stick out. See also gui, jue
44:15 M07812 Y. [kjew") L. kiak E. kiak
Kll38r straw sandal
130:9 M29712b Y. kjaw" L. kiak E. kiak
K776g foot; leg; also jiao
157:12 M37887B Y. [kjew"] L. kiak E. kiak
K1138q straw sandal. See also qiao
87:13 M19711 Y. tsjew" L. tsiak E. tsiak
Kl 121a ancient wine vessel with three legs and a
loop handle; title of honour, rank of
nobility; soarrow, small bird, same as
qiao, que
30:18 M04602b Y. tsjew' L. tsfiiak E. dziak
chew; also jiao
86:18 M19614 Y. [tsjew'] L. tsfiiak E. dziak
K1121e torch
64:20 M13043 Y. [kyawv] L. kyak E. kuak
K778b seize
109:15 M23792 Y. [kqew"] L. kyak E. kuak
K778a look, anxiously
167:20 M41092 Y. [kuew~ (?)] L. kyak E. kuak
pick, pick-axe
157:20 M38025 Y. [khqewv(?)] L. khyak E. khuak
K778d wobble
75:7 M14813 Y. kjawv L. kjaiwk E. kaiwk/kceiwk
K1225d square beam, rafter
75:10 M152835 Y. [kjaw"] L. kjaiwk E. kaiwk/koeiwk
footbridge; toll; monopoly; also que
96:5 M20926 Y. [kjawv] L. kjaiwk E. kaiwk/koeiwk
pair of jades, same as Kl226d
147:13 M34973A Y. kjawv L. kjaiwk E. kaiwk/koeiwk
Kl038f realize, become aware. See also jiao
148:0 M35003b Y. kjaw" L. kjaiwk E. kaiwk/koeiwk
K1225a horn; corner; also jiao
159:6 M38297B Y. [kjaw"] L. kjaiwk E. kaiwk/kceiwk
Kl I66b' bars on the top of the sides of a carriage
box; compete, contest. See also jiao
9:8 M00769 Y. [ky] L. kfiyt E. gut
K496r stubborn

168
jue
jue
jue
jue
jue
jue
jue
jue
jue
jue
jue
jue
jue
jue
jue
jue
jue
jue
jue
jun
jun
Lexicon
46:8 M08185 Y. [ky] L. kfiyt E. gut
rise abruptly
27:10 M02992 Y. [kq£V] L. kyat E. kuat
K30lc his, her, its
140:12 M32001 Y. kqe" L. kyat E. kuat
K301d fern, bracken
157:12 M37880A Y. [kqe^] L. kyat E. kuat
K30lg lose one's footing, fall; suffer a setback.
See also gui
195:12 M46501B Y. [kqe"l L. kyat E. kuat
juezhSu bitterling, Acheilognathus
moriokae. See also gui
64:8 M12264 Y. [kqe'] L. kfiyat E. guat
K496s dig out. Also E. gut
64:12 M12676B Y. kqe' L. kfiyat E. guat
K301i dig out. See also jue, gui
75:12 M15556 Y. [kue'] L. kfiyat E. guat
K301j post, stake, peg
140:12 M31976A Y. [tsqe"] L. tsyat E. tswiat
K296b bundle of grass used in a ritual. See also
zui
120:6 M27407 Y. tsqe' L. tsfiyat E. dzwiat
K296a cut off; exhausted, used up; extremely,
very
64:4 M11873 Y. [qev] L. Tjyat E. ?wet
K3l2j pull out, gouge out; pick out, choose
85:4 M17174 Y. kqe" L. kjyat E. kwet
K312b open a passage for a stream; decide
96:4 M20869 Y. kqe" L. kjyat E. kwet
K312c semiannular jade pendant
148:4 M35018 Y. [kqe~] L. kjyat E. kwet
dissatisfied
148:15 M35193 Y. [kqe"] L. kjyat E. kwet
K1256f buckle
149:4 M35272 Y. kqe" L. kjyat E. kwet
K312e words of farewell
149:12 M35956 Y. kqe" L. kjyat E. kwet
K5071 deceptive, crafty; cheat, swindle
167:12 M40882 Y. [kqe~] L. kjyat E. kwet
K507n lock on a box or trunk; buckle
196:4 M46722 Y. kqe" L. kjyat E. kwet
K3l2g shrike
30:4 M03323 Y. kyn L. kyn E. kun
K459a ruler, lord
107:9 M22888 Y. kyn L. kyn E. kun
chapped skin

Lexicon 169
jun
jun
jun
jun
jun
jun
jun
jun
jun
jun
jun
jun
jun
jun
jun
jun
jun
jun
jun
jun
jun
159:2 M38179 Y. kyn L. kyn E. kun
K458a army
198:5 M47612 Y. [kyn] L. kyn E. kwin
K485e fallow-deer
198:7 M47639 Y. kyn L. kyn E. kwin
K4591 fallow-deer
198:8 M47660 Y. kyn L. kyn E. kwin
K485d fallow-deer
32:4 M04916 Y. kyn L. kjyn E. kjwin
K39lc equal, even; all
145:4 M34150 Y. [kyn] L. kjyn E. kjwin
K391d soldier's uniform
167:4 M40238 Y. kyn L. kjyn E. kjwin
K391e potter's wheel; 30 jln Jv weight
116:7 M25519b Y. kyn" L. kfiynx E. gwin'
K4591 distressed, in straits. Usually read jidng.
64:16 M12949 Y. [kynN] L. kyn" E. kunh
K485g gather, harvest
163:7 M39436 Y. kynv L. kfiynv E. gunh
K459g administrative region; commandery,
prefecture
118:8 M26147 Y. [kynv] L. kfiynv E. gwin'
K485b kind of bamboo
140:8 M31156 Y. [kynv] L. kfiynv E. gwin'
K485c mushroom
9:7 M00674 Y. tsynx L. tsyn" E. tswinh
K468t of outstanding talent, eminent; handsome
9:13 M01175 Y. [tsyns] L. tsynv E. tswinh
K235d Same as'
102:7 M21865 Y. [tsynx] L. tsynv E. tswinh
K468v inspector of fields
184:7 M44174 Y. [tsynv] L. tsynx E. tswinh
K468x left-overs of a meal
187:7 M44775 Y. tsynx L. tsynv E. tswinh
K468y fine horse; swift
117:7 M25773 Y. [tshyn] L. tshyn E. tshwin
K468q cease, retire; complete, finish
46:7 M08116 Y. synv L. synv E. swinh
K468z high; precipitous; severe, stern
85:7 M17460 Y. synv L. synv E. swinh
K468a' ladle out; deep; dig out, deepen, dredge
85:14 M18524 Y. [synv] L. synv E. swinh
K466b deep; deepen, dredge

170 Lexicon
kai
kai
kai
kai
kai
kai
kai
kai
kai
kai
kai
kai
kai
kan
kan
kan
kan
t
kan
kan
kan
kan
169:4 M41233 Y. khaj L. khaj E. k^j
K541a to open
64:9 M12383 Y. khjaj L. khia:iE. k^y/k^y
K599h wipe; used for qifc
16:10 M01790 Y. khaf L. khaj' E. khsj'
K548b triumphal music; triumphant, glad
32:10 M05326 Y. khaf L. khaj' E. khaj'
K548d high and dry (land)
61:10 M11015 Y. [khaf] L. khaj'E. khaj'
K548c joy, triumph, same as
167:10 M40735 Y. khaf L. khaj' E. kh9j'
K548e armour
169:10 M41451 Y. [khaf] L. khaj' E. khsj'
to open
61:11 M11122a Y. khajv L. khajv E. khsjh
K515n disappointed, sad; indignant; deeply
moved; generous; also kai
75:9 M15185 Y. khjaf L. khjaij' E. k^ij'/k^j'
K599e model, pattern; regular (script)
167:9 M40599 Y. [khjajv] L. khja:j' E. k^ij'/k^ij'
good quality iron; also E. ksij/keij
61:10 M11029B Y. [khajv] L. khajN E. khgjh
K517d sigh; anger. See also xi
61:11 M11122b Y. khajv L. khajx E. khajh
K515n alternative reading, see k&i
76:6 M16061a Y. [khajv] L. khajs E. khajh
K937scoueh, reading pronunciation, see kesou
18:3 M01865 Y. kftan L. khan E. khan
Kl39n cut, shave; cut (a printing block), print
109:4 M23196A Y. khan L. khan E. khan
Kl42a look at; watch, guard, take care of. See
also kan
32:9 M05266 Y. kham L. kham E. kh9m/kham
K658p bear; able to bear, be capable of
62:9 Ml 1616 Y. kham L. kham E. kh9m/kham
K658q conquer, suppress (rebellion)
212:6 M48839 Y. kham L. kham E. kh9m/kham
room at the foot of a pagoda; shrine,
niche
19:9 M02393a Y. khamv L. khanT E. khomh/khamh
compare, collate; also kan
9:6 M00577 Y. k*W L. khan' E. khan'
Kl4la straightforward, bold, fervent
32:4 M04928 Y. khanT L. kham' E. kh9m'/kham'
K624d pit;kank£ bumpy

Lexicon 171
kan
kan
kan
kan
kan
kan
kan
kan
kan
kan
kan
kang
kang
kang
kang
king
kang
kang
kang
32:8 M05186 Y. khanT L. kham' E. k^m'/k^m'
K672e pit, same as
159:13 M38550 Y. [kharrTl L. kham' E. khsm'/kham'
kSnkS \ bumpy, rough
181:9 M43598 Y. [khanf 1 L. kham' E. khsm'/kham'
K671m kSnhan emaciated
76:8 M16111 Y. [xairf] L. xfianr E. yam'/yam'
K672f insufficient, wanting; crave
109:4 M23196B Y. kW L. khanN E. khanh
K142a look at; read; look upon, regard. See
alsokan
144:3 M34034 Y. [khanv] L. khanN E. khanh
Kl39p joy; rejoice
19:9 M02393b Y. khanT L. kharrT E. kh3mh/khamh
compare, collate; also kan.
109:12 M23704 Y. khams L. kharrr E. khamh
look down on from a height
109:19 M23838 Y. [khairf] L. khairf E. khamh
K607e same as
169:12 M41484 Y. khanT L. kharrT E. khamh
K607d place name; look down on from a height
46:9 M08279c Y.khjam,khanr L.khja:m E. khaim/khe:m
yawning (hole in a cliff); inlay, imbed,
set; also qian, qian
53:8 M09376 Y. kharj L. kharj E. kharj
K746h empty husk; prosperous; tranquil, at ease;
healthy
115:11 M25250 Y. [kharj] L. kharj E. kharj
K746n husk of grain
119:11 M27105 Y. kharj L. kharj E. kharj
K746o husk, bran, chaff
61:11 M11146a Y. [kharf] L. kharj' E. kharj'
K746m kangk&i' vehement, fervent;
generous; also king
61:11 Mlll46b Y. [kharjv] L. kharj' E. kharj'
K746m k^ngkai /ehement, fervent;
generous; also kang
8:2 M00288B Y. kharp L.kharjv E. kharjh
K698a high; haughty, overbearing; excessive,
extreme. See also gang
9:4 M00431 Y. [kharf ] L. kharf E. kharjh
K698c equal; companion, mate
64:4 Ml 1889 Y. kharf L. kharjv E. kharjh
K698b lift; resist, oppose; contend with, be a
match for

172 Lexicon
kan
kao
kao
kao
kao
kao
kao
kao
kao
ke
ke
ke
ke
ke
ke
ke
ke
ke
ke
ke
ke
ke
86:4 M18918 Y. kharf L. kharp E. kharjh
beatable brick bed, kang
44:2 M07634 Y. [khaw] L. khaw E. khaw
K992u rump, buttocks
66:2 M13111 Y. khaw~ L. khaw' E. khaw'
Kl04lj investigate, examine, same as
75:6 M14734 Y. khaw" L. khaw' E. khaw'
K1041o evergreen chinquapin; kaolao
wicker basket
86:6 M19034 Y. kW L. khaw' E. khaw'
roast
125:0 M28843 Y. khaw" L. khaw' E. khaw'
K104ld old; deceased father; examine
140:13 M32146 Y. [kW] L. khaw' E. khaw'
K1129a' dried fish, dried food
93:10 M20114 Y. [khaws] L. khawv E. khaw
K11291 feast victorious troops; recompense
175:7 M42604 Y. [khawx] L. khawv E. khawh
go against, oppose; lean against, near, by
75:5 M14658 Y. ko L. ka E. ka
Kid stalk, branch; axe-handle
96:5 M20906 Y. k*b L. kha E. kha
jade-like stone, (white) chalcedony
159:5 M38274A Y. k1^, kV L. kha E. kha
given name of Mencius. See also k6, ke
140:5 M30785a Y. xo' L. xfia E. ya
Kli harsh, cruel; itch; also he"
115:4 M24950 Y. khwo L. khua E. khwa
K8n class, degree; rule; department, division
115:8 M25126 Y. khwo L. khua E. khwa
qlngkehighland barley
116:8 M25556 Y. khwo L. khua E. khwa
nest, burrow
142:9 M33248 Y. khw~ L. khua E. khwa
keddu J • tadpole
181:8 M43551a Y. khwo L. khua' E. khwa'
classifier for small round objects; also k&
181:6 M43456a Y. xaj' L. xfiaj E. yaj
chin; also hai
109:10 M23570 Y. [kV] L. khap E. khap/khap
sleepy, drowsy
75:10 M15295 Y. [kV] L. khap E. khap
K642t ancient drinking vessel
112:10 M24407 Y. [kV] L. khap E. khap
K642v knock against, bump. Also E. khat,
khajh

k6
ke
k6
ke
kl
ke
k6
ke
ke
ke
ke
ke
ke
ke
ke
ke
ken
ken
ken
k6n
ken
ken
Lexicon 173
76:6 M16061b Y. [khaM L. khajv E. khsjh
K937s kesou cough; also kai
79:8 M16646a Y.[khjaw ] L.khja:wk E.khaiwk/khoeiwk
Kl226a husk, shell; hollow; also qiao, que
30:7 M03685b Y. to" L. ka' E. ka'
Kl5i good, all right; also gS
30:2 M03245 Y. kV L. kha' E. kha'
Kla possible; permissible
32:5 M04994 Y. kV L. kha' E. kV
see kaiikS $1 ^T
159:5 M38274B Y. kV L. kV E. kha'
seekSnkS . See also ke, ke
181:8 M43551b Y. khwov L. khua' E. khwa'
lump of earth, clod; also ke
85:9 M17788 Y. kV L. khat E. khat
K313j thirst
159:5 M38274C Y. [kV] L. kV E. khah
see also ke, ke. Guangyun implies that ke
is the preferred reading for the given
nameofMencius
149:8 M35589 Y. khwov L. khuav E. khwah
K35lf try, test; test; task, assignment; tax, levy
10:5 M01355 Y. [kh3f ] L. kh9§k E. k^k
K903a conquer; manage to do, be capable of
18:6 M01970 Y. khaf [sic] L. k^Sk E. k^k
K937v carve, engrave; cutting, penetrating
18:7 M02009 Y. [khajv] L. kh99k E. k^k
K903g conquer
61:6 Ml0592a Y. [khawv] L. khak E. khak
K766g respect; scrupulous; also que
40:5 M07128 Y.khjaf ,khje' L.khja:jk E. khaijk/khe:jk
K766d' guest
85:10 M17936 Y. [kV] L. khap E. khsp/khap
K642u quickly, suddenly
130:2 M29247 same as 1*f
130:4 M29311 Y. k'W L. kh3§rj' E. kh9rj'
K882b be willing
32:13 M05509 Y. khsnv L. khsn' E. khan'
K4l6m break new land; till
61:13 M11326 Y. khonv L. khsn' E. khgn'
sincere, earnest
152:6 M36387 Y. [khanv] L. khsn' E. khgn'
K4l6c sincere
211:6 M48649B Y. k*W L. khan' E. khan'
bite, gnaw. See also yin

174
keng
keng
keng
keng
keng
kong
kong
kong
kong
kong
kong
kong
kong
kong
kou
kou
kou
kou
kou
Lexicon
112:7 M24200 Y. khirj L. khja:jrj E. k^ijrj/k^ijrj
K83ls sound of a stone being struck; kengkeng
block-headed, stubborn, low, vulgar
149:7 M35526 Y. khirj L. khja:jrj E. kh3ijrj/kheijq
K8311 kengkeng unswerving determination
167:11 M40801 Y. khirj L. khja:jrj E. khsijrj/khe:jrj
Kl252a sound of clinking metal or stones
32:4 M04932 Y. khirj L. khjaijrj E. khaijrj/kheijrj
K698H pit; bury alive, same as P/L
170:4 M41566 Y. [khirj] L. khjaijrj E. khaijrj/khe:jrj
K698i pit, hole
46:8 M08146 Y. [khurj] 1.. kh3wrj E. kh9wrj
kongtong mountain in Gansu
61:8 M10746 Y. khurj L. khawrj E. kh9wrj
Kll72z simple-minded, sincere
116:3 M25415A. Y. khurj L. kh9wrj E. kh9wrj
K1172h hollow, empty; the sky; in vain. See also
kong.
118:8 M26151 Y. [khurj] L. kh9wrj E. kh9wrj
konghou ncient plucked stringed
instrument
39:1 M06933 Y. khurjv L. k^wrj' E. kh9wrj'
K1174a hole; opening; great; surname
61:6 M10552 Y. khurf L. khqawrJ' E. khuawrj'
Kll72d' fear
64:8 M12283A Y. khurjv L. k^wrf E. kh9wrjh
K1172a' draw a bow; rein in; control; throw;
accuse. See also qiang
116:3 M25415B Y. khurf L. k^wrp E. khawrjh
Kl I72h empty space, vacancy; leave empty,
vacant. See also kong
177:8 M42864 Y. khurjv L. k^wrf E. kh9wrjh
horse bridle
64:11 M12638 Y. khow L. khaw E. khow
Kl22h lift (the edge of a gown); dig out with the
finger or something pointed. Also E.khu9
30:0 M03227 Y. k*W L. kh3W E. khsw'
KllOa mouth
30:2 M03238 Y. [kh9w"] L. kh9W E. khsw'
KllOd strike, knock
64:3 Ml 1807 Y. khawv L. kh3W' E. khsw'
KllOe hold back, detain; knot, button; strike.
Also E. kh3wh
167:3 M40175 Y. [kh9w"] L. k^bw' E. khsw'
KllOf inlay, chase; strike; button

kou
ku
ku
ku
ku
kfl
ku
ku
kii
ku
ku
ku
ku
kua
kua
ku&
kua
kuai
kuai
kuai
kuai
Lexicon 175
40:8 M07209 Y. khswv L. k^w^ E. khawh
Kl 1 la robber, bandit, marauder; invade
18:6 M01956 Y. khu L. khus E. k'b
K43f cut open; hollow out; clean out
75:5 M14579 Y. khu L. khu§ E. k*b
K49t dried up, withered
30:7 M03658 Y. kV L. k^wk E. khawk
K1203a cry, wail, lament
32:8 M05205 Y. khu" L. khut E. khwst
K496q cave, den
116:8 M25552 Y. kV L. khut E. khwat
K496p cave, hole; dig out
140:5 M30797 Y. kV L. khU9' E. kV
K49u bitter; suffer. Also E. k^11 straits,
difficulties; motion sickness
53:7 M09330 Y. [kV] L. khusv E. kV
K74e storehouse
120:6 M27420 Y. [kV] L. khu3v E. kV
K43i trousers
145:6 M34236 Y. [kV] L. khu§v E. k'b11
K43h trousers, same as $§
145:10 M34523 Y. [khr] L. khu3NE. k^h
K43h trousers, vulgar form ol
30:17 M04586 Y. khu L. k'bwk E. khawk
Kl038g legendary prehistoric ruler
164:7 M39870 Y. kV L. k^wk E. khawk
K1039m cruel; extremely
37:3 M05854 Y. khwa L. khwa: E. khwai/khwei
K43a exaggerate, boast
149:6 M35474 Y. khwa L. khwa: E. khwai/khwe:
K43b boast, brag
130:6 M29430 Y. khwav L. khwar E. khwaih/khwe:h
crotch, groin, space between the thighs
157:6 M37504 Y. khwav L. khwa:v E. khwaih/khweih
K43d step over; straddle. Also E. khwai' loin
and E. k^h squat
30:6 M03573 Y. [khwaj] L. khwa:j E. khwaij/khwe:j
K18a wry mouth, same word as wai
140:10 M316015 Y. kwaf L. khwa:jx E. khwaijh/khweijh
K534b kind of rush, wool grass, Scirpus
cyperinus; also kuai.
32:10 M05319 Y. khwajx L. khuajN E. khwajh
K569g lump, clod (of earth, etc.)
9:13 M01189 Y. [kujv] L. kuajv E. kwajh
middleman; broker

176 Lexicon
kuai
kuai
kuai
kuai
kuai
kuai
kuai
kuai
kuai
kuai
kuai
kuan
kuan
kuan
kuan
kuang
kuang
kuang
kuang
kuang
kuang
kuang
Lexicon
18:13 M022255 Y. [kujv] L. kuajx E. kwajh
cut off; executioner; also gui
53:13 M09505 Y. [kuf] L. kuajv E. kwajh
K321d barn
73:9 M14306Ba Y. [kujv] L. kuaj^ E. kwajh
K32la calculation, account; also gui
75:13 M156765 Y. kuf L. kuajv E. kwajh
K32H Chinese juniper; also gui.
85:13 M18405 Y. [kujv] L. kuajv E. kwajh
K321f ditch, irrigation channel
130:13 M29937 Y. kujv L. kuajv E. kwajh
K32lg mincemeat
163:13 M39686 Y. [kujv] L. kuaj^ E. kwajh
ancient feudal state
195:13 M46530 Y. kujv L. kuajx E. kwajh
Chinese herring; mincemeat, same as
30:13 M04407 Y.khwajv L. khwaif E. khwaijh(s)/khwe:jh
K3211 throat; pleased, same as !fe
61:4 M10369 Y. khwajv L. khwa:jv E. khwaij(s)/khwe:j
K3l2k pleased; satisfied; fast (colloquial)
140:10 M3160la Y. kwaf L. khwa:jv E. khwaijh/khwe:jh
K534b alternative reading, see kuai
40:12 M07322 Y. k'bn L. khuan E. khwan
Kl65b wide, broad; extend; relax, be lenient,
generous
188:15 M45300 Y. [k'bn] L. khuan E. khwan
hip-bone; crotch, breech
76:8 M16107 Y. k^n" L. khuan' E. khwan'
K162a sincere; empty; knock, rap
116:12 M25655 Y. [k'W] L. khuanx E. khwan'
Kl62b hole, opening; empty
19:6 M02336 Y. [khwarj] L. khyarj E. khuarj
kuangrang quick, hasty
22:4 M02606 Y. khwarj L. khyarj E. khuarj
K739m rectify, correct
61:6 M10529 Y. [khwarj] L. khyarj E. khuarj
scared
118:6 M26001 Y. khwarj L. khyarj E. khuarj
K739v square basket
94:4 M20287 Y. khwarj L. kfiyarj E. guarj
K739o wild, reckless; mad, foolish
149:7 M35510a Y. kwarf L. kyarjs E. kuarjh
K739x deceive; also kuang.
32:15 M05576 Y. khwarjv L. khwarj^ E. khwarjh
K707n grave pit; wilds

kuang
kuang
kuang
kuang
kuang
kuang
kuang
kuang
kuT
kuT
kuT
kuT
kuT
kuT
kuT
kui
km
kui
kui
kui
Lexicon 177
72:15 M14245 Y. khwarf L. khwarf E. khwarjh
K707o open, clear; vast; desolate, waste; neglect
120:6 M27409 Y. [khwarf ] L. khuarjN E. kNvarj11
K706g fine floss silk
120:15 M28033 Y. khwarp L. khuarjN E. kNvarj11
K707p fine floss silk
149:7 M355105 Y. kwarf L. kyary E. kuarjh
K739x deceive; also kuang
109:6 M23310 Y. khwarj L. khyarj E. khuarj
K739u eye socket
85:5 M17264 Y. xqarf L. xyarp E. xuarjh
K765g condition; compare; how much the more;
moreover
154:5 M36713 Y. xyarf L. xyarp E. xuarjh
K765H confer, present
112:15 M24564a Y. kwarf L. kwaijrj'E. kwaijrj'/kweiirj'
mineral ore; mine; also g6ng
46:17 M08622 Y. [khuj] L. khyj E. khwi
K570g lofty
141:11 M32770 Y. khuj L. khyj E. khwia/khwi
K28a lack, be missing; deficient; deficit; wane
(of the moon)
116:11 M25633 Y. khuj L. khjyj E. khjwi3/khjwi
K875c spy, peek
169:11 M41467 Y. [khuj] L. khjyj E. khjwis/khjwi
K875d spy, peek
61:7 M10678 Y. [khuj] L. khuaj E. khwaj
banter, ridicule, laugh at
108:6 M22992 Y. khuj L. khuaj E. khwsj
helmet
18:6 M01955 Y. [khuj] L. khjyaj E. khwej
K879h cut, butcher; cut off
35:18 M05746 Y. khuj' L. kfiyj E. gwi
Kl237s monster with only one leg; grave,
respectful
62:9 Ml 1622 Y. [khuj'] L. kfiyj E. gwi
K605f kind of lance
162:8 M38948 Y. khuj' L. kfiyj E. gwi
K989a where several roads meet; thoroughfare
181:2 M43339B Y. [khuj'] L. kfiyj E. gwi
K992e cheekbone; simple and honest looking.
See also qiu
181:7 M43492A Y. [khuj'] L. kfiyj E. gwi
K988a cheekbone; simple and honest looking.
See also qiu

178
kui
kuf
kui
kui
kui
kui
kui
kui
kul
kuT
kui
kui
kui
kui
kui
kui
kui
kui
kui
kui
kui
kun
Lexicon
185:2 M44492 Y. khuj' L. kfiyj E. gwi
K992m intersection of several roads
187:9 M44870 Y. [khuj'] L. kfijyj E. gwi
K605H kuflori sturdy
140:9 M31458 Y. khuj' L. kfijyj E. gjwi
K605g mallow, sunflower, hollyhock
64:9 M12326 Y. khuT [sic] L. kfijyjv E. gjwi'
K605e measure; conjecture, estimate; standard
194:4 M45785 Y. khuj L. khuaj E. khwsj
K569f spoon; principal, chief, head; big
37:6 M05911 Y. khuj L. khjyaj E. khwej
K8791 crotch; star name
109:9 M23532 Y. [khuj] L. khjyaj E. khwej
K605i diverge, separate; kuikui stare
9:10 M00928B Y. [khuf| L. khuaj' E. khwaj'
K569d kuTlei' puppet
157:6 M37520 Y. [khuf] L. khjyj' E. khjwiS'/khjwi'
K8791 step, stride, half a pace (bu
181:4 M43369 Y. [khuj~] L. khjyj' E. khjwi3'/khjwi'
K864m cleft band (for tying a cap)
38:10 M06600 Y. [kujv] L. kyjvE. kwih
K569n ashamed, same as '
61:10 M10982 Y. kujv L. kyjv E. kwih
K5691 ashamed
30:9 M03963 Y. [khujv] L. khyjv E. khwih
K523g deep breath, sigh
22:12 M02651 Y. [kujv] L. kfiyjx E. gwih
K540g box; deficient
118:12 M26524 Y. khujv L. kfiyjv E. gwih
K540j basket for carrying earth. AlsoE.
khwsijh
140:12 M31989 Y. khuf L. kfiyjv E. gwih
K540i basket
184:10 M44320 Y. [kujv] L. kfiyjv E. gwih
K569r same as
184:12 M44382 Y. [kujv] L. kfiyjv E. gwih
K5401 present of food; present
61:12 Ml 1211 Y. [kujs] L. kuajv E. kwgjh
K540c muddled, confused, disturbed
85:12 M18281a Y. xuf L. xfiuajv E. ywsj11
K540d burst (of a dam); break through an
encirclement; be routed; also hui
128:12 M29175 Y. wajv L. rjwaif E. rjwaijh/rjweijh
K540p deaf from birth
46:8 M08173 Y. [kunl L. kun E. kwan
K417c kunlun • mountain name

kun
kun
kun
kun
kun
kun
kun
kun
kun
kun
kun
kun
kun
kun
kun
kuo
kuo
kuo
kuo
kuo
Lexicon 179
72:4 M13792 Y. kun L. kun E. kwsn
K4l7a elder brother, kunwu legendary
country in the Xia dynasty; legendary
mountain; fabulous sword (same as
kunwu
96:8 M21065 Y. [kun] L. kun E. kwan
K417d precious stone
167:8 M40542 Y. [kun] L. kun E. kwan
K417H kunwu fabulous sword, same as
kunwu
195:8 M46247 Y. kun L. kun E.. kwsn
K4l7i fabulous large fish
196:8 M47036 Y. kun L. kun E. kwan
K417j kind of large fowl
32:5 M04969 Y. khun L. khun E. khwsn
K421a principle of earth (Yijing)
47:0 M08670 Y. [khun] L. khun E. khwon
K422a original form of ,
190:3 M45361 Y. khun L. khun E. khwsn
K423a to shave the head
33:10 M05667 Y. kW L. khun' E. khwsn'
K424a lane or alley between various buildings of
palace compound
61:7 M10625 Y. kW L. khun' E. khwan'
K420c sincere
64:7 M12131 Y. [khun"] L. khun' E. khwon'
K420d beat
75:7 M14883 Y. [khun"] L. khun' E. khwsn'
K420e threshold
115:8 M25121 Y. [khmT] L. khun' E. khwan'
K485H, 420f bind, string together
169:7 M41329 Y. khun" L. khun' E. khwsn'
threshold
31:4 M04717 Y. khunv L. khunv E. khwsnh
K420a hard pressed, distressed, in difficulty
53:11 M09461 Y. khwaw" L. khuak E. khwak
K774g wide, extensive; open out, extend
57:15 M09881 Y. [khwaw] L. khuak E. khwak
extend, stretch
64:15 M12895 Y. [khwaw"] L. khuak E. khwak
K707t extend, broaden
177:11 M42993 Y. [khwawv] L. khuak E. khwak
K7741 leather
64:6 Ml 1988 Y. kwo" ( L. kuat E. kwat
K302h draw together; include

180 Lexicon
kuo
kuo
kuo
190:6 M45439 Y. [kwo"] L. kuat E. kwat
K302k bind the hair in a knot
162:6 M38844 Y. [khwov] L. khuat E. khwat
proper name
169:9 M41429 Y. khwo~ L. khuat E. khwat
K302q widely separated, distant

la
la
la
la
la
la
la
lai
lai
lai
lai
lai
lai
lai
lai
lai
lai
lai
lai
lai
lai
Ian
Lexicon 181
140:9 M31362c Y. lawv,bv L. lak E. lak
K766q' leave out, leave behind, lag; also luo, lao
18:7 M02010 Y. [lav] L. lat E. lat
K272a to slash; perverse, wicked
160:7 M38645 Y. laN L. lat E. lat
hot, spicy, peppery
64:5 Ml 1946 Y. lav L. lap E. bp/lap
K6941 break. Modern la pull is a different word
130:15 M30009 Y. laN L.lap E. lap
K637j sacrifice offered at end of lunar year
142:15 M33786 Y. lax L.lap E. lap
wax; beeswax
167:15 M41014 Y. la: L. lap E. lap
solder
9:6 M00581A Y. laj' L. laj E. bj
K944a come. See also lai
50:8 M10155A Y. [laj*] L. laj E. bj
K944f come, same as A. See also lai
140:8 M31262 Y. laj' L. laj E. bj
K944jgoosefoot, Chenopodium album; laifu
radish
163:8 M39481 Y. [laj' ] L. laj E. bj
place name
187:8 M44809 Y. laj' L. laj E. bj
K944m horse of seven chl stature
?:6 M00581B
K944a same as See also lai
19:8 M02380B Y. [lajv] L. lajN E. bjh
K9441 encourage to come, same as B. See
also chi
50:8 M10155B Y. [lajx] L. lajv E. bjh
K944f induce to come; encourage. See also lai
154:8 M36805 Y. lajv L. lajv E. bjh
K944k bestow
35:16 M18672 Y. lajv L. laj* E. laj!l
water flowing rapidly over shallows
104:16 M22622 Y. lajv L. lajv E. lajh
leprosy
118:16 M26751 Y. lajx L. lajs E. lajh
K272g ancient musical pipe with three holes
140:16 M32405 Y. [laj^] L. lajv E. la'.h
K272H kind of Artemisia
154:9 M36861 Y. lajN L. laj^ E. lajh
K272e lean on, rely on
54:17 M12977 Y.Ian' L.Ian E.Ian
bar, cut off, block off

182
Ian
Ian
Ian
Ian
Ian
Ian
Ian
Ian
Ian
Ian
Ian
Ian
Ian
Ian
Ian
Ian
Ian
Ian
Ian
Ian
Ian
Ian
lang
Lexicon
75:17 M15904 Y.Ian' L.Ian E.Ian
K185q fence, railing
85:17 M18722 Y. [Ian'] L.Ian E.Ian
Kl85k large waves, billows. Also E. lanh.
140:17 M32519 Y.Ian' L.Ian E.Ian
K185n orchid
149:17 M36142 Y. [Ian'] L.Ian E.Ian
K185o lie, make false accusations
169:9 M41433 Y.Ian' L.Ian E.Ian
K185f barrier, railing
67:16 M13486 Y. Ian' L. lam E. bin/lem
banian multicoloured, gorgeous
38:8 M06436 Y. lam' L. lam E. bm/lam
K655i tanlan ,. „. greedy
46:9 M08289 Y. lam' L. lam E. bm/lam
mountain mists, haze; place name
61:8 M10785 Y. [lam'n L. lam E. bm/lam
K655j same as
118:14 M26648 Y. lam' L. lam E. lam
basket
145:14 M34674 Y. [lair1 L. lam E. lam
lanlyu ragged, shabby
140:14 M32258 Y. lam' L. lam E. lam
K609k indigo, blue
61:16 M11455 Y. lan~ L.Ian' E.Ian'
idle; lazy
26:5 M028575 Y. Ion" L. luan' E. Iwan'
K179a egg; also luan
64:21 M13046 Y. lanT L. lam' E. lam'
K609o take; clasp
75:21 M15964 Y. lanT L. lam' E. lam'
ganlan Chinese olive
147:14 M34977 Y. lain L. lam' E. lam'
K6091 scan, see, view; read
120:21 M28100b Y. lamv L. lamv E. lamh
towrope; hawser, cable; also Ian
86:17 M19604 Y. Ian" L. lanv E. lanh
K1851 brilliant; burn up; rot; destroyed, rotten
5:12 M00214b Y. bnv L. luanx E. lwanh
Kl30c disorder; also luan
85:14 M18521 Y. lairf L. lairT E. lamh
K609j overflowing, excessive
120:21 M28100a Y. lams L. lairT E. lamh
towrope; hawser, cable; also \an
53:10 M09437 Y. larj' L. larj E. larj
K735t porch; corridor

lang
lang
lang
lang
lang
lang
lang
lang
lang
lang
lang
lang
lang
lang
lao
lao
lao
Lexicon 183
75:10 M15226 Y. lag' L. lag E. lag
blnglang areca, betel palm
85:7 M17482A Y. lag' L. lag E. lag
K735k langlang . flow unceasingly;
canglang * * blue, colour of the sea;
river name. See also lang
94:7 M20432 Y. lag' L.Ian E. lag
K7351 wolf; langbe .. _ ... mythical animal with
short front legs and long hind legs; in
sore straits, in a dilemma, quandary
96:7 M21013 Y. lag' L. lag E. lag
K735n langlan§ "" "~" tinkle (as jade); th*
sound of reading aloud; langgan
jade-like stone
115:7 M25061 Y. lag' L. lag E. lag
K735o noxious weed
118:7 M26047 Y. [lag' ] L. lag E. lag
K735p canglang; colour of new bamboo
shoots
142:7 M33108 Y. [lag'i T , lag E. lag
K735q tanglangmantis
142:10 M33362 Y. lag' L. lag E. lag
tanglang mantis; qianglang
dung beetle
163:7 M39431 Y. lag' L. lag E. lag
K735r place name; young gentleman; official tide
167:7 M40436 Y. [lag' ] L. lag E. lag
langdang iron chains; clanking
sound
169:7 M41330B Y. [lag' ] L. lag E. lag
K735s high gate; spacious, empty. See also
lang
74:7 M14364 Y. lagv L. lag' E. lag'
K735h bright; loud and clear
85:7 M17482B Y. lagv L. lagN E. lagh
K735k wave, billow; reckless; unrestrained,
dissolute. See also lang
169:7 M41330a Y. larjx L. lagx E. larjh
K735s high gate; place name; also lang
64:12 M12679a Y. law' L. law E. law
drag for, dredge up; also lao
19:10 M02410A Y. law' L. law E. law
K1135a work, toil; fatigue. See also lao
64:12 M12679b Y. law' L. law E. law
drag for, dredge up; also lao

184
lao
lao
lao
lao
lao
lao
lao
lao
lao
lao
lao
lao
lao
le
le
le
le
le
le
le
Lexicon
85:12 M18318B Y. [law'] L. law E. law
river name. See also lao
93:3 M19934 Y. law' L. law E. law
Kl056a pen, fold; prison; firm, secure; taila"o A
sacrifice of an ox, sheep and pig
164:11 M40004 Y. law' L. law E. law
K1069r unstrained wine, wine with dregs
75:6 M14736 Y. W L. law' E. law'
see k5ol<io
85:12 M18259 Y. law" L. law' E. law'
KlI5lu rain water; heavy rain
94:12 M20692B Y. [lawv] L. law' E. law'
Kl 15 In southwestern people, now called gel&o
See also liao.
125:0 M28842 Y. W L. law' E. law'
K1055a old, aged
19:10 M02410B Y. lawN L. lawv E. lawh
Kll35a reward, recompense, encourage. See also
lao
85:12 M18318A Y. lawv L. lawv E. lawh
flooded, waterlogged. See also lao
86:6 M19014a Y. law\ bv L. lak E. lak
K766n scorch; brand; to iron; bake; also luo
120:6 M274265 Y. law% bv L. lak E. lak
K766o network pouch of silk threads; also luo
140:9 M31362b Y. law\bv L. lak E. lak
K766q' fade; also luo, la
164:6 M39847a Y. lawv,bv L. lak E. lak
K766p fermented milk; yoghurt; kumiss; cream;
junket; also luo
64:7 M12140b Y. [bs] L. luat E. Iwat
K299e pluck; also luo, lyii. Reading as if from
E. Iwst (?), cf. ne
9:2 M00350 Y. [bf] L. b5k E. bk
K928c surplus; tenth
19:9 M02386a Y. bjv L. bsk E. bk
K928f bridle; rein in; restrain; compel; also lei
64:2 M11778 Y. [bjv] L. b3k E. bk
K928d spaces between the fingers
85:5 M17283 Y. [bjN] L. bak E. bk
K928H split along the veins (of a stone)
130:2 M29239b Y. taj* L. bak E. bk
rib; sides of the chest; also lei.
170:2 M41543 Y. [bjv] L. bak E. bk
K928e vein in the earth

le
lei
lei
lei
lei
Ifi
lei
lei
lei
lei
lei
lei
lei
lei
lei
lei
lei
lei
lei
lei
Lexicon 185
75:11 M15399B Y. law*, fo* L. lak E. lak
Kll25e joy, joyful. See also yue, yao
120:5 M27343C. Y. [luj'] L. lyj E. Iwi
K577r same as . See also 16i, lei.
120:11 M27821
K577s same as ..'
120:15 M28039 Y. luj' L. lyj E. Iwi
K577f wind around; bind; string; burden, pile
up, encumber; leilei in clusters, in
heaps; worn out, haggard.
140:21 M32630 Y. [luj'] L. lyj E. Iwi
K577q basket
123:13 M28583 Y. luj' L. lyj E. IwiS/lwi
K14c weak; thin, emaciated
121:15 M28187 Y. luj' L. luaj E. Iwaj
K5771 jar, vase
173:5 M42245 Y. luj' L. luaj E. Iwsj
K577o thunder
32:15 M05574 Y. luj~ L. lyj' E. Iwi'
K577d rampart; build up
85:11 M18169B Y. [luf] L. lyj' E. Iwi'
river name. See also ta
127:0 M28898 Y. luj* L. lyj' E. Iwi'
K578a plough stem, plough. Also E. lwih.
140:15 M32334 Y. [luf] L.lyj' E. Iwi'
K577g kind of creeping plant, vine
142:8 M33205 Y. [luj'] L.lyj' E. Iwi'
K575q kind of monkey; snub-nosed langur
Rhinopithecus sp. Also E. juwh, jwih
149:6 M35471 Y. lujv L.lyj' E. Iwi'
K578b eulogy for the dead
120:5 M27343A. Y. [luf] L.lyj' E. IwiS'Awi'
K577r accumulate, pile on; continuous, repeated;
involve. See also lei, lei
120:6 M27439. Y. [luj"] L.lyj' E. IwiS'/lwi'
augment, pile on. Now written
9:15 M01249 Y. lujv L. luajF 1«/gj'
K577j worn out, exhausted; kuTlSi
puppet. Also E. Iwaj
104:13 M22554 Y. [luf] L. luaj' E. Iwsj'
small skin eruptions
112:10 M24394 Y. luj' L. luaj' E. Iwsj'
K545a amassed rocks, heaped boulders; 16ilu6
piled up, numerous, large
112:11 M24443 Y. jUrf] L. luaj' E. Iwaj'
Same as

186
lei
lei
lei
lei
lei
lei
lei
lei
lei
leng
len§
len^
If
If
If
If
If
If
If
If
If
Lexicon
140:13 M32067 Y. luj" L. luaj' E. lw9J'
bud; see beilei;
85:8 M17644 Y. lujv L. lyjv E. lwih
K532c tears
181:10 M43636 Y. lujx L. lyjv E. lwih
K529a class, category
120:5 M27343B. Y. lujv L. lyjv E. Iwi3h/lwih
K577r involve, implicate; see also lei \ . See
also lei, ISi
9:21 M01328. Y. lujs L. luajv E. lwajh
K577p tired, exhausted, now written
120:15 M28027 Y. lujv L. luajv E. lw3Jh
K529b knot in thread; knotty; scar
164:7 M39872 Y. lujv L. luajv E. lwajh
pour a libation. Also E. lwajh
19:9 M02386b Y. bjs L. b5k E. bk
K927h bridle; rein in; restrain; compel; also le
130:2 M29239a Y. bjv L. bak E. bk
rib; sides of the chest
75:8 M14979 Y. [brj' ] L. bsrj E. brj
edge; ridge
75:9 M15149 Y. brj' L. barj E. bq
edge; ridge
15:5 M01622 Y. bqv L. laijrj E. lajrj'
K823h cold
18:11 M02152 Y. [li' ] L. li E. Mi
scratch with knife
38:11 M06655 Y. [li'] L. li E. li/li
K979f widow
75:7 M14874 Y. li' L. li E. li/li
K978c spade, shovel
82:11 M16952A Y. li' L. li E. UAi
K9791 hair; small, fine. See also mdo.
93:11 M20154A Y. [li' ] L. li E. li/li
K979j yak. See also mao.
94:7 M20427 Y. li' L. li E. li/li
K978i vulgar form of
153:7 M36561 Y. [li'] L. liE. li/li
K978H Guangyw savs ye" mao . ,„ wild cat,
cf. limSo eopard cat; li alone is
now used for raccoon dog
166:11 M40146A Y. li' L. li E. li/li
K9791 regulate, govern. See also XT
75:7 M14873 Y. li' L. li E. li
K519H pear

Lexicon 187
If
If
If
If
If
If
If
If
If
If
If
If
If
If
If
If
If
If
If
If
IT
140:12 M31892 Y. [li' ] L. li E. li
K5191 seejili
142:7 M33106 Y.li'L. li E. li
geli dam
18:21 M02283 Y. [li' ] L. li E. k'3/li
Kl24lp cut apart, divide
85:19 M18779 Y. [li' ] L. li E. lis/li
K23h drip; river name
96:11 M21196 Y.liL. liE. liS/li
see boli , liuli '•
114:6 M24888B. Y.li' L. li E. Ii3/li
K23a to separate, same as See also chT
118:19 M26803 Y.li L. li E. lio/li
K23g hedge, fence
120:11 M27814 Y.li' L. li E. Ii3/li
K23d bride's headcloth
122:11 M28347 Y. [li' ] L. li E. Ii3/li
K24a encounter (misfortune); implicate,
involve; sorrow
145:11 M34524 Y. [li' ] L. li E. lis/li
same as li
164:11 M40001 Y.li' L. li E. lia/li
K23e thin wine
172:11 M42140A Y.li' L. li E. liaAi
K23f leave, be separated from; meet with,
encounter. See also li
187:19 M45090 Y. li' L. li E. Ii5/li
K878f pure black horse. Also E. lej
196:19 M47507 Y.li'L. li E. lia/li
huangli 1 oriole. Also E. lej
198:8 M47663B Y. [li' ] L. li E. lio/li
K878a encounter. See also li
93:8 M20048 Y.li' L. liaj E. lej
K5l9g plough; brindled
140:15 M32326 Y.li' L. liaj E. IEJ
K5l9m pigweed, lamb's quarters, Chenopodiurr
album
142:15 M33796B Y. [li' ] L. liaj E. lej
Kl24lo calabash shell serving as a dipper; dippei
See also li, luo
202:3 M47994 Y.li' L.liaj E. lej
K519k numerous; black; old
203:8 M48131 Y. [li' ] L.liaj E. lej
K519j blackish. AlsoE. li
9:7 M00699 Y. [if] L. li E. li'/li'
rustic, vulgar

188
IT
IT
IT
IT
IT
IT
IT
IT
IT
IT
IT
IT
IT
li
11
11
11
11
li
li
Lexicon
38:7 M06287 Y. [if]L. li E. li'/li'
zh6uli husband's brother's wife,
sister-in-law
75:3 M14459 Y. if L. li E. li'/li'
K980a plum, Prunus salicina
96:7 M21014 Y. if L. li E. li'/li'
K978d veins (in jade), grain (in wood);
underlying principle; reason, logic; put
in order, manage
145:7 M34294 Y. if L. li E. li'/li'
K978e lining of a garment; inside, inner
145:7 M34295 Y. ifL. li E. li'/li'
same as „
166:0 M40131 Y. if L. li E. li'/li'
K978a village, hamlet; measure of distance
195:7 M46182 Y. if L. li E. li'/li'
K978J carp
44:12 M077995 Y. if L. li E. li'
K562a shoe; tread, walk on; also lyu
162:19 M39260 Y. [Ji"lL. li E. lio'/li'
yllT winding, meandering
113:13 M24844 Y. if L. liaj E. lej'
K597d rites, ceremony, ritual, propriety; treat
with ceremony
142:15 M33796A Y. if L. liaj E. lej'
Kl24lo woodworm; worm-eaten. See also If, luo
164:13 M40053 Y. if L. liaj E. lej'
K597e sweet wine
195:13 M46542 Y. [if] L. liaj E. lej'
K597H murrel; snakehead
30:3 M03299 Y. [liv] L. liv E. lihAih
K975g official, clerk; used of lower grade
functionaries in contrast to guan
18:5 M01932 Y. lis L. lis E. lih
K5l9a sharp; profit; advantage, benefit
85:7 M17544 Y. liv L. liv E. lih
K520a lili sound of dripping water; used for
oversee, direct
104:7 M22213 Y. liv L. li" E. lih
dysentery
140:7 M31024 Y. [liv] L.lix E. lih
K520b oversee, direct
140:10 M31565 Y. [liv] L.liv E. lih
K520c oversee, direct
149:5 M35360 Y. liv L. liv E. Ii3h/lih
K872a scold, upbraid

n
li
H
n
li
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
Lexicon 189
172:11 M42140B Y. hv L. lis E. Ii3h/lih
K23f be separated from, differ from. See
alsoli
9:6 M00587 Y. liv L. liajs E. liajh
K291H example; instance; precedent, rule
19:15 M02472 Y. [liv] L. liajv E. liajh
K340c urge, encourage
27:13 M03041 Y. lis L. liajs E. liajh
K340a severe; stern, rigorous, harsh
104:13 M22556 Y. liv L. liajv E. liajh
K340d pestilence, plague
112:15 M24571 Y. liv L. liajv E. liajh
K340b grindstone; whet, sharpen
119:15 M27181 Y. lav L. liajv E. liajh
coarse grain. Also E. lat (cf. Y. reading)
and lajh
142:15 M33799 Y. [1ML. liajv E. liajh
K340f muli oyster
9:19 M01311 Y. [liv] L. liajv E. lejh
K878c pair; mate, companion
30:8 M03767 Y. lis L. liajv E. lejh
cry of a crane
63:4 M11712A Y. lix L. liajv E. lejh
K532a do violence, transgress; crime, guilt;
disobedient; perverse. See also lie
64:8 M12192B Y. [liv] L. liaf E. lejh
pluck the pipa. See also lie
85:5 M17246 Y. li" L. liajv E. lejh
K124ls foul water; noxious vapours
108:15 M23087 Y. [liv] L. liajv E. lejh
Kl24ln do violence, transgress, same as j^; a
green dye used for ribbons on caps and
seals. Also E. let
140:6 M30865 Y. li"L. liajv E. lejh
K1241r lizhTkind of fruit. AlsoE. li§h
171:9 M41932 Y. hv L. liajv E. lejh
Kl24lm be attached to, belong to; subordinate,
dependent
198:8 M47663A Y. liv L. liajv E. lejh
K878a pair, well-proportioned; beautiful;
apply, attach. See also If
19:0 M02288 Y. liv L. liSk E. lik
K928a strength, force
72:12 M14171 Y. liv L. liajk E. lejk
K858h calendar

190
li
li
n
n
li
n
ii
li
n
n
n
n
n
ii
n
n
n
n
lian
lian
lian
lian
lian
Lexicon
75:15 M15823 Y. [liv] L. liajk E. lejk
K1125i oak
75:16 M15846 Y. lis L. liajk E. lejk
horse stable
77:12 M16340 Y. liN L. liajk E. lejk
K858e pass through in order
85:16 M18658 Y. [liN] L. liajk E. lejk
drip
104:16 M22617 Y. lis L. liajk E. lejk
Seeluoli
112:15 M24572 Y. [liv] L. liajk E. lejk
K1125J pebbles, gravel
140:16 M32385 Y. [liv] L. liajk E. lejk
see tmgli
157:15 M37965A Y. [liv] L. liajk E. lejk
Kll25k stride. See also luo
159:15 M38588 Y. [li^] L. liajk E. lejk
K1125d cart tracks; crush, oppress
163:19 M39753 Y. [hv] L. liajk E. lejk
surname; place name
173:16 M42523 Y. livT,. liajk E. lejk
see prti
193:0 M45672B Y. [liv] L. liajk E. lejk
K855a tripod with hollow legs. See also ge
61:10 M11042 Y. [liv] L. lit E. lit
K403d lili fearful, trembling
75:6 M14695 Y. lis L. lit E. lit
K403a chestnut
117:0 M25721 Y. liv L. lip E. lip
K694a stand; set up, establish; immediate
118:5 M25924 Y. lix L. lip E. lip
K694e wide-brimmed bamboo rain hat
119:5 M26884 Y. lix L. lip E. lip
K694f grain, granule
140:5 M30783 Y. [liv] L. lip E. lip
K694g animal pen. Also E. gip
128:11 M29153 Y. luen' L. lian E. lian
K214a connect, join, unite
85:11 M18155 Y. [Ijen'] L. lian E. lian
K2l3b ripples; continuous flow (of tears)
162:7 M38902 Y. Ijen' L. lian E. lian
K213a link up with; connect, join
195:11 M46415 Y. [Ijen' ] L. lian E. lian
silver carp
61:12 M11206 Y. Ijen' L. lian E. len
K3871 pity

lian
lian
lian
lian
lian
lian
lian
lian
lian
lian
lian
lian
lian
lian
lian
lian
lian
lian
lian
lian
liang
liang
Lexicon 191
140:11 M31722 Y. Ijen' L. lian E. len
K213d lotus
173:5 M42242B Y. [Ijenl L. lian E. len
K823u xianlianbranch of the Qiang
people in me rian dynasty. See also ling
22:13 M02655 Y. Ijem' L. liam E. liara
toilet case
37:11 M05991 toilet case, same as 1
50:5 M08851 Y. Ijem' L. liam E. liam
shop banner
53:10 M09436 Y. Ijem' L. liam E. liam
K6271 incorruptible, honest
118:13 M26616 Y. Ijem' L. liam E. liam
bamboo curtain, screen
142:13 M33701 Y. [Ijem'] L. liam E. liam
feilian cockroach
167:10 M40693 Y. [Ijem'] L. liam E. liam
K627n sickle
167:13 M40927 Y. [Ijem'] L. liam E. liam
same as
96:11 M21206 Y. Ijen" L. lian' E. lian'
K213c kind of sacrificial vessel
66:13 M13407A Y. IjerrT L. liam' E. liam'
K6131 restrain; levy, collect. See also lian
130:13 M29954 Y. Ijem" L. liam' E. liam' (?)
face. Reading not found till Jiyun.
Guangyun reads the character as E.
laim'/leim' in an unrelated sense
120:9 M27689 Y. ljenv L. lianN E. lianh
K1851 white silk; boil silk; refine, purify; to train
61:19 M11504 Y. lqens L. lyan^ E. lwianh
K178m love, long for
75:9 M15148 Y. ljenv L. lianv E. lenh
China berry, Melia azederach
86:9 M19178 Y. ljenv L. lianv E. lenh
K1851 fuse, smelt
167:9 M40602 Y. [ljenv] L. lianx E. lenh
K185J smelt
66:13 M13407B Y. ljemv L. liarrT E. liamh
K6131 prepare body for burial. See also lian
78:13 M16590 Y. IjeirT L. liarrT E. liamh
prepare body for burial, same as
75:7 M14825 Y. Ijarj' L. liaq E. liarj
K738a roof-beam; bridge; dam
85:8 M17606 Y. [Ijarj] L. liarj E. liarj
K7551 cool

192
liang
liang
liang
liang
liang
liang
liang
liang
liang
liang
liang
liang
liang
liao
liao
liao
liao
liao
liao
liao
liao
Lexicon
119:7 M26952 Y. Ijarj' L. liarjE. liar)
K735e grain, provisions, same as
119:7 M26962 Y. Ijarj' L. liarj E. liar)
K738b fine millet, fine grain
119:12 M27132 Y. [Ijarj' ] L. liarj E. liar)
K737d grain, provisions
138:1 M30597 Y. Ijarj L. liarj E. liarj
735a good, fine
159:8 M38402 Y. Ijarj' T «— E. liarj
see wenliang
166:5 M40138A Y. Ijarj' L. liarj E. liarj
K737a to measure. See also Hang
11:6 M01436A Y. Kan" L. liarj E. liarj'
K736a pair, couple; two. See also liang
194:8 M45870 Y. ljarjv L. lian' E. liarj'
see wangliang
8:7 M00304 Y. Ijarf L. liarjs E. liarjh
K755J bright
11:6 M01436B Y. ljarjv L. liarf E. liarjh
K736a chariot; classifier for carriages. See
also liang
149:8 M35653 Y. Ijaif L. liarf E. liarjh
K755m trust, believe in, understand
159:8 M38361 Y. ljarjv L. liarf E. liarjh
count word for carriages
166:5 M40138B Y. ljarjv L. liarjv E. liarjh
K737a measure; capacity, quantity. See also
liang
86:12 M19414A Y. [IjeW ] L. liaw E. liaw
KllSle burn; burnt offering. See also liao, liao
162:12 M39137 Y. Ijew' L. liaw E. liaw
KllSlq distant
104:12 M22500 Y. ljewv L. liawv E. liawh
K115lf cure, heal
9:12 M01100 Y. Ijew' L. liaw E. lew
Kl 15 ih colleague; official
40:11 M07292 Y. [Ijew' ] L. liaw E. lew
Kl069n silent, deserted; few scanty
40:12 M07325 Y. Ijew' L. liaw E. lew
K115H small window; small house, hut; used for
colleague; official
64:12 M12741 Y. Ijew L. liaw E. lew
tease, provoke, stir up. Now also read
liao hold up (curtain, skirt, etc.)
68:6 M13501A Y. [Ijew] L. liaw E. lew
Kl245c measure out. See also liao.

Lexicon 193
Mo85:11 M18182 Y. [IjeW ] L. liaw E. lew
K1069o limpid, pure
Mo94:12 M20692A Y. [Ijew' ] L. liaw E. lew
Kl I51n hunt at night by torchlight; fierce,
ferocious. See also lao
liao120:12 M27904 Y. [IjeW ] L. liaw E. lew
Kl 15 ig bind, wrap around; entangled
liao128:5 M29049 Y. Ijew' L. liaw E. lew
Kl 114u depend on, rely; just; a little
liao130:10 M29791 Y. [IjeW ] L. liaw E. lew
Kl I35b fat surrounding the intestines
Mo130:12 M29865 Y. [Ijew] L.liaw E. lew
Kl 15 lp fat round the intestines
Mo167:12 M40886A Y. [Ijew] L. liaw E. lew
fine silver. See also liao
Mo196:12 M47342 Y. liaw' L.liaw E. lew
KllSlr jiaoliao wren
Mo86:12 M19414B Y. Ijew L. liaw E. liaw'
K1151e singe. See also liao, liao
Mo6:1 M00226 Y. ljewv L.liaw' E. lew'
know clearly, understand; finish,
complete
Mo109:12 M23697 Y. Ijew" L.liaw' E. lew'
Kll5lo clear-eyed
Mo140:11 M31744A Y. Ijew" L.liaw' E. lew'
K1069p knotweed, Polygonum. See also lu
liao86:12 M19414C Y. [Ijew^] L. liawv E. liawh
KllSle shine; nocturnal hunt; torch. See also
liao, liao
Mo53:11 M09464 Y. ljewv L. liwx E. luwh
a surname. Reading E. lewh is found in
Jiyun. Also E. lew personal name,
ancestor of the liao surname
Mo68:6 M13501B Y. ljewv L. liawv E. lewh
K1245c stuff, material; expect, anticipate. See
also liao
Mo167:12 M40886B Y. [Ijew^] L. liaw^ E. lewh
fine silver; fetters. See also lido
He15:6 M01637 Y. ljex L. liat E. liat
K291b cold
He18:4 M01901 Y. ljev L. liat E. liat
K29la row; arrange in a row
lie85:6 M17364 Y. [ljev] L. liat E. liat
K29lc clear, limpid
lie86:6 M18987 Y. [ljev] L. liat E. liat
K291d blazing, intense; ardent; brilliant, famous

194 Lexicon
lie140:6 M30888 Y. [ljev] L. Hat E. liat
K291e kind of reed used for making brooms
used in ritual purification
lie142:6 M33001 Y. [ljevl L.liat E. liat
jlnglie cricket
lie145:6 M34260 Y. ljes L.liat E. liat
K291f tear, rend, crack
lie19:4 M02302 Y. luev L. lyat E. Iwiat
poor, inferior
lie32:7 M05123 Y. [luev] L. lyat E. Iwiat
K299d low wall; enclosure for horses; water
channel down a mountain; outline, shape;
equal to
lie63:4 M11712B Y. [ljeN] L.liat E. let
K532a twist, turn. See also li
lie64:8 M12192A Y. [ljev] L. liat E. let
twist, turn. See also li
lie94:14 M20768 Y. ljev L. liap E. liap
K637e hunt
lie157:15 M37962 Y. [ljex] L. liap E. liap
K637f tread, trample; overstep
lie190:15 M45613 Y. [ljev] L. liap E. liap
K6371 horse's mane; broom; long beard
lin86:12 M19417 Y. [lin'] L. lin E. lin
K387b will-o'-the-wisp; phosphorescence
Kn119:6 M26939 Y. [lin'] L. lin E. lin
K387a will-o'-the-wisp
Ifn119:8 M26991 Y. lin' L. lin E. lin
K387c Imlm clear, crystalline
1m159:12 M38542 Y. lin' L. lin E. lin
K387g Imlm rumble, rattle
lin163:12 M39656 Y. lin' L. lin E. lin
K3871 neighbour, neighbouring, adjacent
1m187:12 M44990 Y. [lin' ] L. lin E. lin
qilm superior horse; same as qflm
unicorn
lin195:12 M46502 Y. lin' L. lin E. lin
K387k scale (of fish, etc.)
lin198:12 M47690 Y. lin' L. lin E. lin
K387j fabulous swift-running animal, unicorn,
qflm
1m75:4 M14551 Y. lim' L. lim E. lim
K655a woods, forest
1m85:8 M17626A Y. lim' L. lim E. lim
K655e pour, drench. See also lin

Lexicon 195
lih96:8 M21077 Y. lim L. lim E. lim
K655h beautiful jade, blue-green jade
lin131:11 M30087A Y. lim' L. lim E. lim
K669e overlook, look down at from close at
hand; on the point of. See also lin
lin173:8 M42335 Y. lim' L. lim E. lim
K655f extended rain
lln15:13 M01717 Y. liirT L. lim' E. lim'
cold; strict, severe
ITn53:13 M09515 Y. liirT L. lim' E. lim'
K668c granary
lin61:13 M11335 Y. linT L. lim' E. lim'
K668d awe, respect; apprehensive, fearful
ITn115:8 M25127B. Y. [linT] L. lim' E. lim'
K668a grain allowance, salary; give; receive. See
also b!ng
lin30:4 M03327 Y. Ihr L. InT E. linh
K475t regret; mean, stingy, niggardly
lin140:16 M32399 Y. linv L. linv E. linh
K1251i kind of rush
lin112:12 M24481 Y. lin* L. InT E. linh
K387f fretted, worn thin
lin162:12 M39117 Y. [linv] L. InT E. linh
K387H walk with difficulty
lin154:6 M36743a Y. nimv L. nrimv E. nrimh
K667t rent, let; also ren
lin85:8 M17626B Y. limv L. linT E. limh
K655e strain, filter (reading not found till Jiyuri).
See also 1m
lin131:11 M30087B Y. limv L. liirT E. limh
K669e funeral wailing. See also lih
ling15:8 M01669 Y. lirj' L. liar) E. lirj
K898f ice; to insult
ling85:8 M17670 Y.lirj' L. Ii3rj E. lirj
K898e surmount; transgress
ling120:8 M27591 Y. lirj' L. liar) E. lirj
kind of silk fabric, thin damask
ling140:8 M31219 Y.lirj' L. liSrj E. lirj
K898g water chestnut; water caltrop
ling140:11 M31760 Y. [lirj'] L. liorj E. lirj
K898I water chestnut
ling170:8 M41704 Y.lirj' L. liSrj E. lirj
K898c mound, tomb-mound; ascend; encroach
upon; injure; insult
ling195:8 M46259 Y.lirj' L. liarjE. lirj
K898H kind of fish; dace; lingli pangolin

196 Lexicon
ling?:3 M00387A Y. lirj' L. liajrj E. liajrj
K823a order; cause (now read ling in this sense).
See also ling
ling140:5 M30777 Y. lirj' L. liajrj E. liajrj
K823o Siberian cocklebur, Xanthium sibiricum;
see fuling
ling9:5 M00478 Y. lirj' L. liajrj E. lejrj
K823g musician; actor or actress
ling31:5 M04744 Y. [lirj' ] L. liajrj E. lejrj
K823i lingyii prison
ling75:17 M15887 Y. lirj' L. liajrj E. lejrj
lattice
ling85:5 M17306 Y. lit)' L. liajrj E. lejrj
K823j enlighten, instruct; light, fine
ling96:5 M20888 Y. [lirj'] L. liajrj E. lejrj
K823k lingling tinkling of jade
ling98:5 M21471 Y. lirj' L. liajrj E. lejrj
concave roof tile for drainage; water jar
ling118:5 M25944 Y. [lirf] L. liajrj' E. lejrj
K8231 bamboo matting on a carriage box
ling124:5 M28663 Y. lirj' L. liajrj E. lejrj
plume, decorative feather
ling128:5 M29044 Y. lirj' L. liajrj E. lejrj
listen; listen to, obey
ling137:5 M30393 Y. [lirj'] L. liajrj E. lejrj
K823n boat having a cabin with windows
ling140:17 M32508 Y. [lirj' ] L. liajrj E. lejrj
K836g medicinal plant; shed leaves
ling142:5 M32969 Y. lirj' L. liajrj E. lejrj
K823p see mingling , qmgling
ling159:5 M38239 Y. [ling'] L. liajrj E. lejrj
K823q cross-piece on front inside of carriage
box; linch-pin
ling163:17 M39742 Y. [lirj' ] L. liajrj E. lejrj
place name
ling167:5 M40267 Y. lirj' L. liajrj E. lejrj
K823r small bell
ling173:5 M42242A Y. lirj' L. liajrj E. lejrj
K823u form drops, fall in drops. Also E. lejrjh.
See also lian
ling173:9 M42364 Y. [lirj' ] L. liajrj E. lejrj
K836a raindrops
ling173:16 M42532 Y. lirj' L. liajrj E. lejrj
K836i numinous, supernatural; intelligent;
quick-witted

Lexicon 197
ling196:5 M46770 Y. lirj'L. liajrj E. lejrj
K823v seejilmg
ling211:5 M48632 Y. lin' L. liajrj' E. lejrj
K823x age, years of life
ling46:14 M08553 Y. lirj" L. liajrj' E. liajrj'
mountain range
ling181:5 M43423 Y. lirf L. liajrj' E. liajrj'
K823f neck, collar; lead; have jurisdiction over;
receive; comprehend, grasp
ling9:3 M00387B Y. lirf L. liajrf E. liajnh
K823a an order, command; law. See also ling
liu18:13 M02224 Y. liw' L. liw E. luw
Kl 114a' kill; battle-axe; place name; a surname
liu70:9 M13676 Y. liw' L. liw E. luw
Kl 104c pendants of a banner or cap
liu85:6 M17431 Y. liw' L. liw E. luw
K1104a flow
liu85:15 M18607 Y. [liw' ] L. liw E. luw
Kl l I4c' clear and deep (water)
liu96:6 M20978 Y. [liw' 1 L. liw E. luw
liuli glass, coloured glaze
liu96:10 M21143 Y. [liw ] L. liw' E. luw
same as liu
liu102:5 M21808 Y. liw L. liw E. luw
Klll4p remain, stay; detain. Also E. luwh
liu104:10 M22408 Y. liw' L. liw E. luw
tumour
liu112:7 M24229 Y. [liw' ] L. liw E. luw
sulphur
liu167:11 M40789 Y. [liw'] L. liw E. luw
Kl069b fine gold
liu182:11 M43943B Y. [liw] L. liw E. luw
K1069f west wind; wave, flutter. See also liu
liu187:10 M44912 Y. liw L. liw E. luw
Klll4z bay horse with black mane. Seehualiu
liu196:10 M47195 Y. liw' L. liw E. luw
xiuliu owlet
liu75:5 M14662 Y. liw L. liw' E. luw'
K11141 willow
liu122:10 M28335 Y. hV L. liw' E. luw'
Klll4x fish trap
liu85:10 M17943 Y. liwv L. liwN E. luwh
Klll4v gush forth; swift current. Graph is also
used for a colloquial word liu slide,
slippery

198 Lexicon
liu124:5 M28665 Y. [liwv] L. liwx E. luwh
Kl069a sound of beating feathers, liuliu
sound of the wind
liu173:10 M42396 Y. liwv L. livT E. luwh
K1114y impluvium
liu182:11 M43943A Y. [liwN] L. liwx E. luwh
K1069F west wind; wave, flutter. See also liu
liu196:11 M47278 Y. [liwv] L. liw% E. luwh
pipit
liu12:2 M01453a Y. liwv L. liwk E. luwk
K1032a six; also lu
liu170:8 M41708b Y. lyv L. liwk E. luwk
K1032f used for liu TN six; also lu
long30:16 M04550 Y. lurj' L. bwrjE. bwrj
longhu , longhou * , houlong
throat
long75:16 M15868 Y. lurj' L. bwrj E. bwrj
window; cage
long112:16 M24586 Y. lurj' L. bwrj E. bwrj
Kl 193k grind; hull rice; rice huller
long118:16 M26752A Y. lurj' L. bwrj E. bwrj
Kl 1931 basket; cage. See also 16ng.
long128:16 M29212 Y. lurj' L. bwrj E. bwrj
K1193m deaf
long140:16 M32438 Y. [lurj' ] L. bwrj E. bwrj
K1193h kind of plant
16ng142:16 M33832 Y. [lurj'] L. bwnE. bwrj
Kl I93o kind of ant; walong kind of demon
long212:3 M48824B Y. [lurj] L. bwrj E. bwrj
16ngl6ng full, replete. See also
pang
long104:12 M22506 Y. ljurj ' L. liwrj E. luwrj
K1015g infirm, decrepit; retention of urine
long170:9 M41746 Y. ljurj' L. liwrj E. luwrj
K1015f high, eminent, grand, exalted
long212:0 M48818 Y. ljurj' L. lywrj E. luawrj
Kll93a dragon
16ng118:16 M26752B Y. [lurf] L. bwrj' E. bwrj'
Kl 1931 large bamboo box or crate; envelop,
cover. See also long
16ng32:16 M05591 Y. ljurf L. lywrj' E. luawrj*
Kl 193f grave mound; ridge in a field
16ng170:16 M41904 Y. ljurf L. lywrj E. luawrj'
K1193g grave mound; Gansu province
long30:7 M03635 Y. lurp L. bwrjs E. bwrjh
bird cries

Lexicon 199
16ng55:4 M09596a Y. lurf L. bwrjv E. bwrjh
KllSOa manipulate, play with; lane, alleyway;
also nong
lou9:11 M01045A Y. [bw'1 L. bw E. tow
Kl23b yulou hunchback. See also lyu
16u38:8 M06383A Y. bw' L. bw E. bw
Kl23a star name; empty. See also lyu
16u64:11 M12595 Y. law', tow" L. bw E. bw
Kl23d search out. Also E. lus drag away. Now
read colloquially lou gather up and 16u
embrace
lou75:11 M15430 Y. bw' L. bw E. bw
Kl23k building of several stories
lou140:11 M31813 Y. ly' L. bw E. bw
K123e kind of Artemisia. Also E. lu§, which
accounts for the Y. reading
lou142:11 M33515 Y. [bw'] L. bw E. bw
K1231 16ugu mole-cricket; 16ugu5a
kind of frog
lou188:11 M45267 Y. bw' L. bw E. bw
K123n dulou skull
16u118:11 M26456 Y. bw L. bw' E. bw'
basket
lou85:11 M18120 Y. bw^ L. bwx E. bwh
K120a leak, drip; divulge; water-clock
lou104:11 M22467B Y. bwv L. bwv E. bwh
Kl23g fistula. See also lyu
lou167:11 M40820 Y. bwv L. bwv E. bwh
Kl23m incise, engrave
lou170:6 M41616 Y. bwv L. bwv E. bwh
K1246b low, mean; uncultivated; ugly; corrupt
lu32:16 M05586 Y. [lu'] L. luS E. b
K69j hard, black earth; wine shop
lu85:16 M18646 Y. lu' L. Iu3 E. b
river name
lu86:16 M19566 Y. lu' L. luS E. b
K691 stove; furnace
lu95:6 M20818 Y. [lu'] L. lus E. b
K77f black
lu108:11 M23050 Y. lu' L. lua E. b
K69d food vessel; black; a surname
lu120:16 M28054 Y. [lu'] L. lua E. b
K69o bleached hempen threads
lu137:16 M30582 Y. lu' L. luaE. b
prow, see zhulu

200 Lexicon
lu140:16 M32425 Y. lu' L. luS E. b
reed, Phragmites communis
lu159:16 M38596 Y. lu' L. his E. b
see lulu
lu167:16 M41038 Y. [lu'] L. luS E. b
K69m Stove
lu181:16 M43742 Y. lu' L. luS E. b
K69p skull
lu195:16 M46600 Y. lu' L. lu§ E. b
perch, Lateolabrax japonicus
lu196:16 M47467 Y. [lu'1 L. Iu5 E. b
luci J cormorant, Phalacrocorax
carbo sinensis
lu53:16 M09535 Y. ly' L. liS/lyo E. lia
K69q hut, cottage, house
lu130:16 M30027 Y.ly' L. lis/lya E. US
K69r skin; array, set out, display, expose
lu64:13 M12787a Y. [hT] L. Iu5' E. b'
capture; also lud
lu75:15 Ml5798 Y. hT L. lu§ ' E. b'
K70e large shield; scull, sweep
lu85:11 M18088 Y. hf L. luS ' E. b'
brine, salty
lu141:6 M32710a Y. lu" L. lua ' E. b'
K69e capture; captive; also Iu6
lu195:4 M46013 Y. bv L. lu§ ' E. b'
K70a blunt, dull, stupid; place name
lu197:0 M47528 Y. hf L. Iu3 ' E. b'
K71a salt flat, salt marsh
lu85:12 M18243 Y. [luv] L. Iu9v E. bh
K766u' river name
lu96:12 M21225 Y. [luv] L. Iu3v E. bh
K766r' kind of precious stone
lu154:6 M36738 Y. luv L. luSv E. bh
K766k' present, bribe
lii157:6 M37524 Y. hT L. Iu5v E. bh
K76611 road, path, way
lu159:6 M38302 Y. lus L. luaN E. bh
K766n' kind of large chariot
lu173:12 M42463 Y. luv L. Iu3s E. bh
K766t' dew; reveal, expose
lu196:12 M47362 Y. luv L. lu§N E. bh
K766v' heron, egret
lu64:11 M12593 Y. [luv] L. towk E. bwk
K1209e shake

Lexicon 201
lu85:11 M18112 Y. hr L. bwk E. bwk
K1209f draw off water; strain, filter
lu108:8 M23019 Y. [hr] L. bwk E. bwk
K1208e box; strain, pour off, same as
lu109:8 M23465 Y. hr L. bwk E. bwk
K1208g look carefully
lu112:8 M24282 Y. [hr] L. bwk E. bwk
lulu stony; mediocre, commonplace; busy
lu113:8 M24741 Y. hr L. bwk E. bwk
K1208H blessings; emolument, salary
lu118:11 M26458 Y. [hr] L. bwk E. bwk
box, hamper
lu150:0 M36182C Y. [hr] L. bwk E. bwk.
Kl202a lull king Xiongnu title. See
also gu, yu
lu159:11 M38502 Y. [hr] L. bwk E. bwk
lulu winch, windlass, pulley
lu198:0 M47586 Y. hr L. bwk E. bwk
K1209a deer
lu198:8 M47658 Y. hr L. bwk E. bwk
foot of a hill or mountain
lu12:2 M01453b Y. hV L. liwk E. luwk
Kl032a six, reading pronunciation; also liu
lu19:11 M02418 Y, [lyv] L. liwk E. luwk
K1069J join forces
lii62:11 M11655 Y. lyx L. liwk E. luwk
Kl069v punish, kill, disgrace
lu115:8 M25102 Y. [lys] L. liwk E. luwk
Kl032h kind of grain sown late, ripening early
lit140:11 M31744B Y. [lyv] L. liwk E. luwk
K1069p high or lengthy plants; trailing vines. See
also liao
lu170:8 M41708a Y. lyx L. liwk E. luwk
K1032f high plateau; dry land; mainland; also liu
as substitute for 7s six
lu118:16 M26734 Y. lys L. lywk E. luawk
register, record book
lu120:8 M27541b Y. lyx L. lywk E. luawk
Kl208k green; also lyu
lu167:8 M40519 Y. lyx L. lywk E. luawk
K1208m inscribe, record; a record
lu187:8 M44787 Y. [lyx] L. lywk E. luawk
lufcr one of the eight famous horses
of King Mu of Zhou
luan46:19 M08640 Y. bn ' L. luan E. Iwan
K178c small, steep, pointed mountain

202 Lexicon
luan75:19 M15947 Y. bn ' L. luan E. Iwan
Kl78d goldenrain tree, Koelreuteria paniculate
luan167:19 M41083 Y. bn' L. luan E. Iwan
K178f harness bells
luan196:19 M47508 Y. bn' L. luan E. Iwan
K178h fabulous bird like a phoenix
luan64:19 M13032 Y. Iqen ' L. lyan E. Iwian
Kl78n connected, continuous; contraction
luan130:19 M30049 Y. luen' L. lyan ' E. Iwian'
K1781 to mince
luan39:19 M07051b Y.[swans] L. swamv E. swianh, swainh/swe:nh
twins; also shuan
luan26:5 M02857a Y. ten L. luan ' E. Iwan'
K179a egg; also Ian
luan5:12 M00214a Y. bnv L. luanv E. lwanh
K180c disorder; also Ian
lun46:8 M08183 Y. lun' L. lun E. Iwsn
K470H see kunlun
lun149:8 M35658A Y. lun ' L. InnE. Iwan
K470b discuss, ponder; Lunyu, Analects
of Confucius. See also lun
lun9:6 M00599 Y. [lyn '] L. lyn E. Iwin
K470a think, ponder
lun9:8 M00793 Y. lyn ' L. lyn E. Iwin
K470c class, category; right principles; human
relations
lun64:8 M12238 Y. lyn ' L. lyn E. Iwin
K470j select, pick
lun85:8 M17675 Y. lyn ' L. lyn E. Iwin
K470d ripples; sink; indiscriminately, all
lun120:8 M27583A. Y. lyn ' L. lyn E. Iwin
K470e woof; twist thread; envelop; ribbon of
dark silk; fishing line. See also guan.
lun159:8 M38400 Y. lyn' L. lyn E. Iwin
K470f wheel
lun149:8 M35658B Y. luns L. luns E. lwsnh
K470b categorize; discuss; discussion; view,
opinion. See also lun.
luo64:7 M12140a Y. [bv] L. luat E. Iwat
K299e rub the palm along something; also le, lyu
luo75:19 M15933 Y. b' L. la E. la
suoluo spinulose tree fern,
Cyathea spinulosa
luo118:19 M26805 Y. b' L. la E. la
bamboo basket with square bottom

Lexicon 203
Iu6122:14 M28397 Y.fo' L. la E. la
K6a bird-net; collect, gather, spread; gauze
lud140:19 M32590 Y. b ' L. la E. la
K6b creeper, vine
luo167:19 M41081 Y. b' L. la E. la
gong
luo162:19 M39259a Y. fr L. lav E. lah
patrol; also Iu6
lu<5142:11 M33512 Y. b' L. lua E. Iwa
snail; helical shell; luosi snail;
screw
Iu6142:15 M33796C Y. b'L. lua E. Iwa
Kl24lo same as See also li, li
luo142:13 M33685A Y. [b'] L. lua E. Iwa
K14b snail, same as . See also Iu6
luo147:12 M34962 Y. [b'] L. lua E. Iwa
luolyu detailed and well-ordered
(of a discourse)
luo187:11 M44957 Y. b ' L. lua E. Iwa
K577t mule
Iu6112:5 M24088 Y. [IcTj L. la' E. la'
see 16ilu6
luo104:11 M22447 Y. [kTl L. lua' E. Iwa'
ludli scrofula
Iu6130:17 M30032 Y. b L. lua' E. Iwa'
K35li bare, naked
luo140:10 M31658 Y. [b"] L. lua' E. Iwa'
K1236b fruit of low-growing plants such as
melons
Iu6142:13 M33685B Y. b~L. lua' E. Iwa'
Kl4b gu61u6 wasp. See also Iu6
luo145:8 M34371 Y. b~ L. lua ' E. Iwa'
K35lh bare, naked
Iu664:13 M12787b Y. \u L. luS ' E. b'
capture; also lu
Iu6141:6 M32710b Y. hT L. Iu3 ' E. b'
K69e capture; captive; also lu
luo162:19 M39259b Y. fr L. IsC E. lah
patrol; also luo
luo64:11 M12594 Y. bv L. luav E. lwah
pile up, stack
luo85:6 M17383 Y. law\bs L. lak E. lak
K766k river name
luo85:15 M18563 Y. [lawv] L. lak E. lak
K1125g river name. Also E. lawk and p^wk.

204 Lexicon
luo86:6 M19014b Y. law\ b^ L. lak E. lak
K766n scorch, burn; brand; iron; also lao.
luo96:6 M20953 Y. lawv L. lak E. lak
K766u Iu61u6 stony, hard
luo120:6 M27426a Y. law\bv L. lak E. lak
K766o silk thread; net, web
luo140:9 M31362a Y. law\ bN L. lak E. lak
K766q' drop, fall; also lao, la
luo157:15 M37%5B Y. [lawv] L. lak E. lak
K1125k zhuoluo outstanding. See also li.
luo164:6 M398475 Y. law\ bN L. lak E. lak
K766p alternative reading, also lao
luo172:6 M42026 Y. [lawv] L. lak E. lak
K766q kind of bird; same as
luo187:6 M44734 Y. [law% foN] L. lak E. lak
K766s white horse with black mane; Iu6tuo
camel
luo196:6 M46881 Y. [lawv] L. lak E. lak
K766t kind of aquatic bird
luo93:10 M20126 Y. lwawv L. Iwaiwk E. laiwk/lceiwk
parti-coloured ox. Y reading from
Menggu ziyun.
lyu140:15 M32313 Y. [lyv] L. Ii3/ly5 E. US
K69u madder
lyu169:7 M41334 Y. ly ' L. HS/lyS E. US
K76g gate of an alley; gate of a village; village
lyu187:16 M45069 Y. ly ' L. liS/lyS E. US
donkey, ass
lyu38:8 M06383B Y. ly L. lyS E. luS
K123a drag, trail. See also lou
lyu104:11 M22467A Y. [ly] L. lyS E. luS
K123g julyu crooked spine, hunchback.
See also lou.
lyu130:11 M29844 Y. [ly' ] L. ly§ E. Iu3
K123c kind of sacrifice. Also E. bw
lyu9:7 M00647 Y. ly" L. Ii5'/ly3' E. US'
K76d companion, associate
lyu30:4 M03386 Y. ly' L. HS'/lya' E. US'
K76a backbone; pitch pipe; a surname
lyu70:6 M13644 Y. ly" L. lia'/lyS' E. US'
K77a troop; journey; traveller; lodge, lodging
lyu75:7 M14862 Y. [ly"] L. US'Ays' E. US'
K76e beam supporting the rafters of a roof
lyu130:10 M29755 Y. ly" L. lis'/lya' E. US'
K77e spine, backbone

Lexicon 205
lyu9:11 M01045B
K123b
lyu120:11 M27832
K123H
lyu145:11 M34530
lyu44:11 M07787
K123f
lyu44:12 M07799a
K562a
lyu64:7 M12140c
K299e
lyu61:11 M11132
K69f
lyu167:15 M41021
K69v
lyu120:8 M27541a
K1208k
lyu60:6 M10097
K502c
lyu95:6 M20817C
K498a
lyu130:11 M29840
K498h
lyue64:8 M12273
K755k
lyue102:6 M21839
K766v
lyue167:7 M40470
K299c
Y. lyv L. Iy5 ' E. Iu3'.
hunchback. See also lou
Y. ly" L. lp ' E. Iu3'
thread, strand, wisp; in detail
Y. [ly"l L. Iy5 ' E. lug'
lanlyu ragged, shabby
Y. lyv L. lyfr E. lush
frequently, repeatedly
Y. If L. li' E. li'
shoe; to walk; also IT.
Y. [kr] L. luat E. Iwat
pluck; stroke; reading as if from E. Iwit
(with irregular tone) which Guangyun
gives for ?f, said to be equivalent to
ffi; also luo, le.
Y. ly* L. \&/\y& E. Ii9h
think, ponder; concern, anxiety
Y. [ly^] L. l&YlyS* E. liah
file; to file, burnish
Y. lyx L. lywk E. luawk
green, also lu
Y. ty L. lyt E. Iwit
row, rank; law, statute, regulations; pitch
pipe
Y. [lyx] L. lyt E. Iwit
limit; norm; proportion, ratio. See also
shuai, shuo
Y. [ly*] L. lyt E. Iwit
fat round the intestines
Y. ljew\ljov L. liak E. liak
rob, plunder. Also E. liarjh
Y. IjewMjo^ L. liak E. liak
trace out, measure; plan; outline,
summary; hurried,remiss; rob
Y. [lqes] L. lyat E. Iwiat
an ancient unit of weight

206 Lexicon
ma64:5 M11926c Y. mo", mav L. muat E. mat
wipe; also mo, mo
ma142:11 M33542 Y. ma' L. mai E. mai/mei
K802n hama rog
ma200:0 M47888 Y. ma' L. maj E. mai/me:
K17a hemp
ma96:10 M21156 Y. [ma"i T,. mai' E. mai'/mei'
manao agate
ma112:10 M24368 Y. [ma*! L. mai' E. mai'/me:'
manao agate
ma187:0 M44572 Y. ma" L. mai' E. mai'/mef
K40a horse
ma113:10 M24799 Y. [mav] L. maT E. maih/me:h
K40f sacrifice made by army on expedition;
horse sacrifice. Also written
ma122:10 M28333 Y. mas L. maf E. maih/meih
K40h curse, abuse
ma 153:6 M36549C
K766H same as See also hao, he, mo
mai32:7 M05116 Y. maj' L. may E. msij/mey
K9781 bury
mai140:14 M32198 Y. [maj'] L. may E. msij/mey
K978m bury
mai173:14 M42507 Y. maj' L. may E. maij/mey
K978n haze
mai154:5 M36708 Y. maj" L. may' E. maij'/mey'
K1240c buy
mai19:13 M02459 Y. [maf] L. maijv E. maijh(s)/m£:jh
K267c exert one's strength
mai154:8 M36825 Y. majv L. mayv E. maijh/me:jh
K1240e sell
mai162:13 M39169 Y. majv L. may'v E. maijh(s)/meyh
K267d step, stride, proceed, march
mai130:6 M29469a Y. majx L. maijk E. msijk/meyk
K848a blood vessels, arteries and veins; pulse;
also mo
mai173:10 M42385a Y. [majx] L. maijk E. moijk/meyk
K848c maimu drizzle. Also mo
mai199:0 M47717a Y. majv L. maijk E. moijk/meyk
K932a wheat; also mo
man109:11 M23649 Y. mon' L. muan E. man
K183d manman with the eyes shut
man140:11 M31784B Y. [mon'] L. muan E. man
K266d manjing turnip. See also man,
wan

Lexicon 207
man149:11 M35909A Y. mon' L. muan E. man
K266o deceive, cheat. Also E. mjian, same
meaning
man177:7 M42835 Y. mon' L. muan E.man
K222f upper or vamp of a shoe
man195:11 M46443 Y. [mon'] L. muan E.man
eel
man142:19 M33914 Y. man' L. mam E. main/mem
K178p (southern) barbarians
man190:11 M45568 Y. [man'] L. mam E. main/mem
flower garland, floral headdress
man85:11 M18099 Y. mon" L. muan' E.man'
K183c full
man32:11 M05405 Y. monv L. muanv E. manh
K2661 trowel; to plaster; wall decoration
man50:11 M09050 Y. monv L. muanv E. manh
K266j curtain
man85:11 M18166 Y. monv L. muanN E. manh
K266n overflow; widespread, everywhere; free,
unrestrained
man120:11 M27829. Y. mon' L. muanv E. manh
K266k unpatterned silk. Also E. mainh/me:nh,
same as
man163:11 M39619 Y. [monv] L. muanv E. manh
K2661 place name
man167:11 M40807 Y. monv L. muanv E. manh
trowel. Also E. man, L. muan, Y. mon'
man38:11 M06644 Y. manv L. mamv E. mainh/memh
K266e scorn, humiliate
man61:11 Ml 1110 Y. manv L. manr E. mainh/me:nh
K266H slow; supercilious, rude
man149:11 M35909B Y. manN L. mamv E. mainh/me:nh
K266o cheat (also E. manh); disrespectful, rude
. See also ma"n
man73:7 M14298a Y. uanv L. ujyan^am" E. muanh
K266a drawn out, long; also wan
man140:11 M31784Ab Y. uanv L. ujyan^aur E. muanh
K266d creeping vine; spread, extend; drawn out;
also wan. See also man
mang61:3 M10334 Y. mar)' L. marj E. marj
K742o anxious; busy
mang140:3 M30682 Y. marj' L. marj E. marj
K742k awn, beard of grain
mang140:6 M30900 Y. marj' L. marj E. marj
K742d' boundlesss and indistinct; confused,
ignorant

208 Lexicon
mang163:3 M39282 Y. mag' L. mag E. mag
place name; hill north of Luoyang
mang167:7 M40490 Y. man/ L. ujyarj/uarj E. muarj
K742c' point of a weapon
mang83:4 M17030b Y. marj' L. maijrj E. maijrj/meijrj
K742u people; vagrants; also meng
mang109:3 M23132 Y. marj', muq' L. maijrj E. maijrj/meyrj
K742q blind
mang27:7 M02942 Y. mar)' L. maiwrj E. maiwrj/mceiwrj
Kl20le great, ample, thick; particoloured
mang43:4 M07554a Y. [mag'] L. maiwrj E. maiwrj/mceiwrj
Kl20la shaggy dog; particoloured, motley; also
pang
mang187:7 M44761 Y. [mar)'] L. maiwrj E. maiwrj/mceiwrj
Kl20ld particoloured, variegated
m&ng85:12 M18218 Y. marjv L.marj' E. marj'
broad, vast
mSng140:8 M31132 Y. marf L.marj' E. mar)'
K709a rank grass, weeds
mang142:12 M33572 Y. marf L.marj' E. marj'
python, boa
mao153:9 M36595 Y. [maw'] L. maiw E. maiw
cat. Also E. miaw
mao64:11 M12644Ab Y. [maw*] L. mak E. mak
also mo. See also mo
mdo70:6 M13642A Y. maw' L. muaw E. maw
Kll37c ox-tail banner
m^o82:0 M16772 Y. maw' L. muaw E. maw
Kll37a hair, down, fur, feathers
mao82:11 M16952B Y. [maw] L. muaw E. maw
K979i, Kl 137f yak-tail. See also If
mao140:4 M30745A Y. mow' L. muaw E. maw
Kll37g greens, vegetables. See also mao
mao190:4 M45377 Y. maw' L. muaw E. maw
Kl I37e long hair; uncut tufts of hair worn by
children; talented
mao93:11 M20154B Y. [maw'] L. maiw E. maiw/rriEiw
K979j long-haired ox; yak. See also If
mao140:5 M30836 Y. maw' L. maiw E. maiw/meiw
Kll09c various grasses, Miscanthus, etc.; thatch;
maosi latrine
mao142:9 M33294B Y. maw' L. maiw E. maiw/meiw
Kll09m banmao Chinese blister beetle,
cantharides. See also mou
mao110:0 M23846 Y. maw' L. maw E. muw
Kll09a lance, spear

Lexicon 209
mao142:11 M33549 Y. maw' L. mow E. muw
Kl I09n insect that eats the roots of grain.
Expected reading m6u. Cf. mou
a variant graph for the same word
mao26:3 M02847 Y. maw" L. ma:w' E. maiw'/rne:w'
Kl 114a fourth Earthly Branch
mao72:5 M13865 Y. maw" L. irmiw' E. maiw'/meiw'
Kl l I4g star name, the Pleiades
mao85:5 M17293 Y. [maw"] L. maiw' E. maiw'/meiw'
still pond; name of a lake
mao140:5 M30838 Y. [maw"] L. maiw' E. maiw'/me:w'
Klll4f watershield, Brasenia purpurea. Also
mao, same as
mao13:7 M01538A Y. maws L. muaws E. mawh
K1062a cover; covering; cap; risk, venture; claim
falsely. See also mo
mao38:9 M06527 Y. mawv L. muaw" E. mawh
Kl062c jealous
mao50:9 M08971 Y. mawv L. muawv E. mawh
hat, cap
mao96:9 M21096A Y. [mawN] L. muawv E. mawh
Kl062d cap of a jade sceptre; see daimao
See also mei
mao109:4 M23194 Y. mawv L. muawv E. mawh
K1137i blurred vision. AlsoE. maiwk
mao125:4 M28848 Y. mawv L. muawv E. mawh
Kl 137h very aged, 90 years old
mao140:4 M30745B Y. [mowv] L. muawv E. mawh
Kll37g gather (vegetables). See also mao
mao106:2 M22686 Y. [mawv] L. maiwvE. maiwh
Kll71a appearance, look, same as
mao153:7 M36556 Y. mawv L. maiwv E. maiwh
Kl 17 ib appearance, look
mao61:13 Ml 1333 Y. mawv L. mawv E. mawh
Kl I09f strive; diligent; profuse, lush, same as
mao109:9 M23541 Y. [m9wv] L. mswv E. maw*1
Kll09q troubled eyesight; deluded. Also E.
maiwk
mao140:5 M30833 Y. mawv L. mawv E. mawh
Kl23lf luxuriant (vegetation)
mao145:5 M34213a Y. [m3wv] L. mswv E. m9wh
length (of a tract of land), also mou
mao154:5 M36721 Y. maw^ L. m3wv E. mow
Klll4j trade, commerce
mao163:12 M39651 Y. [m9wN] L. mawN E. m9wh
place name

210 Lexicon
mei46:9 M08278 Y. muj' L. mi E. mi
6m6i mountain in Sichuan
mei75:9 M15155 Y. muj' L. mi E. mi
K567f lintel of a door
mei85:9 M17809 Y. muj' L. mi E. mi
K567g riverbank
mei109:4 M23190 Y. muj' L. mi E. mi
K567a eyebrow
mei163:9 M39514 Y. [muj'] L. mi E. mi
place name. Also E. mih
mei38:9 M06498 Y. muj' L. muaj E. rnaj
K948c go-between, matchmaker
mei75:4 M14554 Y. muj' L. muaj E. maj
K546a stem, branch, twig
mei75:7 M14830 Y. muj' L. muaj E. msj
K9471 Japanese apricot, Prunus mume
mei86:9 M19220 Y. muj' L. muaj E. maj
K948d soot; coal
mei96:4 M20874 Y. muj' L. muajE. maj
K546b kind of pearl; meigui rugosa rose;
rose
mei113:9 M24776 Y. [muj'] L. muaj E. msj
K948e divine intercessor to whom one prays for
a son. Cf. mei
mei130:6 M29465 Y. [muj'] L. muaj E. msj
K950c meat on the backbone, same as
mei130:7 M29525 Y. [muj'] L. muaj E. maj
K947m meat on the sides of the backbone
mei140:7 M31047A Y. muj' L. muaj E. maj
berry. See also mei
mei167:7 M40435 Y. [muj'] L. muaj E. msj
K947n large ring with two smaller rings
attached
m6i123:3 M28435 Y. muj" L. mi' E. mi'
K568a beautiful
mei80:3 M16725 Y. [muf] L. muaj' E. msj'
K9471 every, each
mei85:7 M17510 Y. [muf] L. muaj' E. maj'
K2221 defile; meimei richly flowing water
mei38:9 M06513 Y. mujv L. mi" E. mih
K567d flatter, fawn on
mei194:3 M45764 Y. [muf] L. mi* E. mih
K522a kind of demon
mei194:5 M45811 Y. muj" L.mi* E. mih
K531h chlmei mountain demon

Lexicon 211
mei40:9 M07236 Y. mujv L. mji" E. mjih
K531i sleep
mei38:5 M06138 Y. muf L. muajv E. majh
K531k younger sister
mei72:5 M13846 Y. mujv L. muajv E. majh
K53ln dusk, dark; hide, deceive; ignorant; risk
mei96:9 M21096B Y. mujs L. muajx E. mojh
Kl062d daimei See also mao
mei104:7 M22184 Y. [mujv] L. muajv E. majh
K947q pain, distress. Also read E. xwajh
mei140:7 M31047B Y. [mujv] L. muajv E. majh
meimei luxuriant (vegetation). See
also mei
mei145:4 M34154 Y. mujx L. mjiaf E. mjiajh
K312d sleeve
mei149:10 M35800c Y. miv L. mjiajv E. mejh
riddle, enigma. Also mi, mi
men64:8 M12197 Y. mun' L. mun E. man
K441e stroke, touch
men115:11 M25257 Y. [mun'] L. mun E. man
K442a kind of grain
men169:0 M41208 Y. mun L. mun E. man
K44la gate; door
men8:20 M00342B Y. [mun'] L. mun E. man
K585a place name. See also w6i
men61:8 M10729 Y. mun" L. munv E. manh
K44ld melancholy, depressed
men61:14 M11384 Y. munv L. munv E. man*1
K183g depressed, discontented. Also E. man',
man'
meng109:14 M23774b Y. murj' L. mswrj E. mawrj
KllSlc hoodwink, cheat; unconscious; wild
guess; also meng
meng109:11 M23653 Y. murj' L. muarj E. marj
K902d darkened; ashamed, despondent. Also
E. muwrj
meng83:4 M17030a Y. man' L. mayrj E. maijrj/meijrj
K742u people; vagrants; also mang
meng98:11 M21587 Y. man', mun' L. maijrj E. maijrj/meijr)
K902e rafters, beam supporting roof tiles
meng140:8 M31265 Y. man', murj' L. maijrj E. maijrj/meijr)
K760g sprout, shoot, bud
meng102:3 M21743 Y. [msrj', murj']L. mayrjE. maijrj/mEijr)
same as
meng142:3 M32835 Y. man' L. maijrj E. maijq/meijrj
K742s gadfly

212 Lexicon
meng142:9 M33318 Y. [mag', mug'] L. mayrjE. maijrj/meijg
K742t gadfly
meng108:8 M23024a Y. mig' L. miajg E. miajg
K760e covenant, make a covenant, also ming
meng50:14 M09122A Y. [mug'] L. mswrj E. mawrj
KllSlb cloak, hood; to cover. See also mSng
meng85:14 M18491 Y. murj' L. mawrj E. mawrj
KllSld fine rain; mengmeng drizzly, misty
meng109:14 M23774 Y. mug' L. mown. E. mawrj
Kl 181c blind; drowzy, half asleep; also meng
meng140:10 M31555 Y. murj' L. mawrj E. mswrj
KllSla to cover; ignorant; encounter, be exposed
to; receive
meng173:14 M42508 Y. [murj'] L. mawrj E. mowrj
dark sky. Also E. m9wrjh
meng184:14 M44451 Y. [murj'] L. mawrj E. mawrj
KllSlf full (food vessel)
meng205:0 M48257C Y.[mag", mug"] L. maijrj'E. msijg'/meyg'
K1252 toad. See also mTn, mian
meng94:8 M20498 Y. mug" L. meg' E. maijrj/meijg
K76lg fierce
merig50:14 M09122B Y. [mugv] L. mawg' E. mawg'
KllSlb m&ngmeng dense, luxuriant. See
also meng
meng61:16 M11451 Y. mug" L. mswg' E. mawg'
mengddng muddled, ignorant
m£ng142:14 M33745 Y. [mug"] L. mawg' E. mawg'
KllSle midge. AlsoE. mawg
meng39:5 M06960 Y. msg", murf L. maijg" E. m9ijgh/meygh
K76le eldest (of brothers); first month of a
quarter
meng36:11 M05802 Y. mugv L. rnawg" E. muwgh
K902a dream
mi140:17 M32515 Y. [muj'] L. mi E. mi
K598m miwu fragrant plant
mi198:6 M47625 Y. muj' L. mi E. mi
K598f elaphure, Pere David's deer
mi119:11 M27097 Y. muj' L. mi E. mis/mi
Kl7g rice gruel; destroy, crush; rotten; waste
mi175:11 M42612B Y. [muj'] L. mi E. miS/mi
Kl7h divide, distribute. See also ml
mi140:19 M32583Y. [muj'] L. mi E. mis/mi
fragrant plant, same as
mi57:14 M09877 Y. mi' L. mji E. mjiS/mji
K359m long; extend; extensively; extend to;
increasingly

Lexicon 213
mi85:17 M18690 Y. mi' L. mji E. mjis/mji
K359o full-flowing; also E. mjia'
mi94:17 M20788 Y. [mi'] L. mji E. mjiS/mji
mihdu rhesus monkey, macaque
mi162:6 M38825 Y. mi' L. mjiaj E. mej
K598e be confused, perplexed; fascinated
mi198:9 M47675 Y. [mi'] L. miaj E. mej
K360e fawn
mi149:10 M35800b Y. mi" L. mjiajv E. mejh
riddle, enigma; also mi, mei
ml57:6 M09768 Y. mi" L. mji' E. mjiS'/mji'
K360a curve at the end of a bow; stop; repress
ml175:11 M42612A Y. [mf] L. mi' E. mia'/mi'
Kl7h not, there is not (preclassical); small;
let fall; extravagant. See also mi
ml66:6 M13191 Y. [mf ] L. mji' E. mjiS'/mji'
K598h stroke, soothe
ml123:1 M28428 Y. [mf] L. mji' E. mjis'/mji'
the bleating of sheep; ruling surname of
the ancient state of Chu
ml109:6 M23289 Y. mf L. mjiaj' E. mej'
K598d get something in the eye, troubled sight
ml119:0 M26832 Y. mf L. mjiaj' E. mej'
K598a hulled grain; rice
mi113:5 M24663a Y. pi" L.pi" E. pih
K405m secret, also bi
mi115:5 M24977a Y. pi" L.pi" E. pih
vulgar form of $&
mi149:10 M35800a Y. mi" L. mjiajx E. mejh
riddle, enigma; also mi, mei
mi14:14 M01601 Y. [mi"] L. mjiajk E. mejk
K802s cloth cover
mi50:10 M09024 Y. [mi"] L. mjiajk E. mejk
K84lf to cover
mi85:4 M17152 Y. [mi"] L. mjiajk E. mejk
K304f Miluo river name
mi147:4 M34815 Y. mi" L. mjiajk E. mejk
seek
mi206:2 M48317 Y. [mi"] L. mjiajk E. mejk
K859a cover for cauldron
mi40:8 M07205 Y. muj" L. mil E. mit
K405p silent; close, dense; secret
mi40:5 M07098A Y. [mi"] L. mjit E. miit
K405o silent, tranquil. See also fu.
mi142:8 M33143 Y. mi" L. mjit E. mjit
K405r honey

214 Lexicon
mi149:10 M35803 Y. [mi"] L. mjit E. mjit
K405t quiet
mian75:8 M14919 Y. [mjen'] L. mjian E. mjian
cotton
mi£n120:8 M27592 Y. mjen' L. mjian E. mjian
K225a floss silk; soft, downy; long-drawn-out,
continuous
mian120:9 M27644 Y. [mjen'] L. mjian E. mjian
K225b same as
mian109:5 M23240 Y. mjen' L. mjian E. men
K457e sleep
mian109:10 M23600C Y. [mjen'] L. mjian E. men
K84lb sleep, same as See also mTng, mian
mian9:7 M00700 Y. mjen" L. mian' E. mian'
K222b bow the head. Guangyun also reads
pus', same as
mian10:5 M01358A Y. mjen" L. mian' E. mian'
K222a avoid, escape; dismiss. See also wen
mian13:9 MO 1545 Y. mjen" L. mian' E. mian'
K222d ceremonial cap, crown
mian19:7 M02362 Y. mjen" L. mian' E. mian'
K222c exert oneself, strive; encourage, urge
mian38:7 M06337A Y. [mjen"] L. mian' E. mian'
K222g give birth. See also wan
mian9:9 M00890 Y. [mjen"] L. mjian' E. mjian'
K223b to face; oppose, go against
mian85:4 M17207 Y. mjen" L. mjian' E. mjian'
K247c river name; full-flowing
mian85:9 M17826 Y. mjen" L. mjian' E. mjian'
K223c addicted to wine
mian85:13 M18378C Y. [min"] L. mjin' E. mjin'
river name, also . See also min, she"ng
mian120:9 M27674 Y. [mjen'] L. mjian' E. mjian'
K223d thin, drawn-out; distant
mian205:0 M48257B Y. mjen" L. mjian' E. mjian'
K1252d mianchi place name. See also
mln, mSng
mian109:4 M23182 Y. mjen" L. mjian' E. men'
K247b look askance. Also E. menh
mian176:0 M42618 Y. mjen" L. mjian" E. mjianh
K223a face, countenance; surface
mian199:9 M47827 Y. mjen" L. mjian" E. menh
flour; noodles
mian109:10 M23600B Y. [mjenv] L. mjian" E. menh
K841b dizzy, confused. See also mTng, mian

Lexicon 215
mido64:9 M12339 Y. mjew' L. miaw E. miaw
trace, copy; retouch
miao140:5 M30781 Y. mjew' L. miaw E. miaw
K1159a seedling, sprout
miao75:4 M14490 Y. mjew" L. mjiaw' E. mjiaw'
Kll58c tip, end
miao85:9 M17794 Y. mjew" L. mjiaw' E. mjiaw'
Kl I58e vast waters; distant and indistinct, vague
miao109:4 M23188 Y. mjew" L. mjiaw' E. mjiaw'
Kl 158a blind in one eye; squint; fine, minute
miao115:4 M24952 Y. [mjew"] L. mjiaw' E. mjiaw'
beard of grain; second, 60th of a minute
miao140:14 M32267 Y. mjew" L. mjiaw' E. mjiaw'
Kll7lc small, petty; despise; distant
miao162:14 M39198 Y. [mawv] L. maiwk E. maiwk/moeiwk
Kl 17 id distant, remote
miao53:12 M09489 Y. mjewv L. miawv E. miawh
K1160a ancestral temple
miao38:4 M06090 Y. mjewv L. mjiaw" E. mjiawh
K11585 wonderful, excellent; subtle, mysterious
miao53:9 M09400 Y. [mjew"l L. miaw" E. miawh
K11595 same as
miao120:11 M27855Bb Y. miwv L. mjiwv E. mjiwh
K10691 a surname; also miu. See also mou, mu
mie85:10 M18008 Y. mjev L. mjiat E. mjiat
K294b extinguish, destroy
mie61:15 M11422 Y. [mjev] L. mjiat E. met
K31 ig belittle, despise
mie109:15 M23795 Y. [mjes] L. mjiat E. met
K31 Ih sore eye, bleary eye
mie118:11 M26416 Y. mjex L. mjiat E. met
K31 Ik rind of reed or sorghum; thin bamboo
strip
mie140:11 M31781 Y. mje" L. mjiat E. met
K311a eliminate, destroy; there is no ...
(perfective)
mm46:5 M08007 Y. [min'] L. min E. min
mountains in northwest Sichuan
min61:4 M10350 Y. [min'] L. min E. min
K475m exert oneself; minmin dark, obscure
min72:4 M13775 Y. min' L. min E. min
K475n autumnal sky
min96:5 M20916 Y. min' L. min E. min
K457d kind of precious stone
min120:9 M27652 Y. min' L. min E. min
K457x cord (for stringing coins)

216 Lexicon
mfn169:6 M41315a Y. min' L. min E. min
K44 li Fujian; ancient people of that region; also
mln. Also E. mun
min83:1 M17028 Y. min' L. mjin E. mjin
K457a people
mln108:0 M22941a Y. min" L. miajrj' E. miajrj'
K76la bowl, vessel
mln61:9 M10919 Y. min" L. min' E. min'
K457z sorrow; pity
mTn66:7 M13217 Y. min" L. min' E. min'
Kl25lq quick, nimble, keen
mTn169:4 M41251 Y. min" L. min' E. min'
K475q distress; pity; a surname
mTn169:6 M41315b Y. min' L. min E. min
K4411 alternative reading, also min
mTn85:5 M17324 Y. min" L. mjin' E. mjin'
K457c ruin, destroy; vanish, die out
min85:13 M18378B Y. [min"] L. mjin' E. mjin'
river name, also . See also mian,
sh6ng
mTn205:0 M48257A Y. [min"] L. miin'E. mjin'
Kl252d toad; mTnmian exert oneself. See
also mSng, mian
ming72:4 Ml3805 Y. mirj' L. miajrj E. miajrj
K760a light, bright, clear; eyesight; intelligent;
understand
ming108:8 M23024b Y. min' L. miajrj E. miajrj
K760e covenant, make a covenant.; also meng
ming196:3 M46672 Y. mirj' L. miajrj E. miajrj
K827a to ring, sound; cry of birds, insects, etc.
ming30:3 M03297 Y. min' L. mjiajrj E. mjiajrj
K826a name
ming14:8 M01588 Y. mirj' L. mjiajrj E. mejrj
K841a dark, obscure; deep, profound
ming72:10 M14083A Y. min' L. mjiajrj E. mejrj
dusk. See also ming
ming85:10 M17947 Y. mirj' L. mjiajrj E. mejrj
K841c ocean
ming109:10 M23600A Y. ming' L. mjiajrj E. mejrj
K84lb close the eyes. See also mian, mian
ming142:10 M33429 Y. mirj' L. mjiajrj E. mejrj
K84ld mingling caterpillar
ming167:6 M40385 Y. mirj' L. mjiajrj E. mejrj
K826d engrave; inscription
ming140:6 M30864 Y. mirj" L. mjiajrj' E. mejrj'
alternative reading, see mTng

Lexicon 217
mTng108:0 M22941b Y. mirf L. miajrj' E. miajrj'
K761a bowl, vessel; also mln
mTng140:6 M30864 Y. mil)" L. mjiajrj' E. mejrj'
tender tea leaves; tea; also ming
mTng164:6 M39846 Y. mirf L. mjairj' E. mejrj'
mTngdTng intoxicated
ming30:5 M03473 Y. mirf L. miajrf E. miajrjh
K762a decree; fate; life
ming72:10 M14083B Y. mirf L. mjiajrf E. mejrjh
nighttime. See also ming
miu120:11 M27855Ba Y. miwN L. mjiwv E. mjiwh
K10691 same as ; also miao. See also mou, mu
miu149:11 M35872a Y. miwN L. mjiwv E. mjiwh
Kl069m false; lie; err; also niu
mo64:11 M12644Aa Y. [maws] L. mak E. mak
feel, stroke, touch; also mao; mosuo
grope, fumble. See also mo
mo64:11 M12613 Y. mo' L. mua E. ma
K17e rub, polish
mo112:11 M24449A Y. mo' L. mua E. ma
Kl7f grind
mo194:11 M45906 Y. mo' L. mua E. ma
evil spirit, demon
mo200:3 M47892 Y. mo L. mua E. ma
Kl7d small, minute. Also E. ma'
mo64:11 M12644B Y. mu' L. mua E. mo
copy, trace. See also mo, m6
mo64:11 M12645 Y. [mu'] L. mua E. mo
copy, trace, same as B
mo75:11 M15453b Y. mu' L. mua E. mo
K802j pattern, standard, model
mo130:11 M29834A Y. [mu'] L. mua E. mo
K802k prostrate oneself in worship. See also mo
m6149:11 M35864 Y. mu' L. mua E. mo
K8021 plan
mo64:5 Ml 19265 Y. mo", mav L. muat E. mat
apply, smear; also mo, ma
mo112:11 M24449B Y. mo L.musC E. mah
Kl7f grindstone
mo1:2 M00010B Y. [mujv] L. musk E. mak
Moqi non-Chinese surname in the
N.Wei Dynasty
mo 13:7 M01538B Y. [mujN] L. jnuSk E. mak
Kl062a covet; Modun , founder of the
Xiongnu empire. The reading du < E.
dawk given for the second character
108:0
140:6
164:6
30:5
72:10
120:1
149:1
64:11
64:11
112:1
194:1
200:3
64:11
64:11
75:11
130:1
149:1
64:5
112:1
1:2
13:7

218 Lexicon
mo (continued) by one late Hanshu commentator is not
possible for the graph. See also mao
moM05469 Y. muj" L. mu5k E. mak
K904c black, pitch black; ink; tatooing
moM28026 Y. [mujv] L. musk E. mak
K904f cord, string
moM48063 Y. [mujv] L. muSk E. mak
K904d silent
moM07282 Y. maw\moN L. mak E. mak
K802n jim6 silent, still, desolate
moM29834B Y.[ maws] L. mak E. mak
K802k membrane. Now also read mo in this
sense. See also m6
moM18149 Y. mawv L. mak E. mak
K802p desert; quiet, still
moM31078A Y. mawv,mov L. mak E. mak
K802a no one, nothing, none; don't (post-
classical). See also mu
moM40784 Y. [mawv] L. mak E. mak
moye famous sword
moM29469b Y. majL. maijk E. maijk/mEijk
K848b blood vessels, arteries and veins; pulse;
also mai
moM423855 Y. [maivl L. maijk E. msijk/meijk
K848c momudrizzle.; also mai
moM477175 Y. maj"JL. maijk E. maijk/meijk
K932a wheat; also mai
moM36549B Y. [majvl L. maijk E. maijk/meijk
K766H same as See also hao, h6, ma
moM36550 Y. majv L. maijk E. maijk/me:jk
K78lf northeastern people in the Zhou dynasty
moM36621 Y. [majv] L. maijk E. maijk/m£ijk
tapir
moM41617 Y. majv L. maijk E. maijk/meijk
K781g path between cultivated fields, east-west
moM44949 Y. majv L. maijk E. maijk/meijk
mount a horse; suddenly
moM16385 Y. [muv] L. mut E. mot
K492c die
moM17204 Y. imT L. mut E. mat
K492b sink; drown; die
moM11926a Y. mo", mav L. muat E. mat
daub, plaster; also md, ma
mo M14420 Y. mo% maw L. muat E. mat
K277a tip; end; nonessentials

Lexicon 219
mo
mo
mou
mou
mou
mou
mou
mou
mou
mou
mou
m6u
m6u
mou
mu
mu
mu
mu
mu
mu
mu
2$. 85:5
ffi 115:5
f£ 9:6
%- 93:2
%$ 109:6
§ 142:9
t£ 149:9
3£ 167:9
ft 199:6
^ 120:11
^ 75:5
ft 102:5
$ 62:1
145:5
^ 75:11
$t 38:6
ft 64:5
"^ 80:1
tt 93:3
ft 102:5
S§ 102:7
M17235
K277b
M24992
K277c
M00597
KlllOe
M19928
KlllOa
M23312
KlllOe
M33294A
K1109m
M35756
K948f
M40640
K1109o
M47774
KlllOd
M27855A.
K10691
M14618
K948a
M21815b
K949a
M11532b
K1231a
M34213b
M15453a
K802J
M06216
Ml 1944
K947g
M16723
K947a
M19933
K1063a
M21815a
K949a
M21864
K947o
Y. mo\mawv L. muat E. mat
foam, froth; saliva
Y. [mos] L. muat E. mat
feed grain to animals; fodder
Y. maw' L. maw E. muw
equal; alike, uniform
Y. maw' L. maw E. muw
bellow, moo
Y. maw' L. maw E. muw
pupil of the eye
Y. [maw'] L. maw E. muw
insect that eats roots of grain, same as
mao ^. See also mao
Y. maw L. maw E. muw
to plan, scheme
Y. maw' L. maw E. muw
ancient cooking vessel; helmet
Y. maw' L. maw E. muw
barley
Y. maw' L. mjiw E. mjiw
choumou $1 $$• closely bound together.
Also E. muw. See also miao, miu, mu
Y. mu" L. maw' E. maw'
such-and-such
Y. mu" L. maw' E. maw'
unit of land measure, Chinese acre; also
mu.
Y. inr [sic] L. mawv E. mawh
5th Heavenly Stem; usually read wii.
Y. [mawv] L. mawv E. mawh
alternative reading, see mao
Y. mu' L. mua E. mo
pattern, standard, model, see mo
Y. mu" L. mua' E. mo'
governess, old woman; now also lao
Y. [mu"] L. maw' E. maw'
thumb; big toe
Y. mu" L. maw' E. maw'
mother
Y. mu" L. maw' E. maw'
male of animals
Y. mu" L. maw' E. maw'
unit of land measure, Chinese acre; also
mou
Y. [mu"] L. maw' E. maw'
same as tft.

220 Lexicon
miiM06159 Y. [iri9ws] L. msw^ E. mawh
K947f governess. The modern reading properly
belongs to jfc in the reading E. mo', see
mu $t above
muM02416 Y. muv L. mu3v E. moh
K802e recruit; enlist
muM05431 Y. muv L. mu3x E. moh
K802f grave
muMl 1088 Y.miT L. mu3N E. moh
K802h yearn for, emulate, admire
muM14128 Y. miT L. mu3N E. moh
K802d dusk, evening
muM31078B Y. [rmT] L. mu3s E. moh
K802a evening, same as 4£. See also mo
muM09051 Y. maw\mo" L. mak E. mak
K802o tent
muM14415 Y. muv L. mawk E. mawk
K12l2a tree; wood
muM17201 Y. mus L. mawk E. mawk
K1212e wash the hair; vacation
muM42282 Y. [rmT] L. mawk E. mawk
K12l2f maimu H ^, m6mu H ^ drizzle
muM47142A Y. mu" L. mawk E. mswk
K1109s domestic duck; also wu
muM19950 Y. muv L. mswk E. muwk
K1037a to herd; herdsman
muM23105 Y. rmT L. mswk E. muwk
Kl036a eye; to eye, look at, regard as; item;
catalogue, table of contents
muM23460 Y. rmT L. mawk E. muwk
K10321 concord, harmonious
muM25251 Y. muv L. mawk E. muwk
K1035a splendid, stately; the right-hand (odd)
series of tablets in the ancestral shrine
muM27855C. Y. [muv] L. mawk E. muwk
K10691 same as %. See also miao, miii, mou
muM30787 Y. [muv] L. mawk E. muwk
musu H\ $, muxu ^ ^ lucerne, alfalfa,
Medicago denticulata

Lexicon 221
na
na
na
na
na
na
nai
nai
nai
nai
nai
nai
nai
nan
nan
nan
nan
nan
nan
nan
3F 64:5
IP 163:4
Ift 120:4
$ 145:4
fft 159:4
IP 163:4
7] 4:1
iS 162:6
M 38:14
1
IT 126:3
M 206:2
^ 37:5
^ 75:5
H 172:11
1& 24:7
tt 75:5
$f 75:9
;% 102:2
pit 30:9
pft 149:9
Ml 1954
K94b'
M39305B
K350a
M27264
K695h
M34130
M38209
K695i
M39305Ca
K350a
M00113
K945a
M38831
K946a
M06824
K359d
M28879
K982h
M48318
K945d
M05893
K318b
M14659
K3l8a
M42145A
K152d
M02750
K650a
M14637
cf. K6221
M15152
M21730
K649a
M03903
M35738
Y. na' L. nra: E. nrai/nei
grasp; take
Y. no" L. na' E. na'
which? what? (colloquial). See also nuo,
nu6, na
Y. nax L. nap E. nap/nap
bring in; receive; accept
Y. nax L. nap E. nap/nap
patch; monk's patchwork robe
Y. [nav] L. nap E. nap/nap
inner reins of the outside horses in a team
of four
Y. nov, nav L. nas E. nah
that (colloquial); also nu6. See also
nu6, n&
Y. naf L. naj' E. naj'
you, your; then, thereupon
Y. [najv] L. naj' E. naj'
then, thereupon
Y. [naj~] L. nraij' E. nraij'/nreij
breasts; milk; suckle; mother
Y. najs L. najv E. najh
bear, endure
Y. najv L. najN E. najh
large three-footed cauldron. Also E. naj'
Y. naj\ no" L. naj\ nav E. najh, nah
nai he 3fc TO what is to be done about it?
recourse, expedient, way out
Y. najv L. najv E. najh
kind of fruit, apple-pear
Y. nan' L. nan E. nan
difficult. See also nan
Y. nam' L. nam E. nam/nam
south
Y. nam' L. nam E. nam/nam
kind of tree, Phoebe nanmu, same as $f.
Y. [nam'] L. nam E. nam/nam
kind of tree, Phoebe nanmu
Y. nam' L. nam
man, male
Y. nam' L. nraim
nannan mutter, mumble
Y. nam' L. nraim
E. nam/nam
E. nraim/nreim
E. nraim/nreim
nannan talkative; mutter, mumble; same

222 Lexicon
n&n
nan
n£n
nan
nang
na"ng
nao
n£o
nao
nao
nao
nao
nao
nao
nao
nSo
n5o
nao
nao
nao
ne
nei
IS 61:19
jR. 155:5
It 130:9
172:11
30:19
72:17
V2.
3£ 94:9
t*L-«
ft 30:5
ii
tt 61:5
i jk
tfc 64:12
tt 75:12
ffl H2:6
IS 149:12
^ 167:12
i 61:9
^ 96:9
fii 112:9
1$ 130:9
$£ 85:8
fill 191:5
J»M
in 149:4
«^<t
1ft 184:7
Ml 1505
K152h
M37001
K216b
M29692
M42145B
K152d
M04633
K7301
M14258
K730k
M20544
K1105g
M03460
K12441
M10441
K1244J
M12698
K1164s
M15521A
K1164p
M24162
M35947
K1164q
M40867
K1164r
M 10856
M21125
M24350
M29681
K1244f
M17639
K1126J
M45639
M35274
K695J
M44163
K354d
Y. [nan"] L. nra:n" E. nrain'/nrem'
to fear
Y. nan" L. nrain' E. nrain'/nrem'
turn red in the face, blush
Y. nanT L. nam' E. nsm'/nam'
grill meat; sirloin, tenderloin
Y. nanv L. nanv E. nan
difficulties; trouble, disaster; blame.
See also nan
Y. narj' L. narj E. narj
bag
Y. [narjv] L. narj' E. narj'
formerly
Y. naw L. naw E. naw
kind of monkey
Y. naw' L. nraiw E. nraiw/nre:w
n^onao clamorous, disorderly
Y. naw' L. nraiw E. nraiw/nreiw
n^onao clamorous, disorderly
Y. naw", naw' L. nraiw' E. nraiw '/nreiw'
disturb, trouble; bend. Also E. xaw. Also
used for a probably unrelated colloquial
word, nao, nao scratch
Y. [nawv] L. nra:wh E. nraiwh/nre:wh
bend; crooked, unjust. See also r£o
Y. [naw'] L. nraiw E. nraiw/nreiw
naosha 50 ^ sal ammoniac
Y. naw' L. nraiw E. nraiw/nreiw
shout, wrangle
Y. naw' L. nraiw E. nraiw/nreiw
kind of bell; naob6 ^ $L big cymbals
Y. naw L. naw' E. naw'
worry, distress; angry, irritated
same as 5i
Y. naw" L. naw' E. naw'
see m&nao ^f fii
Y. naw" L. naw' E. naw'
brain
Y. nawv L. nraiw" E. nraiwh/nre:wh
mud, mire
Y. nawv L. nraiwv E. nraiwh/nreiwh
noisy; make a noise, disturb; annoyance
Y. nuv L. nut E. nwst
slow of speech
Y. nuj" L. nuaj' E. nwsj'
hungry; putrid (fish)

Lexicon 223
nei
nei
nen
neng
neng
nf
nf
nf
nf
nf
nf
nf
nf
nf
nf
nf
nf
nf
nT
nT
nT
nT
W 184:8
ft 11:2
$& 38:11
II 130:6
%• 55:4
fi 44:2
tfc 61:5
ffi 9:8
« 94:8
5t 10:6
» u-
*£ 142:8
•tfcfa
IJL 159:8
$ 163:8
JL 173:8
i^u
1%, 195:8
^ 198:8
56 85:5
Ht 130:19
tfJL 9:14
$1 64:14
H 140:14
$ 9:5
M44236A
K357f
M01418
K695e
M06666a
M29454
K885a
M09596c
KllSOa
M07635
K563a
M10481
K563b
M00792
K873f
M20468
M01365B
K873a
M33202
K873n
M38357
K873i
M39482
K873J
M42332
K873m
M45245
K8731
M47656
K873o
M17311A
K563d
M30055
K1521
M01233
K956b
M12870
K956d
M32219
K956e
M00471
Y. mif L. nuaj' E. nwaj'
hungry, same as i£. See also wei
Y. nujv L. nuajs E. nwajh
inside
Y. nunv L. nunv E. nwanh
tender, delicate; also nun
Y. nsrj' L. nasrj E. nsrj
be capable of, can; ability. Also E. naj
Y. lurf L. bwrjv E. bwrjh
play with; handle; also nong, 16ng
Y. ni' L. mi E. mi
near; abbreviation for bTqiuni tt & &
Buddhist nun
Y. [ni'] L. mi E. mi
nyuni, niuni '|2L % ashamed, bashful
Y.ji' L.rjjiaj E.rjej
young and weak; surname
E.rjej
Y.ji' L.rjjiaj E.rjej
surname. See also er
Y. (ji'] L. rjjiaj E. rjej
kind of cicada; used for j£
Y. ji' L. rjjiaj E. rjej
attachment of the yoke to the carriage pole
Y. [ji'] L. rjjiaj E. rjej
place name
Y.ji' L.rjjiaj E.rjej
rainbow. Also E. rjejh, rjet
Y.ji' L.rjjiaj E.rjej
female whale; salamander; small fish
Y. [ji'] L.rjjiaj E.rjej
fawn
Y. ni' L. niaj E. nej
mud. See also ni
Y. ni L. niaj E. nej
kind of pickled meat. Also E. na
Y.(jf] L.rji' E.rji'/rji'
copy, imitate
Y.jf L. rji' E.rji?/rji'
estimate; plan; decide, settle; imitate, copy
Y.|jf] L.rji' E.rji'/qi'
nTnT lush vegetation. Also E. rjik
Y. nf L. ni' E. ni' (?)
you. Guangyun places in rhyme zhT _lL
with fanqie implying E. ni'/ni', but E. ni'

224 Lexicon
nT (continued)
nT
nT
ni
ni
ni
ni
ni
ni
ni
ni
ni
ni
ni
nian
TK. 70:7
If 113:14
JK 130:12
a(y
% 109:8
JE 85:5
E 23:9
H 46:14
i£ 162:6
fe 61:8
$§ 85:10
9t 72:5
01 72:11
^0 145:4
H 140:11
M13660
K563e
M24851
K359H
M29862
K564J
M23464
K873H
M17311B
K563d
M02690
K7771
M08545B
K956c
M38849
K788c
M10755
K1031p
M17990A
K1123d
M13866
K563f
M14132
K777n
M34135
K404e
M31837b
nian
nan
nian
51:3 M09168
K364a
64:5 Ml 1945
K618o
119:5 M26901A
nian |$ 202:5 M48007
is improbable. I assume E. ni', as a
vernacular doublet of er !? E. jiiS'/Jii'.
Not in earlier Qieyun manuscripts
Y. nf L. nri' E. nria'/nri'
nTnT jfc jfc, yTnT ffi jfc flutter
Y. ni" L. niaj' E. nej'
term used to refer to deceased father
whose tablet is in the ancestral temple
Y. ni- L. nriN E. nrih
greasy, oily; slippery
Y. [jn L. qjiaf E. rjejh
look askance
Y. nix L. niajs E. nejh
mired, obstructed; daub with mud. See
alsoni
Y. niv L. nriSk E. nrik
hide
Y. [jil L. rjisk E. nik
stand firmly; nini H $L lofty. See also
yi
Y. jiv L. rjiajk E. rjiajk
go up stream; go against; contrary
Y. [niv] L. niajk E. nejk
hunger for, covet
Y. niN L. niajk E. nejk
sink, drown. See also niao
Y. [niN] L. nrit E. nrit
close, intimate; same as H!
Y. [niv] L. nrit E. nrit
intimate
Y. [niv] L. nrit E. nrit
undergarments
Y. [jen] L. ?ian E. ?ian
fade, wither; listless; also y3n. Also E.
?ian
Y. njen' L. nian E. nen
harvest; year
Y. njem' L. niam E. nem
take with the fingers, pinch. Also has
modern readings nian and ni&n
Y. [njem'] L. nriam E. nriam
sticky, glutinous, same as $k. See also
zhan
Y. njem' L. nriam E. nriam
sticky, glutinous, same as $f

Lexicon 225
nian giU 195:5 M46070
nian ^ 159:8 M38393
K215a
nian $| 112:10 M24370
nian It 159:10 M38467B
K201b
nian $£ 64:12 M12713
nian & 64:8 M12222b
nian ^ 61:4 M10390
K670a
nian 4f 55:1 M09586
niang j$i 38:7 M06304
niang M 38:17 M06891
niang ft 164:17 M40099
K730J
niao J^ 140:11 M31828
K1116b
niao ft 196:0 M46634
K1116a
niao ijfi 38:10 M06614
K1123e
ni^o %$ 38:14 M06831
niao 4k 145:7 M34285
niao X 145:10 M34509
niao j>jt 44:4 M07651
niao $1 85:10 M17990B
K1123d
nie il 64:9 M12345
Y. njem' L. niam E. nem
catfish, Parasilurus asotus
Y. Ijen" L. lian' E. Han'
man-drawn carriage
Y. njen" L. nrian' E. nrian'
stone roller; crush with a roller. Also
E. nrianh water mill
Y. njen" L. nrian' E. nrian'
crush with a stone roller, grind. Also
E. nrianh water mill. See also zh&n
Y. njen" L. nian' E. nen'
twist with the fingers
Y. [njes] L. niap E. nep
twist with the fingers, compare $£
Y. njem" L. niam" E. nemh
ponder, think about; read; study
Y. [riN] L. rip E. ~ip
twenty
Y. njarj' L. nriarj E. nriarj
young woman; mother
Y. jnjarj'] L. nriarj E. nriarj
same as $1
Y. njarj" L. nriarf E. nriarjh
ferment, brew
Y. [tjew"] L. tiaw' E. tew'
parasitic plant on mulberry, parasitic
loranthus; ni&oluo $ M cypress vine,
Quamoclit pennata
Y. njew" L. tiaw' E. tew'
bird
Y. njew" L. niaw' E. new'
niSoni&o $$ $& long and pliant, slender
and delicate
Y. [njew~] L. niaw' E. new'
tease, ridicule; muddle, confuse
Y. njew" L. niaw' E. new'
same as J[
Y. njew' L. niaw' E. new'
ornamental braid on a horse; same as M
Y. [njewv] L. niaw" E. newh
urine
Y. [njewx] L. niawv E. newh
urine, same as jjc. See also ni
Y. njev L. niat E. net
pick up with the fingers, pinch, knead,
mould

226 Lexicon
me 64:8 M12222a
nie
nie
nie
nie
nie
nie
nie
nie
nie
nie
nie
nie
nie
nie
ning
nmg
nmg
ning
ning
ning
ning
2fc 140:5 M30818
K1255e
If 39:16 M07046
K289g
Ife 75:16 M15863
K289J
It 119:16 M27188
K2891
If 142:16 M33815
K289h
A 132:4 M30107
K285a
$fe 132:10 M30130
K285dHH
IXI 169:10 M41449
K285c
PI. 170:9 M41749
K1256a
H 211:6 M48651
K279e
7J-. 85:7 M17521
K404J
ft 128:12 M29179
K638a
ft 157:18 M38009
K638b
*R 167:18 M41069
$t 15:14 M01720
K956h
"•? 30:14 M0445
K837a
3? 40:11 M07296
K837a
^ 101:7 M21717A
j% 9:5 M00521
K838a
>? 85:14 M18487
W 101:7 M21717B
E.rjet
E. net
Y. [njev] L. niap E. nep
nip with the fingers, pinch, cf. $1;
also nian
Y. [nje"] L. niap E. nep
tired, listless, lethargic
Y. |jes] L. rjiat E. rjiat
bastard, concubine's son; evil, sin
Y. [jev] L. rjiat E. rjiat
tree stump; shoots from a stump
Y. njev L. rjiat E. rjiat
yeast
Y. [jev] L. rjiat E. rjiat
inauspicious, unfortunate
Y. njes L. rjiat E. rjet
target; gnomon; standard; limit
Y. [jev] L. rjjiat E. rjet
nienie unstable
Y. [je^] L. rjjiat
gate-post. Also E. rjiat
Y. [jev] L. rjjiat
wunie ^C Hi unsteady, collapsing
Y. nje" L. rjjiat E. rjet
bite, gnaw
Y. [njev] L. niat E. net
black earth; sediment; alunite; dye black;
block up
Y. njev L. nriap
whisper; a surname
Y. njev L. nriap
tread on; follow
Y. nje" L. nriap
tweezers; pull out with tweezers
Y.jirj' L. rjisrj
freeze, congeal
Y. [nirj'J L. niajrj
see dmgnmg "T ^
Y. nirj' L. niajrj
peaceful; would that, would rather
Y. [nirj'] L. niajrj E. nejrj
preferable, rather, cf. ^. See also ning
Y. nirp L. niajrj" E. nejrjh
clever, artful; flattering, sycophantic
Y. nirj" L. niajrj" E. nejrjh
muddy
Y. [nirf ] L. niajrj" E. nejrjh
a surname. See also ning
E. nriap
E. nriap
E. nriap
ers
E.rjirj
E. nejrj
E. nejrj

Lexicon 227
niu
niu
niu
niu
niu
niu
niu
niu
niu
niu
^p 93:0 M19922
K998a
JL 64:4 Ml 1826
tt 75:4 M14512B
K1076e
ffl 94:4 M20289
K1076f
& 120:4 M27268
K1076g
IS 167:4 M40228
ta 61:4 M10397b
K1076k
119:9 M27023b
K1105f
149:11 M35872b
K1069m
143:4 M33973b
nong li
nong J!
nong J
nong \
nong $
nong \
nong 1
nong 3
j
nou ^
•
nu J!
nu \
ft. 9:13
1. 130:13
(t 161:6
§ 115:13
I 85:13
(. 145:13
1 164:13
E
f 55:4
fe
f 127:10
X 38:2
f 39:5
M01176
M29938
K1005H
M38688
KlOOSa
M25324
KlOOSk
M18442
K10051
M34640
K10051
M40050
K1005J
M09596b
KllSOa
M28961
K1223f
M06039
K941
M06967
K94v
Y.jiw' L. rjiw E. rjuw
ox, cow, cattle
Y. niw" L. nriw' E. nruw'
twist, wrench; turn around
Y. [niw~] L. nriw' E. nruw'
kind of tree, Ilex. See also ch6u
Y. niw" L. nriw' E. nruw'
be familiar with, treat with familiarity;
repeat, practise
Y. niw" L. nriw' E. nruw'
knot
Y. niw" L. nriw' E. nruw'
button, knob
Y. [nyv, niwv] L. nriwk E. nruwk
nyuni, niuni '|fi % bashful, ashamed
Y. [niwv] L. nriwv E. nruwh
mixed; also r6u
Y. miwx L. mjiwv E. mjiwh
false; to lie; err; also mid
Y. [nys] L. nriwk E. nruwk
bleed from the nose, see nyu. Also E.
jiuwk
Y. nurj' L. nswrj E. nawrj
I, me (ancient Wu dialect)
Y. nurj' L. nawrj
pus
Y. nurj' L. nawrj
agriculture; peasant, farmer
Y. njurj' L. nrywrj
thick growth. Also E. jiuawrj
Y. njurj' L. nrywrj E. nruawrj
thick, dense
Y. [njurj'] L. nrywrj E. nruawrj
thick clothing. Also E. jiuawrj
Y. njurj' L. nrywrj E. nruawrj
thick liquor
Y. lurf L. bwrjv E. bwrjh
play with; handle; also neng, long
Y. nawv L. nowv E. nswh
to hoe, weed. Also E. nawk
Y. nu' L. nua E. no
wife and children, family dependents,
same as ^ ; slave
Y. nu' L. nu§ E. no
wife and children
E. nawrj
E. nawrj
E. nruawrj

228 Lexicon
nu 1
* *i
nu 3
nu 1
j
nu ]
nu ^
nu ^
i
nu ?
nu&n I]
inu&n /
I
nun y>
nu6 i
nu6 ^
$• 50:5
& 118:5
Uv«
W 187:5
K
?" 19:5
^ 57:5
^ 112:5
^ 61:5
R 72:9
»jfit^ 86:9
jj
It 38:11
H 9:19
?P 163:4
M08838A
K94y
M25946
K94e'
M44661
K94f
M02314
M09760
K94z
M24111
K94d'
M10439
K94a'
M14064
K255J
M19196
K255i
M06666b
M01317
K152k
M39305A
K350a
nuo
nuo
nuo
nuo
nuo
nuo
nyu
nyu
64:8 M12223
163:4 M39305C5
K350a
Y. [nu'] L. nua E. no
treasury; child, wife and children, same
as ^ . See also t&ng
Y. [nu'] L. nus E. no
bird cage. Also E. noh, nrai
Y. nu' L. nua E. no
poor, inferior horse
Y. mT L. nua' E. no'
exert one's strength
Y. nu" L. nu5' E. no'
crossbow
Y. [nuv] L. nua' E. no'
stone used for making arrowheads
Y. nuv L. nuav E. noh
angry, anger
Y. non L. nuan' E. nwan'
warm
Y. [non"] L. nuan' E. nwan'
warm. Also E. xuan
Y. nunN L. nunv E. nwanh
tender, delicate; also nen
Y. no' L. na E. na
exorcise
Y. no' L. na E. na
plenty, ample; beautiful. See also n&,
nu6, nk
Y. no ' L. nua E. nwa
rub (the hands). Also E. jiwi, nwsj.
Also written ^
Y. no\ nav L. naN E. nah
preclassical particle; see na. See also nuo,
61:14 M11390A Y. [nov] L. nuav E. nwah
t
K134e weak, timid. See also ru
119:14 M27173 Y. [nov] L. nuav E. nwah
glutinous rice
149:9 M35753 Y. naws, nov L. nak E. nak
K777f agree, approve; yes
64:10 M12500 Y.[naw\ nox] L.nraiwk E. nraiwk/nroeiwk
seize, grasp. Also E. nrsijk/nreijk Y. najv
in the same sense
38:0 M06036A Y. ny" L. nria'/nryo' E. nria'
K94a woman, female, girl. See also nyu, ru
119:3 M26844 Y. [ny~] L. nri5'/nry3' E. nris'
K94f Seeju'nyu

Lexicon 229
nyu :&" 38:0 M06036B Y. nyv L. nri3N/nry§x E. nri§h
K94a give a woman in marriage. See also nyu,
ru
nyu TIL 61:4 Ml0397a Y. [ny\ niws] L. nriwk E. nruwk
K1076k nyuni, niiini 'f& 'fa bashful
nyu J|& 143:4 M33973a Y. [nyN] L. nriwk E. nruwk
bleed from the nose. Also E. jiuwk
nyue M 104:10 M224l9b Y. njaws (?), njV (?) L. niak E. rjiak
Kl l I8c fever, ague; also yao
nyue Jg 141:3 M32678 Y. njawv(?), njov(?) L. rjiak E.rjiak
KlllSa cruel, oppressive

230 Lexicon
ou
ou
ou
ou
ou
ou
ou
ou
6u
6u
6u
6u
ou
6u
6u
6u
ou
®L 23:9
"6 30:11
ft 76:11
7H 85:11
R, 98:11
ffi 149:11
tufaif 196:11
R 79:11
"H 30:11
ft 76:11
R 79:11
Iff 9:9
$f 127:9
H 130:9
_4£.
IS 140:15
IS 9:9
£ 85:11
M02691B
K122a
M04200B
K1221
M16185A
M18139A
K122k
M21586
K1221
M35885
K122m
M47268
M16674a
K122J
M04200A
K1221
M16185B
M16674b
K122J
M00899A
K124n
M28952
K124o
M29672
K124J
M32298
M00899B
K124n
M18139B
K122k
Y. aw L. ?sw E.
conceal; ancient measure of weight; a
surname. See also qu
Y. [aw] L. ?sw E. ?aw
sing, same as M . See also 6u
Y. 9W L. ?9W E. ?9W
ouydng H$C $fr surname. See also 6u
Y. aw L. ?9W E. ?9w
foam, froth; gull. See also ou
L. ?9W E. ?3W
L. ?sw
L. ?3W
L.
E.
E. ?sw
E. ?3W'
E.
E.
A. See also ou
E.
Y. sw
bowl
Y.3W
sing
Y. 9W
gull
Y. aw"
beat; also 6u
Y. aw" L. ?3W
vomit. See also ou
Y. aw" L.
vomit, same as'
Y. 3WV L.
beat; also ou
Y. sw" L. rpw' E. rpw'
pair, mate; match. See also 6u below
Y. 9w L. rjaw' E. rjsw'
pair; two people plowing together
Y. [aw"] L. rjaw' E.
clavicle. AlsoE. rju§
Y. aw L. rjaw'
lotus root
Y. [awv] L. rjaw"
unexpectedly, by chance. See also 6u
above
Y. [awv] L. ?9wv E.
steep, soak. See also ou
E. rpw'
E. rpwh

Lexicon 231
pa HE, 140:9 M31441
pa fc 75:4 M14505
K39e
pa jf£ 87:4 M19662
p£ 8 96:8 M21081
pa ft 61:5 M10448
K7821
pai ft 64:5 M11952a
K782m
pai $|= 60:8 M10141
K579t
p^i $• 9:8 M00726
K579v
pai ^ 64:8 M12256
K579x
pai f$ 91:8 M19854
pai $| 118:11 M26411
pai JR. 85:6 M17427
pai W 85:9 M17808
pan >$• 85:12 M18236
pan ^ 102:7 M21858B
K195b
pan $[ 64:4 M11837A
K262m
pan aj£ 64:15 M12926
K263d
pan H 75:10 M15303
K182d
pan $t 108:10 M23036
K182e
pan $£ 112:10 M24401
K182g
pan %$ 112:12 M24490
E. phai/phe:
L. pfia:
H
L. pha:v
E. bai/be:
E. bai/be:
E. bai/bei
E. phaih/phe:h
E. phaijk/phe:jk
E. baj
Y. pha L. pha:
flower, blossom
Y. pV L. pfia:
rake; dig with the fingers
Y. pV L. pfia:
scratch; crawl; climb
Y. pV
see pipa
Y. pV
to fear
Y. phajv L. pha:jk
beat, clap; also po
Y. [phuj'] L. pfiuaj
paihuai $• $3 move to and fro, pace up
and down; irresolute
Y. phaj' L. pfiay E. bsij/bey
variety show; comical
Y. phaj' L. pfiay E. baij/bey
push; bank up (a river); shield); arrange,
put in order; row, line
Y. phaj' L. pfiay
plate, tablet, signboard
Y. phaj' L. pfiay
raft
Y. pV L. pha:jv E.
branch stream; party, faction; style
Y. paf [sic] L. pha:jv E.
pangpai $£ W roaring and rushing of
water
Y. p*bn L. phuan E. phan
rice water; surname
Y. [p'bn] L. phuan E. phan
Panyu ^ M place name. See also fan,
bo
Y. [phan] L. pha:n E. phain/phem
pull, same as ^
Y. phan L. pha:n E. phain/phe:n
pull; pull oneself up; climb, clamber
Y. p^n' L. pfiuan E. ban
tray, pan, basin
Y. p'bn L. pfiuan E. ban
basin, dish, tray, plate; turn round; joy
Y. pSn L. pfiuan E. ban
large stone, stone slab
Y. p^bn" L. pfiuan E. ban
river name
E. baij/be:j
E. baij/be:j

232 Lexicon
pan
pan
pan
pan
pa^i
pan
pan
pan
pan
pan
pan
pan
pan
pang
pang
pa"ng
pang
pang
pang
pang
J£ 120:11
$£ 130:5
Mi 137:4
i$ 142:12
S 177:10
vll 1
n 18:5
$• 85:5
%1/iC
fl 181:5
ff 130:5
& 29:7
$f- 102:5
^ 109:4
fit 145:19
^ \.
?f 85:10
J$ 130:6
Ir 173:4
it 9:10
^ 60:4
>§• 63:4
% 70:6
M27849B.
K265b
M29381A
K181h
M30388C
K182a
M33591
K195o
M42977
K182i
M01923
K181d
M17323
K181f
M43400
K1811
M29381B
K181h
M03166
K1811
M21801
K181k
M23167
K471x
M34741
M18003
K7401'
M29428
M42233
K740c'
M00948A
K740m'
M10052A
K740e'
M11714B
K740y
M13637
K740f
Y. [p'bn'] L. pfiuan E. ban
girth strap of a horse. See also fa"n, po
Y. p*bn' L. pfiuan E. ban
ample, broad. See also pan
Y. pSn' L. pfiuan E. ban
turn round; pleasure. See also ban, b5
Y. p^n' L. pfiuan E. ban
coiling
Y. p'bn' L. pfiuan E. ban
large belt; girth strap of a horse
Y. phonv L. phuanN E. phanh
halve; divide; separate; discriminate,
judge; judgement
Y. [p^r] L. phuans E. phanh
semi-circular pool; academy in a feudal
state; dissolve, melt away
academy, same as $•
Y. [p'bn"] L. phuan* E. phanh
halved sacrificial animal. See also pa"n
Y. ponv L. pfiuans E. banh
turn against, defect, rebel
Y. ponv L. pfiuan" E. banh
bank between fields; side, bank; rebel
Y. phanv L. pha:nv E. ph3inh/phe:nh
clear, bright eyes; look at; hope for
Y. phanx L. pha:nv E. phainh/pheznh
button loop
Y. pharj L. pharj E. pharj
rushing water, torrent
Y. [pharj] L. phaiwrj E. phaiwrj/phoe:wrj
swell. Now written $f
Y. [phaq] L. pharj E. pharj
heavy snowfall
Y. pharj' L. pfiarj E. barj
side. See also bang
Y. [pharjx] L. pfiarj E. barj
panghuang $ tfJL hesitant, irresolute;
pangyang tfj $• hesitant, irresolute. See
also f5ng
Y. pharj' L. pfiarj E. barj
apang P^T J% name of a palace. See also
fang
Y. parj' L. pfiarj E. barj
side; pdngbo ^ vast, boundless;
permeate

Lexicon 233
pang J
pang :
pang j
pang ;
pang f
pao :
pao ;
pao j
pao ;
pao J
pao '
pao ,
pao )
pao j
tf 130:10
4 162:6
K 212:3
)^
76 43:4
|f 130:4
[ft 64:5
ffe 85:5
J? 130:7
ffe 145:5
tfe 20:9
»
1, 30:5
j^
1, 53:5
fcfe 86:5
S& 157:5
M29748
M38847
M48824A
M07554b
M29298
Ml 1948
M17307
M29540
M34174
K1113i
M02544
K1113f
M03484
M09266
K1113e
M18954
K1113g
M37461
Y. [pharj'l L. pfiarj E. barj
pangguang j$ jjfc (urinary) bladder
Y. pharj L. pfiaiwrj E. baiwrj/bceiwrj
a surname
Y. pharj' L. pfiaiwrj E. baiwrj/boeiwrj
lofty, grand; in disorder; a surname. See
also long
Y.[marj'] L. maiwrj E. maiwrj/moeiwrj
parti-coloured, motley; also mang
Y.pharjv L.phaiwrjv E. phaiwrjh/phceiwrjh
fat, corpulent; now written $£ , see pan,
pan
Y. [phaw] L. phaiw E. p^w/p^iw
throw; throw away
Y. phawv L. phaiw E. p^aiw/p^iw
foam; puffy, spongy. Now also read pao
bubble; steep, soak
Y. phaw L. phaiw E. p^iw/p^iw
bladder
Y. phaw' L. pfiuaw E. baw
long robe, gown
Y. phaw' L. pfiaiw E. baiw/beiw
gourd
Y. phaw' L. pfiaiw E. baiw/beiw
paoxiao "fe ^ , "fe "^ roar
Y. phawx L. pfiaiw E. baiw/beiw
kitchen
Y. phaw' L. pfiaiw E. baiw/beiw
bake, roast
Y. phaw' L. pfiaiw E. baiw/beiw
pao
pao
pao
pei
pei
177:5 M42781
K1113m
198:4 M47598A
K1170a
112:5 M24120
64:5
32:4
M11909b
K25j
M04930Ba
K999s
paw the ground. Graph now used for an
unrelated word, p&o run
Y. phaw' L. pfiaiw E. baiw/beiw
leather worker. Also E. phaiwk, baiw',
baiwh
Y. [phaw'] L. pfiaiw E. baiw/beiw
roe deer. See also biao
Y. phawN L. phaiwx E. phaiwh/pheiwh
device for hurling stones; catapult,
ballista; cannon
Y. phuj L. phi E. phi§/pi
throw over the shoulder; open, unroll;
also p\
Y. [phuj] L. phuaj E. phsj
unfired ceramic; semi-finished product;
also pi. Used for &. See also pei

234
pei :
pei >
pei j
pei '•
pei :
pei '.
pei ;
pei I
pei '
pei '
pei }
pei I
nei ^pei
pei :
pei i
pei ;
pei ;
pen '
pen }
pen :
pen '
peng '•
& 32:5
E 130:5
S? 164:8
3? 163:5
Irr*
*P 32:4
$ 32:8
Jb
H 145:8
& 170:8
jAfc
W 159:15
fe 50:5
S& 38:3
IE 164:3
ft 9:6
& 96:6
/$ 85:4
If 173:7
VJ^,
5rp 70:6
-4r_
3* 30:13
$ 85:9
& 108:4
*t 30:13
R1 112:5
M04984a
M29390
M39899
M39340b
M04930A
K999s
M05195
K999a'
M34362
M41680
K999b'
M38587
K1237y
M08846
M06061B
K581a
M39771
K514a
M00543
K951a
M20977
K951c
M17216
KSOlf
M42301
M13646
KSOld
M04409A
K437e
M17832
M22959
K471s
M04409B
K437e
M24115
K825g
Lexicon
Y. [phuj] L. phuaj E. p^j
unfired ceramic; semi-finished product;
also pT
Y. phuj L. phuaj E. phsj
foetus, embryo
Y. phuj L. phuaj E. phsj
unstrained wine
Y. phuj' L.pfii E. bi
place name, also pi
Y. phuj' L. pfiuaj E. bsj
fill up, block up. Compare tf£ . See
also pei, pi
Y. phuj' L. pfiuaj E. bsj
earth up; cultivate, train
Y. phuj' L. pfiuaj E. baj
surname
Y. phuj' L. pfiuaj E. bsj
accompany, support; augment, double
Y. phujv L. piv E. pih
bridle
Y. puj^ L. phi* E. phi§h/phih
cape
Y. [phujs] L. phuajv E. phajh
mate, consort, same as SE . See also fei
Y. phujv L. phuajN E. phojh
mate with, marry; match; distribute
Y. phujv L. pfiuajv E. bajh
girdle ornament; wear at the waist
Y. phujv L. pfiuajv E. bajh
wear at the girdle, same as i&
Y. phujv L. phuajv E. phajh
torrential; abundant; marsh; river name
Y. phujN L. phuajv E. phajh
heavy rain
Y. [pujv] L. pfiuajv E. bajh
streamer; banner; peipei flutter
Y. phun L. phun E. p^n
spurt, spout; spray. See also pen
Y. phun' L. pfiun E. ban
river name
Y. phun' L. pfiun E. ban
basin, pot, tub
Y. phun^ L. pW E. phsnh
blow out, spit out. See also pen
Y.[phuq, p'bq] L.pha:jq E. p^ijq/p^ijq
rumble, sound of thunder, etc.

Lexicon 235
peng
peng
peng
pe'ng
peng
pe'ng
peng
peng
peng
peng
peng
peng
P'
P'
PT
P'
P'
Pi
Pi
Pi
3$ 140:8
1F 8:5
^ 86:7
SR 74:4
H 196:8
$18 75:8
% 59:9
tj| 142:12
ft 118:11
Jt 140:3
3| 140:11
W 64:8
3i 1:4
ft 9:5
S 115:5
$£ 187:5
jBb 120:4
^P 163:5
ft 64:5
ft 145:5
M31192B
K824k
M00295C
K716b
M19049
K751a
M14340
K886a
M47005
K886J
M14941
M10003
K750a
M33583
M26404
M30662
K625g
M31720
K1197y
M12189
K1197b'
M00030
K999k
M00487
K9991
M24989
K999n
M44664
K999m
M27279A
K566t
M39340a
M11909a
K25j
M34222C
K25e
Y.[phuq, p^q] L.phaijq E. p^jq/p^ijq
cause, make. See also ping
Y. phaq, phuq L. pha:jq E. phaijq/pheijq
boil, same as ^ . See also heng, xi&ng
Y. phsq, phuq L. pha:jq E. p^jq/p^jjq
boil, cook
Y. phaq' L. pfiuaq E. bsq
set of cowries; pair; peer, equal; friend;
faction
Y. phuq', phsq' L. pfiuaq E. baq
fabulous giant bird, roc
Y. phsq', phuq' L. pfiaijq E. baijq/beijq
canopy, awning; shed
Y. phuq' L. pfiaijq E. baijq/bejjq
place name, surname
Y.[ph9q', phuq'] L.pfiaijq E. baijq/beijq
pengqf !||^ kind of crab
Y. phuq' L. pfiawq E. bowq
covering for a boat, car, etc.; sail
Y. phuq L. pfiawq E. bawq
luxuriant, bushy
Y. phuq' L. pfiswq E. bswq
bitter fleabane, Erigeron acer; fluffy,
dishevelled
Y. phuqv L. fjyawq'/fawq' E. phuawq'
hold in both hands. The irregular
Mandarin reading is unexplained
Y. phuj L. phi E. phi
great
Y. [phuj] L. phi E. phi
pipy strong
Y. [phuj] L. phi E. phi
black millet with double kernels
Y. phuj L. phi E. p^i
dappled, piebald horse
Y. phi L. phji E. phji
wrong, incorrect. See also pi
Y. phuj' L. pfii E. bi
place name; also pei
Y. phuj L. phi E. phio/phi
throw over the shoulder; open, let loose;
also pei
Y. phuj L. phi E. ph£/phi
throw over the shoulders, wear; open, let
loose, same as $[ . See also bei

236 Lexicon
pi M. 167:5 M40272
K25k
pi & 32:5 M04984b
pi 32:4 M04930B5
K999s
pT ft 64:4 Ml 1845
K566a'
pT 7^ 18:13 M02223
pT J| 173:13 M42491
pi It 81:0 M16743C
K566g
pi Bit 81:5 M16752
K566u
pi H 81:6 M16755
K566e'
pi !§ 96:8 M21080
pi 140:4 M30693A
K566z
pi ||| 153:10 M36606
K566h'
pi $L 104:5 M22084
K25d
pi K 107:0 M22823
K25a
pi Si 122:10 M28336A
K26a
pi M 122:14 M28398
K26b
pi fl5 163:8 M39470A
pi $%- 32:8 M05167
K874k
pi jBfc 120:4 M27279B.
K566t
pi jft 130:8 M29579
K874H
pi 4$ 142:8 M33182
Y. [phuj] L. phi E. phi§/phi
large needle; short double-bladed sword
Y. [phuj] L. phuaj E. p^j
unfired ceramic; semi-finished product;
also p5i
Y. [phuj] L. phuaj E. p^j
unfired ceramic; semi-finished product;
also pgi, same as i£. See also pei
Y. phi L. phjiaj E.
slap
Y. phiv L. phjiajk
split, chop, cleave
Y. [phf] L. phjiajk
plli M % thunderclap
Y. phi' L. pfiji
juxtapose; gaopi & ttj
also bT, bi
Y. [phi'J L. pfiji E. bji
adjoin, juxtapose; support; strengthen
Y. [phi'J L. pfiji E. bji
navel. Later interchanged with Bit,
Y. [phi'J L. pfiji E. bji
pipa" fl f^ guitar-like stringed
instrument, lute
Y. [phi'J L. pfiji E. bji
pffSu & ^ kind of plant. See also bi
L. pfiji E. bji
fabulous bear-like animal
L. pfii E. bi§/bi
E.
E.
E.bji
tigerskin. See
E. bi§/bi
Y. [phi']
pixiu Ift
Y. phi
exhausted, wearied
Y.phuj' L.pfii
skin
Y. phi' L. pfii E. bi3/bi
worn out, tired. See also ba
Y. phi L. pfii E. bia/bi
kind of bear
Y. [phuj'l L.pfii E. bia/bi
place name in Sichuan. See also pi below
Y. [phi1 L. pfiji E. bji3/bji
add to; increment, layer
Y. phi' L. pfiji
hem, border. See also pT
Y. phi' L. pfiji
spleen
Y. [phi'] L. pfiji
tick
E. bjis/bji
E. bjis/bji

Lexicon 237
Pi
Pi
145:8 M34338A
K874e
163:8 M39470B
Pi
Pi
P1'
Pi
pj
p|
pT
P'
pT
P«
PT
P'
P'
Pi
Pi
Pi
V*f- 170:8
& 118:4
JK 130:10
|£ 207:8
U 30:16
if 30:4
ft 32:3
;§ 104:7
fit 9:4
j£ 53:2
L> -
^ 104:13
^ 23:2
/E 103:0
>fe 44:4
^ 149:13
B^ 109:8
M41702
K8741
M25887
M29796
K566g'
M48361
K874p
M04564
M03340A
K999e
M04888
K1237a'
M22206
M00404
K566s
M09222
K566k
M22550
M02673
K408a
M21994C
K90a
M07654
M36019
K853t
M23459b
Pi
Pi
9:13 M01166
K8531
E. bej
E. phi'
E. bi'
160:6 M38642B
K853a
Y. [phi'j L.pfiji E.bjia/bji
secondary, assistant. See also bi
Y. [phi'] L. pfiji E. bjia/bji
Pishao $P #P ancient place name in
Henan. See also pi above
Y. [phi'] L. pfiji E. bjia/bji
parapet
Y. [phi'] L. pfijiaj E. bej
device for catching shrimps
Y. [phi'J L. pfijiaj E.bej
stomach of an ox or other ruminant;
bestow generously
Y. [phi'] L. pfiiaj
small hand drum
Y. phf L. phi'
great
Y. phf L. pfiT
bad, wicked, evil. See also f6u
Y. phf L. pfiT E. bi'
collapse; destroy overthrow
Y. phujv L. pfii^ E. bi'
constipation; addiction
Y. [phf] L. phji' E. phjiQ7phji'
pTli '(It ^ separate (of husband and
wife)
Y. [phiv] L. phji; E. phji3'/phji'
prepare, provide; regulate
Y. [phiv] L. phjiajk E. phjiajk
indigestion; addiction, craving
Y. phiv L. phjit E. phjit
mate; one of a pair, single (especially
of horses)
used for E . See also yS, shu
Y. [phn L. pV E. phjih
break wind, fart
Y. [phn L. phjiv E. phji3h/phjih
give an analogy, exemplify
Y. [phiv] L. phjiajv E. phejh
pini B£ $%> look at disdainfully out of the
corner of one's eye; also bi
Y. phf L. phjiajk E. phjiajk, phejk
oblique; perverse, depraved; out of the
way, secluded; rare
Y. [phiv] L. phjiajk E. phjiajk
same as i^. See also bi

238 Lexicon
pi
pi
Pi
pi
pian
pian
pian
pian
pian
pian
pian
pian
pian
pian
pian
piSn
plan
plan
plan
piao
piao
64:13
169:13
85:13
98:13
9:9
63:5
118:9
124:9
9:7
120:9
149:9
130:8
157:9
187:8
188:8
149:9
M12834
K853J
M41500
K853k
M18428
K853m
M21609
K853n
M00848
K246H
M11724A
K216a
M26257
K246J
M28762
K246k
M00659A
K221a
M27693A
M35703B
K246m
M29586
K824p
M37717
M44795
K824n
M45204
K824o
M35703A
K246m
187:9 M44848
60:9 M10174b
K246b
91:0 M19813
K218a
85:11 M18102A
K11571
113:6 M24694
K1157b
Y. [pi'] L. pfijiajk E. bjiajk
beat one's breast
Y. phf L. pfijiajk E. bjiajk
open up; expel
Y. [phfj L. phjiajk E. p^jk
see pingpi $f $
Y. pf L. pfijiajk E. bejk
brick
Y. phjen L. phjian E. phjian
slanting, inclined to one side, one-sided
Y. phjen L. phjian E. phjian
small (boat). See also bi&n
Y. phjen L. phjian E. phjian
writing slip, tablet; section of a book
Y. phjen L. phjian E. phjian
descriptive of rapid flight
Y. phjen' L. pfijian E. bjian
cheap; eloquent; specious. See also bian
Y. [phjen'] L. pfijian E. bjian
sew; weave straw. See also bian
Y. [phjen'] L. pfijian E. bjian
cunning words. See also pi&n
Y. phjen' L. pfijian E. ben
callus
Y. phjen L. pfijian E. ben
kneecap; stagger, walk unsteadily
Y. phjen' L. pfiian E. ben
team of two horses; parallel (prose)
Y. [phjen'] L. pfijian E. ben
pair, two (ribs) stuck together; callus
Y. phjen" L. pfijian' E. bjian'
cunning words; also E. bjianh . These E.
readings should give modern bian. The
colloquial word pian 'show off now
associated with the graph may be an
unrelated word. See also pian
Y. phjenv L. phjianv E. phjianh
jump on a horse; swindle, cheat
Y. pjenv L. pjianv E. penh
all around, everywhere; also bian
Y. phjenv L. phjians E. phenh
one-sided; flat, thin piece, slice, flake
Y. phjew L. phjiaw E. phjiaw
float. See also piSo
Y. [phjew] L. phjiaw E. phjiaw
leaping flames; leaping, flying. The

Lexicon 239
piao 35P 142:11 M33505
piao % 182:11 M43946
K1157e
piao i$l 140:14 M32203
piao H 97:11 M21419
K1157k
piao ifl 85:11 M18102B
K11571
piao If 120:11 M27837
K1157J
piao £? 78:7 M16464
K12331
piao -^- 140:7 M31076B
K1233f
piao JS 113:6 M24694
piao 1S 9:11^ M01047
K1157f
piao f'J 18:11 M02160
K1157g
piao H 187:11 M44966
pie If- 109:12 M23672
pie $!C 64:12 M12678a
piS Jft 64:12 M12678b
pin jtjf 38:8 M06366
pm 1JS 30:16 M04562
K390c
pm M 38:14 M06819
K389m
pm $jf 140:16 M32435
K390d
pm $[ 142:14 M33741b
K389p
graph is now used for an unrelated word
piao 'ticket; banknote, etc.1
Y. [phjew] L. phjiaw E. phjiaw
piaoxiao jft $j the egg capsule of a
mantis
Y. phjew L. phjiaw
whirlwind; swift
Y. phjew' L. pfijiaw
floating duckweed
Y. phjew' L. pfijiaw
gourd
Y. phiaw" L. phjiawN
bleach. See also piao
Y. [pjew"] L. phjiaw'
light blue or green
Y. phjew~ L. pfiiaw'
starve to death
Y. phjew' L. pfiiaw"
same as ^. See also fu
E. phjiaw
E. bjiaw
E. bjiaw
E. phjiawh
E. phjiaw'
E. biaw'
E. biaw'
E. phjiawh
E. bjiawh
ticket; banknote. See piao
Y. phjew L. phjiawv E. phjiawh
light, airy
Y. phjewv L. phjiawv
stab; pare; quick
Y. [pjewv] L. pfijiaw"
roan horse; piaoji IP ^ title of a general
in Han times
Y. pkje' L. phjiat E. phjiat
glance at, glimpse; moment, instant
Y. phje" L. phjiat E.
throw, cast aside; also pie
Y. pkje' L. phjiat E.
strike lightly; throw, cast; left downward
stroke in Chinese writing; also pie
Y. [phirj] L. phjiajrj E. p^jrj
fornicate, have illicit sexual intercourse
Y. phin' L. pfijin E. bjin
scowl, knit the brows, same as ^
Y. phin' L. pfijin E. bjin
marry (of a woman); deceased wife;
female court rank
Y. phin' L. pfijin E. bjin
kind of floating plant, duckweed
Y. [phin'] L. pfijin E. bjin
pearl-producing oyster; also bin

240 Lexicon
pin
pin
pin
pin
pin
pin
pin
ping
ping
ping
ping
ping
ping
ping
ping
154:4 M36677
K471v
181:7 M43519
K390a
181:15 M43737
& 30:6
ft
M03581
K669a
38:7 M06282
K839c
128:7 M29079a
K839d
93:2 M19925
K5661
it 9:7 M00701
ping
ping
ping
ping
ping
^ 16:6
$5 61:12
$f 187:2
¥ 5.1:2
3£- 140:5
M01766
M11210
K899e
M44579B
K899d
M09167
K825a
M30823
K825c
ff 149:5
M 44:8
85:8
98:8
121:8
140:8
140:8
M35383
M07734A
K824f
M17621
K824h
M21537
K824J
M28153
K824i
M31192A
K824k
M31266
K825d
Y. phin'
poor
Y. phin'
frequently
Y. phin'
L. pfiin
L. pfijin
E. bin
E. bjin
E. bjin
E. phim'
E. birj
E. birj
E. birj
L. pfijin
scowl, knit the brow
Y. phin~ L. phim'
class, grade; produce, goods
Y. phirj" L. pJHiajif E. phjiajrjh
betroth, same as W
Y. phirjv L. phjiajrf E. p^iajrj11
go to inquire, invite; seek a marriage,
betroth; also ping
Y. phnT L. pfijin' E. bjin'
female of animals. Also E. bji'
Y. pirj' [sic] L. phjiajrj E. p^jrj
messenger (Shuoweii); lingplng fa i%
stagger, unsteady
Y. phirj' L. pfiiarj
lean on, rest on, rely on
Y. phirj' L. pfiiorj
lean on; rely on
Y. phirj' L. pfiisrj
tread on; encroach; lean on, rely on.
See also feng
Y. phirj' L. pfiiajrj E. biajrj
level, even; calm, peaceful
Y. [phirj'] L. pfiiajrj E. biajrj
Artemisia; used for ping ^ duckweed;
now used for pinggud ^ ^ 'apple1
Y. phirj' L. pfiiajrj E. biajrj
evaluate, weigh, consider, criticize
Y. phirj' L. pfiiajrj E. bejrj
standing screen; to screen. See also
blng
Y. [phirj'] L. pfijiajrj E. bejrj
pfngpi $• $ sound of washing silk
Y. phin' L. pfijiajrj E. bejrj
bottle, flask, vase, jar
Y. phirj' L. pfijiajq E. bejrj
bottle, vase, jar, flask, same as $C
Y. [phirj'] L. pfijiajrj E. bejrj
kind of plant for making brooms. See
also peng
Y. phirj' L. pfijiajrj E. bejrj
duckweed

Lexicon 241
ping
ping
PO
po
PO
po
po
PO
po
P6
P6
PO
po
PO
PO
P6
PO
PO
PO
PO
pou
159:8 M38396
W 128:7
$L 32:5
$j( 181:5
%
S 85:12
U 38:8
$T 106:12
120:11
SP 163:12
E 30:2
$$. 181:5
$L 112:5
ft 119:5
$ 85:5
2& 162:5
$1 64:5
5$ 96:5
173:13
$L 194:5
^ 75:2
fl 18:8
M29079b
K839d
M04966
M43415A
K25p
M18225
M06390
K25q
M22784
K195r
M27849C.
K265b
M39658
M03254
M43415B
K25p
M24124
K25o
M26891
K782p
M17275b
K782r
M38797
K782k
M11952b
K782m
M20904
M42490B
K772b
M45810A
M14428a
K1210f
M02034b
K999v
E. ba
E. ba
E. ba
Y. [phirj'] L. pfijiajrj E. bejrj
curtained carriage for a lady. Also E. ben
Y. phirf L. phjiajrf E. phjiajrjh
go to inquire; invite; seek a marriage,
betroth; also pin
Y. p1^ L. phua E. pha
slope; bank
Y. p1^ L. phua E. pha
inclined, slanting, oblique. See also pd
Y. pV L. phuat E. phat
sprinkle, splash
Y. p*b' L. pfiua
old lady
Y. pV L. pfiua
white-haired
Y. p^' L. pfiua
surname. See also fan, pan
Y. p^' L. pfiua E. ba
place name
Y. pV L. pV E. pV
fusion of bu k6 ^ ^T not possible, not
permissible
Y. pV L. phua' E. pha'
quite, now usually read po in this sense.
See also po
Y r\K^^ T r»hno-. p \J i-<. p Ua
break, smash
Y. pV L. phak
dregs
Y. paw', po' L. pfiak
anchor or moor a boat; also bo
Y. paj" L. paijk E. paijk/peyk
press upon, coerce; approach
Y. phaj" L. pha:jk E. phaijk/pheijk
beat, clap; also pai
Y. phaj" L. pha:jk
hupo ^ $& amber
Y. [phajv] L. pha:jk
phase of the moon. See also ba
Y. phajv L. pha:jk E. phaijk/pheijk
terrestrial soul. See also tuo
Y.[phaw"] L. pha:wk E. phaiwk/phoe:wk
Chinese hackberry, Celn's sinensis; also
Y. ph9w", phaw" L. phaw' E. p^w'
split, cut open; also p6u
E. phah
E. phak
E. bak
E. phaijk/phe:jk
E. phaijk/phe:jk

242 Lexicon
p6u
pou
pou
p6u
p6u
p6u
pdu
pou
pu
pu
pu
pu
pu
pu
pu
pu
pu
ffi 64:4
ft 64:8
J[ 145:7
ft 64:8
V. 1
fl 18:8
H 140:11
p-ft 98:8
p|5 163:8
A 104:7
H 167:7
§f 195:10
ft 9:2
^h 64:2
$£ 64:12
ft 20:7
M 130:7
^ 140:8
Ml 1886
K999J
M12244A
K999d'
M34299
K1230a
M12244B
K999d'
M02034a
K999v
M31748B
K999g'
M21534
K999y
M39460B
K999z
M22212
K102g'
M40491A
K102H1
M46361
K102y'
M00354B
K1210g
Ml 1779
K1210e
M12755
K1211J
M02527
K102 1'
M29543B
K102r
M31205
Y. phaw' L. pfiaw E. baw
hold with cupped hands
Y. phaw' L. pfiaw E. baw
take in cupped hands; levy, exact. See
also p6u
Y. phaw' L. pfiaw E. baw
collect, gather, assemble
Y. [paw"] L. paw' E. paw'
beat. The modern reading is borrowed
from $1 . See also pou
Y. phawv, phaw" L. phaw' E. p^w'
split, cut open; also pou
Y. [phawv] L. p^w' E. phaw'
small mat. See also bu
Y. [paws] L. pfiaw" E. baw'
jar, pot
Y. [pawv] L. pfiawv E. baw'
p6ulou $J ^ hillock. See also bu
Y. [phu] L. phua E. p*b
worn out, exhausted. Also E. phua
Y. [phu] L. phua E. p!b
spread out; extend. See also pu
Y. [phu] L. phua E. pho
kind of fish
Y. [phu"] L. phawk E. phawk
fall prostrate. See also fu
Y. [phuv] L. phawk E. phawk
strike, beat; rod, stick; rush at, attack
Y. phu" L. p^wk E. phawk
strike, beat; rod, stick; rush at, attack
Y. [pV] L. pfiua E. bo
pufu ^ "I/ crawl
Y. phu' L. pfiua E. bo
breast meat of a fowl. See also fu
Y. pV L. pfiua E. bo
pu
pu
pu
pu
used for bo in Buddhist transcriptions as
in pusa ^ W. bodhisattva, putf |£ H
bodhi.
140:9 M31430 putao ^f ^ grape, grape wine, originally
written $f |%
140:10 M31610 Y. phu' L. pfiua E. bo
K102o' reed, rush, variant of )$f
140:10 M31611 Y. phu' L. pfiua E. bo
Kl02n' rushes, reeds, aquatic grasses
164:7 M39874 Y. pV L. pfiua E. bo
K102k' drinking party

Lexicon 243
pu
pu
pu
pu
pu
pu
pu
pu
pu
pu
pu
pu
pu
m 85:14
H 9:12
3ji 96:12
B 31:7
If 149:12
M- _0.fiH /2:8
7$ 85:7
%• 85:10
^h 75:2
$L 75:12
$t 167:7
^ 72:11
SI 72:15
M18526
M01094
K1211b
M21245
K1211n
M04774
K102z
M35990
M13982
K72a
M 17475
K102f
M17957
K771f
M14428b
K1210f
M15495
K1211g
M40491B
K102h'
M14137B
K1136a
M14239
Y. [pu ] L. pawk E. pawk
river name
Y. phu' L. pfiawk E. bawk, bawk
servant
Y. [phaw"] L.phaiwk E. phaiwk/phce:wk
unworkedjade
Y. pu" L. pus' E. po'
garden, orchard
Y. phu" L. pus' E. po'
record book, account book; chart; musical
score
Y. pV L. phua' E. pV
common, widespread, general, universal
Y. pu" L. phua' E. p^'
river bank
Y. phu" L. phu§' E. pV
great, vast; widespread, common
Y.[phaw"] L.pha:wk E. phaiwk/phoe:wk
in a natural state, uncarved, pristine; also
Y.[phaw"] L.phaiwk E. phaiwk/phoe:wk
uncut block of wood; simple, plain;
Y v^u" L p'1u5v E p^'o'1
bed; shop. See also pu
Y. phu" L. pfiswk E. bowk
expose to the sun, dry, same as $|
Y. phu" L. pfiawk E. bawk
expose, dry in the sun

244 Lexicon
-t
qi
76:8
74:8
46:8
65:8
148:8
157:8
150:10
85:10
38:5
61:8
85:8
140:8
75:6
75:8
61:11
62:7
167:11
1:1
85:11
120:9
113:3
M16097
K952q
M14378Aa
K952k
M08169a
M13086
Kid1
M35105
Kle1
M37655A
Klc1
M36219b
K876q
M17967b
M06140A
K592a
M10744
K592e
M17635
K592f
M31264
K592g
M14693b
K594f
M14980a
K5921
M11158
K1031x
Ml 1594
K1031f
M40804
K1031y
M00006
K400a
M18108
K401b
M27645c
K688b
M24634
K5531
Y. khi L. khi E. khi/khi
cheat, deceive
Y. khi' L. kfii E. gi/gi
stipulated time; wait for, expect; also
qi. See also JT
Y. [khi] L. k^ E. khi3/khi
qiqu ^ tfj>. rugged, uneven. Now
commonly pronounced qiqu
Y. [khi] L. khi E. khi3/khi
slanting
Y. [khi] L. khi E. khia/khi
one horn turned up, one turned down
Y. [khi] L. k11! E. khi§/khi
lame; one-legged, standing on one leg.
See also jT
Y. [khi] L. khjiaj E.
rivulet, brook; also XT
Y. [khi] L. khjiaj E.
rivulet, brook; also XT, same as
Y. tshi L. tshiaj E.
wife. See also qi
Y. tshi L. tshiaj E.
sorrowful
Y. [tshi] L. tshiaj E. ts^j
chilly, cold
Y. tshi L. tshiaj E. tsNy
thickly growing grass, dense
Y. [si] L. siaj E. sej
perch, roost, rest; also XT
Y. tshi [sic] L. siaj
perch, roost, rest; also XT
Y. [tshf] L. tshiajk
anxiously thoughtful, solicitous
Y. tshf L. tshiajk E. tshejk
battle-axe; relation by marriage
Y. [tshiv] L. tshiajk E. ts^jk
battle-axe
Y. tshf L. tshit E. tshit
seven
Y. tshiv L. tshit E. tshit
lacquer
Y. [tshf] L. tship E. tship
fell a seam; also JT, qi
Y. khi' L. kfiji E. gji
grand; abundant; place name. The
Yunjing places words in this homophone
E. sej
E. ts^jk

Lexicon 245
qi (continued)
qi *
^qi W
qf ^
qf It
qf ft
qf #
qf *
qf »
qf $
qf $
qf $
qf »
qf X
qf *
qi ^
qi Vt
qf JK
qi ifej-
qi ^T
125:4
190:10
195:6
195:10
9:7
12:6
70:10
74:8
75:8
85:8
96:8
112:8
140:8
113:8
120:8
187:8
198:8
46:8
37:5
M28849
K5521
M45535
K552n
M46123
K552h
M46400
K552m
M00705B
K976m
M01472A
K952a
M13687
K952v
M14378Ab
K952k
M14921
K952u
M17620
M21067
K952x
M24261
M31248A
K952m
M24733
K952y
M27555
K952z
M44818
K952a'
M47657
K952b'
M08169b
M05892A
Kls
group in Grade III, implying E. gi, and
leaves Grade IV empty. The hPhags-pa
spelling and Sino-Korean confirm that the
reading should be E. gji
Y. khi' L. kfiji E. gji
very old, over sixty
Y. khi' L. kfiji E. gji
horse's mane; dorsal fin of a fish
Y. [khi'] L. kfiji E. gji
pickled fish
Y. [khi'] L. kfiji E. gji
dorsal fin
Y. [khi'] L. khi E. gi/gi
Moqi 7f ^ non-Chinese surname in the
N.Wei Dynasty. See also si
Y. khi' L. kfii E. gi/gi
modal particle, perhaps, possibly;
possessive pronoun, his, her, its, their
Y. khi' L. kfii E. gi/gi
banner, flag
Y. khi' L. kfii E. gi/gi
stipulated time; wait for, expect.
Now usually read qT. See also jT
Y. khi' L. kfii E. gi/gi
Chinese surrounding chess, go; chess
Y. [khi'] L. kfii E. gi/gi
river name
Y. khi' L.kfii E. gi/gi
fine jade
Y. [khi'] L. kfii E. gi/gi
surrounding chess, go, same as ^
Y. khi' L. kfii E. gi/gi
bean-stalks. See also JT
Y. [khi'] L. kfii E. gi/gi
good fortune, prosperity
Y. [khi'] L. kfii E. gi/gi
mottled grey; sandal cord
Y. [khi'] L. kfii E. gi/gi
black-grey mottled horse
Y. khi' L. kfii E. gi/gi
qflm J$ |$ fabulous animal, unicora
Y. [khi] L. khi E. khi£/khi
qi'qu ^ "^ rugged, uneven; also qT
Y. khi' L. kfii E. gS/gi
strange, unusual. See also JT

246 Lexicon
qi
qi
qi
qi
qi
qi
qi
qi
qi
qi
qi
qi
^ 96:8
JLJL
m 167:8
JNf 187:8
ft 159:4
ft 46:4
J$L 77:4
^ 113:4
i^f 32:4
$T 70:6
II 102:10
W 113:4
J$T 140:16
M21062
Kit
M40560B
Klv
M44817A
Klu
M38210
K867J
M07936
K864H
M16275
K8641
M24639A
K867i
M04903
K4431
M13638
K443p
M219255
K5471
M24640
K443o
M32418
K443t
qi
qi
qi
qi
181:4
102:6
130:14
142:14
210:0
llfi 46:3
M43370
K443m
M21842a
K879J
M29967
K593f
M33732
K593g
M48560A
K593a
M07891
K953k
Y. khi' L. kfii E. gi5/gi
fine jade; rare, beautiful
Y. [khi'] L. kfii E. gi5/gi
cooking pot; kind of chisel. Also E. gi§'.
See also y!
Y. khi' L. kfii E. gio/gi
ride astride. See also ji
Y.[khi'] L.kfiji E.gjiS/gji
protruding part of a wheel nave
Y. khi' L. kfiji E. gjia/gji
name of a mountain
Y. [khi'] L. kfiji E. gjiS/gji
branching, divided (road)
Y. khi' L. kfiji E. gjis/gji
earth spirit. See also zhi
Y. khi' L. kfii E. gij
territory 1000 li square; royal domain.
Also E. rjin
Y. khi' L. kfii E. gij
banner with bells; dragon banner
E. gij
E. gij
E. gij
Y. [khi'] L. kfii
royal domain; also JT
Y. khi' L. kfii
pray, seek a blessing
Y. khi' L. kfii
place name; Chinese angelica; pray,
beseech. Also E. kij and gin. The
Guangyun also places this word in rhyme
zhi ^ , implying E. gi, but this is
inconsistent with the phonetic and with
the readings kij and gin
Y. [khi'] L. kfii E. gij
of imposing stature
Y. xi' L. xfijyaj E. ywej
garden plot; area of fifty mu; also xi
Y. tshi' L. tsfiiaj E. dzej
navel
Y. [tshi'J L. tsfiiaj E. dzej
qicao ^ if larva of various beetles
Y. tshi' L. tsfiiaj E. dzej
even, uniform, equal. See also ji, ZT,
zhai
Y. khf L. khi' E. khi'/khi'
bare mountain

Lexicon 247
qi
qi
ft
-g
A
$
db
a
LL»*
*
*
t
*
^
•S-
If
*
&
dfe-
ft
fc
75:3
140:3
156:3
120:8
9:4
157:4
151:3
30:8
75:8
115:10
120:8
5:2
30:13
55:4
75:8
7:7
9:4
157:4
5:2
M14479
K9531
M30681
K953q
M37048
K953r
M27586
Klb1
M00422A
K862a
M37416A
K864g
M36248
K548a
M03820
K588c
M14965
M25218B
K552o
M27569A
K588h
M00170A
K517f
M04376
K536a
M09594
M14913
K535a
M00279B
K910a
M00422B
K862a
M37416B
K864g
M00170B
K517f
E. khi'/khi'
E. khi'/khi'
E.
Y. khiv L. khi' E. khi'/khi'
kind of willow, Salix purpurea; place
name, surname
Y. [khf] L. khi'
kind of millet; lettuce
Y. khf L. khi'
arise; start, begin
Y. khf L. khi'
figured silk material, damask; beautiful
Y. [khf] L. khji' E. khji3'/khji'
stand on tiptoe. See also qi
Y. [khf] L. khji' E. khjia'/khji'
stand on tiptoe; same as &. See also qi
Y. khf L. khi' E. khij'
rhetorical question expecting a negative
answer, 'how (could it be that...)'
Y. khf L. khjiaj' E. k^j'
open; expose, announce; letter to a
superior
Y.khf L.khjiaj' E. khej'
wooden tally in the shape of a halberd
used as a pass
Y. [kf] L.khjiaj' E. khej'
bow to the ground, kotow. See also JT
Y.khf L.khjiaj' E. khej'
joint (of the body); tally. See also qing
Y. khiv L. khit E. khit
beg. See also qi
Y. khr L. khi^ E. khih
vessel, utensil; tool; capacity, ability
V ric^ivl T k^iivA • |_iv 1 I J-~«* «- II
abandon, same as 3£
Y \fh:\ i irh,:-.. A. i i -*- iv ji
abandon, throw away
Y rirh^vi T L-h.v. [K i j L-,. K i
frequent. See also ji
Y. [khi*] L. khji- E. khji3h/khjih
stand on tiptoe and look. See also q!
Y. [khiv] L. khjiv E. khjiah/khjih
stand on tiptoe and look, same as •&. See
also qT
Y rif^ivl T kfyv F k-^ii^1 . I A. 1 J Ljt n. 1 X-«. Jx ]J
give; originally written ^. See also
E. khjih
E. khjih
E.

248 Lexicon
qi
qi
qi
qi
qi
qi
qi
qi
~\ 84:0
H 84:6
It 61:12
$t 64:9
Jl 37:6
f 38:5
$y 112:4
$'! 18:6
M17043
K517a
M17059
K517c
Ml 1246
K329a
M12389B
K313n
M05917A
K279b
M06140B
K592a
M24062
M01969A
K868d
qi
qi
qi
*lt 112:11
fe 149:3
ft 37:6
M24448
M35242
K517H
M05917C
K279b
qi
qi
qi
qi
qia
qia
qia
qia
Q 162:3
& 85:5
ft 120:9
$ 140:9
$ 64:8
$| 75:9
'fp 61:6
& 85:6
M38724
K517k
M17309
K694h
M27645b
K688b
M31465
K688c
M12253
M15169B
K313o
M 10603
M17426a
K675m
Y fl>"ivl T l>hiv TH. [K 1 J !_,. K 1 JC.
breath, air, vapour, same as Mt; give,
see qi £
Y b-h*>. T \fhi* TJ i,.h:4h
. A. 1 .1—*• JV 1 .*-»• JV XJ
breath, air, vapour
Y l/-hjN T b-hjnjv p k-hicnh. A. 1 1^. JV IdJ JL^« JV JdJ
rest
Y rkNvl T t^iaix F If^iai^• |_n. I J i^f. JV luj XJ». JV IdJ
lift the clothes to wade. See
v khiv T khiiai" FJ. * A. 1 i^» JV. J^Mj •!-*•
notch; contract, agreement. See also qi
below and qie
Y. tshiv L. tshiajv E. tshejh
give a woman in marriage. See also qi
Y. tshix L. tshiajs E. ts^j11
stone steps; lay bricks
Y. [tshiv] L. tshiajk E. tshiajk
pierce, stab. See also ci. Now read ci
in all senses
Y. [tshiv] L. tshiajk E. tshiajk
gravel in shallow water; desert
Y. khf L. kit E. kit
finish, cease
Y. [khO L. khit E. khit
Qidan M ^" tribe in Manchuria, founders
of the Liao dynasty. See also qi above
and qie
Y. [xf] L. xit
arrive at, reach, come to
Y. khf L. khip
weep
Y. [tshiv] L. tship
to hem; sew up; bring together;
continuous; pursue, arrest; also JT, qT
Y. tsi' [sic] L. tship E. tship
thatch; repair. Also E. tsip.
Y. khje[sic] L. khja:p E.
pinch
Y. [khjav] L. khjait E. khgit/kheit
ancient percussion instrument; yu $L
Y. khja" L. khja:p E. khaip/khe:p
lucky, opportune; fitting, appropriate
Y. xja' L. xfijaip E. Y9ip/Ye:P
permeate, imbue; accord with,
concordant; also xia
E. xit
E. khip
E. tship

Lexicon 249
qian
qian
qian
qian
qian
qian
qian
qian
qian
1£ 61:11
?§ 61:9
^ 64:10
H 145:10
^ 187:10
IB" 167:5
38 162:12
t 93:7
ff 9:3
Ml 1140
M10900
K197b
M12519
K143d
M34513
K143g
M44894
K143h
M40310a
K229e
M39123
K206c
M20025A
K366k
M00380
en
qian
qian
qian
qian
T 24:1
3r 140:3
Pf 170:3
•$: 46:9
M02697
K365a
M30669
K365f
M41548
K365e
M08279a Y,
qian
qian
qian
qian
qian
qian
qian
1% 9:11
& 118:13
ft, 118:17
H 167:7
l$t 149:10
ft 5:10
Jc 141:4
M01054
K613a
M26614
M26769
M40474B
K661k
M35821
K627f
M00204A
K140c
M32686
K198a
Y. [khjan] L. khja:n E.
stingy
Y. khjen L. khian E. khian
overflow, excess; fault
Y. [khjen] L. khian E. khian
seize, gather, pluck up. Jiyun reading.
Guangyun reads kian'
Y. khjen L. khian E. khian
trousers; pick up one's skirt
Y. khjen L. khian E. khian
fault, flaw, defective
Y. qen' L. jyan E. jwian
lead (metal); also yan
Y. tshjen L. tshian E. tshian
move, transfer
Y. khjen L. khjian E. kh;
pull, lead. See also qian
Y. tshjen L. tshian E.
thousand; commander of one thousand,
chiliarch
Y. tshjen L. tshian E. ts^n
thousand
Y. tshj£n L. tshian E. tsh£n
qianqian flourishing, luxuriant
Y. tshj£n L. tshian E. tsh£n
north-south path between cultivated fields
khjam, kham" L. khja:m E. khaim/khe:m
yawning (hole in a cliff); inlay, imbed,
set; also qian, kan
Y. tshj£m L. tshiam E. tshiam
aU
Y. [tshj£m] L. tshiam E. tshiam
bamboo slip; to sign. Earlier written H,
Y. tshj£m L. tshiam E. tshiam
bamboo slip, tally;
Y. [tsiam] L. tshiam E. tshiam
engrave (Jiyun, Guangyun has E. tsiam).
See also qTn
Y. khj£m L. khjiam E. kh£m
modest
Y. khj£n' L. kfiian E. gian
positive principle in the Yijing; heaven;
male. See also gan
Y. khj£n' L. kfiian E. gian
respectful, reverent; seize, usurp; kill

250 Lexicon
qian
qian
qian
qian
qian
qian
qian
qia"n
m 167:8
It 18:7
tt 75:5
|?F 118:8
$ 167:4
IB" 167:5
$7^ 203:4
)f 85:12
M40563A
K155J
M02011
K245a
M14619B
K606J
M26152
K6061
M40223
M40306
K6061
M48056
K651r
M18240
K660n
qiSn
qian
qian
qian
qian
qian
qian
qian
qian
qian
qian
qian
S| 120:14
i4 162:10
$; 85:8
1st 149:14
ft 9:7
$ 93:7
$£ 120:11
"ft 9:8
If 120:8
W 140:6
flf 140:10
•ft 46:9
M28006
K196e
M39052
K196b
M17697
K155k
M36043
K196f
M00686A
K241f
M20025B
K366k
M27827
M00791
K1250c
M27562
K812t'
M30871
M31590
M08279b Y.
Y. tshjen' L. tsfiian E. dzian
cash, coin, money. See also ji&n
Y. tshjen' L. tsfiian E. dzen
front, ahead, before, preceding
Y. [khjem'] L. kfiiam E. giam
wooden gag in a horse's mouth. See
also gan
Y. [khjem'] L. kfiiam E. giam
pincers; pinch, restrain; gag, same as IH"
Y. khjem' L. kfiiam E. giam
door latch; to seal
Y. khjem' L. kfiiam E. giam
pincers, tongs; restrain, gag
Y. khjem' L. kfiiam E. giam
black
Y. tshjem' L. tsfiiam E. dziam
wade; plunge, submerge; covert, in
secret. Guangyun reads E. dziamh in the
latter sense
Y. [khjenv] L. khjian' E. khjian'
qiSnquan &| $£ deeply attached
Y. khjenv L. khjian' E. khjian'
send, dispatch. Also E. khjianh escort
(carriage)
Y. tshianv L. tshian' E. tshian'
shallow
Y. khjenv L. khjianv E. khjianh
reprimand, condemn
Y. [khjen^J L. khjianv E. k'W1
comparable to. See also xian
Y. khjenx L. khjians E. kNm11
tow-rope, same as $% . See also qian
Y. khjenN L. khjianv E.
tow-rope
Y. [tshjenN] L. tshian* E. tshenh
pretty, handsome
Y. [tshjens] L. tshianv E.
dark red
Y. tshjemN [sic] L. tshianv E.
madder, alizarin red
Y. [tshjenv] L. tshian^ E.
flourishing vegetation; red, same as If
khjam,kharrf L. khja:m E. k^im/k^im
yawning hole in a cliff; inlay, imbed, set;
also qian, kan

Lexicon 251
qian
qian
qian
qian
qian
qiang
qiang
qiang
qiang
qiang
qiang
qiang
qiang
qiang
qiang
qiang
qiang
qiang
qiang
qiang
A. 76:0
2£ 140:4
fi 32:11
l4t
W- 61:10
J& 76:10
3k 123:2
4£ 142:8
% 64:10
j|jf 69:4
tt". 75:10
^ 96:10
H" 157:10
m 167:11
JR, 62:4
$£ 64:8
J6 130:8
3t 57:9
31 57:13
ifr 38:13
)ft 62:4
M15991
K624a
M30705
K624c
M05394
K611g
Ml 1051 A
K627d
M16159
K627e
M28429
K712a
M33154
K712e
M12525B
K703g
M13540
K727d
M15319
K703i
M21169
K703h
M37755
K703J
M40802
K727z
M115625
K727g
M12283B
K1172a'
M29630
M09822A
K713a
M09872A
K710e
M06777
K727J'
M11562a
K727g
Y. khjenr L. khiamx E. khiamh
open the mouth wide, yawn; lacking,
wanting; owe, be behind with a debt
Y. khj£nr L. kfiianT E. giam'
water plant, Euryale ferox
Y. tshjemv L. tskianr E.
moat; dig out
Y. [kkjenV] L. khjiam' E.
unsatisfied, resentful. See also qie
Y. khjenT [sic] L. khjiam' E.
unsatisfied (hunger); crop failure; E.
k^m11 in Jiyun. Also E. khsim'
Y. khjarj L. khiarj E. khiarj
western Tibeto-Burman people
Y. khjarj L. khiarj E. khiarj
qianglang $jfc> %$ dung beede, Geotrupes
laevistriatus
Y. tshjarj L. tshiarj E. tshiarj
opposing, contrary; strike one's head
against. See also qi&ng, chuang
Y. [tshjarj] L. tshiarj E. tshiarj
kind of axe with a rectangular socket
Y. [tshjarj] L. tshiarj E. tshiarj
spear
Y. [tshjarjl L. tshiarj
tinkling of jade
Y. [tshjarj] L. tshiarj
move in stately fashion; dance
Y. tshjarj L. tshiarj E. tshiarj
tinkle, clang; gong
Y. tshjarj' L. tsfiiarj E. dziarj
See qiang
Y. khjarj L. khja:wrj E. khaiwrj/khoe:wrj
beat. See also kong
Y. khjarj L. khjaiwrj E. khaiwrj/khce:wrj
internal body cavity; tune; accent
Y. khjarj' L. kfiiarj E. giarj
strong. See also qiang, jiang
Y. [khjarj'] L. kfiiarj E. giarj
strong, same as 3£ . See also qiang,
Jiang
Y. tshjarj' L. tsfiiarj E. dziarj
lesser-ranked imperial concubine
Y. tshjarj' L. tsfiiarj E. dziarj
kill, wound, injure. Now usually read
qiang
E. tshiarj
E. ts^arj

252 Lexicon
qiang ^W
qiang jj®
qiang Jw
qiang If
qi&ng m.
qi&ng TC&
qiang 5*
qiang 51
qiSng ^
.
qiao ^
qiao ilP
qiao 'R
qiao ft
qiao $H
qiao m
qiao ff
qiao w
qiao *m
qiao w
qiao $|t
75:13
90:13
53:13
140:13
120:11
145:11
57:9
57:13
64:10
66:10
112:12
163:10
188:6
75:12
157:12
120:12
9:12
30:9
75:12
140:12
156:12
M15687
M19806
K727J
M09509
K727m
M32113
M27857a
K713c
M34545a
K713d
M09822B
K713a
M09872B
K710e
M12525A
K703g
M13337
K1129s
M24494
K1164i
M39576A
M45170
K1166p
M15517
M37887A
K1138q
M27886
K1138p
M01088
K1138c
M03990
K1138a
Ml 5526
K1138g
M31946
M37303
K1138H
Y. tsjarj' L. tsfiiarj E. dziarj
mast
Y. tshjarj' L. tsfiiarj E. dziarj
wall of a house
wall of a house, same as %& .
Y. [tshjarj'] L. tsfiiarj E. dziarj
qiangwei W $fc Rosa acicularis, rose
Y. [kjarf] L. kiarj' E. kiarj'
cord for stringing cash; string of cash;
alsoji&ng
Y. [kjarj"] L. kiarj' E. kiarj'
qi&ngb&o $1 $fc straps for carrying babies
on the mother's back; also ji&ng
Y. khjarjv L. kfiiarjs E. giarj'
strive; force, compel. See also qiang,
Jiang
Y. [khjarjv] L.kfiiarj' E. giarj'
compel. See also qiang, jiang
Y. tshjarj" L. tshiarj' E. tshiarj'
seize by force, snatch, rob. See also
qiang, chu&ng
Y. khjaw L. khja:w E. khaiw/khe:w
knock, beat, strike
Y. khjaw L. khjaiw E. khaiw/khe:w
stony, rocky terrain
Y. [khjaw] L. khjaiw E. ^aiw/k^iw
name of a mountain. See also hao
Y. khjaw L. khjaiw E. khaiw/kheiw
shank; tapered end of a wheel spoke
Y. khjew L. khiaw E. khiaw
sledge
Y. [khJEw] L. khiaw E. khiaw
lift the foot; on tiptoe; stilts. See also jue
Y. [khjew] L. khjiaw E. khjiaw
string or band for trousers
Y. khjew' L. kfiiaw E. giaw
sojourn; live abroad
Y. khj£w' L. kfiiaw E. giaw
high, lofty; a surname
Y. khj£w' L. kfiiaw E. giaw
bridge
Y. khj£w' L. kfiiaw E. giaw
buckwheat
Y. khj£w L. kfiiaw E. giaw
agile. Also E. khiaw

Lexicon 253
qiao
qiao
qiao
qiao
qiao
qiao
qiao
qiao
qiao
qiao
qiao
qiao
qiao
qiao
qiao
qiao
qiao
qie
qie
M 124:12
iK 140:6
tt 61:12
'ft 75:12
H 149:12
^ 48:2
'f$ 61:7
'K 61:9
%. 172:3
$$ 196:8
^ 79:8
1$ 9:7
•$} 46:7
13 149:7
IS 177:7
tli 64:13
$C 116:13
^J 18:2
ft1 9:5
M28808
K1164H
M30948
K1139a
Ml 1213
K1148H
M15489
K11481
M35976
K1148J
M08721
K10411
M10627
K1149s
M 10884
K1092J
M41954a
K1122a
M47014a
K798n
M16646b
K1226a
M00680
K1149p
M08085
K1149r
M35529
K1149t
M42850B
M12776
K1162g
M25680
K1162H
M01858Aa
K400F
M00486
qie
qiS
140:5
1:4
M30835
M00029A
K46a
Y. khj£\v' L. kfijiaw E. gjiaw
long tail feather; raise (the head);
outstanding
Y. [khj£w'] L. kfijiaw E. gjiaw
kind of mallow, Malva sylvestris
Y. [tshjew] L. tsfiiaw E. dziaw
qiaocui tH '$ withered, thin and pale
Y. tshj£w' L. tsfiiaw E. dziaw
gather firewood; firewood; burn
Y. tshj£w' L. tsfiiaw E. dziaw
deteriorated, worn; watchtower
Y. khjawv L. khja:w' E. khaiw'/khe:w'
clever, skilful
Y. tshj£w~ L. tshiaw' E. tshiaw'
anxious, grieving; calm, quiet
Y. tshj£w" L. tshiaw' E. tshiaw'
change countenance. Also E. dzuw'
Y. tshjewv L. tsiak E. tsiak
kind of small bird; sparrow; also que
Y. ts^Ew" L. tshiak E. ts'Hak
magpie; also que
Y. [khjawv] L.khja:wk E. khaiwk/khceiwk
husk, shell; hollow; also ke, que
Y. tshjewv L. tshiawv E. tshiawh
handsome, smart; used for xiao ft
resemble
Y. tshj£wx L. tshiawv E. tshiawh
lofty, precipitous, steep; stern, severe
Y. tshj£ws L. tsfiiaw" E. dziawh
blame
Y. sj£wv L. siawv E. siawh
sheath, scabbard. See also shao
Y. [khj£wx] L. khjiawv E. khew
slap from the side
Y. khiawv L.
hole, aperture
Y. tshj£v L. tshiat E. tsh£t
cut; also qie. See also qie from E.
Y. [khj£] L. kfiia E. gia
transcription character for Sanskrit ga,
ga, gha, gha
Y. [khj£'] L. kfiia E. gia
eggplant
Y. tshj£' L. tshia' E. tshia'
and, moreover; about to; for the time
being. See also ju
E. khewh

254
qie
qie
qie
qie
qie
qie
qie
qie
qie
qie
qie
qie
qln
qin
qln
qrn
qln
qin
qrn
qin
qin
ty 18:2
$ 73:10
H 37:6
¥ 64:6
St 167:9
"fej 18:2
If 116:17
ft 61:5
3c 38:5
'IE 61:9
'Hfc 61:10
S 118:9
II 147:9
$C 46:12
$A 76:8
^£ 145:4
$1 181:8
if. 9:7
$€ 120:7
U 187:7
ii_i
Sfr 19:11
M01858B
K400f
M14311
K313m
M05917B
K279b
M12035
K279c
M40635
K279f
M01858Ab
K400f
M25713
K309a
M10491a
K642J
M06147
K635a
M10949
K630n
M11051B
K627d
M26271
K630o
M34918A
K382o
M08464
K652k
M16104
K652f
M34147
K651h
M43541A
K652J
M00646
K661c
M27488A
K661e
M44759
K6611
M02424
K480x
qieku6
E.
E.
Lexicon
Y. [tshiv] L. tshiajN E.
ylqie — ty all, each and every. See
also qie and qie below
Y. [khjev] L. khiat E. khiat, khiat
go away
Y. [khjev] L. khjiat E.
carve, cut a notch, same as $
M $j separated. See also qi
Y. khjev L. khjiat E.
Uft; take along
Y. [khjev] L. khjiat
cut; carve, engrave
Y. tshjev L. tshiat
cut; also qie. See also qie above
Y. tshje L. tshiat E.
snatch, steal; humble first person
pronoun
Y. kjev L. khiap E. khiap
afraid, timid, nervous; also que
Y. ts^e" L. tshiap E. ts^ap
concubine
Y. [khjev] L. khjiap E.
satisfied, content
Y. [khje"] L. khiap E.
satisfied, same as IS. See also qian
Y. khje" L. khjiap E. k^p
box, small suitcase
Y. tshin L. tshin E. ts^n
close, intimate; relative; parent; in person.
See also qing
Y. khim L. khim E. khim
precipitous
Y. khim L. khim E. khim
respect; by the emperor himself
L. khim E. khim
E. tshi m
Y. khim
quilt
Y. khim L. khim E. khim
crooked chin. See also han
Y. tshim L. tshim
invade, encroach upon
Y. tshim L. tshim E. tshim
thread; also E. tsim. See also xian
Y. tsim [sic] L. tshim E. tshim
qlnqin ^ ^ at a gallop. Also E. tshim
Y. khin' L. kfiin E. gin
diligent, industrious

Lexicon 255
qin
qin
qin
qin
qin
qin
qin
qin
qin
ff 61:11
J& 61:13
)f 140:4
^ 115:5
i^ 142:10
^ 64:13
^ 96:8
$5" 114:8
^ 140:4
Ml 1129
K480v
M11321
K480y
M30742
K443f
M24995
K380a
M33404
K380e
M12816
K651n
M21079
K651q
M24893
K651J
M30724
K651o
qin
qln
qln
qin
qmg
qing
W 177:4
fj^
WL 40:11
$§L 167:7
» \
3*V»N 85:4
$ 26:10
fi 159:7
M42724
K651p
M07289
K661f
M40474A
K661k
M17182
M02879
K714o
M38346
K831o
qmg t
qing 3
j
qing 1
j
qing 3
qmg 1
j
qing 1
H 31:8
*f 85:8
i—-
% 9:11
j.
f 142:8
|=f 174:0
ti
sf 195:8
M04797
M17695
K812i'
M01038
K828b
M33203A
K812e'
M42564
K812c'
M46210A
E. gin
E. dzin
E. dzin
E. gim
E. gim
Y. [khin'] L. kfiin E. gin
sad; brave; sincere, energetic
Y. khin' L. kfiin E. gin
ylnqin l& H careful
Y. khin' L. kfiin
cress; celery
Y. ts^n L. tsfiin
ancient state and dynasty
Y. [tshin'] L. tsfiin
small cicada
Y. khim' L. kfiim
catch, capture
Y. khim' L. kfiim
stringed musical instrument, zither
Y. [khinr] L. kfiim E. gim
bird
Y. khim' L. kfiim E. gim
marsh plant; huangqin ^ ^ root of the
large-flowered skullcap Scutellana
balcanensis
Y. [khim'] L. kfiim
strap
Y. tshirrT L. tshim'
sleep; sleeping apartment
Y. [tshimv] L. tshim'
engrave. See also qian
Y. tshimx L. tshirrT
ooze, seep; name of a river
Y. khirj L. khiajrj E. khiajrj
minister
Y. khirj L. khjiajrj
light (weight). Also E. khjiajrjh make
light of; be hasty
Y. [tshirj] L. tshiajrj
latrine
Y. tshirj L. tshiajrj
clear, clean
Y. khirj, khjurj L. khjyajrj
overturn
E. gim
E. tshim'
E. tshim'
E. tshimh
E. khjiajrj
na
E. tshiajrj
E. tshiajrj
E. khjwiajrj
Y. [tshirj] L. tshiajrj E. ts^jrj
qmgting $ $£, qingling $ &
dragonfly. See also jTng
Y. tshiq L. tshiajrj E. tshejrj
blue, green, grey
Y. tshirj L. tshiajrj E. tsh£Jrj
mackerel. See also zheng

256 Lexicon
qing
qing
qing
qihg
qing
qmg
qing
qmg
qing
qlng
qlng
qlng
qing
qing
qing
qing
qing
vst% 181:2
$ 19:8
jy>
T£ 64:13
9k 75:13
AJt-
M 195:8
ttJ^
I? 203:8
tt 61:8
Bj=f 72:8
If 149:8
% i.
If 149:8
jfljv 75:14
kjf 181:2
jft 61:11
If 149:8
^ 149:11
J-/t
|r 112:11
$ 120:8
M43338B
K828a
M02370
K755e
M12808
K813k
M15681
K8131
M46257b
K755f
M48123
K755g
M10756
K8121'
M13994
M35640B
K812k'
M35640A
K812k'
M15749
K843b
M43338A
K828a
Ml 1145
K753a
M35640C
K812k'
M35856
K832e
M24454
K832c
M27569B
K588H
qing (convtinued)
qing
qing
qiong
H 121:11
II 147:9
=7 116:3
M28167
K832d
M34918B
K382o
M25414a
K901e
Y. [khirj, khjui]] L. khjyajrj E. khwejrj
same as $( . See also qTng
Y. khirj' L. kfiiajrj E. giajrj
strong
Y. khirj' L. kfiiajrj E. giajrj
raise, lift
Y. khirj' L. kfiiajrj E. giajrj
bow straightener
Y. khirj' L. kfiiajrj E. giajrj
whale; alsojing
Y. khirj' L. kfiiajrj E. giajrj
black tattoo on the face of a criminal
Y. tshirj' L. tsfiiajrj E. dziajrj
passion, feelings; circumstances
Y. tshirj' L. tsfiiajrj E. dziajrj
clear skies
Y. [tshirj'] L. tsfiiajrj E. dziajrj
same as 'ftf . See also qTng, qing
Y. tshirjv L. tshiajrj' E. tshiajrj'
request, petition, beseech. See also
qing, qing
Y. khirf L. khjyajrj' E. khwejrj'
Indian mallow, Abutilon
Y. khirjv L. khjyajrj' E. khwejrj'
unit of area, 100 mu\ interval of time,
short while. See also qmg
Y. khirf L. khiajqv E. khiajrjh
congratulate; celebrate
Y. tshirjv L. tsfiiajrj" E. dziajrj
autumn assembly at the Han court. See
also qmg, qTng
Y. khirjv L. khjiajrj' E. khejrj'
cough
Y. khirj^ L. khjiajrjv E. k^jq11
musical stone, lithophone
Y. [khirf] L. khjiajrjv E. khejrjh
joint of the body, point of articulation;
kenqing 1*f ^ joint (of the body),
critical, vital. Jiyun reading. Also E.
khejrj'. See also qT
Y. khirjv L. khjiajrjv E. khejrjh
exhausted, depleted, empty
Y. [tshins] L. tshinv E. tshinh
relatives by marriage. See also qln
Y. khjurj L. khiwrj E. khuwrj
vaulted; high and arched; also qiong

Lexicon 257
qiong
qiong
qiong
qiong
qiong
qiong
140:3 M30678a Y. khjuq L. khiwrj E. khuwrj
qiongqiong "^ ^ aromatic plant,
Ligusticum wallichii; also qidng
Y. [khyrj'] L. kfijyajrj E. gjwiajrj
alone, helpless, same as '$, &
Y. khyrj' L. kfijyajrj E. gjwiajrj
without brothers, solitary, alone
38:13
61:9
86:9
96:15
109:8
qm
qiu
1:4
142:5
M06782A
K829b
M10865
K830a
M19217
K843g
M21328
K167i
M23432
K829a, 256h scared; alone, helpless, same as
Y.khyrj' L.kfijyajn
isolated, orphaned, alone
Y. khyrj' L. kfijyajrj
red gem stone
Y. [khyrj1 L. kfijyajrj
E. gjwiajrj
E. gjwiajrj
E. gjwiajrj
qiong «
qiong *
qiong |
7 116:3 M254145
K901e
7 140:3 M30678b
| 116:10 M25593
K1006H
qiong
qiong
qiong
qiong
qiong
qiu
If 140:15
^P 118:6
3* 142:6
J| 157:6
*$ 163:3
H 213:0
M32352
M25988
M33037
K1172e'
M37519
K1172f
M39288
K1172s
M48847B
K985a
M00033
K994a
M32916
Y. khjurj L. khiwrj E. khuwrj
vaulted; high and arched. See qiong
Y. khjurj L. khiwrj E. khuwrj
See qiong
Y. khjurj' L. kfiiwrj E. guwrj
limit, extreme point; exhaust; in
extremity, poor
Y. khjurj' L. kfiiwrj E. guwrj
See qiongqiong "^ ^
Y. khjurj' L. kfiywrj E. guawrj
kind of bamboo
Y. khjurj' L. kfiywrj E. guawrj
cricket; locust
Y. [khjurj'] L. kfiywrj E. guawrj
qi6ngqiong H? Ht sound of marching
feet. Also E. khaiwrj
Y. khjurj L. kfiywrj E. guawrj
mound
Y. [kiw] L. kiw E. kuw
Qiuci ^i 3£ Kucha. Guangyun gives
this reading with unaspirated initial k
which corresponds to the usual reading
guTin the sense of'turtle.1 Compare
Amoy ku. The reading qiu, with
aspirated initial, based on Yan Shigu's
commentary to the Hanshu, is of doubtful
validity as evidence of a genuine Chinese
reading for the graph. See also guT
Y. khiw L. khiw E. khuw
hillock; mound; grave; empty
Y. [khiw] L. khiw E. khuw
qiuyTn iji $| earthworm

258 Lexicon
qiu
qiu
qiu
qiu
qiu
qiu
qiu
qiu
qiu
qiu
qiu
qiu
qiu
qiu
qiu
qiu
qiu
qiu
qiu
qiu
J*P 163:5
tt 75:9
$C 115:4
ft 120:9
& 140:9
fft 177:9
4ft. 195:9
fit 195:9
% 196:9
Hi 9:2
tjl 64:7
ft 82:7
$. 85:2
2$. 96:7
ft 120:7
^L 140:2
i*
H 145:7
ft 148:7
ft 154:7
3J. 162:7
M39335
M15186
K1092b
M24940
K1092a
M27661
K1096p
M31333
K1092c
M42922
M46331
M46330
K1096q
M47094
K1092d
M00355a
K992p
M12127
K1066g
M16837
M17105
K1066a
M21011
K1066f
M27477
K1066H
M30646A
K992s
M34312
K1066e
M35079
K10661
M36793
K1066J
M38878
K1066k
Y. [khiw] L. khiw E. khuw
same as Jr. ; a surname
Y. tshiw L. tshiw E. tshuw
Catalpa bungei
Y. tshiw L. tshiw E. tshuw
autumn
Y. [tshiw] L. tshiw E. tshuw
crupper
Y. [tshiw] L. tshiw E. tshuw
kind of artemisia; same as qiu $t
Y. tshiw L. tshiw E. tshuw
crupper; qiuqian M ^ rope swing
Y. tshiw L. tshiw E. tshuw
kind of mud-fish, loach
Y. [tshiw'] L. tshiw E. tshuw
Same as qiu $& . Used for a word
meaning 'press, harass,1 probably same
as cu ^ E. tsuwk. Also E.dzuw kind
of fish
Y. tshiw L. tshiw E. tshuw
large water bird, stork
Y. khiw' L. kfiiw E. guw
enemy. See also chou which properly
belongs to the synonym f$
Y. [khiw'] L. kfiiw E. guw
long and curved
Y. khiw' L. kfiiw E. guw
ball
Y. khiw' L. kfiiw E. guw
seek, ask for
Y. khiw' L. kfiiw E. guw
precious jade; ball, sphere
Y. [khiw'] L. kfiiw E. guw
urgent, pressing
Y. [khiw'] L. kfiiw E. guw
wilderness; wild animal's den. See also
jiao
Y. khiw' L. kfiiw E. guw
fur, fur coat
Y. [khiw'] L. kfiiw E. guw
curved like a horn; cf. ^
Y. khiw' L. kfiiw E. guw
bribe
Y. khiw' L. kfiiw E. guw
bring together; pair off, mate

Lexicon 259
qiu
qiu
qiu
qiu
qiu
qiu
qiu
qiu
qiu
qiu
qiu
qiu
qiu
qu
qu
qu
qu
qu
qu
qu
qu
3# 167:7
ftf 181:2
$1 181:7
|JL 209:2
if 142:9
»i
ift 162:9
if 164:2
0 31:2
ffl 85:5
^ 96:11
i1] 142:2
$| 148:2
Ht 119:10
ii 9:5
u |
|£ 130:5
^ 113:5
JjflL 141:6
$ 145:5
3$. 112:5
Jt 140:5
41 142:5
M40423
K10661
M43339A
K992e
M43492B
K988a
M48503
K992t
M33293
K1096n
M39008
K1096o
M39765
K10961
M04681
K1094a
M17270
K1094c
M21202
K10691
M32810
K1064e
M35006
K1064f
M27071
K1088d
M00499
M29398
K642g
M24670
K642d
M32709Bb
K78a
M34220
K642e
M24084
K46q
M30813C
K46t
M32963B
K46m
Y. khiw' L. kfiiw E. guw
chisel
Y. [khiw'] L. kfiiw E. guw
cheek bones. See also kui
Y. [k^w] L. kfiiw E. guw
cheek bones. See also kui
Y. [khiw] L. kfiiw E. guw
head cold
Y. [tshiw'] L. tsfiiw E. dzuw
qiuqi 4| $ tree grub
Y. tshiw' L. tsfiiw E. dzuw
exhaust; strong, powerful; gather
Y. tshiw' L. tsfiiw E. dzuw
chief, leader
Y. siw' L. sfiiw E. zuw
imprison; prisoner
Y. siw' L. sfiiw E. zuw
swim
Y. [khiw'J L. kfijiw E. gjiw
fine jade; jade lithophone
Y. k^w' L. kfijiw E. gjiw
young dragon born with horns; hornless
dragon
Y. [khiw'J L. kfijiw E. gjiw
horn-shaped, long and curved
Y. [khiw"] L. khiw' E. khuw'
dry provisions, parched grains
Y. (?) L. khia E. khia
for Sanskrit kha, kha. Modern reading
from the phonetic qu 3z
Y. [khy] L. khis/khy9 E. khi§
side (of the body); right wing of an army;
open the side. Also E. khiap
Y. [khy] L. khiS/khy3 E. khi§
drive away, dispel; ququ strong, robust
Y. [khy] L. khiS/khy§ E. khia
same as ^ ; also xu. See also xu
Y. [khy] L.khi5/khy3 E. khiS
sleeve hole; lift; remove
Y. [tshy] L. tshiS/tshi3 E. ts'HS
hill covered with earth
Y. [tshy] L. tshia/tshi§ E. ts^S
straw used in the sole of a shoe. See also
cha, ju, ju
Y. tshy L. tshiS/tshis E. ts^S
maggot. See also ju

260 Lexicon
qu
qu
qu
qu
qu
qu
qu
qu
qu
qu
qu
qu
qu
qu
qu
qu
qu
qu
qu
qu
qu
qu
m 23:9
"Ifi 46:11
H 158:11
H 187:11
$| 156:10
$| 199:8
I*
ffi 73:2
>8 44:5
tt 149:5
H 85:9
]8 H8:17
H 140:12
S| 140:17
Avfe
M 167:13
^4 19:5
MH
H 109:13
S 112:12
|^ 120:5
^ 130:5
W 130:18
$ff 144:18
W 157:18
M02691A
K122a
M08426
M38137
K122g
M44968
K122c
M37258
K132c
M47818
K10171
M14280a
K1213a
M07669
K496k
M35387
K4961
M17764
K95g
M26777A
K803J
M31962
M32509
K803k
M40957A
K803g
M02317
K108t
M23747B
K96c
M24470
M27377
K108u
M29360
K108v
M30044
K96h
M34090
K96d
M38013
K96e
Y. khy L. khy3 E. khu§
classify; area, district. See also ou
Y. khy L. khy§ E. khu3
qiqu, qiqu % ^ rocky, uneven, rugged
Y. khy L. khy§ E. khu5
body; self
Y. khy L. khya E. khus
drive forward; drive; drive out, expel
Y. tshy L. tshy3 E. tshua
run, hasten towards
Y. kV L. khiwk E. khuwk
leaven, yeast
Y. khy" L. khywk E. khuawk
bent, crooked; also qfl
Y. khyv L. khyt E. khut
bend
Y. [khy1 L. khyt E. khut
bent, contracted; crooked
Y.khy' L. kfiiS/kfiya E. gi§
canal; vast, spacious; third person
pronoun
Y. khy' L. kfiis/kfiyS E. gig
quchu $| $£ coarse mat. See also ju
Y.kV L. kfiiS/kfiya E. gis
jt L. »/,-
fuqu ^ W. lotus
Y. [khy1 L. kfiia/kfiyS E. gis
wild pink, Dianthus superbus; thatch
Y. [khy1 L. kfiiS/kfiyS E. gia
gold or silver ear ornament. See also ju
Y. khy' L. kfiyS E. guS
toil, labour; hardworking; weary
Y. khy' L. kfiyS E. gu§
kind of lance; a surname. See also ju
Y. khy' L. kfiyS E. gua
chequ fy $! giant clam, Tridacna
Y. [ky] L. kfiys E. gus
decorative cord on the toe of a shoe
Y. [khy1 L.kfiya E. guS
bent part of a slice of dried meat
Y. [khy1 L. kfiyS E. guS
thin, emaciated. Also E. gush
Y. khy' L. kfiya E. gu§
street, thoroughfare
Y. [khy1 L.kfiy5 E. gua
ququ descriptive of walking

Lexicon 261
qu
qu
qu
qu
qu
qu
qu
qu
qu
159:5 M38236
K108x
196:5 M46801
K108y
196:18 M47502
K96g
208:5 M48422
211:9 M48716
29:6 M03158
K131a
38:8 M06365a
K131e
73:2 M14280b
K1213a
28:3 M03070A
qu :
j
qu Jl
qu I
\
qu ?
qu !
quan t
i
quan '[
quan \
quan \
quan \
£• 28:3
khi3h
bcr
R, 147:11
ir 38:8
ft 156:8
W 169:9
XtT
II 31:8
A
£ 61:7
P1 64:6
t 64:8
ft 75:18
M03070B
K642a
M34945
M06365b
K131e
M37207A
K131g
M41411
K860d
M04789C
K226k
M10674
K468c'
Ml 1996
K226g
M12208B
K226f
M15926
K158o
Y. [khy'] L. kfiyS E. gua
curved part of a carriage yoke. Also E.
kawh
L. kfiys E. gua
myna
L. kfiya E. gu§
myna. Compare ty
L. kfiyo
shrew
L. khy3'
E. gus
E. khua'
Y. [khy]
quyu
Y. [khy']
quyu ||
Y. [khy]
qujlng
Y. [khy']
tooth decay, caries
Y. tsV L. tshyS' E. tshu§'
take. AlsoE. tshaw'
Y. tshyv L. tshy§x E. tshush
take a wife, marry (of a man); also qu
Y. khy~ L. khywk E. khuawk
bent, crooked; tune; type of poetry; also
qu
Y. k L. khi^/kfi^ E.
K642a remove, get rid of
Y. kV L. khi^/kfiy3v E.
go away, depart; be apart from, distant
Y. tshyv L. tshi9N/tshy^ E. tshiah
spy on; look closely
Y. tsV L. tshysv E. tshuoh
take a wife, marry (of a man); also qu
Y. tshyv L. tshy3" E. tshush
hurry towards; purport, bent; interest.
See also cu, c6u
Y. [?] L. khjyajk
quiet, still
Y. [khqen] L. khyan
ring, circle. See also juan
Y. tshqen L. tshyan
repent, make amends
Y. kqen' L. kfiyan
fist
Y. kqen' L. kfiyan
fist, same as ^; quanquan
forceful. See also ju&n
Y. khqen' L. kfiyan
balance; weigh; advantage, power,
authority; temporarily
E. khwejk
E. khuan
E. tshwian
E. gwian
E. gwian
E. gwian

262 Lexicon
qua"n
quan
quan
quan
quan
quan
quan
quan
quan
quan
quan
quan
quan
quan
quan
quan
qu&n
qu&n
quan
quan
que
*!• 142:8
it 142:18
4£aT
H 181:18
M- 190:8
^ 104:6
^ 118:6
0 120:10
^ 140:6
^ 149:6
H 167:6
^ 11:4
^ 85:5
ft 93:6
LI
ft 159:6
H 120:8
^J'l 102:3
$k 102:4
^t 94:0
^ 18:6
JJ 19:18
^ 121:4
M33199
K226h
M33894
K158p
M43751
M45490
K226e
M22141
M25995
K234e
M27752
K1249a
M30934
K234f
M35435
M40378
K234g
M01424
K234a
M17274
K237a
M20002
K234c
M38304
K234H
M27550
K226m
M21740
K422c
M21777
K479e
M20234
K479a
M01966
K2261
M02486
K158s
M28122
K312H
Y. [khqen'] L. kfiyan E. gwian
wriggle; curl up
Y. [kqen] L. kfiyan E. gwian
insect that eats melon leaves
Y. khqen' L. kfiyan E. gwian
cheekbone
Y. khqen' L. kfiyan E. gwian
beautiful hair, hair parted in the middle
and tied in two braids on either side;
curly, wavy. Also E. khwian
Y. tshqen L. tshyan
recover from illness
Y. tshqen L. tshyan
bamboo fish trap
Y. [tshuen] L. tshyan
light red, orange
Y. tshqen L. tshyan
fragrant plant
Y. tshqen L. tshyan
explain, annotate
Y. tshqen L. tshyan
weigh, measure
Y. tshyen' L. tsfiyan
complete, whole, entire
Y. tshqen' L. tsfiyan
spring, source
Y. [tshqen'] L. tsfiyan
sacrificial animal all of one colour
Y. [tshwen'J L. sfiyan E. d?wian
cart with solid wheels
Y. [khqenv] L. khyan' E. khuan'
qianquSn $| fflfc deeply attached
Y. [kqen"] L. kjyan' E. kwen'
See ^
Y. [kqen"] L. kjyan' E. kwen'
watering channels in a field
Y. khqenv L. khjyan' E. khwen'
dog
Y. khyenv L. khyanN
tally, contract, bond, certificate
Y. khqenv L. khyanN E. khuanh
urge, exhort, encourage
Y. khqev L. khjyat E. khwet
lack; defective, incomplete; vacancy.
Also E. khjwiat
E. tshwian
E. tshwian
E. tshwian
E. tshwian
E. tshwian
E. tshwian
E. dzwian
E. dzwian
E. dzwian
E. khuanh

Lexicon 263
que
que
que
que
que
que
que
que
que
que
que
que
que
que
que
que
qun
qun
qun
qun
m 169:10
3$f 104:11
ft* 61:6
$P 26:7
172:3
H 196:8
!§£ 61:10
1$= 64:10
$1 64:10
^ 75:10
$t 79:8
$ 112:7
*t 112:10
W 169:10
H 169:9
'ft 61:5
H 31:5
i4 162:7
? 123:7
^ 145:7
M41456b
K301h
M22464
M10592b
K766g
M02867
K776b
M41954b
K1122a
M47014b
K798n
M10983
K1226b
M12451A
K1117c
M12451B
K1117C
M15283a
M16646c
K1226a
M24232
K1225e
M24366
K1117d
M41456a
K301H
M41430
K605k
M10491b
K642J
M04742
K485a
M38899
K468r
M28497
K459d
M34314
K459f
E. gua
E. khak
E. k^ak
Y. khqe~ L. khyat E. khuat
fault, defect; used for ^t ; also que
Y. khqe' L. kfiya
lame
Y. [khaw~] L. khak
respect; also ke
Y. [khjaw~] L. khiak
step back; reject; decline, refuse
Y. tshjew" L. tsiak E. tsiak
small bird; sparrow. See qiSo
Y. tshjewv L. tshiak E. ts^ak
magpie; also qi&o
Y.[khjawv] L. khjaiwk E. khaiwk/khoe:wk
sincere, earnest, diligent
Y.[khjawv] L. khja:wk E. khaiwk/khoe:wk
beat, attack. See also que below
Y.[kjawv] L. kjaiwk E. kaiwk/kceiwk
raise; quote. See also que above
Y.[kjawv] L. kjaiwk E. kaiwk/kceiwk
footbridge; toll; monopoly ; also jue
Y.[khjawv] L. khja:wk E. khaiwk/khceiwk
husk, shell; hollow; also ke, qiao
Y.fxjaw'] L. xfijaiwk E. yaiwk/Yoeiwk
hard, stony. Now used for 3$
Y.[khjaw"] L. khja:wk E. khaiwk/khce:wk
hard, solid; true, authentic, reliable
Y. khqev L. khyat E. khuat
observation tower; imperial palace; also
que
Y. khqe~ L. khjyat E. khwet
close; terminate, bring to an end
Y. khje" L. khiap E. khiap
afraid, timid, nervous; also qie
Y. kyn" L. khyn E. khwin
round granary. Also E. gwin' in Jiyun
Y. tshyn L. tshyn E. tshwin
withdraw
Y. khyn' L. kfiyn E. gun
flock, herd; large group, crowd
Y. khyn' L. kfiyn E. gun
skirt

264 Lexicon
ra"n
ran
ran
ran
ran
ran
r^n
ran
rang
rang
rang
rang
rang
rang
rang
rang
rang
rang
rao
rao
rao
rao
rao
$S 86:8
86:12
tt 142:5
M 145:5
% 190:5
*
-fi- 13:3
ffe 75:5
S 140:5
0 19:17
ill 64:17
*i£r
IR 85:17
t&Mf
1H 97:17
H 113:17
vJte1
H 115:17
» 1,
3R: 32:17
tjfcf
JR 64:17
H 115:17
tt 149:17
^ 75:12
ft 140:12
^ 142:12
^ 184:12
> »
?j| 38:12
M19149
K217a
M19394
K217b
M32931
M34207
K622h
M45404
K622k
M01514
K622b
M14621
K623a
M30776
M02485
M12989A
K730e
M18716
K730f
M21429
M24868
K730g
M25383A.
K730H
M05608
K730d
M12989B
K730e
M25383B.
K730h
M36139
K730i
M15521B
K1164p
M31965
K11641
M33626
K1164m
M44400
K1164o
M06734
Y. ren L. rian E. jiian
burn, same as )&; like this, thus, so, -ly
Y. ren' L. rian E.jiian
ignite, burn
Y. [rem'] L. riam E.jiiam
large snake; boa, python
Y. [rem'] L. riam E.jiiam
hem of a robe
Y. rem' L. riam E.jiiam
facial hair
Y. rem" L. riam' E.jiiam'
gradually, slowly; surname
Y. rem" L. riam' E.jiiam'
dye
Y. rem L. riam' E.niam'
rich vegetation. See r&min ^ ||
Y. [rarj'] L. rian E.jiiarj
kuangrang ^f j|(f hasty
Y. [rarj'j L. riarj E.jiiarj
steal; thrust aside, expel. See also rang
Y. rarj' L. riarj E.jiiarj
rangrang heavy with dew
Y. rarj' L. riarj E.jiiarj
flesh of melons and similar fruits
Y. rarj' L. riarj E.jiiarj
prayer to avert misfortune
Y. rarj' L. riarj' E.jiiarj'
pith of a grain stalk. See also rang
Y. rarf L. riarj' E.jiiarj'
soil broken by the plough; soil, loam
Y. [rarf] L. riarj' E.jiiarj'
oppose, resist; disturb. See also rang
Y. rarf L. riarj' E.jiiarj'
abundant, flourishing. See also ra"ng
Y. rarj" L. riarjs E. jiiarjh
reprimand; yield, defer to; allow, permit
Y. rew' L. riaw E.jiiaw
oar. See also nao
Y. rew' L. riaw E.jiiaw
grass for fuel; brushwood
Y. [rew'] L. riaw E.jiiaw
intestinal worm
Y. rew' L. riaw E.jiiaw
rich, plentiful
Y. rew L. riaw' E.jiiaw'
disturb

Lexicon 265
r&o
r&o
rao
rS
re
re
ren
ren
ren
ren
ren
r6n
r£n
r£n
ren
ren
ren
ren
ren
ren
ren
4*.IK
$$L
HI
S
S~
^A
t
ft
$
ft
^
^!£
19
'ft/
57
ft
tt
IS
W-
64:15
120:12
120:12
61:9
140:5
86:11
9:0
9:2
9:4
33:1
120:4
61:3
115:8
140:6
120:3
9:3
18:1
93:3
149:3
149:7
159:3
M 12920
K1152a
M27909A.
K1164k
M27909B.
K1164k
M10866
M30796B
K777a
M19360
K330J
M00344
K388a
M00349
K388f
M00416A
K667f
M05639
K667a
M27297A.
K6671
M10312
K456c
M25107
K670d
M30950
K667s
M27248
K456h
M00379
K456b
M01848
K456a
M19935
K456d
M35237
K456f
M35502
K456J
M38190
K456g
Y. rew" L. riaw' E.jiiaw'
disturb, harass; domesticate, tame
Y. rew" L. riaw' E.jiiaw'
wind round, encircle. See also rao
Y. [rewv] L. riawv E.jiiawh
wind, coil, move in a circle. See also r&o
Y. re" L. ria' E. jiia'
disturb; provoke; stimulate
Y. re" L. ria' E. jiia'
dry grasses; borfc $L 3-r Skt. prajiia. See
also ruo
Y. rev L. rial E.jiiat
hot
Y. rin' L. rin E. jiin
man, person, human being
Y. rin' L. rin E.jiin
benevolence, kindness, goodness
Y. rim' L. rim E. jiim
bear; support; endure; reliable. See also
ren
Y. rim' L. rim E. jiim
9th Heavenly Stem
Y. rim L. rim E. jiim
weave. See also ren
Y. rin" L. rin' E.jiin'
bear, endure; tolerate; be hard-hearted,
cruel
Y. rim" L. rim' E.jiim'
harvest; year; familiar with
Y. rim" L. rim' E. jiim'
kind of large bean; rfcraiin $= $• elapse,
slip by (of time)
Y. nin' L. nrin E. nrin
twist into cord; thread needle; stitch, sew
Y. rinv L. rinv E. jiinh
measure of length, 8 feet (chT X. )
Y. rin" L. rin" E. jiinh
blade
Y. [rhT] L. rinv E. jiinh
full
Y. rinN L. rin" E. jiinh
stammer, speak with difficulty
Y. Tin" L. rinN E. jiinh
know, recognize. Also E. jiirjh
Y. [rinv] L. Tin" E. jiinh
wooden carriage brake

266 Lexicon
ren
ren
ren
ren
ren
ren
ren
ren
ren
reng
re"ng
reng
ri
ri
ri
rong
rdng
rong
rong
VI 178:3
If 140:9
JJt 130:8
te 184:4
ft 9:4
#£ 38:4
fe 120:4
ft 145:4
H 154:6
Vl 9:2
J? 140:2
R 170:9
0 72:0
W 187:4
A 11:0
j£ 75:10
K 130:3
fife 142:10
$, 62:3
M43109
M31416a
K658i
M29619
K670e
M44049
K667p
M00416B
K667f
M06072
K667i
M27297B.
K6671
M34146
K667n
M367435
K667t
M00361
K945e
M30649
K945g
M41726
K982J
M13733
K404a
M44604
K404f
M01415b
K695a
M15273
K843d
M29272
KlOOSa
M33384
K1009d
Ml 1539
K1013a
E. jiimh
E. jiimh
E. jiimh
E. nrimh
E.jiii]
rong 94:6 M20384
Y. rin" L. rin" E. jiinh
pliable
Y. sim" L. sfiim" E. ?im'
fruit of the mulberry; also shen
Y. [rinT] L. rim' E.jiim'
well cooked, tasty, compare fa
Y. [riirT] L. rim' E. jiim'
fully cooked. Also E. jiimh in Jiyun
Y. rim" L. rim" E. jiimh
burden, responsibility; office; appoint.
See also ren
Y. rim" L. rim"
pregnant
Y. rim" L. rim"
weave. See also r£n
Y. rim" L. rim"
lapel, overlap of garment
Y. nim" L. nrim"
rent; also 1m
Y. rirj' L. riarj
continue as before; still, yet
Y. [rirj'] L. risrj E.jiirj
wild, uncut grass
Y. [rirj'] L. riarj E.jiirj
re'ngre'ng H^ M numerous. Also E. jii,
now'
Y. ri" L. rit E. jiit
sun; day
Y. [ri"] L. rit E.jiit
post-horse, relay-horse
Y. ri", ry" L. rip E.jiip
penetrate (sexually)(vulgar); also ru
Y. yrj'Jurj' L. yajrj E. wiajrj
curved end of roof beam; flower;
flourish; glory, honour
Y. [jurj'] L. jiwrj E. juwrj
sacrifice on the day after main sacrifice
Y.jurj' L. jiwrj E. juwrj
melt, thaw; smelt
Y. rurj' L. riwrj E.jiuwrj
weapons of war; army; military; you,
your; western barbarians
Y. [rurj'] L. riwrj E. jiuwrj
golden monkey, Rhinopithecus
roxellanae

Lexicon 267
r6ng
rong
rong
r<5ng
rong
rong
r6ng
rong
r6ng
rong
r6ng
rdng
r6ng
rou
rou
rou
rou
rou
r6u
rou
rou
m, 120:6
$[ 140:6
& 40:7
^ 75:10
^ 85:10
^- 140:10
l£ 167:10
>N3C*
*R 181:4
•3f 140:6
% 14:2
ft 40:2
^1 82:12
3f 140:6
ft 64:9
^ 75:5
1^ 157:9
^ 177:9
H 159:9
tt 159:9
fjc 119:9
ft 64:9
M27435
M30868
K1013e
M07172
K1187a
M15228
M17983
K1187b
M31648
K1187C
M40704
M43365B
K1190d
M30918A
K1194a
M01566
M07056
K1196a
M16970
K1195a
M30918B
K1194a
M12332A
KllOSb
M14622
KllOSa
M37718
KllOSd
M42909
M38415a
KllOSe
M38415b
KllOSe
M27023a
KllOSf
M12332B
KllSOb
Y. rurj' L. riwrj E.jiuwrj
fine hair, down; flannel, velvet
Y. rurj' L. riwrj E.jiuwrj
kind of bean
Y.jurj' L. jywrj E.juawrj
contain, hold, have room for; face
Y. [jurj'] L. jywrj E. juawrj
small-fruited fig tree, banyan
Y.jurj L. jywrj E.juawrj
abundant water; dissolve
Y. jurj' L. jywrj E. juawrj
fur6ng It ^ hibiscus
Y.jurj' L.jywrj E.juawrj
mould for casting metal; cast; melt
Y. [jurj'] L. jywrj E. juawrj
form, appearance, demeanour, same as
*Y. [rurj'] L. rywrj E.jiuawrj
new grass, fine and soft, downy; young
pilose antler. See also rdng
See 5tl
Y. rurj" L. rywrj' E.jiuawrj'
extraneous, supernumerary, superfluous
Y. [rurf] L. rywrj' E.jiuawrj'
fine hair
Y. [rurjv] L. rywrj' E.jiuawrj'
fine hair, down. See also rong
Y. riw' L. riw E. jiuw
knead, soften; bend, shape (wood). See
also rou
Y. riw' L. riw E. jiuw
soft, flexible
Y. riw' L. riw E. jiuw
tread on, trample. Also E. jiuw', jiuwh
Y. riw' L. riw E. jiuw
tan
Y. [riw ] L. riw' E. jiuw'
see r6u. Level tone reading in Jiyun
Y. [riw"] L. riw' E.jiuw'
curved rim of a wheel, felloe; also rou.
Also E. jiiwh
Y. [niwv] L. nriwv E. nruwh
mixed; interspersed with; also niu
Y. riw" [sic] L. riwx E. jiuwh
soften. See also rou

268
rou
ru
ru
ru
ru
ru
ru
ru
ru
ru
ru
ru
ru
ru
ru
ru
ru
ru
ru
ru
ru
ft 130:0
$P 38:3
-w-#P 140:6
$f 142:14
196:6
/^-
if 9:14
IS 39:14
'If 61:14
?f 85:14
ffi 120:14
ffi 145:14
H 164:14
;&" 38:0
$t 85:3
3& 140:6
?L 5:7
4J 161:3
|p 140:6
IS 39:14
ft 130:0
if 85:10
M29236a
K1033a
M06060
K94g
M30921A
K94r
M33749A
K238d
M46882
K94s
M01220
Kl34c
M07042a
Kl34d
M11390B
K134e
M18504
K134f
M27996A.
K134b
M34678
K134i
M40069
K134J
M06036C
K94a
M17138
K94j
M30921B
K94r
M00190
K135a
M38686b
K1223a
M30921C
K94r
M07042a
K134d
M29236b
K1033a
M17996
K1223b
E.rm3h
E.J1U3
E.J1U9
Lexicon
Y. riw\ ryx L. riwk E. jiuwk
flesh, meat; also ru
Y. ry' L. ris/ryS E.jiia
(be) like; if; go to
Y. ry' L. ria/ryS E.jiia
interlaced (roots); eat; estimate. See also
ru, ru
Y. [ry'] L.ri*yry3 E.jiiS
writhe, wriggle. See also rua"n
Y. ry' L. ri5/ry§ E.jiis
quail
Y.ry L.ry3 E.
weak, timid; scholar; Confucian
Y. ryv, ry' L. ryav
baby, child; mild; also ru
Y. [ry'] L. ry5
weak, timid. See also nuo
Y. ry' L. ry3
moisten, soak
Y.ry' L. rya E.JUKJ
coloured silk; silk torn in two as a tally
See also xu
Y.ry' L. ry§ E.jiuS
jacket
Y. [ry'] L. ryS E.jiu§
thick wine. AlsoE.jiua'
Y.ryv L.ri§'/ry3' E.jiiS'
you, same as $t. See also nyu, nyu
Y.ry L.riS'/ryS' E.jiis'
river name; you
Y. [ry ] L. ria'/rya' E. jiiS'
dried vegetables; spoiled, rotten; greedy.
See also ru, ru
Y.ry L. rya' E.jnio'
breast; milk
Y. ryv L. rywk E. jiuawk
shame, disgrace; also ru
Y. ryv L. riSVrya" E. jiia11
vegetables; feed cattle. See also ru, ru
Y. ryv, ry' L. ryov E. jiu9h
babe, child; mild; also ru
Y. riw% ryv L. riwk E. jiuwk
flesh, meat; also rou
Y. [ryv] L. rywk E. jiuawk
moist, humid; rich-tasting

Lexicon 269
ru
ru
ru
rii
ru
ruan
ruan
ruan
ruan
ruan
ruan
ruan
rui
rui
ruT
nil
rui
rui
rui
rui
rui
rui
rui
Wt 120:10
$ 140:10
$r 145:10
^ 161:3
A 11:0
*f 96:14
51 126:3
Jay
2j£ 142:9
ll$f 142:14
ft 159:4
f§|2 159:9
t*~
I?C 170:4
$t 120:8
H 140:12
.-
5R 120:12
-tf-£& 140:12
llj
m 96:9
ft 29:14
^ 109:9
|£ 167:7
tf] 75:4
^.L,
m 85:4
?f 140:4
M27779
K1223c
M31660
K1223d
M34495
M38686a
K1223a
M01415a
K695a
M21313
K238f
M28877
K238a
M33290
K238c
M33749B
K238d
M38213
M38412
K238b
M41569
M27605
K354e, 357h
M31995
K1237v
M27912
K1238J
M31939
K1238k
M21131
K168p
M03214
K344a
M23536
K344a
M40418
K324f
M14552
K695n
M17157
K695o
M30731
K695q
Y. [ryv] L. rywk E. jiuawk
variegated; elaborate; cumbersome
Y. [ryv] L. rywk E. jiuawk
straw mat, bedding
Y. ry\ riw" L. rywk E. jiuawk
mattress
Y. ryv L. rywk E. jiuawk
shame, disgrace; also ru
Y. ri\ryv L. rip E.jiip
enter; also ri
Y. [rwen"] L. ryan' E.jiwian'
kind of precious stone
Y. [rwen"] L. ryan' E.jiwian'
soft, pliable
Y. [rwen"] L. ryan' E.jiwian'
writhe, wriggle
Y. [rwen'] L. ryan E.jiwian
wriggle. See also ru
Y. rwen" L. ryan' E.jiwian'
soft, supple, weak. Same as $|
Y. [rwen"] L. ryan' E.jiwian'
soft, supple, weak
Y. qen" L. rjyan' E. rjuan'
surname
Y. [ruj'] L. ryj E.jiwi
tassel
Y. ruj ' L. ryj E. jiwi
hanging flowers; tassels on a cap
Y. [ruj"] L. ryj' E.jiwiS'/jiwi'
hang down, dangle
Y. ruj" L. ryj' E. jiwi',jiwi9'/jiwi
ovary of a flower, stamen or pistil
Y. sujN L. sfiyf E. d?wioh/d?wih
jade tablet of investiture; auspicious
Y. [rujv] L. jyaj" E. jwiajh
perspicacious, same as ^j-
Y. [rujN] L.jyajv E.jwiajh
perspicacious, farsighted
Y. rujv L. jyajv E. jwiajh
sharp
Y. [rujx] L. ryajv E. jiwiajh
peg, pin, tenon
Y. [rujv] L. ryaj" E. jiwiajh
confluence of two rivers
Y. rujv L. ryajs E. jiwiajh
ancient state; surname

270 Lexicon
rui
run
run
ruo
ruo
ruo
ruo
ruo
ruo
142:4
85:12
169:4
57:7
118:9
140:5
140:10
163:9
86:15
M32850
K695p
M18255
K1251p
M41244
K12510
M09790
K1123a
M26192
M30796A
K777a
M31623
K1123b
M39517
K7771
M19541
K330k
Y. rujv L. ryajv E. jiwiajh
buffalo gnat, blackfly
Y. rynv L. rynv E. jiwinh
moisten, lubricate; moist; embellish
Y. rynN L. ryns E. jiwinh
intercalary month
Y. rew\ rov L. riak, riak E. jiiak
weak
Y. rewv L. riak E. jiiak
outer skin of bamboo; variety of bamboo;
Indocalamus
Y. rox L. riak E. jiiak
like; thus; if; you. See also rS
Y. rew\ rov L. riak E.jiiak
rush used for making mats
Y. [rewv] L. riak E.jiiak
place name
Y. rwev L. ryat E. jiwiat
burn

Lexicon 271
sa
sa
sa
sa
sa
sa
sa
sa
sa
sa
sa
sal
sai
sai
sai
sai
sai
san
san
san
s&n
m 64:12
Jilt 64:12
JB 85:6
85:19
1VM
W. 64:11
H. 140:14
•tfnR 177:4
IS 167:4
% 182:5
IS 187:4
III
7TT 24:2
txt
A§- 61:5
JB 130:9
Ant
£1 195:9
|S 32:10
IS 32:10
154:10
E- 1:2
>^
^ 28:9
> -
It 82:11
^ 9:10
M126875
M12687a
M17374C
K594g
M 18774
K8781
M 12558
K319g
M32189
M42743
M40225
M43808
K680a
M44605
M02700
M10462C
K973a
M29702
M46344
M05349Aa
K908a
M05349B
K908a
M36886
M00012A
K648a
M03098D
K647a
M 16942
M00966
Y. sa L. sat E. sat
cast, let go; throw off restraint. Guangyun
has |jt for this word. Also sS
Y. sa" L. sat E. sat
scatter. Guangyun has |i for this word.
Also sa
Y. ga" L. s.a:j' E. s.aij7s£ij'
sprinkle. See also xT, xian
Y. gajv L. ga:' E. gai'/gei'
sprinkle. Also E. gaij', gia'
Y. [sav] L. sat E. sat
strike with the side of the hand
Y. sa" L. sat E. sat
pusa ^ H Bodhisattva
Y. sa" L. sap E. sop/sap
slipper
Y. [sa"] L. sap E. ssp/sap
short spear, halberd. Also E. gip
Y. sa" L. sap E. sap/sap
soughing of the wind
Y. [sa"] L. sap E. ssp/sap
gallop
Y. [sa"] L. sap E. sap
thirty
Y. [sai] L. saj E. soj
bearded. See also ST, si
Y. saj L. saj E. soj
cheek; gills, same as M
Y. [saj] L. saj E. saj
gills ^
Y. sz" L. S3§k E. ssk
block up, stuff, also se. See also sai
Y. sajx L. sajv E. sojh
frontier. See also sai, se
Y. sajv L. sajv E. sajh
compete, rival; competition, match
Y. sam L. sam E. sam
three. See also san
Y. [sam] L. sam E. sam
three, same as H . See also can, cen,
shen
Y. sam L. sam E. sam/sam
sansan long and fine like long hair
Y. san L. san' E. san'
umbrella

272 Lexicon
s5n
s&n
sSn
sSn
san
san
sang
sang
s&ng
siing
sSng
sang
sao
sao
sao
sao
sao
sao
sSo
sSo
sao
sao
1>C 66:8
$$[ 120:12
IS 119:9
W- 119:11
$fc 66:8
3 1:2
ft 30:9
^ 75:6
v& 30:10
^ 112:10
^ 181:10
ft 30:9
ft 64:10
H 120:11
U 120:13
^ 130:13
jft 137:10
Hr 187:10
38:10
if 32:8
-ts£
Tt 64:8
if 32:8
M13265A
K156a
M27896
M27014
K658o
M27101
K647f
M13265B
K156a
M00012B
K648a
M03985A
K705a
M 14772
K704a
M04070
M24393
M43624
K704b
M03985B
K705a
M 12477
K1112f
M27854
K1169d
M27953B.
K1134i
M29955
K1134e
M30511a
M44935
K1112g
M06603
K1097k
M05202A
K1087f
M12237A
K1087g
M05202B
K1087f
Y.san" L. san' E. san'
come loose, fall apart, scatter, dissipate.
See also san
Y. [sanv] L. san' E. san'
umbrella
Y. [sanT] L. sam' E. ssm'/sam'
rice gruel with meat, same as $•
Y. sam" L. sam" E. S9mh/samh
rice gruel with meat
Y. san" L. san" E. sanh
break up, disperse (trans.), dispel. See
also san
Y. sam" L. sairr E. samh
thrice. See also san
Y. sarj L. sarj E. sarj
mourning, funeral. See also sang
Y. sarj
mulberry tree
Y. sarj"
throat; voice
Y. sarj"
plinth
Y. sarf
forehead
Y. sarj"
lose. See also sang
Y. saw L. saw
scratch
Y. saw L. saw
reel silk from a cocoon
Y. [saw] L. saw
same as $£. See also zao
Y. saw L. saw
L. sarj
L. sarj'
L. sarj'
L. sarj'
L. sarj"
E. sarj
E. sarj'
E. sarj'
E. sarj'
E. sarjh
E. saw
E. saw
E. saw
E. saw
pork or dog fat; smell of urine, foul smell
Y. saw L. saw
classifier for boats, also sou
Y. saw L. saw
disturb, stir up
Y. saw" L. saw'
elder brother's wife
Y. [saw"] L. saw'
sweep
Y. saw" L. saw'
sweep, same as ^
Y. [saw"] L. saw"
broom
E. saw
E. saw
E. saw'
E. saw'
E. saw'
E. sawh

Lexicon 273
sao
se
se
se
se
se
ff 64:8
t- 32:10
•ft 30:10
$ 85:13
flt 115:13
& 139:0
M12237B
K1087g
M05349Ac
K908a
M04053
K926a
M 18448
M25325
K926e
M30602a
K927a
se i& 96:9 M21133
K411a
se S 85:12 M18311
sei
sen
seng
sha
sha
sha
sha
sha
sha
sha
sha
sha
sha
vtt
H: 32:10
3fc 75:8
it 9:12
fy 85:4
$> 112:4
ffl 120:4
^ 140:7
|£ 145:7
^ 195:7
$ 75:3
Si 79:7
$f 167:11
ft 9:11
M05349Ab
K908a
M 14974
K664a
M01117
M17212
K16a
M24046
M27287
M31040B
K16f
M34325
M46186
K16d
M14452b
M16638A
K319d
M40768B
M01034
Y. saw" L. sawv E. sawh
broom, same as ^
Y. sz~ L. saak E. ssk
block up, stuff, also sai, sei. See also sai
Y. [gaj"] L. gsak E. gik
stingy, miserly
Y. [gaf ] L. S99k E. gik
rough, astringent. Also E. sip, same as se
*Y. gaj" L, gssk E. gik
harvest, reap
Y. §af L. gsSk E. gik
colour; appearance, looks; kind,
description; sexual desire; also she, shai
Y. srv L. gat E. sit
stringed musical instrument like a zither
Y, sr" L. gap E. gip
astringent
Y. sz" L. soak E. ssk
block up, stuff, also sai, se. See also sai
Y. gam L. gam E. gim
dense trees, thicket; dense
Y. sarj L. saarj E. sarj
monk, for Sanskrit samgha
Y. ga L. ga: E. gai/ge:
sand
Y. ga L. gai E. gai/ge:
gravel, sand, same as ty
Y. ga L. gai E. gai/g£i
silk gauze; yarn
Y. [ga] L. ga; E. gai/ge:
shajl $ H kind of locust. See also
suo
Y. ga L. ga: E. gai//ge:
seejiasha^c ^
Y. ga L. ga: E. gai/ge:
small sand-dwelling fish; shark
Y. gam L. gaim E. g3im/ge:m
China fir, Cunninghamia lanceolata; also
shan
Y. ga" L. ga:t E. gsit/ge:t
kill. See also shai
Y. [gav] L. ga:t E. gsit/geit
tapered sword blade. See also sha
Y. ga" L. gw.af E. gwai'/gwe:'
foolish

274
sha
sha
sha
sha
sha
sha
sh*
sha
shai
shai
shai
shai
shai
shai
shai
shan
shan
shan
shan
shan
)$L 53:10 M09435B
K36c
HC 27:10 M02993
Pj[ 30:10 M04047
K1236c
fffC 76:9 M16131
M: K631c
|| 118:8 M26136
M 140:8 M31271
? 173:8 M42322
9- 124:8 M28739
K635g
91 164:19 M40l06b
K878H
It 118:10 M26359
118:19 M26804
139:0 M30602b
K927a
72:19 M14266
79:7 M16638B
K319d
167:11 M40768A
38:5 M06169
E. gaih/geih
E. gaih/geih
Lexicon
Y. [&] L. gar E. gaih/geih
large house, mansion, this reading is
found only in the Jiyun. See also xia.
Y. [ga"] L. gar
verandah; mansion
Y. [gav] L. gar
become hoarse
Y. [gav] L. gaip E. gaip/geip, giap
smear the mouth with blood at oath-taking
Y. [ga ] L. gaip E. gaip/geip, giap
kind of fan
Y. [ga"] L. gaip E. gaip/geip, giap
shafu H^l auspicious plant
Y. ga" L. gaip E. gaip/geip, giap
drizzle, light rain; moment, instant
Y. [gav] L. gaip E. gaip/geip
decoration of a coffin; feathered fan
Y. [gr] L. gr E. gia/gi
to strain wine, also ST. Also E. gia
Y. gaj L. gaij E. gaij/geij
sieve; to sift. This reading, found in the
Yupian, properly belongs to H. The
proper reading of f$, found in the
Gwngyun, is E. gi, L. gr, a variant of the
same word
Y. [gaj] L. gaij E. gaij/geij
sieve, to sift. Also E. gia. See 1$
Y. gaj" L. gaak E. gik
colour; also se, she
Y. gajv L. ga:jv E. gaijh/geijh
shine (of the sun); dry in the sun. Also
E. giah
Y. gajv L. gaif E. gaijh/geijh
diminish, decrease, reduce. See also sha
Y. gajv L. gajv E. gaijh/ge:jh
to shave, whittle to a point. See also sha
Y. [san] L. san E. san
ridicule; shanshan Of M be late
m
ilj
#
96:5
18:5
46:0
85:12
M20917
M01917
M07869
K193a
M18295
K156c
Y. san
shanhu
L. san
2|f $1 coral
Y. gan L. gam
delete
Y. gan L. gam
mountain, hill
Y. gan
tearful.
L. gam
Also E. gain'/gem'
E.
E.
E.
E.
san
gain/gem
gain/gem
gain/gem

Lexicon 275
shan
shan
shan
shan
shan
shan
shan
shan
shan
shan
shan
sh&n
shan
sh£n
shin
shan
shan
shan
shan
shan
shan
shan
9t 32:7
m 63:6
fa 86:10
If 123:13
M 181:13
^ 64:11
¥ 75:3
X 140:4
¥ 145:3
$ 190:0
"Jf 140:5
^ 64:11
l£ 109:8
Pj 169:2
Rfe 170:7
^lll 85:3
#S 104:3
till 149:3
^ 30:9
-¥• 30:9
if 32:12
IP 163:12
M05121A
K203e
M11743A
K212a
M19272A
K212c
M28581
K148q
M43706B
K148s
M12649A
K647h
M14452a
M30701
K610a
M34111
M45355B
K1154a
M30802A
K6181
M12649B
K647h
M23412
M41214
M41657
M17128
K193d
M22040
M35241
K193e
M03904A
K205a
M03993C
K147a
M05458
K147a'
M39655
Y. [gen] L. gian E. plan
mix clay and water; make bricks. See also
yan
Y. gen L. gian E. pian
to fan; incite. See also shan
Y. gen L. gian E. pian
fan a fire, incite. See also shan
Y. gen L. gian E. pian
odour of sheep; rancid
Y. [gen] L. gian E. pian
strong smell. See also chan, zhan
Y. [gam] L. gaim E. gsim/geim
slender, delicate (fingers). See also shan
Y. gam L. gaim E. gaim/geim
see sha
Y. [gam] L. gaim E. gaim/geim
mow, cut grass
Y. gam L. gaim E. gaim/geim
unlined upper garment, shirt
Y. [gam] L. gaim E. gaim/geim
longhair. See also biao
Y. gem L. giam E. piam
thatch; straw mat. See also shan
Y. [gam"] L. gaim' E. gsim'/geim'
grasp, hold firmly. See also shan
Y. [gem"] L. giam' E. piam'
flash, blink, twinkle. Compare ffi
Y. gem" L. giam' E. piam'
flash; lightning; evade, shun
Y. gem L. giam' E. piam'
place name
Y. gan" L. gain" E. g9inh/gemh
bamboo fish trap; place name
Y. gan" L. gamv E. gyin/gemh
hernia, rupture
Y. gan" L. gain" E. sainh/;se:nh
ridicule, mock
Y. gen" L. gfiian" E. d?ian'
good. See also shan below
Y. gen" L. gfiian" E. d?ian', d?ianh
a surname; place name. See also dan, chan
Y. gen" L. gfiian" E. d^ian'
levelled area for sacrifice
Y. [gen"] L. gfiian" E. d?;an'
place name. Also E. d?ianh.

276 Lexicon
shan
shan
shan
shan
shan
shan
shan
shan
shan
shan
shan
shan
shan
shan
shan
shang
shang
shang
shang
sh&ng
shSng
sha"ng
Pp 195:12 M46496
K147h'
If 195:12 M46499
ft 142:13 M33671
K148p
-H 30:9 M03904B
K205a
H. 38:13 M06771
4^r
m 64:13 M12790
K148o
%mt
if- 113:12 M24835A.
K147b'
If 120:12 M27893
K205f
M 130:12 M29891
K205d
W 63:6 M11743B
K212a
$! 86:10 M19272B
K212c
^JU 1
JK|| 18:8 M02059B
K617d
It 154:13 M36945
K619f
$£. 64:8 M 12270
K617e
If 140:5 M30802B
K6181
W 9:11 M01029
K720J1
W 30:8 M03803
K734a
$| 78:11 M16557
K720k'
$| 148:11 M35157
K7201'
S
72:6 M 13903
72:13 M14195B
K714k
^ 154:8 M36813
K725n
Y. gen" L. gfiian" E. d?ian'
eel
same as §£
Y. [gens] L. gfiianv E. d?ian'
earthworm
Y. gens L. §fiianx E. d?ianh
make good, repair. See also shan above
Y. [sens] L. §fiianN E. d?ianh
change, evolve
Y. sens L. sfiianv E. d?ianh
act one one's own authority, usurp power,
presume
Y. sen" L. §fiianx E. d?ianh
kind of sacrifice; yield, abdicate. See
also chan
Y. [sens] L. gfiianx E. d?ianh
to restore, repair, make good
Y.[senv] L. gfiian" E. d?ianh
food, meals
Y. gen" L. §ianv E. qianh
a fan. See also shan
Y. senv L. sians E. pianh
burn brightly. See also shan
Y. [gem"] L. gfiiam" E. d?iam'
place name. See also yiin
Y. gems L. gfiiarrT E. d?iamh
support, provide for; sufficient, abundant
Y. gem" L. giairf E. qiamh
unfold, deploy
Y. gem" L. giam" E. qiamh
cover with straw matting. See also shan
Y. gar) L. giarj E. eiarj
wound; injure, hurt
Y. garj L. giarj E. piarj
discuss; trade; merchant; Shang dynasty
Y. garj L. giarj E. qiarj
die prematurely
Y. garj L. giarj E. Qiarj
wine cup
see JS
Y. garj" L. giarj' E. qiarj'
short time, part of a day, now written
$J , also E. qiarjh. See also xiang
Y. garf L. giarj' E. piarj'
reward

Lexicon
sh&ng
shang
shang
shang
shang
shao
shao
shao
shao
shao
shao
shao
shao
shao
shao
shao
shao
shao
sh&o
shSo
_t 1:2
IP] 30:3
± 1:2
Jl 1:2
Sj 42:5
3$ 57:7
$j 64:7
$ 75:7
118:7
i$ 142:7
IS 177:7
18 190:7
fl( H5:7
M 86:12
B§ 180:5
^7 20:1
$J 75:3
^ 140:3
fll 115:7
^N 42:1
MOOOlSAb
K726a
M03301B
K715a
M00013Aa
K726a
M00013B
K726a
M07493A
K725a
M09789
M12148A
K1149x
M14866
K1149y
M26077
K1149a'
M33072B
K1149b'
M42850A
M45460
M25083a
K1149z
M19420A
K1164t
M43276
K1131a'
M02494a
K1120a
M14466Ab
K1120b
M30674a
M25083c
K1149z
M07475A
K1149e
Y. garjv L. gfiiarf E. d?iarj'
Rising Tone; also shang. See also shang
Y. [garf] L. sians E. qiarjh
a surname, place name. See also xiang
Y. garjx L. sfiiarf E. d?iarj'
go up, rise; also sh&ng. See also shang
below
Y. sarp L. gfiiarf E. d?iarjh
up; above. See also shang and shang
above
Y. sanx L. sfiianv E. d?iarjh
above, superior; esteem, value; still, yet.
See also chang
Y. §aw L. §a:w E. saiw/geiw
end of a bow
Y. gaw L. saiw E. saiw/geiw
mow, weed out, eliminate; now used
for a colloquial word 'to take something
to some one.1 See also xiao
Y. §aw L. §a:w E. saiw/geiw
tip, thin end of a twig
Y. gaw L. saiw E. saiw/geiw
pail, bucket
Y. [§aw] L. ga:w E. saiw/seiw
xiaoshao J^t ^ spider. See also xiao
Y. saw L. saiw E. saiw/seiw
whiplash. See also qiao
Y. saw L. saw E. saiw/se:w
queue
Y. gaw" L. sawv E. saiwh/seiwh
a little, a few; gradually; also sh&o, shao
Y. gew L. giaw E. piaw
burn; cook. See also shao
Y. tghew' L. gfiiaw E. d?iaw
ancient kind of music; splendid, beautiful
Y. gew' L. gfiiak E. d?iak
ladle, also shuo. Also E. tqiak ladle out,
cf. zhuo li/
Y. gew', go' L. gfiiak E. d?iak
ladle, also shuo. See also biao
Y. gew' L. gfiiak E. d?iak
shaoyao ^ ^| peony; also shuo
Y. gaw" L. gawv E. gaiwh/ge:wh
a little, a few; gradually; also shao, shao
Y. gew" L. giaw' E. piaw'
few. See also shao

278 Lexicon
shao
shao
shao
shao
shao
shao
shao
she
she
she
she
she
she
she
she
she
she
shS
she
she
T-fK
T$ 115:7
$? 120:5
5 30:2
$P 163:5
$ 19:5
fy 42:1
^ 86:12
^P 37:9
1ft 102:7
j& 154:7
& 9:5
SI 169:9
ft 142:5
ft 167:5
iff 64:4
$d 64:9
"S" 135:0
fe 64:8
^ 135:2
tt 113:3
M25083b
K1149z
M27361
K1131z
M03241B
K1131e
M39343
M02318
M07475B
K1149e
M19420B
K1164t
M05964
K45e
M21860B
M36786
K82s
MOOS 14
M41434B
K45h'
M32964A
K41
M40289B
K4m
M11890B
K287a
M12403
K6331
M30277
K288a
M12191
K48c
M30278B
K48a
M24631
K62j
E. d?iawh
$P . See
E. d?iawh
E. d*iawh
E. qiawh
E. piawh
Y. saw L. gawv E. gaiwh/se:wh
a little, a few; gradually; also shao, sh&o
Y. gews L. gfiia wv E. d?iaw'
continue, carry on
Y. [gewv] L. gfiiawv
ancient place name, same as
also zhao
Y. sewv L. sfiiawv
place name; a surname
Y. [gewv] L. gfiiawv
encourage; fine, excellent
Y. SEWV L. giawv
young. See also shao
Y. sew" L. giawv
burn over waste land to prepare for
cultivation. See also shao
Y. ge L. gia E. qia
extravagant
Y. [se] L. gia E. qia
non-Chinese people; a surname. See also
yu
Y. ge L. gia
buy or sell on credit
Y. ge L. gfiia
a surname
Y. [ge'] L. gfiia
in Buddhist transcriptions for ja, ja. See
also du
Y. ge' L. gfiia E. ?ia
snake, serpent, reptile. See also yi
Y. [ge'] L. gfiia E. ?ia
short spear. See also shi
Y. ge' L. gfiiat E. d?iat
break (intrans.); broken. See also zhe
Y. [ge'] L. gfiiat E. ?iat
count out divining stalks. Also E. jiap,
dep
Y. ge' L. gfiiat E. ?iat
tongue
Y. gev L. gia' E. qia'
release, set aside, abandon. Same as
Y. ge" L. gia' E. pia'
release, set aside, abandon. See also she
Y. gev L. gfiias E. d?ia'
god of the soil, sacrifice to the god of the
soil; communal organization; society
E. qia
E. d?ia
E. d?ia

Lexicon 279
she
she
she
she
she
she
she
she
she
she
she
she
shei
shen
shen
shen
shen
shen
shen
shen
shen
shen
^ 135:2
$L 155:4
JL 1
%$ 41:7
Jf 198:10
ft 149:4
ft 64:18
1$k. 76:12
^t 140:9
H 178:9
$ 85:7
tt 61:18
& 139:0
-iJi.
Pf 149:8
^ 140:7
j^.1
WC 149:6
tt 100:5
ttlt-
% 187:6
ft 9:5
pt 30:5
^ 102:0
It 120:5
A 158:0
M30278A
K48a
M36999
K793d
M07434B
K807a
M47682
M35293
K290a
M13010
K638e
M16204B
K675s
M31387B
K63d
M43175
K633o
M17530
K634a
M11498b
K638d
M30602c
K927a
M35586b
K575u
M31056
K382h
M35448
K478n
M21680
K484a
M44718
K478o
M00481
K385f
M03470
K385g
M21726
K385a
M27348
K385h
M38034
K386a
Y. gev L. siav E. piah
house; lodging provided for a guest; to
lodge, rest. See also sh£
Y. sex L. giav E. piah
liberate, release, pardon
Y. gev L. sfiias E. ?iah
shoot with bow. See also shi, yi, ye
Y. gex L. sfiiaN E. ?iah
musk-deer, Moschus moschiferus
Y. se" L. siat E. qiat
set up, establish, arrange
Y. se" L. giap E. piap
grasp, hold; absorb, assimilate; act for,
hold office in an acting capacity
Y. [ge"] L. siap E. piap
place name. See also xi
Y. [ge"] L. siap E. piap
place name. See also ye
Y. [ge~] L. siap E. piap
archer's thimble. Also E. sep
Y. se' L. sfiiap E. d?iap
wade; cross a stream
Y. [tge"] L. tsiap E. tqiap
fear, terror; also zhe
Y. gajv L. pak E. gik
(male) sexual desire. See se, shai
Y. suj' L. gfiyj E. d?wi
who; also shui
Y. son L. san E. sin
long, extended; shenshen numerous
Y. san L. son E. sin
shenshen numerous
Y. [son] L. ssn E. gin
shenshen great crowd, numerous
Y. [san] L. gsn E. gin
shenshen numerous
Y. gin L. gin E. pin
stretch, extend
Y. gin L. gin E. pin
groan, moan
Y. gin L. gin E. pin
ninth Earthly Branch; extend, stretch
Y. gin L. gin E. pin
sash, girdle; gentry
Y. gin L. gin E. pin
body; self

280 Lexicon
shen
shen
shen
shen
sh£n
sh6n
shgn
shen
shSn
sh6n
shSn
shgn
shen
shen
shen
shen
shen
shen
shen
sheng
sheng
sheng
m 38:7
^- 28:9
$£ 85:8
%
tt 113:5
pffi 30:6
$1 111:4
jf- 38:15
W 40:12
iJt 85:4
Htfi?
W 109:12
t& 149:8
$| 85:15
-fi 142:7
IS 130:7
If 130:8
L-t
Tl 61:10
^ 85:11
4 99:4
S 140:9
tt 93:5
4 100:0
JM
2|f 100:7
M06322
K455q
M03098B
K647a
M 17687
K666c
M24673
K385J
M03583
K5941
M23938
K5601
M06851
M07316
K665a
M17189B
K656b
M23691
M35660
K670g
M18600
K665b
M33089
K455m
M29527
K4551
M29621
K368h
Ml 1024
K375i
M18081
M21648
K658a
M31416b
K658i
M 19986
K812e
M21670
K812a
M21689
K812g
Y. tghin' L. gin E. pin
pregnant
Y. gam L. gam E. gim
Triad constellation, belt of Orion. See also
san, cen, shen
Y. gim L. gim E. pirn
deep. Also E. pimh depth
Y. gin' Lgfiin E. ?in
spirit, god, divine, numinous
Y. gin" L. gin' E. pin'
smile
Y. [gin"] L. gin' E. pin'
base of tooth; how much the more
Y. gim" L. gim' E. pirn'
aunt, wife of father's younger brother
Y. gim" L. gim' E. pirn'
examine closely
Y. gim" L. gim' E. pirn'
place name; a surname. See also chen
Y. gim" L. gim' E. pirn'
look intently at
Y. [sim"] L. gim' E. pirn'
reflect on, ponder; examine and criticize
Y. [tghim"] L. tghim' E. tphim'
liquid, juice
Y. gin L. gfiin' E. d?in'
clam
Y. [ginx] L. gfiins E. d?in'
sacrificial meat for the god of the soil
Y. ginv L. gfiin" E. d?in'
kidney
Y. gins L. gfiin" E. d?inh
careful; cautious
Y. gam" L. gam" E. gimh
ooze, seep
Y. gim" L. gfiim" E. d?im'
extreme, very much. Also E. d?imh
Y. gim" L. gfiim" E. ?im'
mulberry; also ren
Y. gag L. gaijrj E. giajr/§eijrj
sacrificial animal
Y. garj L. gaijrj E. giajrj/geijrj
be born; life; living, alive; fresh; raw
Y. garj L. gaijrj E. giajrj/geijrj
sister's son or daughter; son-in-law

Lexicon 281
sheng
sheng
sheng
sheng
sheng
sheng
sheng
sheng
she"ng
shSng
shgng
sheng
sheng
sheng
sheng
sheng
sheng
sheng
shi
HE 118:5
14 208:5
j$f 19:10
ft 24:2
If- 72:4
S 170:7
4£ 128:11
$1 85:13
tit 120:13
4f 109:4
If 109:5
J§£ 19:10
# 4:9
fPJ 18:10
^ 102:2
Jft 154:10
8. 128:7
4 108:7
f$ 50:7
M25913
K812h
M48423
K812u
M02409A
K893p
M02702
K897a
M13794
K897c
M41658
M29166
K822a
M18378A
M27937
K892b
M23179A
K8121
M23228
K812i
M02409B
K893p
M00154B
K895a
M02109
M21732B
K362g
M36878
K8931
M29074
K835z
M23005B
K818i
M08916
K559a
Y. sarj L. saijrj E. siajrj/seijrj
reed organ
Y. [prj] L. saijrj E. siajrj/seijrj
weasel
Y. sirj L. siarj E. Qirj
equal to; fully. See also sheng
Y. sin. L. sisrj E. airj
measure of capacity, pint; rise
Y. sirj L. gisrj E. pirj
rise
Y. sir) L. gisrj E. pirj
rise
Y. sirj L. siajrj E. piajrj
sound; voice
Y. [sirj'] L. gfiiSrj E. ?irj
river name. See also mTn
Y. sirj ' L. sfiiarj E. ?irj
rope, string
Y. sarjv L. saijrj' E. siajrj Vgeijrj'
reduce, diminish; economize; palace
precinct; name for certain government
bureaus; province. See also xTng
Y. ssrjv L. saijrj' E. siajrj'/seyrj'
disease of the eyes; crime, fault; disaster
Y. sirjv L. siSrj" E. pirj11
conquer, be victorious. See also sheng
Y. sirf L. sfiisrp E. ?irjh
vehicle. See also cheng
Y. sirf L. sfiiarj E. ?irjh
remainder, surplus
Y. [sirjv] L. sfii§rjv E. ?irjh
unit of land area; royal carriage, same as
^ . See also dian
Y. sirjv L. sfiisrj" E. ?irjh
extra gift, additional presents; additional
concubine accompanying the primary
wife. AlsoE. jirjh
Y. sirj" L. siajrjv E. piajrjh
sage
Y. sirjs L. gfiiajrj" E. d?iajrjh
full. See also cheng
Y. sr L. sr E. si
multitude; army; director, teacher; shizi
^ ^ lion (probably a transcription of
Tocharian secake 'lion')

282 Lexicon
shT
shT
shT
shT
shT
shT
shT
shT
shi
shT
shT
shT
shT
shT
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
W 94:10
P 44:0
ta
JR. 44:6
¥ 140:10
nk 196:3
1$ 149:6
IP 163:6
\i
M 70:5
M 140:9
ft 167:5
& 142:9
£. 37:2
*Ef
7l 85:10
S 85:14
ft$ 32:10
SJ 140:10
J-H
H 64:9
NF 72:6
1$ 195:10
til 149:12
% 40:9
M20609
M07629
K561a
M07688
K561c
M31655
K552q
M46667
K561e
M35427
K961d'
M39367
K961e'
M13629
K411
M31464
K4m'
M40289A
K4m
M33303
K506a
M05844
K402a
M 17992
K693a
M18483
K692a
M05329
K961J1
M31546B
M12344D
K866n
M13890
K961z
M46378
M35974A
K920k
M07244
K866s
Y. gr L. gr E. gi
lion. See shTzi $ -$~
Y. gr L. gi E. pi
corpse; substitute for the spirit at a
sacrifice; to set forth, expose; to preside
Y. gr L. gi E. pi
corpse
Y. gr L. gi E. pi
alpine yarrow, Achillea alpina
Y. gr L. gi E. pi
shTjiu J% fy cuckoo
Y. gr L. gi E. pi/pi
poetry
Y. [gr] L. gi E. pi/pi
place name
Y. gr L. gi E. pia/pi
spread; bestow, grant. E. 9i3h/pih in the
latter sense
Y. [gr] L.gi E.9i3/pi
kind of burr- weed
Y. [gr] L. gi E. pia/pi
short spear. See also she
Y. [gr~] L. gat E. git
louse
Y. gf L. git E. pit
lose; fail; mishap, error
Y. [giv] L. gip E. pip
moist
Y. gf L. gip E. pip
moist
Y. gr' L. gfii E. d?i/d?i
nests for domestic fowl in house wall
Y. [gr'] L. gfii E. d?i/dzi
transplant; shiluo 3£ M. cummin, from
Sanskrit jTra. See also shi
Y. [gr'] L. gfii E. dfig/d?i
shishi in a flock (of birds); at ease,
calmly. See also ti, dT, dT.
Y. gf L. gfii E. d?i/d?i
time; season; this, that (pre-classical)
Y. gf L. gfii E. d?i/d?i
hilsa herring; reeve's shad
Y. gi" L. gi5k E. pik
know, recognize. See also zhi
Y. [gi'] L. gfiiSk E.d?ik
this (referring to the subject)

Lexicon 283
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shT
shT
shT
shT
shT
shT
shT
shT
shT
shT
Hfc 142:9
& 184:0
^ 112:0
%% 112:9
W 113:5
15 208:5
K 41:7
If 40:11
ft 9:2
"t" 24:0
& 64:6
$[ 9:6
jfe. 30:2
It 187:5
$1 120:19
44:6
& 111:0
$ 38:5
5fe 57:3
-^ 152:0
$[ 9:6
M33264
K921d
M44014A
K921a
M24024
K795a
M24338a
K795e
M24651
K795d
M48424
K795h
M07434A
K807a
M07294
K398a
M00348
K686e
M02695
K686a
M 12014
K687a
M00573A
K975n
M03249
K975a
M44679
M28092
K878g
M07689
K561d
M23929
K560a
M06166
K976e'
M09724a
K4a'
M36334
K1238f
M00573Ba
K975n
Y. [si'] L. gfiisk E. ?ik
solar or lunar eclipse
Y. si' L. sfiiak E. ?ik
to eat. See also si, yi
Y. si' L. sfiiajk E. d?iajk
stone, rock
Y. [si'] L. sfiiajk E. d?iajk
great, large; also shu6
Y. [si'] L. sfiiajk E. d?iajk
housing for ancestral tablets
Y. [si'] L. sfiiajk E. d?iajk
kind of rodent
Y. si' L. sfiiajk E. ?iajk
shoot at. See also she, yi, ye
Y. si' L. sfiit E. ?it
full, solid;fruit; true; this
Y. si' L. sfiip E. d?ip
squad of ten men
Y. si' L. sfiip E. d?ip
ten
Y. si' L. sfiip E. d?ip
gather, pick up
Y. srv L. srv E. si'/§i'
to send; cause, make to do. See also shT
below and shi.
Y. sr" L. sr' E. si'/si'
scribe, recorder; history
Y. srv L. sr' E. si'/§i'
swift; drive; sail Also E. sih
Y. [sr"] L. sr' E. sis'/si'
cloth for tying up the hair
Y. srv L. si' E. pi'
excrement, dung
Y. sr" L. si E. pi'
arrow
Y. sr" L. si' E. pi'/pi'
begin, for the first time
Y. sr" L. si' E. pis'/Pi'
to slacken, release. See also chi
Y. srv L. si' E. pis'/pi'
pig, swine
Y. sr L. §r E. gih/sih
envoy, formerly read shi. See also shT
above

284 Lexicon
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
K 154:5
ft 9:5
ft 9:6
# 75:5
^ 6:7
i± 9:3
i 33:0
^ 56:9
t^, 149:6
ft 147:5
^ 30:10
BE 109:5
ft 147:5
M 149:9
/F 113:0
if) 50:2
'1$ 61:6
i$ 9:6
If 140:10
7Z. 72:5
ft 83:0
M36699
K339d
M00485b
K976H
M00573Bb
K975n
M14596
K554h
M00241
K971a
M00368
K970d
M05638
K970a
M09680
K918o
M35415
K918n
M34836A
K553H
M04089
K552p
M23241
K590q
M34836B
K553H
M35708
K12371
M24623
K553a
M08775
K963a
M10521
K961y
M00589
K961x
M31546A
M13859
K866a
M17026A
K867a
Y. gev L. gfiiav E. ?iah
lend; substitute; remit. (Modern reading
based on phonetic?)
Y. szv L. shV E. zi'/zi'
... snide like, as if; also si
Y. gr L. gr E. gih/gih
envoy, now read shT in this sense. See
also shT
Y. gr L. gfir E. d?i'/d?i'
persimmon
Y. gr L. gfir E. d?ih/d?ih
affair, matter, thing; be concerned with;
serve
Y. gr L. gfir E.
serve in office
Y. gr L. gfir E.
man of the official class; soldier
Y. gr L. gis E. qih/pih
to kill one's ruler
Y. gr L. giv E. qih/Qih
to try, test, examine; examination
Y. gr L. gfiiv E. d?i'
observe, watch, compare
Y. gr L. gffr E. d?ih
be fond of, enjoy; be addicted to
Y. [gr] L. ghT E. d?ih
look at, same as ^ B
Y. gr L. gffr E. d?ih
look at; show
Y. sf L. gfiix E. d?ih
posthumous name
Y.gr L. gfiiv E. ?ih
show, inform
Y.gr
market
Y.gr
to rely on
Y.gr
serve, wait on
Y.gr
transplant. See also shi
Y. gr L. gfiiv E.
this, that; right
Y. gr L. ghT E.
lineage; clan, surname. See also zhi
L. gfiiv
L. gfiiv
L. gfiiv
L. gfiiv
E.d?i'/d?i'
E.d?i'/d?i'
E. d?ih/d?ih
E. d?ih/d?ih

Lexicon 285
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
shi
PL 149:9
ft 151:4
1& 135:4
j§§ 135:8
•4 30:13
& 118:7
-ft 1:4
$ 19:11
¥ 149:7
SS 162:7
31 162:11
&t 56:3
^i 64:6
W 184:5
$ 159:6
R 37:12
Sf1 142:11
m 145:15
iS 162:11
M35704
K866d
M362535
M30283
K867f
M30310
M04382
K336c
M26070
K336a
M00031
K339a
M02422
K3301
M35514
K287k
M38895
K287m
M39090B
K315e
M09663
K918f
Ml 1989
K918k
M44111
K921H
M38285
K9181
M06002
K913a
M33491b
K793e
M34700
K913b
M39076A
Y. [gr] L. gfii^ E. d?iS'/d?i'
to verify
Y. gr L. ghT E. d*i§h/d?i'
salt products, salted foods such as beans,
fruits, etc.; also chT
Y. [gr] L. gfiT
to lick
Y. [gr] L. gnT
lick, same as 19£
Y. gr L. gfiiajs
bite, gnaw
Y. gr L. gfiiajv
to divine by stalks
Y. giv L. giajv
generation; world
Y. gi^ L. giaj^
E.
E.
E.
E.
E.
?iS7
?i$7
d?iaj
d?iaj
piajh
h
h
E. piajh
power, force; force of circumstances,
situation
Y. giv L. gfiiajv
oath, covenant
Y. giv L. gfiiaj"
to pass away, die
Y. giv L. gfiiaj"
sword sheath; to pass away;
iiJr . See also di
Y. [gf ] L. giak
rule, pattern, style
Y. gf L. giSk
wipe
Y. gf L. giSk
decorate, adorn
Y. gf L. giSk
cross-bar at front of carriage
Y. gf L. giajk
ruddy; startled; angry
Y. [gf ] L. giajk
sting, bite
Y. [gf ] L. giajk
see b6shi 3$ $i
Y. gf L. giajk
E.
E.
E.
die
E.
E.
E.
E.
E.
E.
E.
E.
d?iaj
d^iaj
d?iaj
h
h
h
, same as
qik
qik
pik
pik
piajk
piajk
piajk
piajk
go to; meet, happen; fit, suitable. See
shi
shi
H 165:13
S 40:6
M40129
K7901
M07136
K413J
also di
Y. gf L. giajk
release; explain, analyze
Y. gf L. git
room; house; family
E.
E.
piajk
pit

286 Lexicon
shOu
shou
shou
sh6u
sh6u
shdu
shou
shou
shou
shou
shdu
shou
shou
shou
shou
shu
sha
shu
shu
shu
ft
$&
T
-^
3-
t
t
$t
3?
ft
*
^
t$L
1lF
ft
I*,tt
/E
It
3
H,
66:2
86:11
40:3
64:0
185:0
185:0
104:10
40:3
94:6
94:15
29:6
33:11
120:8
30:8
64:8
75:7
103:0
103:7
103:7
140:11
M13110
K1103a
M193325
K1026a
M07071A
K1099a
Ml 1768
KllOla
M44489A
K1102a
M44489B
K1102a
M22415
K 10971
M07071B
K1099a
M20390
K1099c
M20775
KllOOa
M03159
K1085a
M05672
K1090g
M27565
K1085e
M03760
K1091e
M 12242
K1085d
M 14886
M21994B
K90a
M22000Aa
K90b
M22002a
K90c
M31839b
K90d
Y. giw L. giw E. QUW
receive, accept, gather in
Y. giw', gy' L. gfiiwk E. d?uwk
cooked; ripe; also shu
Y. giw L. giw' E. QUW'
guard, defend, keep. See also shou
Y. giw L. giw' E. QUW'
hand
Y. giw" L. giw' E. QUW'
head. See also shdu below
Y. giw" L. giw" E. Quwh
to give oneself up (of a criminal or rebel).
See also shdu above
Y. gaw" L. gsw" E. guwh
emaciated, thin
Y. [giw"] L. giw" E. Quwh
governor of a commandery (jtin 3»P ); to
hold an office higher than one's rank on a
temporary or acting basis. See also shdu
Y. giw" L. giw" E. Quwh
hunt; great winter hunt; inspection tour
Y. giw" L. giw" E. Quwh
animal, beast
Y. giw" L. gfiiw" E. d?uw'
receive, accept; suffer
Y. giw" L. gfiiw" E. d?uw', d?uwh
long life
Y. giw" L. gfiiw" E. d?uw'
silk band or ribbon for tying a seal to the
waist band. Also E. d?uwh
Y. giw" L. gfiiw" E. d?uwh
sell, offer for sale
Y. giw" L. gfiiw" E. d?uwh
give
Y. gu L. gaS/guS E. gi§
comb
Y. [gu] L. g39/gu9 E. gia
foot. See also ya. Now used for pi 15: .
Y. gu L. g33/gu5 E. giS
wide apart, separated, distant; also su"
See also shu
Y. gu L. g33/gu9 E. gi§
same as $L ; also su
Y. gu L. gaS/gua E. gig
vegetables; also su

Lexicon 287
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
.JTT-
W 73:6
$f 120:4
If 135:6
^f 64:4
$fa 159:9
$fc 78:6
A 79:0
$fc 38:6
i ^f
3f 64:11
it 64:15
^ 75:11
ft 75:11
>& 85:8
W. 29:6
ft 115:5
Si 32:11
Ik 39:8
>fe 85:8
^ 86:11
Hi
IK 154:15
M14294
K45t
M27276
K83j
M30300
K83k
Ml 1884
K83g
M38438
K125s
M16451
K128s
M16613
K130a
M06206
K128p
M 12639
M 12932
K69x
Ml 5438
K1242b
M 15450
K122q
M17634a
K1031J
M03154a
K1031b
M25001
K497c
M05402
K1026c
M06995
K1026a
M17634b
K1031J
M19332a
K1026b
M36970
K1023t
Y. gy L. gi§/gy5 E. pis
write; written document
Y. gy L. gi§/gy3 E. pia
be tardy, remiss; relax. Also E. ?ia'
Y. gy L. gis/gya E. pi§
stretch, unfold; slow-paced, relaxed,
leisurely
Y. [gys] L. gfii5Ygfiy3s E. ?i§'
remove. Also E. zis'. According to Ding
Shengshu the modern reading shu
'express, convey1 is an alternative writing
for If
Y. gy L. gy5 E. pus
transport, convey; contribute; exhaust,
ruin; lose, be defeated
Y. gy' L. gfiyS E. d?u§
different; special, outstanding; very much
Y. [gy'] L. gfiyS E. d?u§
baton; kind of lance
Y. tgy L. tghya E. tphu5
beautiful
Y. [tghy] L. tr^Mya E. trhia
shupu $r It gambling game
Y. tghy L. trMa/tr^ys E. tr^S
spread, extend
Y. tghy L. trhi§/trhyS E. trhi5
Ailanthus glandulosa
Y. tghy L. tghy§ E. tphuo
pivot
Y. gy' L. gfiiwk E. d?uwk
good, gentle, pure; also shu
Y. gy L. giwk E. puwk
father's younger brother, uncle; also shu
Y. gy' L. gfiyt E. ?wit
glutinous millet
Y. gy' L. sfiiwk E. d?uwk
gate room; private school
Y. gy L. gfiiwk E. d?uwk
who? which one?
Y. gy' L. gfiiwk E. d?uwk
good, gentle, pure; also shu
Y. giw', gy' L. gfiiwk E. d?uwk
cooked; ripe; also shou
Y. gy' L. gfiywk E. ?uawk
ransom, redeem

288 Lexicon
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
shu
*R 29:6
;|£ 140:8
Si 44:18
It 142:7
$5 145:13
66:11
^ 72:9
$| 104:13
$ 202:0
fit 208:0
If" 122:9
8j 72:14
§ 32:11
$fc 85:11
Ife 103:7
ft 66:11
& 53:8
& 61:6
Bfl 72:14
4F 122:9
>$, 62:2
M03154b
K1031b
M31241
K1031g
M07821B
K1224s
M33086
K1224a
M34650A
K1224J
M13363A
K123r
M 14051
K45x
M22561
K92b
M47991
K93a
M48390
K92a
M28319b
K45r
M14220b
K45m'
M05412
M18171b
K1222t
M22000B
K90b
M13363B
K123r
M09373
K804a
M10560
K94t
M14220a
K45m'
M28319a
K45r
M11537
K1243c
E. SU3'
Y. sy" L. giwk E. puwk
father's younger brother, uncle; also shu
Y. gyv L. giwk E. quwk
pulse, beans, legumes
Y. gy' L. gfiywk E. d?uawk
be attached to, belong. See also zhu
Y. gy' L. gfiywk E. d?uawk
kind of caterpillar, place name; ancient
name for Szechuan
Y. [gy'] L. gfiywk E. d?uawk
long shirt. See also du
Y.su L. gua'
to count. See also shu, shud
Y. gy" L. gia'/gya' E. qia'
heat, summer
Y. [gyv] L. gia'/gya' E. qia'
hidden affliction
Y. syv L. gia'/gya' E. qia'
broomcom millet, Panicum miliaceum
Y. sy" L. gia'/sya' E. qia'
rat, mouse
Y. gy" L. gfiisVgfiys" E. dziah
place, establish; office, bureau; also
shu
Y. gy" L. gfiiaVgfiya" E. d?iah
dawn, morning light; also shu
Y. tgy" [sic] L. gfiiaVgfiya" E. d?ia'
country estate; villa
Y. saw" L. saw", gaw" E. sawh, guwh
rinse the mouth; also sou
Y. su" L. gaa"/gua" E. giah
set out item by item; commentary.
See also shu, su
Y. gu" L. gua"
number. See also shu, shud
many; hope
Y. gy" L. gia"/gya"
kind, forgiving
Y. gy" L. gfiia"/gfiya"
dawn, morning light; also shu
Y. gy" L. gfiiSYgfiya" E. d?iah
place, establish; office, bureau; also shu
Y. gy" L. giaYgya" E. quah
guard; garrison
E. guah
E.
E.
E. d?iah

Lexicon 289
shu
shu
shu
shii
shu
shii
shu
shu
shu
shii
shu
shua
shuai
shuai
shuai
shuai
shuai
shuai
shuan
W 75:12
If 145:7
8 151:8
ffi" 75:12
M 85:12
$f 144:5
3i 162:5
it 167:5
ft 9:8
tt 9:17
^ 75:3
$1 18:6
3S 145:4
&t 50:6
4s- 95:6
^ 50:6
$• 95:6
^ 142:11
ip 39:19
M15496A
K127J
M34286
K118f
M36280
K118g
M15496B
K127J
M 18329
M34046
K497d
M38803
K497e
M40320
K497g
M00762
K1077p
M01299
K1077o
M 14480
K1222a
M01964
K298a
M34127A
K355a
M08886B
K499a
M20817B
K498a
M08886Aa
K499a
M20817Aa
K498a
M33531a
K498g
M07051a
shuan 85:8 M17580
Y. sy^ L. sfiya' E. d?u3'
plant, set up, establish. See also shu
below
Y. [syv] L. sfiya" E. dzuS'
cloth robe, servant's garment
Y. syN L. sfiy^ E. d?ua'
plant, implant; young man (uncapped);
attendant
Y. sy^ L. sfiy^
tree. See also shii above
Y. [&] L. sfiy^
timely rain; soaking rain
Y. sy' L. sfiyt
technique, skill, craft, artful means. Also
sui E. zwih, same as i£
Y. sy' L. sfiyt
follow; transmit, set out
Y. [sy'] L. sfiyt
long needle; lead, guide
Y. [syv] L. siwk
suddenly; hastily
Y. [sy ] L. siwk
black; quick, rapid, sudden
Y. tshu" ? L. sywk
tie in a bundle
Y. swax L. svyait E. swait/sweit
brush; to brush
Y. gwaj L. suj E. swi
decline, wane. See also CUT
Y. swajv L. sujv E. swih
leader. See also shuai below and shuo
Y. shwajv L. suj" E. swih
leader, commander. See also shuai below
and shuo, lyii
Y. [suv ?] L. sut E. swit
lead; also shuo. See also shuai above
Y. [suv ?] L. sut E. swit
go along, follow; lead, command; rash,
hasty, cursory; generally, usually; also
shuo. See also shuai above, shuo, lyu
Y. [su"?] L. sut E. swit
xlshuai $& 4$ cricket; also shuo
Y.[swanv] L. swamv E. swianh, swainh/sw£inh
twins; also luan
Y. [swans] L. s\va:n" E. swainh/swe:nh
rinse
E. d?uah
E. d?u5h
E. ?wit
E. ?wit
E. ?wit
E. quwk
E. puwk
E. quawk

290 Lexicon
shuang m
shuang $f
shuang $1
shuang 5£
shuang |^
shui pfl
shuT ^C
shui Bf
shui %
shui ft
shui tfe
shun %
shun T/f
shun /if
shun ^
shun |«F
shun |f
shun /H
shuo Ift,
shuo ;n
shuo /5?c
38:17
173:9
85:16
172:10
89:7
149:8
85:0
109:8
115:7
142:7
149:7
50:7
30:4
75:9
109:4
109:12
136:6
140:12
181:3
149:7
75:3
86:15
M06885
K731H
M42363
K731g
M18671
M42116
K1200a
M 19746
K733a
M35586a
K575u
M 17083
K576a
M23448
K31d
M25070
K324i
M33078B
K324e
M35556B
K324q
M08904
K324g
M03356
K468m
M15173
K465b
M23171A
K465a
M23694
K469c
M30339
K469a
M31991
K469b
M43349
K462c
M35556A
K324q
M14466Aa
K1120b
M19549
K1125n
Y. gwarj L. gairj E. giarj
widow
Y. gwarj L. gairj E. giarj
frost
Y. [gwarj] L. gwaiwrj E. gaiwrj/sceiwrj
river name. Also E. bwrj, laiwrj torrent
Y. gwarj L. gwaiwrj E. gaiwrj/gceiwrj
pair, couple; double
Y. gwarf L. gain' E. giarj'
lively, quick; bright
Y. guj ' L. gfiyj E. d?wi
who; also shei
Y. gujv L. gyj' E. qwi'
water
Y. gujv L. gfiyjv E. d?wi3h/d?wih
sleep
Y. gujv L. gyajv E. qwiajh
tax
Y. [guj"] L. gyajv E. qwiajh
sloughed snake skin. See also tui
Y. gujv L. gyajv E. qwiajh
persuade. See also shuo, yue
Y. [tshujv] L. tshyajv E. tshwiajh
kerchief
Y. [gyns] L. gfiynv E. ?win'
suck; lick
Y. [§ynv] L. gfiynv E. ?win'
hand-rail; shield, same as jff
Y. [gynv] L. gfiynv E. ?win'
shield. See also dun
Y. gun" ? L. gynv E. pwinh
blink, wink
Y. gyn" L. gynv E. qwinh
proper name; Hibiscus
Y. [gynv] L. gynv E. qwinh
Hibiscus
Y. gynv L. gfiyn" E. ?winh
follow; obey; along; in order; docile,
obedient
Y. gwe L. gyat E. qwiat
explain; theory, doctrine. See also
shui, yue
Y. gew', go' L. gfiiak E. d?iak
cup handle; also shao. See also biao
Y. gew L. giak E. qiak
melt, fuse

Lexicon 291
shu6
shuo
shuo
shuo
shuo
shuo
shuo
shuo
shuo
shuo
shuo
ST
ST
si
ST
ST
ST
ST
ST
ST
ST
W. 167:15
^7 20:1
%] 140:3
^ 112:9
It 66:11
$1 74:6
3)1 75:10
tfi 118:9
^ 50:6
^ 95:6
A£ 142:11
ttp 142:10
SI 164:19
II 182:9
^A 115:2
JH 53:12
_| |>-*
^f 69:8
9i 64:12
iS 9:9
fl 30:2
/§• 61:5
M41019
K1125o
M02494b
K1120a
M30674b
M24338b
K795e
M13363C
K1207a
M 14359
K769a
M15316
M26232
K1149e'
M08886Ab
K499a
M20817Ab
K498a
M33531b
K498g
M33364
M40106a
K878h
M43888
K973e
M24913
K557b
M09487
K869d
M13563
K869a
M12705B
K869f
M00895
K973f
M03257
K972a
M10462A
K973a
Y. gew" L. siak E. piak
melt, fuse
Y. gew ' L. sfiiak E. d?iak
ladle; also shab
Y. sew' L. sfiiak E. d?iak
see shao.
Y. [si'] L. sfiiajk E. d?iajk
great, large; also shi.
Y. [gwaw"] L. swaiwk E. gaiwk/gceiwk
frequent. See also shti, shu.
Y. swawv L. swaiwk E. gaiwk/gceiwk
first day of the new moon; north
Y. swaw" L. swaiwk E. saiwk/sceiwk
long spear, lance
Y. [gwaw'] L. swaiwk E. saiwk/goeiwk
ancient dance tune; pole carried in a war
dance. Also E. sew flute
Y. [suv ?] L. sut E. swit
lead, also shuai. See also shuai
Y. [suv ?] L. sut E. swit
go along, follow; lead, command;
immediately; also shuai. See also shuai,
lyu
Y. [su"(?)] L. swat E. swit
see shuai.
Y. sr L. sr E. si
luosi i$ % snail
Y. [§r] L. sr E. sis/si
strain wine; also shai. Also E. gia
L. E. tshi/tshiY. sz
cold breeze
Y. sz L. sz E. si
private; personal; self-centred
Y. sz L. sz E. sis/si
servant, menial
Y. sz L. sz E. si3/si
cleave, tear apart; this; then
Y.sz
rip, tear, same as $f in the first sense. See
also XT.
Y. sz L. sz
slsT urgent
Y. sz L. sz
supervise, control
Y. sz L. sz E. si/si
think; think of, long for. See also si, sai
E. si/si
E. si/si

292 Lexicon
ST
ST
ST
ST
si
si
si
si
si
si
si
si
si
si
si
si
si
si
si
si
si
si
•$$ 120:6
$& 120:9
taj
& 122:9
l9f 30:12
^E 78:2
0 31:2
^ 75:5
70 85:5
IB 187:5
^ 129:4
^ 129:7
IS 154:8
fa 9:5
/§> 61:5
IJ 118:5
$L 10:6
$ 9:5
j$ 38:5
& 49:0
y£ 85:3
$3 127:5
Bfl 30:10
M27448
K974a
M27660
K973b
M28321
M04260a
K869e
M16365
K558a
M04682
K518a
M 14666
K518f
M 17294
K518g
M44683
K518e
M29221
K509o
M29226
K509H
M36809a
K850t
M00483b
K972f
M10462B
K973a
M25934
K972g
M01369
K556a
M00485a
K976H
M06177
K9761
M08744
K967a
M17136
K967i
M28915
K976k
M04109
K972k
Y. sz L. sz E. si/si
silk; thread, filament
Y. [sz] L. sz E. si/si
coarse cloth for mourning
Y. sz L. sz E. si/si
fusT ^ J§. , ^j- M- screen across a
doorway
Y. si L. siaj E. sej
neigh, formerly read XT
Y. sz" L. sz' E. si'
die
Y. szv L. sz: E. sih
four
Y. [szv] L. szv E. sih
spoon, ladle
Y c^v T OTN fJ ojh. SZ Li. SZ H. SI
mucus from the nose, snivel, snot
Y. szv L. SZN E. sih
team of four horses
Y. [sz:] L. szv E. sih
bury; preliminary burial. Also E. jih
Y. sz: L. sz: E. sih
set out; display; a shop; unrestrained;
then, thereupon
Y. sz^ L. sz: E. si9h/sih
bestow; also ci
Y. [sz: ] L. szr E. sih/sih
watch; await; spy on; also ci. Also E. si/si
Y. sz: L. sz: E. sih/sih
thought. See also ST, sai
Y. sz: L. szv E. sih/sih
basket, hamper
Y. szv L. sfiz" E. zi'
rhinoceros
Y. szv L. sfizv E. zi'/zi'
resemble; also shi
Y. szv L. sfizv E. zi'/zi'
older brother's wife; ancient clan name
Y. szv L. sfizv E. zi'/zi'
sixth Earthly Branch
Y. sz: L. sfif E. zi'/zi'
branch stream; river name
Y. sz" L. sfizx E. zi'/zi'
spade shaped farm tool, plough share
Y. S2T L. shV E. zih/zih
succeed; succession, heir

Lexicon 293
si 41:3 M07414
K961m
si 85:7 M17546
K976o
Si 113:3 M24633
K967d
si 184:0 M44014B
K921a
si 184:2 M44025
K921e
Si 184:5 M44107
si 53:9 M09410c
K906g
Si 9:7 M00705A
K976m
song 46:8 M08209
K1190f
song 46:10 M08348
K1012a
song 140:8 M31177
song 75:4 M14516
K1190a
s6ng 61:7 M 10672
s6ng 117:7 M25776
K1222n
s6ng 128:11 M29167
K1191J
s6ng 187:7 M44758
K12221
song 162:6 M38842
K1179a
song 40:4 M07078
K1004a
song 149:4 M35266
K1190b
song 149:7 M35551
K1185o
song 181:4 M43365A
K1190d
SOU 53:10 M09438
K1097e
Y. szs L. shy E. zih/zih
eunuch; government office (place);
Buddhist temple
Y. sz^ L. shV E. ?ih/zih
river bank
Y. szx L. sfizx E. ziVzih
sacrifice
Y. szs L. sfizN E. zih/zih
to feed; food. See also shi, yi.
Y. [sp] L. shV E. zih/zih
to feed; food
Y. sf L. sfif E. zih/zih
to feed; food
Y. tsV L. tgV E. tshih/tghih
see maosi % IK. See also ce.
Y.sf L.sfir E.zjYzT
wait for. See also qi.
Y. [sjurj] L. siwrj E. suwrj
same as $j
Y. sjurj L. siwrj E. suwrj
lofty; name of a mountain
Y. [sjurj] L. siwrj E. suwrj
kind of vegetable, Brassica chinensis
Y. sjurj [sic] L. sfiywrj E. zuawq
pine tree
Y. [sjurjv] L. sywrj' E. suawrj'
frightened
Y. sjurj" L. sywrj' E. suawrj'
raise; esteem
Y. sjurj" L. sywrj' E. suawrj'
incite, encourage; rise up high
Y. [sjurjv] L. sywrj' E. suawrj'
urge on a horse by shaking the bit.
Also E. sow'.
Y. surf L. S9wrjv E. S3wrjh
carry, deliver; give; escort
Y. surf L. s9wrjN E. sawrjh
ancient state; a surname
Y. sjurjv L. sfiywrf E. zuawrjh
sue, bring to court; dispute, argue
Y. sjurf L. sfiywrf E. zuawrj
read aloud, chant, recite
Y. sjurf L. sfiywrjx E. zuawrjh
eulogy, praise. See also rong
Y. [sow] L. pw E. guw
conceal

294
sou
sou
sou
sou
sou
sou
s6u
s6u
s6u
s6u
s6u
sou
sou
su
su
su
su
su
su
su
su
Lexicon
64:10 M12486 Y. saw L. saw E. suw
K1097d search
85:10 M17979 Y. saw L. saw E. suw
Kl097f,g urinate
140:10 M31539 Y. [saw] L. saw E. suw
Kl098a madder, Rubia cordifolia; assemble,
gather; spring or autumn hunt; search
167:10 M40739 Y. saw L. saw E. suw
engrave
182:9 M43903 Y. saw L. saw E. suw
sound of the wind
137:10 M30511b Y. saw L. saw E. saw
classifier for boats; also sao
29:8 M03176 Y. saw" L. saw' E. saw'
Kl097b old gentleman
30:11 M04155 Y. [saw"] L. saw' E. saw'
K1206g urge on a dog; instigate, abet. Also E.
sawh, tshawh
64:15 M 129 12 Y. [saw"] L. saw' E. saw'
ddusdu £f $t arouse
140:15 M32348 Y. saw" L. saw' E. saw'
Kl207c marsh, shallow lake; gathering place for
fish or animals
109:10 M23581 Y. sawv L. sawv E. sawh
K1097n blind
30:11 M04154 Y. saw" L. sawv E. sawh
K1222s cough
85:11 M18171a Y. saws L. sawv, sawv E. sawh, suwh
K1222t rinse the mouth, also shu
115:11 M25263 Y. [su] L. sua E. so
K67a revive
140:16 M32427 Y. SU L. sua E. SO
K67c revive
164:5 M39835 Y. su L. sua E. so
cream; crisp, short
103:7 M22000Ab Y. su L. saa/sua E. sia
K90b wide apart, separated, distant; also shu
See also shu
103:7 M22002b Y. su L. saa/sua E. sia
K90c same as $fc
140:11 M31839a Y. su L. saa/sua E. sia
K90d vegetables; also shu
3:7 M00695 Y. sy' L. sfiywk E. zuawk
K1220a popular usage, custom; popular, vulgar
?0:10 M04057 Y. suv L. suav E. soh
bird's crop

Lexicon 295
32:10 M05328 Y. suv L. su5N E. soh
model in clay; mould
61:10 M10988 Y. [siT] L. SU9X E. soh
K769b inform, accuse; same as tfc
85:5 M17300 Y. suv L. SU3V E. soh
K7921 go upstream; trace back, recall
85:10 M17975 Y. [SUN] L. su3v E. soh
same as ?/f
120:4 M27300 Y. suv L. sua^ E. soh
K68a white, undyed, silk; white; in its original
state, plain
149:5 M35325 Y. suv L. suov E. soh
K792j tell, inform; accuse
162:10 M39048 Y. suv L. suav E. soh
K769d go upstream; same as ?/F
116:8 M25561 Y. [su] L. sut E. swot
emerge suddenly
140:11 M31773 Y. su L. sswk E. sswk
K1222q vegetables; susu J$C ^ low, vulgar
162:7 M38897 Y. su L. sawk E. sawk
Kl222i speedy, fast
162:11 M39079 Y. [su"] L. sawk E. sawk
K1222r swift, same as ij.; anxious, attentive
184:7 M44180 Y. [su"] L. sswk E. sswk
Kl222k kind of stew
149:10 M35816 Y. su' L. gawk E. suwk
K922c rise
157:11 M37811 Y. [su"] L. gawk E. suwk
Kl029d susu $t 51 drag the feet
120:11 M27815b Y. su" L. sawk E. suwk
Kl029c contract, shrink; draw back, recoil; also
suo.
36:3 M05755 Y. [sy"] L. siwk E. suwk
K1030a early morning; long-standing, old; stern
40:8 M07195A Y. siw", sy" L. siwk E. suwk
Kl029a stay overnight; old; continuous. See
also xiu
129:7 M29225 Y. [sy"] L. siwk E. suwk
Kl028a severe, solemn, reverent
140:11 M31747a Y. [sy"] L. siwk E. suwk
musu W ^ lucerne, alfalfa, Medicago
denticulata, also xu
119:6 M26922 Y. sy" L. sywk E. suawk
K1221a unhusked grain; millet as opposed to rice
148:7 M35084 Y. [sy"] L. sywk E. suawk
husu j& ^ fearful, trembling
su
su
su
su
su
su
su
sii
su
su
su
su
su
su
su
su
su
su
su
su
su

296 Lexicon
suan
suan
suan
suan
suan
suan
SUT
suT
SUT
sm
sui
sui
suT
suT
suf
suT
sui
sui
sui
sui
sui
94:7
104:7
164:7
118:8
118:7
140:10
109:8
120:7
140:7
172:9
170:9
170:13
46:13
85:16
172:10
188:13
109:8
113:5
149:8
162:14
86:13
M20431
K46d
M22211
M39871
K468e'
M26146
K174a
M26069
K173a
M31562
K175b
M23450A
K1237u
M27501
K354g
M31009
M42104
K575v
M41751
Kllb
M41871
Kllg
M08532
M 18665
Kill
M42125B
K880a
M45289
Kllh
M23446
K490o
M24674
K528a
M35596
K490q
M39191
M19469
K526i
Y. sonL. suan E. swan
suanni lion (?)
Y. [son] L. suan E. swan
muscular aches, aching of the limbs
Y. son L. suan E. swan
sour, acid; painful
Y. [son"] L.suan' E. swan'
count; calculate, reckon, compute
Y. son" L. suan" E. swanh
counting tally
Y. sonv L. suan" E. swan
garlic
Y. suj L. syj E. swi
river name. See also huT
Y. suj L. syj E. swi
carriage-mounting strap; comfort, pacify;
peaceful
Y. sujL. syj E. swi
husuT coriander
Y. suj L. syj E. swi
although, even if
Y. suj' L. sfiyj E. zwi§/zwi
ancient state; dynasty
Y. suj' L. sfiyj E. zwi3/zwi
follow
Y. [suf] L. syj' E. swia'/swi'
place name
Y. [sujv] L. syj' E. swiS'/swi'
soak food so as to make it slippery.
Also E. swiah
Y. [suj ] L. syj' E. swio'/swi'
place name, same as See also XT,
gui
Y. suj" L. syj' E. swia'/swi'
bone marrow
Y. [suj"] L. syjv E. swih
candid (gaze)
Y. suj" L. syj" E. swih
malevolent spirit, noxious influences
Y. [suf] L. syj" E. swih
reprimand; question; insult
Y. [suj"] L. syj" E. swih
remote, far away
Y. suj" L. sfiyj" E. zwih
device for making fire; flint; beacon fire

Lexicon 297
115:12
115:13
145:13
162:9
170:13
112:8
77:9
120:12
39:7
140:10
184:3
64:10
118:6
118:12
172:2
49:9
38:7
64:7
30:7
75:7
140:7
140:10
M25298
K533h
M25315
K526k
M34636
K5261
M38985
K526d
M41870
K526m
M24284
K490n
M 16326
K346a
M27881
K5331
M06987
K434a
M31635
K434d
M44038
K436a
M 12459
K435a
M25997
K391h
M26554
K433b
M41943a
K467a
M08765a
M06294
K16e
M 12096
M03696
M14878
M31040A
K16f
M31661
K355b
Y. sujs L. sfiyj" E. zwih
ear of grain; tassel, fringe
Y. [sujv] L. sfiyjs E. zwih
ear of grain
Y. [sujv] L. sfiyjv E. zwih
grave clothes
Y. suf L. sfiyjv E. zwih
fulfil; carry out; succeed, achieve;
continue; then, thereupon
Y. sujv L. sfiyjv E. zwih
underground tunnel; channel
Y. sujv L. suajs E. swajh
shatter; in fragments
Y. sujv L. syajv E. swiajh
year
Y. [suf ] L. syajv E. swiajh
loosely woven cloth
Y. sun L. sun E. swan
grandson
Y. sun L. sun E. swsn
kind of aromatic plant
Y. sun L. sun E. swsn
cooked rice; evening meal
Y. sun" L. sun' E. swan'
decrease; lose; diminish, injure
Y. syn" L. syn" E. swin'
bamboo shoots
Y. [syn"] L. syn' E, swin'
cross-beam in a bell frame; bell-stand
Y. syn" L. syn' E. swin'
hawk, falcon
Y. sunv L. sunv E. swanh
humble, submissive; one of the eight
trigrams of the Yijing. See also xun
Y. so
posuo '
Y. so
mosuo
Y. so
instigate, abet
Y. so L. sua
shuttle
Y. [so] L. sua E. swa
kind of grass, Cyperus. See also sha
Y. [so] L. sua E. swa
straw rain cape
L. sa E. sa
whirling, dancing
L. sa E. sa
feel, fondle, stroke
L. sua E. swa
E. swa
sui
sui
sui
sui
sui
sui
sui
sui
sun
sun
sun
sun
sun
sun
sun
sun
suo
suo
suo
suo
suo
suo

298 Lexicon
suo
su6
sud
su6
sud
suo
120:11
96:10
167:10
63:4
120:4
7:5
M27815a Y. siT L. sawk E. guwk
Kl029c contract, shrink; draw back, recoil; bind;
gather; straight, vertical; also su
M21147 Y. sov L. sua' E. swa'
Kl3b small, fragment; trivial, petty
M40708 Y. so" L. sua' E. swa'
lock
Ml 1715 Y. su" L. S99'/§U3' E. s.i5'
K9la place; that which
M27306 Y. saw~ L. sak E. sak
K770a twist a rope; cord, cable; seek. Also E.
pijk select
M00268A Y. sov L. saN E. sah
K1236a final particle in the Child. See also xie

Lexicon 299
32:10
9:3
9:5
94:16
32:10
64:13
75:10
94:16
162:9
169:13
85:11
157:8
85:4
149:8
162:10
157:10
169:10
30:2
130:5
163:5
187:5
M05322
M00370b
K4c'
M00513a
K4h
M20782a
K2721
M05332
M12774
K271d
M15292
M20782b
K2721
M39011B
K271b
M41508
K271e
M18169A
M37602
M17206b
K677a
M35604
K677b
M39044A
K678e
M37750
K628b
M41450
M03246B
K976p
M29369
K976H'
M39332
M44675A
K976J'
Y. tV L. thap E. thap
collapse, fall down
Y. t'b L. tha E. tha
other; he, she, it (colloquial); see tuo
same as ; also tuo
Y. thav L. that E. that
otter, also ta. Also E. ^rait/tr^it
Y. thav L. thap E. thap
pagoda, transcription of Skt. stupa
Y. ta' [sic] L. that E. that
beat, flog, whip
Y. tY L. thap E. thap
long, narrow, low bed, couch
Y. tV L. that E. that
otter; see ta. Also E. ^rait/tr^it
Y. [tVl L. that E. that
taota to go back and forth. See
also da
Y. [thav] L. that E. that
small door; small door inside a palace
Y. [tV] L. thap E. th3p/thap
ancient river name. See also 16i
Y. ta' L. thap E. thsp/thap
step, tread, tramp
Y. ta' L. tfiap E. dap/dap
crowded; repeated; a pile; babble; see da
Y. [ta'] L. tfiap E. dsp/dap
tata talkative
Y. [ta'l L. tfiap E. dap/dap
zata '«- -^. varied, mixed, numerous,
same as See also dai
Y. [ta'] L. tfiap E. dap
trample, tread on
Y. [ta'] L. tfiap E. dap
small door in an upper story
Y. thaj L. thaj E. thsj
Santai H , name of a constellation
Graph now used for tdi , See also yi
Y. thaj L. thaj
foetus, embryo
Y. thaj L. thaj
place name; a surname
Y. thaj L. tfiaj E. dsj
poor quality horse; to champ at the bit.
See also dai.
E. thoj
E.
ta
ta
ta
ta
ta
ta
ta
ta
ta
ta
ta
ta
ta
ta
ta
ta
ta
tai
tai
tai
tai

300 Lexicon
195:5
64:14
86:5
133:8
140:5
140:14
61:10
37:1
85:4
85:5
64:19
85:19
64:8
154:4
32:13
57:12
75:13
72:12
85:12
146:6
149:8
M46073
M12851
M18957
K976i'
M30161
K939a
M30778
M32204
Ml 1052
K885f
M05834
K317d
M17160
K317g
M 17325
K316a
M13033
M18784
K152m
M12276A
K666f
M36680
K645a
M05528
K148d
M09865A
K147n
Ml 5632
K148e
M14172
M18271
K646b
M34778
K646a
M35633
K6171
Y. [thaj] L. thaj E. thaj
chub mackerel
Y. thaj' L. tfiaj E. dsj
to raise up, elevate
Y. thaj' L. tfiaj E. ctej
soot
Y. thaj' L. tfiaj E. dsj
platform, terrace
Y. thaj' L. tfiaj E. daj
moss, lichen
Y.thaj' L. tfiaj E. dsj
sedge
Y. thajv L. thajv E. t^j11
form, appearance, attitude
Y. thajv L. thajv E. thajh
very great, greatest; too much
Y. thajv L. thajv E. thajh
sift, discard, eliminate
Y. thajs L. thajv E. thajh
great; excessive
Y. than L. than E. than
to spread out, open out
Y. than L. than E. than
shoal, shallows; beach
Y. tham L. tham E. t^m/^am
insert the hand to test; try. See also tan.
Y. tham L. tham E. t'bm/^am
greedy
Y. than' L. tfian E. dan
sacrificial mound, altar
Y. than' L. tfian E. dan
shoot (pellets); strike; accuse; play a
musical instrument. See also dan.
Y. than' L. tfian E. dan
kind of tree; for zhantan
sandalwood, from Skt. candana; a
surname
Y. tham' L. tfiam E. dsm/dam
dark clouds, overcast; transcription of
Sanskrit dharma
Y. tham' L. tfiam E. dam/dam
deep pool
Y. tham' L. tfiam E. dsm/dam
spread, extend; deep; a surname
Y. tham' L. tfiam E. dam/dam
talk, chat; discussion
tai
tai
tai
tai
tai
tai
tai
tai
tai
tai
tan
tan
tan
tan
tan
tan
tan
tan
t£n
tan
tan
t£n

Lexicon 301
149:12
167:12
104:8
163:8
184:8
32:5
145:5
164:9
113:12
82:8
140:8
30:11
76:11
86:5
64:8
M35978
K646c
M40893B
K646e
M22251
M39476
M44229A
K617p
M04971
K149d
M34184
K149f
M39941
K656o
M24836
K646g
M16858
M31240
K617J
M04171
K152a
M16182
K152c
M18953
K151a
M12276B
K666f
Y. tham' L. tfiam E. dam/dam
talk (about something)
Y. [tham'] L. tfiam E. dom/dam
knob or ring on sword-handle. See also
xin.
Y. tham' L. tfiam E. dam
phlegm, sputum
Y. [tham'] L. tfiam E. dam
place name; a surname
Y. tham' L. tfiam E. dam
to bait, provoke; inducement. See also
dan.
Y. than~ L. than' E. than'
level, open, smooth
Y. thanv L. tfian' E. dan'
to bare; leave the upper part of the body
bare; stripped to the waist
Y. [thamv] L. tham' E. th3m'/tham'
kind of pickled mincemeat
Y. thamv L. tfiarrf E. dsm'/dam'
sacrifice at the end of mourning period
Y. thamv L. tham' E. tham'
blanket, rug, carpet
Y. [thairT] L. tham' E. tham'
kind of rush
Y. thanv L. thanv E. thanh
sigh
Y. thanv L. thanv E. thanh
sigh
Y. thanv L. thans E. thanh
charcoal
Y. tharrr L. thairf E. thamh/thamh
explore, search out. Reading from Jiyun.
tan
tang
tang
tang
tang
64:12
85:9
167:11
30:7
32:8
M12724
K646h
M17874A
K720z
M40805
K725e'
M03709
K700a
M05207
K725s
Guangyun has TW- for this sense. See
also tan.
Y. [thairf] L. thairT E. th9mh/thamh
try to find out, explore, sound. See
Y. tharj L. tharj E. tharj
hot water; soup. See also tang.
Y. tharj L. tharj E. tharj
sound of drums
Y. tharj' L. tfiarj E. darj
boast; great; empty, vain; dodder; ancient
place name; dynastic name; a surname
Y. tharj' L. tfiarj E. darj
hall, main room
tan
tan
t£i
tan
tan
tan
tan
tan
tan
tan
tan
tan
tan
tan
tan

302 Lexicon
tang
tang
tang
tang
tang
tang
tang
tang
tang
tang
tang
tang
tang
tang
tao
tao
tao
tao
tao
tao
tao
tao
32:10
75:8
119:10
142:10
142:11
184:9
9:8
9:20
50:5
64:20
85:9
86:13
108:12
156:8
30:2
57:5
61:10
64:6
64:10
85:10
120:7
149:10
M05340
K700c
M14953
K725t
M27070
M33414
K700e
M33503
K725d'
M44283B
K720c'
M00774
K725k
M01323
K725z
M08838B
K94y
M13040
K725a'
M17874B
K720z
M19435
M23062B
K720n
M37189
M03237
K1131d
M09748
K1046c
Ml 1044
K1078b
M12055C
K1145o
M12510
K1078c
Ml 8035
K1078d
M27465
M35831
K1078F
Y. tharj' L. tfiar)
dike, dam; pool, pond
Y. tharj L. tfiarj
wild pear, Pyrus
Y. tharj' L. tfiarj
sweets; sugar
Y. [tharj'l T- tfiarj
E. dan.
E. darj
E. darj
E. darj
tangtiab kind of cicada
Y. [tharj'l L. tfiarj
tanglang mantis
Y. [than/] L. tfiarj
sugar. See also xing
same as
Y. tharjv L. than'
if, supposing
Y. tharjv L. tharj'
treasury. See also nu
Y. [tharjv] L. tharj'
beat
Y. tharf L. tharf
E. darj
E. darj
E. tharj'
E. tharj'
E. tharj'
E. tharjh
scald. Now written See also tang
same as tang B
Y. [thar/] L. thar/ E. tharjh
push forward; time(s); numeral adjunct
for journeys, now written
dang
see tang B
Y. thaw L. thaw
greedy, covetous
Y. [thaw] L. thaw
bow case
Y. thaw L. thaw
See also
E. thaw
E. thaw
E. thaw
take pleasure in; be negligent; pass away;
doubtful
Y. [thaw] L. thaw E. thaw
taota go back and forth. See also
tiao, tiao.
Y. [thaw] L. thaw
to beat; draw out, pull out
Y. thaw L. thaw
inundate, flood, rise high
Y. thaw L. thaw
a silk ribbon, braid
Y. [thaw] L. thaw
to doubt
E. thaw
E. thaw
E. thaw
E. thaw

Lexicon 303
178:10
184:13
85:6
20:6
30:6
75:6
75:14
M43189
K1078g
M44426
K1244H
M17408
K1145s
M02524
K1047a
M03559
K1145t
M14757
K1145u
M15713A
K1090t
Y. thaw L. thaw E. thaw
bow case; to wrap, cover
Y. thaw L. thaw E. thaw
taotie glutton
Y. [thaw] L. thaw E. thaw
pour water, wash. Jiyun also reads E.
daw
Y. [thaw'] L. tfiaw E. daw
pottery, same as
Y. thaw' L. tfiaw E. daw
wail
Y. thaw' L. tfiaw E. daw
peach
Y. thaw' L. tfiaw E. daw
block of wood, blockhead; taowu $ fy
tao
tao
tao
tao
tao
tao
tao
tao
tao
ta"o
tao
tao
te
legendary evil beast, or man; historical
records of Chu. See also dao.
85:8 M17642 Y. thaw' L. tfiaw E. daw
wash in a pan or basket; clean out,
dredge
85:14
120:8
140:8
162:6
170:8
177:5
177:6
187:6
187:8
149:3
37:7
61:3
M18508
M27573
K1047e
M31252
M38845
K1145v
M41705A
K1047d
M42771
K1131e'
M42807
K1145x
M44699
M44808
M35231
K1073d
M05926
M10319
K918g
Y. thaw' L. tfiaw E. daw
great waves, billows
Y. thaw' L. tfiaw E. daw
rope
Y. thaw' L. tfiaw E. daw
putac grape.
Y. thaw' L. tfiaw E. daw
to run away, escape; evade, shirk
Y. thaw' L. tfiaw E. daw
pottery, ceramics; cultivate, mould;
contented; a surname. See also yao
Y. [thaw'] L. tfiaw E. daw
kind of small drum
Y. [thaw'j L. tfiaw E. daw
kind of small drum
Y. [thaw'] L. tfiaw E. daw
four year old horse. Also E. driaw'
Y. [thaw'] L. tfiaw E. daw
taotu kind of wild horse
Y. thaw L. thaw' E. thaw'
punish, suppress (an insurrection);
condemn; ask for, seek; discuss.
Y. [thawN] L. thawv E. thawh
sheath, case
Y. [thsjv] L. th39k E. t^k
to err, wrong
tao
tao
tao
tao
tao
tao
tao

304 Lexicon
te
te
te
te
teng
teng
teng
teng
t6ng
teng
teng
t6ng
tT
tT
tT
tf
tf
tf
tf
tf
61:11
154:3
93:6
142:10
85:10
104:15
120:10
140:15
142:10
149:10
187:10
104:5
75:7
18:8
157:8
30:9
30:10
32:9
64:9
113:9
M11100
K777o
M36666
K918h
M20013
K961h'
M33435B
K893u
M18036
K893q
M22606
M27783
K893t
M32340
M33435A
K893u
M35780
M44915
K893v
M22105
M14881
K5911
M02031
K850h
M37648
M03887
K877g
M04035
K870d
M05259B
K866k
M12344A
K866n
M24773
K866e
Y. [tVl L. tha5k E. t^k
evil, wrong, turpitude, depravity
Y. [thaf] L. th39k E. t^k
to demand Also E. dak
Y. [t3j'] L. tfiaSk E. dak
bull, male animal; single, only; special
Y. [t9j'] L.tfi99k E. dsk
insect which eats leaves. See also t€ng
Y. ten/ L. tfiaSrj E. dorj
gushing water; place name; a surname
Y. [t'brj'j L. tfiaarj E. darj
see below
Y. tn9rj' L. tfissrj E. darj
bind, tie up; cord
Y. th3rj' L. tfiaSrj E. dsrj
any kind of trailing or creeping vine;
wisteria; rattan
Y. [ten] L. tfborj E. darj
fabulous flying serpent. See also te
Y. ten' L. tfissi] E. darj
copy, transcribe
Y. thsrj L. tfiaarj E. darj
gallop, prance; rise, soar
Y. th9rj' L. tfiswrj E. dawrj
ache, pain, sore. The Yuan and modern
readings correspond to . dsrj, L.
tfisSrj with the same meaning
Y. thi L. thiaj E. t^j
ladder, steps, stairs
Y. thf L. thiajk E. t^jk
separate meat from the bone; clean out
with a pointed instrument, pick
Y. thr L. thiajk E. t^jk
kick
Y. thi' L. tfiiaj E. dej
cry, wail
Y. thi' L. tfiiaj E. dej
cry, wail, call out. Cf.
Y. [thi] L. tfiiaj E. dej
embankment, dike. See also dl
Y. thi' L. tfiiaj E. dej
lift, raise, propose. See also dl, dl,
shi
Y. [thi'] L. tfiiaj E. dej
content, happy

Lexicon 305
115:7
120:7
120:9
140:6
157:9
164:9
170:9
181:9
195:9
196:7
164:9
188:13
18:7
73:8
85:6
85:7
140:13
145:8
190:3
190:8
M25079
K591g
M27491
K591H
M27698
K866J
M30952B
K551k
M37724
K877h
M39924A
K8661
M41740B
K866g
M43584A
K866p
M46290
K866r
M46952
K591J
M39924B
K8661
M45291
K597i
M01989
M14300
K1241J
M17387B
K551f
M17543
K59lm
M32121
K560m
M34379B
K850m
M45363
K4e'
M45471
K850r
Y. thi' L. tfiiaj E. dej
shoot, sprout; kind of grass
Y. thi' L. tfiiaj
kind of thick silk
Y. [thi'] L. tfiiaj
orange red
Y. [thi'] L. tfiiaj
shoot, sprout, same as
Y. thi' L. tfiiaj
hoof
Y. thi'L. tfiiaj
tihu clarified butter, cream,
essence. See also t!
Y. [thi'J L. tfiiaj E. dej
dike. See also dT
Y. thi' L. tfiiaj E. dej
forehead; to head; heading, title; theme,
topic. See also di
Y. [thi'] L. tfiiaj E. dej
anchovy, Engraulis japonicus
E. dej
E. dej
E. dej
See also yi
E. dej
E. dej
E. dej
E. fej'
E. thej'
Y. [thi'l L. tfiiaj
tihu pelican
Y. [thf] L. thiaj'
clear wine. See also ti
Y. thi" L. thiaj'
body; structure; form, style; system
Y. thiN L. thiajv E. i^jh
shave
Y. thi* L. thiajv E. thejh
abolish; discontinue; replace, substitute
for
Y. [thi^] L. thiajv E. t^f1
tears, mucus from the nose; same as
See also yi
Y. thiv L. thiajv E. fef1
tears, mucus from the nose. Also E.
tej'.
Y. [thi1 L. ftaf E. tej11
mow, cut grass or weeds. Also E. dri'
Y. [thi1 L. thiaj^ E. fef
baby wrapper, swaddling cloth. See also
XT
Y. [thi^] L. thiaf E. thejh
false hair. Also E. dejh
Y. [thi1 L. thiai^E. thejh
false hair, same as
tf
tf
ti
tf
tf
tf
tf
tf
tf
tf
tr
tr
ti
fl
ti
ti
fl
ti
ti
ti

306 Lexicon
ti
ti
fl
ti
fl
d
d
tian
tian
tian
tian
tjan
tian
tian
tian
tian
tian
tian
tian
tian
tian
tian
78:11
30:15
61:7
61:8
118:14
156:14
162:7
37:1
85:8
102:0
30:10
32:10
102:4
116:10
167:5
169:10
9:5
61:6
99:6
85:8
130:8
176:7
M 16550
M04501
K415e
M10642
K591f
M10803
K850i
M26671
K1124d
M37334
K1124e
M38886
K856f
M05833
K361a
M17698
M21723
K362a
M04074B
K375q
M05355A
K375u
M21774
K362e
M25598
K375t
M40279A
M41446
K375r
M00492A
K362d
M10595
K621b
M21656
M17654
M29602
K476d
M42660
K244a
Y. ni- [sic] L. thiajv E. t^j11
distress
Y. thiv L. tiajv E. tejh
sneeze
Y. tiv L. tfiiajv E. dejh
duty towards one's elder brother
Y. [thf] L. thiaik E. tNyk
fear, respect; tid sorrowful
Y. [thfl L. thiajk E. thejk
dd ' long and tapering. Also E.dejk
Y. [thn L. thiajk E. thejk
leap, jump
Y. ti' [sic] L. thiajk E. t^jk
remote
Y. thjen L. thian E. then
heaven; sky
Y. thjem L. thiam E. tern
add, increase
Y. thjen' L. tfiian E. den
cultivated field; to hunt
Y. [thjen'] L. tfiian E. den
sound of a drum. See also chen
Y. thjen' L. tfiian E. den
block up, fill, stuff. See also dian
Y. thjen' L. tfiian E. den
cultivate a field; to hunt
Y. [thjen'] L. tfiian c den
to stop up, block, same as
Y. thjen' L. tfiian E. den
gold filagree. See also dian
Y. thjen' L. tfiian E. den
to fill, full; sound of drums
Y.tjenv L. tfiian E. den
cultivate, now usually read dian in this
sense; hunt. See also dian.
Y. thjem' L. tfiiam E. dem
quiet, tranquil, calm
Y. thjem' L. tfiiam E. dem
sweet
Y. [thjenv] L. thian' E. tW
muddy
Y. thjenv L. thian' E. tW
abundant, sumptuous, rich
Y. [thjenv] L. thian' E. tW
blushing face; ashamed

Lexicon 307
78:5
61:4
96:10
61:6
64:6
113:6
140:11
9:6
75:7
140:5
142:8
149:8
162:5
167:6
190:5
195:11
64:6
116:6
149:6
109:6
M16413
K453k
M10348
K1247c
M21167
K375p
M10541
K1145i
M12055A
K1145o
M24693
K1145k
M31713
K1077s
M00569
K1145n
M14859
K1077f
M30779
K1131d'
M33166
K1083v
M35609A
K1083x
M38781
M40387C
K1145H
M45392
M46432
K1077t
M12055B
K1145o
M25496
K1145q
M35469
K1145r
M23314
K1145J
Y. thjeiT [sic] L. tfiian' E. den'
exterminate
Y. thjerrT L. t^am' E. fern'
shame
Y. [thjenv] L. thianv E. fenh
jade pendant beside the ear
Y. [thjew] L. thiaw E. few
unimportant, mean
Y. thjew L. thiaw E. few
choose, pick; carry on a pole. See also
tao, ti&o
Y. [thjew] L. thiaw E. few
shrine for remote ancestors; become heir
to, inherit
Y. [thjew] L. thiaw E. few
sorrel, Rumex; also E. fejk
Y. thjew' L. thiaw E. few
reckless, frivolous; appropriate, steal.
Also E. dew
Y. thjew' L. tfiiaw E. dew
twig; long narrow strip, slip; item, article
Y. [thjew'] L. tfiiaw E. dew
trumpet creeper, Campsis grandiflora
Y. thjew' T. tfiiaw E. dew
see tangtiac
Y. thjew' L. tfiiaw E. dew
to tune; harmonize, blend. See also diao,
zhou
Y. thjew L. tfiiaw E. dew
far, remote
Y. [thjew'] L. tfiiaw E. dew
long lance. See also yao, diao
Y. thjew' L. tfiiaw E. dew
small child's hanging hair
Y. [thjew'] L. tfiiaw E. dew
kind of small white fish
Y. thjewv L. tfiiawx E. dew'
poke, stir up, challenge. See also tao,
tiao
Y. thjewv L. tfiiawv E. dew'
yaoti&c reticent, modest
Y. [tjewv] L. tfiiaw" E. dew'
lead, seduce, same word as , B
Y. thjews L. thiawv E. thewh
look into the distance
tian
ti&i
tian
tiao
tiao
tiao
tiao
tiao
tiao
tiao
tiao
tiao
tiao
tiao
tiao
tiao
tiao
tiao
tiao
tiao

308 Lexicon
tiao
tiao
tiao
tiao
tiao
tie
tie
tie
tie
tiS
tie
tie
tie
ting
ting
ting
ting
ting
ting
tmg
119:19 M27207
K11241
147:6 M34854
K11451
157:6 M37533B
K1145p
181:6 M43463A
K1145m
157:6 M37533A
K1145p
61:5 M10451
K618h
50:5 M08849b
K618q
154:5 M36718
167:13 M40945
K1256b
187:13 M45022
K1256c
184:9 M44268
K453m
50:5 M08849a
K618q
50:5 M08849c
K618q
53:22 M09562
75:7 M14801
K835y
85:2 M17103
K833f
128:16 M29211A
K835d'
8:7 M00303
K833h
9:9 M00864
K833I
53:7 M09337
K835h
E.
E.
E.
Y. thjewx L. thiawv
to sell grain
Y. [thjewv] L. thiawv
go to pay homage
Y. thiawN L. t'Haw"
jump over, skip. Guangyun uses radical
156 for this reading and sense. See
also tiao below
Y. [thjewv] L. ftaw^
go to pay homage, same as ; used
for fu bow the head
Y. thiaw' L. tfiiaw E. dew
leap, jump, move up and down. See also
tiao above
Y. [thjev] L. thiap E.
well-placed; submit; submissiv
Y. thjev L. ftap E.
well-placed; submit; submissive, cf.
also tie, tie
Y. t^e" L. thiap
to stick, paste
Y. thjev L. thiat
iron
Y. [t^ev] L. thiat
black horse. Also E. det
Y. thj£v L. thiat
see taotie % f£
Y. t^e" L. thiap
label; card; also tie, ti
Y. thjev L. thiap
rubbing of calligraphy on stone; also tie,
tie
Y. thirj L. thiajrj E.
hall
Y. [thirj] L. thiajrj E.
shaft of an awl; small table
Y. thing L. thiajrj E.
small island; low land beside a river
Y. thirj L. thiajrj E. fejrj
listen. See also ting
Y. thirj' L. tfiiajrj E. dejrj
pavilion; settle, regulate; well balanced
Y. thirj' L. tfiiajrj E. dejrj
stop, cease, halt
Y. thirj' L. tfiiajrj E. dejrj
courtyard; court
E.
E.
E.
E.
E.
E. thep

Lexicon 309
54:4
85:9
118:7
140:7
140:9
142:7
173:7
9:7
96:7
102:2
130:7
181:7
64:7
75:7
102:2
137:7
128:16
61:6
140:11
162:7
M09571
K835d
M17763
M26078
K835k
M31060
K8351
M31459
M33121
K835n
M42299
K835m
M00650
M21001
K835p
M21735A
K833g
M29518
K835q
M43504
M12106
K835i
M14827
K835J
M21735B
K833g
M30440
M29211B
K835d'
M10594A
K1176k
M31715
M38892
K1185r
E. dejrj
E. dejrj
E. thejrj'
E. thejrj'
E. thejrj'
Y. thirj' L. tfiiajrj
court, seat of government
Y. [thirj'] L. tfiiajrj
standing pool
Y. [thirj'] L. tfiiajrj E. dejrj
bamboo rods used for divination
Y. [thirj'l L. tfiiajrj E. dejrj
stalk, stem
Y. [tin'l L. tfiiajrj E. dejrj
tingli Draba nemorosa
Y. [thirj'l L. tfiiajrj E. dejrj
qlngtfng dragonfly; y&nting
gecko
Y. thirj' L. tfiiajrj E. dejrj
clap of thunder. Also E. dejrj'
Y. [thirj] L. thiajrj'
long and straight
Y. [thirj] L. thiajrj'
jade tablet
Y. thirjv T,. thiajrj'
tTngtuan trampled (field) See also
ting below
Y. [thirf] L. thiajrj'
slice of dried meat
Y. [thirjv] L. thiajrj'
upright, straight
Y. thirf [sic] L. tfiiajrj"
stick out, project; pull out
Y. [thirf] L. tfiiajrj"
stick, stalk, staff
Y. thirj" L. tfiiajrj"
path between fields; field boundary.
See also ting above
Y. thirf L. tfiiajrj' E.
small boat, skiff
Y. thirp L. thiajrj" E.
to heed, obey; hear a court case, judge.
See also ting
Y. [thurj] L. thswrj E.
pained, hurt. See also dong
Y. thurj T,. thawrj E.
tongc&o stem pith of the ric-s
paper plant, Tetrapanax papyriferus
Y. thurj L. thawrj E.
to go through, penetrate; open, through;
communicate; throughout, in general
E.
E.
E. dejrj'
E. dejrj'
E. dejrj'
ting
ting
ting
ting
ting
ting
ting
ting
ting
ting
ting
ting
ting
ting
ting
tTng
ting
tong
tong
tOng

310 Lexicon
9:12
9:3
9:6
30:3
46:6
75:6
85:12
109:12
117:7
118:6
118:7
122:12
9:5
167:6
195:6
59:4
155:6
164:6
118:6
118:7
75:7
120:6
M01132
K1188r
M00378
M00601A
K1176J
M03294
K1176a
M08038A
M14770
K1176e
M18302
M23707
K1188s
M25775
K1188o
M26004a
K1176g
M26062a
K11851
M28377A
K1188c'
M00522
M40361
K1176d
M46121A
M09972
KlOOSe
M37003
K1009e
M39853
M26004b
K1176g
M260625
K11851
M14811
K1185p
M27447
KlOllb
Y. thurj' L. tfiawrj E. dawrj
boy
same as
Y. thurj' L. tfiawrj E. dawrj
immature, cf. . See also dong
Y. thurj' L. tfiswrj E. dawrj
same; together, in common
Y. thurj' L. tfiawrj E. down.
kSngtong name of a mountain in
Gansu. See also dong.
Y. thun' L. tfiawrj E. down.
various trees including Paulownia,
phoenix tree and tung-oil tree
Y. thurj' L. tfiswrj E. dswrj
tongtong high
Y. thurj' L. tftewrj E. dawrj
pupil of the eye
Y. thurj' L. tfiawrj E. dawrj
boy, youth; servant
Y. thurj' L. tfiawrj E. dawrj
hollow tube; also t6ng
Y. [thun'J L. tfiawrj E. dawrj
hollow tube; also t6ng
Y. [thurj'] L. tfiswrj E. dawrj
bird net. See also chSng
Y. [thurj'] L. tfiawrj E. dawrj
a surname
Y. thurj' L. tfiawrj E. dawrj
copper
Y. [thurj'] L. tfiawrj E. dswrj
kind of fish. See also zhou.
Y. [thurj'] L. tfiswrj E. dawrj
red
Y. [thuq] L. trbwrj E. dawq
red
Y. [thurj'] L. tfiawrj E. dswrj
yogurt made of mare's milk
Y. thurj' L. tfiswrj E. dswrj
hollow tube; also tong
Y. [thurj'] L. tfiawrj E. dawrj
hollow tube; also tong
Y. thurjv L. th3wrj' E. thswr)'
tub, pail, bucket; measure of capacity
Y. thungv L. th9wrf E. thawrjh
leading thread; continuous succession;
bring together, unite; comprehensive
tong
t6ng
tong
tong
tong
tong
tong
tong
tong
tong
tong
tong
tong
tong
tong
tong
tong
tong
tong
tong
t6ng
tong

Lexicon 311
104:7
61:11
9:9
38:9
167:9
64:4
181:7
201:5
162:7
115:2
17:3
116:4
31:11
32:10
44:9
60:7
85:7
104:9
115:7
140:7
M22195
K1185q
Ml 1103
K1188n
M00901
K125u
M06469
K125v
M40645
Ml 1887
K130c
M43490
K118e
M47937
K129i
M38876
M24910
K1205a
M01809Ba
M25439
K489a
M04832
K64a
M05338
K82d'
M07761
K45i'
M10121
K62e
M17518
K82u
M22330
K45j'
M25082
K82b'
M31008B
K82x
Y. thurf L. th3wrjv E. thQwrjh
sore, painful
Y. thunv [sic] L. tfiawn^ E. d3wrjh
sorely grieved
Y. thaw L. thaw E. thaw
steal; by stealth, stealthily
Y. t^w L. thaw E. thsw
cunning
Y. t^w L. thaw E. thaw
brass
Y. t^W L. tfisw E. daw
throw
Y. thaw' L. tfisw E. daw
head
Y. [t^w^] L. thaw' E. thaw'
yellowish
Y. thswx L. thawv E. thawh
pass through; penetrate
Y. thu L. thawk E. thswk
bald
Y. [tu'] L. tfiut E. dwat
protruding, convex; also tu. See also
di6
Y. tu' L. tfiut E. dw9t
to emerge suddenly; spring out. The
modern reading may be for E. thwst ,
written in the Guangyun with radical 40
instead of 1 16 but given in the Jiyun as a
reading for this character.
Y. tV L. tfiuS E. do
diagram, map, plan, illustration; to plan
Y. tV L. tfiuS E. do
mud; daub, smear; road
Y. tV L. tfius E. do
butcher, slaughter
Y. tV L. tfiuS E. do
go on foot; foot soldier; conscript;
colleague, disciple; only; vainly
Y. [tV] I tfiuS E. do
path, same as
Y. tV L. tfius E. do
fatigue
Y. [tV] Y. tfiua E. do
glutinous rice. Also E. t^b, t^)'
Y. [tV] L. tfiuS E. do
bitter herb, bitter. See also cha
tong
tong
tou
tou
tou
tou
tou
t6u
tou
tu
tu
tu
tu
tu
tu
tu
tu
tu
tu
tu

312 Lexicon
140:8
162:7
187:7
17:3
130:9
30:3
32:0
10:6
30:3
140:8
85:9
18:11
31:13
61:11
64:11
85:11
102:9
58:6
145:9
64:8
M31189B
K63c
M38882
K82v
M44772
M01809Bb
M29704
K465g
M03300A
K62d
M04876
K62a
M01368
K63a
M03300B
K62d
M31189A
K63c
M17825
K168i
M02148
K231c
M04834
K231n
M11137
K231o
M12642
K231p
M18136
K231q
M21907
K1248a
M09920
K171a
M34443
K171b
M12284
K575a'
Y. tV L. tfius E. do
tuqiu '. ancient place name. See also
tu
Y. tV L. tfiuS E. do
path, roadway
Y. thi L. tfiuS E. do
tdotu
Y. Ltu'J L. tfiut E. dwgt
protruding, convex; also tu. See
alsodi6
Y. [tu'] L. tfiut E. dwat
fat
Y. tV L. thu§- E. tV
spit. See also tu
Y.tV L. thu§' E. tV
earth
Y. tV L. thu§N E. foh
hare, rabbit
Y. tV L. te E. foh
vomit. See also tu
Y. [tVl L. thu^ E. t*b
tusT Chinese dodder, Cuscuta
chinensis; used for . See also tu
Y. t^n L. thuan E. thwan
rushing water
Y. [tSn'] L. tfiuan E. dwan
cut fine; also E. tcwian'
Y. t'bn' L. tfiuan E. dwan
round, circular; roll into a ball; combine;
group; regiment
Y. t*bn' L. tfiuan E. dwan
troubled, grieved
Y. t'bn' L. tfiuan E. dwan
roll up in a ball, round
Y. t'bn' L. tfiuan E. dwan
heavy dew
Y. [t^n"] L. thuan' E. thwan'
tTngtuSn trampled ground
Y. tW L. thuanv E. thwanh
definitions of hexagrams in the Yijing
Y. [t^n^ L. thuanv E. thwanh
decorated hem on a garment
Y. tshuj L. thuaj E. thwaj
push; extend; infer, deduce. Also E.
tphwi, which accounts for the Y reading.
tu
tu
tu
tu
tu
tu
tu
tu
tu
tu
tuan
tuan
tua'n
tuan
tuan
tuan
tu&n
tuan
tuan
tuT

Lexicon 313
140:11
170:12
115:14
181:7
130:10
142:7
162:6
187:7
30:4
31:4
45:1
61:4
130:13
140:4
152:4
159:4
184:4
145:10
9:3
9:5
40:2
64:5
M31737
K57511
M41849
K544a
M25343
K544b
M43517
K544c,12C
M29747
M33078A
K324e
M38839
K512a
M44774
K324d
M03329
K361d
M04704A
M07828A
K427a
M10388
K427d
M29939
K429c
M30695
K427f
M36352
K428a
M38198
K427g
M44047
M34503
M00370a
K4c'
M00513b
K4h
M07057
K4a
M11961
K4f
E. dwoj
E. dwsj
E. dwsj
E. thwajh
E. thwajh
Y. [thuj] L. thuaj E. thwaj
motherwort, Leonurus heterophyllus.
Also E. tphwi.
Y. [thuj'] L. tfiuaj
collapse, give way
Y. thuj' L. tfiuaj
bald; collapse, give way
Y. thuj' L- tfiuaj
K544c,l205b bald; violent wind; collapse, give away
Y. thujv L. thuaj' E. thw9j'
leg
Y. thujs L. thuajN E. thwajh
shed the skin or shell (snakes, insects).
Also E. thwah. See also shui
Y. thur L. thuajs
retreat, withdraw
Y. [thuf] L. thuajv
flee
Y. than L. than
swallow, gulp
Y. [thun'] L. tfiun
store up, accumulate. See also dun
Y. thun' L. tfiun E. dwsn
station troops; garrison. See also zhun.
Y. [thun'] L. tfiun E. dwsn
sorrowful, anxious
Y. thun' L. tfiun E. dwsn
rump, buttocks
Y. [thun'] L. tfiun E. dwsn
first sprouts of plants
Y. thun' L. tfiun E. dwan
young pig
Y. [thun'] L. tfiun E. dwan
kind of war chariot
Y. thun' L. tfiun E. dwan
huntun fe, wonton, dumpling soup
Y. thunv L. thunv E. thw3nh
slip out of (clothing)
Y. to L. tha E. tha
other (reading pronunciation); also ta.
E.
E. dwan
same as alsota.
Y. [t^] L. tha
another; other
Y. to L. tha
drag
E. tha
E. tha
tUT
tUl
tUl
tUl
tuT
tui
tui
tui
tun
tun
tun
tun
tun
tun
tun
tun
tun
tun
tuo
tuo
tuo
tuo

314 Lexicon
tuo
tuo
tuo
tuo
tuo
tu6
tuo
tuo
tuo
tuo
tuo
tuo
tu6
tu6
tuo
tuo
tuo
tuo
tuo
130:7
149:3
85:5
120:5
157:5
164:5
170:5
187:3
187:12
M29539
K324e
M35243
K780e
M17243
K4k
M27367
K4j
M37452
M39822
M41600
M44589A
187:5 M44681
M45002
K147d'
205:12
75:12
38:4
75:12
30:8
64:5
75:5
118:16
140:16
M48306
K147e'
M15533
K795p
M06107
K354a
M15565
Kile
M03785
K31m
M11958A
K795m
M14633
K792f
M26742
M32408
K790r
Y. tV L. thuat E. thwat
peel off, take off; shed, cast off; escape.
Also E. dwat. The two E. readings were
probably thwat (trans.), dwat (intrans.)
Y. thawv L. thak E. thak
entrust; rely on; encharge with; entrust
oneself to
Y. tV L.tfia E.da
flow; name of a river
Y. tV L.tfia E.da
bundle of threads
Y.tV L.tfia E.da
cuotuo lose one's footing
Y. tV L. tfia E.da
flushed with drink
Y. tV L. tfia E. da
hill; in Buddhist transcriptions for da, dha
Y. tV L. tfia E.da
carry on the back (as a pack animal).
See also duo
Y. tV L.tfia E.da
luotuo camel. Abbreviated to tuo in
tuonicio ostrich, tuobei
hump-backed
Y. [tV] L. tfia E. da
blue-black horse with white spots; tuoxT
a small wild equine domesticated
by the Xiongnu. Also E. dan, ten.
Y.tV L.tfia E.da
Alligator sinensis
Y. thawv L. thak E. thak
sack; bellows
Y. tV L. thua' E. thwa'
firm, settled, appropriate, proper
Y. [tV] L. thua' E. thwa'
ellipse, oval
Y. rV L. thuav E. thwah
spittle
Y. thawv L. thak E. thak
open up, develop. See also zhi
Y. thawv L. thak E. thak
night watchman's rattle
Y. [thawv] L. thak E. thak
sheaths of bamboo shoots
Y. [tW] L. thak E. thak
bark or leaves fallen from plants

Lexicon 315
tuo194:5 M45810B Y. thaw" L. thak E. thak
K782o luotuo out of work; in dire straits;
casual, unconventional. See also po

316 Lexicon
85:3
85:6
116:5
116:9
142:6
195:6
38:9
98:0
98:0
145:15
30:10
30:9
77:5
117:13
36:2
18:8
142:8
151:8
57:19
154:4
85:22
M17132C
K97b
M17425
K879k
M25467
M25580
K879b'
M32997
K879z
M46132C
K879g
M06533
K18d
M21438A
K20a
M21438B
K20a
M34696
M04107
M03925
K18a
M16286
M26828
M05750
K322a
M02044
M33210
M36273
M09904
M36681B
K159a
M18823
Y. [wa] L. ?wa: E. ?wai/?we:
hollow out; low-lying. See also wu, wii
Y. wa L. ?wa: E. ?wai/7we:
concave, puddle
Y. [wa] L. ?wa: E. ?wai/?we:
dig out, excavate; cavity, depression
Y. wa L. ?wai E. ?wai/?we:
hollow, concave
Y. wa L. ?wa: E. ?wai/?w£i
frog. Also E. ?waij/7we:j
Y. [wa] L. ?wa:j E. ?waij/?we:j
walong name of a spirit. See also
guT, xie
Y. wa L. kwa: E. kwai/kwe:
Nyuwa mythological prehistoric
ruler. Also E. kwaij/kweij
Y. wa" L. rjwa:' E. rjwai'/rjwei'
tile. See also wa
Y. wa" L. rjwar E. rjwaih/rjwe:h
to tile a roof. See also w&
Y. veC L. ujyat/uait E. muat
socks, stockings
Y. [IT] L. ?ut E. ?wst
be choked, stifled
Y. [khwaj] L. khwa:j E. khwaii/khwe:j
wry mouth. Same word as kuai
see
Y. waj L. xwaij E. xwaij/xweij
askew, slanting, crooked; now written
Y. wajv
outside
Y.on
L. rjuaj" E. rjwajh
L. ?uan E. ?wan
cut out, gouge out, scoop out
Y.on L. ?uan E. ?wan
winding, writhing; wanyan
wriggle, wind (as a snake)
Y.on L.?uan E. ?wan
pea
Y. wan L. ?wa:n E. ?wain/?wem
bend (as a bow); curved, bent
same as See also guan
Y. wan L. ?wa;n E. ?wain/?wem
bend in a stream; bay
wa
wa
wa
wa
wa
wa
wa
w&
wa
wa
wa
wai
wai
wai
wai
wan
wan
wan
wan
wan
wan

Lexicon 317
18:4
3:2
40:4
120:3
140:3
96:4
181:4
75:8
108:5
112:8
120:8
140:7
38:8
40:5
96:8
102:8
140:8
64:7
72:7
130:7
159:7
167:7
167:8
M01895
K257h
M00094
K163e
M07079
K257m
M27247
K163c
M30663
K163d
M20872a
K257k
M43374
K257g
M15001
K260o
M22979
M24306
M27575
M31063B
K257q
M06396
K260g
M07110A
K260b
M21069
K2601
M21894
K260J
M31135A
K260q
M12111
M13940
K222H
M29495
K2221
M38337
K222J
M40437
Y. on' L. rjuan E. rjwan
round off the corners
Y. on' L. xfiuan E. ywan
ball, pellet
Y. on' L. xfiuan E. ywan
whole, intact; finish, complete
Y. on' L. xfiuan E. ywan
fine silk material
Y. [xon'] L. xfiuan E. ywan
kind of grass, Metaplexis
Y. onv L. rjuan" E. rjwanh
play; trifle with, play with; also wan
Y. wan' L. rjwam E. rjwain/rjwe:n
stupid; stubborn; greedy; naughty
Y. vn L. ?uan' E. ?wan'
bowl, now written
Y. [onv] L. ?uan' E. ?wan'
bowl, same as
Y. onv L. ?uan' E. ?wan'
coil up, wind together
Y.[xwanvl L. xfiwa:nv E. Ywain'/Ywem'
wan'Sr smiling. See also guan
Y. [uen"] L. ?yan' E. ?uan'
graceful, gentle
Y. qen^ L. ?yan' E. ?uan'
pliant, supple; small; as if. See also yuan
Y. [uen'] L. ?yan' E. ?uan'
jade tablet with curved top
Y. qen" L. ?yan' E. ?uan'
unit of land area, 20 mu or 30 mu
Y. [Den"] L. ?yan'* ?uan'
luxuriant growth; zlwan aster. See
also yu
Y. uan" L. ujy an '/ua:n'
draw, pull; roll up
Y. Dan" L. ujyan'/uam'
evening; late
Y. [uan"] L. ujyan'/uam'
lustrous rich colour
Y. [uan"] L. ujyanYuam'
draw, pull
Y. [uan ] L. ujyam'/uaim' E. muam'
head ornament for a horse
Y. [uan"] L. ujyam'/ua:m' E. muam'
head ornament for a horse. This graph is
E. muan'
E. muan'
E. muan'
E. muan'
w£n
wan
wan
wan
wan
wan
wan
wan
wan
wan
wan
wan
wan
wan
wan
wSn
wan
wan
wan
w&n
wan
wan
wan

318 Lexicon
wan (continued) found in Guangyun and Jiyun but is
used instead in the Kangxi zidian and is
the only form included in the Morohashi
dictionary, hence the lack of an M
number
61:8
64:8
130:8
61:4
96:4
124:9
159:7
140:13
1:2
M10771
M12181
K260m
M29631
K260n
M10365
K257J
M208725
K257k
M28766
K2571
M38334
K257p
M32102
M00010A
Y. ons L. ?uanv
alarmed
Y. [onv] L. ?uanv
wrist
Y.on\ wanv L. ?uanv
wrist
Y. [onx] L. rjuanv
E. ?wanh
E. ?wanh
E. ?wanh
E. rjwanh
covetous, greedy, avid. Also E. rjuan
Y. on" L. rjuanv
plaything; to play; also wan
Y. onv L. rjuanv
be familiar with, trifle with;
Y. [onx] L. rjuanv
round. Also E. rjwan'
E. rjwanh
E. rjwanh
play with
E. rjwanh
Y. [wan"] L. rjwa:nv E. rjwainh/rjwe:nh
kind of reed-like plant
Y. uanv L. ujyanYuauT E. muanh
ten thousand, same as , See also mo
73:7
140:9
140:11
M14298b
K266a
M31339
K267a
M31784Aa
Y. uans L. ujyanN/uaaT
drawn out, long
Y. uan" L. ujyanx/ua:nv
ten thousand
Y. uanx L. ujyanv/uamv
E. muanh
E. muanh
E. muanh
creeper, vine. See also man
43:4
85:4
96:0
8:1
61:3
75:4
60:5
61:8
M07557
K739t
M17154
K739r
M20823A
K739a
M00287
K742a
M10333b
K742i
M14530
K739q
M 10073
K739k
M10809
K742b'
Y. warj L. ?uarj
feeble, lame, crippled
Y. warj L. ?uarj
puddle, pool; vast
Y. warj' L. yarj
king. See also wang
Y. uarj' L. ujyarybarj
E. ?waq
E.?waq
E. wuarj
E. muarj
not present; be lost; disappear; die; lose
Y. uarjv L. ujyarj^arj"
forget; also wang
Y. warj" L. ?yarj'
bent, crooked; depraved
Y. warf L. yarj'
go
Y. [uarjv] L.i)jyarjVuarj'
dejected
E. muarjh
E. ?uarj'
E. wuarj'
E. muarj'
wan
wan
wan
wan
wan
wan
wan
wan
wan
wan
wan
wan
wang
wang
wang
wang
wang
wang
wang
w&ng

Lexicon 319
120:8
122:0
122:3
159:8
194:8
72:4
96:0
162:4
38:3
61:3
74:7
9:8
38:5
140:8
162:8
38:6
140:9
9:9
86:9
170:9
M27577
K742a'
M28199
K744a
M28211
K7421
M38373
M45869
M13774
M20823B
K739a
M38737
K7391
M06063
K742g
M10333a
K742i
M14368
K742m
M00796A
K357b
M06181B
K357a
M31269
K357d
M38949
K357e
M06259
K574a
M31456
M00843
K573e
M19228
K573f
M41748
K573h
Y. uarj L. ujyarjVuarj' E. muarj'
net
Y. [uarf] L. ujyarjVuarj' E. muarj'
net
Y.uarf L.ujyarj'/uarj' E. muarj'
net; catch, snare with a net; not have
Y.uarf L. ujyan'/uarj' E. muaq'
felloe of a wheel
Y. [uarf] T, ujyarjVuarj' E. muarj'
wangling evil spirit, demon
Y. warf L. yarf E. wuarjh
bright, shining
Y. warjv L. yarf E. wuarjh
be king, rule. See also wang
Y. [warf] L. yarf E. wuarjh
go, cf. w^ng '^ Also used for
kuang, kuang . r deceive.
Y. uarf L. ujyarj^arj" E. muarjh
wild, reckless, extravagant, foolish
Y. uarf L. ujyarj^arjv E. muarjh
forget; also wang
Y. uarf L. ujyarj^arj" E. muarjh
full moon; look at from afar; expect, hope
Y. [uj] L. ?yj E. ?wi§/?wi
long and winding (road). See also wo
Y. [ujl L. ?yj E. ?wia/7wi
weiyi winding, roundabout;
leisurely and contented. See also w&i
Y. [uj] L.?yj E.?wi9/?wi
decline, wither
Y. [uj] L. ?yj E. ?wiS/?wi
weiyi winding, roundabout, same
as weiyi i ; weisui long and
winding
Y. uj L. ?yj E. ?uj
overawe; majesty, power
Y.[uj] L.?yj E.?uj
weirui Polygonatum odoratum
Y. uj L. ?uaj E. ?W9J
snuggle up to, cuddle
Y. uj L. ?uaj E. ?waj
glowing coals; cook over a slow fire
Y. uj L. ?uaj E. ?W3J
bend, corner
w&ng
wSng
wling
wSng
wing
wang
wang
wang
wang
wang
wang
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei

320 Lexicon
60:10
26:4
26:4
50:8
87:8
31:9
162:9
50:9
169:9
178:0
46:18
46:10
75:6
195:6
30:8
61:8
120:8
60:10
140:13
M10203b
K584d
M02849b
K29a
M02849a
K29a
M08954
K575m
M19686A
K27a
M04806
K571g
M39013
K571d
M08993
K571H
M41425
K571o
M43108
K571a
M08626
K569s
M08355
K569J
M14759
M46112
M03761A
K575i
M10820
K575n
M27568
K575o
M10203a
K584d
M32092
K584f
Y. ui' L. ujyj/uji E. muj
small, minute; secret; were it not for; also
wei
Y. uj' L. rjyj E. rjwia/rjwi
high, precipitous; danger; also we"i.
Y. uj' L. rjyj E. rjwis/rjwi
high, precipitous; danger; also wei
Y.[uj'] L.yj E. wi
curtain, tent
Y. uj' L. yj E. wis/wi
do, make; act as, constitute, become, be.
See also wei.
Y. uj' L. yj E. wuj
surround, enclose. Also E. wujh wind
around.
Y. uj' L. yj E. wuj
turn away from, deviate; go against,
disobey
Y. uj' L.yj E. wuj
bag for carrying cosmetics and toiletries
Y. uj' L.yj E. wuj
small interior palace gate
Y. uj' L. yj E. wuj
softened hides, leather; a surname
Y.uj' L.rjyj E. rjuj
lofty; eminent
Y. uj' L. rjuaj E. rjwsj
lofty, towering
Y.uj' L. rjuaj E. rjwsj
mast
Y. [uj'] L. rjuaj E. rjwaj
Leiocassis dumerili
Y. [ui'] L. jyj E. jwi
preclassical copula; only. See also w6i.
Y.ui' L.jyj E.jwi
think; preclassical copula; only
Y.ui' L.jyj E.jwi
tie, bind; guide rope of a net; guiding
principle; preclassical copula; only; same
as and
Y. ui' L. ujyj/uji E. muj
small, minute; secret; were it not for; also
wei.
Y.ui' L.ujyj/uji E. muj
name for various plants; see qiangwei
wei
wei
wei
wei
W&
wei
wei
w£i
wei
wei
wei
wei
w6i
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei

Lexicon 321
38:5 M06181A
K357a
104:8 M22290
K357c
188:3 M45106
K163e
104:6 M22154
K995x
195:6 M46126
K995y
140:12 M31895
140:14 M32195
Y.uf L.?yj'
bend; cast away, abandon;
entrust. See also wei
Y.[ujv] L.?yj'
paralysis
Y.[ujv] L.?yj'
bent
Y.[ujv] L.yj'
wound
Y. [uf ] L. yj'
sturgeon
Y.[uf] L.yj'
place name; a surname
Y.[uf] L.yj'
E. ?wi3'/?wi'
hand over,
E. ?wi9'/?wi'
E. TwiSVTwi'
E. wi'
E. wi'
E. wis'/wi'
E. wi5'/wi'
milkwort, Polygala; a surname
169:12 M41481
K27f
9:9 M00837
K571f
86:9 M19189
K571J
96:9 M21107
K571k
140:9 M31437
K571n
178:9 M43176
K571p
178:12 M43209
K571q
30:8 M03761B
K575i
94:9 M20519
K573g
170:10 M41788
Y.[uf] L.yj'
to open. Also E. khwaij
Y.uf L.yj'
big, great
Y. [ujv] L. yj'
glowing, bright
Y.[uf] L.yj'
rare, precious
Y. ujv L. yj'
reed
Y.[uf] L.yj'
correct, right
Y. [ujv] L. yj'
flowering, flourishing
Y. uf L.jyj'
yes. See also wei
Y. uf L.?uaj'
E. wia'/wi'
E. wuj'
E. wuj'
E. wuj'
E. wuj'
E. wuj'
E. wuj'
E. jwi'
E. ?W9J'
numerous, multifarious; vulgar, obscene
Y. uj~ L. rjuaj' E. rjwsj'
high; an ancient state; a surname
8:20 M00342A
K585a
44:4 M07650
K583a
149:8 M35636
K354f,357i
120:9 M27682
K571m
9:12 MOllOSb
K27k
Y. i)i L. uji' E. muj'
weiwei vigorous, untiring. See
also men
Y. uf L.ujyj'/uji'
tail; to copulate
Y. [nujx] L. nryjs E.
shift the responsibility to
Y. ujv L. yj"
woof, weft
Y.[utt L.rjyj^ E.
counterfeit, false; also wei.
E. muj'
nrwi§h/nrwih
E. wujh
rjwi3h/rjwih
wfei
w6i
wei
w6i
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei

322 Lexicon
184:8
41:8
61:11
102:4
122:11
140:11
145:11
9:5
87:8
85:9
130:5
142:9
149:9
162:12
9:12
194:8
115:13
144:10
149:16
30:5
75:1
85:10
M44236B
K357f
M07440B
K525a,b
Ml 1135
K525d
M21778
K573a
M28351
K525e
M31805A
K525f
M34538
K525g
M00503
K539a
M19686B
K27a
M17781
M29348
K523a
M33287
M35759
K523d
M39134B
K540m
M01105a
K27k
M45872
K569k
M253315
K3461
M34074
K342a
M36126
K342f
M03456
K531g
M14419
K531a
M17968
K426c
Y. ujv L. ?yjv E. ?wi3h/?wih
feed. See also nSi
Y. ujv L. ?yf E. ?ujh
dominate; a military official. See also yu
Y.tf L.?yj^ E.?ujh
comfort, console
Y.uT L.?yjx E.?ujh
fear
Y.[un L.?yf E.?ujh
small net
Y. [uf] L. ?yjx E. ?ujh
kind of artemisia; luxuriant; colourful.
See also yu
Y.fujl L.?yjx
lay on
Y. uf L. y?
position; rank; throne
Y. [ujl L. yf
for, on behalf of. See also wei.
Y. ujx L. yjv
river name
Y. ujs L. yjv
stomach
Y. ujv L. yjx
hedgehog
Y. ujv L. yjv
speak to, say; call; mean
Y.[ujM L.jyjx
present as a gift. See also yi
Y. [ujv] L. rjyjx E. rjwiah/r)wih
counterfeit, false. Now usually read wSi
Y. ujx L. qyjx E. rjujh
exalted, majestic; ancient state
Y. uf L. ?yajx E. ?wiajh
dirt, filth; also hui
Y. ujv L. yajv E. wiajh
guard, protect; a surname
Y. [ujx] L. yajv E. wiajh
exaggerate, give unjustified praise
Y. uiN L. uji" E. mujh
taste
Y. uiv L. ujyj'/uji" E. mujh
eighth Earthly Branch; not yet
Y. un L. ?un E. ?wsn
warm
E. ?ujh
E. wih
E. wiah/wih
E. wujh
E. wujh
E. wujh
E. wujh
E. jwih
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
wei
w6n

Lexicon 323
104:10
120:10
140:13
159:10
67:0
120:4
128:8
142:4
169:9
169:9
115:14
18:4
64:4
30:4
10:5
30:8
64:4
85:4
96:14
120:4
120:7
M22396
M27757C.
K426f
M32071A
K426h
M38473
K426d
M13450
K475a
M27262
M29104A.
K441f
M32849
K475k
M41385
M41415
M25344
M01879
K503n
M11868A
K475H
M03375
K503o
M01358B
K222a
M03814
K441g
M11868B
K475H
M17168
K4751
M21305
M27261
K475J
M27472
K222k
Y. un L. ?un E. ?wan
infection, epidemic
Y. [un] L. ?un E. ?wan
yellowish-red, brown. See also yun,
yun
Y. un L. ?un E. ?wan
water plant. See also yun
Y. [un] L. ?un E. ?wan
wenliang closed carriage in
which one could lie down
Y. uun' L. ujyn/uun E. mun
mark, lines; ornament; writing; literature;
civil (as opposed to military)
Y. uun' L. ujyn/uun E. mun
pattern, lines, veins
Y. uun' L. ujyn/uun E. mun
hear. See also wen
Y. uun' L. ujyn/uun E. mun
mosquito
Y. [uun'] L. ujyn/uun E. mun
place name, see next entry
Y. [uun'] L. ujyn/uun E. mun
place name; now written
Y. un" L. ?un' E. ?wan'
stable, firm; sure, certain
Y. uun" L. ujyn'/uun' E. mun'
cut one's throat
Y. [uun"] L. ujynVuun" E. mun'
wipe off. See also wen
Y. uun" L. ujyn'/uun' E. mun'
lips; kiss
Y. [uunv] L. ujynv/uunv E. munh
mourning headdress. See also mian
Y. uuns L. ujynVuun" E. munh
ask
Y. [uuns] L. ujynv/uunv E. munh
wipe off. See also w£n
Y. [uunv] L. ujyns/uunh E, munh
name of a river
Y. [uunv] L. ujynv/uunv E, munh
crack in glass or pottery
Y. uun" L. ujynv/uunv E. munh
disorderly, confused
Y. [uunv] L. ujynN/uuns E. munh
mourning headdress, same as B
wen
wen
wen
wen
wen
wen
wen
wen
wen
w6n
w&n
w6n
w6n
w£n
wen
wen
wen
wen
wen
wen
wen

324 Lexicon
128:8
124:4
140:10
98:13
121:13
9:8
85:9
116:9
157:8
142:9
62:3
131:2
68:10
85:4
50:9
64:9 -
85:9
130:9
30:10
61:8
70:4
75:3
M29104B.
K441f
M28635
M31650
M21617
K1184p
M28180
K1184o
M00796B
K357b
M17771A
M25579
M37612
K357g
M33338a
K18c
Ml 1545
K2a
M30071
K9a
M13522
K1401
M17l84a
K11411
M08994
K1204e
M12366
K1204f
M17770
K1204g
M29660
K1204h
M04084
K61d
M10824C
K805H
M13628B
K61e
M14450
K97a'
Y. [uunv] L. ujynv/uunv E. munh
to be heard, reported; fame, see also wen
Y. urj L. ?9wrj E. ?awrj
father, old man
Y. [wf] L. ?3wrj' E. ?swrj'
wfcngyu full, thick
Y. ur/ L. ?9wrp E. ?3wrjh
jug, jar
Y. urf L. ?9wrjv E. ?9wrjh
jug, jar
Y. wo L. ?ua E. ?wa
old name for Japan. See also wei
Y. WD L. ?ua E. ?wa
whirlpool, eddy. See also guO
Y. wo L. ?ua E. ?wa
nest
Y. wo L. ?ua E. ?wa
sprain
Y. wa L. kwai E. kwai/kwei
snail. AlsoE. kwaij
Y. wo" L. rja' E. rja'
I, me, we, us
Y. wov L. rjuav E. rjwah
lie down, lie; go to bed
Y. [wo^] L. ?uat E. ?wat
revolve; intercede, mediate
Y. uv L. ?awk E. ?awk
water, irrigate; fertile; also wu
Y. [wawN ?] L. ?wa:wk E. ?aiwk/?oe:wk
tent
Y. [wawv ?] L. ?wa:wk E. ?aiwk/?ce:wk
grasp, hold
Y. [waws ?] L. ?wa:wk E. ?aiwk/?oeiwk
moisten
Y. [waws ?] L. ?waiwk E. ?aiwk/?oeiwk
fat, grease
Y. u L. ?u§ E. ?o
ah! (interjection)
Y. [u] L. ?u5 E. ?o
how? where? See also e, wu
Y. [u] L. ?u§ E. ?D
ah! (interjection). See also yu.
Y. [u] L. ?ua E. ?o
plasterer's trowel; to plaster
wen
weng
wSng
weng
weng
wo
wo
wo
wo
wo
w6
wo
wo
wo
wo
wo
wo
wo
wu
wu
wu
wu

Lexicon 325
85:3
85:6
86:6
163:10
44:6
48:4
149:7
30:4
30:4
75:7
142:7
167:7
208:7
48:4
71:0
80:0
86:8
140:12
149:7
7:2
9:4
9:4
M17132A
K97b'
M17429
K43k
M18998
K61a
M39570
M07684
K1204a
M08728b
K105a
M35542b
K105b
M03365
K59a
M03379
K58f
M14872
K58m
M33099
M40465B
K58v
M48441
M08728a
K105a
M13716
K106a
M16721
K107a
M19113
K103a
M32004
K1031
M35542a
K105b
M00257
K58a
M00409
K60f
M00435
K58e
Y. u L. ?u§ E. ?o
stagnant water; dirt, filth; defile, corrupt.
See also wii, wa.
Y. u L. ?us E. ?o
stagnant water; pool; dirty; deep
Y. u L. ?u3 E. ?o
crow; black
Y. uv L. ?uS E. ?o
place name. Also E. ?o'
Y. uv L. ?3wk E. ?awk
house, room
Y. uu' L. ujys/uua E. mus
shaman; also wu.
Y. uu' L. ujy5/uu3 E. mua
accuse falsely; also wu
Y. u' L. rju3 E. rp
an ancient state
Y. u' L. qua E. rp
I, my
Y. u'T,. qua E. rp
wutong Chinese parasol tree
Y. u'T.quS E.rp
wugong centipede
Y. u' L. qua E. rp
see kunwu , See also yu
Y. u' L. rjua E. rp
flying squirrel, Petaurista
Y. uu' L. ujys/uua E. mu5
shaman, also wu
Y. [uu'] L. ujy9/uu3 E. mu§
not have, same as
Y. [uu'l L. ujy§/uu5 E. mua
don't, negative imperative or subjunctive;
later interchangeable with
Y. uu' L. ujys/uua E. mua
not have, there is no
Y. uu' L. ujy5/uu3 E. mua
overgrown with weeds; grassland
Y. uu' L. ujyQ/uuS E. mu5
accuse falsely; also wu
Y. u" L. qua' E. rp'
five
Y. u" L.rjuS' E.rp'
equal
Y. u L. qua' E. rp'
group of five
wu
wu
wu
wu
wu
wu
wu
wu
wu
wu
wu
wu
wu
wu
wu
wu
wu
wii
wu
wu
wu
wu

326 Lexicon
24:2
61:4
9:7
53:12
61:12
77:4
130:12
136:8
196:7
32:10
61:8
85:3
40:11
61:7
61:7
72:7
140:16
149:7
162:4
85:4
10:1
75:3
M02703
K60a
M10358
K60g
M00630
K138a
M09491
K1031
M11259A
K103J
M16273
K104a
M29895B
K103o
M30342
K103g
M46963
K104f
M05357
M10824B
K805H
M17132B
K97b
M07291
K58n
M10679
K59e
M10680
K58j
M13956
M32409
K768d
M35546
K59d
M38759
K60h
M17184b
K11411
M01337
K487a
M14457
K487c
Y. u L. rjuS' E. rp'
seventh Earthly Branch; noon
Y. if [sic] L. rju3N E. rph
refractory, opposed
Y. uu" L. ujyS'/uua' E. mus'
insult
Y. uu" L. ujyS'AmS' E. muS'
porch, veranda
Y. [uu"] L. ujyS'/uuS' E. mus'
startled. See also hu
Y. uu" L. ujya'/uuS E. mus'
martial, military
Y. [uu"l L.ujy5'/uu5' E. mu3'
wu wu rich, fertile. Also E. mu3.
See also hu
Y. uu L. ujy§'/uu§' E. mua'
dance
Y. uu" L. ujys'/uua' E. mus'
ylngwu parrot
Y. uv L.?uS' E.?o'
low wall, stockade; fortified manor
Y. u^ L. ?u^ E. ?oh
hate. See also e, wu
Y. u^ L. ?u5s E. ?oh
wash, cleanse. See also wu, wa
Y. uv L. rjuax E. rph
wake up
Y. us L. rju3v E. rph
error, mistake; deceive
Y. uv L. rju5v E. rph
awake; understand
Y. [ul L. rju^ E. rph
meet face to face; wake up
Y. [IT] L. rju3v E. rph
oppose, resist
Y. uv L. rju^ E. rph
error, mistake; deceive
Y. [IT] L. rju^ E. rph
go against
Y. uv L. ?awk E. ?awk
water, irrigate; fertile; also wo
Y. u" L. rjut E. rjwst
cut off the feet; high, eminent; treeless
Y. [ux] L. rjut E nwar
tree stump; low bench; wunie
unstable
wu
wu
wu
wu
wu
wu
wu
wu
wu
wu
wu
wu
wu
wii
wu
wu
wu
wu
wu
wu
wu
wu

Lexicon 327
19:9
38:9
173:11
187:9
196:9
20:2
93:4
140:4
62:1
M02394
K1109J
M06461
K1109k
M42418
K1109t
M44845
K11091
M47142B
K1109s
M02501
K503a
M 19959
K503H
M30737A
K503J
M11532a
K1231a
Y. tnT L. ujy3v/uu9v E. mush
work at, apply oneself to; activity,
business
Y. uuvL. ujy3vA>u9v E. muah
wunyu name of a constellation
Y. tnT L. ujysVuua" E. muah
fog
Y. uiT L. ujy9v/uu3v E. muSh
gallop wildly
Y. uuv L. ujys^uS" E. mush
domestic duck. See also mu
Y. wT L. ujyt/uut E. mut
don't, prohibitive particle
Y. inT L. ujyt/uut E. mut
creature; thing
Y. [wT] L. ujyt/uut E. mut
kind of plant
Y. uuv [sic] L. mswv E. maw11
fifth Heavenly Stem; also mou
wu
wu
wu
wu
wu
wu
wu
wu
wu

328 Lexicon
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
9:12
27:9
30:12
38:12
86:9
86:12
86:12
113:12
149:7
149:12
166:11
72:16
93:16
123:11
50:4
72:7
76:7
109:7
115:7
152:7
164:12
M01095
M02983
K979a
M04276
K955e
M06736
K955g
M19192
K960J
M19380
K955k
M19381
K955J
M24828
M35513
K938f
M35938
K955f
M40146B
K9791
M 14253
M20209
K2z
M28554
K2y
M08813
K549a
Ml 3949
K549c
M16087
K549d
M23393
K549g
M25058
M36404
K549f
M40036
K124H
Y. xi L. xi E. xi/xi
pleasure
Y. [xi] L. xi E.xi/xi
split. Karlgren rejects this reading and
adopts a reading E. li from the Jiyun but
compare XT below
Y. xi L. xi E. xi/xi
exclamation of regret, surprise, laughter
Y. [xi] L. xi E. xi/xi
play; ramble
Y. xi L. xi E. xi/xi
bright; prosperous; gay, merry
L. xi E. xi/xi
L. xi
L. xi
Y.xi
shine
Y.xi
same as
Y. [xi]
fortunate, same as XT
Y. [xi] L. xi
expletive, compare. XT
Y. [xi] L. xi
same as
Y. [xi] L. xi
fortunate, same as
Y. xi L. xi
sunlight
Y. xi L. xi
sacrificial animal
Y. xi L. xi
FuxT legendary prehistoric
sovereign
Y. xi L. xi
thin; few, rare; cease; hope
Y. [xi] L. xi
dry; dawning light
Y. [xi] L. xi
sob; sigh; XT xusigh
Y. [xi] L. xi
look for, hope for
Y. xi L. xi
thin, sparse, rare
Y. xi L. xi
pig, swine, especially wild
Y. xi L. xjiaj
vinegar; sour; pickles
E. xi/xi
E. xi/xi
E. xi/xi
laugh
E. xi/xi
E. xi/xi
See also li
E. xia/xi
E. xis/xi
E. xi5/xi
E. xij
E. xij
E. xij
E.xij
E. xij
E. xij
E. XEJ

Lexicon 329
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
150:10
85:10
148:18
157:10
12:2
37:7
187:10
208:10
64:18
142:18
163:18
172:10
30:4
64:12
30:12
75:6
93:8
146:0
75:8
36:0
M36219a
K876q
M17967a
M35198
K880e
M37747a
K8761
M01455
K1241d
M05930
K876d
M44916
M48477a
K876m
M13008a
K880c
M33887a
K880e
M39748
M42125Aa
K880a
M03372
K681J
M12705A
K869f
M04260b
K869e
M14693a
K594f
M20045
K596a
M34763
K594a
M14980b
K5921
M05749a
K796a
E.
&; also ql
E. xjwia/xjwi
Y. [khi] L. khjiaj E.
rivulet, brook; also qi
Y. [khi] L. khjiaj
rivulet, brook, same as
Y. [xuj] L. xjyj
pointed horn for untying knots
Y. xi' L. xfijiaj E. yej
footpath; also xi
Y. xi' L. xfijiaj E. yej
metrical space filler in ancient poetry
Y. xi' L. xfijiaj E. yej
female slave; how? where?
Y. [xi'l L. xfijiaj E. yej
tudxi a kind of domesticated
equine of the Xiongnu
Y. [xi'] L. xfijiaj E. yej
house mouse; also xi
Y. xi' L. xfijyaj E. ywej
lead by the hand; carry, take along;
also xie
Y. [xi' (?)] L. xfijyaj E. ywej
sea turtle, Caretta caretta olivacea; also xi
Y. [xi'] L. xfijyaj E. YweJ
ancient place name in Shandong
Y. [xi'] L. xfijyaj E. ywej
cuckoo; distance equal to the revolution
of a wheel; also guT. See also suT.
Y. xi" L. xip E. xip
inhale
Y. sz [sic] L. siaj E. sej
tfxT take by the hand, lead. See
also ST.
Y. si L. siaj E. sej
neigh. Now read si
Y. [si] L. siaj
perch, roost; rest; also ql.
Y. si L. siaj
rhinoceros
Y. si L. siaj
west
Y. tshi [sic] L. siaj
perch, roost; rest; also qT.
Y. si' L. sfiiajk
evening; also xi.
E. sej
E. sej
E. sej
E. sej
E. ziajk

330 Lexicon
116:3
61:7
86:10
72:4
61:8
130:8
72:8
75:4
85:8
106:8
142:8
145:8
167:8
61:7
130:11
142:11
157:10
208:10
142:18
102:6
75:13
M25413a
K796e
M10601
K925a
M19287
K925b
M13816
K798a
M10814
K798f
M29614
K798g
M13990
K857c
M14538
K857a
M17617
K857e
M22748
K857d
M33157
M34379A
K850m
M40573
K850n
M10635
K1257e
M29837
K401c
M33550
K1257f
M377475
K8761
M48477b
K876m
M338875
K880e
M218425
K879J
M15639
Y. [si'] L. sfiiajk E. ziajk
zhunxT pitch dark; grave, tomb;
alsoxi
Y. sf L. sik E. sik
breath; cease; grow, multiply; children,
descendants; interest (on money)
Y. [siv] L. sik E. sik
extinguish
Y. sf L. siajk E. siajk
formerly
Y. si" L. siajk E. siajk
cherish; pity; regret, begrudge
L. siajk E. siajkY. [si ]
dried meat
Y. sf L. siajk
fair-complexioned
Y. si" L. siajk
split, divide
Y. si" L. siajk
wash rice; name of a river
Y. [sf ] L. siajk
white (complexion)
Y. [si 1 L. siajk
xlyi land of lizard
Y. [si ] L. siajk
bare the upper body. See also ti
Y. sf L. siajk E. sejk
tin
Y. [sf ] L. sit E. sit
in detail, completely, exhaustively; all
E. sejk
E. sejk
E. sejk
E. sejk
E. sejk
E. sejk
Y. [si ] L. sit
knee
Y. [sf ] L. sit
xTshuai, xishu6
sit.
Y. xi' L. xfijiaj
footpath; also XT.
Y. [xi'] L. xfijiaj
house mouse; also XT.
Y.[xi'(?)] L.xfijyaj
E. sit
E. sit
cricket. AlsoE.
E. yej
E. ye]
E. ywej
sea turtle, Caretta caretta olivacea, also
XT.
Y. xi' L. xfijyaj E.
measure of land area; also qi
Y. xf [sic] L. xfijajk E.
military despatch; call to arms
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XT
XI
XI
XI
XI
XI

Lexicon 331
147:7
50:7
140:10
124:5
145:11
145:16
170:14
173:11
30:9
61:12
142:12
44:11
60:8
96:14
140:11
75:5
140:9
149:9
85:6
85:6
62:13
32:11
M34875
K1260d
M08926
K797a
M31645
K797b
M28672
K690a
M34525A
K690g
M34717
K689a
M41889
K692b
M42434
M03957
K955a
M11219
M33595
M07791
K871g
M10142
K871a
M21309
K359J
M31725
K871f
M14582
K976d'
M31463
K973c
M35731
K973d
M17374A
K594g
M17379A
K478J
M11681A
K22b
M05423B
K515h
Y. xi L. xfijiejk E. yejk
male shaman
Y. si' L. sfiiajk E. ziajk
sitting mat; seat
Y. [si'] L. sfiiajk E. ziajk
large, spacious; sitting mat, see
Y. si' L. sfiip E. zip
repeat, practise; be familiar with
Y. [si'] L. sfiip E. zip
breeches. Also E. d?ip. See also die, zh&
Y. si' L. sfiip E. zip
extra layer of clothing; cover; repeat;
attack by surprise
Y. [si'] L. sfiip E. zip
low-lying wet land
Y. [si'] L. sfiip E. zip
a northeastern people; xfxf W W rainy
Y. xf L. xi' E. xi'/xi'
pleased, happy
Y. [xf] L. xi' E. xi'/xi'
pleased, happy, same as ^
Y. [xiv] L. xi' E. xi'/xi'
kind of spider
Y. sf [sic] L. sr' E. si§'/si'
sandal
Y. si" L. sz' E. sis'/si'
move, change one's residence
Y. si" L. sz' E. sis'/si'
royal seal
Y. [siv 1] L. sf E. sis'/si'
five times; five-fold
Y. sf [sic] L. sz' E. si '/si'
hemp
Y. [si" 7] L. sz' E. si'/si'
timid, afraid
Y. [sf ?] L. sz' E. si'/si'
timid, see $£
Y. [sf ] L. siaj E. sej'
wash, same as fy, A. See also xi&n, s&
Y. si L. siaj' E. sej'
wash. See also xian
Y. xi- L. xi- E. xi3h/xih
sport, jest; play, drama. See also hu
Y. [xi-] L. xi- E. xijh
plaster; collect; rest. See also ji
XI
XI
XI
XI
XI
XI
XI
XI
xl
XI
xT
XI
xT
xT
xT
xT
xT
xT
xT
xT
xi
xi

332 Lexicon
xi
xi
xi
xi
xi
xi
xi
xi
xi
xi
xi
xi
xi
xi
xi
xi
xi
xi
xi
xi
xi
xi
Y. [xiv] L. xiv E. xijh
sigh. See also kai
Y. [xiv] L. xiv E. xijh
present with food; sacrificial animal
Y. [xiv] L. xfijiajv E. Y£Jh
glare at, look angrily. Also E. rjejh
Y. xi" L. xfijiaj" E. yejh
tie, fasten;, be related to; be; system,
series; department, faculty
Y. [xi"] L. xfijiaf E. yejh
be attached to; connected; appendage,
attachment. See also ji
113:8
155:6
141:12
147:8
170:10
191:8
130:4
76:12
124:6
169:12
120:7
163:7
120:5
120:8
85:12
134:6
36:0
M24760
M37004
M32782
K787d
M34891
K789a
M41792
K787c
M45644
K873q
M29326
M16204A
K675s
M28691
K675q
M41487
K675u
M27497
K776d
M39440
K776e
M27344
K1241 1
M27599
K8501
M18247
K799e
M30202
K799a
M057495
K796a
Y. khix L. xfijiajv E. yejh
seasonal sacrifice, purification ceremony
Y. [xf] L. xik E. xik
deep red
Y. [xf] L. xiajk E. xiajk
fear, fright
Y. [xf] L. xiajk E. xiajk
fear, same as
Y. xf L. khiajk E. khiajk
crack; space between, interval; discord
Y. [xi ] L. xjiajk E. xejk
quarrel, wrangle
Y. [xf] L. xit E. xit
spread. Also E. xit
Y. [xi"] L. xip E. xip
draw in, contract. See also she
Y. xi" L. xip E. xip
combined, in accord, united
Y. [xi"] L. xip E. xip
come to a sudden stop
Y. [khf ] L. khiajk E. khiajk
coarse cloth of dolichos fibre
Y. [khf ] L. khiajk E. khiajk
a surname
Y. sis L. siajx E. sejh
thin, slender; fine, minute
Y. [sf] L. siajk E. sejk
thin cloth
Y. [si"] L. siajk E. siajk
salty land
Y. [si"] L. siajk E. siajk
kind of shoe, sandal; sole
Y. si' L. sfiiajk E. ziajk
evening, also XT.
61:10 M11029A
K517d
184:10 M44316
K517e
109:4 M23166
K1241H
120:1 M27223
K876a
120:13 M27940B
K854d

Lexicon 333
116:3
142:9
109:10
96:9
155:9
162:9
173:9
187:9
203:6
136:7
159:10
167:10
46:7
85:6
94:7
112:7
113:6
22:5
94:5
75:5
9:7
M25413b
K796e
M33299a
K33i
M23586
M21120
K33h
M37018
M39005
K33j
M42365
K33k
M44867
K331
M48097
K393v
M30341
K282a
M38482
K314f
M40692
M08122
M17426b
K675m
M20428
K630e
M24216
M24698
K675n
M02610
K629e
M20329
K629g
M14628
K629f
M00706
K630k
Y. [si'] T,. sfiiajk E. ziajk
zhunxi pitch dark; grave, tomb.
Also XT
Y. xja L. xfija: E. yai/ye:
shrimp. See also ha"
Y. xja" L. xjait E. xait/xe:t
blind
Y. xja' L. xfijai E. yai/ye:
defect, flaw
Y. [xja'] L. xfijai E. yai/ye:
rosy (clouds), same as
Y. xja' L. xfija: E. yai/ye:
remote, distant
Y. xja' L. xfija: E. yai/ye:
rosy clouds; distant
Y. [xja'] L. xfija: E. yai/ye:
horse of mixed red and white colour
Y. [xja'] L. xfija:t E. yait/ye:!
shrewd; crafty
Y. [xja'] L. xfijat E. yait/ye:t
axle-cap
Y. xja' L. xfijatt E. yait/ye:t
axle-cap; be in charge of
Y. xja' L. xfiiart E. yait/ye:t
axle-cap, same as
Y. xja' L. xfija:p E. ysip/ye:p
gorge between two mountains
Y. xja' L. xfija:p E. ysip/y^p
permeate, imbue; be in harmony with;
wide, comprehensive; discuss; also qia
Y. [xja'] L. xfija:p E. y3ip/ye:p
narrow
Y. xja' L. xfijaip E. ysip/yerp
place name
Y. xja' L. xfija.-p E. y3ip/ye:p
joint sacrifice to remote ancestors
Y. xja' L. xfija:p E. yaip/ye:p
small box
Y. xja' L. xfija:p E. yaip/ye:p
familiar; over-intimate, disrespectful
Y. [xja'] L. xfija:p E. yaip/ye:p
box, container; cage
Y. XJE', xja' L. xfijiap E. yep
one devoted to martial arts and chivalrous
conduct
xi
xia
xia
xia"
xia
xia
xia
xia
xia
xia
xia
xia
xia
xia
xia
xia
xia
xia"
xia
xia
xia

334 Lexicon
64:7
72:9
30:14
121:11
1:2
35:7
53:10
1:2
35:7
72:9
140:3
64:8
113:4
M121185
K6301
M14036b
K33g
M04459A
K7795
M28169
M00014A
K35a
M05720A
K36a
M09435A
K36c
M00014B
K35a
M05720B
K36a
M14036a
K33g
M30680B
K35d
M12230
K443y
M24638
9:3
9:11
115:3
195:6
10:4
38:17
61:13
M00374
K193f
M01055
K206b
M24927
M46133A
K209a
M01349A
K478a
M06893
Ml 1299
K613b
xia
xia
xia
xik
xia
xia
xia
xia
xia
xia
xia
xian
xian
xian
xian
xian
xian
xian
xian
xian
Y. xje' L. xfijiap E. yep
clasp under the arm, also xie
Y. xjav L. xfijar E. Yaih/Y£ih
leisure; also xia
Y. xjav L. xjar E. xaih/xe:h
scare, frighten. See also he
Y. xjav L. xjar E. xaih/xe:h
crack, rift, chink
Y. xjax L. xfijar E. yai'/YEi'
below. See also xia below
Y. xjav L. xfijar E. vai'/Yei'
name of the first and various later
dynasties; Chinese. See also xi& below
Y. xjav L. xfijar E. Yai'/Y£I'
house, room; XiamenAmoy. See
also sha
Y. xjav L. xfijar E. Yaih/Y£:h
go down. See also xia above
Y. xjav L. xfijar E. Yaih/Y£ih
summer. See also xik above
Y. xjax L. xfijar E. Yaih/YElh
leisure; also xia
Y. xjav L. xfijar E. Yaih/Y£'h
rushes. See also hu
Y. xjen L. xian E. xian
lift
Y. xjen L. xianE. xen
dialectal variant of tian 'heaven1
which became specialized as the name of
the Zoroastrian religion
Y. sjen L. sian E. sian
Taoist immortal
Y. [sjenl L. sian E. sian
same as
Y. [sjen] L. sian E. sian
early-ripening non-glutinous rice
Y. sjen L. sian E. sian
fresh. See also xi&n
Y. sjen L. sian E. sen
first; earlier, before, in advance; elder
generation, ancestor. See also xian
Y. sjem L. siam E. siam
slender
Y. sjem L. siam E. siam
insincere, glib, flattering, ingratiating

Lexicon 335
72:12
120:7
120:17
167:6
38:12
104:12
169:4
169:4
196:12
57:5
120:5
137:5
142:5
154:8
30:6
149:9
197:9
167:6
38:10
85:7
50:16
142:7
M14150
M27488B
K661e
M28072
K620e
M40389
K621a
M06711
M22518
M41247
K192a
M41248C
K191a
M47348
M09754
K366f
M27373
K366g
M30403
M32946
K3661
M36822
K368e
M03563
K671a
M35737
K671e
M47553
K671f
M40390
K608a
M06618
K627J
M17536
M09143
M33093
Y. sjem L. siam E. siam
sunrise; Xianlu6 Siam
Y. [sjem] L. siam E. siam
fabric of mixed black and white thread.
See also qln
Y. sjem L. siam E. siam
fine thin silk; thin, delicate
Y. sjem L. siam E. siam
sharp
Y. xjan' L. xfijam E. yain/yein
refined, elegant; skilled, accomplished
Y. xjan' L. xfijam E. yain/yein
epilepsy
Y. xjan' L. xfijam E. yam/yem
bar, barrier; block, obstruct; leisure
Y. [xjan'] L. xfijam E. ysin/yem
leisure; idle; unoccupied, not in use. See
also jian, jian.
Y. xjan' T_,. xfijam E. ysin/yem
baixian silver pheasant
Y. xjen' L. xfijian E. yen
bowstring
Y. xjen' L. xfijian E. yen
string for a musical instrument
Y. xjen' L. xfijian E. yen
side of a boat
Y. [xjen'] L. xfijian E. yen
millipede
Y. xjen' L. xfijian E. yen
worthy, virtuous, able
Y. xjam' L. xfijaim E. ysim/yeim
all
Y. xjam' L. xfijaim E. ysim/yeim
harmonious
Y. xjam' L. xfijaim E. ysim/yeim
salty, saline
Y. xjam' L. xfijaim E. yaim/yeim
horse bit; hold in the mouth
Y. xjem' L. xfijiam E. yem
suspicion; resentment; dislike
Y. sjen' L. sfiian E. zian
saliva
Y. [xjen"] L. xian' E. xian'
curtains, or screen of a carriage
Y. [xjen ] L. xjian' E. xen'
small clam
xian
xian
xian
xian
xidn
xian
xian
xian
xia"n
xian
xian
xian
xian
xian
xian
xian
xian
xian
xi£i
xian
xian
xian

336 Lexicon
xian
xian
xian
xian
xian
xian
xian
xian
xiSn
xian
xian
xian
xian
xian
xian
xian
xian
xian
xian
xian
xian
xian
xian
177:14
181:14
46:13
94:13
170:13
94:14
104:17
140:17
195:6
82:6
85:6
85:6
118:6
157:6
167:6
170:6
140:7
64:12
61:12
94:16
9:7
46:7
72:7
M32483
M46133B
K209a
M16821
K478f
M17374B
K594g
M17379B
K478J
M25986
M37497
K478g
M40376
K478H
M41627
K4161
M31074
K241H
M12682
K191J
Ml 1269
K250a
M20783
K252e
M00686B
K241f
M08106
M13942
K1250e
M43069 Y. [xjen~] L. xjian' E. xen'
K242c harness strap
M43726 Y. xjen" L. xjian' E. xen'
K242a manifest, apparent, exposed, visible
M08520 Y. [xjemv] L. xiam' E. xiam'
K6l3g precipitous, dangerous, same as Bfc
M20730 Y. [xjemv] L. xiam' E. xiam'
K6l3k Xianyun^^fc, an ancient tribe
M41874 Y. xjenT L. xiam' E. xiam'
K613f narrow defile; danger
M20748 Y. sjenv L. sian' E. sian'
K3591 autumnal hunt
M22629b Y. sjen" L. sian" E. sian'
tinea, ringworm, also xuSn
M32483 Y. sjen" L. sian' E. sian'
moss
M46133B Y. sjen" L. sian' E. sian'
K209a rare. See also xian
M16821 Y. sjen" L. sian' E. sen'
K478f glossy (coat of an animal)
M17374B Y. [sjen~] L. sian' E. sen'
K594g wash same as fa B. See also xl, s&
M17379B Y. sjen" L. sian' E. sen'
K478j wash. See also xT
M25986 Y. sjenv L. sian' E. sen'
bamboo brush, pot scrubber
L. sian' E. sen'Y. sjen
barefoot
Y. sjen" L. sian'
polished metal
Y. xjan" L. xfija:nv
limit, boundary
Y. xjanv L. xfijain"
amaranth
Y. [xjanN] L. xfijam'
forceful, energetic, fierce
Y. xjens L. xian"
law, model, statute, constitution
Y. xjenv L. xians E. xianh
offer up, present
Y. [xjen"] L. xfijian" E. yen'
comparable to, like. See also qian
Y. [xjen"] L. xfijian" E. yen'
steep hill; name of a mountain
Y. [xjenv] L. xfijian" E. yen'
sunlight. Also E. nenh
E. sen'
E. yain'/yem11
E. y3inh/yeinh
E. yain'/yem'
E. xianh

Lexicon 337
109:7
96:7
147:0
120:10
170:8
120:8
120:9
123:7
10:4
173:12
140:13
163:10
186:0
53:9
85:9
109:4
118:9
120:9
120:17
145:11
167:17
170:6
M23392
K241g
M21004
K241e
M34796B
K241a
M27784B
K248a
M41707
K672c
M27564
K155r
M27641
K237e
M28503
K207a
M01349B
K478a
M42458
K156d
M32100
K714m
M39571A
K714c
M44518
K717a
M09416
M17842
K731e
M23151A
K731a
M26209
K731f
M27636
M28071
K730b
M34556
K730a
M41053
M41620A
K1015a
Y. [xjerr] L. xfijianv E. yen'
xianhuan beautiful
Y. xjenN L. xfijiair E. yenh
appear, be visible
Y. xjeir L. xfijiair E. yenh
appear, be visible
Y. xjeif L. xfijyan E. ywenh
district, county. See also xua"n
Y. xjamv L. xfijainr E. Y3*mh/Yejmh
pitfall, trap; fall into; sink
L. sianx E. sianh
L. sfiianv E. zianh
Y.
thread
Y. sjenv L. sianx E. sianh
thread
Y. sjenv
covet, want; surplus
Y. [sjenx] L. sianv E. senh
precede, go before. See also xian
Y. sjens L. sian" E. senh
sleet
Y. [xjarj] L. xiarj E. xiarj
fragrance of grain
Y. xjarj L. xiarj E. xiarj
village; district, region. See also xiang
Y. xjarj L. xiarj E. xiarj
fragrant
Y. sjarj L. siarj E. siarj
side rooms, wings
Y. sjarj L. siarj E. siarj
a river in Hunan; boil
Y. sjarj L. siarj E. siarj
look at, inspect; each other, mutually. See
also xiang
Y. sjarj L. siarj E. siarj
box, container
Y. [sjarj] L. siarj E. siarj
pale yellow
Y. [sjarj] L. siarj E. siarj
sash, waistband
Y. sjarj L. siarj E. siarj
rise up; achieve; assist; remove
Y. [sjarj] L. siarj E. siarj
inlay
Y. xjarj' L. xfijaiwrj E. Yaiwrj/Yoeiwrj
submit, surrender. See also Jiang
xian
xian
xian
xian
xian
xian
xian
xian
xian
xian
xiang
xiang
xiang
xiang
xiang
xiang
xiang
xiang
xiang
xiang
xiang
xia"ng

338 Lexicon
53:6
113:6
124:6
149:6
8:5
8:6
180:13
184:13
61:9
195:6
184:17
184:6
30:3
30:16
72:13
163:10
49:6
181:3
109:4
9:12
M09298
K732m
M24689
K732n
M28689
K732p
M35446
K732q
M00295B
K716b
M00298
K716a
M43325
K714n
M44431
K714J
M10858
K731d
M46100
M44480
K730c
M44140
K715e
M03301A
K715a
M04565
K714i
M14195A
K714k
M39571B
K714c
M08756
K1182s
M43343
K1172y
M23151B
K731a
M01084
K728e
L. sfiiaq E. ziaq
E. ziaq
E. ziag
E. ziar)
E. xiaq'
E. xiaq'
E. siaq'
E. siaq'
E.
Y. [xjaq']
school
Y. siaq' L. sfiiaq
auspicious, felicitous
Y. sjaq L. sfiiaq
fly to and fro, hover, soar
Y. sjaq' L. sfiiaq
enquire into in detail; detailed, minute
Y. xjaq" L. xiaq E. xiaq'
same as See also heng, pgng
Y. xjarf L. xiaq' E. xiaq'
offer a feast; enjoy a feast; enjoy
Y. xjaq" L. xiaq'
echo
Y. xjaq" L. xiaq'
ceremonial feast, banquet
Y. sjaq" L. siaq'
think; thought
Y. sjaq" L. siaq'
dried salted fish
Y. [saq"1 L. giaq'
same as Also E. qiaq, Qiaqh
Y. gaq" L. siaq" E. qiaqh
deliver food to labourers or troops on
duty; rations, pay
Y. xjaqv L. xiaq" E. xiaqh
to face; towards; formerly. See also
shang.
Y. [xjaq"] L. xiaqv E. xiaqh
to face; towards
Y. [xjaq"] L. xiaqv E. xiaqh
formerly, a while ago. See also shang
Y. xjaq" L. xiaq" E. xiaqh
to face, turn towards; formerly, a while
ago. See also xiang
Y. xjaq" L. xfijaiwq E. Ya*wqh/Yra\vqh
lane
Y. xjaq" L. xfijaiwq" E. Yaiwqh/Y<Eiwqh
neck
Y. sjaq" L. siaq" E. siaqh
observe, judge the appearance,
physiognomize; assist; chief minister. See
also xiang
Y. sjaq" L. sfiiaq" E. ziaq'
image; imitate; resemble
xiang
xiang
xiang
xiang
xiang
xiang
xiang
xiang
xiang
xiang
xiang
xiang
xiang
xiang
xiang
xiang
xiang
xiang
xiang
xiang

Lexicon 339
75:12 M15564
K728f
152:5 M36372
K728a
30:7 M03659
K1168d
86:6 M18991
K10701
141:4 M32684
K992v
188:12 M45276
K1164d
30:18 M04616
K1140a
75:5 M14585
K1041s
140:21 M32633
196:5 M46803
K104U
75:7 M14861
K1070m
187:12 M44986
40:7 M07168
K1149H
64:7 M12148B
K1149x
85:7 M17529
K1149J
112:7 M24201
120:7 M27485
K11491
142:7 M33072A
K1149b'
162:7 M38873
K1149m
167:7 M40424
K1149n
173:7 M42290
K1149o
Y. [sjarf] L. sfiiarjv E. ziarj'
oak
Y. sjarjs L. sfiiarj' E. ziarj'
elephant; image; imitate; resemble
Y. xjaw L. xjaiw E. xaiw/xe:w
roar, shout.
Y. xjaw L. xjaiw E. xaiw/xeiw
roar, shout.
Y. xjaw L. xjaiw E. xaiw/xeiw
roar, shout
Y. [xjaw] L. xjaiw E. xaiw/xeiw
like bleached bones
Y. xjew L. xiaw E. xiaw
clamour, din. Also E. rjaw Y. aw'
Y. xjew L. xiaw E. xiaw
hollow tree
Y. [xjew] L. xiaw E. xiaw
kind of fragrant grass
Y. xjew L. iaw E. wiaw
owl
Y. xjew [sic] L. kjiaw E. kew
owl
Y. xjew L. kjiaw E. kew
valiant, brave
Y. sjew L. siaw E. siaw
night
Y. [sjewl L. siaw E. siaw
yaoxiao move, shake. See also
shao
Y. sjew L. siaw E. siaw
melt, dissolve; disappear; eliminate
Y. sjew L. siaw E. siaw
nitre, saltpetre
Y. sjew L. siaw E. siaw
thin fabric of raw silk
Y. sjen L. siaw E. siaw
piaoxiao egg capsule of a mantis,
See also shao
Y. [sjewl L. siaw E. siaw
xiaoyao free and unfettered,
carefree
Y. sjew L. siaw E. siaw
melt; reduce, diminish; spend
Y. sjew L. siaw E. siaw
sleet; vapour beside the sun; cloud; sky
xiang
xiang
xiao
xiao
xiao
xiao
xiao
xiao
xiao
xiao
xiao
xiao
xiao
xiao
xiao
xiao
xiao
xiao
xiao
xiao
xiao

340 Lexicon
194:7
85:16
118:12
124:7
140:12
142:16
18:7
38:6
79:8
85:8
89:0
130:4
39:13
42:0
72:12
118:10
149:10
39:4
9:10
66:6
66:16
75:6
118:4
M45841
M18660
K1028J
M26560
K1028H
M28709
K1077 1
M32012
K1028i
M33828
K1028k
M02000a
K1149c'
M06214B
K1166f
M16647b
K1167e
M176195
M19737b
K1167a
M293225
K1167d
M07033b
K1038a
M07473
K1149a
M14176
K1164f
M26328
K1077u
M35801
K10971
M06952
K1168a
M00969
K1166u
M13186
K1166r
M13431
K1038d
M14713B
K1166i
M25885
KllSOa
Y. sjew L. siaw E. siaw
mountain demon
Y. sjew L. siaw E. sew
deep and clear
Y. sjew L. siaw E. sew
panpipes
Y. sjew L. siaw E. sew
rapid flight. Also E. puwk
Y. sjew L. siaw E. sew
mugwort, Artemisia; desolate, dreary
Y. [sjewl L. siawP sew
xiSoxiao xiaoshaospider
Y. sjew" L. siak c. siak
pare, whittle, chop; also xue, xue
Y. xjaw' L. xfijaiw E. yaiw/yeiw
immoral. See also xiao
Y. xjaw' L. xfijaiw E. yaiw/yeiw
food; mixed, confused; also yao
Y. xjaw' L. xfijaiw E. yaiw/yeiw
confuse, mix, also yao
Y. xjaw' L. xfijaiw E.
divination line in the Yijing, also ya"o
Y. xjaw' L. xfijaiw E. yaiw/yeiw
cooked meat or fish; also yao
Y. xjaw', xjo' L. xfijaiwk E. Yaiwk/Yceiwk
study; imitate; also xue
Y. sjew" L. siaw' E. siaw'
small
Y. xjew L. xjiaw' E. xew'
dawn; bright; make clear, understand
Y. sjew" L. siaw' E. sew'
thin bamboo
Y. [sjew ] L. siaw'
small, trivial
Y. xjawv L. xjaiw"
filial, filial piety
Y. xjawv L. xfijaiw"
emulate, imitate
Y. [xjawv] L. xfijaiw* E. yaiwh/yeiwh
imitate; devote oneself to; effect
Y. [xjawv] L. xfijaiw" E. Yaiwh/Y£iwh
teach
Y. xjaws L. xfijaws E. Yaiwh/Yei\vh
school; a military title. See also jiao
Y. sjews L. siawv E. siawh
smile, laugh; mock
E. sew'
E. xaiwh/xeiwh
E. Yaiwh/Y£J\vh
xiao
xiao
xiao
xiao
xiao
xiao
xiao
xiao
xia"o
xiao
xiao
xiao
xiao
xiao
xi&o
xi&o
xi&o
xiao
xiao
xiao
xiao
xiao
xiao

Lexicon 341
130:3
30:12
76:9
142:9
142:13
7:5
75:9
9:9
149:9
177:6
195:6
64:18
120:6
120:15
145:15
181:6
19:13
24:6
M29263
K1149g
M04246
K1028f
M16141
K313u
M33254B
K313f
M33707
M00268B
K1236a
M15131a
K279i
M00855b
K599b
M35718
K599g
M42813
M46132B
K879g
M13008b
K880c
M27419B.
K279d
M28028
M34702
K393y
M43452Aa
K393r
M02458
M02742
K639b
Y. sjewx L. siawv E. siawh
resemble
Y. sjewv L. siawv E. sewh
whistle; howl, roar
Y. xje" L. xiat E. xiat
rest
same as See also he
Y. [xjev] L. xiat E. xiat
scorpion
Y. sje L. sia E. sia
a few. See also su6
Y. [sjev] L. siat E. set
wedge; also xie
Y. kjaj L. kjaij E. ksij/keij
accompany; together with; alsojie. The
modern reading xie suggests an
unattested old reading v^ij for the verb
derived fromjie all
Y. xjaj' L. xfijaij E. yaij/yeij
match, be in harmony with
Y. xjaj' L. xfijaij E. yaij/yeij
shoe
Y. [xjaj'] L. xfijaij E.yaij/yeij
food prepared from fish. See also gui,
wa
Y. xi' L. xfijyaj E. ywej
lead by the hand; carry, take along;
also XT
Y. [xje'] L. xfijiat E. yet
bind; measure, even out, moderate.
See alsojie
Y. xje' L. xfijiat E. yet
tie; tie-dye; tie-dyed fabric
Y. [xje'] L. xfijiat E. ye;
tuck up the skirt to carry something
Y. [xje'] L. xfijiat E. yet
straighten the neck; great; xiehang [
descriptive of birds flying up and down;
xiehua muddled, confused; great.
See also jie,jia.
Y. [xje'] L. xfijiap E. y^F
harmonious
Y. xje' L. xfijiap E. yej
in cooperation, jointly, together
xiao
xiao
xie
xie
xie
xie
xie
xie
xie
xie
xie
xie
xie
xie
xie"
xie
xie
xie

342
xie
xie
xie"
xie
xie
xie
xi&
xiS
xie
xie
xie
xie
xie
xie
xie
xie
xie
xie
xie
xie
xie
30:2
64:7
130:6
94:9
68:7
163:4
143:0
40:12
53:13
187:7
61:13
75:7
85:16
140:13
211:4
148:6
148:6
162:13
142:13
85:15
26:6
M03255
K639c
M12118a
K6301
M29466
K639e
M20550
K313t
Ml 3509
M39319A
K47a
M33964a
K410a
M07320
K799f
M09510b
M44749
K990e
Ml 1328
K861b
M14882
K990d
M18667
K1240f
M32141
K1240g
M48603
K327h
M35067C
K861a
M35067D
K861a
M39173
K861e
M33668
K861d
Ml 8596
K799h
M02861
Lexicon
Y. [xje'] L. xfijiap E. yep
same as
Y. xje' L. xfijiap E. yep
clasp under the arm; coerce; also xia".
Y. [xje"] L. xiap E. xiap
side (of the body), ribs; coerce
Y. [xje"l L. xiat E. xiat
xiexiao short-muzzled dog. Also E.
xat
Y. sje' L. sfiia E. zia
aslant
Y. sje' L. sfiia E. zia
inclined; perverse, heretical, evil. See
also ye"
Y. xje" L. xyat E. xwet
blood; also xue
Y. sje" L. sia' E. sia'
drain off; dissipate; cast metal; depict;
transcribe, copy; write
Y. kjaj" L. kjaij" E. kaijh/ke:jh
public office building; also jie
Y. [xjaj"] L. xfijaij" E. Y9tj'/YeU'
alarm; sound an alarm
Y. xjaj" L. xfija:jv E. Y9*jh/Yeyh
slack, lax
Y. xjaj" L. xfijaij" E. Y9*jh/Y£yh
fetters; tool, instrument; weapon
Y. xjaj" L. xfijaij" E. Y^jh/Y£yh
hangxie dew
Y. xjaj" L. xfijaj" E. Y9ijh/YeUh
shallot, scallion, kind of Allium
Y. [xjajv] L. xfijay" E. Y9*jh/Yejjh
gnash the teeth
Y. xjaj" L. xfijaij" E. Yaij'/Yeu'
understand; a surname. See also jie, jie
Y. xjajs L. xfijaij" E. Yaijh/Y£yh
place name. See also jie, jie
Y. [xjajv] L. xfija:jv E. Ya*jh/Y£yh
xiehdu free and easy, carefree and
relaxed
Y. xjaj" L. xfijaij E.Yaij'/Y£y'
crab
Y. sje" L. siav E. siah
purge; diarrhoea. Also E. sia' =
Y. sje" L. sfiia" E. ziah
unload, discharge

Lexicon 343
75:10
149:10
38:9
85:5
85:9
120:5
120:6
145:11
44:7
75:9
44:12
86:13
61:4
76:4
72:4
76:9
186:11
69:9
140:13
160:0
61:0
M15272
K807e
M35827
K807g
M06524
M17267B
K339h
M17778
K3391
M27347
K339i
M27397
K338c
M34536
K330n
M07709
K1256e
M15131b
K279i
M07804
K633p
M19481
K1255c
M10401
K443J
M16008
K443i
M13817
K443H
M16139
K653J
M44559a
K832f
M13572
K382k
M32149
K392n
M38630
K382a
M10295
K663a
Y. sj£v L. sfiia" E. ziah
pavilion
Y. SJ£N L. sfiiav E. ziah
decline, excuse oneself; thank
Y. sj£v L. siat E. siat
overfamiliar, disrespectful
Y. sje" L. siat E. siat
let out, release, leak. See also yl
Y. [sj£v] L. siat E. siat
leak; flush away, cleanse
Y. SJE" L. siat E. siat
bind; lead for a horse
Y. [SJE"] L. siatE. siat
tie, bind, same as
Y. sje" L. siat E. siat
undergarment; intimate; familiar;
disrespectful; obscene
Y. SJE" L. siat E. s£t
scraps; trifle; pure
Y. [sj£v] L. siat E. s£t
wedge; also xie
Y. SJE" L. siap E. siap
wooden shoe; inlay in a shoe
Y. sje" L. siap E. sep
blend, harmonize
Y. xin L. xin E. xin
joyful; same as
Y. xin L. xin E. xin
joyful, glad
Y. xin L. xin E. xin
dawn
Y. xim L. xim E. xim
enjoy the fragrance of sacrificial food;
receive with joy
Y. xirj L. xjiajq E. x£Jrj
strong fragrance, also xing
Y. sin L. sin E. sin
new
Y. sin L. sin E. sin
firewood; fuel
Y. sin L. sin E. sin
eighth Heavenly Stem; pungent, bitter
Y. sim L. sim E. sim
heart; mind
xie
xie
xie
xie
xie
xie
xie
xie
xie
xie
xie
xie
xin
xm
xm
xm
xin
xin
xin
xln
xin

344 Lexicon
41:9
167:12
193:8
86:8
143:5
164:18
9:7
134:9
186:11
94:9
72:5
130:9
164:9
187:7
144:0
18:4
32:6
59:4
112:8
163:4
M07447a
K662a
M40893A
K646e
M45695
K660k
M19137
K443x
M33980
K447a
M40103
K446a
M00707
K384a
M30226A
K889a
M445595
K832f
M20528
K812z
M13837
K812x
M29678
K812a'
M39936A
K812b'
M44779
K821c
M34029A
K748a
M01886
K808b
M05030
M09969
K808d
M24244
K808f
M39301
Y. sim' L. sfiim E. zim
measure of length, 8 c/zf; to seek; also
xun
Y. sim' L. sfiim E. zim
knob or ring on sword-handle. See also
tan
Y. sim' L. sfiim E. zim
kind of cooking vessel, boiler. Also E.
dzim, dziam
Y. [xinv] L. xinv E. xinh
burn; steam, smoke
Y. [xinv] L. xinv E. xinh
same as
Y. xinv L. xins E. xinh
anoint or smear with blood in a sacrifice;
crevice, crack; rift, quarrel
Y. sinx L. sin" E. sinh
true; trustworthy; believe
Y. xirj L. xisrj E. xirj
rise; get up; start; prosper. See also xing
Y. xirj L. xjiajrj E. xejrj
strong fragrance, also xm
Y. sarj L. sayrj, siajrj E. siajrj, sejrj
xTngxTng orangutan
Y. sirj L. siajrj E. sejrj
star
Y. sir) L. siajrj E. sejrj
raw meat or fish; fishy smell; stench
Y. sir) L. siajrj E. sejrj
awake from a drunken stupor; awake.
See also xTng
Y. sirj L. siajrj E. siajrj
red-coloured horse
Y. xirj' L. xfijaijrj E. Yaijrj/Yeyrj
walk, go; put in motion, operate. See also
xing, hang, hang
Y. xirj' L. xfijiajrj E. yejrj
model; law; punishment
Y. xirj' L. xfijiajrj E. yejrj
mould, pattern
Y. xirj' L. xfijiajrj E. yejrj
form, shape
Y. xirj' L. xfijiajrj E. yejrj
whetstone
Y. xirj' L. xfijiajrj E. yeji]
place name; a surname
XUl
xih
xih
xin
xin
xin
xin
xTng
xmg
xlng
xlng
xing
xlng
xing
xing
xing
xmg
xmg
xmg
xing

Lexicon 345
xing
xrng
xing
xrng
167:6
167:6
170:7
184:8
M40343
K808g
M40377
K808H
M41650
K8311
M44204
184:9
61:9
109:4
164:9
134:9
9:8
51:5
75:3
140:6
144:0
38:8
38:5
M44283A
K720c'
M10868
M23179B
K8121
M39936B
K812b'
M30226B
K889a
M00771
K810b
M09176
K810a
M14461
K749a
M30942
K748e
M34029B
K748a
M06423
K810c
M06178
K812q
Y. xirj' L. xfijiajrj E.
kind of ceremonial vessel
Y. [xing'j L. xfijajrj E.
kind of wine vessel
Y. [xirj'] L. xfijiajrj E. yejrj
ravine
Y. sir)' L. sfiiajrj E. ziajrj
dried sweets. This graph is now
considered to be an error for H, also
pronounced tang, E. dan, 'sugar'. A
reading E. ziajrj would be *~' ~hly irregular
for the xiesheng series of , while the
derivatives of have similar initials and
belong to the same Old Chinese rhyme
category, except that they end in stops or
glides instead of a nasal. Traditional
versions of the Shuowen and available
early texts of the Qieyun tradition support
the view that is correct.
see See also tang
Y. sirj L. siajrj' E. siajrj'
to awaken, become aware
Y. sir/ L. siajrj' E. siajrj'
observe, inspect. See also shfcng
Y. sirj" L. siajrj' E. sejrj'
awake from a drunken stupor; awake.
See also xlng. Also E. sejrjh
Y. xirjv L. xiorf E. xirjh
interest; excitement. See also xmg
Y. xirjv L. xfijaijrp E. Y^JO'/Y8^'
good fortune, luck, fortunately
Y. xirf L. xfija:jrjv E. Y3ijrj'/Ye:Ji]'
fortunate
Y. xirj" L. xfijaijrf E. Y^jfl'/Y^jr)'
apricot, Prunus armeniaca
Y. [xirjv] L. xfijaijrf E. yaij^)' Y£IJi)'
Limnanthemum nymphoides; fringed
water-lily
Y. xirf L. xfijaijrf E.
action, behaviour, conduct. See also
xfng, hang, hang
Y. [xirjx] L. xfijiajrf E. yejrj'
strong-minded, hard
Y. sirjv L. siajrjv E. siajrjh
clan name, surname
xmg
xTng
xTng
xTng
xing
xing
xing
xing
xing
xing
xing
xing

346 Lexicon
61:5
10:3
10:4
17:2
20:4
85:6
130:6
130:6
149:4
86:10
172:4
35:11
149:5
9:4
153:6
190:4
190:6
196:6
9:8
123:5
130:7
M10478
K812s
M01343
K765a
M01348
K1183b
M01803
K1183a
M02512
K1183d
M17417
K1183g
M29441
K1183e
M29442
K1183f
M35282
K1183c
M19294
K674a
M41972
K8871
M05731A
K167g
M35386
M00440
K1070a
M36542
K1070h
M45372
K1070J
M45430
K1070J
M46890
K1070i
M00721
K1077d
M28471
K1076H
M29535
K1077e
Y. sirjv L. siajrj" E. siajrjh
life; nature; propery, quality; sex
Y. xyrj, xjurj L. xyajrj E. xwiajrj
elder brother
Y. xjurj L. xywrj E. xuawrj
fear; evil
Y. xjurj L. xywrj E. xuawrj
ill-omened; crop failure; fierce
Y. [xjurj] L. xvwrj E. xuawrj
breast, same as Xiongnu
dominant people in Mongolia in the Han
period
Y. xjurj L. xywrj E. xuawrj
rushing water
Y. xjurj L. xywrj E. xuawrj
same as
Y. xjurj L. xywrj E. xuawrj
chest, bosom, thorax
Y. [xjurj] L. xywrj E. xuawrj
wrangle, contend; xiongxiong clamorous
discord
Y. xjurj' L. iwrj, xfiiwrj E. wuwrj
bear (animal)
Y. xjurj' L. iwrj, xfiiwrj E. wuwrj
male; powerful
Y. xyrj" L. xjyajrj" E. xjwiajrjh
distant. See also xuan
Y. xyrjv L. xjyajrf E. xjwiajrjh
investigate, spy out
Y. xiw L. xiw E. xuw
to rest; stop; good fortune
Y. xiw L. xiw E. xuw
see plxiu
Y. [xiw] L. xiwp. xuw
dark-red varnish, same as
Y. [xiw] L. xiw E. xuw
dark-red varnish
Y. [xiw] L. xiw E. xuw
xiuliu owlet
Y. siw L. siw E. suw
long, tall and slender; repair, improve
Y. siw L. siw E. suw
offer food; fine food, delicacies; shame
Y. siwL. siw E. suw
same as
xing
xion
xion
xion
xiOn
xion
xion
xion
xion
xion
xion
xion
xion
xiu
xiu
xiu
xiu
xiu
xiu
xiu
xiu

Lexicon 347
75:2
85:11
30:10
40:8
96:7
115:2
120:12
46:5
145:5
145:9
32:12
141:6
30:11
76:12
141:6
M14439
K1041m
M18071
K1077r
M04048
K1088c
M07195B
K1029a
M21015
K1095c
M24911
K1095a
M27913
K1028e
M07991
M34192
K1079m
M34432B
K1079n
M05457a
K78b
M32709Ba
K78a
M04206
K78d
M16198
K78c
M32709A
K78a
Y. xiw" L. xiw E. xuw'
rotten, decayed; senile
Y. [siw ] L. siw' E. suw'
water in which rice has been washed
Y. xiwv L. xiwv E. xuwh
to smell, sniff
Y. siwv L. siwv E. suwh
division of the heavens, mansion. See
also su.
Y. siwv L. siwx E. suwh
kind of precious stone. Also E. juw'
Y. siw" L. siw" E. suwh
come into flower (of grain); elegant,
beautiful; excellent
Y. [siwv] L. siwv E. suwh
embroider
Y. siwv L. sfiiwv E. zuwh
cave; mountain peak
Y. siwv L. sfiiw" E. zuwh
sleeve
Y. [siwv] L. sfiiwL E. zuwh
same as . See also you
Y. xy L. khi3/khy§ E. khi3
large hill; mound; site of ruined city; also
qu
Y. [xy ?1 L. khi9/khy§ E. khi§
same as . See also xu below
Y. xy L. xia/xya E. xiS
exhale; sigh
Y. xy L. xia/xyo E. xi§
exhale; sigh
Y. xy L. xis/xyo E. xia
empty; false; in vain. See also xu above
andqu
187:12
30:3
109:3
149:3
130:5
M44981
M03275
K97t
M23124
K97u
M35233
K97v
M29406
K90e
Y. [xy] L. xia/xys
Seejuxu
Y. xy L. xya
sigh
Y. [xy] L. xyS
raise the eyes; stare; Xuyf
name in Anhui.
Y. [xy] L. xys
great, grand
Y. sy L. sis/sya
mutually, respectively; aid,
functionary, clerk
E. xi§
E. XU3
E. XU3
place
E. XU3
E. si§
assist; petty
xiu
xiu
xiu
xiu
xiu
xiu
xiu
xiu
xiu
xiu
xu
xu
xu
xu
xu
xu
xu
xu
xu
xu

348 Lexicon
xu
xu
xu
xu
xu
xu
xu
xu
xu
xu
xu
xu
V
xu
V
xu
xu
xu
xu
xu
xu
xu
173:6
120:14
181:3
190:12
62:1
60:7
149:4
163:12
75:6
86:9
149:6
85:9
119:9
164:9
164:4
85:6
61:10
102:5
140:10
19:9
M42275
K134a
M27996B
K134b
M43352
K133a
M45580
K133d
Ml 1535
K1257H
M10110
K82p
M35298
K60i
M39629
M14721
K98c
M19225
KlOSc'
M35410
K98d
M17829
K90f
M27035
K90h
M39935
M39794
K1243a
M17403
K930a
Ml 1049
K1018e
M21814A
K1018a
M31642
KlOISc
M02391
K1217a
Y. sy L. sya E. sua
wait; require, need
Y. sy L. sys E. sus
frayed silk; silk torn in two as a tally.
See also ru
Y. sy L. syS E. su5
beard, mustache; need, must; wait for;
xuyua moment, instant
Y. sy L. sy5 E. sua
beard, mustache
Y. [sy~] L. syt E. swit
eleventh Earthly Branch
Y. sy' L. sfiia/sfiya E. zia
slowly; place name; a surname
Y. xy L. xia'/xys' E. xi§'
permit, agree to, approve; promise; place;
approximately, about; place name
Y. [xy"] L. xi3-/xv3- E. xi3'
place name, same as
Y. [xyv] L. xya" E. xu§'
kind of oak, Quercus serrata
Y. [xyv] L. xy§' E. xus'
warm, balmy. Also E. xush sunshine
Y. xy L. xy§' E. xuo'
brag, boast; speak assertively; extensive,
far-reaching
Y. [syv] L. siaVsys' E. sis'
strained liquor; clear
Y. [sy"] L. siS'/sys' E. sio'
grain; fine grain for sacrifice
Y. sy L. siS'/sya' E. sis'
fine liquor; spirit
Y. [xy] L. xy^ E. xu3h
drunk
Y. [xy ?] L. xysk E. xwik
water channel, ditch, moat
Y. [xyv] L. xiwk E. xuwk
nourish, cherish
Y. [xyv] L. xiwk E. xuwk
raise domestic animals. Also E. xuwh.
See also chu
Y. [xyv] L. xiwk E. xuwk
store up; grow. Also E. ti^uwk
Y. [xy"] L. xywk E. xuawk
rouse, urge

Lexicon 349
72:2
181:4
33:9
38:9
120:6
120:9
53:4
66:7
140:4
140:14
195:14
46:14
26:6
61:6
140:11
120:15
140:15
159:3
30:9
32:10
32:14
72:9
M13747
K992x
M43357
K1216d
M05664
K90i
M06470
M27443
K94u
M27633
K45s
M09253
K83h
M 13205
K82o
M30717A
K83i
M32234
K89n
M46571
K89o
M08561b
M02862
K410f
M10583
K410e
M3 17475
M28037
K1023u
M32321
K1023v
M38187
K139g'
M03976
K164x
M05360
K227d
M05546
K461J
M14033
Y. [xyv] L. xywk E. xuawk
rising sun, bright
Y. [y*] L. nvwk E. rjuawk
see Zhuanxu
Y. siv L. siajv E. sejh
daughter's husband, son-in-law
same as
Y. syx L. siSVsyS" E. sish
raw silk, floss; cotton wadding
Y. syv L. si5Ysy3v E. si3h
thread; sequence, succession
Y. syv L. sfii5Ysfiy3N E. zia'
school; order; arrange in order, preface
Y. sy" L. sfiiaYsfiya" E. zia'
arrange in order; class, rank; assess
Y. [sy"] L.sfii5Vsfiy3" E. zia'
kind of chestnut. See also zhu
Y. [syv] L. sfii3Vsfiy§v E. zia'
fine quality, excellent
Y. [syv] L. sfiiSVsfiySv E. zi§'
name of a fish
Y. syv L. sfiiSVsfiyS^ E. ziS'
small island; now read yu
Y. [sy"] L. syt E. swit
pity
Y. [sy"] L. syt E. swit
pity; give relief
Y. [sy"l L. siwk E. suwk
muxu lucerne, alfalfa, Medicago
denticulata, also su
Y. sy' L. sfiywk E. zuawk
connect, continue; continuous, successive
Y. [sy'] L. sfiywk E. zuawk
water plantain, Alisma plantago
Y. xjen L. xian E. xian
high-fronted carriage; high, lofty
Y. xyen L. xyan E. xuan
clamour, hubbub
Y. xijen L. xyan E, xuan
ocarina
Y. [xqen] L. xyan E. xuan
ocarina. Same as
Y. xuen L. xyan E. xuan
warmth of the sun
xu
xu
xu
xu
xu
xu
xu
xu
xu
xu
xu
xu
xu
xu
xu
xu
xu
xuan
xuar
xuan
xuar
xuar

350 Lexicon
140:9
149:9
149:9
153:6
9:13
124:13
187:7
40:6
64:9
61:16
120:10
95:0
70:7
96:11
96:14
162:13
30:6
86:6
104:17
162:12
35:11
120:6
M31345
M35706
K164z
M35750
K255k
M36543B
K1641
M01188
K256z
M28824
K256a'
M44773
K228k
M07132
K164t
M12338
Ml 1462
K248b
M27784A
K248a
M20814
K366a
M13656A
K236a
M21203
K236d
M21311
K466c
M39174B
K256k
M03569
K164q
M19018
K164s
M22629a
M39127
K433f
M05731B
K167g
M27427
K392r
Y. xqen L. xyan E. xuan
day lily, Hemerocallis fulva
Y. xqen L. xyan E. xuan
clamour
Y. [xqen] L. xyan E. xuan
deceive; forget
Y. [xqen] L. xyan E. xuan
small raccoon dog. See also huan.
Y. [xyen] L. xyan E. xwian
nimble; clever
Y. [xqen] L. xyan E. xwian
fly about, flutter
Y. xqen L. xjyan E. xwen
grey horse
Y. sqen L. syan E. swian
spread, diffuse
Y. sqen L. syan E. swian
roll up the sleeves
Y. xjen' L. xfijyan E. ywen
suspend, hang
Y. xjen' L. xfijyan E. ywen
suspend, hang, same as . See also
xian
Y. xqen' L. xfijyan E. ywen
dark, black
Y. sqen' L. sfiyan E. zwian
revolve, spin; return; soon. See also
xuan.
Y. sqen' L. sfiyan E. zwian
fine jade
Y. [sqen'l L. sfiyan E. zwian
same as
Y. sqen' L. sfiyan E. zwian
revolve, rotate. See also huan
Y. [xqen"] L. xyan' E. xuan'
brilliant, majestic; cry bitterly
Y. [xqen ] L. xyan' E. xuan'
dry in the sun; blazing, bright
Y. sjen" L. sian" E. sian'
tinea, ringworm, also xi&n.
Y. sqen" L. syan' E. swian'
select
Y. [xqens] L. xyan" E. xwenh
inquire into, seek.out. See also xiong
Y. xqenN L. xjyan" E. xwenh
patterned, decorated, gorgeous
xuan
xuan
xuan
xuan
xuan
xuan
xuan
xuan
xuan
xuan
xuan
xuan
xuan
xuan
xuan
xuan
xuan
xuan
xuan
xuan
xuan
xuan

Lexicon 351
85:5
167:5
86:5
109:5
144:5
70:7
167:11
177:4
140:13
18:7
116:0
39:13
196:13
173:3
143:0
116:0
149:10
18:7
19:14
72:14
86:10
94:14
M17319
K366c
M40290
K366e
M18948
K366H
M23254
K366d
M34045
K366J
M13656B
K236a
M40778
M42729
M32123
K289e
M02000c
K1149c'
M25406a
K409a
M07033a
K1038a
M47379
K1038H
M42216
K297a
M33964b
K410a
M25406b
K409a
M35810
KlllSd
M02000b
K1149c'
M02465
K461f
M 14224
M19300
K461a
M20754
K461g
Y. xqenv L. xfijyanv E. ywen'
weep, drip, trickle
Y. [xqenv] L. xfijyanv E. ywen'
bar passed through the handles of a tripod
to lift it
Y. [xqenv] L. xfijyanv E. ywenh
dazzle; display
Y. xqenv L. xfiyanv
dazzled; confused
Y. [xqenv] L. xfijyan" E. ywenh
show off, display
Y. suenv L. sfiyanv
E.
E. zwianh
whirl; turn on a lathe. See also xuan
Y. sqenv L. sfiyarT E. zwianh
turn on a lathe
Y. xue L. xya E. xua
boot
Y. sje" L. siat E. siat
kind of plant; place name; a surname
Y. sjev/ L. siak E. siak
pare, whittle; also xiao, xue
Y. xje' L. xfijyat E. ywet
cave, cavern, grotto; also xue
Y. xjaw', xue' L. xfijaiwk E.
study, learn; also xiao
Y. xjaw' L. xfijaiwk E.
kind of bird, Pyrrhula
Y. sue" L. syat E. swiat
snow
Y. xje L. xyat E. xwet
blood, also xi£
Y. xje' L. xfijyat E. ywet
cave, cavern, grotto; also xue
Y. xjaw" L. xiak E. xiak
banter, tease, ridicule
Y. sjew" L. siak E. siak
pare, whittle; also xiao, xue
Y. xyn L. xyn E. xun
merit, meritorious service
Y. xyn L. xyn E. xun
dim light of the setting sun, dusk
Y. [xyn] L. xyn E. xun
smoke, steam; aflame
Y. [xynl L. xyn E. xun
xunyu name of a northern people
xuan
xuan
xuan
xuan
xuan
xuan
xuan
xue
xue
xue
xue
xue
xue"
xu6
xue
xue
xue
xue
xun
xun
xun
xun
. ywenh

352 Lexicon
120:14
130:14
140:14
164:14
41:9
47:4
60:6
60:9
72:2
120:3
187:3
61:6
85:6
140:6
149:6
163:6
85:12
195:12
195:12
149:3
85:3
149:3
M28011
K461H
M29978
K4611
M32192
K461e
M40070
M07447b
K662a
M08684
K462e
M10091A
K392e
M10187
K465f
M13746
K392a
M27241
K462d
M44595
K462f
M10520
K392k
M17416
K3921
M30929
K392o
M35411
K392p
M39385
M18280
M46488
K6461
M46504
M35238
K422d
M17135
M35224
K383c
in prehistoric times. Also hunyu
, etc.
Y. [xyn] L. xyn E. xun
crimson, dark red
Y. [xyn] L. xyn E. xun
pork or mutton stew
Y. xyn L. xyn E. xun
fragrant herb; pungent, fragrant
Y. xyn L. xyn E. xun
drunk
Y. sim' L. sfiim E. zim
measure of length; to seek; also xm
Y. syn' L. sfiyn E. zwin
tour of inspection, rounds, patrol
Y. [syn'] L. sfiyn E. zwin
follow, obey; everywhere, all around
Y. syn' L. sfiyn E. zwin
follow, go along; orderly; all around
Y. syn' L. sfiyn E. zwin
cycle of 10 days; everywhere, all around
Y. [syn'] L. sfiyn E. zwin
thin cord, sash; sandal strap
Y. syn' L. sfiyn E. zwin
tame, docile; to tame
Y. [syn] L. syn E. swin
sincere, trusting
Y. [syn] L. syn E. swin
drip, weep; truly, really
Y. syn L. syn E. swin
kind of grass; a surname
Y. synv L. syn E. swin
ask, enquire
Y. [syn] L. syn E. swin
ancient place name
Y. sim' L. sfiim E. zim
bank, shore; place name
Y. sim' L. sfiim E. zim
kind of fish, sturgeon, now written
same as |
Y. xynN L. xynv E. xunh
instruct, teach; precept; follow, obey;
gloss the meaning of a word
Y. [siir] L. sin" E. sinh
in flood; sprinkle
Y. sin" L. sinv E. sinh
ask, interrogate; announce; dispatch
xun
xun
xun
xun
xun
xun
xun
xun
xun
xun
xun
xun
xun
xun
xun
xun
xun
xun
xun
xun
xun
xun

Lexicon 353
162:3
60:6
78:6
49:9
162:10
M38727
K383b
M10091B
K392e
M16448
K392g
M087655
K433a
M39038
K434e
Y. sinv L. sirT, synv E. sin1
rapid, swift
Y. [syrr] L. sfiyrT E.
go all around; proclaim everywS
Y. synx L. sfiyn" E.
accompany in death
Y. sunv L. sunv E.
humble, submissive; one of the
trigrams of the Yijing; also sun
Y sunv L. sunv E.
yield; modest, submissive
xun
xun
xun
xun
xun

354 Lexicon
2:2
75:8
196:4
32:14
64:5
196:5
92:0
140:4
144:7
85:8
27:6
46:8
109:8
7:6
103:0
172:4
30:8
104:8
7:6
38:8
112:4
M00071
M15025
M46738
K37h
M05557
K616h
Ml 1929
K629H
M46823
M19909
K37a
M30747
K37d
M34061
K58s
M17582a
K879r
M02930a
K879p
M08180a
M23437a
K879a'
M00274b
K805a
M21994A
K90a
M41973
K37g
M03835
K805f
M22297
M00274a
K805a
M06441
M24067
Y. ja L. ?ja: E. ?ai/7e:
bifurcation, fork
Y. ja L. ?ja: E. ?ai/?e:
fork of a tree, crotch
Y. ja L. ?ja: E. ?ai/?e:
crow
Y. jav L. Tjaip E. ?aip/7ejp
press down, crush
Y. jav L. ?ja:p E. ?aip/?eip
signature, mark; pawn, pledge; arrest
Y. jav L. ?ja:p E. ?aip/?e:p
duck
Y. ja L. njai E. rjai/rje:
tooth
Y. ja' L. njai E. rjai/rje:
bud, sprout
Y. ja' L. njai E. rjai/rjei
headquarters of a magistrate or other local
or military official
Y. ja' L. njaij E. rjaij/rjEij
river bank; margin, limit; also yai. Also
E. rjia
Y.jaj' L.njaij E. rjaij/rje:j
same as ; also yai.
Y.jaj' L.njaij E. rjaij/rjeij
high bank, also yai.
Y. [jaj'] L. njaij E. rjaij/rjeij
rim of the eye; also yai. Also E. rjaijh
Y. jax L. Tjar E. ?aih/?e:h
second; also ya
Y. [ja] L. njar E. nai'/ne:'
proper; elegant; same as . See also
shu, pi.
Y.ja" L. njai' E. nai'/ne:'
refined, decorous, elegant
Y.jav L.?jai' E.?ai'/7ei'
dumb, mute; hoarse
Y.ja" L.?jai' E.?aiV?e:'
dumb, unable to speak, same as
Y. jav L. ?jar E. ?aih/?eih
second, inferior; also ya
Y.jV L.?jar E.?ai/?eih
term of address between sons-in-law in a
family
Y. ja" L. rjjaT E. rjaih/neih
roll, press with a roller; smooth, polish
ya
ya
ya
ya
ya
ya
ya
ya
ya
ya
ya
ya
ya
ya
ya
ya
ya
ya
ya
ya
ya

Lexicon 355
149:4
162:4
64:9
159:1
27:6
46:8
85:8
109:8
79:6
38:11
86:7
140:11
M35260
K37e
M38756
K37f
M12363
K253m
M38173
K280a
M029305
K879p
M08180b
M175825
K879q
M234375
K879a'
M16627B
K448a
M06659
M19076A
K200a
M31837a
ya
ya
ya
ya
yai
yai
yai
yai
yan
van
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
163:11
30:6
85:9
86:6
86:9
86:12
M39614
M03577A
K370h
M17873A
K483e
M19022
K3701
M19203
K483H
M19429A
K243a
130:6 M29426
169:8 M41380B
K270a
Y. jav L. njar E. rjaih/rjejh
meet, encounter; be surprised, astonished
Y. jav L. njar E. rjaih/rjeih
meet, encounter; receive, welcome
Y. [jav] L. Tjait E. Tait/Teit
pull up out of the ground
Y. [jav] L. Tjait E. Tsit/Teit
crush under carriage wheels, run over
Y.jaj' L.rjjaij E. rjaij/rjey
same as also ya
Y.jaj' L.rjja:j E. rjaij/rjeij
high bank, also ya
Y.ja' L. rjjaij E. rjaij/rje:j
river bank; also ya
Y. |jaj'] L. njaij E.rjaijA]eij
rim of the eye, also ya. Also E. rjaijh
Y. jan L. ?jan E. Tain/Tern
blackish red. See also yln
Y. jen L. ?ian E. ?ian
handsome, winsome
Y. [jen] L. ?ian E. ?ian
where? how? See also yan below
Y. [jen] L. ?ian E. ?ian
to dry out, wither; listless; also nian.
Also E. ?ian
Y. [jen] L. ?ian E. ?ian
place name; a surname
Y. jen L. Tjian E. ?en
throat, pharynx. See also yan, ye
Y. [jen] L. ?jian E. ?en
block up, dam. fall into oblivion. See
also yln
Y. jen L. ?jian E. ?en
smoke; mist, vapour; same as
Y. (jen] L. Tjian E. ?en
smoke; mist, vapour; same as
Y. jen L. ?jian E. ?en
ancient state in northern Hebei. See also
yan.
Y. jenL. ?jian E. ?en
yanzhlkind of facial cosmetic,
rouge
Y. [jen1 L. Tjian E. Ten
yanzhl , queen of the Xiongnu

356 Lexicon
86:7
130:8
164:8
85:8
169:8
27:12
61:14
181:9
149:0
38:6
112:6
32:7
54:4
118:7
120:7
142:7
167:7
85:5
167:5
140:4
M19076B
K197a
M29616
M39896
M17696
K614c
M41372
K614d
M03025B
K616c
M11356
K616e
M43591
K199c
M35205
K251a
M06247
M24177
K239g
M05121B
K203e
M09569
K203a
M26080
M27516
K203c
M33120
M40446A
M17260
K229b
M403105
K229e
M30727a
K257d
Y. jen' L. ian E. ian
final particle, to it, in it, there, etc. See
also yan above.
Y. jem L. ?iam E. ?iam
preserve with salt, pickle, cure
Y. jem L. ?iam E. ?iam, ?iam
same as
Y. jem L. ?iam E. ?iam
flood, submerge, soak; delay
Y. jem L. ?iam E. ?iam
eunuch; palace doorkeeper
Y. [jeml L. Tjiam E. Tjiam
yanyan satisfied, contented. See
also yan
Y. jem L. Tjiam E. Tjiam
same as B
Y. jan' L. rjjain E. rjain/rjem
face, appearance, countenance
Y.jen' L. rjian E. rjian
speak; speech; word
Y.jen' L. njian E. rjen
beautiful
Y.jen' L. njian E. rjen
grind; study
Y.jen' L. jian E.jian
limit, boundary; pathway to a tomb. See
also shan
Y.jen' L.jian E.jian
prolong, extend; postpone; send for,
invite
Y.jen' L.jian E.jian
bamboo mat
Y. (jen'] L.jian E.jian
crown of a ceremonial cap
Y.jen' L.jian E. iian
see youyan wanyan
Y.jen' L.jian E.jian
short spear. See also chan
Y.jen' L. jyan E. jwian
go along (a riverside or coast); follow
Y. uen' L. jyan E. jwian
lead (metal), also qian; Yanshan li/
place name
Y. [uen'l L. rjyan E. rjuan
yanhua Daphe genkwa; also yuan.
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan

Lexicon 357
46:9
112:9
46:20
30:17
86:4
75:13
118:13
169:8
170:5
197:13
109:6
9:9
23:7
142:9
163:9
142:9
98:16
85:11
144:3
10:7
M08294
M24315
K673a
M08649
K6071
M04589
K607H
M18910
K617a
M15659
K619g
M26607
M41379
K672m
M41595b
K618e
M47579
K609n
M23318
K4161
M00830
K253g
M02684
K253d
M33268A
K2531
M39513
K253H
M33268B
K2531
M21626
K252d
M18130
K450k
M34033
K197a
superfluoi
M01375
K229d
Y. [jam'] L. njaim E. rpim/rjeim
precipitous, craggy
Y. [jam'] L. njaim E. rpim/rjeim
precipitous, craggy
Y.jam' L. njaim E. rjaim/rjeim
rocky, precipitous; dangerous
Y. jem' L. rjiam E. rjiam
stern, strict, severe
Y. jem' L. iam E. wiam
flame; blaze; blazing hot; inflammation
Y. jem' L. jiam E. jiam
eaves
Y.jem' L. jiam E.jiam
eaves, same as
Y. jem' L. jiam E. jiam
gateway to a lane; transcription of
Sanskrit Yama, King of the underworld
Y. jem' L. jiam E. jiam
looming over, threatening; now read dian
Y. jem' L. jiam E. jiam
salt
Y. jan" L. njain' E. rpin'/rjem'
eye
Y.jen" L.?ian' E.Kan'
fall on one's back, lie down; lay down;
desist, cease
Y. (jen"] L. ?ian' E. ?ian'
hide; gutter, drain. Also E. ?ianh
Y. [Jen"] L. ?ian' E. ?ian'
kind of cicada. See also yan below
Y. [jen] L. ?ian' E. Kan'
place name
Y. [jenvl L.?jian' E. ?en'
y anting gecko. See also yan above
Y. (Jen"] L. rjian' E. rjian'
ancient cooking vessel, steamer. Also E.
rjian, rjianh.
Y.jen" L. jian' E. jian'
develop, evolve; deduce, elaborate; drill,
practise; perform
Y. jen" L. jian' E. jian'
overflow; spread out; excessive,
as. AlsoE. jianh
Y.jen" L. jyan' E
ancient place name
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan

358 Lexicon
9:20
37:5
55:6
64:8
64:9
85:9
75:14
194:14
203:14
18:8
63:8
96:8
72:6
196:6
196:10
154:15
172:4
196:4
32:9
30:6
30:16
40:7
M01324
K607k
M05881
K614a
M09610
K615a
M12285
K614b
M12359
K615b
M17784
K615c
M15750
K616f
M45941
M48229
M02059A
K617d
M11751
M21073
K617f
M13914
K146f
M46852
K146g
M47208
K146i
M36972
M41960
K186b
M46734
K186a
M05274
M03577B
K370H
M04545
K243c
M07166
K253b
Y. [jam"] L. njaim' E. rjaim'/rjeim'
majestic, stem
Y. jem" L. ?iam' E. ?iam'
cover, overspread; extensive; sudden
Y. [jem] L. ?iam' E. ?iam'
cover; narrow passage
Y. jem" L. Tiam' E. ?iam'
cover; take by surprise
Y. [jem"] L. Tiam' E. ?iam'
same as
Y. jem, jem" L. ?iam' E. ?iam'
gathering (clouds)
Y. jem" L. Tjiam' E. Tjiam'
wild mulberry
Y. jem" L. Tjiam' E. Tjiam'
have a nightmare. Also E. Tjiap.
Y. (jem"] L. Tjiam' E. Tjiam'
black mole on the skin
Y.jem L. jiam' E.jiam'
sharp; sharpen; bright. See also shan
Y. [jem"l L. jiam' E. jiam'
y&nyi vertical door bar
Y.jem L.jiam' E.jiam'
carved piece of fine jade
Y. janN L. Tja:nv E. Tainh/Te:nh
clear, cloudless; calm, at peace; pleasant;
late. AlsoE. Tanh
Y. [janvl L. Tjams E. Tain/Temh
same as
Y. (janvj L. Tja:nv E. Tain/?e:nh
kind of small bird
Y. jan" L. rjja:nv E. rjainh/qejnh
counterfeit, spurious
Y. janx L. rjjaaT E. rjainh/rjemh
wild goose, same as
Y. janv L. rjjam" E. rjainh/rjemh
wild goose
Y. jens L. TianN E. Tianh
dam, weir
Y. jenv L. Tjianv E. Tenh
to swallow. See also yan, ye
Y. jenv L. Tjianv E. Tenh
to swallow. Cf.
Y. jenv L. Tjianv E. Tenh
repose, rest; have pleasure; feast
yan
yan
ySn
yan
y&n
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan

Lexicon 359
86:12
149:16
149:20
59:6
149:9
112:7
157:6
27:12
184:14
86:8
86:12
86:16
151:21
164:20
187:13
37:2
78:5
85:5
115:5
196:5
9:6
60:6
64:9
M19429B
K243a
M36121
M36170
K2521
M09980
K199a
M35747
K199b
M24233
M37527B
K239c
M03025A
K616c
M44453
K616d
M19141
M19395
M19574
K672o
M36332
K12475
M40109
M45024
K613h
M05840
K718a
M16410
K718e
M17326
K718g
M24996
M46822
K718H
M00552
K732e
M10094
K732f
M12355
K720J
Y. jenN L. ?jianv E. ?enh
swallow (bird); rest; feast. See also yan
Y. jenv L. ?jianv E. ?enh
feast
Y. njen" L. rjian' E. rjian'
decide a court case
Y. jenv L. rjian" E. rjianh
elegant
Y. jenv L. rjianv E. rjianh
common saying, proverb
Y. jenx L. rjjian" E. rjenh
ink stone
Y. [jenv] L. rjjian" E. rjenh
on tiptoe (of animals). See also jiSn
Y. jerrr L. Tjiairf E. ?jiamh
satiated; fed up, disgusted. See also yan
Y. jemv L. TjianT E. ?jiamh
full; satiated
Y. jenT L. jianT E. jiamh
tongue of flame; flame
Y. [jem] L. jiam' E. jiam'
yanyan fire about to blaze up
Y. [jemv] L.jiarrf E. jiamh
bright, blazing
Y. jemv L. jiamv E. jiamh
beautiful, gorgeous; amorous; admire
Y. jemv L. rjiarrf E. rjiamh
thick, strong (tea, etc.)
Y. j£mv L. rjiam" E. rjiamh
examine, verify
Y. jarj L. ?iarj E. ?iarj
inside; centre, middle
Y. jarj L. ?iarj E. ?iarj
disaster
Y.jarj L.?iarj E.?iarj
yangyang vast, widespread
Y. jarj L. ?iarj E. ?iarj
seedling, sprout
Y. jarj L. ?iarj E. ?iarj
yuanyang mandarin duck
Y.jarj' L.jiarj E.jiarj
pretend
Y.jarj' L. jiarj E.jiarj
pangyang hesitant, irresolute
Y.jarj' L.jiarj E.jiarj
raise
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yan
yang
yang
yang
yang
yang
yang
yang
yang

360 Lexicon
72:9
75:9
85:6
86:9
104:9
123:0
167:9
170:9
182:9
177:5
104:6
104:15
184:6
9:4
26:2
61:5
61:6
75:11
85:11
85:15
86:9
M14066
K720h
M15112
K720q
M17363
K732h
M19235A
K7201
M22327
K720s
M28425
K732a
M40624
K720t
M41725
K720e
M43909
K720p
M42784
K718f
M22163
K732I
M22602
K732r
M44144A
K732J
M00400A
K699c
M02841B
K699a
M10434
K718d
M10565
K732g
M15457
M18184
K732s
M18573
M19235B
K7201
Y.jarj' L.jiarj E.jiarj
sun rising; sunshine, bright
Y.jarj' L.jiarj E.jiarj
poplar
Y.jarj' L. jiarj E.jiarj
great expanse of water, ocean
Y. [jarj'] L.jiarj E.jiarj
melt metals, smelt. See also yang
Y. (jar)'] L.jiarj E.jiarj
sore, ulcer
Y.jarj' L.jiarj E.jiarj
sheep
Y. [jarj'] L.jiarj E.jiarj
horse bridle ornament
Y.jarj' L.jiarj E.jiarj
sunny side; south side of a hill, north side
of a river; positive, male principle
Y.jarj' L.jiarjE.jiarj
lift; promote; same as
Y.jarf L.?iarj' E.?iarj'
breast strap of horse
Y.jarf L.jiarj' E.jiarj'
itch. Also E. ziarj, jiarj illness
Y. [jarfj L.jiarj' E.jiarj'
same as
Y.jarf L. jiarj' E.jiarj'
nurture, raise. See also yang
Y.jarjv(?) L. rjiarj' E. rjiarj'
face upward; look up to. The Zhongyuan
yinyun places this word in a separate
homophone group from jarjv. It is not
clear what this means. See also yang
same as See also ang
Y. jarf L. ?iarjs E. ?iarjh
yangyang discontented
Y. jarjv L. jiarf E. jiarjh
malady, sickness
Y. jarf L. jiarj" E. jiarjh
appearance, shape; model, pattern; type
Y.jarp L.jiarjx E.jiarjh
ripple; long; river name
Y. jarjv L. jiarj"
river name, same as
Y.jar/ L.
r
to roast, burn. See also yang.
yang
yang
yang
ya"ng
yang
yang
yang
yang
yang
ySng
yang
yang
yang
yang
yang
yang
yang
yang
yang
yang
yang

Lexicon 361
123:4
184:6
9:4
17:3
37:1
38:4
113:4
130:9
140:9
146:3
162:13
52:0
79:8
85:8
89:0
130:4
38:6
60:10
64:10
94:10
96:6
M28449
K732k
M44144B
K732J
M00400B
K699c
MOlSlOb
M05838B
K1141a
M06086
K1141d
M24637
K1141g
M29705
K1142b
M31468
K1142c
M34768A
K1142a
M39168
K1162f
M09189
KlllSa
M16647a
K1167e
M17619a
M19737a
K1167a
M29322a
K1167d
M06202
K1145d
M10201
K1144e
M12479
K1144g
M20571
M20968
K1145g
Y.jarf L.jiarp E.jiarjh
long (river)
Y. jarjv L. jiarjv E. jiarjh
support, provide for. See also ySng
Y.jarjX?) L.rjiarjv E.rjiarjh
depend on, turn to. See also yang
Y. jaw L. Tjaiw E. ?aiw/?e:w
concave, hollow, cavity; also ao
Y. jew L. ?iaw E. ?iaw
tender, young, delicate. See also y£o, ao
Y. jew L. ?iaw E. ?iaw
evil spirit; black magic, witchcraft;
bewitching
Y. [jew] L. ?iaw E. ?iaw
inauspicious, same as
Y. jew L. Tjiaw E. Tjiaw
waist
Y. jew L. Tjiaw E. Tjiaw
kind of grass
Y. jew L. Tjiaw E. Tjiaw
waist; seek, demand; coerce; agreement,
treaty. See also yao
Y. jew L. Tjiaw E. Tjiaw
intercept; invite, request; seek; also E.
kew
Y. jew L. Tjiaw E. Tew
small
Y. xjaw' L. xfijaiw E. yaiw
see xiao
Y. xjaw' L. xfija;w E. yaiw
see xiao
Y. xjaw' L. xfijaiw E. yaiw
divination line in the Yijing, also xiao
Y. xjaw' L. xfijaiw E. yaiw
cooked meat or fish; also xiao
Y.jew' L. jiaw E.jiaw
a surname
Y. [jew'] L. jiaw E.jiaw
corvee labour
Y.jew' L. jiaw E.jiaw
shake, wave
Y. [jew'] L. jiaw E.jiaw
a southern people, now written
Y. [jew'] L. jiaw E.jiaw
small clam; clam shell
yang
yang
yang
yao
yao
ySo
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao

362 Lexicon
96:10
116:10
120:11
149:10
159:5
162:10
167:6
170:8
182:10
195:10
9:12
32:9
46:12
30:6
211:6
37:1
78:4
134:4
196:11
75:4
116:5
M21149
K11441
M25594
K1144c
M27856A
K1144n
M35832
K1144J
M38272
K1131k
M39035
K1144k
M40387A
K1145H
M41705B
K1047d
M43917
M46390
K11441
M01113
K1164b
M05272
K1164a
M08491
M03543B
K1166g
M48653
M05838A
K1141a
M16390
K1141f
M30184
K1078a
M47263
K575g'
M14501
K1245b
M25458
K1245a
Y.jew' L. jiaw E. jiaw
precious jade
Y. [jew'] L. jiaw E. jiaw
kiln
Y. [Jew'] L.jiaw E.jiaw
follow; from; flourishing, abundant. See
also you, zhou
Y.jew' L.jiaw E.jiaw
folk-song, ballad; rumour
Y. [jew'] L.jiaw E.jiaw
kind of small carriage
Y.jew' L.jiaw E.jiaw
distant, remote
Y. [jew'] L.jiaw E.jiaw
large hoe. See also diao, tiao
Y. jew L. jiaw E. jiaw
kiln; Gaoyao , legendary ancestor
of the Eastern Yi. See also tab
Y.jew' L.jiaw E.jiaw
piaoyaofloating and bobbing in the
wind
Y. [jew'] L.jiaw E.jiaw
fabulous fish with wings; ray, skate
Y. [jew'] L. niiaw E. rjew
seejiaoyao
Y. jew' L. rjjiaw E. rjew
high; legendary predynastic ruler
Y.jew' L. rjjiaw E. rjew
high, lofty
Y. jaw" L. njaiw' E. rjaiw'/rjeiw'
now used for See also jiao
Y. jaw" L. rjjaiw' E. rjaiwVrjeiw'
bite, now written
Y. jew" L. ?iaw' E. ?iaw'
bend; die prematurely. See also yao, ao
Y. jew" L. ?iaw' E. ?iaw'
die prematurely
Y.jew" L.jiaw' E.jiaw'
ladle out, scoop out
Y. [jew"] L.jiaw' E.jiaw'
cry of the female pheasant
Y.jew" L. Tjiaw' E. ?ew'
dark, secluded; distant
Y. [jew"] L. Tjiaw' E. ?ew'
deep (eyes); distant, withdrawn
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
y&o

Lexicon 363
116:5
75:11
104:10
140:9
140:15
167:17
146:3
116:6
72:14
86:14
124:14
30:12
75:9
75:9
88:9
128:3
163:4
167:4
5:2
15:5
166:4
M25463
KlllSi
M15399C
K1125a
M22419a
KlllSc
M31451a
K1120n
M32341a
K1125p
M41051a
M34768B
K1142a
M25495
K1166a'
M14227
K1124i
M19520
K1124J
M28828
K1124k
M04307a
K395b
M 15069
M15069b
M19734
M29008
K47b
M39319B
K47a
M40201
M00171
K4g
M01621
K976p'
M40133
K831
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
yao
ye
ye
ye
ye
ye
ye
ye
ye
ye
ye
167:4
5:2
15:5
166:4
Y. [jew"] L. Tjiaw' E. ?ew'
withdrawn, retiring; yaotiao
reticent, modest
Y. jaws L. rjja:wN E. rjaiwh/rje:wh
enjoy, be pleased with. See also le, yue
Y. jawX?), nqeX?) L. rjiak E. rjiak
fever, ague; also nyue
Y. [jaw\jo^] L.?iak E.?iak
kind of medicinal plant, Heracleum; also
yue
Y. jawv,jos L. jiak E.jiak
medicinal herb, medicine; also yue
Y. jawv,jov L.jiak
key; also yue
Y. jewv L. ?jiawv
important. See also yao
Y. [jewv] L.?jiawv
deep, dark; southeast corner of a house
Y. jew" L. jiaws
shine, illuminate, same as
Y. [jewv] L. jiawv
shine, same as
Y. jewv L. jiawv
shine, illuminate
Y. je"L. ?jiat
choke, cf. ye
Y. [je'] L.jia
coconut palm; also ye
Y. [je'] L.jia
coconut palm; also ye
Y. je' L.jia
father; term of respect for an old man
Y. je' L. iia E. jia
vulgar form of as a question particle
Y. je' L.jia E. jia
final question particle, equivalent to y& hu
. See also xie
Y. [je] L. jia E. jia
see moye
Y. je" L. jia' E. jia'
final particle of noun predication, etc.
Y. je" L.jia' E.jia'
smelt
Y. je L. jia' E. jia'
open, uncultivated land; wilderness; wild
f a hou
',. jiawh
. jiawh
. jiawh
.?et
• jia
• jia
• jia

364 Lexicon
ye
ye
ye
ye
ye
ye
ye
ye
ye
ye
ye
ye
ye
ye
ye
ye
yT
yi
36:5
41:7
30:6
64:6
M05763
K800J
M07434D
K807a
M03577C
K370h
M12013
149:9 M35757
K313x
64:14 M12867
K616g
176:14 M42698
72:12 M14169
86:12 M19390
K682a
184:10 M44328
K642x
140:9 M31387A
K633d
75:9 M15170
K640a
163:13 M39684
64:8 M12262b
K8001
85:8 M17586a
KSOOn
130:8 M29615b
KSOOm
30:13 M04381
K957b
164:11 M40006
K958a
Y. jev L. jiav E. jiah
night
Y. jevL. jiax E. jiah
puye title of a high court official,
supervisor. See also she, shi, yi
Y. jesL. Tjiat E. ?et
gfcngyS choke with emotion, sob,
cf. ye See also yan, yan
Y. jev L. jiat E. jiat
drag; the graph is now used for two other
words: zhuai fling, and zhuM drag
Y. jex L. ?iat E. ?iat
announce; call on, visit (a superior)
Y. je% L. ?jiap E. Tjiap
press with one's finger; grasp. Also
E. ?jiam'
Y. jem" L. Tjiap E. Tjiap
dimple
Y. [jes] L. iap E. wiap
bright, shining
Y. jes L. iap E. wiap
bright, shining
Y. [jev] L. iap E. wiap
deliver food to labourers in the field
Y. jex L. jiap E. jiap
leaf. See also she
Y. jes ? L. rjiap E. rjiap
horizontal board of a bell stand; initiate;
work, trade, profession; course of study;
property, inheritance; cause, enterprise.
The Zhongyuan yinyun sets up a separate
homophone group for this and the
following word
Y. jev ? L. rjiap E. rjiap
place name
Y. jiv L. jiajk E. jiajk
armpit; support under the arm; also yi
Y. jiv L. jiajk E. jiajk
liquid, fluid, juice; moisten; also yl
Y. ji" L. jiajk E. jiajk
armpit, also yi
Y.ji L.Ti E.Ti/Ti
exclamation, alas
Y.ji L.Ti E.Ti/Ti
medical practitioner, doctor

Lexicon 365
76:8
85:11
94:8
113:9
9:6
145:0
9:4
120:11
196:11
203:6
1:0
33:9
64:9
37:3
38:6
58:15
85:6
104:6
140:6
30:2
M16093
M18164
M20493
Klh1
M24775
K5711
M00607
K550f
M34091A
K550a
M00432
K604a
M27853
K589e
M47267
K589g
M48091
M00001
K394a
M05661
K395a
M12351
K688g
M05852
K551a
M06222
K551e
M09950
K1237c
M17387A
K551f
M22148
K551g
M30952A
K551k
M03246A
K976p
Y.khi[sic] L.?i E.?ia/?i
sigh or exclamation of delight
Y.ji L.?i E.?ia/?i
ripples, waves
Y.ji L.?i E.?ia/?i
sigh, exclamation
Y. [ji] L.?i E.?ia/?i
beautiful
Y.ji L.?i E.?ij
lean on, depend on
Y.ji L.?i E.?ij
clothing, clothes, garment; covering. See
alsoyi
Y.ji L.?ji E.?ji
adnominal particle, copula (Shijing); he,
she, it
Y. [ji] L.?jiaj E.?ej
brown; an adnominal particle and copula
in the Zuozhutin and Guoyu, like we"i
Y.jiji' L.?jiaj E.?ej
gull
Y.[ji] L.?jiaj E.?ej
blackish; place name
Y.ji\jf L.?jit E.?jit
one
Y.[ji\jf] L.?jit E.Tjit
one
Y.ji* L.?jip E.?jip
salute, bow
Y.ji' L.ji E.ji
level, even; to level, raze; a non-Chinese
people in Zhou times; (eastern) barbarian
Y.ji' L.ji E.ji
mother's sister, maternal aunt; wife's
sister, sister-in-law
Y.ji' L.ji E.ji
rule, norm; wine goblet
Y.[ji'] L.ji E.ji
tears. See also ti
Y.ji' L.ji E.ji
injure, wound
Y.[ji'] L.ji E.ji
mow; weed. See also ti
Y.ji' L.ji E.ji/ji
I, me. See also tai
yT
yi
yT
y'
yT
yi
yT
yT
yT
yT
yT.
yT.
yT
yf
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi

366 Lexicon
32:3
61:5
109:5
131:0
149:5
154:5
181:6
184:5
22:3
63:6
75:9
115:6
142:5
149:3
162:3
162:5
162:6
164:3
162:12
46:14
103:9
9:13
M04889
M10470
K976u
M23227A
K976a'
M30069
K960a
M35376B
K976v
M36719
K976x
M43455
K960c
M44080
K976y
M02598
K4n
Ml 1741
M15081
K4n'
M25045
K3q
M32964B
K41
M35235B
K4q
M38728B
K4r
M38785B
K4i'
M38833
K3r
M39773
K4s
M39134A
K540m
M08545A
K956c
M22007
K956a
M01170
K2u
Y.ji' L.ji
bridge
Y.ji' L.ji
harmony; happy, joyful
Y.ji'L.ji
See xuyi
Y.fjH L.ji
E.ji/ji
E.ji/ji
E.ji/ji
E.ji/ji
chin, same as 1
Y. Iji-] LY.[ji'] L.ji E.ji/ji
hand down, bequeath. See also dai
Y.ji' L.ji E.ji/ji
bestow; hand down, bequeath
Y.ji' L.ji E.ji/ji
chin; cheek; nourish
Y.ji' L.ji E.ji/ji
sweet rice cake, sweet; malt sugar
Y. Iji'] L.ji E.jia/ji
ewer with a handle; ladle
Y.ji' L.ji E. jia/ji
1 Hf vertical door bar
E. jia/ji
E. jia/ji
E. jia/ji
Y.Ijil L.ji
clothes horse
Y.ji' L.ji
move, transport
Y.ji'T ji E.jia/ji
see weiyf . See also she
Y.lji'] L.ji E.jia/ji
yiyi self-satisfied
Y.[ji'] L.ji Ejia/ji
same as also yT.
Y.[ji'] Mi
see weiyi
Y.[ji'] L.ji
move, transport, same as
Y.[ji'] L.jiY.tjil L.ji E.jia/ji
thin broth used in brewing wine
Y.ji' L.jyj E.jwi
lose, leave behind. See also wei
Y.ji'L. rji E. rji/rji
Jiuyi name of a mountain. See also
ni.
Y.ji' L. rji E. rji/rji
suspect, doubt
Y.ji' L. rji E. rjia/rji
etiquette; correct behaviour
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
E..

Lexicon 367
40:5
85:4
9:8
70:10
159:8
63:6
111:2
9:3
49:2
49:0
140:5
140:5
162:3
162:5
137:13
142:13
167:8
142:10
5:0
61:18
M07111
K21a
M17183
M00776
Klf
M13685
Kll1
M38386
Kli'
Ml 1742
K550g
M23930
K9761
M00388
K976b
M08747
K976a
M08743
K977a
M30792
K976g
M30793
K976f
M38728A
K4r
M38785A
K4i'
M30565
M33672
K2x
M40560A
Klv
M33415
K548i
M00161
K505a
M11501
K395d
Y.ji' L. rji E. rjia/ni
fitting, right
Y. ji' L. rji E. rjij
name of a river
Y.jf L.?i' E.?ia'/?i'
lean on, rely on
Y.(jfl L.?i' E.?iaY?i'
yT'nl flutter
Y.rjf] L.?i' E.?iaV?i'
boards on the sides of a carriage box on
which one can lean. Also E. ?iah
Y.jf L.?i' E.?ij'
silken screen
Y.jf L.i' E.i'/i'
final perfective particle
Y.jf L.ji' E.ji'/ji'
use; by means of, with
same as
Y.jf L.ji' E.ji'/ji'
stop, complete, finish; already; very
much
Y.jf L.ji' Rji'/F
see fouyT . Also E.
zi'
Y.jf L.ji' E.ji'/ji'
same as
Y.|jf] L.ji' Ejia'/ji'
same as . See also yi
Y.jf L.ji' EJia'/ji'
inclined, slanted, askew; yllT 3
winding, meandering. See also yi
Y.jf L.rji' E.rjiaVrji'
moor a boat
Y.jf L.rji' E.rjiaVni'
ant
Y.jf L.rji' E. rjia'/rji'
frame for hanging crossbows. See also qi
Y. [jf] L. rji' E. rjij'
ant. Compare
Y.ji* L.?it E.?it
second Heavenly Stem
Y.ji* L.?i* E.?ih
beautiful; excellent. The Yunjing places
this in Grade III and leaves Grade IV
yi
yf
yT
yT
yT
yT
yT
yT
yT
yT
yT
yT
yi
yT
yT
y>
yT
yT
yT
yi

368 Lexicon
yi (continued) vacant. It is likely that it should really be
read as Grade IV: L.?ji\ E. ?jih
184:12
61:9
196:13
145:0
129:7
55:3
102:7
184:0
72:4
18:14
123:7
149:8
149:13
79:11
140:15
104:10
72:12
78:12
109:11
120:10
124:11
M44396
K395H
M10921
K957a
M47384
K957c
M34091B
K550a
M29224
K509g
M09591
K977b
M21866
K954a
M44014C
K921a
M13814B
K850a
M02249
K537a
M28504
K2r
M35605
K21h
M36027
K2v
M16673
K516c
M32317
K516d
M22395
K332a
M14163
K395i
M16578
K395k
M23630
M27738
K849g
M28796
K589f
Y.jiv L.?i^ E.?ih
spoiled food. For the reading see
Y.ji^ L.?i^ E.?ih/?ih
idea; meaning
Y.ji^ L.?i^ E.?ih/7ih
yier swallow (bird)
Y. [jn L. ?i^ E. ?ijh
put on, wear. See also yT.
Y.tjil L.ji* E.jih
practise, study; labour, toil; cut branch
that has sprouted
Y. [jil L.ji^ E.jih/jih
different, same as •
Y. jix L. jiv E. jih/jih
differ; different; strange
Y.tiH L.ji* E.jih/jih
proper name. See also shi, si
Y.ji* L.ji* E.jiah/jih
easy; well-cultivated (field). See also yi
below
Y. jiv L. rjiv E. rjih
cut off the nose
Y. jiv L. rjiv E. rjiah/rjih
what is right, proper; righteousness, duty
Y.ji^ L.rjis E.rjiah/rjih
what is fitting, proper, appropriate
Y.ji* L.qi^ E. qiah/nih
discuss, consider, plan
Y.ji* L.ni^ E.nijh
resolute
Y.IJM L.rji^ E.rjif
Xantoxylum
Y. jiN L. ?iajv E. ?iajh
bury (as a sacrifice)
Y. [jn L.?M E.?ejh
cloudy, wind-blown sky
Y. jis L. Tjiaf E. ?ejh
kill
Y. jiv L. ?jiajv E. ?ejh
eye affliction, cataract
Y. kis [sic] L. ?jiajv E. ?ejh
hang oneself, strangle oneself
Y. jiv L. ?jiajv E. ?ejh
feather screen; to hide
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi

Lexicon 369
19:12
75:5
73:2
85:5
145:7
149:5
4:1
140:2
18:10
18:2
140:11
140:15
124:3
149:6
9:13
130:13
61:13
140:13
164:13
64:4
56:0
75:3
M02441
K339k
M14592
K339f
M14282
K338a
M17267A
K339h
M34303
K333a
M35367
K339g
M00111
K347a
M30648B
K347c
M02108
K285e
M01859
K347b
M31742
K330e
M32330
K330f
M28625
M35412
K552k
M01178
K957e
M29951
K9571
Ml 1295
K957f
M32106
M40058
K957d
Ml 1883
K915a
M09656
K918a
M14473
K918e
Y.ji* LJiaj^ E-JiaJh
toil, fatigue
Y. jiv L. jiajv E. jiajh
oar; rudder
Y. jiv L. jiajv E. jiajh
drag, trail behind
Y.[jn L.jiaf E-JiaJh
yiyi dragging, slow-moving. See also
xie
Y. jiv L. jiajv E. jiajh
border; posterity, descendants
Y. [ji1 L.M E.jiajh
gabbling, garrulous
Y. jiv L. rjiajv E. rjiajh
mow; regulate, govern
Y. tjil L. rjiaj^ E. rjiajh
mow. See also ai
Y. jis L. rjiaj^ E. rjiajh
cut off the nose
Y. jiv L. rjiaj^ E. rjiajh
mow
Y. tin L. njiaf E. njiajh
plant, sow
Y. jis L. njiajx E. rjjiajh
plant, sow, cultivate; skill, talent, art,
craft
Y.tin L.rjM E.nejh
legendary archer
Y. jix L. njiajv E. rjejh
come to, arrive at; call on, visit
Y. (jil L. ?iak E. ?ik
100,000
Y. Ui^] L. ?iak E. ?ik
breast, bosom
Y.ji^ L.?iak E. ?ik
remember
Y. |ji^] L. ?iak E. ?ik
yisi, yiyT Job's tears, Coix agrestis
Y. [jil L. ?iak E. ?ik
drink made of prune juice
Y. tin L. ?iak E. ?jik
repress, restrain; or
Y. []iv] L.jiak E.jik
shoot (with arrow and string attached)
Y. tiil L.jiak E.jik
stake, post
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi

370 Lexicon
124:5
124:5
124:12
203:3
30:10
108:5
130:10
8:4
31:13
37:6
41:7
46:13
50:6
55:6
61:13
64:8
66:13
72:4
85:8
109:8
120:13
130:8
M28655
K912a
M28657
K912b
M28818
K954d
M48052
M04063
K849c
M22972
K849a
M29773
K849d
M00293
KSOOa
M04850
K790b
M05922
KSOOd
M07434C
K807a
M08502
M08873
KSOOe
M09611
KSOOf
Ml 1334
K790c
M12262a
K8001
M13406B
K790d
M13814A
K850a
M17586b
KSOOn
M23466
K790a
M27975
K790e
M29615a
KSOOm
L.jiak
L. Tjiajk
L. Tjiajk
E.jik
E. Tjiajk
E. Tjiajk
Y.ji* L.jiakE.jik
next (day), same as
Y. [jn L.jiak E.jik
next day. AlsoE. juwk.
Y.ji* L.jiak E.jik
wing; protect, aid; next day
Y. or;
black
Y. Gi^
throat
Y.ji*
increase; more and more; advantage
Y. [jiv] L. Tjiajk E. Tjiajk
flesh on the neck, fat
Y. [jix] L. jiajk E. jiajk
also
Y. jiv L. jiajk E. jiajk
turn around
Y. [ji*] L. jiajk E. jiajk
grand; lovely; orderly,well-ordered
Y. ]i" L. jiajk E. jiaik
be satiated with, dislike; wuyi
one of the twelve standard pitch-pipes in
ancient music. See also she, shi, ye
Y. [jiN] L. jiajk E. jiajk
name of a mountain
Y. [jiv] L. jiajk E. jiajk
baldachin
Y. [jiN] L. jiajk E. jiajk
kind of board game, chess
Y. [jis] L. jiajk E. jiajk
pleased
Y. ji" L. jiajk E. jiajk
armpit; lift under the arms; also ye
Y. [jis] L. jiajk E. jiajk
weary of; full. See also du
Y. jiv L. jiajk E. jiajk
change, exchange. See also yi above
Y. jiv L. jiajk E. jiajk
liquid, fluid; moisten; also ye
Y. [jiv] L. jiajk E. jiajk
spy on
Y. jiv L. jiajk E. jiajk
draw out, open out; continue, successive
Y. jis L. jiajk E. jiajk
armpit; also ye
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi

Lexicon 371
142:8
149:13
164:13
187:13
60:4
104:4
196:1
33:9
9:5
9:6
85:5
85:10
159:5
162:8
167:10
9:3
46:3
61:7
163:0
64:7
86:11
61:10
M33190
K850f
M36023
K790f
M40051
K790g
M45030
K790h
M10057
K851a
M22069
K851c
M46635
M05661
K395a
MOOS 16
K402b
M00572
K397a
M17271
K402c
M17951
K1257a
M38275A
K402d
M38951
K396a
M40747
K12575
M00382
K517m
M07889
M10655
K683f
M39269
K683a
M12105
K683g
M19333
K690f
M11045
K448e
Y. [jiv] L. iiajk E. jiajk
see xiyi
Y. jis L. jiajk E. jiajk
translate
Y. [jis] L. jiajk E. jiajk
spoiled wine
Y. jiv L. jiajk E. jiajk
horse relay station; post-station
Y. jiv L. jyajk E. jwiajk
military expedition; corvee duty
Y. jiv L. jyajk E. jwiajk
pestilence; epidemic
Y. [jH L. Tit E. Tit
swallow
Y. jiv L. Tjit E. Tjit
one, same as yi —
Y. Giv] L.jit E.jit
escape; retire; at ease; idle; neglect
Y.ji^ L.jit E.jit
row of dancers at a sacrifice
Y.ji* L.jit E.jit
gush forth; let loose; reckless
Y. jiv L. jit E. jit
overflow, inundate
Y. [jiv] L. jit E. jit
rush by, overtake. See also die
Y. fr L. jit E. jit
flee, escape; let loose; relax; at ease
Y. jiv L. jit E. jit
measure of weight
Y. (jiv] L. rjit E. rjit
great, powerful
Y. \jn L. rjit E. rjit
tall, towering, impressive
Y. \jf] L. Tip E. Tip
grieving, sad
Y. jiN L. Tip E. Tip
city, town
Y. ji^ L. Tjip E. Tjip
ladle out; suppress; pull
Y. tjiv] L. ip, jip E. wip, jip
gleaming
Y. [jin] L. TinE. Tin
grieved; yTnqineagerly attentive,
solicitous
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
yi
ym

372 Lexicon
79:6
31:3
32:9
38:6
84:6
85:9
113:9
120:6
140:6
169:9
170:9
187:6
30:9
104:9
170:8
180:0
61:9
36:11
40:8
94:7
M16627A
K448a
M04693
K370a
M05239
K483d
M06250
K370f
M17060
M17873B
K483e
M24761
K483g
M27438
K370e
M30914
K370d
M41428
K483f
M41723
K483c
M44732
K370g
M03934
K653d
M22359
K653e
M41691
K651y
M43265
K653a
M10937
K653c
M05805
K450H
M07204
K450a
M20430
K251g
Y.jin L.?in E.?in
great, ample; Yin dynasty. See also yan
Y. jin L. Tjin E. ?jin
rest on, depend on; follow on; because of
that, accordingly
Y.jin L.Tjin E.Tjin
block up; mound; dam
Y. jin L. ?jin E. ?jin
marriage; relationship by marriage
Y. jin L. ?jin E. ?jin
ylnyun dense, thick, enshrouding
Y.jin L.?jin E.Tjin
block up, dam; fall into oblivion. See
also yan
Y. [jin] LTjin E.Tjin
sacrificial smoke; sacrifice
Y. [jin] L. Tjin E. Tjin
ylnyun dense mist; primal mist
Y. jin L. Tjin E. Tjin
mat; mattress
Y. jin L. Tjin E. Tjin
rampart above a gate in a city wall
Y. [jin] L. Tjin E. Tjin
dam up
Y. [jin] L. Tjin E. Tjin
piebald horse
Y. jim L. Tim E. Tim
dumb; silent
Y. jim L. Tim E. Tim
dumb, unable to speak
Y. jim L. Tim E. Tim
shade; shady side, north side of a hill,
south bank of a river; negative or female
principle
Y. jim L. Tim E. Tim
sound
Y. [jiml L. Tjim E. Tjim
ylnyin peaceful, harmonious
Y.jin' L. jin E. jin
small of the back; reverence, respect;
ymyuan cling, climb, as a vine
Y.jin' L. jin E. jin
third Earthly Branch
Y. [jin'l L. rjin E. rjin
yinym frenzied barking
ym
yin
ym
yin
ym
ym
yin
yln
ym
yTn
ym
yln
ym
ym
ym
ym
ym
yin
yin
ym

Lexicon 373
163:11
211:4
211:6
30:15
32:6
167:6
149:8
38:8
85:8
173:11
30:4
75:13
170:14
57:1
142:4
142:11
177:4
44:1
184:4
170:14
26:4
130:5
M39607
M48600
M48649A
M04518
K125la
M05054
K416h
M40355
K416k
M35608
K251f
M06440
M17678
K657b
M42430
M03330
K651s
M15636
K449b
M41891A
K449a
M09699
K371a
M32866
K371c
M33529
K450j
M42735
K371b
M07631
K12511
M44063A
K654a
M41891B
K449a
M02848
K1251f
M29405
K451a
Y. jin' L. qin E. qin, qin
place name
Y. [jin'] L. qin E. qin
gums
Y. jin' L. qin E. qin
gums. See also kSn
Y.jin' L. qin E. qin
stupid; insincere
Y.jin' L. qin E. qin
boundary, limit
Y. jin' L. qin E. qin
silver
Y. iin' L. qin E. qin
yfnyin affable but respectful
Y. jim' L. jimE. jim
licentious, same as
Y. jim' L. jim E. jim
soak; excessive; licentious, lewd
Y.jim' L.jim E. jim
excessive rain
Y. jim' L. qim E. qim
moan; chant, recite
Y. (jin"] L. ?in' E. ?in'
bevel
Y.jin" L.?in' E. ?in'
hidden; painful, be pained by, grieve.
See also yin
Y.jin" L. jin' E. jin'
stretch, extend; lead; draw out; quote
Y. jin" L. iin' E. jin'
see qiuyTn
Y. [jin ] L. jin' E. jin'
same as
Y. [jin"] L. jin' E. jin'
strap for pulling a carriage
Y.jin" L-jyn' E. jwin1
prime minister; governor
Y.jim" L.?im' E.?im'
drink. See also yin
Y. jjiir] L. ?in^ E. ?inh
lean on, rely on. See also yTn
Y. ]in- L. ?jinN E. ?jin*
stamp, seal; print
Y. [jin^] L. jin- E. jinh
descendants, posterity
yin
yin
yin
ym
yin
yin
yin
yin
yin
yin
yin
yTn
yTn
yTn
yTn
yTn
yTn
yTn
yTn
yin
yin
yin

374 Lexicon
164:7
61:12
53:11
116:9
140:11
184:4
121:14
30:17
75:17
98:14
196:10
196:17
61:13
130:13
196:13
96:9
140:5
38:14
64:17
120:17
142:13
38:14
M39866
K451c
M11215
K12515
M09463
K651c'
M25578
M31840
K651b'
M44063B
K654a
M28185
K814h
M04592
K814f
M15888
M21620
M47169
K8431
M47489
K814g
M11330A
K890d
M29928
K890e
M47377
K890c
M21127
M30808
K718k
M06828
K814a
M12966
K814c
M28067
K814e
M33690
K892a
M06834
K816a
Y. [jnr] L. jinv E. jinh
rinse the mouth ceremonially with wine
Y. [jin%] L. rjinv E. rjinh
be willing; temporarily
Y.jim" L.Tirrf E.?imh
shade; protection
Y. jinr L. ?imv E. ?imh
underground chamber, cellar
Y.jinT L.Tirrf E.?imh
shade; protection
Y.jinT L.Tinr E.?imh
to give to drink. See also yln
Y. arj L. Tjaijrj E. Taijrj/Teijrj
small-mouthed jar, same as
Y. jirj L. Tjaijrj E. Tsijrj/Teijrj
ylngymg harmonious singing of
birds
Y.jirj L. Tjaijrj E. ?3ijrj/7eijrj
cherry
Y. jirj L. ?ja:jrj E. ?9ijrj/?e:jrj
jar, vase
Y. [jirj] L. Tjaijrj E. ?9Jjrj/?eijrj
oriole; bush-warbler; descriptive of
variegated plumage
Y. jirj L. Tjaijrj E. ?9ijrj/?eijrj
ylngwu parrot
Y.jirj L.?iarj E.?irj
answer, respond; ought. See also ying
Y.jirj L.?iarj E.?irj
breast; resist; receive
Y.jirj L.?iarj E. ?irj
eagle; hawk
Y. jirj L. ?iajrj E. ?iajrj
luster of jade
Y. jirj L. ?iajrj E. ?iajrj
flower, blossom; hero
Y. jirj L. Tjiajrj E. ?jiajrj
baby, infant
Y. [jirj] L. Tjiajrj E.Tjiajq
bump into, encroach on
Y. jirj L. Tjiajrj E. Tjiajrj
cap-string, tassel
Y.jirj' L.jiarj E. jirj
fly (insect)
Y.jirj' L.jiajrj E.jiajrj
a surname
yin
yin
yin
yin
yin
yin
ymg
ymg
ylng
ymg
ymg
ymg
ying
ymg
ymg
ymg
ymg
ymg
ymg
ymg
ymg
ying

Lexicon 375
75:9
85:16
108:4
118:20
154:13
162:4
32:10
86:13
142:10
120:10
86:10
96:10
59:12
104:17
163:7
85:11
115:11
61:13
38:10
72:5
M15188
K815c
M18656
K816e
M22961
K815a
M26813
M36950
K816f
M38748A
K699d
M05320
K843c
M19457
K843f
M33434
K843i
M27733
K843h
M19304
K843a
M21155
K843k
M10019
K756a
M22630
K814d
M39438
M18188
M25267
K828c
M11330B
K890d
M06575
K893k
M13838
E.jiaji]
E.jiajrj
EJiajrj
E.jiajrj
E. rjiajrj
Y. Ijirj'] L.jiajrj
pillar, column
Y.jin' L.jiajrj
ocean
Y.jirj' LJiajrj E.jiajrj
full; overflow; have a surplus
Y. [jin'] L.jiajrj
bamboo basket
Y.jirj' L.jiajrj
surplus; profit; excess
Y.jin' L.rjiajrj
go to meet, welcome; meet face to face.
See also ying
Y.jirj' L.jyajrj E.jwiajrj
grave area
Y.jirj' L.jyajrj E.jwiajrj
to lay out, plan; build; camp
Y.jirj' L.xfijyajrj E. ywejrj
glow-worm, firefly
Y. jirj L. ?jyajrj E. Tjwiajrj
to entwine, wind around, entangle
Y. xirj' L. xfijyajrj E. YweJr)
glimmering; dazzle
Y. jurf L. yajrj E. wiajrj
jade-like stone; lustrous, brilliant. Also
E. ?ejrjh
Y.jirf L.?iajrj' E.?iajrj'
shadow; reflection; image
Y. jirj" L. Tjiajrj' E. Tjiajrj'
goitre; gall
Y.jirf L.jiajq' E.jiajrj'
ancient place name, capital of Chu
Y. Onf] L.jyajrj' E.jwiajrj'
river name
Y.jhf L.jyajn' E.jwiajrj'
outer husk of an ear of grain, beard, awn;
point, tip; budding talent
Y. jiif L. ?iarj^ E. ?irjh
respond, echo; correspond; comply
with, grant. See also ymg
Y. jirjv L. jiatf E. jirjh
attendant accompanying a bride to her
new home; concubine
Y. [jirjv] L.?iajrj^ E.?iajrjh
shine; reflect, mirror; sunlight
ying
ying
ying
ying
ying
ying
ying
ying
ying
ying
ying
ying
yTng
ying
yTng
yTng
yTng
ying
ying
ying

376 Lexicon
162:4
112:7
53:18
64:13
104:18
163:3
32:13
172:5
172:10
184:13
9:11
32:11
53:8
163:11
167:11
61:11
195:11
9:11
32:11
53:8
61:11
163:11
M38748B
K699d
M24230
M09554
K1184J
M12781b
K1184k
M22638
K11841
M39277
K1184a
M05524
K1184i
M42000
K1184H
M42123
K1184c
M44416
K1184m
M01007a
K1185y
M05419a
K1185z
M09378a
K1185x
M39596a
M40808a
K1185a'
M11144a
M46460a
M01007b
K1185y
M05419b
K1185z
M093785
K1185x
M11144b
M39596b
Y. [jirp] L. rjiajrf E. rjiajrjh
go to meet one's bride. See also ying.
Y. jirjs L. qjaijrf E. ipijrjh/rj£ijrjh
hard; strong, firm
Y. urj [sic] L. ?ywrj E ?uawrj
biyOng a ceremonial hall in the
palace of the Zhou kings
Y.jurjv L.?ywrj' E. ?uawrj'
embrace; also y6ng
Y. urj [sic] L. ?ywrj E. ?uawrj
carbuncle; ulcer
Y. jurj L. ?ywrj E. ?uawrj
city moat; place name
Y. urj [sic] L. ?ywrj E. ?uawrj
block up, obstruct. Also E. ?uawrj'
Y. jurj L. ?ywrj E. ?uawrj
united, in harmony. Also E. ?uawrjh
Y. [jurj] L. ?ywrj E. ?uawrj
harmonious
Y. [jurj] L. ?ywrj E. ?uawrj
cooked grain
Y.jurj' L. jywrj E.juawrj
hire; also yong
Y.jurj' L. jywrj E.juawrj
high wall; city wall; also y6ng
Y. jurj' L. jywrj E. juawrj
use, employ; usual, ordinary; also yong
Y.jurj' L. jywrj E.juawrj
ancient place name; also yong
Y.jurj' L. jywrj E.juawrj
large bell; also yong
Y. [tshurj'] L. sfiywrj E. d?uawrj
lethargic, languid; also yong
Y. tshurj' L.jywrj E.juawrj
variegated carp, bighead; also yong. Also
E. d?uawrj
Y. jurj' L. jywrj E. juawrj
hire, see y6ng
Y.jurj' L. jywrj E.juawrj
high wall; city wall; also yong
Y.jurj' L. jywrj E.juawrj
use, employ; usual, ordinary; also yong
Y. [tghurj'] L. sfiywrj E. d?uawrj
lethargic, languid; also yong
Y.jurj' L. jywrj E.juawrj
see yong
ying
ying
yong
yong
yong
yong
yong
yong
yong
yong
yong
yong
yong
yong
yong
yong
yong
yong
yong
yong
yong
yong

Lexicon 377
167:11
181:9
195:11
85:1
85:5
64:13
9:7
19:7
85:7
101:2
142:7
157:7
113:10
149:5
101:0
9:15
61:11
120:15
127:15
163:15
198:2
M40808b
K1185a'
M43599
K124p
M46460b
M17088
K764a
M17328
K764J
M12781a
K1184k
M00683
K1185J
M02360
K1185k
M17534
K11851
M21707
K1185h
M33076
K1185m
M37587
K1185n
M24790
K843e
M35409
K764i
M21703
K1185a
M01261
K1071d
Ml 1170
K1071a
M28034
K1071g
M28993
K1071I
M39722
M47588
K1072a
Y.jurj' L. jywrj E.juawrj
see yong
Y. [jurj'] L. rjywrj E. rjuawrj
big head; great, dignified
Y. t§hurj' L. jywrj E.juawrj
variegated carp, bighead; also yong.
Also E. d?uawrj
Y.yifjurf L. yajrj' E. wiajrj'
for a long time; perpetually, forever
Y. [yrfjurf] L. yajrj' E. wiajrj'
swim
Y.jurf L. ?ywrj' E. ?uawrj'
embrace; also yong
Y.jurf L.jywrj' E.juawrj'
puppet; tomb figurine
Y.jurf L.jywrj' E.juawrj'
brave, courageous
Y. jurf L.jywrj' E.juawrj'
gush forth
Y. [jurf] L. ywrj' E.juawrj'
suspension ring for a bell; measure of
capacity
Y. [jurf] L.jywrj' E.juawrj'
silkworm chrysalis
Y.jurf L.jywrj' E.juawrj'
jump up; rise
Y. [yrj\jurjv] L. yajrf E. wiajrjh
sacrifice to avert calamities. Also E.
wiajrj
Y. yrj\jurjv L. yajrjv E. wiajrjh
hum, chant, intone
Y. jurjx L. jywrj" E. juawrjh
use; sacrifice
Y. jiw L. ?iw E. ?uw
abundant; excellent
Y. jiw L. ?iw E. ?uw
worry
Y. [jiw] L. ?iw E. ?uw
middle part of a hair pin
Y. jiw L. ?iw E. ?uw
agricultural implement to level the ground
and cover the seed; cover seed with a you
Y. [jiw] L. ?iw E. ?uw
ancient place name
Y. jiw L. ?iw E. ?uw
doe
y6ng
yong
yong
ydng
y6ng
y6ng
y6ng
y6ng
ydng
ydng
ydng
ydng
ydng
ydng
yong
y5u
you
you
you
you
you

378 Lexicon
52:6
61:7
66:3
43:1
130:4
149:4
163:8
85:5
85:9
94:9
94:9
102:0
104:4
120:11
140:12
142:5
142:9
159:9
162:7
162:9
25:5
29:2
M09205
KlllSc
M10691
K1077c
M13113
K1077a
M07543
K996a
M29304
K996f
M35277
K996d
M39485
K997a
M17253
K1079c
M17792
KlOSOf
M20557
K1096r
M20558
K1096t
M21724
K1079a
M22050
K996e
M27856B
K1144n
M31961
K1096a'
M32918
M33292
K1080H
M38436
K1096y
M38872
KlOSlg
M38994
K1080g
M02791
KlOSla
M03119
K995e
Y. jiw L. ?jiw E. Tjiw
deep, secluded, hidden, dark, obscure
Y. jiw' L. jiw E. juw
distant; long drawn out; pensive
Y. jiw' L. jiw E. juw
place; the place where, that which
Y. jiw' L. iw E. wuw
fault, blame; excessive, very
Y. [jiw'] L. iw E. wuw
swelling, tumour
Y. jiw' L. iw E. wuw
blame, fault
Y. jiw L. iw E. wuw
post-station, relay station, courier relay
Y. jiw' L. jiw E. juw
oil; lubricate; slippery
Y. jiw' L. jiw E. juw
float, swim; wander, ramble; play
Y. jiw' L. jiw E. juw
still, yet; like
Y. jiw' L. jiw E. juw
plan; method; speak, discourse
Y. jiw' L. jiw E. juw
proceed from, follow from; from
Y. jiw' L. jiw E. juw
wart
Y. jiw' L. jiw E. juw
follow; from , compare you . See also
yao, zhou.
Y. jiw' L. jiw E. juw
odoriferous water plant
Y. jiw' T. jiw E. juw
youyan centipede
Y. jiw' ju. jiw E. juw
Ephemerida
Y. jiw' L. jiw E. juw
light carriage
Y. (jiw'] L. jiw E. juw
free, unhampered
Y. jiw' L. jiw E. juw
wander, roam, travel
Y. [jiw"] L. jiw' E. juw'
ancient type of bronze vessel
Y. jiw" L. iw' E. wuw'
friend
you
you
you
you
you
you
you
you
you
you
y6u
you
you
you
you
you
you
you
you
you
y6u
y6u

Lexicon 379
74:2
61:15
203:5
75:11
91:11
123:3
140:7
164:0
9:5
9:6
29:0
30:2
30:2
31:6
40:6
113:5
52:2
75:5
94:5
145:9
208:5
149:7
M14332
K995o
M11413
K1071e
M48082
KlllSh
M15374
K1096J
M19890
K1082a
M28438
K993f
M31065
M39763
K1096a
M00507
K995k
M00594
K995q
M03115
K995a
M03250A
K9951
M03250B
K9951
M04756
K995u
M07137
K995r
M24652
K9951
M09193
KlllSf
M14629A
K1079b
M20344
K1246c
M34431A
K1079o
M48427
K1079d
M35525
Y. jiv/ L. iw' E. wuw'
have; there is, there are
Y. (jiv/] L. ?iw' E. ?uw'
easy, carefree
Y.jiw" L.Tjiw' E.Tjiw'
glossy black, vitreous
Y. Ijiw"] L. jiw' E. juw'
pile up firewood for a sacrifice. Also E.
juwh pile up firewood and burn it
Y. jiw" L. jiw' E. juw'
window
Y.jiw" L. jiw' E. juw'
Y6ulT ancient place name
Y.jiw L. jiw' E. juw'
wild millet, Setaria viridis; weed
Y.jiw" L. jiw' E. juw'
tenth Earthly Branch
Y. jiw" L. iw" E. wuwh
protect; assist
Y. jiw" L. iw" E. wuwh
assist; urge (to drink, eat)
Y. jiw" L. iw" E. wuwh
also, again, in addition
Y. [jiw"] L. iw' E. wuw'
right hand. See also you below
Y. jiw" L. iw" E. wuwh
assist, same as jfa. See also you above
Y. jiw" L. iw" E. wuwh
enclosure, park. Also E. wuwk
Y. jiw" L. iw" E. wuwh
pardon; aid
Y. jiw" L. iw"
pardon; bless
Y. jiw" L. Tjiw"
young
Y. jiw" L. jiw"
shaddock, pomelo. See also zhu
Y. jiw" L. jiw" E. juwh
black, long-tailed monkey
Y. [jiw"] L. jiw" E. juwh
ample, flowing robes. See also xiu
Y. [jiw"] L. jiw" E. juwh
weasel, Mustela
Y.jiw L. jiw' E. juw'
lead, induce; tempt, entice
E. wuwh
E. ?jiwh
E. juwh
y6u
y6u
y6u
y6u
y6u
y6u
y6u
y6u
you
you
you
you
you
you
you
y6u
y6u
you
you
you
you
y6u

380 Lexicon
85:8
104:8
120:3
162:3
70:4
6:3
9:5
70:16
76:14
96:14
102:7
134:4
134:7
149:14
159:10
184:7
196:14
85:11
195:0
M17665
M22292
K61g
M27244
K97y
M38722
K97p
M13628A
K61e
M00231B
K83a
M00515
K82a
M13709
K891
M16226
K89e
M21297
K89f
M21860A
K82f
M30188
K89a
M30212C
K89b
M36066A
K89i
M38468
K89j
M44185
K821
M47440
K89k
M18101
K79g
M45956
K79a
Y. [y] L. ?ia^/?yr E. ?ia
muddy water, silt; clog; clot
Y. [jy] L. ?i^/?ya^ E. ?iah
congestion, bruise, contusion
Y. y L. ?ya E. ?ua
bent, crooked
Y. y L. ?ya E. ?ua
bend, deflect; long and winding (road);
circuitous, roundabout. Also E. wua and
?ua'
Y.y L.?ia/?ya E.?ia
in, at, to, from. See also wu
Y.[y] L.jia/jya E.jia
I, me. Though traditionally read in
the Level Tone in this meaning, ancient
rhyming evidence shows that it should be
read in the Rising Tone. See also yu
Y.y' L.jia/jya E.jia
I, me, my
Y.y' L.jia/jya E.jia
banner adorned with falcons
Y.y L.jia/jya E.jia
final interrogative particle
Y.y T..jia/jya E.jia
yufa"n; name of a precious jade
Y.y' L.jia/jya E.jia
slash and burn cultivation, swidden; a
field after two or three years of
cultivation. See also she
Y.y L.jia/jya E.jia
lift, raise up
Y.y L.jia/jya E.jia
sentence final interrogative particle. See
also yu, yu
Y.y L.jia/jya E.jia
praise. See also yu
Y.y L.jia/jya E.jia
carriage, vehicle
Y.y' L.jia/jya E.jia
excess, surplus, remaining
Y. [y] L.jia/jya E.jia
kind of bird. Also E. jiah
Y. y' L. rjia/rjya E. rjia
to fish
Y. y L. rjia/nya E. rjia
fish
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu

Lexicon 381
7:1
75:3
108:3
118:3
130:9
173:3
11:7
61:9
64:9
75:9
85:9
96:9
116:9
123:9
134:2
147:9
149:8
157:9
162:9
38:7
46:9
61:9
M00252
K97a
M14448
K97i
M22949
K97k
M25851
K97n
M29713
K126e
M42212
K97q
M01437
K125a
M10905
K125f
M12320
K125p
M15153
K125g
M17761
K125h
M21129
K1251
M25582
K125q
M28533
K125k
M30178
K126a
M34904
K1251
M35696
K126f
M37675
K125n
M38977
K125o
M06307
K59g
M08281
K124f
M 10946
K124g
E. wua
E. wua
Y.jy L.ya
go (to); to; in, at
Y. [y'J L. ya
bathing tub, large vessel
Y. y' L. ya E. wua
broad-mouthed round vessel, bowl
Y. y' L. ya E. wua
reeded musical pipes, reed organ
Y. y' L. ya E. wua
fat, plump, fertile
Y. y' L. ya E. wua
sacrifice when praying for rain
Y. y' L. jya E.jua
yes; yuyu satisfied, at ease
Y. y L. jya E. jua
pleased
Y. y' L. jyaE. ma
wave, brandish; yuyangpraise
Y. y L.jya n. jua
elm
Y. y L-jya E.jua
change (attitude, feeling)
Y. y L. jya E.jua
fine jade; lustre, excellence
Y. y L.jya E.jua
small opening at the side of a doorway.
Also E. daw pierce, pass through
Y.[y] L.jya E.jua
ewe; goodness
Y. y L.jyaE.jua
pull, drag; good; see xuyu
Y. y L.jya n. jua
desire, covet. Also E. juah
Y. y' L.jya E.jua
flatter
Y. [y] L.jya E.jua
leap over, surpass, same as 3tt
Y. y' L.jya E.jua
exceed, transcend, surpass; even more
Y. y L. rjya E. qua
amuse; joy, pleasure
Y. [y] L. rjya E. qua
corner or bend of a mountain
Y. y L. rjya E. qua
stupid
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu

382 Lexicon
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
114:4
141:7
170:9
6:3
134:7
31:7
31:8
66:7
149:7
167:7
9:11
38:11
40:3
114:4
124:0
163:9
173:0
53:9
116:10
M24886A
K124a
M32723
K59h
M41743
K124i
M00231A
K83a
M30212A
K89b
M04775
K58p
M04793
K81a
M13224
K58q
M35533A
K58t
M40465A
K58v
M01020
K122n
M06640B
K122o
M07067
K97h
M24885
K99a
M28614
K98a
M39526
M42210A
KlOOa
M09398
K126b
M25601
K1243b
Y. y' L. nva E. qua
see Panyu . See also yu
Y. y' L. qya E. qua
name of a royal officer in early Zhou,
game-keeper, forester; estimate, consider;
be anxious, take precautions; deceive
Y. y' L. rjya E. rjuii
corner, angle
Y. [/] L.jia'/jya' E.jia'
give; I, me. See also yu.
Y. y~ L.jia'/jya' E.jia'
associate with; together with; and;
give. See also yu, yu
Y. y" L.qia'/qya' E.qia'
see lingyu
Y. yv L. qia'/qya' E. qia'
horse stable; groom; frontier; prison
Y. [yv] L. qia'/qya' E. qia'
ancient percussion instrument
Y. yv L. qia'/qya' E. qia'
speak; words, language. See also yu
Y. [y~i L. qia'/qya' E. qia'
juyu ill-fitting, discordant; also E.
qia. See also wu
Y. [y"] L.?ya' E.?ua'
bent, crippled; yu!6u hunchback
Y. yv L. ?ya' E. ?ua'
warm with the body, sit on eggs (of a
bird). See also yu
Y. y" L. ya' E. wua'
eaves; area under the eaves; boundary,
territory; the world
Y. yv L. ya' E. wua'
legendary tamer of the floods and founder
of the Xia dynasty
Y. yv L. ya' E. wua'
feather, plume
Y. [yv] L. ya' E. wua'
ancient place name
Y. y" L. ya' E. wua'
rain. See also yu
Y. yv L.jya' E.jua'
granary; measure of capacity
Y. [y~] L.jya' E.jua'
defective; corrupt; lazy, negligent

Lexicon 383
198:7
46:14
113:11
61:9
134:7
149:14
152:9
181:4
184:4
149:7
60:8
187:2
38:11
140:3
173:0
30:9
145:7
149:9
40:9
114:4
162:9
M47634
K59j
M08561a
M24820
K60p
M10904
K125d
M30212B
K89b
M36066B
K89i
M36425
K83e
M43373
M44050
K1242a
M35533B
K58t
M10157
K601
M44576
K80a
M06640A
K122o
M30670
K97o
M42210B
KlOOa
M03979
K125c
M34305
K1202H
M35727
K125m
M07243
K124c
M24886B.
K124a
M38991
K124h
E. rjia'
E. jua'
E.jiah
ee also;
E.jiah
E.jiah
E.jiah
E.jiah
Y. [/] L. rjya'F. rjua'
female river-deer; yiiyu flocking
together, in a herd
Y. sy" L. sfiiaN/sfiyav E. zia'
small island, also xu
Y. yv L. rjia'/rjya'
ward off, oppose
Y.yv L.jya'
the more...; better
Y. y" L. jiav/jyav
participate, take part in. See also yu, yu.
Y. y* LJiaVjya^
praise. See also yu
Y. y" L. jiav/jyav
elephant; beforehand
Y.y* LJiaVjyr
anticipate; beforehand
Y. yv L. jiaVjyav
eat to the full; a family feast
Y. [yl L. rjiaVrjya^ E. rjiah
tell, report, notify. See also yu
Y. yv L. niav/rjyav E. rjiah
drive a chariot; preside over, govern;
imperial; charioteer; servant, attendant
Y. yv L. rjiaVrjyav
drive a carriage
Y. y^ L. ?ya^
old woman. See also yu
Y. y* L. yfr
taro, Colocasia esculenta
Y. [yl L. ya^
to rain. See also yu
Y. y^ L.jyr
explain; metaphor, analogy; understand
Y.y^ L.jya^ E.juah
abundant, ample
Y.y^ L.jyr E.juah
explain; instruct; proclaim; metaphor;
understand
Y. [yl L. rjya^ E. rjuah
to lodge; reside
Y. [yl L. rjya^ E. nuah
kind of monkey. See also yu
Y. yv L. rjyax E. nuah
encounter, meet unexpectedly; entertain
E.
E.
E.
E.
E.
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu

384 Lexicon
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
41:8
86:11
140:8
140:11
140:11
85:4
110:7
120:12
129:0
162:12
187:12
196:5
196:12
59:7
85:13
86:13
140:13
163:6
170:13
M07440A
K525b
M19346
K525c
M31135B
K260q
M31805B
K525f
M45671
K495b
M17153B
K304f
M23863
K507a
M27900B.
K507H
M29215
K502a
M39129
K507b
M44978
K507e
M46819
K409d
M47359
K507f
M09983
K929y
M18412B
K1045b
M19458
K1045d
M32072
K1045e
M39371
K995a'
M41872B
K1045c
Y. y^ L. ?yt E. ?ut
repress (illness); Yuchi Jit i& a surname.
See also wei
Y. [yv] L. ?yt E. ?ut
press, repress; iron clothes. Also
now read yiin
Y. for] L.?yt E.?ut
medicinal plant; accumulate, store up;
also read yun in this sense, cf. H. See
also wSn
Y. for] L. Tyt E. ?ut
kind of Artemisia. See also we"i
Y. [y^] L. ?yt E. ?ut
thickly wooded; fragrant herb; strong
smelling; kind of plum; block up;
depressed
Y. [yx] L. yt E. wit
rapid flowing. See also gu
Y. for] L. jyt E. jwit
pierce
Y. [yv ] L. jyt E. jwit
well rope. See also ju
Y. (y] L. jyt E. jwit
pre-classical particle
Y. [yv] L. jyt E. jwit
go awry; follow; then, thereupon
Y. [y] L.jyt E.jwit
black horse with white rump.Also E.
?wit
Y. for] L.jyt E.jwit
rapid flight of a bird
Y. [yv] L. jyt E. jwit
sandpiper, snipe
Y. [y*] L. ?iwk E. ?uwk
flourishing, elegant
Y. |y ] L. ?iwk E. ?uwk
back-water, back-bay. See also ao
Y. for] L. ?iwk E. ?uwk
warm
Y. [y^] L. ?iwk E. ?uwk
wild vine
Y. yv L. ?iwk E. ?uwk
courtly, elegant; place name
Y. for] L. ?iwk E. ?uwk
bay, cove. See also ao

Lexicon 385
80:10
86:9
130:4
193:12
61:11
76:7
85:7
150:0
196:7
94:10
96:0
32:8
75:8
120:8
122:8
142:8
169:8
14:8
40:5
61:5
196:5
M16740
K1021a
M19207
M29318
K1020a
M45721A
K1024b
Ml 1163
K1202e
M16080
K1202d
M17496
K1202f
M36182B
K1202a
M46926
K1202g
M20603
K1215a
M20821
K1216a
M05158
K929e
M14968
K929g
M27608
K929n
M28297
K929J
M33176
K929r
M41384
K929k
M01587
K261a
M07110B
K260b
M10479A
K260c
M46795
K260e
Y. [yv] L.jiwk E. juwk
nourish, rear
Y. [yv] L. jiwk E. juwk
illuminate, shine
Y. y% L. jiwk E. juwk
raise, nourish
Y. [yx] L. jiwk E. juwk
nourish; sell. See also zhu, zhou
Y. [yN] L. jywk E. juawk
desire, lust
Y. yv L. jywk E. juawk
wish, desire
Y. yx L. jywk E. juawk
bathe, wash the body
Y. [yx] L.jywk E. juawk
valley. See also gu, lu
Y. y" L. jywk E. juawk
qiiyii myna
Y. yv L. rjywk E. rjuawk
trial, litigation; prison
Y. yv L. rjywk E. rjuawk
jade
Y. [ujv(?)j L. yak E. wik
boundary; region, territory
Y. [?] L. yak E. wik
kind of oak
Y. (?) L. yak E. wik
bundle of threads
Y. [?] L. yak E. wik
fine-meshed net for catching small fish
Y. (?) L. yak E. wik
fabulous water demon; noxious insect
that eats the leaves of grain
Y. [?] L. xyak E. xwik
threshold
Y. yen L. ?yan E. ?uan
wrong, injustice
Y. uen L. ?yan E. ?uan
Dayuan , ancient country
commonly identified with Ferghana but
probably in present Uzbekistan. See also
yuan
yuan
w£n.
Y. [qen] L. ?yan E. ?uan
enemy. See also yuan
Y. uen L. ?yan E. ?uan
yuanyang %> 3fc Mandarin duck
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yu
yuan
yuan

386 Lexicon
196:8
38:13
61:7
85:8
142:7
207:8
196:3
31:10
32:6
64:9
87:5
94:9
94:10
145:4
159:10
30:7
31:10
75:15
120:9
142:9
10:2
M47023
K260k
M06782B
K829b
M10623
K228c
M17692
K367a
M33115
K228b
M48359
M46674
K230a
M04818
K256b
M05060
K164m
M12407
K255e
M19672
K255a
M20525
K255d
M20584
K256c
M34152
K256a
M38483
K256e
M03633A
K227a
M04819
K227c
Ml 5822.
M27656A
K171d
M33278
K171c
M01340
K257a
yuan
yuan
yuan
yuan
yuan
yuan
yuan
yudn
yuan
yuan
yuan
yuan
yudn
yuan
yuan
yuan
yuan
yuan
yuan
yuan
yuan
Y. qen L. ?yan E. ?uan
yuanchu mythical bird like a
phoenix
Y. [qen] L. Tjyan E. Tjwian
light, graceful. See also qiong
Y. [qen] L. Tjyan E. Tjwian
annoyed, unhappy, displeased
Y. qen L. Tjyan E. Twen
abyss, deep water
Y. [qen] L. Tjyan E. Twen
mosquito larva; yuanyuan wriggle; also
E. Tjwian and gjwian
Y. [qen] L. Tjyan E. Twen
yuanyuan sound of a drum
Y. qen' L.jyan E. jwian
kite, Milvus korschun lineatus
Y. qen' L. yan E. wuan
garden, orchard
Y. qen' L. yan E. wuan
wall
Y. qen' L. yan E. wuan
pull up. Also E. wuanh aid, succour.
Y. [qen'] L. yan E. wuan
to it, in it, there, then, thereupon
Y. [qen'] L. yan E. wuan
ape, same as
Y. qen' L. yan E. wuan
ape; gibbon
Y. qen' L. yan E. wuan
long gown; place name; a surname
Y. qen' L. yan E. wuan
carriage pole, shafts of a cart or carriage
Y. yen' L. yan E. wian
circle; complement of officials; personnel,
member. See also yun
Y. qen' L. yan' E. wian
circle
Y.jen' L.jyan E. jwian
juyuancitron, Citrus medica
Y.jen' JL. jyan E. jwian
follow along; climb; depend on; reason.
See also yuan
Y. [qen'] L.jyan E.jwian
immature locust
Y. qen' L. rjyan E. rjuan
first, primary; basic, fundamental

Lexicon 387
27:8
85:10
140:4
162:16
163:4
187:10
195:4
205:4
162:10
140:5
140:5
61:5
38:9
96:9
162:10
170:7
61:10
181:10
64:9
120:9
30:13
73:0
120:3
M02973
K258a
M17926
K258c
M30727b
K257d
M39234
K259a
M39312
M44925
K258g
M46008
K257f
M48261
K257e
M39047A
K256f
M30774a
K260d
M30774b
K260d
M10479B
K260c
M06516
K255g
M21122
K255f
M39047B
K256f
M41665
K257u
Ml 1030
K258d
M43623
K258f
M12313
M27656B
K171d
M04372
K346J
M14278
K304a
M27242
K1120m
Y. qen L. rjyan E. rjuan
spring, source; origin; high plain
Y. qen' L. rjyan E. rjuan
spring, source
Y. [qen'] L. rjyan E. rjuan
Daphne genkwa, also yan
Y. [qen] L. rjyan E. rjuan
plateau, high plain, same as
Y. [qen'] L. rjyan E. rjuan
ancient place name
Y. [qen'] L. rjyan E. rjuan
red horse with white belly
Y. [qen'] L. rjyan E. rjuan
same as
Y. qen' i^. rjyan E. rjuan
soft-shelled turtle, Pelochelys bibroni
Y. qen" L. yan' E. wuan'
distant, far. See also yuan
Y. qenv L. ?yan' E. ?uan'
park; trees with rich foliage; also yuan.
Y. qenv L. ?yan' E. ?uan'
see yuSn
Y. qen" L. ?yan" E. ?uanh
resent, resentment. See also yuan
Y. [qen"] L. yan" E. wuanh
beautiful woman
Y. [qen"] L. yanv E. wuanh
ring-shaped jade ritual object
Y. qen" L. yan" E. wuan
keep at a distance. See also yu&n
Y. qen" L. yan" E. wuanh
walled courtyard
Y. qen" L. rjyan" E. rjuanh
sincere and attentive
Y. qen" L. rjyan" E. rjuanh
wish for, desire
Y. jen" [sic] L. jyan" E. jwianh
subordinate official, clerk
Y. jen" L. jyan" E. jwianh
hem, border of a garment. See also yuan
Y. qe" L. yat E. wuat
hiccup; retch, vomit
Y. qe" L. yat E. wuat
say; is called
Y. jaw",jo" L. ?iak E. ?iak
bind; restrict; abbreviate; condensed,
yuan
yuan
yuan
yuan
yuan
yuan
yuan
yuan
yuan
yuan
yuan
yuan
yuan
yuan
yuan
yuan
yuan
yuan
yuan
yuan
yue
yue
yue

388 Lexicon
yue (continued)
62:1
75:12
119:6
156:5
167:5
18:4
74:0
159:3
61:7
149:7
169:7
46:5
46:14
75:11
140:9
85:17
86:17
113:3
113:17
118:17
M11531
K303a
M15502
M26935
K305a
M37110
K303e
M40313
K303d
M01900
K306h
M14330
K306a
M38183
K487f
M10629
K324o
M35556C
K324q
M41341
K324p
M08001
K1227a
M08566
K1215c
M15399A
K1125a
M31451b
K1120n
Ml 8709
K1119d
M19603
K1119f
M24632
K1120g
M24870
K1119g
M26771
K1119c
essential; contract, agreement. Also E.
?jiawh in the sense of promise,
agreement, same as B
Y. [qex] L. yatE. wuat
battle-axe, same as
Y. qeN L. yat E. wuat
shaded passage between trees
Y. [qeN] L. yat E. wuat
pre-classical particle; alternative name for
Guangdong province; same as
Y. qev L. yat E. wuat
cross over, exceed; pre-classical particle
Y. qeN L. yat E. wuatY. qe"
battle-axe
Y. qev L. rjyat E. rjuat
cut off the feet
Y. qex L. rjyat E. rjuat
moon; month
Y. qes L. rjyat E. rjuat
cross-bar at end of carriage pole
Y. qeN L. jyat E. jwiat
relaxed, pleased, happy
Y. qev L. jyat E. jwiat
relaxed, pleased, happy, same as . See
also shuo, shui
Y. qev L. jyat E. jwiat
hole; add up; review, inspect; read, go
over; experience
Y. jawv, jo" L. rjjaiwk E. rjaiwk/rjceiwk
great mountain
Y. jawv, jov L. rjjaiwk E. rjaiwk/rjoeiwk
great mountain
Y. jawv, jo" L. rjjaiwk E. rjaiwk/rjoeiwk
music. See also le, yao
Y. [jaw\ jox] L. ?iak E. ?iak
see yao
Y. [jawv, jov] L. jiak
moisten, soak; drain off
Y. [jaw\ jos] L. jiak
shine; melt, disperse
Y. [jawv, jov] L. jiak
seasonal (spring or summer) sacrifice
Y. [jawYiov] L.jiak E. jiak
same as
Y. [jaw\jov] L.jiak E.jiak
flute; key
E.jiak
E. jiak
E.jiak
yue
yue
yue
yue
yue
yue
yue
yue
yue
yue
yue
yue
yue
yue
yue
yue
yue
yue
yue
yue

Lexicon 389
140:15
157:14
167:17
214:0
84:10
120:10
181:7
7:2
30:7
38:4
120:4
•127:4
140:4
163:10
173:4
118:7
20:2
102:4
170:10
173:10
78:10
10:2
M32341b
K1125p
M37955
K1124f
M41051b
M48882
K1119a
M17075
M27757A
K426f
M43510
K459J
M00254
K460a
M03633B
K227a
M06088
K460c
M27296
M28910
K460e
M30741
K460f
M39572
M42235
K460b
M26032
K391J
M02496
K391a
M21764
M41785
K227g
M42393
K227i
M16535
K227e
M01338
K468a
Y. jawv, JDV L. jiak E. jiak
medicinal herb, medicine, also yao.
Y. jaw\joN L.jiak E. jiak
jump, leap
Y. jawv, jov L. jiak E. jiak
key, also yao
Y. [jaw\jov] L.jiak E.jiak
panpipes, syrinx
Y. yn T ?yn E. ?un
ymyun dense, thick,
enshrouding
Y. [yn] T. ?yn E.?un
ymyun dense mist, primal mist.
See also yun, wen
Y. [yn] L. ?yn E. ?win
big head (man's name). Also E. kwin
Y. yn' L. yn E. wun
says so; says
Y. yn' L. yn E. wun
proper name. See also yuan
Y. [yn'] L. yn E. wun
a surname
Y. [yn'] L. yn E. wun
yunyun many and varied, profuse
L. yn E. wunY. yn'
to weed
Y. yn' L. yn
fragrant plant
Y. yn' L. yn
ancient place name
Y. yn' L. yn
cloud
Y. yn' L. yn
bamboo husk
Y. yn' L.jyn
even, uniform
Y. [yn'] L.jyn
yunyun cleared (land) for cultivation
Y. yn L. yn' E. wun'
fall down from the sky; collapse; perish
Y. [yn"] L. yn' E. wun'
rain, fall like rain
Y. yn" L. yn' E. win'
fall, perish
Y. jyn" L.jyn' E. jwin'
permit, agree, sincere
E. wun
E. wun
E. wun
E. win
E. jwin
E. jwin
yue
yue
yue
yue
yun
yun
yun
yun
yun
yun
yun
yun
yun
yun
yun
yun
yun
yun
yun
yun
yun
yun

390 Lexicon
yun
yun
yun
yun
yun
yun
yiin
yiin
yun
yiin
yun
yiin
yun
61:9
140:16
61:10
120:10
140:13
164:10
72:9
162:9
163:9
178:9
180:10
184:9
39:2
M10857
M32434
K426i
Ml 1059
K426e
M27757B
K426f
M32071B
K426H
M39974
M14037
K458c
M38998
K458d
M39529
M43174
K426
M43307
M44254A
K458e
M06938
K945J
Y. yn^ [sic] L. ?yn' E.?un'
a surname
Y. ynv L. ?yn' E. ?un'
accumulate, store
Y. ynv L. ?ynv E. ?unh
resent, feel anger
Y. [ynl L. ?yn^ E. ?unh
ravelled hemp; confused. See also yun,
wen
Y. [ynl L. ?yn^ E. ?unh
accumulate. Also E. ?un'. See also wen
Y. ynx L. ?ynv E. ?unh
brew, ferment. Also E. ?un'
Y. yn" L. ynv E. wunh
halo around the sun or moon
Y. ynv L. ynv E. wunh
revolve; move, transport
Y. [ynv] L. ynN E. wunh
ancient place name
Y. [ynv] L. yn" E. wunh
drum maker
Y. ynN L. ynv E. wunh
rhyme
Y. [ynv] L. ynv E. wunh
deliver food to. See also hun
Y. jinx L. jiarjv E. jirjh
pregnant

Lexicon 391
64:6
30:5
22:3
50:1
172:10
30:6
75:6
86:3
40:7
159:6
13:4
159:6
32:3
32:3
159:6
118:12
156:19
64:6
149:19
154:12
163:19
M12004a
M03478
M02599
K679b
M08773
K679a
M42122
K691d
M03596
K943v
M14750
K943y
M18879
K940a
M07160
K965b
M38309A
K943a'
M01524
K941a
M38309B
K943a'
M04881A
K943i
M04881B
K943i
M38309C
K943a'
M26558
K660g
M37362
M12004b
M36163
K153c
M36935
K153a
M39752A
K153g
E. tsatY. [tsa"] L. tsat
compel, coerce; also zan
Y. tsa" L. tsap
sip, suck
Y. tsa" L. tsap
circuit; go around, circumambulate
E. tsap/tsap
E. tssp/tsap
L. tsap E. tssp/tsap
E. dzap/dzap
E. tssj
E. tsaj
E. tssj
E. tS9J'
Y.tsa
same as 01
Y. tsa' L. tsfiap
mixed, miscellanous
Y. tsaj L. tsaj
final exclamatory particle
Y. tsaj L. tsaj
to plant
Y. tsaj L. tsaj
disaster, catastrophe
Y. tsaj" L. tsaj'
to butcher; preside over; steward; minister
Y. tsaj" L. tsaj' E. tsaj'
year. See also zai
Y. tsaj" L. tsaj" E. tsajh
twice; second; again
Y. tsaj" L. tsajv E. tssjh
load a carriage,, be conveyed in, carry.
See also zai and zai below
Y. tsajN L. tshaj" E. dzaj"
be at, in; be present. See also zai below
Y. tsaj" L. tsfiajv E. dzsjh
location, place where something is. See
also zai above
Y. tsaj" L. tsfiaj" E. dzsjh
convey, transport. See also zSi and zai
above
Y. tsam L. tsam E. tssm/tsam
hair-pin. Also E. tsim
Y. tsan" L. tsan' E. tsan'
hurry; urge, press. Also E. dzanh
Y. [tsav] L. tsat E. tsat
press or squeeze hard, torture by squeezing
the fingers; see za
Y. tsans L. tsans E. tsanh
praise; approve, support
Y. tsan" L. tsanv E. tsanh
promote, praise, advance
Y. tsan" L. tsanv E. tsanh
place name. See also zuan, cuo
za
za
za
za
za
zai
zai
zai
zai
zai
zai
zai
zai
zai

392 Lexicon
96:19
167:11
72:11
90:6
131:8
154:14
188:13
187:5
140:9
130:18
140:14
119:11
162:11
167:20
72:2
75:8
85:13
96:13
120:13
140:16
142:4
116:16
M21361
K153e
M40824
M14120
K611d
M19774
K727t
M30083
K727f
M36962
K727H1
M45284
M44665A
K46m'
M31448
K702a
M30046
M32264B
K727g'
M27104
K1053g
M39082
K1053H
M41088a
K1128a
M13742
K1049a
M14937
KlOSOa
M18379
K1134g
M21273
K1134H
M27953A
Kll34i
M32401
K1134n
M32893
K1112d
M25703
K1027b
Y. tsanv L. tsfianv E. dzan'
impure jade; jade libation utensil
Y. tsarrf L. tsfianr E. dzam'
small chisel, engraving tool; engrave
Y. tsarrf L. tsfianT E. dzamh
temporary, short-term
Y. [tsarj] L. tsarj E. tsarj
female sheep, ewe; Zanggeplace
name
Y. tsarj L. tsarj E. tsarj
good, right
Y. tsarj L. tsarj E. tsarj
stolen goods, contraband; bribe
Y. tsarj" L. tsarj' E. tsarj'
dirty, filthy
Y. [tsarj"] L. tsarj' E. tsarj'
strong, fleet horse. See also zu
Y. tsarf L. tsarjv E. tsarjh
bury, inter
Y. [tsarj*] L. tsfiarj" E. dzarjh
internal organs, viscera
Y. tsarj" L. tsfiarjv E. dzarjh
storage place, treasury. See also cang
Y. tsaw L. tsaw E. tsaw
wine dregs
Y. tsaw L. tsaw E. tsaw
meet, encounter
Y. tsaw', tso' L. tsfiak E. dzak
chisel; to chisel; also zuo. Also E. dzawk
Y. tsaw" L. tsaw' E. tsaw'
early; morning
Y. tsaw" L. tsaw' E. tsaw'
jujube, Zizyphus vulgaris
Y. tsaw" L. tsaw' E. tsaw'
bathe; bath
Y. tsaw" L. tsaw' E. tsaw'
jade pendant on a hat
Y. [tsaw"] L. tsaw' E. tsaw'
reddish-purple silk; wash. See also sao
Y. tsaw L. tsaw' E. tsaw'
seawead, algae; ornamented, ornate
Y. tsaw" L. tsaw' E. tsaw'
flea; early
Y. tsawN L. tsawv E. tsawh
stove; kitchen
zan
zan
zan
zang
zang
zang
zang
zang
zang
zang
zang
zao
zao
zao
zao
zSo
zSo
z&o
zSo
z&o
zSo
zao

Lexicon 393
157:13
156:13
106:2
106:2
162:7
85:11
61:11
162:7
86:13
30:13
149:13
154:6
18:7
64:13
85:13
145:13
110:8
154:11
211:5
50:11
118:11
M37906
K1134k
M37326
K1134J
M22685
K1054a
M22684
K1054b
M38898A
KlOSla
M18131B
K1053e
M11114b
KlOSld
M38898Ba
KlOSla
M19467
K1134d
M04380
M35998
K1134c
M367595
K907a
M01994
K906a
M12796a
K790n
M18383
K790o
M34630A
M23875
K798z
M36887
K868s
M48614
M09058
K868p
M26419
K868q
Y. tsaw" L. tsaw" E. tsawh
rush; impetuous, rash; urge
Y. [tsawvl L. tsaw" E. tsawh
same as
Y. tsaw" L. tsfiaw" E. dzaw'
acorn; black dye; menial, groom; stable
Y. tsaw" L. tsfiaw" E. dzaw'
same as
Y. tsaw" L. tsfiaw" E. dzaw'
construct, create, make. See also cao and
zao below
Y. tsaw" L. tsfiaw" E. dzawh
water transport of grain. See also cao
Y. tshaw" L. tshawv E.tshawh
zaozao sincere; also cao
Y. tshaw" L. tshaw" E. tshawh
go to, reach, arrive at; also cao. See also
zao above
Y. saw" L. saw', saw" E. saw', sawh
dry
Y. saw" L. saw" E. sawh
same as
Y. saw" L. saw" E. sawh
shout; stir up, make noise; clamour
Y. tsaj' L. tsfiaak E. dzak
bandit, murderer; injure, murder; thief;
also zei
Y. tsaj" [sic] L. tsaak E. tsak
model, standard, norm; then
Y. tsaj' L. trfiaijk E. draijk/dreijk
pick out, select, choose; also zhai
Y. tgaj' L. trfiaijk E. draijk/dreijk
marsh, pool; moist; lustre; favour
Y. [tsaj'] L. trfiaijk E. draijk/dreijk
undergarment. See also duo
Y. [tsaj'] L. tgfiaijk E. dzpijk/dzeijk
spear fish
Y. [tsaj'] L. tsfiaijk E. dzpijk/dzeijk
cryptic, obscure, recondite
Y. [tsaj'] L. tsfiaijk E. dz.aijk/dzeijk
bite
Y. tsaj" L. tsaijk E. tsaijk/tseijk
kerchief round the hair
Y. tsaj" L. tsaijk E. tgaijk/tseijk
bed-mat
zao
zao
zao
zao
zao
zao
zao
zao
zao
zao
zao
ze
ze
ze
ze
ze
ze
ze
ze
ze
ze

394 Lexicon
154:4
116:5
118:5
162:5
9:2
9:9
72:4
154:6
149:12
32:12
61:12
73:8
111:12
122:12
120:12
154:12
98:12
30:6
75:5
75:5
75:9
M36682
K868m
M25455b
M25945
K806k
M38801a
K806m
M00352
K924d
M00897b
K906c
M13785
K924f
M36759a
K907a
M35972
K660J
M05454
K884c
Ml 1202
K884d
M14299A
K884a
M24017
K884g
M28370
K884f
M27888
K884h
M36929
K884J
M21602
K884k
M03533B
K780g
M14642
K46i
M14643A
M15094A
K5h
Y. tgaj" L. tgaijk E. tgaijk/tgeijk
demand, require; call to account, lay
responsibility on; blame, reprove
Y. tsajv L. tgaijk E. tgaijk/tgeijk
narrow, constrained; also zhSi
Y. tgajv L. tsaijk E. tgaijk/tSEijk
quiver; press, constrain
Y. tgaj" L. tgaijk E. tsaijk/tgeyk
press, constrain; used for zuo arise; also
zuo
Y. tsaj" L. tpak
slanting, oblique
Y. tsajv L. tgaak
side; also ce
Y. tsajv L. tssak
afternoon sun, declining sun
Y. tssj' L. tsfisak
E.
E.
E.
E.
bandit, murderer; injure, murder;
alsoze
Y. tsairf L. tsarrf E.
tsik
tsik
tsik
dzsk
thief;
tsimh
accuse falsely, slander, malign
Y. tssrj L. tsaarj
add, increase
Y. tsarj L. tsaarj
hate, loathe
Y. tssrj L. tsaarj
E.
E.
E.
tsarj
tsarj
tssrj
then; even, just; a surname. See also ceng
Y. tssrj L. tssarj
arrow with a string attached
Y. tssrj L. tsaarj
fish net
Y. tshin' L. tsfiiarj
silk fabric
Y. tssrjv L. tsfiaarj
give, present, bestow
Y. tsirjs L. tsiarjN
boiler, rice steamer
Y. [tsa] L. tra:
for Sanskrit fa. See also zha
Y. [tsa] L. tsa:
hawthorn, same as
Y. tsa L. tsa:
a surname; hawthorn, same as
also cha
Y. tsa L. tsa:
E.
E.
E.
E.
E.
E.
E.
E.
E.
tssrj
tssrj
dzirj
dzsrjh
tsinh
trai/tre:
tsai/tse:
tsai/tse:
, See
tgai/tge:
hawthorn, same as . See also cha
ze
z6
ze
ze"
ze
ze
ze
zei
zen
zeng
zeng
zeng
zeng
zeng
zeng
zeng
zeng
zha
zha
zha
zha

Lexicon 395
75:11
91:9
169:5
M15449
K46s'
M19869
M41263A
142:5
75:1
118:8
195:5
109:5
30:6
75:10
149:5
4:4
142:8
75:5
210:0
210:3
64:11
40:3
64:13
124:8
116:5
104:11
M32932
M14422
K280b
M26149
M46076
M23253
M03533A
K780g
M15259
M35373
K806g
M00130
K806a
M33150a
K798y
M14665
K845g
M48560D
K593a
M48565
K593y
M12582a
K877p
M07064a
K780b
M12796b
K790n
M28727Ba
K1124a
M25455a
M22458
K337h
Y. [tga] L. tga: E. tgai/tge:
Chinese hawthorn, Crataegus pinnatifida
Y. [tga'] L. tgfiaip E. dzoip/dze:p
sluice-gate, flood-gate
Y. tga' L. Tjaip E. ?aip/?ejp
sluice gate. The modern reading properly
belongs to See also g&
Y. [tsa"] L. tsait E. tsoit/tse:t
kind of small cicada
Y. tga" L. tsait E. tsait/tseit
writing slip; letter
Y. tga" L. trap E. troip/treip
pierce, stab; letter, document, used for
Y. tga" L. tga:' E. tsai'/tse:'
salted fish; jellyfish
Y. [tsa"] L. tsaip E. tgsip/tgeip
blink
Y. [tsav] L. trar E. traih/tre:h
shout at, upbraid. See also zhao
Y. tgas L. tgar E. tgaih/tge:h
press out oil, etc.
Y. tgaN L. tgar E. tgaih/tgeih
cheat, deceive
Y. tgav L. tgfiar E. dzaih/dzjE:h
suddenly
Y. [tsav] L. tgfiar E. dz_aih/dze;h
pre-Han year-end festival; also cha
Y. tghaj" L. tgha:jk E. tg^ijk/tg^yk
hedge, fence; railings, bars. Also E.
tghaijk/tghe:jk, gainh/gemh
same as See also qf, ji, ZT.
Y. tgaj L. tgay E. tgaij/tgeij
purify oneself; fast; vegetarian diet
Y. tgaj" L. traijk E. treijk/treijk
pluck, pick; also zhe. Also E.^rsijk/tr^yk
Y. tgaj' L. trfiayk E. drsijk/dreijk
residence; also zhe
Y. tgaj' L. trfiayk E. draijk/dreyk
pick out, select, choose; also ze
Y. [tgaj'] L. trfiayk E. draijk/dreyk
place name; surname, also zhe. See also di
Y. tgaj" L. tgayk E. tgaijk/tgeyk
narrow, constrained; also ze
Y. tgajv L. tgayv E. tg3ijh/tge:jh
suffering, distress; congestion of the lungs
zha
zha
zha
zha
zha
zha.
zha
zha
zha
zha
zha
zha
zha
zha
zhai
zhai
zhai
zhai
zhai
zhai
zhai
zhai

396 Lexicon
75:6
82:13
184:13
196:13
149:5
85:5
119:5
M14737
M16982
K1481
M44433
K148m
M47411
K148n
M35346A
M17259
K618c
M26901B
Y. tsen L. tsian
zhantan sandalwood,
Sanskrit candana
Y. tsen L. tsian
felt
Y. tgen L. tgian
congee, gruel
Y. tsen L. tgian
kind of hawk or falcon
Y. tsam L. traim E.
garrulous. See also che
Y. tsem L. triam
moisten, soak
Y. tsem L. triam (?)
E. tpian
transcription of
E. tpian
E. tpian
E. tpian
treim/treim
E. triam
E.triam (?)
paste. This reading is not found in early
173:8
25:3
109:13
149:6
96:8
108:8
164:8
M42329
K618d
M02780A
K618a
M23742
K619c
M35458
K619a
M21040
K155e
M23020
K155f
M39900
K155H
dictionaries. See also nian.
Y. tsem L. triam
moisten, soak, same as
Y. tsem L. tgiam
to divine. See also zhan
Y. tgem L. tgiam
look up or forward
Y. tgem L. tgiam
garrulous
Y. tgan" L. tgain' E
jade cup
Y. tganv L. tgain' E
shallow cup; lamp
Y. [tganv] L. tgam' E
wine cup, same as
E. triam
E. tpiam
E. tpiam
E. tpiam
. tgsin'/tgein'
. tgain '/tsem'
. tgern'/tgem'
zhai
zhai
zhai
zhai
zhan
zhan
zhan
zhan
zhan
zhan
zhan
zhan
zhan
zhan
zhan
zhan
zhan
zhan
zh&n
zhSn
zh&n
113:6 M24700B Y. [tgajv] L. tga:jv E. tsaijh/tse:jh
K337a a surname. See also ji
9:11 M01022 Y. tgaj* L. tgaijv E. tgaijh/tse:jh
debt
40:11 M07298 Y. tsajv L. tsfia:jv E. dzaijh(s)/dze:jh
stockade; camp; mountain stronghold
112:5 M24098 Y. [tgajv] L. tgfiaif E. dzaijh(s)/dze:jh
stockade, same as 3fc
162:13 M39175 Y. tsen L. trian E. trian
K1481 move with difficulty; turn, change course
195:13 M46533 Y. tgen L. trian E. trian
K148j sturgeon
70:6 M13640 Y. tsen L. tsian E. tpian
K150c kind of banner; contraction of zhi yan ^,

Lexicon 397
zhan
zh&n
zhan
zhan
zhan
zhan
zhan
zhan
zhan
zhan
zhan
zhan
zhan
zhan
zhan
zhan
zhang
zhang
zhang
zhang
44:7
159:10
69:7
182:5
120:8
75:8
159:8
159:12
75:8
62:12
181:13
120:15
117:5
85:9
140:19
25:3
57:8
119:8
59:11
75:11
M07715
K201a
M38467A
K201b
M13555
K611a
M43795
M27587
K12485
M14963A
K155d
M38360
M38534
K208e
M14963B
K155d
Ml 1667
K147r
M43706Aa
K148s
M28043B
K204c
M25742
M17846B
K6581
M32574
M02780B
K618a
M09812A
K721H
M26990
K7211
M10015
K723e
M15451
K723f
Y. tgerT L. trian' E. trian'
unfold, display
Y. [tsen"] L. trian' E. trian'
zhanzhuSn pass through many
hands or places; toss and turn. See also
niSn
Y. tgarrT L. tgaim' E. tssim'/tseim'
cut off, cut in two, behead
Y. tsenT L. tsiam' E. tpiam'
wind-stirred water or waves
Y. tsanv L. trfiaaT E. drain'/drem'
split (seam of a garment)
Y. tsan" L. tsfiamv E. dzpin'/dzem'
shed for animals; carriage box; warehouse.
Also E. dzjan'. See also zhan below
Y. [tsanv] L. tsfiam" E. dzpin'/dzem'
sleeping carriage. Also E. dzpinVdzem11
Y. [t§anv] L. tsfia:nv E. dzpin'/dzem'
sleeping carriage
Y. tsanv L. tgfiamv E. dz.ainh/dzemh
plank road along the face of a cliff. See
also zhan above
Y. tsenv L. tsianv E. tpianh
war, battle; shiver, tremble
Y. tsenv L. tsianv E. tpianh
shiver, tremble; also chan. See also shan
Y. tsen" L. trfiianv E. drianh
cord, binding. See also chan
Y. tsanT L. tra:rrT E. tr3imh/tre:mh
stand; station
Y. tsam" L. trfiaiirT E. draim'/dreim'
soaking; deep; crystal clear. See also dan.
Y. tsanT L. tsaiirf E. ts3imh/tse:mh
immerse in liquid; dip
Y. tsenT L. tgianT E. tpiamh
seize, occupy. See also zhan
Y. tsarj L. triarj E. triarj
stretch, extend, spread; a surname. See
also zhang
Y. [tsarj] L. triaq E. triarj
provisions
Y. tsarj L. tsiarj E. tqiarj
clear, evident, bright
Y. tsarj L. tgiarj E. tpiarj
camphor tree

398 Lexicon
85:11
94:11
96:11
117:6
163:11
168:0
64:8
50:8
57:8
85:11
130:8
1:2
9:3
75:3
9:3
75:3
168:0
46:11
104:11
170:11
M18174
M20643
K723g
M21211
K723h
M25761
K723a
M39617
K723J
M41100C
M12248
K725J
M08939
K721g
M09812B
K721h
M18173
M29570
M00011
K722a
M00371A
M14469A
K722b
M00371B
M14469B
K722b
M41100B
K721a
M08410
M22455
M41821
K723k
Y. tsarj L. tsiarj E. tpiarj
river name
Y. tsar) L. tsiarj E. tqiarj
river deer, Hydropotes inermis
Y. tsarj L. tsiarj E. tpiarj
jade tablet
Y. tsarj L. tsiarj E. tciarj
pattern; display; brilliant, splendid; chapter
Y. tsarj L. tsiarj E. tpiarj
place name
Y. tsarf L. triarj' E. triarj'
grow; elder; chief, head. See also chdng,
zhang
Y. tsarf L. tsiarj' E. tqiarj'
palm of the hand; handle, control
Y. tsarf L. triarf E. triarjh
curtain, tent
Y. [tsarf] L. triarf E. triarjh
swell, same as . See also zhang
Y. tsarf L. triarf E. triarjh
swell. Graph is also now read zhang to
rise (of water, prices, etc.)
Y. tsarf L. triarj" E. triarjh
expand; swell; bloated
Y. tsarf L. trfiiarf E. driarj'
measure of length, 10 feet
Y. tsarf L.trfiiarf E. driarj'
weapons of war; fight. See also zhang
below
Y. tsarf L. trfiiarf E. driarj'
staff, stick. See also zhang below
Y. tsarf L.trfiiarf E. driarjh
weapons; hold, rely on, depend on. See
also zhang above
Y. tsarf L. trfiiarf E. driarjh
lean on (as a staff, or walking-stick). See
also zhang above
Y. tsarf L. trfiiarf E. driarjh
length. See also chang, zhang
Y. [tsarf] L. tsiarf E. tpianh
high and imposing mountain peak
Y. tsarf L. tgiarf E. tqiarjh
miasma, fever, malaria
Y. tsarjv L. tsiarf E. tqiarjh
barrier, barricade; block, obstruct. Also E.
tpiarj separate, obstruct
zhang
zhang
zhang
zhang
zhang
zh&ng
zhSng
zhang
zhang
zhang
zhang
zhang
zhang
zhang
zhang
zhang
zhang
zhang
zhang
zhang

Lexicon 399
30:12
74:8
64:5
72:5
167:2
167:5
140:9
109:6
87:0
85:5
122:8
75:14
75:8
118:4
10:4
70:8
129:8
156:7
30:2
86:9
149:5
162:11
M04254b
M14374A
K1143a
Ml 1968
K11311
M13855
KllSlm
M40158
K1163a
M40291
K1131r
M31410Cb
K45n'
M23339
M19653b
Klllla
M17257
K1131p
M28289
K11261
M15756
K1124q
M14992
M25872
M01347
K1145a
M13668
K1145c
M29229
K1146a
M37171
K1149u
M03241A
K1131e
M19226
K1131o
M35379
K1131q
M39086
K804d
Y. tsaw L. traiw E. traiw/tre:w
ridicule, mock; also chao
Y. tsew L. triaw E. triaw
morning. See also chao
Y. tsew L. tsiaw E. tpiaw
invite, beckon, summon
Y. tsew L. tsiaw E. tpiaw
bright, illustrious; display, manifest
Y. [tsew] L. tsiaw E. tciaw
shave, pare; encourage; distant; a surname.
Also E. kew.
Y. [tsew] L. tsiaw E. tqiaw
big sickle
Y. tsew', tso' L. trfiiak E.driak
adjoin, touch, be attached to; feel, be
affected by; also zhu6. See also zhu, zhuo
vulgar form of zhao
Y. tsaw" L. tsaiw' E. tsaiw Ytgeiw'
claw, see zhui
Y. tsew" L. tsiaw' E. tpiaw'
pool, pond
Y. tsaw" L. traiw" E. traiwh/tre:wh
bamboo basket for catching fish; cover
Y. tsaw" L. trfiaiw" E. draiwh/dreiwh
oar
Y. tsaw" L. trfiaiw" E. draiwh/dreiwh
oar, same as
Y. tsaw"L. tsaiw" E. tgaiwh/tseiwh
zhaoli strainer
Y. tsew" L. trfiiaw' E. driaw'
omen, portent; million
Y. tsew" L. trfiiawv E. driaw'
banner adorned with serpents and tortoises
Y. tsew" L. trfiiaw" E. driaw'
initiate, inaugurate
Y. tsew" L. trfiiaw' E. driaw'
exceed, surpass; an ancient state; a surname
Y. tsew" L. trfiiaw" E. driawh
summon. See also zhao
Y. tsew" L. tsiaw" E. tpiawh
shine, shine on, illuminate
Y. tsew" L. tsiaw" E. tpiaw
instruct; imperial decree
Y. tse L. tsia E. tqia
screen, hide; block, impede
zhao
zhao
zhao
zhao
zhao
zhao
zhao
zhao
zhao
zhao
zhao
zhao
zhao
zhao
zhao
zhao
zhao
zhao
zhao
zhao
zhao
zhe

400 Lexicon
142:7
142:11
159:12
30:7
64:4
159:7
61:11
61:18
64:11
145:18
30:18
149:18
64:11
149:11
112:10
124:8
142:11
125:4
155:9
64:11
M33096
K287g
M33491a
K793e
M38524a
K286e
M03667
K287c
M11890A
K287a
M38336
K632b
Ml 1143
K690h
M11498a
K638d
M12647a
M34730
M04615
M36156
K638c
M12582b
K877p
M35868
K877u
M24406
K795J
M28727Bb
K1124a
M33537a
K685g
M28852
K45a
M37017
K45d
M12647b
zhe
zhe
zhe"
zhe
zhe"
zhe
zhe
zhe
zhe
zh&
zhe
zhe
zhe
zhe
zhe
zhe
zhe
zhe
zh6
zhe
Y. [tre~] L. trial E. trial
sting^
Y. [sf ] L. giajk E. piajk
sting, poison bite; colloauial reading
may be borrowed from ; also shi
Y. tsV L. trfiial E. drial
wheel ruts; also che
Y. [tsev] L. irial E. trial
wise
Y. tge" L. tsiat E. tpiat
bend, break (irans.). See also she
Y. [tse"] L. triap E. Map
sides of a carriage; straighlaway,
immediately, then; always, often
Y. [tse"] L. tgiap E. tqiap
fear, terror.
Y. [tse"] L. tgiap E. tgiap
fear, terror; also she
Y. ise" L. isiap E. tpiap
fold; also zhS
Y. [tse"] L. tgiap E. tciap
pleats, folds of a gown; same as
Y. [tse"] L. tgiap E. tpiap
garrulous, talkative. AlsoE.jiiap
Y. [tge~] L. tgiap E. tpiap
garrulous, talkative. Also E. jiiap
Y. tgaj" L. trayk E. irsijk/ireijk
pluck, pick; also zhai. Also E.
thr9ijk/trhe:jk.
Y. tgaj" L. trayk E. trsijk/treijk
blame, censure; also E. draijk/dreyk
Y. [tgajv] L. traijk E. traijk/treijk
tear or cut open, dismember
Y. [tgaj'] L. irfiaijk E. draijk/dreijk
place name; surname; also zhai. See also di
Y. [isi'] L. trfiip E. drip
hibernate, cluster (of insects); also zhf
Y. tgia" L. igia' E. tpia'
pronoun substitute for the head of a
relative clause, he who ..., the facl lhat
..., etc.
Y. tge" L. tgia' E. tpia'
reddish-brown, burnt ochre
Y. tge" L. tgiap E. tpiap
crease, pleat; also zhe

Lexicon 401
145:11
75:5
140:11
196:11
85:7
40:3
75:10
85:10
133:10
140:10
96:5
98:9
109:5
112:5
112:9
68:9
118:9
167:2
167:9
195:15
75:9
M34525C
K690g
M14626
K7951
M31794
M47251
M17458
M07064b
K780b
M15240
K380f
M17978
K380g
M30165
K380h
M31639
K3801
M20920
K4531
M21557A
K1251H
M23235
K375a
M24099
M24339
M13517
K658h
M26214
V6f*-\ _Kffi/ln
M40165
M40667
K671o
M46591
M15163
K8341
Y. tse"L. tsiap E. tpiap
pleat, same as . See also die", XT
Y. t§ex L. tsiav E. tpiah
thorny tree, Cudrania tricuspidata
Y. tsex L. tgiax E. tqiah
sugarcane
Y. tsevL. tsiax E. tpiah
zhegu partridge, Francolinus
chinensis
Y. tsev L. tsiat E. tqiat
name of a river
Y. tsaj' L. trfiaijk E. droijk/dreijk
residence; also zhai
Y. tsan L. tsan E. tsin
hazel
Y. [tsan] L. tssn E. tsin
name of a river; numerous, prolific
L. E. tsin
E. tsin
E. trin
Y. tssn
arrive, reach
Y. tshin' L. tssn
thickly growing vegetation
Y. tsin L. trin
valuable, precious
Y. tsin L. tsin E. tpin
make pottery; distinguish, discriminate; a
surname. See also jian
Y. tsin L. tsin E. tqin
real, true
Y. tsim L. trim E. trim
anvil; fulling block
same as
Y. tsim L. tsim E.
ladle out, pour out (tea or wine);
zhenzhuo deliberate, consider
Y. tsim L. tsim E. tpim
needle; prick; remonstrance, exhortation
Y. [tsim] L. tsim E. tpim
needle, same as
Y. [tsim] L. tsim E. tqim
needle
Y. tsim L. tsim E. tpim
saury, half-beak, Hemirhamphus sajori
Y. [tsirj] L. triajrj E. triajrj
terminal posts in a wall; glossy privet,
Ligustrum lucidum
zhe
zhe
zhe
zhe
zhe
zhe
zhen
zhen
zhen
zhen
zhen
zhen
zhen
zhen
zhen
zhen
zhen
zhen
zhen
zhen
zhen

402 Lexicon
113:9 M24767a
K834J
154:2 M36658a
K834g
9:9 M00898
K834k
9:3 M00372
K453a
102:5 M21810
K453d
104:5 M22097
K453J
109:5 M23222
K453c
115:10 M25212
K375b
120:5 M27368
K453e
120:10 M27775
K375c
145:5 M34194
K453f
149:5 M35337
K4531
159:5 M38243
K453g
190:10 M45544
K375d
203:10 M48178
K375e
75:4 M14546A
K656g
167:10 M40744
K375f
109:4 M23313
120:4 M27284
K371d
170:7 M41667
K373f
170:8 M41698B
K373f
64:7 M12093
K455p
Y. tsiq L triajq E. triajq
auspicious, favourable; also zheng
Y. tsiq L. triajq E. triajq
loyal, upright; chaste; test, verify, also
zheng
Y. [tr^iq] L. triajq E. triajq
reconnoitre, scout, spy out
Y. [tsin"] L. tsin'E. tpin'
thick hair; same as
Y. [tsin"] L. tsin' E. tpin'
path between fields, boundary paths
Y. tsin" L. tsin' E. tpin'
fever; rash
Y. [tsin"] L. tsin' E. tqin'
look angry but controlled
Y. tsin" L. tsin' E. tpin'
packed together, compressed, compact
Y. [tsin"] L. tsin' E. tgin'
twist. AlsoE. man'
Y. [tsin"] L. tsin' E. tpin'
fine-textured, dense; careful, meticulous
Y. [tsin"] L. tsin' E. tpin'
unlined gown
Y. tsin" L. tsin' E. tpin'
examine
Y. tsin" L. tsin' E. tpin'
cross-bar at the rear of a carriage
Y. [tsin"] L. tsin' E. tpin'
black hair, same as
Y. [tsin"] L. tsin' E. tpin'
black
Y. tsim" L. tsim' E. tpim'
pillow. See also zhen
Y. tsinv L. trins E. trinh
press down, control; garrison. Also E. trin
Y. [tsnr] L..«fiiiT E. drin'
pupil of the eye; presage, omen
Y. [tsnr] L. trfihr E. drin'
cord for leading oxen
Y. tsins L. trfiinv E. drinh
battle array, line of battle
Y. tsinv L. trfiin^ E. drinh
battle array, line of battle, same as
See also chen
Y. tsins L. tsinv E. tqinh
shake
zhen
zhen
zhen
zh6n
zh6n
zhen
zh6n
zhSn
zh6n
zhSn
zh6n
zh6n
zh6n
zhen
zh6n
zh6n
zhen
zhen
zhen
zhen
zhen
zhen

Lexicon 403
154:7 M36785
K455r
173:7 M42300
K455s
64:9 M12350
K658e
74:6 M14361
K893f
164:4 M39792B
K656e
196:4 M46727
K656f
75:4 M14546B
K656g
1:1 M00002B
K833a
87:4 M19663
K811a
118:8 M26133
167:8 M40553
60:12 M10239A
K891a
104:15 M22608
86:6 M19019
K896h
140:10 M31618
K896k
113:9 M24767b
K834J
154:2 M36658b
K834g
60:5 M10077
K833o
77:1 M16255A
K833J
167:5 M40322
K833v
L. tsinN E. tqinh
E. teinh
E. trimh
E. drim'
Y. tshr
relieve, aid
Y. tgiiT L. tsins
shake, quake (of the earth)
Y. [tsirrT] L. triirf
strike
Y. tsirrf L. trfiiirf
I, me. From the Qin dynasty onward
used exclusively by the emperor
Y. [tsirrT] L. trfiirrT E. drimh
poisoned wine. See also dan
Y. tsirrf L. trfiinr E. drimh
fabulous bird with poisonous wings; to
poison wine
Y. tsirrT L. tgirrT E. tpimh
use as a pillow. See also zhen
Y. [tsarj] L. traijrj E. troijrj/trEijrj
zhengzheng sound of striking wood. See
also ding
Y. tsarj L. tsaijrj
quarrel, struggle, vie
Y. tsar) L. tsaijrj
kind of zither
Y. tsh3rj L. tshaijrj
zhengzheng clank, clang
Y. tgirj L. triarj E. trirj
summon; test, prove. See also zhT
Y. [tsirjl L. triarj E. trirj
obstruction in the bowels
Y. tsirj L. tgiarj E. tpirj
steam; winter sacrifice; offer, present;
numerous
Y. tsirj L. tsiarj E. t<?irj
kindling; steam; numerous; winter sacrifice
Y. tsirj Ltriajrj E. triajrj
auspicious, favourable; also zhen
Y. tsirj L. triajrj E. triajrj
correct, upright; chaste; to test, verify; also
zhen
Y. tsirj L. tsiajrj E. tpiajrj
expedition; make an expedition against; tax
Y. tsirj L. tgiajrj E. tpiajrj
first month of the year. See also zheng
Y [tsirj] L. tsiajrj E. tQiajrj
hand bell used to signal a halt to an army
E. tssijrj/tseijrj
E. tsaijrj/tgeijrj
E.
zhen
zhen
zhen
zhen
zhen
zhen
zhen
zheng
zheng
zheng
zheng
zheng
zheng
zheng
zheng
zheng
zheng
zheng
zheng
zheng

404 Lexicon
195:8 M46210B
64:6
66:12
149:8
149:12
163:12
66:5
77:1
149:5
130:5
113:5
130:6
4:2
26:3
30:2
65:0
75:4
75:7
83:0
113:4
M11991
K8961
M13394
K833t
M35643
M35946
K883n
M39647
K363e
M13135
K833r
M16255B
K833J
M35341
K833u
M29395
K590k
M24665
K590p
M29463
K552g
M00125
K962a
M02846
K1238d
M03239A
K865a
M13061
K864a
M14557
K864b
M14846
M17026B
K867a
M24639B
K867i
Y. [tgirj] L. tgiajrj E. teiajrj
dish of mixed meat and fish. See also
qing
Y. tgirf L. tgiarj' E. tqirj'
raise; help, rescue
Y. tsirj" L. tgiajrj' E. tpiajrj'
in good order; put in order; whole
Y. tsarp L. tsaijrf E. tS3ijrjh/tse:jrjh
argue, debate
Y. tgirf L. tgiarf E. tQirjh
verify, demonstrate, ascertain, prove
Y. tgirf L. trfiiajrjx E. driajrjh
place name; a surname; heavy; zhengzhong
serious, earnest
Y. tgirf L. tgiajrf E. tpiajrjh
government
Y. tgirf L. tgiajrf E. tpiajrjh
upright; correct, right. See also zheng
Y. [tgirf] L. tgiajrj" E. tpiajrj
upbraid, remonstrate
Y. tgr L. tri
callus
Y. [tgr] L. tgi
respect, revere
Y. tgr L. tgi
fat, grease
Y. tgr L. tgi
go to; him, her, it; genitive particle
Y. tgr L. tgi E. tqia/tpi
goblet
Y. [tgr] L. tgi E. tqia/tpi
single; one only. See also zhT.
Y. tgr L. tgi E. tqia/tpi
branch; separate; support; resist, hold out
Y. tgr L. tgi E. tpia/tpi
branch
Y. tgr L. tgi E. tqia/tci
cape jasmine, Gardenia jasminoides
Y. tgrL. tgi E. tpia/tqi
YuezhT a nomadic Indo-European
people who migrated from Gansu to
Bactria in the second century B.C. See
also shi
Y. [tgr] L. tgi E. tqia/tci
only. See also qi
E. tri
E. tpi
E. tgi
E. tpi/tqi
zheng
zhSng
zhfcng
zheng
zheng
zheng
zheng
zheng
zheng
zhT
zhT
zhi
zhT
zhT
zhT
zhT
zhT
zhi
zhT
zhT

Lexicon 405
zhT
zhT
zhT
zhT
zhT
zhT
zhT
zhT
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
130:4 M29285
K864c
130:5 M29374
K865b
111:3 M23935A
K863a
85:2 M17104
K686f
120:12 M27892A
K920f
140:4 M30699
K962c
142:8 M33134
K863d
172:2 M41941
K1260c
75:8 M15023
K919e
78:8 M16502
K919d
32:8 M05188
K919c
9:8 M00786B
K919H
109:3 M23136
K919a
64:15 M12893b
64:15 M12922
K877t
157:11 M37821A
K877o
157:15 M37963
K363f
38:6 M06226
K413o
115:8 M25119
K919b
Y. tsr L. tsi E. tcia/tqi
limb
Y. [tsr] L. tsi E. tpia/tpi
limb.
Y. tsi L. tri E. tria/tri
know. See also zhi
Y. tgi" L. tsip E. tqip
juice
Y. t§f L. tsiak E. tpik
weave, make cloth. See also zhi
Y. tsr L. tsi E. tpi/tpi
kind of fungus growing on dead wood
anciently thought to be of good omen
Y. tsiL. tri E. tria/tri
zhlzhu spider
Y. tsf L. tsiajk E. tpiajk
single, individual
Y. [si'] L. sfii&k E. d?ik
plant; establish. The modern pronunciation
corresponds to a reading E. drik found in
Jiyun . Also E. drih establish
Y. [si'] L. gfiiak E. d?ik
propagate; breed, multiply; colonize
Y. [si'] L. gfiiak E. d?ik
clay
Y. tsi' L. trfiiak E. drik
value, be worth (colloquial), reading in
Jiyun. For the ancient reading and
meaning see zhi
Y. tsi' L. trfiiak E. drik
direct, straight; only
Y. tsi' L. trfiiajk E. driajk
throw, cast; also zhi
Y. tsi' L. trfiiajk E. driajk
scratch; throw
Y. [tsi']
zhizhu
same as
Y. [tsi']
zhizhu
Y. tsi'
L. trfiiajk E. driajk
walk haltingly, hesitate,
. See also di
L. trfiiajk E. driajk
walk haltingly, hesitate
L. trfiit
brother's son, nephew
Y. [tsf] L. triak
plant early
E. drit
E.trik

406 Lexicon
128:12
64:5
64:11
157:5
157:11
154:8
120:11
187:4
142:11
32:8
204:0
60:12
113:4
27:5
72:2
64:6
112:5
32:4
77:0
85:4
M29183
K920g
M11958B
K795m
M12624
K804e
M37469
K7951
M37815
K804f
M36833Aa
K493a
M27831
K685f
M44612
K684a
M335375
K685g
M05193
K685a
M48248
K1237i
M10239B
K891a
M24641
K961k
M02918
M13738
K552a
M12034
K552f
M24093
K590o
M04908
M16253
K961a
M17213
K961H
Y. [tsf] L. tsiak E. tpik
attend to, manage; responsibilities, duties
of office; office
Y. [tsf] L. tsiajk E. tqiajk
same as . See also tub
Y. [tsf] L. tsiajk E. tpiajk
pick, gather, select
Y. [tsf] L. tsiajk E. tpiajk
sole of the foot
Y. [tsf] L. tgiajk E. tpiajk
sole of the foot; tread
Y. tsf L. tsit E. tpit
substance, material, now usually read
zhi. See also zhl from E. trih
Y. [tsf] L. trip E. trip
tie up, tether; imprison
Y. [tsf] L. trip E. trip
hobble a horse
Y. [tsi'] L. trfiip E. drip
hibernate, cluster (insects), reading
pronunciation, also zhe.
Y. [tgf ] L. tsip E. tpip
hold, grasp
Y. [tsrv] L. tri' E. tri'
embroidery
Y. tsf L. tri' E. tri '/tri'
one of the notes of the scale. See also
zh5ng
Y. tszv L. tri' E. tri '/tri'
prosperity, blessings
Y. tsrv L. tsi' E. tqi'
whetstone; come to, reach; bring about,
settle
Y. tsr" L. tsi' E. tqi'
fine-tasting; fine, excellent; purport,
aim; decree
Y. tsr" L. tsi' E. tci'
finger; point, indicate
Y. tsrv L. tsi' E. tpi'
whetstone. See also dT.
Y. tsrv L. tsi' E. tpi'/tpi'
base, foundation, site
Y. tsrv L. tsi' E. tei'/tci'
stop
Y. tsr' L. tsi' E. tqi'/tQi'
islet
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhf
zhi
zhl
zhT
zhl
zhT
zhT
zhT
zhT
zhT
zhT
zhT

Lexicon 407
140:4 M30740 Y. tsr" L. tsi' E. tpi'/tpi'
K961 j kind of fragrant plant
140:6 M30876B Y. [tsr"] L. tsi' E. tpi'/tpi'
K9601 kind of iris. See also chai
157:4 M37406 Y. tsrv L. tgi" E. tpi'/tpi'
K96lg heel
170:4 M41570 Y. tsr" L. tsi' E. tpi'/tpi'
base, foundation
30:2 M03239B Y. [tsrv] L. tsi' E. tpia'/tpi'
K865a merely, only. See also zhT.
30:6 M03542 Y. is/ L. tsi' E. tpia'/tpi'
K865d measure of length; eight inches
75:5 M14583 Y. [tsf] L. tsi' E. tpia'/tpi'
K865e trifoliate orange, Poncirus trifoh'ata. Also
E. kjia'
120:4 M27293 Y. tsr" L. tsi' E. tpia/tpi'
paper
159:5 M38271 Y. [tsr"] L. tsi' E. tpia/tpi'
K865c linch-pin hole
64:11 M12632 Y. [tsr] L. tsi^ E. tpih
K685k catch, seize; sincere, earnest
133:0 M30142 Y. tsr L. tsiv E. tpih
K413a arrive; utmost, most
154:11 M36907 Y. tsr L. tsis E. tpih
K685m ceremonial gift to a superior
196:11 M47275 Y. [tsr] L. tgiv E. tpih
K685n bird of prey
61:3 M10331 Y. tsrv L. tsix E. tpih/tpih
K962e aim, intention, purpose
104:7 M22218 Y. [tsr] L. tgiv E. tqih/tpih
mole, freckle
120:12 M27892B Y. [tsr] L. tsiv E. tqih/tpih
K920f fabric woven of coloured silk. See also
zhi
149:7 M35501 Y. [tsr] L. tsiv E. tpih/tqih
K962f record, report
149:12 M35974B Y. [tsr] L. tgiv E. tpih/tpih
K920k record, commemorate. See also shi
40:10 M07257 Y. [tsr] L. tsiv E. tpiah/tpih
K375x set up, establish, fix
148:12 M35170 Y. [tsr] L. tsiv E. tpia/tpih
K147c' ancient wine vessel
50:12 M09080 Y. tsiv L. tshi^ E. tphih/tphih
K920j banner
61:15 M114001 Y. [tsiv] L. triv E. trih
K4l5d anger, dislike
zhT
zhT
zhT
zhT
zhT
zhT
zhT
zhT
zhT
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi

408 Lexicon
133:4
103:9
154:8
159:6
187:11
122:8
72:8
111:3
172:5
115:8
115:10
120:9
157:15
162:12
9:8
46:6
53:6
102:6
157:6
85:5
104:6
53:10
M30149
K413d
M22006
K415a
M36833B
K493a
M38311
K413e
M44945
K685J
M28298
K919g
M14010
K863b
M23935B
K863a
M41987
K560e
M25120
K575y
M25213
K595g
M27700
M37967
K493c
M39113B
K596d
M00786A
K919h
M08053
K961q
M09310
K961s
M21837
K961r
M37529
K961u
M17256B
K976z
M22167
K961t
M09432
Y. tsiv L. tot E. trih
cause to arrive, bring; send
Y. [tsis] L. tot E. trih
slip
Y. tsiN L. tit E. trih
hostage, pledge. See also zhf and zhi
from E. tail.
Y. [tsH L. tot E. trih
carriage low in front and high behind
Y. [tsH L. tot E. trih
slow, reluctant (horse)
Y. tsiv L. tot E. trih/trih
place, set; set aside, release
Y. tgi* L. tit E. triah/trih
knowledge, wisdom
Y. [tsil L. tot E. triah/trih
knowledge, wisdom. See also zhl.
Y. tsiN L. trhT E. dri'
pheasant
Y. tsiN L. trhT E. drih
young
Y. [tgi*] L. trfiT E. drih
sow grain late; young. Compare
Y. [tsi^] L. trffr E. drih
mend; fine-textured, dense
Y. [tgi*] L. tot E. drih
stumble, lose one's footing
Y. [tgi*] L. trfiT E. drih
wait, delay. See also chi.
Y. [tgi*] L. trnT E. drih/drih
hold upright; meet. See also zhi.
Y. [tsi*] L. trfiiv E. dri '/dri'
stand erect, tower; accumulate, store
Y. [tsil L. trfiT E. dri'/dri'
accumulate, store, provide
Y. [tsH L. trfii^ E. dri'/dri'
place of sacrifice; accumulate, store
Y. [tsH L. trmv E. dri'/dri'
stop, hesitate
Y. tsiv L. trfiix E. drih/drih
well-governed, in good order. See also
chi
Y. [tsH L. trfiiv E. dri'/dri'
piles, haemorrhoids
Y. [tsH L. trfiT E. dria'/dri'
ji&zhi fabulous one-horned animal
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi

Lexicon 409
zhi (continued)
153:0
157:9
170:3
85:11
157:11
58:10
18:6
145:8
64:15
50:5
115:5
120:5
124:5
145:5
154:8
170:7
86:4
53:6
116:6
M36496
K1238b
M37688B
K866q
M41552
K4z
M18075
K315b
M37808B
M09931
K334a
M01961
K335a
M34380
K335b
M12893a
M08852
M24998
K402f
M27334
M28666
K402H
M34204
K402g
M36833Ab
K493a
M41659
K916a
M18922
K791a
M09307
M25493
K413H
able to distinguish right and wrong in law
cases
Y. tgaf L. trfiT E. dria'/dri'
worm; disperse. Also E.draij', which
accounts for the Yuan reading
Y. [tsHL. trfiT E. dria'/dri'
zhiql exert an effort. See also di
Y. [t&] L. trfiT E. driaVdri'
slope; fall down, collapse.
Y. tsiN L. trfiiajN E. driajh
stop up, obstruct; stagnant, sluggish
Y. [tsiN] L. trfiiaf E. driajh
block up, same as See also dai
Y. tsiv L. trfiiaj^ E. driajh
swine
Y. tsiv L. tsiajv E. tpiajh
cut out (clothing); form, make; regulate;
regulation
Y. tsiv L. tsiajN E. tqiajh
cut out (clothing); manufacture
Y. tsi' L. trfiiajk E. driajk
throw, cast, also zhi
Y. [tsi'] L. trfiit E. drit
book covering, box for thread-bound
books
Y. tsi' L. trfiit E. drit
order, succession; regulate; rank, office
Y. [tsi'] L. trfiit E. drit
sew
Y. [tsi'] L. trfiit E. drit
; fenfen zhizhi flutter
Y. [tsi'J L. trfiit E. drit
wrapper, sheath; satchel
Y. tsf L. tgit E. tpit
substance, material, also zhi. See also
zhi above
Y. [tsiv] L. triak E. trik
ascend; promote
Y. tsf L. tsiajk E. tqiajk
roast, broil. Also read E. tpiah roast
meat
Y. [tsf] L. tritE. trit
stop up. Zhouzhi name of a place
in Shamxi
Y. [tsf] L. trit E. trit
block up, obstruct. Also E. tet
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi

410 Lexicon
167:6
75:6
142:6
163:6
167:15
187:10
94:8
2:3
61:4
145:4
M40371
K413g
M14768
K413i
M33048
M39380
M41000
K493b
M44906
M20494
K335d
M00073A
K1007a
M10353
K1007k
M34139A
K1007J
85:11
108:4
120:5
142:11
167:9
167:12
14:8
32:10
115:9
130:9
157:9
2:3
M18187
KlOlOf
M22958B
M27372
K1002e
M33519
K1002f
M40672
K1188g
M40902
K1188x
M01585
K1218H
M05345
M25174A
K1188d
M29697
K1188e
M37686
K1188f
M00073B
K1007a
Y. [tsi ] L. trit E. trit
reaping hook
Y. [isf] L. tsit E. tqit
foot fetters
Y. [tsf] L. tsit E. tpit
leech, Hirudinea
Y. [tsf] L. tsit E. tqit
place name
Y. [tsf] L. tsit E. tpit
chopping block
Y. tsf L. tsit E. tpit
stallion; climb; settle, stabilize
Y. [ki^] L. kiajv E. kiajh
mad dog
Y. tsurj L. triwrj E. truwrj
middle, centre. See also zhong
Y. tsurj L. triwrj E. truwrj
loyal, devoted
Y. tsurj L. triwrj E. truwrj
inner garment; sincere, loyal. See also
zhong
Y. [tsurj] L. tsiwrj E. tpuwrj
confluence of two rivers. Also E. dzawrj,
dzawrj
teacup (modern usage). For the old use
of the character see chong
Y. tsurj L. tsiwrj E. tpuwrj
end, finish; to the end, forever
Y. [tsurj] L. tsiwrj E. tpuwrj
locust, grasshopper
Y. tsurj L. tsywrj E. tpuawrj
measure of volume; wine cup
Y. tsurj L. tsywrj E. tpuawrj
bell
Y. tsurj" L. trywrj' E. truawrj'
tomb, grave
same as
Y. tsurf L. tsywrj' E. tpuawrj'
seed; kind, sort, species. See also zhong
Y. tsurf L. tsywrj' E. tquawrj'
swelling; swollen
Y. tsurf L. tsywrj' E. tquawrj'
heel; follow on the heels of
Y. tsurjv L. triwrjv E. truwrjh
hit (the middle); hit. see also zhong
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhi
zhong
zhong
zhong
zhong
zhong
zhong
zhong
zhong
zhong
zhong
zhdng
zh6ng
zh6ng
zh6ng
zhong

Lexicon 411
145:4 M34139B Y. [tsurf] L. triwrjv E. truwrjh
KlOOTj oppose; meet up with; match. See also
zhong
9:4 M00403 Y. tsurf L. trfiiwrf E. druwrjh
Kl007f second oldest brother; second, intermediate
109:6 M23321 Y. tsurf L. tsiwrf E. tQuwrjh
KlOlOa multitude; crowd; numerous; same as
143:6 M33981 Y. tsurf L. tsiwrp E. teuwrr
multitude; crowd; numerous; same as
166:2 M40132B Y. tsurf L. trfiywrf E. druawrj'
Kll88a heavy; important. See also zhong below
and chong
Y. tsurf L. trfiywrf E. druawrjh
repeat. See also chong and zhong above
Y. tsurjv L. tsywrf E. tpuawrjh
sow, plant. See also zhdng
Y. [tsurf] L. tsawrjv E. tsawrjh
see zong
Y. [tsiw] L. triw E. truw
cheat, impose on
Y. tsiw L. triw E. truw
zhoujiu, zhoujiao twitter
Y. [tsiw] L. triw E. truw
pull out; Zhouzhi name of a place
in Shamxi
149:8 M35609C Y. [tsiw] L. triw E. truw
Kl083x morning. See also tiao, diao
149:14 M36050 Y. [tsiw]L. triw E. truw
K1090q zhouzhang exaggerate, bluff
159:6 M38308 Y. tsiw L. triw E. truw
Kl084g carriage pole
30:5 M03441 Y. tsiw L. tsiw E. tquw
K1083a circuit; go around; all around; Zhou
dynasty
47:3 M08678 Y. tsiw L. tsiw E. tpuw
K1086a region; province, prefecture
85:6 M17413 Y. tsiw L. tsiw E. tquw
K1086d island; continent
137:0 M30350 Y. tsiw L. tsiw E. tpuw
K1084a boat
154:8 M36804 Y. tsiw L. tsiw E. tpuw
K1083H give, bestow alms
159:8 M38356 Y. [tsiw] L. tsiw E. tquw
K10831 heavy in front (of a carriage)
119:6 M26938a Y. tsiw\ tsyv L. tsiwk E. tpuwk
Kl024a rice gruel, congee; also zhu
166:2
115:9
119:8
9:6
30:8
108:12
M40132C
K1188a
M25174B
K1188d
M269935
M00606
K1084f
M03790
K1083J
M23060
K1074a
zhong
zhong
zhong
zhong
zhong
zhong
zhong
zhong
zhou
zhou
zhou
zhou
zhou
zhou
zhou
zhou
zhou
zhou
zhou
zhou
zhou

412 Lexicon
193:12
38:5
159:5
130:3
50:5
195:8
98:9
107:10
120:10
187:14
30:6
72:7
120:3
195:6
13:7
130:5
40:5
118:13
120:11
164:3
30:5
M45721Bb
K1024b
M06125a
K1079e
M38269a
K1079p
M29268
K1073a
M08854
K1087a
M46237
M21554
K1092H
M22899
M27747
K132f
M45048a
K131q
M03545
K128u
M13948
K1075a
M27239
M46121B
M01537
K10791
M29349
K1079H
M07108
K1079g
M26646
M27856C
K1144n
M39772
K1073c
M03443
Y. [tgy~, tsiw"] L. tsiwk E. tguwk
gruel, same as ; also zhu. See also yu
Y. [tsiw', tsy'] L. trfiiwk E. druwk
agitated, anxious; zh6uli
husband's brother's wife; also zhu
Y. tsy', tsiw' L. trfiiwk E. druwk
axle; also zhu
Y. tsiw" L. triw' E. truw'
elbow
Y. [tsiw"] L. tsiw' E. tquw'
broom
Y. [tsiw"] L. tsiw' E. tpuw'
seejuezhdu
Y. tSh9WN L. tS9Wv E. tSUWh
brickwork of a well
Y. tS3Wv L. tS3Wv E. tSUWh
wrinkles
Y. [tpwN] L. tsgw" E. tsuwh
crape, crinkled fabric
Y. tsawv L. tsfiaw" E. dzjiw
gallop; swift; frequent; also zou
Y. tsiwv L. triwv E. truwh
bird's beak; also E. traiwk and tawh
Y. tsiw" L. triwv E. truwh
daytime
Y. tsiwv L. trfiiw" E. druw'
last ruler of the Shang dynasty
Y. [tsiw] L. trfiiw" E. druw'
place name. See also tong
Y. [tsiwv] L. trfiiwv E. druwh
helmet
Y. [tsiwx] L. trfiiwv E. druwh
heir; eldest son of a principal wife
Y. tsiwv L. trfiiwv E. druwh
canopy of heaven, world
Y. tsiwv L. tfiriwv E. druwh
read aloud, recite; ancient style of writing,
also called Large Seal, named after an early
Zhou scribe to whom it was attributed
Y. [tsiwv] L. trfiiwv E. druwh
oracular pronouncement. See also yao, you
Y. tsiw L. trfiiw" E. druwh
add old wine yeast to new wine
Y. tsiwx L. tsiwv E. tquwh
curse; spell, incantation, same as
zhou
zhou
zh6u
zh6u
zh6u
zh6u
zhou
zhou
zhou
zhou
zhou
zhou
zhou
zhou
zhou
zhou
zhou
zhou
zhou
zhou
zhou

Lexicon 413
113:5
85:16
94:9
152:9
149:9
75:6
142:6
149:6
157:6
163:6
9:6
75:2
96:6
85:6
167:6
38:5
75:5
137:5
140:11
159:5
162:7
142:13
M24672B
K1025a
M18670
K45k
M20534
M36432
K45h
M35743
K45p
M14723
K128f
M33002
K128g
M35472
K128k
M37501
K1281
M39366
K128m
M00592
K128d
M14424
K128a
M20956
K128e
M17381
M40383
K128t
M06125b
K1079e
M14629B
K1079b
M30397
M31719
K1022e
M38269b
K1079p
M38877
K1022a
M33703
K1224d
Y. [tgiwv] L tgiwv E. tauwh
curse, same as . See also zhu
Y. tsy L. tria/trya E. tria
stagnant water, pool
Y. tsy L. tria/trya E. tria
pig, same as
Y. tsy L. tria/trya E. tria
pig
Y. tsy L. tgia/tgya E. tpia
all; fusion word for zhi hu •
Y. tsy L. trya E. trua
tree trunk
Y. tsy L. trya E. trua
zhlzhu spider
Y. tsy L. trya E. trua
execute; punish
Y. [tgy] L. trya E. trua
zhuzhu jump forward
Y. tsy L. trya E. trua
ancient place name
Y. tsy L. tsya E. tpua
zhuru dwarf
Y. tsy L. tsya E. tpua
vermilion, bright red; cinnabar; a surname
Y. tsy L. tsya E. tpua
pearl; bead
Y. gy L. gfiya E. d?ua
river name
Y. gy' L. gfiya E. d?ua
1/24 oz, measure of weight
Y. [tgy', tgiw'] L. trfiiwk E. druwk
see zhou
Y. [tgy', tgiw'] L. trfiiwk E. druwk
piece of a loom; the cylinder for the warp.
See also you
Y. [tgy', tgiw'] L. trfiiwk E. druwk
zhulu [ a convoy of ships touching
stem to stern
Y. [tgy', tgiw'] L. trfiiwk E. druwk
sorrel, Rumex
Y. tsy', tgiw' L. trfiiwk E. druwk
axle; also zhou
Y. tgy', tgiw' L. trfiiwk E. druwk
pursue, chase; chase away, drive off
Y. [tgy', tgiw'] L. trfiywk E. druawk
caterpillar
zhdu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu

414 Lexicon
157:13
75:1
118:0
118:2
118:6
118:10
86:13
85:9
86:9
170:9
64:5
3:4
198:5
69:21
109:21
30:21
44:18
198:5
19:5
154:5
140:9
M37917
K1224H
M14423
K497a
M25841
K1019a
M25842
K1019f
M26002
K1019c
M26298a
K1019d
M19480
K1224e
M17758
K45k
M19187
K451
M41724
K45q
Ml 1940
K129e
M00100
K129a
M47616
M13619
K1224t
M23841
M04654
M07821A
K1224s
M47611
M02312
K46z
M36698
K84g
M31410A
K45n'
Y. [tgy', tsiw'] L. trfiywk E. druawk
footprint; see zhizhu
Y. [tsy'] L. trfiyt E. drwit
glutinous millet. Also E. ?wit
Y. tsy", tsiw" L. triwk E. truwk
bamboo
Y. [tsy", tsiw"] L.triwk E. truwk
a surname; Tianzhu India,
transcription of Iranian Hinduka, for the
reading of see under xian ;
Y. [tsy", tsiw"] L. triwk E. truwk
kind of zither
Y. tsy" L. triwk E. truwk
pestle for pounding earth; build of pounded
earth; build; also zhu
Y. tsy , tsiw" L. tsywk E. tquwk
torch; candle
Y. tsy" L. tsia'/tsya' E. tpia'
small island
Y. tsy" L. tsia'/tsya' E. tpia'
boil, cook
Y. [tsy"] L. tsia'/tsya' E. tpia'
small island
Y. tsy L. trya' E. trua'
prop up, support
Y. tsy" L. tsya E. tqua'
host; master, owner; main, primary
Y. tsy" L. tsya' E. tpua'
kind of large deer
Y. [tsy"] L. trywk E. truawk
chop
Y. [tsy"] L. tsywk E. tpuawk
fix one's gaze on
Y. [tsy ] L. tsywk E. tquawk
attach; enjoin; entrust; same as A
Y. tsy L. tsywk E. tquawk
attach; enjoin. See also shu
Y. [tsuv] L. tsrbr E. dzjah
young of the fallow-deer
Y. tsu^ L. tshba* E. d?iah
assist, help
Y. tsy^ L. tria'/trya' E. tria'
pile up, heap, store
Y. tsyv L. triav/tryav E. triah
place, position, order; appear, visible,
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu

Lexicon 415
d)
9:5
75:4
40:2
118:7
118:9
120:5
123:5
140:4
140:5
124:9
149:5
167:5
187:5
75:5
9:5
85:5
86:5
167:14
187:3
113:5
118:10
M00496
K84c
M14513
K83f
M07055
K84a
M26071
M26224
K45j
M27353
K84e
M28467
K84f
M30717B
K83i
M30798
M28744
K45o
M35340
K129d
M40300
K129f
M44660
M14660
K129h
M00505
K129g
M17316
K129c
M18965
M40972
K1090a'
M44597
K1232a
M24672A
K1025a
M26298b
K1019d
L. trfiiaYtrfiyav E. dria'
manifest; outstanding; write, publish. See
also zhao, zhu6
Y. [tsyx] L. trfiiaVtrfiyaN E. dria'
stand for a long time, stand waiting
Y. tshyv [sic] L. trfiiaVtrfiyav E. dria'
shuttle
Y. [tsy*] L. trfiiaVtrfiyav E. driah
area between doorway and standingscreen
Y. [tsyl L. trfiiaYtrfiy^ E. driah
chopsticks, same as
Y. [tsyv] L. trfiiaVtrfiyav E. driah
chopsticks
Y. tsr
same as
Y. [tsyi
lamb
Y. [tsyl
kind of chestnut. See also xu
Y. tsyv L. trfiiav/trfiyav
ramie, Boehmeria nivea
Y. tsy~ L. tsiaVtsyav
soar, fly high
Y. tsyv L. tryav
annotate
Y. [tsy^] L. tryr
mineral ore deposit
Y. tsys L. tryav
L. trfiiaVtrfiyav
L. trfiiav/trfiyav
E.dria'
E. dria'
E.dria'
E. tpiah
E. truah
E. truah
E. truah
post station, way-station; halt; be
stationed
E. drua'
E. druah
E. tpuah
E. tcuah
Y. tsy^ L. trfiya^
post, pillar, column
Y. tsys L. trfiya^
stay; reside
Y. tsyv L. tsyaN
pour; record; annotate
Y. tsyv L. tsyav
wick of a lamp. Also E. tpua'
Y. tsyx L. t§yav E. tpuah
cast metals
Y. tsyN L. tsyav E. tpuah
horse with white left hind leg
Y. [tsyv] L. tsiwk E. tpuwk
invoke, pray; invoker. See also zhou
Y. tsy L. triwk E. truwk
see zhu.
zhu (continue
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu
zhu

416 Lexicon
119:6
193:12
64:13
75:13
190:7
64:4
87:0
41:8
112:11
163:11
181:9
195:11
159:11
64:12
184:12
159:11
96:9
118:9
9:11
154:10
M26938b
K1024a
M45721Ba
K1024b
M12778
M15675
M45455
K12g
Ml 1885
Kllllc
M19653a
Klllla
M07439
K231a
M24418
M39608
M43600
M46459
K2311
M38507A
K231e
M12753
K433g
M44386
K433h
M38507B
K231e
M21113
K171f
M26256
K171g
M01019B
K231f
M36880
Y. tsiw", tsy~ L. tsiwk E. tpuwk
rice gruel, congee; also zhou
Y. [tsy~, tsiw"] L. tgiwk E. tpuwk
gruel, same as ; also zhou. See also yu
Y. tswa L. trwa: E. trwai/trwe:
beat, flog
Y. tswa L. trwa: E. trwai/trwe:
horsewhip
Y. tswa L. tswa: E. tswai/tswe:
hair style for women in mourning
Y. tgaw, tswa L. tga:w E. t§aiw/tse:w
scratch; clutch, grab
Y. tsaw" L. tsa:w' E. tsaiw'/tse:w'
claw; also zhao
Y. tswen L. tsyan E. tpwian
sole; special; have sole charge of,
monopolize
Y. tswen L. tsyan E. tpwian
brick
Y. [tswen] L. tsyan E. tpwian
ancient place name
Y. [tswen] L. tsyan E. tpwian
place name; Zhuanxu ancient
legendary ancestor
Y. [tswen] L. tsyan E. tpwian
horse mackerel; also E. tqwian'
Y. tswen L. try an' E. trwian'
turn, shift; pass on, transfer. See also
zhuan
Y.[tswanv] L. tsfiwam" E. dzjwain'/dz,we:n'
compile, put together; compose, write.
Also E. dzjwian'
Y. tswan" L. tsfiwanr E. dz.wain'/dz.wem'
provide food; food. Also E. dz.wainh
Y. tswenx L. tryan" E. trwianh
revolve; revolution. See also zhu&i
Y. [tswenv] L. trfiyan' E. drwian'
carved design on a jade object
Y. tswenv L. trfiyanv E. drwian'
inscribe; ancient style of writing, seal
script; seal
Y. tswenv L. trfiyanv E. drwianh
tradition; commentary; biography. See
also chuan
Y. tsairT L. trfia:mx E. dr9imh/dreimh
make a profit; kind of song
zhu
zhu
zhua
zhua
zhua
zhua
zhu&
zhuan
zhuan
zhuan
zhuan
zhuan
zhuan
zhuan
zhuan
zhuan
zhuan
zhuan
zhuan
zhuan

Lexicon 417
38:4
140:7
145:7
75:11
33:4
94:4
61:24
64:12
162:6
167:8
172:0
187:8
196:8
32:12
170:9
112:8
120:10
130:10
61:9
120:8
154:11
M06096
K727o
M31035
K727q
M34321
K7271'
M15398
M05643
K727n
M20280
K727s
Ml 1525
K1015e
M12717B
K1188f
M38836
K543d
M40536
K575g
M41937
K575a
M44788
K575h
M47031
K575f
M05451
K526g
M41750B
K526f
M24257
K31h
M27740
K543h
M29768
K543I
M10859
K168o
M27579
K295b
M36908
K343a
Y. tgwarj L. tsairj E. tsiarj
apply cosmetics; woman's adornment
Y. tswarj L. tsairj E. tsiarj
grave, dignified; manor; village
Y. tswarj L. tsairj E. tsiarj
make up, adorn; adornment, costume;
pretend
Y. tswarj L. trwaiwrj E. traiwrj/trceiwrj
post, stake, pile
Y. tgwarp L. tsa:rjv E. tsiarjh
strong, robust
Y. tswarjx L. tsairf E. dzjarjh
form, shape, appearance; conditions,
circumstances, report
Y. tsarf [sic] L. trwaiwrf E. traiwr/Vtrceiwrj11
stupid; simple and honest; blunt and tactless;
now commonly read gang
Y. tswarjv L. trfiwaiwrf E. draiwr/Ydroeiwrj11
bump against, collide; strike (as a bell). See
also chuang
Y. tsuj L. tryj E. trwi
pursue, chase. See also duT.
tsyj E. tpwiY. tsuj
awl
Y. [tguj] L. tsyj E. tcwi
(short-tailed) bird
Y. tguj L. tgyj E. tpwi
piebald, dappled horse
Y. [tguj] L. tgyj E. tQwi
kind of small bird. Also E. swin'
Y. tsujv L. trfiyjx E. drwih
fall, let fall, drop, lose
Y. [t§uf] Ltrfiyj" E. drwih
fall down, same as See also dui
Y. [tgujv] L. trfiyjx E. drwiah/drwih
weigh down with a heavy object
Y. tsujx L. trfiyjv E. drwiah/drwih
suspend by a rope
Y. [t§ujv] L. trfiyjx E. drwiah/drwih
swelling of the feet
Y. [t§ujs] L. tsyjs E. tpwiah/tqwih
anxious and fearful
Y. tsujv L. tryajv E. trwiajh
sew, stitch; connect; embroider
Y. t§ujv L. tgyaj" E. tqwiajh
excrescence; superfluous; growth, wart;
zhuang
zhuang
zhuang
zhuang
zhuang
zhuang
zhuang
zhuang
zhuT
zhuT
zhuT
zhuT
zhuT
zhui
zhui
zhui
zhui
zhui
zhui
zhui
zhui

418 Lexicon
zhui (continued)
45:1
116:4
130:4
149:8
15:8
85:10
120:4
172:2
149:8
64:5
24:6
85:8
64:7
102:8
75:7
64:14
85:13
85:14
167:13
M07828B
K427a
M25438
K427k
M29303
K427m
M35622A
K4641
M01661
M17934
K467d
M27277B
K427n
M41943b
K467a
M35622B
K4641
Ml 1965
K496I
M02741
Kll26a
M17609
K1218e
M12136
K1219e
M21892
K295f
M14885
K324n
M12852
K1124g
M18440
K1224p
M18532
K1124H
M40937
K1224q
give as a pledge for a debt; son-in-law who
lives with his wife's family; sew; join
Y. [tsyn] L. tryn E. trwin
one of the 64 hexagrams of the Yijing',
difficult. See also tun
Y. [tsyn] L. tryn E. trwin
zhunxi, zhunxi heavy darkness,
pitch-dark; tomb, grave
Y. [tsyn] L. tsyn E. tpwin
gizzard of a fowl; sincere
Y. tsyn L. tsyn E. tpwin
favour, assist; zhunzhun earnestly and
tirelessly. See also zhun
Y. tsyn" L. tsyn' E. tpwin'
water level; standard, norm; same as
Y. tsynv L. tsyn' E. tpwin'
water-level; standard, norm; allow, permit
Y. [tsynv] L. tsyn' E. tpwin'
hem, border of a garment. See also chun
Y. syn" L. syn' E. swin'
see sun
Y. [tsynx] L. tsynv E. tpwinh
zhunzhun heavily and slowly. See also
zhun
Y. tswe L. tsyat E. tpwiat
clumsy, awkward
Y. tswaw" L. trwa:wk E. traiwk/trceiwk
tall; outstanding
Y. [tswaw"] L. traiwk E. traiwk/trceiwk
drip; place name
Y. tswaw L. tgwaiwk E. tsaiwk/tsceiwk
grasp; capture
Y. [tswe~] L. tryat E. trwiat
path between fields. Also E. trwiajh
Y. [tgwe ] L. tsyat E. tpwiat
short pillars supporting the rafters of a
house
Y. tswaw' L. trfiwaiwk E. draiwk/droeiwk
pull, take out; select; eliminate
Y. tswaw', tso' L. trfiaiwk E. draiwk/drceiwk
turbid, muddy; deep and thick (voice); chaotic
Y. tswaw', tso' L. trfiwaiwk E. draiwk/droeiwk
wash, rinse
Y. tswaw', tso' L. trfiwaiwk E. draiwk/droeiwk
small bell; bracelet
zhun
zhun
zhun
zhun
zhun
zhun
zhun
zhun
zhun
zhuo
zhuo
zhuo
zhuo
zhuo
zhuo
zhuo
zhuo
zhuo
zhuo

Lexicon 419
30:8
69:10
96:8
149:8
69:8
115:12
140:9
140:9
109:6
69:5
86:3
120:13
164:3
M03801
K1218b
M13585
K1235b
M21058
K1218f
M35651
K1218g
M13562
K798o
M25305
K11481
M31410Ca
K45n'
M31410B
K45n'
M23339
M13548
K795k
M18878
K1120f
M27960A
K1258e
M39768
K1120d
85:8
120:8
140:8
167:8
159:8
30:6
38:6
119:6
M17616
M27600
K969f
M31166
K969d
M40548
K969J
M38368
K969h
M03538
K555e
M06257
M26932
K555g
Y. [tgwaw"] L. trwaiwk E. traiwk/trceiwk
peck
Y. [tg waw"] L. trwaiwk E. traiwk/troe:wk
chop
Y. ts. waw" L. trwaiwk E. traiwk/troeiwk
carve
Y. [ts. waw~] L. trwaiwk E. traiwk/troeiwk
blame, calumny, slander
Y. [tgwaw"] L. tswaiwk E. ts. aiwk/tgceiwk
cut off, sever, chop. Also E. tgiak
Y. [t§wawv] L. tgwaiwk E. tgaiwk/tsceiwk
harvest unripe grain
Y. tsew', tso' L. trfiiak E. driak
touch, come in contact, adhere; also zhao.
See also zhuo below and zhu
Y. [tgewv] L. triak E. triak
place, put, apply; wear (clothes). See
also zhao, zhu.
vulgar form of zhuo
Y. ts.ewv L. tgiak E. tpiak
chop, hack
Y. tgew" L. tgiak E. tpiak
burn, scorch; brilliant
Y. ts.ewv L. tgiak E. tpiak
string attached to an arrow. See also jiao
Y. ts.ewv L. tsiakF-. tpiak
ladle, pour out; zhenzhu6 deliberate,
consider
Y. tsz L. tsr E. ts.i/ts.i
black; river name
Y. [tsz] L. tsr E. tsi/ts.i
black silk; black
Y. [tsz] L. tsr E. tsi/tgi
clear land; field in the first year of
cultivation
Y. [tsz] L. t§r E. tsi/ts.i
ancient measure of weight
Y. [tsz] L. tsr E. ts.i/tsi
baggage wagon
Y. tsz L. tsz E. tsi
sigh; consult, plan
Y. tsz L. tsz E. tsi
looks, appearance; posture
Y. [tsz] L. tsz E. tsi
sacrificial grain
zhu6
zhuo
zhuo
zhuo
zhuo
zhuo
zhu6
zhuo
zhuo
zhuo
zhuo
zhuo
zhuo
ZT
ZT
ZT
ZT
ZT
ZT
ZT
ZT

420 Lexicon
149:9
154:6
210:0
210:5
9:3
39:4
39:9
85:10
95:5
140:6
206:3
148:5
149:5
154:5
163:10
190:5
38:5
115:5
9:3
39:0
M35728
M36750
K555h
M48560C
K593a
M48569
K593v
M00367A
K964k
M06951
K9641
M07011
K966k
M18021
K966H
M20816
K966a
M30911A
K966b
M48321
K943r
M35050A
K358t
M35344A
K358k
M36702
K358m
M39561
M45399
K358n
M06164a
K554b
M25003
K554d
M00367B
K964k
M06930
K964a
Y. tsz L. tsz E. tsi
enquire about; plan
Y. tsz L. tsz E. tsi
resources, capital
Y. [tsz] L. tsz E. tsi
hem of a garment; sacrificial grain. See
also qi, ji, zhai
Y. [tsz] L. ts? E. tsi
vessel for sacrificial grain; sacrificial grain
Y. [tsz] L. tsz E. tsi/tsi
bear responsibility. See also zT
L. tsz E. tsi/tsi
E. tsi/tsi
E. tsi/tsi
E. tsi/tsi
E. tsi/tsi
Y. [tsz]
diligent
Y. tsz L. tsz
breed; multiply; propagate
Y. tsz L. tsz
increase, proliferate
Y. tsz L. tsz
black; this; here
Y. tsz L. tsz
this; augment; mat. See also ci
Y. [tsz] L. tsz E. tsi/tsi
small three-footed cauldron
Y. tsz L. tsz E. tsia/tsi
crest on an owl's head. See also zuT.
Y [tsz] L. tsz E. tsia/tsi
estimate, consider; ancient place name. See
also zl
Y. tsz L. tsi
property, valuables
Y. [tsz] L. tsz
ancient place name
Y. tsz L. tsz
moustache
Y. tsz" L. tsz' E. tsi'
elder sister. Also read ji6, same as
Y. [tszv] L. tsi' E. tsi'
very high number; billion
Y. [tszv] L. tsz' E. tsi'/tsi'
bear responsibility. See also ZT.
Y. tszv L. tsz' E. tsi'/tsi'
son; child; first Earthly Branch; title of
nobility, viscount; title of respect for a
learned or virtuous person; respectful term
of address, you
E. tsia/tsi
E. tsia/tsi
E. tsia/tsi
ZT
ZT
ZT
ZT
ZT
ZT
ZT
ZT
ZT
ZT
ZT
ZT
ZT
ZT
ZT
ZT
zT
zl
zT
zT

Lexicon 421
75:7
85:10
118:5
127:3
130:5
120:5
149:5
18:8
130:6
61:6
132:0
39:3
M14845
K965a
M18034
M25942
K554f
M28903
K964m
M29370
K554g
M27337
K358J
M35344B
K358k
M02041
K971d
M29457
K943d'
M10580
K555f
M30095
K1237m
M06942
K964n
zi
zi
zi
zi
zong
z6ng
zong
zong
z5ng
93:6
85:11
109:5
130:5
M20012
M18167
K868x
M23250
K358s
M29379
K358r
75:8
75:9
152:11
187:9
193:9
M14933
M15078
K1177c
M36453
K1191R
M44868
M45702
K1177f
Y. tsz" L. tsz' E. tsi'/tsi'
Chinese catalpa, Catalpa ovata
Y. [tsrv] L. tsr' E. tsi'/tsi'
dregs, sediment
Y. [tsr"] L. tsr" E. tsi'/tsi'
bed-mat
Y. tsz L. tsz' E. tsi'/tsi'
hoe up earth around a plant. Also E. tsi in
Jiyun
Y. [tsr"] L. tsr' E. tsi'/tsi'
dried meat, with bone in it
Y. tszv L. tsz' E. tsia'/tsi'
purple
Y. [tszv] L. tsz' E. tsia'/tsi'
revile, calumniate, slander. See also zT.
Y. [tsr] L. tsr E. tsih/tsih
stick a knife into, stab
Y. [tszv] L. tszs E. tsih/tsih
minced meat
Y. tszv L. tszx E. tsih
unrestrained
Y. tszv L. tshV E. dzih
starting from, from; self
Y. tszv L. tshV E. dzih/dzih
breed; love; foster, care for; polite name,
style; written character
Y. tszv L. tsftV E. dzih/dzih
female of domestic animals; cow
Y. tsf L. tshV E. dziah/dzih
steep, soak
Y. [tszx] L. tsnV E. dziah/dzih
eye socket. Also E. dzejh
Y. tsf L. tsfif E. dziah/dzih
carcase, bones of a bird or animal with
flesh still adhering.
Y. tsurj L. tsswrj E. tsawrj
coir palm; same as
Y. tsurj L. tssw« E. tsawrj
coir palm; also written
Y. [tsurj] L. tsswrj E. tsawrj
young pig
Y. tsurj L. tsawrj E. tsawrj
horse's mane
Y. [tsurj] L. tsawrj E. tsawrj
cauldron
zT
zT
zT
zT
zT
zT
zT
zi
zi
zi
zi
zi

422 Lexicon
zong
zong
zong
zong
z6ng
z6ng
zong
40:5
75:11
120:11
157:11
64:11
120:11
119:8
120:8
120:11
60:8
64:8
170:8
120:8
140:8
163:10
187:10
156:0
37:6
187:14
115:5
M07106
K1003a
M15404A
K119H
M27819A
K1191H
M37823
M12596
K1199k
M27844
K1199i
M26993a
M27535
K1003f
M27819B
K1191H
M10152C
K1191d
M12287
K131m
M41685
K1311
M27598
K131n
M31146
K131p
M39562
M44928
K132g
M37034
K119a
M05915
K1229a
M45048b
K131q
M24988
K46d'
Y. tsurj L. tsawrj E. tsawrj
ancestor, ancestral temple; clan
Y. tsjurj L. tsywrj E. tsuawrj
fir, Abies firma. See also cong
Y. tsjurj L. tsywrj E. tsuawrj
vertical; longitudinal, north-south. See
also zong
Y. tsjurj L. tsywrj E. tsuawrj
track, footprint
Y. tsurf L. tsawrr E. tsswrj'
bind together, same as
Y. tsurf L. tsawrj' E. tsawrj'
bind together, unite; all, in general, total
Y. [tsurjv] L. tsswrjv E. tsawrjh
pyramid-shaped dumpling made of
glutinous rice wrapped in bamboo leaves,
eaten during the Dragon Boat Festival; also
zhong
Y. tsurjv L. tsawrf E. tsawrjh
bring together, sum up, summarize
Y. tsjurf L. tsywrf E. tsuawrjh
release, let loose. See also zong
Y. tsjurf L. tsfiywrj" E. dzuawrjh
follower; affinal relative. See also c6ng,
cong
Y. tssw L. tssw E. tsaw
make the rounds striking the watches of the
night; ancient place name
Y. [tssw] L. tsaw E. tssw
corner, angle. Also E. tsuw
Y. tsaw L.tsaw, tsaw E. tsuw, tsaw
dark brown, purplish
Y. [tsaw] L. tpw E. tsuw
hemp stalk; good arrow
Y. tsaw L. tssw E. tsuw
ancient state
Y. tssw L. tssw E. tsuw
official in charge of horses; rider
Y. tsaw" L. tssw' E. tsaw'
run; run away. Also E. tsswh
Y. tssws L. tssws E. tsawh
present (a memorial); perform music
Y. tssw" L. tsfiaw" E. dzjiwh
gallop; swift; frequent; also zhou
Y. tsu L. tsua E. tso
grain tax; rent
zong
zong
zong
zou
zou
zou
zou
zou
zou
zou
zou
zou
zu

Lexicon 423
70:7
64:8
167:11
24:6
157:0
24:6
113:5
120:5
9:7
170:5
149:5
187:5
167:19
120:14
120:19
163:19
167:19
130:7
148:5
73:8
122:8
Ml 3661
K1206a
M12225b
K490b
M40772
K1206d
M02740A
K490a
M37365A
K1219a
M02740B
K490a
M24664
K46b'
M27374
K46e'
M00679
K46v
M41593
K46y
M35390
K46x
M44665B
K46m'
M41082A
K153h
M28012
K174d
M28089
K153f
M39752B
K153g
M41082B
M29531
K468H'
M35050B
K358t
M14301
K325b
M28293
K513a
Y. tsu' L. tsfiawk E. dzawk
clan, lineage; kin; group of families;
accumulate
Y. [tsu'] L. tsfiut E. dzwst
grasp, seize; also zuo
Y. tsu'[sic] L. tsawk E. tsswk
arrow-head
Y. tsu" L. tsut E. tswst
clothing for conscripts; soldier; gathering,
group. See also zu below and cu
Y. tsy" L. tsywk E. tsuawk
foot; enough, sufficient. See also ju
Y. [tsyv] L. tsyt E. tswit
end; die. See also zu above and cu
Y. tsu" L. tsua' E. tso'
ancestor
Y. tsu" L. tsua' E. tso'
cord; tie, bind together; group, organization
Y. tsu" L. tssa' E. tsia'
stand for sacrificial meat; chopping block
Y. t§u" L. tsaa'
impede, obstruct
Y. tsus L. tssav
oath, imprecation
Y. [tsul L. tsfiua^
powerful horse. See also zSng
Y. tson L. tsuan E. tswan
pierce, penetrate; bore, drill. See also zuan
Y. tson" L. tsuan' E. tswan'
band of coloured silk; compile, edit
Y. tson" L. tsuan' E. tswan'
succeed, inherit
Y. tson L. tsuan' E. tswan'
group of five hundred families. See also
zan, cuo
Y. tsons L. tsuanv E. tswanh
drill, auger. See also zuan
Y. [tsuj] L. tsuaj E. tswaj
infant's genitalia
Y. [tsuj"] L. tsyj' E. tswia'/tswi'
beak. See also ZT
Y. tsur L. tsuajv E. tsuajh
collect, accumulate; to the highest degree
Y. tsujv L. tsfiuajN E. dzwsj'
crime; guilt
E. tsia'
E. t§iah
E. dzo'
zu
zu
zu
zu
zu
zu
zu
zu
zu
zu
zu
zu
zuan
zuan
zuan
zu&n
zuan
zuT
zul
zui
zui

424 Lexicon
160:6
140:12
140:12
164:8
41:9
75:12
167:12
M38643
K513b
M31977
K325c
M31976B
K296b
M39906
K490H
M07445
K430a
M15500
K430I
M40885
K430o
Y. [tsujx] L. tsfiuajv
crime, guilt, same as
Y. [tsujv] L. tsfiuajs
tiny; used for zui
Y. [tsujv] L. tsyaj"
E. dzwsj'
E. dzwajh
E. tswiajh
bundle of grass used in a ritual. See also
jue
Y. tsujv L. tsyj"
drunk, intoxicated
Y. tsun L. tsun
to honour
Y. tsun L. tsun
wine goblet
Y. [tsunv] L. tsfiuns
metal can on the butt-end ol
E. tswih
E. tswsn
E. tswsn
E. dzwanh
F a wearjon.
162:12
64:12
64:7
30:12
64:8
72:5
48:2
64:12
9:5
48:2
32:4
32:4
53:7
M39118
K430q
M12712
K4301
M12161
K468f
M04238b
K325d
M12225a
K490b
M13847
K806s
M08720A
K5a
M12748B
K325e
M00506
K5e
M08720B
K5a
M04931A
K12a
M04931B
K12a
M09319
Modern pronunciation probably based on a
reading E. tswan in the Jiyun.
Y. tsyn L. tsyn E. tswin
follow along, be in accord with, obey
Y. tsun" L. tsun' E. tswsn'
limit, regulate; restrain; save (money)
Y. [tsunv] L. tsuns E. tsw9nh
push. Also E. tshwin and tsw9Jh
Y. [tshwajv] L. tshwayv E. tshwaijh/t§hwe:jh
bite, eat greedily; eat at one gulp; also chuai
Y. [tsu'J L. tsfiut E. dzwst
grasp, seize; also zu
Y. [tsaw'] L. tsfiak E. dzak
yesterday
Y. tsov L. tsa' E. tsa'
left. See also zu6 below
Y. [tsov] L. tsuat E. tswat
pinch, small amount; tuft of hair. See also
cuo.
Y. tsov L. tsas E. tsah
assist
Y. tsov L. tsa: E. tsah
assist, same as . See also zu6 above
Y. tsos L. tsfiua" E. dzwa'
sit. See also zuo below
Y. tsovL. tsfiuas E. dzwah
seat, same as ; be convicted of a crime.
See also zuo above
Y. tsoN L. tsfiua* E. dzwah
seat
zui
zui
zui
zui
zun
zun
zun
zun
zun
zun
zuo
zuo
zuo
zu6
zu6
zud
zud
zuo
zu6
zuo

Lexicon 425
zuo
zu6
zuo
zuo
zuo
zu6
zuo
zuo
zuo
zu6
zuo
9:5 M00518B
9:9 M00861
113:5 M24668
K806h
130:5 M29387
K8061
170:5 M41594
K806J
9:5 M00518A
K8061
75:5 M14636
K806p
61:5 M10430
K806r
164:5 M39824
K806t
167:20 M410885
K1128a
162:5 M38801b
K806m
Y. tsuv L. tsuoxE. tsoh
make; act as, be; the graph has been
substituted for this sense. Guangyun
also reads tsah in this sense. See also
zu6 below
see zuo
Y. tsuv L. tsfiuov E. dzoh
good fortune, prosperity, blessings
Y. tsuv L. tsfiuov E. dzoh
sacrificial meat; good fortune; bestow
Y. [tsuv] L. tsfiuov E. dzoh
east-side staircase; staircase used by the
emperor at his succession or to perform a
sacrifice
Y. tsaw" L. tsak E. tsak
arise; create. See also zuo above
Y. tsaw" L. tsak E. tsak
Mongolian oak, Quercus mongolicus
Y. [tsaw', tsoN] L. tsfiak E. dzak
ashamed; blush
Y. [tsaw', tsov] L. tsfiak E. dzak
drink in response to a toast; thank offering
Y. tsaw', tsov L. tsfiak E. dzak
chisel; to chisel; see zao. Also E. dzawk
Y. tsajv L. tsaijk E. tgaijk/tsEijk
seeze

This page intentionally left blank 
INDEX
1:0
1:1
1:1
1:1
1:2
1:2
1:2
1:2
1:2
1:2
1:2
1:2
1:2
1:2
1:3
1:3
1:3
1:3
1:3
1:4
1:4
1:4
1:4
1:4
1:4
1:5
1:7
2:1
2:2
2:2
2:3
2:3
2:3
2:4
2:6
2:6
3:2
3:3
3:4
4:1
4:1
4:2
4:2
4:4
4:4
4:4
4:7
4:9
4:9
5:0
5:1
5:2
5:2
5:2
5:7
5:10
5:10
5:12
5:12
6:1
6:3
6:3
6:7
7:0
7:1
7:2
7:2
7:2
7:2
7:4
7:5
7:5
7:6
7:6
7:7
7:7
8:1
8:2
8:2
8:4
8:4
8:4
8:5
8:5
8:5
8:6
8:6
8:7
y*.
A. ding
B. zheng
qT
A. wan
B. mo
zhang
A. san
B. san
Aa. shang
Ab.sh&ng
B. shang
A. xia
B. xia
A. fou
B. bu
C. f6u
gai
chdu
A. qie
B.ju
PT
shi
qiu
bTng
cheng
bing
jiu
ge
ya
A.zhong
B. zhong
feng
guan
A. guan
B. chuan
wan
dan
zhu
yi
nSi
jiu
zhT
zha
hu 8:7
fa 8:8
guai 8:11
A. cheng 8:20
B. sheng 8:20
yT 9:0
jiu 9:2
A. qT 9:2
B. qi 9:2
ye 9:2
ru 9:2
A. qian 9:2
B. gan 9:2
a. luan 9:2
b. Ian 9:2
Mo 9:2
A. yu 9:2
B. yu 9:3
shi 9:3
er 9:3
yu 9:3
yiin 9:3
hu 9:3
wu 9:3
jing 9:3
gen 9:3
A. suo 9:3
B. xie 9:3
a. ya 9:3
b. ya 9:3
A.ji 9:3
B. qi 9:3
wang 9:3
A. gang 9:3
B. kang 9:3
jiao 9:4
hai 9:4
yi . 9:4
A. heng 9:4
B. xiSng 9:4
C. peng 9:4
xiSng 9:4
jmg 9:4
ting 9:4
Hang
bo
dan
A. wSi
B. wei
re"n
shi
ren
le
ze
A. fu
B. pu
a. qiu
b. chou
JTn
jie
reng
A. zT
B. zl
shi
a. tuo
b. ta
A. zhang
B. zhang
zh&n
fu
xian
tong
ren
qian
yi
dai
A. ling
B. ling
yT
A. ySng
B. yang
zhong
PT
wu
jian
jie
A. ren
B. ren

428 Lexicon
9:4
9:4
9:4
9:4
9:4
9:4
9:4
9:4
9:4
9:4
9:4
9:4
9:4
9:4
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:5
A. bin
B. fen
f&ng
A. qT
B.qi
kang
yT
ji
wu
ji
A. fu
B. fu
fa
xiu
a. b&i
b. bo
a. gu
b. gu
nT
ban
ling
shen
a. ci
b. si
a. si
b. shi
qie
P"
A. tian
B. dian
dan
zhu
bu
qu
wei
dT
zhu
zu6
you
he
a. ta
b. tuo
she
yu
yi
a. fo
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:5
9:6
9:6
9:6
9:6
9:6
9:6
9:6
9:6
9:6
9:6
9:6
9:6
9:6
9:6
9:6
9:6
9:6
9:6
9:6
9:6
9:6
9:6
9:6
9:6
9:6
9:6
9:6
9:7
9:7
9:7
9:7
9:7
9:7
9:7
9:7
9:7
9:7
9:7
9:7
9:7
9:7
b. fu 9:7
A. zuo 9:7
B. zu6 9:7
ning 9:7
t6ng 9:7
pei 9:7
ya"ng 9:7
jia 9:7
er 9:7
tiao 9:7
jiao 9:7
d 9:7
yi 9:8
A. shT 9:8
Ba. shT 9:8
Bb. shi 9:8
kan 9:8
A. lai 9:8
B. lai 9:8
chl 9:8
B 9:8
shi 9:8
zhu 9:8
you 9:8
mou 9:8
lun 9:8
A. tong 9:8
B. dong 9:8
A. gong 9:8
B. gong 9:8
zhou 9:8
yT 9:8
wu 9:8
hou 9:8
qln 9:8
lyu 9:8
ju 9:8
ting 9:8
A. plan 9:8
B. bian 9:8
cu 9:8
e 9:8
jun 9:8
zu 9:8
qiao 9:8
y6ng 9:9
A. qian
B. xian
su
fu
IT
mian
ping
bao
A. si
B. qi
xi£
xin
xiu
fu
ju
pai
feng
bT
chang
bing
cang
g*
guan
bdi
shu
A.dao
B. dao
ju6
xing
tang
h6u
yT
jie
A. chan;
B. chan;
fang
A. zhi
B. zhi
juan
ju
qian
ni
lun
A. wei
B. wo
yan

Index 429
9:9
9:9
9:9
9:9
9:9
9:9
9:9
9:9
9:9
9:9
9:9
9:9
9:9
9:9
9:9
9:9
9:9
9:9
9:9
9:9
9:9
9:10
9:10
9:10
9:10
9:10
9:10
9:10
9:10
9:10
9:10
9:11
9:11
9:11
9:11
9:11
9:11
9:11
9:11
9:11
9:11
9:11
9:11
9:11
9:11
9:11
A.jia 9:11
B.jia 9:11
A.ji 9:12
B.jie 9:12
wSi 9:12
wei 9:12
plan 9:12
a.jie 9:12
b. xie 9:12
zuo 9:12
ting 9:12
jian 9:12
bT 9:12
mian 9:12
ST 9:12
a. ce 9:12
b. ze 9:12
zhen 9:13
A. 6u 9:13
B. 6u 9:13
tou 9:13
A. guT 9:13
B. kuT 9:13
fu 9:13
A. pang 9:13
B. bang 9:13
diEn 9:13
jie 9:13
san 9:13
bei 9:14
xiao 9:14
CUT 9:14
a. yong 9:14
b. yong 9:14
ao 9:14
A. chuan 9:15
B. zhuan 9:15
yu 9:15
zhai 9:16
shang 9:16
sha 9:17
qing 9:17
A. 16u 9:19
B. lyu 9:19
piao 9:20
jTn 9:20
qian 9:21
xian 10:1
xiang 10:2
qiao 10:2
pu 10:3
XT 10:4
liao 10:4
a. wei 10:4
b. wei 10:4
yao 10:4
jiu 10:4
seng 10:4
A. jiao 10:5
B.jiao 10:5
jian 10:5
tong 10:5
bo 10.6
jiang 10:6
j& 10:6
pi 10:6
yi 10:7
jun 10:8
n6ng 10:9
yi 10:12
jTng 11:0
xuan 11:0
kuai 11:2
a. jian 11:4
b.jian 11:6
bin 11:6
TU 11:7
chou 12:0
chai 12:2
nT 12:2
jTn 12:2
chang 12:2
lei 12:4
you 12:4
a. chu 12:4
b. chu 12:5
chan 12:6
shu 12:6
li 12:6
nuo 12:6
tang 12:8
yan 12:14
lei
wu
yun
yuan
xiong
ch5ng
zhao
xi6ng
A. xian
B. xian
A. guang
B. guang
ke
dui
A. mian
B. wen
A.er
B. ni
tu
si
yan
dang
dou
jing
a. ru
b. ri
nei
quan
A. HSng
B. liang
yu
ba
gong
a. liu
b. lu
XT
A. g6ng
B. gong
C. g6ng
bing
A. qi
B.JT
ju
dian
jian
ji

430 Lexicon
13:3
13:3
13:3
13:4
13:4
13:5
13:7
13:7
13:7
13:9
14:2
14:7
14:7
14:8
14:8
14:8
14:14
15:3
15:4
15:4
15:5
15:5
15:6
15:8
15:8
15:8
15:8
15:13
15:14
16:0
16:1
16:6
16:9
16:10
16:12
17:2
17:3
17:3
17:3
17:3
17:3
17:3
17:6
17:6
18:0
18:0
ran 18:1
a. ce 18:2
b. chai 18:2
zai 18:2
gua 18:2
ji6ng 18:2
zh6u 18:2
A. mao 18:3
B. mo 18:4
mian 18:4
r6ng 18:4
A. guan 18:4
B. guan 18:4
zhdng 18:4
yuan 18:5
ming 18:5
mi 18:5
dong 18:5
bTng 18:5
hu 18:5
yg 18:5
leng 18:6
lie 18:6
zhun 18:6
ling 18:6
dong 18:6
diao 18:6
lln 18.6
mng 18:6
JT 18:6
fan 18:6
ping 18:6
huang 18:6
kai 18:6
deng 18:6
xiong 18:7
A. die 18:7
Ba. tu 18:7
Bb. tu 18:7
a. ao 18:7
b. yao 18:7
chu 18:7
A. ban 18:7
B. ban 18:7
dao 18:7
diao 18:8
ren 18:8
A. fen 18:8
B. fen 18:8
Aa. qie 18:8
Ab. qie 18:8
B. qie 18:8
yi 18:8
kan 18:8
w6n 18:8
xmg 18:8
hua 18:8
wan 18:9
yue 18:9
Ite 18:9
chu 18:10
shan 18:10
pan 18:10
A. bie 18:10
B. bie 18:10
bao 18:11
B 18:11
gua 18:11
dao 18:11
chuang 18:11
km 18:12
ku 18:12
duo 18:12
er 18:13
zhi 18:13
shua 18:13
quan 18:13
cha 18:13
A. qi 18:13
B. ci 18:14
ke 18:14
fi 18:14
jTng 18:21
ze 19:0
cuo 19:3
a. xiao 19:3
b. xue 19:4
c. xue 19:4
ke 19:4
la 19:5
qian 19:5
tT 19:5
a. pdu
b. pou
chan
zi
gang
wan
a. bao
b. bo
duo
A. yan
B. shan
jian
gua
fu
yi
sheng
ge
A.chuang
B.chuang
tuan
K
piao
A.chao
B.jiao
hua
a.ji
b.ju
PI
lid
a. gui
b. kuai
gui
jian
huo
ji
yiIf
B
gong
jfc
lie
Jin
Jin
zhu
nu
jie

Index 431
19:5
19:5
19:6
19:6
19:6
19:7
19:7
19:7
19:7
19:7
19:7
19:8
19:8
19:8
19:9
19:9
19:9
19:9
19:9
19:9
19:9
19:10
19:10
19:10
19:10
19:11
19:11
19:11
19:11
19:11
19:11
19:11
19:12
19:13
19:13
19:14
19:15
19:17
19:18
20:1
20:1
20:2
20:2
20:2
20:2
20:3
qu 20:3
shao 20:4
kuang 20:6
jte 20:6
he 20:7
A. jing 20:9
B. jin 20:9
bo 21:0
chi 21:2
ydng 21:3
mian 21:3
qi'ng 21:9
A. chi 22.0
B. lai 22:3
a. le 22:3
b. lei 22:4
dong 22:4
xu 22:5
a. kan 22:8
a. kan 22:9
wu 22:11
A. sheng 22:12
B. sheng 22:13
A. lao 23:2
B. lao 23:7
mu 23:9
lu 23:9
shi 23:9
JT 23:9
qm 24:0
A. chao 24:1
B. jiao 24:2
yi 24:2
xie 24:2
mai 24:3
xun 24:4
li 24:6
rang 24:6
quan 24:6
a. shao 24:6
b. shuo 24:6
yun 24:6
A. gou 24:7
B. gou 24:10
wu 25:0
gai 25:2
bao 25:3
xiSng 25:3
ju 25:5
tao 25:6
pu 26:2
pao 26:2
fu 26:3
bl 26:3
hua 26:4
a. bei 26:4
a. bo 26:4
chi 26:5
fang 26:5
yi 26:6
za 26:6
jiang 26:6
kuang 26:6
xia 26:7
fei 26:7
guT 26:10
hui 27:2
kui 27:5
lian 27:6
pi 27:6
yan 27:7
bian 27:7
ni 27:8
A. qu 27:8
B. ou 27:8
shi 27:9
qian 27:9
sa 27:10
sheng 27:10
wu 27:12
ban 27:12
hui 27:13
bei 28:3
A. zu 28:3
B. zu 28:9
C. cu 28:9
zhuo 28:9
xie 28:9
n£n 29:0
bo 29:1
bu 29:2
bian 29:2
A.zhan
B. zhan
y6u
gua
A. ang
B. y5ng
zhT
mao
yin
a. wei
b. wei
a. luiin
b. Ian
A. juSn
B.juan
xie
xii
que
ji
qmg
e
zhT
a. ya
b. yai
mang
hou
A. cuo
B. cuo
yuan
ce
XT
jue
sha
A. yan
B. yan
B
A. qu
B. qu
A. can
B. shen
C. cen
D. san
you
cha
ji'
y6u

432 Lexicon
29:2
29:6
29:6
29:6
29:6
29:7
29:8
29:14
29:16
30:0
30:2
30:2
30:2
30:2
30:2
30:2
30:2
30:2
30:2
30:2
30:2
30:2
30:2
30:2
30:2
30:2
30:2
30:2
30:2
30:2
30:2
30:2
30:2
30:3
30:3
30:3
30:3
30:3
30:3
30:3
30:3
30:3
30:3
30:3
30:3
30:3
fan 30:3
a. shu 30:3
b. shu 30:4
qu 30:4
sh6u 30:4
pan 30:4
s6u 30:4
rui 30:4
c6ng 30:4
k6u 30:4
gu 30:4
A. gou 30:4
B. g6u 30:4
C. jii 30:4
tao 30:4
kou 30:4
A. zhT 30:4
B. zhl 30:4
jiao 30:4
A. zhao 30:4
B. shao 30:4
ding 30:4
kg 30:4
A yi 30:4
B. tai 30:5
chi 30:5
shi 30:5
A. you 30:5
B. y6u 30:5
pd 30:5
xi6 30:5
hao 30:5
ST 30:5
xu 30:5
ji 30:5
ge 30:5
A. ge 30:5
B. he 30:5
ji 30:5
tong 30:5
ming 30:5
A. hou 30:6
B. hou 30:6
li 30:6
A. tu 30:6
B. tu 30:6
A. xiang 30:6
B. shang 30:6
jun 30:6
lin 30:6
tun 30:6
ym 30:6
fei 30:6
A. pT 30:6
B. f6u 30:6
6 30:6
han 30:6
shun 30:6
Cheng 30:6
wu 30:6
chao 30:7
XT 30:7
A, chuT 30:7
B. chui 30:7
we"n 30:7
h6u 30:7
wu 30:7
A. gu 30:7
B. gao 30:7
lyu 30:7
zhou 30:7
zhou 30:7
wei 30:7
he 30:7
nao 30:7
shen 30:8
hu 30:8
ming 30:8
ju 30:8
za 30:8
pao 30:8
Aa he 30:8
Ab. huo 30:8
Ba. he 30:8
Bb. huo 30:8
hai 30:8
jiu 30:8
e 30:8
A. zha 30:8
B. zha 30:8
zT 30:8
zhT 30:9
A. jiao
B.yao
zh6u
tab
xian
xuan
kuai
A. yan
B. yan
C. ye
ai
pin
sh6n
zai
A. yuan
B. yun
long
g5
ku
xiao
zh6
bu
g&ng
a. g£
b.kg
bai
suo
ai
taiig
shou
A. wei
B. w6i
chang
B
Sn
tu6
zhou
zhuo
shang
wen
qi
dan
dan
chuo
ya
chi

Index 433
30:9
30:9
30:9
30:9
30:9
30:9
30:9
30:9
30:9
30:9
30:9
30:9
30:9
30:9
30:9
30:9
30:9
30:9
30:9
30:9
30:9
30:9
30:9
30:10
30:10
30:10
30:10
30:10
30:10
30:10
30:10
30:10
30:10
30:10
30:10
30:10
30:10
30:10
30:10
30:11
30:11
30:11
30:11
30:11
30:11
30:11
tf
jiu
n£n
A. shan
B. shan
h6u
ban
wai
ym
chuan
hui
huan
he
xT
kui
xuan
yii
A. sang
B. sang
qiao
A. dan
B. chan
C. shan
tf
sha
xiu
se
su
yi
sang
A. chen
B. tian
wu
shi
a.jue
b.jie
w£
si
chl
ao
sou
s6u
tan
cao
jia
A. 6u
30:11
30:11
30:11
30:12
30:12
30:12
30:12
30:12
30:12
30:12
30:12
30:12
30:12
30:12
30:12
30:12
30:12
30:13
30:13
30:13
30:13
30:13
30:13
30:13
30:13
30:13
30:13
30:13
30:14
30:14
30:15
30:15
30:16
30:16
30:16
30:16
30:16
30:17
30:17
30:17
30:18
30:18
30:18
30:18
30:19
30:21
B. ou
chang
xu
a. chuai
b. zuo
xiao
a. chao
b. zhao
a. si
b. XT
hao
XT
dan
A. jiao
B. jiao
C.jiu
ye
Jin
yue
qi
e
zao
XT
shi
jiao
kuai
A. pen
B. pen
A. xia
B. he
ti
ym
yan
16ng
pin
PT
xiang
kii
yan
ymg
a. jiao
b.jue
zh6
xiao
nang
zhu
31:2
31:2
31:3
31:3
31:4
31:4
31:4
31:4
31:5
31:5
31:5
31:6
31:7
31:7
31:7
31:8
31:8
31:8
31:8
31:8
31:8
31:9
31:10
31:10
31:11
31:13
31:13
31:13
32:0
32:3
32:3
32:3
32:3
32:3
32:3
32:4
32:4
32:4
32:4
32:4
32:4
32:4
32:4
32:4
32:4
32:4
qiu
si
hui
yTn
A. tun
B. dun
e
kirn
qun
ling
gu
you
him
PU
yu
guo
A. juan
B. juan
C. quan
yu
qing
wei
yuan
yuan
tu
tu&i
yi
huan
tu
A. zai
B. zai
gui
PT
yi
di
qf
zhT
jun
A. fang
B. fang
kan
A. pei
Ba. pei
Bb. pT
A. zuo
B. zu6

434 Lexicon
32:4
32:5
32:5
32:5
32:5
32:5
32:5
32:5
32:5
32:5
32:5
32:5
32:5
32:5
32:6
32:6
32:6
32:6
32:6
32:6
32:6
32:6
32:6
32:7
32:7
32:7
32:7
32:7
32:7
32:7
32:8
32:8
32:8
32:8
32:8
32:8
32:8
32:8
32:8
32:8
32:8
32:8
32:8
32:8
32.8
32:9
keng 32:9
po 32:9
kun 32:9
tan 32:9
gan 32:9
dian 32:9
a. pel 32:9
b. pi 32:9
jiong 32:9
ao 32:9
k6 32:9
chi 32:9
che 32:9
chuf 32:10
xmg 32:10
gai 32:10
a. dud 32:10
b. duo 32:10
ym 32:10
fa 32:10
gou 32:10
yuan 32:10
die 32:10
ba 32:10
ai 32:10
mai 32:10
cheng 32:10
A. shan 32:10
B. yan 32:10
lie 32:10
yu 32:10
pi 32:10
kan 32:11
zhi 32:11
dud 32:11
zhi 32:11
pei 32:11
JT 32:11
A. sao 32:11
B. sao 32:11
ku 32:11
tang 32:11
jian 32:11
duT 32:11
e 32:11
yln 32:11
guo 32:11
die 32:12
hou 32:12
bao 32:12
A. dT 32:12
B. ti 32:12
kan 32:12
yao 32:12
yan 32:12
bao 32:12
a. chang 32:12
b. chang 32:12
du 32:12
kuai 32:13
ying 32:13
ta 32:13
cheng 32:13
kai 32:14
su 32:14
shi 32:14
ta 32:14
tu 32:15
tang 32:15
zh6ng 32:16
Aa. sai 32:16
Ab. sei 32:16
Ac. se 32:17
B. sai 32:21
A. tian 33:0
B. dian 33:1
wii 33:4
xuan 33:9
chen 33:9
qian 33:9
shu 33:9
chi 33:10
man 33:11
jing 35:7
shu 35:7
a. yong 35:11
b. yong 35:11
dian 35:18
A. ji 36:0
B. xi 36:0
a. jln 36:2
b. jin 36:3
mu
zhui
zeng
a. xu
b. qu
shan
fan
m6
dun
A. duo
B. huT
A. fen
B. fen
ken
bi
yong
tan
xuan
h&
ya
hao
lei
kuang
lu
huai
16ng
rang
ba
shi
ren
zhuang
yT.y1
hu
xu
kun
shou
A. xia
B. xia
A. xiong
B. xuan
kui
a. XT
b. xi
wai
su

Index 435
36:3
36:5
36:8
36:11
36:11
36:11
37:0
37:0
37:1
37:1
37:1
37:1
37:1
37:1
37:1
37:1
37:2
37:2
37:3
37:3
37:4
37:5
37:5
37:5
37:5
37:5
37:6
37:6
37:6
37:6
37:6
37:6
37:6
37:6
37:6
37:7
37:7
37:9
37:9
37:9
37:10
37:11
37:11
37:11
37:12
37:13
duo
ye
gou
meng
ym
hud
a. da
b. dai
tian
tai
A.fu
B. fu
guai
A. yao
B. yao
C. ao
yang
shT
yf
kua
jia
ySn
A.qi
B.JT
nai
feng
kui
zou
huan
A. qi
B. qie
C. qi
A. ben
B. ben
yi
tao 38:5
XT 38:5
dian 38:5
ao 38:5
she 38:5
ao 38:6
lian 38:6
duo 38:6
Jiang 38:6
shi 38:6
fen 38:6
37:15
38:0
38:0
38:0
38:2
38:3
38:3
38:3
38:3
38:3
38:3
38:4
38:4
38:4
38:4
38:4
38:4
38:4
38:4
38:4
38:4
38:4
38:5
38:5
38:5
38:5
38:5
38:5
38:5
38:5
38:5
38:5
38:5
38:5
38:5
38:5
38:5
38:5
38:5
38:5
38:6
38:6
38:6
38:6
38:6
38:6
mu
jiSn
yf
zhf
JT
y£n
yln
zl
wei
pin
IT
suo
niang
yu
juan
shen
di
e
miSn
a. qu
b. qu
pin
A.16u
B. lyu
po
w5n
hun
xing
a. bei
b. bi
fu
Ian
yfn
ya
wu
A. chuo
B. er
tou
xu
mei
mei
yuan
xie
mao
wa
ying
bei 38:6
A. nyu 38:6
B. nyu 38:6
C. ru 38:6
nu 38:6
A. hSo 38:6
B. hao 38:6
ru 38:6
A. fei 38:6
B. pel 38:7
wang 38:7
ren 38:7
du 38:7
ji 38:7
yao 38:7
yun 38:7
miao 38:7
zhuang 38.7
bT 38:7
tud 38:8
a. fang 38:8
b. fang 38:8
du 38:8
a. zhou 38:8
b. zhu 38:8
mei 38:8
A. qi 38:8
B. qi 38:8
qie 38:8
mu 38:8
a. zT 38:8
b.jig 38:8
shT 38:8
shan 38:8
jie 38:9
gu 38:9
si 38:9
xing 38:9
A. wSi 38:9
B. wei 38:9
yao 38:9
Jiang 38:9
shu 38:9
A.jiao 38:9
B. xiao 38:9
gou 38:10

436 Lexicon
38:10
38:10
38:10
38:10
38:10
38:10
38:10
38:10
38:11
38:11
38:11
38:11
38:11
38:11
38:11
38:11
38:12
38:12
38:12
38:12
38:12
38:12
38:13
38:13
38:13
38:13
38:13
38:14
38:14
38:14
38:14
38:14
38:15
38:17
38:17
38:17
39:0
39:0
39:1
39:2
39:3
39:3
39:4
39:4
39:4
39:4
So 39:4
gou 39:5
kui 39:5
jia 39:5
sao 39:5
ji 39:6
niao 39:7
xian 39:8
A. yu 39:9
B. yii 39:9
man 39:13
li 39:13
di 39:14
yan 39:14
a. nen 39:16
b. nun 39:19
xian 39:19
guT 40:2
rao 40:2
XT 40:2
chan 40:2
jiao 40:3
bi 40:3
shan 40:3
qiang 40:3
A. qiong 40:3
B.yuan 40:3
pin 40:4
nai 40:4
yTng 40:4
niao 40:5
yfng 40:5
shen 40:5
shuang 40:5
niang 40:5
xian 40:5
zT 40:5
jie 40:5
kdng 40:5
yun 40:5
zi 40:5
cun 40:5
fu 40:6
A. bei 40:6
B. bo 40:6
zT 40:6
xiao 40:7
meng 40:7
ji 40:7
gu 40:7
nu 40:7
hai 40:7
sun 40:7
shu 40:7
chan 40:8
zT 40:8
a. xue 40:8
b. xiao 40:8
a. ru 40:8
b. ru 40:8
nie 40:8
a. shuan 40:9
b. luan 40:9
zhu 40:9
rong 40:9
tuo 40:9
guT 40:10
A. zhai 40:11
B. zhe 40:11
yu 40:11
A. shou 40:11
B. shou 40:11
an 40:11
song 40:11
wan 40:11
hong 40:11
A. mi 40:12
B. fu 40:12
dang 40:12
zong 40:12
guan 40:13
zhou 40:16
A. ding 40:17
B. ding 41:0
A. wan 41:3
B. yuan 41:6
yi 41:7
ke 41:7
xuan 41:7
shi 41:7
you 41:8
huan 41:8
gong
zai
hai
yan
xiao
jia
chen
rong
A. su
B. xiu
ji
yin
mi
kou
fi
fu
mei
han
yu
shi
zhi
mo
cha
gua
qTn
wu
liao
shi
nmg
zhai
shen
xie
kuan
liao
huan
chong
bao
cun
si
feng
A. shi
B.she
C.yi
D.ye
A. jiang
B. jiang

Index 437
41:8
41:8
41:8
41:9
41:9
41:9
41:11
41:13
41:13
42:0
42:1
42:1
42:3
42:5
42:5
43:1
43:4
43:4
43:4
43:9
44:0
44:1
44:1
44:2
44:2
44:4
44:4
44:4
44:4
44:5
44:5
44:5
44:6
44:6
44:6
44:7
44:7
44:7
44:8
44:8
44:8
44:9
44:11
44:11
44:12
44:12
zhuSn
A. yu
B. wei
zun
a. xm
b. xun
dui
a. d£o
b. dao
xi&o
A.shSo
B. shao
jian
A.shang
B. chang
you
a. mang
b. pang
wang
Jiu
shT
yln
chl
kao
ni
wei
niao
ju
pi
ju
jie
qu
wu
shT
shT
JT
xie
zhan
A. ping
B. bTng
fei
tu
lyu
xT
ceng
a. lyu
44:12
44:12
44:14
44:15
44:18
44:18
45:1
45:1
46:0
46:3
46:3
46:4
46:4
46:4
46:5
46:5
46:5
46:5
46:5
46:5
46:5
46:5
46:6
46:6
46:6
46.7
46:7
46:7
46:7
46:7
46:7
46:7
46:8
46:8
46:8
46:8
46:8
46:8
46:8
46:8
46:8
46:8
46:8
46:8
46:9
46:9
b. IT
xi£
ju
ju6ju6
A.zhu
B. shu
A. tun
B. zhun
shan
yi
qT
ji
qi
cen
a. gang
b. gang
xiu
dai
yue
hu
mui
an
A. tong
B. dong
zhi
e
qiao
feng
xian
dao
jun
xia
kong
chong
a. ql
b. qi
kun
CUT
a. ya
b. yai
lun
jue
song
beng
j'
mei
46:9
46:9
46:9
46:9
46:9
46:9
46:10
46:10
46:10
46:11
46:11
46:12
46:12
46:12
46:13
46:13
46:13
46:14
46:14
46:14
46:14
46:14
46:14
46:17
46:17
46:18
46:19
46:19
46:20
47:0
47:0
47:3
47:4
47:8
48:0
48:2
48:2
48:2
48:2
48:4
48:4
48:7
48:7
48:7
48:7
49:0
a. qian
b. qian
c. kan
yu
Ian
y^n
song
wei
cuo
zhang
qu
qTn
deng
ydo
yi
xian
suT
A. yi
B. ni
ling
a. yu
b. xu
yue
chan
kuT
wei
ludn
dian
yan
kun
chuan
zhou
xun
chao
gong
A. zuo
B. zu6
qiao
ju
a. wu
b. wu
A. cha
B rha
C. JT
D. chai
JT

438 Lexicon
49:0
49:0
49:1
49:2
49:6
49:6
49:9
49:9
50:0
50:1
50:2
50:2
50:3
50:3
50:4
50:5
50:5
50:5
50:5
50:5
50:5
50:5
50:5
50:5
50:5
50:6
50:6
50:6
50:6
50:6
50:7
50:7
50:7
50:8
50:8
50:8
50:8
50:9
50:9
50:9
50:9
50:10
50:10
50:11
50:11
50:11
yT 50:11
si 50:12
ba 50:12
y! 50:12
xiang 50:12
jln 50:13
a. sun 50:13
b. xun 50:14
JTn 50:14
za 50:14
shi 50:16
bu 51:0
a. fan 51:2
b. fan 51:3
XT 51:5
A. nu 51:5
B. tang 51:5
pel 51:10
a. tie 52:0
b. ti6 52:1
C. tie 52:2
Han 52:6
zhi 52:9
zh6u 52:9
bo 53:2
di 53:4
yi 53:4
Aa. shuai 53:4
Ab. shuo 53:5
B. shuai 53:5
shui 53:5
shT 53:5
xi 53:5
zhang 53:6
dai 53:6
wei 53:6
chang 53:6
mao 53:6
wei 53:7
wo 53:7
ffi 53:7
huang 53:8
mi 53:8
man 53:8
mil 53:8
guo 53:8
ze 53:8
zhi 53:9
fan 53:9
chuang 53:9
bi 53:9
A. chan 53:9
B. chan 53:9
A. meng 53:10
B. meng 53:10
bang 53:10
xian 53:10
gan 53:10
ping 53:10
nian 53:11
A. bTng 53:11
B. bing 53:11
xing 53:11
gan 53:12
yao 53:12
huan 53:12
you 53:12
you 53:12
A.JT 53:12
B. jT 53:12
pi 53:12
bi 53:13
chuang 53:13
xu 53:13
dl 53:13
pao 53:13
dian 53:16
geng 53:18
fu 53:22
xiang 54:4
zhi 54:4
zhi 54:6
A. duo 54:6
B. du 55:1
zuo 55:2
ku 55:3
ring 55:4
bi 55:4
an 55:4
shu 55:4
kang 55:6
a. yong 55:6
b. y6ng
yu
miao
a. ci
b.ce
c. si
xiang
zhi
A. xia
B. sha
lian
l£ng
sou
jiu
kuo
yin
liao
chu
chan
ST
miao
chSng
wu
fei
guang
kuai
qiaiig
a. jie
b. xie
lln
lu
yong
ting
yan
ting
jian
huf
nian
bian
yiqi
a. 16ng
b. nong
c. neng
yan
yi

xapuj
ZV-Q9 uiJj(
ZV.Q9 3up}
ZVW 2uix
ZVQ9 jX
0^09 mq
Oi:09 iqz
OIW inq
6-09 irem
6=09 UBM
6:09 OtD[
6:09 Jtu
6:09 Sireif -3
g:09 Sugib -g
g:09 §U£ib 'v
8:09 uvp -g
8:09 u?l 'V
8=09 no§
8=09 tq
8:09 Sumf -3
8:09 Su^ib -g
8:09 §upib -y
8:09 §UBif
Z,:Q9 3uBqz -g
L-G9 §uiqz 'v
Z,:Q9 Qiu
9:09 oiqs
9:09 iui
9:09 nu
9:09 omp
9:09 ni{
g:09 u?ix
SW IP
5=09 on
SW ip
$:09 np *q
1^:09 iqs 'B
W9 3uoq
1^:09 nj
Si:6S Uj^
U:6S OBTp
6:6S 3uo§
V6S tqs
8:65 iqs
8:6S i^
8:65 iq
Z,:6S Su^if
5:19 aqo *V
S:i9 ?p
S:t9 iqz "g
g:i9 Susqz -y
S:i9 TOM -q
S:i9 !?M 'B
S:i9 oeX
g:T9 unx
S:i9 nj -g
S:i9 nj -y
g:T9 umd -q
5:19 umq -B
S:i9 nX
S;19 rei "g
g:t9 rei -y
g:i9 §uoz -3
^19 Suoo *g
17:19 §upo 'V
V19 ix
f:i9 red
1^:19 !9P -q
V19 ?P 'B
^19 nj
fr:l9 3uif
f:i9 nx
f:i9 nAi
1?:t9 Su^X
17:19 unx -g
17:19 unx -y
V-\9 rep
17:19 no
t?:i9 Suaqz
£:i9 §U?M
£:i9 nj
£:i9 iq
£:T9 i/
£:i9 §iny -g
£:i9 §UBd 'V
£:i9 SuiX
e:i9 Sueqz
i: 19 Suad
1=19 uiq
(H9 OBip
£T:Q9 omq
£i:09 IP
21=09 n/C
§mx
V
*rep
res-3
Is 'fl
is -v
?P
nq
5P
nq
Bd
opu
nu
SireX
onz
uaj
DM
uix
Piu-q
nXu *B
irem
unj
uaqo
irejq
rerq
UBM
nM
Suoqo
Suoqz
UIUI
u?P
Sireui
SUBM -q
SUBM *B
iqz
UQD
^ugj
tf
oip
W
uix
o^Tf '9
omf *v
^tp'a
9^65
fr:6S
^65
srss
OU8S
Ql'K
8=85
9:85
6V-LS
Si:/,S
WLS
tl'-LS
erz.s
£i:«
zr-LS
zr-LS
OT:/,S
6:Z,S
6:AS
6-L5
&LS
8:/.S
8^5
8=AS
L-LS
L'LS
9'LS
9-L9
5^5
S:/,S
5:£g
g:Z,S
S:/,S
fr:/.S
£:/.£
£:/.S
2:Z.S
^:/.S
i:/.S
V-LS
O'-LS
6'-9S
£:9S
Q:9S
Zl-SS
11=55

440 Lexicon
61:5
61:5
61:5
61:5
61:5
61:5
61:5
61:5
61:6
61:6
61:6
61:6
61:6
61:6
61:6
61:6
61:6
61:6
61:6
61:6
61:6
61:6
61:6
61:6
61:6
61:6
61:6
61:6
61:6
61:6
61:6
61:6
61:7
61:7
61:7
61:7
61:7
61:7
61:7
61:7
61:7
61:7
61:7
61:7
61:7
61:7
wu
huan
you
c5ng
cong
fei
bei
cui
chang
men
ji
dao
qT
kong
ni
qing
chou
dun
wan
ji
Ian
huo
fl
w&ng
chuo
hu
hun
XT
w6i
hui
A.e
B. wu
C. wu
duo
nao
yun
xiSng
zhui
huang
qiong
r&
xTng
ce
qiao
chou
qian
61:9
61:9
61:9
61:9
61:9
61:9
61:9
61:9
61:9
61:9
61:9
61:10
61:10
61:10
61:10
61:10
61:10
61:10
61:10
61:10
61:10
61:10
61:10
61:10
61:10
61:10
61:10
61:10
61:10
61:10
61:10
61:11
61:11
61:11
61:11
61:11
61:11
61:11
61:11
61:11
61:11
61:11
61:11
61:11
61:11
61:11
yu
yu
mTn
bi
yi
yln
6
yu
ai
qie
g5n
kui
que
su
chuang
kai
shen
A vi
kui
que
su
chuang
kai
shen
A. xi
B. kai
yuan
hun
li
tao
ym
ci
xu
A. qian
B. qie
tai
huang
III yun
mu
c5n
can
can
te
tong
man
guan
a. cao
b. cao
hui
a. kSi
b.kai
qm
lyu
A. yuan 61:7
B. yuan 61:7
ni 61:7
guai 61:7
bi 61:8
a. qie 61:8
b. que 61:8
chu 61:8
xun 61:8
shi 61:8
heng 61:8
kuang 61:8
tiao 61:8
huang 61:8
k6ng 61:8
shu 61:8
yang 61:8
hui 61:8
huT 61:8
n 61:8
xu 61:8
chT 61:8
hen 61:8
en 61:8
a. ke 61:8
b. que 61:8
A. tong 61:8
B. d6ng 61:8
tian 61:8
gong 61:8
XT 61:8
qia 61:8
yuan 61:8
kun 61:9
qiao 61:9
yue 61:9
XT 61:9
ti 61:9
han 61:9
yi 61:9
huT 61:9
bei 61:9
song 61:9
quan 61:9
kui 61:9
wu 61:9

Index 441
61:11
61:11
61:11
61:11
61:11
61:11
61:11
61:11
61:11
61:11
61:11
61:11
61:11
61:11
61:12
61:12
61:12
61:12
61:12
61:12
61:12
61:12
61:12
61:12
61:12
61:12
61:12
61:12
61:12
61:12
61:12
61:12
61:12
61:12
61:13
61:13
61:13
61:13
61:13
61:13
61:13
61:13
61:13
61:13
61:13
61:13
wei 61:13
tuan 61:13
qian 61:13
zhe 61:14
a. yong 61:14
b. yong 61:14
qing 61:14
a. kang 61:14
b. k^ng 61:15
qT 61:15
yu 61:15
you 61:15
chong 61:16
bei 61:16
bie 61:16
jiao 61:16
zeng 61:17
lian 61:18
ping 61:18
kui 61:18
qiao 61:18
yin 61:18
xT 61:19
dan 61:19
dui 61:24
fen 62:0
chong 62:1
ban 62:1
qi 62:1
jlng 62:1
A. wu 62:2
B. hu 62:3
c£n 62:3
xian 62:3
yi 62:3
xian 62:4
dan 62:4
ban 62:4
ddng 62:4
qm 62:7
cSo 62:7
ken 62:8
xie 62:9
A. ylng 62:9
B. ying 62:9
ao 62:10
mao 62:11
yi 62:12
lln 62:13
yan 62:13
dui 62:14
men 62:14
A. nuo 63:0
B. ru 63:1
zhi 63:4
ydu 63:4
mie 63:4
cheng 63:4
mSng 63:4
ten 63:4
hu^i 63:5
xuan 63:5
chan 63:5
ju 63:6
huan 63:6
a. zh6 63:6
b. she 63:6
yi 63:7
lian 63:8
n^n 63:8
zhuang 64:0
ge 64:0
yue 64:2
a. wii 64:2
b. mou 64:2
xu 64:3
shu 64:3
r6ng 64:3
cheng 64:4
w6 64:4
jie 64:4
can 64:4
a. qiang 64:4
b. qiang 64:4
huo 64:4
qT 64:4
jia 64:4
jl 64:4
kan 64:4
ji 64:4
km 64:4
jie 64:4
lii
zhan
A. xi
B. hu
chuo
dai
hu
e
hu
A.li
B. li
A. fang
B. pang
sud
A. pian
B. biSn
jiong
yiyT
A.sh5n
B. shan
hu
fei
ya\n
sh6u
cdi
le
pu
da
gang
ban
kou
niu
A. pan
B. ban
fu
PT
e
ch^ng
ji
bian
chao
A. w6n
B. wen
jue
A.ba

442 Lexicon
64:4
64:4
64:4
64:4
64:4
64:4
64:4
64:4
64:4
64:4
64:5
64:5
64:5
64:5
64:5
64:5
64:5
64:5
64:5
64:5
64:5
64:5
64:5
64:5
64:5
64:5
64:5
64:5
64:5
64:5
64:5
64:5
64:5
64:5
64:5
64:5
64:5
64:5
64:5
64:5
64:6
64:6
64:6
64:6
64:6
64:6
B. ba 64:6
yi 64:6
shu 64:6
zhua 64:6
pou 64:6
tou 64:6
d6u 64:6
kang 64:6
A. zh6 64:6
B. she 64:6
a. pi 64:6
b. pel 64:6
bao 64:7
dl 64:7
a. mo 64:7
b. m6 64:7
c. ma 64:7
ya 64:7
chou 64:7
fu 64:7
zhu 64:7
a. chai 64:7
b. che 64:7
mu 64:7
nian 64:7
la 64:7
fu 64:7
pao 64:7
a. pai 64:7
b. po 64:7
na 64:7
ju 64:7
A. tuo 64:7
B. zhi 64:7
ba 64:8
tuo 64:8
ju 64:8
zhuo 64:8
zhao 64:8
bai 64:8
kuo 64:8
shi 64:8
jie 64:8
zh&ng 64:8
gdng 64:8
quan 64:8
a. za 64:8
b. zan 64:8
ye 64:8
shi 64:8
chi 64:8
gua 64:8
zhT 64:8
qie 64:8
an 64:8
A. tiao 64:8
B. tiao 64:8
C. tao 64:8
cub 64:8
zhen 64:8
suo 64:8
yi 64:8
ting 64:8
nuo 64:8
wan 64:8
xie 64:8
xia 64:8
qiu 64:8
kun 64:8
zhuo 64:8
a. luo 64:8
b. le 64:8
c. lyu 64:8
han 64:8
A. shao 64:8
B. xiao 64:8
juan 64:8
a. bu 64:8
b. bu 64:8
zun 64:8
wan 64:8
p&ng 64:8
shg 64:9
A. lie 64:9
B. li 64:9
men 64:9
bai 64:9
ju 64:9
A. juan 64:9
B. quan 64:9
chui 64:9
jie 64:9
a. nie
b. niSn
nuo
a. zuo
b. zu
xian
A. sao
B. sao
lun
duo
shou
diao
A. pou
B. p6u
zhang
JT
qia
pai
a. yi
b. ye
jue
gua
shan
lyue
cai
A. tan
B. tan
che
jie
A. kong
B. qiang
tuT
yan
cuo
zou
ju
yuan
jian
jian
yu
kui
A. r6u
B. rou
xuan
miao
A.ti

Index 443
64:9
64:9
64:9
64:9
64:9
64:9
64:9
64:9
64:9
64:9
64:9
64:9
64:9
64:9
64:9
64:9
64:9
64:9
64:9
64:9
64:10
64:10
64:10
64:10
64:10
64:10
64:10
64:10
64:10
64:10
64:10
64:10
64:10
64:10
64:10
64:10
64:10
64:10
64:10
64:10
64:10
64:10
64:11
64:11
64:11
64:11
B. dT 64:11
C. dT 64:11
D. shi 64:11
nie 64:11
cha 64:11
zhen 64:11
yT 64:11
yang 64:11
huan 64:11
yan 64:11
ya 64:11
wo 64:11
chuai 64:11
kai 64:11
jiu 64:11
A.jie 64:11
B. qi 64:11
huT 64:11
sh6 64:11
yuan 64:11
gou 64:11
A. que 64:11
B. que 64:11
chou 64:12
sun 64:12
bo 64:12
cuo 64:12
sao 64:12
yao 64:12
SOU 64:12
gao 64:12
jin 64:12
e 64:12
nu6 64:12
ban 64:12
da 64:12
tao 64:12
hu 64:12
qian 64:12
A. qiang 64:12
B. qiang 64:12
C.chuang 64:12
sa 64:12
chong 64:12
guo 64:12
a. zhai 64:12
b. zhe 64:12
chT 64:12
lu 64:12
luo 64:12
16u 64:12
z6ng 64:12
CUT 64:12
mo 64:12
zhi 64:12
zhi 64:13
kou 64:13
shu 64:13
tuan 64:13
Aa. mo 64:13
Ab. mao 64:13
B. mo 64:13
mo 64:13
a. zhe 64:13
b. zhe 64:13
A. shan 64:13
B. shan 64:13
A. biao 64:13
B. biao 64:13
A.jue 64:13
B.jue 64:13
C. gui 64:13
a. pie 64:13
b. pie 64:13
a. lao 64:13
b. lao 64:13
xian 64:13
a. s& 64:13
b. sa 64:14
cheng 64:14
nao 64:14
A. XT 64:14
B. ST 64:14
zun 64:14
nian 64:14
huT 64:14
A. chuang 64:15
B. zhuang 64:15
jiao 64:15
tan 64:15
che 64:15
bo 64:15
ch6
Mo
fu
a. bo
b. bo
A. cuo
B. zu6
zhuan
pu
ta
ban
qiao
zhua
a. y6ng
b. yong
a. lu
b. Iu6
shan
a. ze
b. zhai
chuo
ji
A. cao
B. cao
qihg
huan
qm
A. dan
B. dan
Pi
bo
ju
JT
tai
zhu6
dao
ye
nT
huo
bin
a. zhi
b. zhi
kuo
bai
s6u
rao

444 Lexicon
64:15
64:15
64:15
64:16
64:17
64:17
64:17
64:17
64:17
64:18
64:18
64:18
64:19
64:19
64:19
64:20
64:20
64:20
64:21
65:0
65:8
66:2
66:2
66:3
66:3
66:3
66:4
66:4
66:5
66:5
66:6
66:6
66:7
66:7
66:7
66:7
66:7
66:7
66:7
66:7
66:7
66:7
66:8
66:8
66:8
66:8
zhi 66:8
pan 66:8
shu 66:8
jun 66:9
ymg 66:10
Ian 66:11
A. rang 66:11
B. ra"ng 66:11
chan 66:11
a. XT 66:11
b. xie 66:12
she 66:13
cua"n 66:13
ban 66:13
tan 66:13
t£ng 66:14
jiao 66:16
jue 67:0
Ian 67:8
zhT 67:8
qT 67:8
shou 67:9
kao 67:16
you 68:0
gai 68:6
g5ng 68:6
A. fang 68:7
B. fang 68:7
zheng 68:8
gu 68:9
xiao 68:10
ml 69:0
xu 69:1
A. jiao 69:4
B. jiao 69:4
mln 69:5
jiu 69:7
yu 69:8
chi 69:8
ao 69:9
A. bai 69:10
B. bai 69:14
bi 69:14
chang 69:21
g&n 70:0
A. san 70:4
B. san 70:4
A. dun 70:5
B. dui 70:6
jing 70:6
qiao 70:6
di 70:6
fu 70:6
A. shu 70:6
B. shu 70:7
C. shuo 70:7
zhSng 70:7
A. du 70:7
B. yi 70:7
A. lian 70:8
B. lian 70:9
bi 70:10
xiao 70:10
wen 70:14
bin 70:16
fei 71:0
ban 71:7
ban 72:0
Ian 72:1
ddu 72:2
A. liao 72:2
B. liao 72:2
hu 72:2
xie 72:3
jia 72:3
zhen 72:4
wo 72:4
JTn 72:4
chi 72:4
fu 72:4
qiang 72:4
zhuo 72:4
zhin 72:4
zhuo 72:4
ST 72:4
xTn 72:4
zhuo 72:4
A. duan 72:4
B. duan 72:4
zhu 72:4
fang 72:5
A. yu 72:5
B. wu
shT
p£ng
qi'
zhan
mab
lyii
pei
A.xuan
B. xuan
j'ng
nT
zu
zhao
liu
yiqf
fan
yu
wu
ji
ri
dan
zhT
zao
xun
xu
gan
han
wang
mfh
ang
ze
kun
sheng
fang
hao
chang
ming
hun
A. yi
B. yi
XT
xm
xTng
ying

Index 445
72:5
72:5
72:5
72:5
72:5
72:5
72:5
72:5
72:6
72:6
72:6
72:6
72:6
72:6
72:7
72:7
72:7
72:7
72:7
72:7
72:7
72:7
72:7
72:8
72:8
72:8
72:8
72:8
72:8
72:8
72:8
72:9
72:9
72:9
72:9
72:9
72:9
72:9
72:9
72:9
72:10
72:10
72:10
72:11
72:11
72:11
chun 72:11
mei 72:11
zuo 72:11
zhao 72:12
shi 72:12
mao 72:12
ni 72:12
chang 72:12
chao 72:12
shi 72:12
huang 72:13
jin 72:13
sh&ng 72:13
yan 72:14
wan 72:14
xian 72:14
zhou 72:14
XT 72:15
bu 72:15
wu 72:16
hui 72:17
hao 72:19
chen 73:0
pu 73:2
jlng 73:2
XT 73:2
qmg 73:3
JTng 73:3
guT 73:3
zhi 73:5
an 73:6
xuan 73:7
a. xia 73:7
b. xia" 73:7
yun 73:8
hui 73:8
shu 73:8
nu£n 73:8
an 73:9
ya"ng 73:9
A. mmg 73:9
B. ming 73:10
chang 74:0
zan 74:2
mu 74:4
ni 74:4
A. bao 74:5
B. pu 74:6
nan 74:6
xian 74:7
yi 74:7
ji 74:8
ye 74:8
li 74:8
tan 74:8
xiao 74:8
A. xiang 74:8
B. sh&ng 75:0
ai 75:1
a. shu 75:1
b. shu 75:1
xun 75:1
yao 75:1
pii 75:2
kuang 75:2
XT 75:2
nSng 75:2
shai 75:2
yue 75:2
a. qu 75:3
b. qu 75:3
yi 75:3
Aa. geng 75:3
Ab. jing 75:3
B. geng 75:3
he 75:3
shu 75:3
cao 75:3
a. man 75:3
b. wan 75:3
A. zeng 75:3
B. ceng 75:3
fi 75:3
zui 75:3
A. hui 75:3
Ba. kuai 75:3
Bb. gui 75:3
qie 75:3
yue 75:3
y6u 75:3
peng 75:4
fu 75:4
fei
shuo
zhen
ling
wang
A. zhao
B. chao
JT
Aa. qT
Ab/qi
B.JT
mu
wei
mo
bin
zha
zhu
zhu
a. po
b. pii
dud
JT
xiu
yu
wu
cha
a. shan
b. sha
wu
IT
xing
cai
cun
Aa. shuo
Ab. shao
B. biao
di
A.zhang
B. zhang
yi
du
qT
shu
gang
miao
hang

446 Lexicon
75:4
75:4
75:4
75:4
75:4
75:4
75:4
75:4
75:4
75:4
75:4
75:4
75:4
75:4
75:4
75:4
75:4
75:4
75:4
75:4
75:4
75:4
75:4
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
bei
dong
gao
yao
chu
chun
P*
A.ch6u
B. niu
zhu
song
bin
wang
fang
fen
XT
A.zhSn
B. zhen
Hn
rui
mei
gud
zhi
ku
XI
zhi
guai
xiao
jia
jia
A. ju
B. gou
C. gou
fu
yi
shi
duo
a. blng
b. bing
fu
a. bai
b. bo
mou
A. gan
B. qian
ran
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:5
75:6
75:6
75:6
75:6
75:6
75:6
75:6
75:6
75:6
75:6
75:6
75:6
75:6
75:6
75:6
75:6
75:6
75:6
75:6
75:6
75:6
75:6
75:6
rou
zhe
xia
A. y6u
B. zhu
j*
tub
zu6
nan
d!
zha
A. zha
B. cha
jiu
ji5n
ke
nai
zhu
bi
liu
chai
zha
si
a. XT
b. qT
n
gua
A. jiao
B. xiao
xu
zhu
jian
kao
lao
zhan
a. he
b. hii
gen
ge
zai
jie
A. heng
B. hang
gui
tao
wei
75:6
75:6
75:6
75:6
75:6
75:6
75:7
75:7
75:7
75:7
75:7
75:7
75:7
75:7
75:7
75:7
75:7
75:7
75:7
75:7
75:7
75:7
75:7
75:7
75:7
75:7
75:7
75:7
75:7
75:7
75:7
75:7
75:8
75:8
75:8
75:8
75:8
75:8
75:8
75:8
75:8
75:8
75:8
75:8
75:8
75:8
an
zhi
long
sang
hua"n
ji6
ting
fu
t6ng
ju6
liang
ting
m&
gu
zT
zhT
gSng
tiao
xiao
lyu
shao
wu
K
If
suo
tl
xi^
kun
zhuo
shu
chan
fan
qi
bing
mian
qi
fSi
bang
zong
cheng
z5o
J1'
peng
dong
tang
di

Index 447
75:8
75:8
75:8
75:8
75:8
75:8
75:8
75:8
75:8
75:8
75:8
75:8
75:8
75:8
75:8
75:8
75:8
75:8
75:9
75:9
75:9
75:9
75:9
75:9
75:9
75:9
75:9
75:9
75:9
75:9
75:9
75:9
75:9
75:9
75:9
75:9
75:9
75:9
75:9
75:9
75:9
75:9
75:9
75:9
75:9
75:9
ymg 75:11
lang 75:11
rong 75:12
zhen 75:12
A. bSng 75:12
B. beng 75:12
gan 75:12
fei 75:12
zha 75:12
xie 75:12
rong 75:12
CUT 75:12
a. que 75:12
b.jue 75:12
ta 75:12
ke 75:12
gao 75:12
pan 75:12
Shuo 75:12
gou 75:12
chui 75:12
qiang 75:12
cha 75:12
huai 75:12
gao 75:12
gai 75:12
y6u 75:13
hu 75:13
Jiang 75:13
cao 75:13
jTn 75:13
zhuang 75:13
A. yue 75:13
B. le 75:13
C. yao 75:13
A. zong 75:13
B. cong 75:13
fan 75:13
16u 75:13
shu 75:14
biao 75:14
jiu 75:14
zha 75:14
shu 75:14
zhang 75:14
a. mu 75:14
b. m6
y^ng
er
qiao
a. pu
A.shu
B. shu
hua
zun
yue
gan
qiao
A. nao
B. rao
qiao
tuo
cheng
ju
a. cheng
b. chen
jue
ji
xiang
tu6
A. heng
B. heng
tan
yln
XI
cheng
yan
bo
zhua
a. gui
b. kuai
jia
qmg
jian
qiang
A. tao
B.dSo
a. blng
b. bin
jian
qlng
yan
A. zhan 75:9
B. zhan 75:10
ql 75:10
yu 75:10
sen 75:10
leng 75:10
a. qT 75:10
b. XT 75:10
zhao 75:10
guan 75:10
A. fen 75:10
B. fen 75:10
wan 75:10
gu6 75:10
zhi 75:10
chui 75:10
ya 75:10
jiao 75:10
a. ye 75:10
b. ye 75:10
zong 75:10
yi 75:10
chuan 75:10
chun 75:10
A. zha 75:10
B. cha 75:11
bi 75:11
yang 75:11
feng 75:11
a. xie 75:11
b. xie 75:11
chu 75:11
lian 75:11
leng 75:11
nan 75:11
yu 75:11
mei 75:11
zhen 75:11
ji 75:11
jie 75:11
ye 75:11
chu 75:11
shiin 75:11
ji 75:11
kai 75:11
qiu 75:11

448 Lexicon
75:14
75:14
75:15
75:15
75:15
75:15
75:15
75:15
75:16
75:16
75:16
75:16
75:17
75:17
75:17
75:17
75:18
75:19
75:19
75:21
75:21
76:0
76:2
76:4
76:6
76:6
76:7
76:7
76:7
76:7
76:8
76:8
76:8
76:8
76:8
76:9
76:9
76:9
76:10
76:10
76:11
76:11
76:11
76:12
76:12
76:12
zhao 76:14
gul 76:15
lu 76:18
ji6 77:0
gao 77:1
du 77:1
yuan 77:2
li 77:3
li 77:4
chen 77:4
nie 77:5
long 77:9
jfi 77:12
ling 77:14
ying 78:2
Ian 78:4
qu&n 78:4
luo 78:5
luan 78:5
Ian 78:5
ba 78:5
qian 78:6
ci 78:6
xm 78:7
a. kai 78:8
b. ke 78:8
yu 78:9
XT 78:10
A. ai 78:11
B. ai 78:11
yT 78:11
ql 78:11
qin 78:12
kuan 78:12
kSn 78:13
sha 78:13
xln 78:14
xie 78:15
qian 78:17
ge 79:0
tan 79:5
A. ou 79:6
B. 6u 79:6
xu 79:7
A. xi 79:7
B. she 79:8
yii 79:8
chuo 79:8
huan 79:8
zhl 79:8
A. zhEng 79:9
B. zheng 79:9
cT 79:9
bu 79:11
wu 79:11
qi 79:11
wai 79:12
sul 80:0
n 80:1
guT 80:3
si 80:3
mo 80:4
yao 80:10
cu 81:0
yang 81:0
tian 81:0
dai 81:5
xun 81:5
shu 81:6
piao 81:13
zhl 82:0
ca^i 82:6
ji 82:7
yun 82:7
ti 82:8
a. jTn 82:8
b. jin 82:11
shang 82:11
yi 82:11
dan 82:12
jiang 82:12
lian 82:13
bin 83:0
du 83:0
jian 83:1
shu 83:1
duan 83:4
A. ym 83:4
B. yan 84:0
A. sha 84:4
B. shai 84:6
a. ke 84:6
b. qiao
c. que
a. yao
b. xiao
A. dian
B. dian
huT
yi
a. 5u
b. 6u
duan
wu
mu
m6i
ai
du
yu
A. bl
B. bi
C. pi
bi
PI'
Pi
chan
mao
xian
hao
qiu
tan
cui
san
A. If
B. mao
r6ng
chSng
zhan
A. shi
B. zhT
dT
mm
a. meng
b. mang
qi
fen
qi
yln

Index 449
84:10
85:0
85:1
85:2
85:2
85:2
85:2
85:2
85:3
85:3
85:3
85:3
85:3
85:3
85:3
85:3
85:3
85:3
85:3
85:3
85:3
85:3
85:4
85:4
85:4
85:4
85:4
85:4
85:4
85:4
85:4
85:4
85:4
85:4
85:4
85:4
85:4
85:4
85:4
85:4
85:4
85:4
85:4
85:4
85:4
85:4
yun 85:4
shuT 85:4
y6ng 85:4
A. fan 85:4
B. fan 85:4
ting 85:4
zhT 85:5
qiii 85:5
fan 85:5
shan 85:5
A. han 85:5
B. han 85:5
A. wu 85:5
B. wu 85:5
C. wa 85:5
xun 85:5
si 85:5
ru 85:5
a. g6ng 85:-5
b. hong 85:5
jiang 85:5
chi 85:5
mi 85:5
A. gu 85:5
B. yu 85:5
wang 85:5
rui 85:5
tai 85:5
jf 85:5
bian 85:5
wen 85:5
jue 85:5
a. fen 85:5
b. fen 85:5
qin 85:5
yi 85:5
a. wo 85:5
b. wu 85:5
A. hang 85:5
B. hang 85:5
A. chen 85:5
B. shen 85:5
dun 85:5
mu 85:5
mo 85:5
a. da 85:5
b. ta 85:5
mian 85:5
chOng 85:5
sha 85:5
zhT 85:5
pel 85:5
m6 85:5
A.jii 85:5
B. ju 85:6
C. ju 85:6
tuo 85:6
he 85:6
B 85:6
fei 85:6
you 85:6
A. chi 85:6
B. zhi 85:6
zhao 85:6
A. gu 85:6
B. gu 85:6
zhan 85:6
yan 85:6
kuang 85:6
ji6ng 85:6
A. yi 85:6
B. xie 85:6
qiu 85:6
yi 85:6
quan 85:6
a. bo 85:6
b. po 85:6
bi 85:6
le 85:6
hong 85:6
gan 85:6
fa 85:6
mao 85:6
si 85:6
CT 85:6
fan 85:6
su 85:7
h'ng 85:7
pao 85:7
bo 85:7
qi 85:7
A. ni 85:7
B. ni
zhu
xuan
pan
mTn
tai
yang
y6ng
hui
jian
yang
lie
ji
A. xT
B. xiSn
C. sa
A. xT
B. xiSn
zhu
Jiang
luo
dong
A. yi
B. ti
j'n
h6ng
xu
tao
zhou
xun
xiong
guang
huan
huo
wa
a. qia
b. xia
pai
wu
M
zhe
jun
bo
a. huSn
b. huan
pu

450 Lexicon
85:7
85:7
85:7
85:7
85:7
85:7
85:7
85:7
85:7
85:7
85:7
85:7
85:7
85:7
85:7
85:7
85:7
85:7
85:7
85:7
85:7
85:7
85:7
85:8
85:8
85:8
85:8
85:8
85:8
85:8
85:8
85:8
85:8
85:8
85:8
85:8
85:8
85:8
85:8
85:8
85:8
85:8
85:8
85:8
85:8
85:8
hao 85:8
A. lang 85:8
B. lang 85:8
a. fu 85:8
b. fou 85:8
yu 85:8
hai 85:8
jin 85:8
a. jia 85:8
b. ji£ 85:8
mei 85:8
tu 85:8
nie 85:8
JTng 85:8
xiao 85:8
she 85:8
ydng 85:8
xian 85:8
juan 85:8
cen 85:8
fl 85:8
B 85:9
si 85:9
shuan 85:9
a. ya 85:9
b. yai 85:9
a. ye 85:9
b. yi 85:9
ban 85:9
a. he 85:9
b. hao 85:9
Hang 85:9
zhuo 85:9
dian 85:9
ZT 85:9
XT 85:9
a. yao 85:9
b. xiao 85:9
qi 85:9
ping 85:9
A. 1m 85:9
B. lin 85:9
a. sha 85:9
b. shu 85:9
qT 85:9
nao 85:9
tab 85:9
cong 85:9
lei 85:9
tian 85:9
dan 85:9
yu 85:9
gan 85:9
jing 85:9
ling 85:9
lun 85:9
ym 85:9
cui 85:9
huai 85:9
shen 85:9
chun 85:10
yuan 85:10
hun 85:10
qTng 85:10
yan 85:10
qian 85:10
tian 85:10
huan 85:10
zhu 85:10
jian 85:10
yu 85:10
ting 85:10
qu 85:10
dii 85:10
bo 85:10
wo 85:10
A. wo 85:10
B. guo 85:10
xie 85:10
ce 85:10
wei 85:10
gang 85:10
yan 85:10
ke 85:10
you 85:10
miao 85:10
hun 85:10
pai 85:10
mei 85:10
cou 85:10
tuan 85:10
mian 85:11
V
xu
pen
jian
hu
xiang
A. dan
B. zhan
hua"ng
A.jiu
B.jiao
A. yan
B. ym
A. tang
B. tang
yu£n
zhun
ke
liii
gou
muig
yi
pu
a. XT
b. qT
wen
su
zhen
sou
rong
hun
A. ni
B. niao
shi
ru
pang
cang
mie
dian
ZT
fu
A. hua
B. gu
zT
tao
teng
di

Index 451
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:11
85:12
85:12
85:12
85:12
xiu 85:12
hu 85:12
zhi 85:12
shen 85:12
dT 85:12
lu 85:12
hu 85:12
man 85:12
yu 85:12
A. piao 85:12
B. piao 85:12
qT 85:12
lii 85:12
lou 85:12
gai 85:12
yan 85:12
A. cao 85:12
B. zao 85:12
tuan 85:12
A. Ou 85:12
B. 6u 85:12
mo 85:12
ban 85:12
lian 85:12
If 85:12
yT 85:13
man 85:13
zi 85:13
A. ta 85:13
B. lei 85:13
a. sou 85:13
b. shu 85:13
zhang 85:13
zhang 85:13
A. jian 85:13
B.jian 85:13
liao 85:13
cul 85:13
yang 85:13
Jiang 85:13
zhong 85:13
ylng 85:13
mang 85:13
jiao 85:14
po 85:14
jie 85:14
pan
guT
qian
lu
xi
huang
jian
run
iao
tan
chao
xun
a. kui
b. hui
shan
chan
tong
s^
cheng
cheng
jiao
A. Iao
B. Iao
che
shu
A. sheng
B. mTn
C. mian
zao
huan
ze
kuai
A. ao
B. yu
chan
dan
pi
ji
zhuo
nong
fen
se
huo
shi
ning
meng
85:14
85:14
85:14
85:14
85:14
85:14
85:14
85:14
85:14
85:14
85:14
85:15
85:15
85:15
85:15
85:15
85:15
85:15
85:15
85:15
85:15
85:16
85:16
85:16
85:16
85:16
85:16
85:16
85:16
85:16
85:16
85:17
85:17
85:17
85:17
85:17
85:18
85:18
85:19
85:19
85:19
85:21
85:21
85:22
85:24
86:0
\.JT
B.ji
iao
ru
tab
tiuo
Ian
jun
pu
zhuo
bin
A., jian
B.jian
Iu6
yang
du
xie
sh6n
chan
liu
bao
lu
han
ymg
B
xiao
suT
xie
zhu
shuang
lai
mi
jian
yue
rang
Ian
feng
guan
sa
If
tan
hao
ba
wan
gan
hu6

452 Lexicon
86:2
86:3
86:3
86:3
86:4
86:4
86:4
86:4
86:4
86:5
86:5
86:5
86:5
86:5
86:5
86:5
86:5
86:6
86:6
86:6
86:6
86:6
86:6
86:6
86:6
86:6
86:6
86:7
86:7
86:7
86:7
86:8
86:8
86:8
86:8
86:8
86:8
86:8
86:8
86:9
86:9
86:9
86:9
86:9
86:9
86:9
huT 86:9
jiu 86:9
zhuo 86:9
zai 86:9
chuT 86:9
ydn 86:9
ch&o 86:9
kang 86:9
zhl 86:9
xuan 86:9
ju 86:9
tan 86:9
p£o 86:10
ji6ng 86:10
tai 86:10
bing 86:10
zhu 86:10
lie 86:10
xiao 86:10
wu 86:10
hong 86:11
a. lao 86:11
b. luo 86:11
xu&i 86:11
zheng 86:11
yan 86:11
kSo 86:11
peng 86:12
feng 86:12
A. yan 86:12
B. yan 86:12
bei 86:12
fen 86:12
cui 86:12
wu 86:12
jiao 86:12
xin 86:12
yan 86:12
ran 86:12
huT 86:12
lian 86:12
huang 86:12
jian 86:12
zhu 86:12
w6i 86:12
XT 86:12
nuSn 86:13
yan 86:13
yu 86:13
qi6ng 86:13
mei 86:13
huan 86:13
xu 86:13
zhao 86:13
wgi 86:13
fan 86:14
A. yang 86:14
B. yang 86:15
A. shan 86:15
B. shan 86:15
XT 86:16
A. he 86:16
B. hu 86:17
xiong 86:17
xun 86:18
ying 86:18
a. shu 86:25
b. shou 87:0
yi 87:0
yu 87:4
a. ao 87:4
b. ao 87:5
re 87:8
jian 87:8
xi 87:13
XT 88:0
chi 88:0
ch&n 88:6
ye 88:9
ran 89:0
yan 89:0
deng 89:7
jiao 89:10
A. li£o 90:4
B. li&o 90:5
C. liao 90:6
hn 90:13
A. shao 91:0
B. shao 91:4
fan 91:8
A. yan 91:8
B. yan 91:9
tang
ying
yu
zao
can
sui
huT
zhu
xie
Jin
yao
bao
ru6
shub
lu
yan
yue
Ian
jue
guan
cuan
a. zhuS
b. zh&o
pd
zheng
yuin
A. wei
B. wei
jue
A. fu
B. fu
die
y6
a. yao
b. xiao
shuSng
er
chuang
ge
zang
qiang
pian
ban
jian
pai
zM

Index 453
91:10
91:11
91:13
92:0
93:0
93:2
93:2
93:3
93:3
93:3
93:4
93:4
93:5
93:5
93:5
93:6
93:6
93:6
93:7
93:7
93:8
93:8
93:9
93:10
93:10
93:11
93:11
93:15
93:16
94:0
94:2
94:3
94:4
94:4
94:4
94:4
94:5
94:5
94:5
94:5
94:5
94:6
94:6
94:6
94:6
94:7
die 94:7
ydu 94:7
du 94:7
y£ 94:7
niu 94:7
pin 94:7
mou 94:8
mu 94:8
lao 94:8
ren 94:8
mu 94:8
wu 94:8
gu 94:8
sheng 94:9
dT 94:9
quan 94:9
n 94:9
te 94:9
A. qian 94:9
B. qian 94:9
XT 94:9
If 94:9
jian 94:10
kao 94:10
luo 94:10
A. If 94:10
B. mao 94:10
du 94:10
XT 94:10
quan 94:11
fan 94:11
an 94:11
zhuang 94:12
kuang 94:12
niu 94:13
di 94:13
xia 94:14
hu 94:14
you 94:14
g6u 94:14
ju 94:15
h6n 94:16
jiao 94:16
rong 94:16
shou 94:17
juan 95:0
94:7
94:7
94:7
94:7
94:7
94:7
94:8
94:8
94:8
94:8
94:8
94:8
94:8
94:9
94:9
94:9
94:9
94:9
94:9
94:9
94:9
94:9
94:10
94:10
94:10
94:10
94:10
94:10
94:10
94:11
94:11
94:11
94:12
94:12
94:13
94:13
94:14
94:14
94:14
94:14
94:15
94:16
94:16
94:16
94:17
95:0
If 95:5
x& 95:6
ym 95:6
suan 95:6
lang 95:6
bei 95:6
ni 96:0
chang 96:0
yi 96:0
zhi 96:3
mSng 96:3
cai 96:4
cu 96:4
w6i 96:4
yuan 96:4
xTng 96:5
zhu 96:5
nao 96:5
xie 96:5
hou 96:5
you 96:5
you 96:5
yao 96:5
hu£ 96:5
yuan 96:5
a. ai 96:5
b. dai 96:5
yu 96:5
shT 96:5
Jiang 96:6
zhang
ao
A. liao
B. lao
du
xiSn
xian
xun
huo
lie
shou
a. ul
b. ta
xian
mi
xuan
95:5
95:6
95:6
95:6
95:6
95:6
96:0
96:0
96:0
96:3
96:3
96:4
96:4
96:4
96:4
96:5
96:5
96:5
96:5
96:5
96:5
96:5
96:5
96:5
96:5
96:5
96:5
96:5
96:5
96:6
96:6
96:6
96:6
96:6
96:6
96:6
96:6
96:6
96:7
96:7
96:7
96:7
96:7
96:7
96:7
96:7
zT
Aa. shuai
Ab. shuo
B. shuai
C. lyu
lu
yu
A. wang
B. wang
gan
jiu
jue
a. wan
b. wan
mei
ling
dai
a. dian
b. di&n
bo
cT
po
ke
jia
mih
shan
bi
zhen
jue
g6ng
Iu6
zhu
6r
yao
heng
ban
pei
liu
cheng
ting
xian
nan
qiu
lang
IT
xiu

454 Lexicon
96:8
96:8
96:8
96:8
96:8
96:8
96:8
96:8
96:8
96:8
96:8
96:8
96:8
96:8
96:8
96:8
96:8
96:8
96:9
96:9
96:9
96:9
96:9
96:9
96:9
96:9
96:9
96:9
96:9
96:9
96:9
96:10
96:10
96:10
96:10
96:10
96:10
96:10
96:10
96:10
96:11
96:11
96:11
96:11
96:11
96:11
zhan 96:11
ju 96:12
chen 96:12
zhuo 96:12
hu 96:12
qf 96:12
kun 96:12
qi 96:13
beng 96:13
wan 96:13
c6ng 96:13
guan 96:14
yan 96:14
diao 96:14
h'n 96:14
qm 96:14
pi 96:15
pa 96:18
A. mao 96:19
B. mei 97:0
dai 97:5
w6i 97:6
zhuan 97:6
xia 97:11
yuan 97:14
nao 97:17
hu 98:0
ymg 98:0
yii 98:5
rui 98:6
se 98:8
liu 98:8
suo 98:9
ya"o 98:9
ymg 98:9
ma 98:11
guT 98:11
tian 98:12
qiang 98:13
cuD 98:13
jin 98:14
cuT 98:16
If 99:0
qiu 99:4
xuan 99:6
lian 100:0
zhang 100:5
lu 100:6
hu^ng 100:7
pu 101:0
jTng 101:2
fan 101:2
JT 101:7
ai 101:7
bi 102:0
zao 102:0
hu^n 102:0
yu 102:0
wen 102:2
xT 102:2
xuan 102:2
man 102:2
qiong 102:2
guan 102:3
zan 102:3
gua 102:3
die 102:4
A. hu 102:4
B. hu 102:4
piao 102:4
ban 102:4
rang 102:5
A. wa 102:5
B. wa 102:5
ling 102:5
cf 102:5
p6u 102:5
ping 102:5
zhou 102:5
A. zhen 102:6
B. jian 102:6
6u 102:6
m^ng 102:6
zeng 102:6
pi 102:7
weng 102:7
ymg 102:7
yan 102:7
gan 102:7
shen 102:7
tian 102:7
sheng 102:7
shen
chan
sheng
yong
fu
y6ng
A. m'ng
B. ning
tian
you
jia
shen
nan
A. dian
B. sheng
A. ting
B. ting
quan
m6ng
bi
yun
tian
jie
quSn
wei
pan
liu
ben
zhen
A. \u
B. chu
a. mu
b. m6u
bi
zhi
lyue
a. qf
b. xf
A. fan
B. pan
Cbo
A.hua
B. hua
A. yu
B. she
mu

Index 455
102:7
102:7
102:8
102:8
102:8
102:8
102:8
102:9
102:10
102:10
102:14
102:14
102:18
103:0
103:0
103:0
103:7
103:7
103:7
103:7
103:7
103:9
103:9
104:3
104:3
104:4
104:4
104:4
104:4
104:5
104:5
104:5
104:5
104:5
104:5
104:5
104:5
104:5
104:5
104:5
104:5
104:6
104:6
104:6
104:6
104:6
jun 104:6
yi 104:7
A. dang 104:7
B. dang 104:7
zhuo 104:7
JT 104:7
wan 104:7
man 104:7
a. JT 104:7
b. qi 104:8
jiang 104:8
chou 104:8
die 104:8
A. ya 104:8
B. shu 104:8
C. pi 104:8
Aa. shu 104:8
Ab. su 104:8
B. shu 104:9
a. shu 104:9
b. su 104:9
zhi 104:10
yi 104:10
jiu 104:10
shan 104:10
chen 104:10
y6u 104:10
jie 104:10
yi 104:10
pi 104:10
a. CT 104:10
b. Ci 104:10
dan 104:10
zhen 104:10
teng 104:11
ju 104:11
ji 104:11
ju 104:11
dian 104:11
jia 104:11
bing 104:11
quan 104:11
yi 104:12
wSi 104:12
yang 104:12
zhi 104:12
hen
mei
tong
PT
suan
pu
n
zhi
cud
guan
tan
fei
bi
gu
w6i
yu
cui
ya
yang
tu
ym
guan
yi
wen
ji
chuang
ban
liu
A. cuo
B. chai
shou
a. yao
b. nyue
dian
cu
Iu6
chou
zhang
zhai
que
A. lyu
B. lou
liao
long
xian
fei
104:12
104:12
104:13
104:13
104:13
104:13
104:14
104:14
104:14
104:15
104:15
104:15
104:15
104:16
104:16
104:17
104:17
104:17
104:18
104:19
105:4
105:7
105:7
106:0
106:0
106:1
106:1
106:2
106:2
106:2
106:3
106:4
106:4
106:5
106:6
106:7
106:7
106:7
106:8
106:10
106:10
106:10
106:12
106:13
107:0
107:7
A. dan
B. dan
PT
lei
E
shu
bie
ji
chi
jie
yang
teng
zheng
li
lai
a. xuan
b. xian
yTng
yong
dian
guT
deng
fa
a. bai
b. bo
a. bai
b. bo
zao
zao
mao
di
jie
huang
gao
jiao
A.hao
B.gSo
bi
XT
ai
hao
hao
po
jiao
pi
cun

456 Lexicon
miao 109:8
mei 109:8
mao 109:8
A. kan 109:8
B. kan 109:8
zhen 109:8
A. yi 109:9
B. chi 109:9
sh6ng 109:9
zhen 109:9
mian 109:9
shl 109:10
zi 109:10
zha 109:10
xuan 109:10
ml 109:10
xuan 109:10
kuang 109:10
juan 109:11
mou 109:11
zhen 109:11
tiao 109:11
yan 109:12
zh6ng 109:12
zhao 109:12
zhuo 109:12
a. han 109:12
b. huan 109:12
huan 109:12
di 109:12
juan 109:13
e 109:13
xian 109:13
XT 109:13
shan 109:13
qiong 109:14
a. ya 109:14
b. yai 109:15
jing 109:15
sui 109:19
juan 109:19
shui 109:21
A. suT 110:0
B. huT 110:4
du 110:4
a. bi 110:7
109:8
109:8
109:8
109:8
109:8
109:8
109:9
109:9
109:9
109:9
109:9
109:10
109:10
109:10
109:10
109:10
109:10
109:10
109:11
109:11
109:11
109:11
109:12
109:12
109:12
109:12
109:12
109:12
109:12
109:12
109:13
109:13
109:13
109:13
109:13
109:14
109:14
109:15
109:15
109:19
109:19
109:21
110:0
110:4
110:4
110:7
b. pi
mu
ni
lu
yi
ji6
du
kui
rul
mao
fa"
chen
ke
s6u
xia
A. ming
B. mian
C. mian
yi
man
cheng
meng
pie
deng
sh6n
shun
liao
jian
kan
tong
zhan
jian
gu
A.ju
B. qu
a. meng
b. meng
jue
mie
chu
kan
zhu
mao
A.jm
B. guan
yu
jun 109:4
zhou 109:4
a. mTn 109:4
b. mlng 109:4
yu 109:4
A. chong 109:5
B. zhong 109:5
p6n 109:5
ying 109:5
yi 109:5
wan 109:5
hd 109:5
ang 109:5
he 109:5
kuT 109:5
A. cheng 109:6
B. sheng 109:6
dao 109:6
lu 109:6
zhan 109:6
a. meng 109:4
b. ming 109:6
jin 109:6
A. jian 109:6
B. jian 109:6
pan 109:6
guan 109:6
lu 109:6
zhou 109:7
A. dang 109:7
B. tang 109:7
gu 109:7
li 109:7
mu 109:7
xu 109:8
mang 109:8
zhf 109:8
A. xiang 109:8
B. xiang 109:8
xi 109:8
pan 109:8
A. shun 109:8
B. dun 109:8
A. sheng 109:8
B. xlng 109:8
mian 109:8
107:9
107:10
108:0
108:0
108:3
108:4
108:4
108:4
108:4
108:5
108:5
108:5
108:5
108:6
108:6
108:7
108:7
108:7
108:8
108:8
108:8
108:8
108:9
108:9
108:9
108:10
108:11
108:11
108:12
108:12
108:12
108:13
108:15
109:0
109:3
109:3
109:3
109:4
109:4
109:4
109:4
109:4
109:4
109:4
109:4
109:4

Index 457
110:8
111:0
111:2
111:3
111:3
111:4
111:4
111:7
111:7
111:8
111:12
111:12
111:14
112:0
112:2
112:4
112:4
112:4
112:4
112:5
112:5
112:5
112:5
112:5
112:5
112:5
112:5
112:5
112:5
112:5
112:6
112:6
112:6
112:7
112:7
112:7
112:7
112:7
112:7
112:7
112:7
112:8
112:8
112:8
112:8
112:8
ze 112:8
shT 112:8
yl 112:8
A. zhT 112:8
B. zhi 112:9
shin 112:9
ju 112:9
cuo 112:9
duan 112:9
& 112:9
jiao 112:9
zeng 112:9
huo 112:10
shi 112:10
ding 112:10
sha 112:10
huo 112:10
qi 112:10
ya 112:10
qu 112:10
Iu6 112:10
A. zhT 112:10
B. dT 112:11
zhai 112:11
zhen 112:11
bian 112:11
nu 112:11
peng 112:11
pao 112:11
p6 112:12
nao 112:12
ai 112:12
yan 112:12
keng 112:12
xiao 112:12
xia 112:13
che 112:14
liu 112:15
ying 112:15
que 112:15
yan 112:15
xing 112:15
zhui 112:16
qi 112:17
lii 113:0
ai 113:3
sul 113:3
bei 113:3
dul 113:3
wan 113:4
yan 113:4
jie 113:4
bi 113:4
a. shi 113:4
b. shuo 113:4
zhen 113:4
dang 113:4
nao 113:5
que 113:5
ma 113:5
nian 113:5
d 113:5
sang 113:5
lei 113:5
cuo 113:5
pan 113:5
zhe 113:5
ke 113:5
zhuan 113:5
chgn 113:5
lei
qi
A. mo
B. mo
qing
j'
qu
deng
lin
pan
qiao
chu
ai
a. kuang
b. g6ng
B
n
fan
long
bo
shi
she
113:3
113:3
113:3
113:4
113:4
113:4
113:4
113:4
113:4
113:4
113:4
113:5
113:5
113:5
113:5
113:5
113:5
113:5
113:5
113:5
113:5
113:5
113:5
113:5
113:5
113:5
113:5
113:5
113:6
113:6
113:6
113:6
113:6
113:6
113:6
113:7
113:8
113:8
113:8
113:8
113:8
113:8
113:8
113:9
113:9
113:9
yue
si
qi
yao
xian
A.qi
B. zhT
qi
zhT
beng
dui
shi
you
fu
fii
a. mi
b. bi
V
zu
zhT
zuo
qu
hu
A. zhu
B. zhou
shen
sui
ci
chai
xiang
tiao
piao
piao
xia
A.ji
B. zhai
JTn
qi
guan
lu
A. jin
B. jin
dao
xi
ym
hub
a. zhen

458 Lexicon
113:9
113:9
113:9
113:9
113:9
113:9
113:10
113:10
113:11
113:12
113:12
113:12
113:12
113:12
113:12
113:13
113:14
113:14
113:17
113:17
114:4
114:4
114:4
114:6
114:6
114:8
115:0
115:2
115:2
115:2
115:3
115:3
115:4
115:4
115:4
115:4
115:4
115:4
115:4
115:4
115:5
115:5
115:5
115:5
115:5
115:5
b. zheng 115:5
fu 115:5
tf 115:5
yT 115:5
mei 115:5
di 115:6
ydng 115:6
ma 115:6
yu 115:7
XT 115:7
A.jT 115:7
B.ji 115:7
A. shan 115:7
B. ch£n 115:7
tan 115:7
IT 115:7
nT 115:7
dSo 115:7
rang 115:7
yue 115:7
yu 115:8
A. yu 115:8
B. yu 115:8
A. chi 115:8
B.lf 115:8
qm 115:8
he 115:8
tu 115:8
xiii 115:8
ST 115:8
xian 115:9
bTng 115:9
qiu 115:9
chong 115:9
hao 115:9
ke 115:10
miao 115:10
a. jing 115:10
b. geng 115:10
bT 115:10
a. mi 115:10
b. bi 115:10
zu 115:10
pT 115:10
mo 115:11
qm 115:11
yang 115:11
zhi 115:11
shu 115:11
ju 115:11
zT 115:11
a.jia 115:12
b.jie 115:12
yi 115:13
XT 115:13
lang 115:13
shul 115:13
g5n 115:13
a. jing 115:14
b. geng 115:14
tf 115:14
cheng 115:14
tu 115:17
a. shao 115:17
b. shao 116:0
c. sh&o 116:0
lu 116:2
ren 116:2
bai 116:3
zhi 116:3
zhi 116:3
kun 116:3
ke 116:3
A. bTng 116:3
B. lln 116:4
chou 116:4
A. zh6ng 116:4
B. zhong 116:4
A. cheng 116:4
Ba. chen 116:5
Bb.cheng 116:5
ji 116:5
zh£n 116:5
zhi 116:5
dao 116:5
jia 116:5
A.jT 116:6
B. qT 116:6
gSo 116:6
gu 116:7
ji 116:7
kang 116:7
mu
men
su
ji
yTng
sui
zhud
sui
n6ng
se
a. hul
b. wei
ji
tui
w6n
huo
A. r£ng
B.rang
a. xue
b. xue
a. jiu
b.jiu
a. XT
b. xi
a. qiong
b. qiong
A. kong
B. kong
JTng
A.chuan
B. chuan
zhun
tu
a. zhai
b. ze
yao
biSn
y5o
wa
jiao
zhi
yao
tiao
jiao
chuang
a. ji6ng

Index 459
116:7
116:8
116:8
116:8
116:8
116:9
116:9
116:9
116:9
116:10
116:10
116:10
116:10
116:11
116:11
116:12
116:13
116:13
116:15
116:16
116:17
117:0
117:4
117:5
117:5
117:6
117:6
117:7
117:7
117:7
117:8
117:9
117:9
117:15
118:0
118:2
118:3
118:3
118:4
118:4
118:4
118:4
118:4
118:4
118:5
118:5
b. jun 118:5
dan 118:5
ku 118:5
kg 118:5
SU 118:5
yin 118:5
wo 118:5
wa 118:5
yu 118:5
qiong 118:5
yao 118:5
tian 118:5
yu 118:5
ju 118:6
kuT 118:6
kuan 118:6
cuan 118:6
qiao 118:6
dou 118:6
zao 118:6
qie 118:6
H 118:6
hong 118:6
zhan 118:6
bing 118:6
jing 118:6
zhang 118:6
jiin 118:6
tong 118:6
s6ng 118:6
jing 118:7
jie 118:7
duan 118:7
iine 118:7
zhu
zhu
yu
gan
ba
ji
zhao
hu
xiao
pi
sheng
df
118:5
118:5
118:5
118:5
118:5
118:5
118:5
118:5
118:5
118:5
118:5
118:5
118:5
118:6
118:6
118:6
118:6
118:6
118:6
118:6
118:6
118:6
118:6
118:6
118:6
118:6
118:6
118:6
118:6
118:6
118:7
118:7
118:7
118:7
118:7
118:7
118:7
118:7
118:7
118:7
118:7
118:7
118:7
118:7
118:8
118:8
chl 118:8
li 118:8
si 118:8
fu 118:8
zl 118:8
di 118:8
ling 118:8
ze 118:8
nu 118:8
g6u 118:8
jia 118:8
A. g6 118:8
B. gan 118:9
xian 118:9
b! 118:9
qiong 118:9
dSng 118:9
jiao 118:9
jm 118:9
quan 118:9
sun 118:9
fa 118:9
kuang 118:9
zhu 118:9
a. tong 118:9
b. t6ng 118:10
JT 118:10
a. da 118:10
b. da 118:10
ce 118:10
yun 118:10
lang 118:10
ju 118:10
guan 118:10
jian 118:10
a. tong 118:10
b. t6ng 118:10
suan 118:11
shi 118:11
zhu 118:11
shao 118:11
ting 118:11
ce 118:11
yan 118:11
ge 118:11
jian 118:11
zhBng
sha
b6
JT
suan
jun
fu
zha
kong
qian
chui
guan
ruo
jian
xiang
zhen
zhu
shuo
jie
huang
fan
zhuan
pian
qie
hou
a. zhu
b. zhu
gao
fei
gou
xiao
cuan
du
bi
chu
shai
chi
bi
df
peng
pai
mie
ze
cu
chou
guT

460 Lexicon
118:11
118:11
118:12
118:12
118:12
118:12
118:12
118:12
118:12
118:12
118:12
118:12
118:12
118:13
118:13
118:13
118:13
118:13
118:13
118:13
118:13
118:14
118:14
118:14
118:14
118:16
118:16
118:16
118:16
118:16
118:17
118:17
118:17
118:17
118:17
118:19
118:19
118:19
118:19
118:20
117:13
119:0
119:3
119:4
119:5
119:5
16u
lu
bo
dang
dan
dian
jian
kul
deng
huang
sun
zan
xiao
g&n
y£n
A.b6
B. bo
qian
Man
bu
zhou
Ian
fi
chou
ji
lu
tu6
lai
A. long
B. 16ng
qian
yue
A. qii
B.ju
ju
bian
If
shai
luo
ying
wai
ml
nyu
fen
B
ju
119:5
119:5
119:5
119:5
119:6
119:6
119:6
119:6
119:6
119:6
119:7
119:7
119:7
119:7
119:7
119:8
119:8
119:8
119:8
119:8
119:8
119:8
119:9
119:9
119:9
119:9
119:9
119:10
119:10
119:10
119:11
119:11
119:11
119:11
119:11
119:11
119:12
119:14
119:15
119:16
119:16
119:19
120:1
120:2
120:2
120:3
pb 120:3
cu 120:3
A. nian 120:3
B. zhan 120:3
su 120:3
zT 120:3
yue 120:3
a. zhou 120:3
b. zhu 120:3
lin 120:4
Hang 120:4
Hang 120:4
can 120:4
a. jlng 120:4
b. geng 120:4
cui 120:4
bai 120:4
zhang 120:4
lih 120:4
a. zong 120:4
b. zhong 120:4
JTng 120:4
san 120:4
a. r6u 120:4
b. niii 120:4
xu 120:4
hu 120:4
gao 120:4
tang 120:4
qiii 120:4
cao 120:4
mi 120:4
san 120:4
fen 120:4
zao 120:5
kang 120:5
Hang 120:5
nuo 120:5
li 120:5
nie 120:5
di 120:5
tiao 120:5
xi 120:5
A. jiu 120:5
B.jiu 120:5
a. ji 120:5
b.jT
zhou
xun
yue
h6ng
yu
h6
w^n
ren
wen
wen
na
niii
ji
shu
A. chun
B. zhun
A. pi
B.pi
zhen
sha
hong
zhT
ji
fen
yun
A. ren
B. ren
dan
A.jm
B.jin
sii
fang
sud
zhi
zT
chou
A. lei
B.lei
Clei
xi
fu
xie
shen
zhu
shao

Index 461
120:5
120:5
120:5
120:5
120:5
120:5
120:5
120:5
120:5
120:5
120:5
120:5
120:6
120:6
120:6
120:6
120:6
120:6
120:6
120:6
120:6
120:6
120:6
120:6
120:6
120:6
120:6
120:6
120:6
120:6
120:6
120:6
120:6
120:6
120:6
120:6
120:6
120:6
120:7
120:7
120:7
120:7
120:7
120:7
120:7
120:7
gan 120:7
fu 120:7
tUO 120:7
zhen 120:7
dM 120:7
chu 120:7
zhOng 120:7
xi£n 120:7
zu 120:8
ji6ng 120:8
ban 120:8
qu 120:8
xie 120:8
a. jie 120:8
b. jie 120:8
gua 120:8
ju6 120:8
kuang 120:8
ci 120:8
geng 120:8
A. jie 120:8
B. xie 120:8
ku 120:8
jiao 120:8
a. luo 120:8
b. lao 120:8
xuan 120:8
beng 120:8
a. jT 120:8
b. gei 120:8
r6ng 120:8
ym 120:8
lei 120:8
xu 120:8
die 120:8
t6ng 120:8
ST 120:8
Jiang 120:8
tao 120:8
juan 120:8
chT 120:9
wen 120:9
qiu 120:9
xiao 120:9
A. qin 120:9
B. xian 120:9
geng 120:9
tf 120:9
xi 120:9
fu 120:9
SUT 120:9
A. jing 120:9
B. jing 120:9
yan 120:9
z6ng 120:9
a. lyu 120:9
b. lu 120:9
ch6u 120:9
quan 120:9
qf 120:9
qian 120:9
xian 120:9
shou 120:9
wei 120:9
A. qT 120:10
B. qing 120:10
tao 120:10
w5n 120:10
gang 120:10
wang 120:10
zhui 120:10
cai 120:10
A. lun 120:10
B. guan 120:10
q! 120:10
zhan 120:10
chuo 120:10
ling 120:10
mian 120:10
zou 120:10
xi 120:10
zT 120:10
jTn 120:10
fei 120:10
rui 120:11
yu 120:11
xu 120:11
xiang 120:11
jian 120:11
xian 120:11
mian 120:11
a. jT 120:11
b. qi
c. qT
di
mlh
A. yudn
B. yuan
ST
qiu
bian
huan
geng
mian
wei
lian
A. pian
B. bian
tf
zhi
ymg
Jin
yi
zhui
zhou
jian
quan
A. yun
B. yun
C. wen
CUT
A. fu
B. fo
zhen
gao
ru
hu
teng
A. xuan
B. xian
bi
A. feng
B. feng
If
a. suo
b. su
A.zong
B.zong

462 Lexicon
120:11
120:11
120:11
120:11
120:11
120:11
120:11
120:11
120:11
120:11
120:11
120:11
120:11
120:11
120:11
120:11
120:11
120:11
120:11
120:11
120:11
120:11
120:11
120:12
120:12
120:12
120:12
120:12
120:12
120:12
120:12
120:12
120:12
120:12
120:12
120:12
120:12
120:12
120:12
120:12
120:12
120:13
120:13
120:13
120:13
120:13
1& 120:13
qian 120:13
man 120:13
zhi 120:13
lyu 120:13
piao 120:13
z6ng 120:14
JT 120:14
A. fan 120:14
B. pan 120:14
C. po 120:14
beng 120:14
yT 120:14
sao 120:14
A. mou 120:15
Ba. miu 120:15
Bb. miao 120:15
C. mu 120:15
A. yao 120:15
B. you 120:15
C. zhou 120:15
a. qiang 120:15
b. Jiang 120:16
sui 120:17
qiao 120:17
zeng 120:17
A. zhT 120:17
B. zhi 120:19
shan 120:19
san 120:19
A.ju 120:19
B. yu 120:21
A. fan 120:21
B. fan 121:0
liao 121:4
A. rao 121:8
B. rao 121:11
ruT 121:11
xiu 121:13
hui 121:14
hua 121:15
she"ng 121:18
hui 122:0
A. ji 122:3
B. xi 122:3
jian 122:4
Jiang 122:5
A. zao 122:5
B. sao 122:5
A. zhuo 122:5
B.jiSo 122:5
yi 122:7
bian 122:7
A. ru 122:8
B. xu 122:8
ji 122:8
bin 122:8
qian 122:9
xun 122:9
zuSn 122:9
mo 122:9
lei 122:10
xie 122:10
kuang 122:10
you 122:10
xu 122:11
lei 122:11
chan 122:11
hi 122:12
ylng 122:12
cai 122:12
xiang 122:12
xian 122:14
zu&n 122:14
shT 122:17
A. du 122:19
B. dao 123:0
a. Ian 123:1
b.Ian 123:2
fdu 123:3
que 123:3
ping 123:4
qing 123:4
xia 123:4
weng 123:5
yTng 123:5
lei 123:5
guan 123:7
wSng 123:7
wang 123:7
han 123:9
fu 123:9
gQ
fu
a. ju
b.jie
gu
juan
fu
zhao
zui
yu
zhi
fa
a. shu
b. shu
si
ma
Uu
A. pi
B. ba
K
wei
bi
ji
zeng
A. t6ng
B.chong
luo
F
JT
JT
yang
ml
qiang
m6i
y6u
gao
y^ng
gu
zhu
dT
xiu
qun
xian
yiyu
jie

Index 463
123:11
123:13
123:13
123:13
123:13
123:15
124:0
124:3
124:4
124:4
124:4
124:4
124:5
124:5
124:5
124:5
124:5
124:5
124:6
124:6
124:7
124:8
124:8
124:8
124:8
124:8
124:8
124:9
124:9
124:9
124:9
124:9
124:9
124:10
124:10
124:10
124:11
124:12
124:12
124:12
124:12
124:13
124:13
124:14
124:14
125:0
XT 125:0
fen 125:4
Shan 125:4
lei 125:4
geng 125:5
chan 125:6
yu 126:0
yi 126:3
chong 126:3
weng 126:3
fen 126:3
chi 127:0
yi 127:3
yi 127:4
ling 127:4
liu 127:4
zhi 127:4
xi 127:5
xiang 127:7
xi 127:8
xiao 127:9
A. di 127:10
Ba. zhai 127:15
Bb. zhe 128:0
cui 128:3
fei 128:4
sha 128:4
zhu 128:4
jian 128:5
chi 128:5
plan 128:5
wan 128:6
huT 128:6
he 128:7
he 128:7
han 128:7
yi 128:8
qiao 128:8
ao 128:8
fan 128:8
yi 128:11
hui 128:11
xuan 128:11
dao 128:11
yao 128:11
lao 128:12
kao 128:12
mao 128:12
qi 128:16
zh£ 128:16
gou 128:16
die 129:0
er 129:4
ruan 129:7
er 129:7
nai 129:7
duan 129:8
lei 130:0
zT 130:0
a. geng 130:2
b. JTng 130:2
hao 130:2
yun 130:2
si 130:3
chu 130:3
ji 130:3
6u 130:3
nou 130:3
you 130:3
er 130:3
ye 130:4
dan 130:4
dan 130:4
geng 130:4
dan 130:4
ling 130:4
liao 130:4
er 130:4
guo 130:4
sheng 130:4
a. pin 130:4
b. ping 130:4
ju 130:4
guo 130:4
A. wen 130:4
B. wen 130:4
lian 130:5
Cong 130:5
ao 130:5
sheng 130:5
s6ng 130:5
kui 130:5
nie
zhi
A. ting
B. ting
long
yu
si
yi
su
si
zhao
a. rou
b. ru
a. lei
b.le
ji
ken
huang
xiao
zhou
A.du
B. du
rong
gan
gfi
zhT
fei
pang
jian
A. fang
B. fang
zhun
y6u
ken
gong
yu
a. yao
b. xiao
xi
fei
wei
zhou
ba
qu
A.bei
B. bei

464 Lexicon
130:5
130:5
130:5
130:5
130:5
130:5
130:5
130:5
130:5
130:5
130:5
130:5
130:5
130:5
130:5
130:6
130:6
130:6
130:6
130:6
130:6
130:6
130:6
130:6
130:6
130:6
130:6
130:6
130:6
130:6
130:6
130:6
130:6
130:6
130:6
130:6
130:7
130:7
130:7
130:7
130:7
130:7
130:7
130:7
130:7
130:7
tai 130:7
zT 130:7
zhT 130:7
n 130:7
A. p£n 130:8
B. pan 130:8
zud 130:8
pel 130:8
jia 130:8
zhT 130:8
bao 130:8
qu 130:8
hu 130:8
yln 130:8
xu 130:8
yan 130:8
pSng 130:8
kua 130:8
guang 130:8
gal 130:8
A. ge 130:9
B. ge 130:9
xiong 130:9
xi5ng 130:9
er 130:9
neng 130:9
zi 130:9
zhT 130:9
cui 130:9
mei 130:9
xi6 130:9
cui 130:9
a. mai 130:9
b. mo 130:9
a.JT 130:9
b. ji 130:9
wan 130:10
jing 130:10
cud 130:10
ting 130:10
mei 130:10
chun 130:10
shen 130:10
zuT 130:10
xiu 130:10
tuo 130:10
pao 130:10
A. fu 130:11
B. pu 130:11
dou 130:11
zhang 130:11
pi 130:11
plan 130:11
tian 130:11
xT 130:11
a. yi 130:12
b. ye 130:12
yan 130:12
ren 130:12
shen 130:12
fu 130:12
fu 130:13
ju 130:13
fei 130:13
qiang 130:13
wan 130:13
wo 130:13
cou 130:13
6u 130:13
xTng 130:13
nao 130:13
nan 130:13
zhdng 130:14
sai 130:14
tu 130:14
yao 130:15
jian 130:15
a.jiao 130:16
b.jue 130:17
yu 130:18
chang 130:18
fu 130:19
tuT 130:19
pang 131:0
lyu 131:0
zhui 131:2
ge 131:8
yi 131:11
bo 131:11
liao 132:0
pi 132:4
A. gao 132:4
B.gac
guo
fu
A. m6
B. m6
XT
lyu
jiao
lyu
ni
liao
f^n
shan
A. hu
B. wii
yTng
dan
kuai
n6ng
tun
a. bi
b. bei
chu
yilian
sao
qf
bin
xun
biao
la
lu
lud
qu
zang
luan
ni
ch6n
yf
w6
zang
A. 1m
B. lin
zi
nie
chou

Index 465
132:10
133:0
133:4
133:8
133:10
134:0
134:2
134:3
134:4
134:4
134:5
134:6
134:7
134:7
134:7
134:7
134:9
134:9
134:10
134:12
135:0
135:2
135:2
135:4
135:6
135:8
136:0
136:6
136:7
136:8
137:0
137:2
137:4
137:4
137:4
137:4
137:4
137:4
137:5
137:5
137:5
137:5
137:5
137:5
137:5
137:7
nie 137:10
zhl 137:10
zhi 137:13
t£ 137:14
zhen 137:16
jiu 138:0
yu 138:1
cha 138:11
yao 139:0
yu 139:0
chong 139:0
xi 139:5
jiu 140:2
A. yu 140:2
B. yu 140:2
C. yu 140:2
A. xTng 140:2
B. xing 140:3
ju 140:3
jiu 140:3
she 140:3
A. she 140:3
B. sh£ 140:3
shi 140:3
shu 140:3
shi 140:3
chuan 140:3
shun 140:3
xia 140:3
wu 140:4
zhou 140:4
dao 140:4
hang 140:4
ftng 140:4
A. ban 140:4
B. ban 140:4
C. pan 140:4
D. bo 140:4
ling 140:4
zhu 140:4
du6 140:4
b6 140:4
xian 140:4
g£ 140:4
chuan 140:4
ting 140:4
a. sao 140:4
b. sou 140:4
yT 140:4
jian 140:4
lu 140:4
gen 140:4
Hang 140:4
jian 140:4
a. se 140:4
b. shai 140:4
c. she 140:4
fu 140:4
A. qiu 140:4
B. jiao 140:4
A. ai 140:4
B. yi 140:5
reng 140:5
peng 140:5
wan 140:5
qian 140:5
yu 140:5
a. shao 140:5
b. shuo 140:5
a. qiong 140:5
b. qiong 140:5
A. hii 140:5
B. xia 140:5
ql 140:5
mang 140:5
A. pi 140:5
B. bi 140:5
fu 140:5
tun 140:5
zhT 140:5
shan 140:5
qian 140:5
f6u 140:5
fou 140:5
a. jie 140:5
b. gai 140:5
A. xu 140:5
B. zhu 140:5
qm 140:5
a. yan 140:5
b. yuan 140:5
fen 140:5
ba
rui
ji
hua
fang
wu
zhT
yun
qin
chu
A. mdo
B. mao
y*
A.fei
B. fu
a. yu^n
b. yuan
rSn
ling
tffl
tiao
miao
li
a. ke
b. he
mu
bao
g6u
yT
yT
A. rub
B.re
ku
zhu
A.shan
B. shan
yrng
A. cha
B.ju
C. qu
D.ju
nie
ping
fu
gu
fu

466 Lexicon
140:5
140:5
140:5
140:5
140:5
140:5
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:6
140:7
140:7
140:7
140:7
mao 140:7
fan 140:7
qie 140:7
mao 140:7
mao 140:7
ba 140:7
mTng 140:7
ming 140:7
fi 140:7
rong 140:7
qian 140:7
A. chai 140:7
B. zhl 140:7
lie 140:7
Ci 140:7
mang 140:7
jiao 140:7
fu 140:7
A. zT 140:7
B. ci 140:7
hui 140:7
yTn 140:7
cha 140:7
fa 140:8
A. rong 140:8
B. r6ng 140:8
A. ru 140:8
B. ru 140:8
C. ru 140:8
xun 140:8
huan 140:8
quan 140:8
jmg 140:8
xing 140:8
chuan 140:8
cao 140:8
qia"o 140:8
ren 140:8
jian 140:8
A. yi 140:8
B. ti 140:8
huang 140:8
A. he 140:8
B. he 140:8
df 140:8
A. cha 140:8
B. tu 140:8
SUT 140:8
li 140:8
zhuang 140:8
A. suo 140:8
B. sha 140:8
ju 140:8
A. mei 140:8
B. mei 140:8
JTng 140:8
shen 140:8
ting 140:8
cuo 140:8
A. guan 140:8
B. wan 140:8
ydu 140:8
jia 140:8
xian 140:8
A. fu 140:8
B. piao 140:8
e 140:8
A. mo 140:8
B. mu 140:8
mang 140:9
ci 140:9
A. w5n 140:9
B. yu 140:9
jlng 140:9
di 140:9
jian 140:9
zou 140:9
ju 140:9
jun 140:9
zT 140:9
fu 140:9
chang 140:9
song 140:9
cai 140:9
A. tu 140:9
B. tu 140:9
A. ping 140:9
B. peng 140:9
ban 140:9
pu 140:9
jTn 140:9
A. hua 140:9
B. hua
gu
Kng
A.fBi
B. f6i
an
beng
tan
shu
A. qi
B.JT
cui
tab
chdng
huan
lai
qT
meng
ping
wei
dan
sha
huan
qiu
wan
ju
xuan
bian
e
a. luo
b.lao
la
bao
A. ye
B. she
A.feng
B. feng
A. zhu
B.zhuo
Ca. zhuo
Cb. zhao
a. ren
b. shen
a. ge
b.g6
pii

Index 467
d6ng 140:10
wSi 140:10
pa 140:10
hu 140:11
zang 140:11
jia 140:11
a. yao 140:11
b. yue 140:11
wei 140:11
kui 140:11
ting 140:11
him 140:11
xT 140:11
shT 140:11
qi 140:11
yao 140:11
sou 140:11
A. shi 140:11
B. shi 140:11
meng 140:11
suan 140:11
li 140:11
ju 140:11
bang 140:11
qian 140:11
a. kuai 140:11
b. kuai 140:11
pu 140:11
pu 140:11
zheng 140:11
jian 140:11
ji 140:11
rub 140:11
cang 140:11
hao 140:11
sun 140:11
zhen 140:11
xu 140:11
xi 140:11
rong 140:11
w6ng 140:11
A. gai 140:11
B. h6 140:12
C. g€ 140:12
ShT 140:12
Iu6 140:12
TU 140:12
suo 140:12
bei 140:12
diao 140:12
tiao 140:12
long 140:12
zhu 140:12
peng 140:12
lian 140:12
xT 140:12
chun 140:12
tuT 140:12
yi 140:12
A.liao 140:12
B. lu 140:12
a. su 140:12
b. xu 140:12
A. bu 140:12
B. p6u 140:12
ling 140:12
su 140:13
mie 140:13
Aa. wan 140:13
Ab. man 140:13
B. man 140:13
di 140:13
zhe 140:13
A. wei 140:13
B. yu 140:13
lou 140:13
A.cu 140:13
B.cou 140:13
cai 140:13
A. jiang 140:13
B.jiang 140:13
cong 140:13
niao 140:13
a. yan 140:13
b. nian 140:13
a. su 140:13
b. shu 140:13
yin 140:13
bi 140:13
If 140:13
wei 140:13
A. fan 140:14
B. fan
chan
jiao
ruT
qiao
y6u
qu
r^o
hui
A. jue
B. zui
zui
fen
kui
shun
rui
jue"
dang
wu
xiao
lei
A. wen
B. yun
yu
a. bao
b. bo
hao
ai
wei
hui
ji
xiang
wan
yi
Jiang
qiang
fl
xue
A.bo
B.bi
xie
jian
kao
hong
xln
sa
140:9
140:9
140:9
140:9
140:9
140:9
140:9
140:9
140:9
140:9
140:9
140:9
140:9
140:9
140:9
140:9
140:10
140:10
140:10
140:10
140:10
140:10
140:10
140:10
140:10
140:10
140:10
140:10
140:10
140:10
140:10
140:10
140:10
140:10
140:10
140:10
140:10
140:10
140:10
140:10
140:10
140:10
140:10
140:10
140:10
140:10

468 Lexicon
140:14
140:14
140:14
140:14
140:14
140:14
140:14
140:14
140:14
140:14
140:14
140:14
140:14
140:14
140:14
140:14
140:14
140:15
140:15
140:15
140:15
140:15
140:15
140:15
140:15
140:15
140:15
140:15
140:15
140:15
140:15
140:16
140:16
140:16
140:16
140:16
140:16
140:16
140:16
140:16
140:16
140:16
140:16
140:16
140:16
140:16
xian 142:4
ju 142:4
ling 142:4
qu 142:4
f&i 142:4
mf 142:5
Idn 142:5
zhan 142:5
mf 142:5
luo 142:5
lei 142:5
xiao 142:5
hu 142:5
nyufc 142:5
xiao 142:5
qian 142:5
A. chu 142:5
B. chu 142:5
hu 142:5
fu 142:6
A. xu 142:6
Ba. xu 142:6
Bb. qu 142:6
a. \u 142:6
b. Iu6 142:6
yu 142:6
A. hao 142:6
B. hao 142:7
ju 142:7
gu6 142:7
kuT 142:7
XI 142:7
A. hul 142:7
B. chong 142:7
qiu 142:7
h£i 142:7
A. h6ng 142:7
Ba. jiang 142:7
Bb. gang 142:7
A. huT 142:7
B. hui 142:7
meng 142:7
wen 142:7
rui 142:7
bang 142:7
yin 142:7
gOng
z&o
fu
chT
ddu
qiu
you
Chi-
lian
fu
r£n
zha
xi&i
gu
A. ju
B. qu
A. sh<S
B. yi
h'ng
hui
wa
lie
zhu
jiao
&
qiong
zhi
A. xiao
B. shao
y6ng
jia
A. tui
B. shui
e
shu
feng
shen
xi5n
zhe
wu
fu
If
l&ig
chu
yuan
dan
xun 140:17
dul 140:17
wei 140:17
mal 140:17
piSo 140:17
t& 140:17
ji 140:17
nT 140:19
gSo 140:19
xu 140:19
A.jie 140:21
B.jf 140:21
Ian 141:2
jin 141:3
A. cdng 141:4
B. zang 141:4
miao 141:5
6u 141:5
lyu 141:5
yi 141:5
xu 141:6
If 141:6
yi 141:6
lei 141:6
teng 141:6
a. yao 141:7
b. yue 141:7
A. fan 141:7
B. fan 141:8
sdu 141:9
qiong 141:11
li 141:12
M 142:0
Bn 142:0
zao 142:2
lai 142:3
hu6 142:3
tuo 142:3
wu 142:3
qi 142:3
heng 142:3
\u 142:3
SU 142:4
yun 142:4
pin 142:4
long 142:4

Index 469
142:7
142:7
142:8
142:8
142:8
142:8
142:8
142:8
142:8
142:8
142:8
142:8
142:8
142:8
142:8
142:8
142:8
142:8
142:8
142:8
142:8
142:8
142:8
142:8
142:9
142:9
142:9
142:9
142:9
142:9
142:9
142:9
142:9
142:9
142:9
142:9
142:9
142:9
142:9
142:9
142:9
142:9
142:9
142:9
142:9
142:9
y£n 142:9
ting 142:9
zhT 142:9
A. fei 142:9
B. fei 142:10
mi 142:10
a. zha 142:10
b. cha 142:10
qiang 142:10
XT 142:10
tiao 142:10
yu 142:10
pi 142:10
yi 142:10
quan 142:11
ni 142:11
A. qmg 142:11
B. JTng 142:11
lei 142:11
gu6 142:11
wan 142:11
A. dong 142:11
B. dong 142:11
di 142:11
ke 142:11
ji 142:11
A. he 142:11
B. xie 142:11
shi 142:11
huang 142:11
A. yan 142:11
B. yan 142:11
bian 142:11
yuan 142:11
wei 142:11
fu 142:12
ruan 142:12
you 142:12
qiu 142:12
A. mou 142:12
B. mao 142:12
a. xia 142:12
b. ha 142:12
shT 142:12
fu 142:13
meng 142:13
hu
die
a. wo
b. gua
lang
ST
rong
qih
tang
yT
ming
ymg
A. teng
B. te
a. zhe
b. shi
cao
chl
di
ao
tang
piao
Iu6
lou
zhong
yTn
Jiang
a. shuai
b. shuo
a. zhe
b. zhi
ma
guo
mao
XT
mSng
peng
pa^i
xl
JT
hui
chan
rao
chong
ch&ng
xie
142:13
142:13
142:13
142:13
142:13
142:13
142:13
142:13
142:13
142:13
142:13
142:14
142:14
142:14
142:14
142:14
142:14
142:14
142:15
142:15
142:15
142:15
142:15
142:15
142:16
142:16
142:16
142:17
142:18
142:18
142:18
142:18
142:18
142:19
143:0
143:0
143:3
143:4
143:4
143:5
143:6
144:0
144:0
144:0
144:0
144:3
shan
yT
chdn
A.luo
B. Iu6
feng
ying
chai
lian
zhu
xie
qi
a. bin
b. pin
mSng
A. ru
B.ru5n
hu6
la
A. IT
B. If
C. luo
chun
li
nie
xiao
long
juan
a. XT
b. xi
can
quan
du
man
a. xi£
b. xue
huang
a. nyu
b. niu
xin
zhong
A. xmg
B. xing
C. hang
D. hang
yan

470 Lexicon
kan 145:6
xuan 145:7
shu 145:7
jie 145:7
ya" 145:7
chong 145:7
wei 145:7
heng 145:7
qu 145:7
A. yT 145:7
B. yi 145:7
biao 145:7
shan 145:7
gun 145:7
A. shuai 145:7
B. CUT 145:8
na 145:8
ni 145:8
A. zhong 145:8
B. zhong 145:8
ren 145:8
qin 145:8
jTn 145:8
jun 145:8
yuan 145:8
mei 145:8
jia 145:8
dai 145:8
pao 145:9
tan 145:9
xiu 145:9
zhen 145:9
zhi 145:9
ran 145:9
fan 145:9
a. mao 145:9
b. mou 145:9
qu 145:9
A. bei 145:9
B. bei 145:10
C. pT 145:10
ku 145:10
A. jie 145:10
B.jia 145:10
jie 145:10
cai 145:10
lie 145:10
niao 145:11
shu 145:11
jia 145:11
cheng 145:11
IT 145:11
IT 145:11
pou 145:11
yl 145:11
yu 145:11
qiu 145:11
qun 145:11
bfl 145:12
zhu^ng 145:12
sha 145:12
chan 145:13
A. pi 145:13
B. bi 145:13
chou 145:13
chang 145:13
pei 145:13
Iu6 145:13
gu6 145:13
du 145:13
A. XT 145:13
B. ti 145:13
zhi 145:13
ju 145:14
fu 145:14
bian 145:15
di<£ 145:15
you 145:15
xiu 145:15
he 145:16
bao 145:16
bao 145:18
tuan 145:19
huT 145:19
chu 146:0
ru 146:3
nai 146:3
jidng 146:5
tun 146:6
chT 146:12
niao 146:12
qian 146:12
ku
If
A. xi
B. die
Czh6
lyu
xie
wei
a. qi&ng
b. ji&ng
bao
xiang
ji
dan
bo
So
A.ze
B. duo
gui
sui
n6ng
chan
bi
JTn
dang
A.shu
B. du
Ian
ru
wa
shi
\i6
bo
chen
xf
zhe
jian
pan
XT
A. yao
B. yao
feng
tan
A.fu
B. fu
C. fu
144:3
144:5
144:5
144:6
144:7
144:9
144:10
144:10
144:18
145:0
145:0
145:3
145:3
145:4
145:4
145:4
145:4
145:4
145:4
145:4
145:4
145:4
145:4
145:4
145:4
145:4
145:5
145:5
145:5
145:5
145:5
145:5
145:5
145:5
145:5
145:5
145:5
145:5
145:5
145:5
145:5
145:6
145:6
145:6
145:6
145:6

Index
146:13
147:0
147:0
147:4
147:4
147:5
147:5
147:5
147:6
147:7
147:8
147:9
147:9
147:9
147:9
147:10
147:10
147:11
147:11
147:12
147:13
147:13
147:14
147:15
147:18
147:18
148:0
148:0
148:2
148:4
148:5
148:5
148:5
148:5
148:6
148:6
148:6
148:6
148:6
148:6
148:7
148:7
148:8
148:9
148:10
148:11
he 148:12
A.jian 148:13
B. xian 148:15
guT 148:18
mi 149:0
A. shi 149:2
B. shi 149:2
chan 149:2
tiao 149:2
xi 149:3
xi 149:3
yu 149:3
du 149:3
A. qm 149:3
B. qing 149:3
ji 149:3
gou 149:3
qii 149:3
Jin 149:3
luo 149:3
A. jue 149:3
B. jiao 149:3
Ian 149:4
df 149:4
A. guan 149:4
B. guan 149:4
a. jiSo 149:4
b. jue 149:4
qiu 149:4
jue 149:4
gu 149:4
A. ZT 149:4
B. zul 149:4
dT 149:5
ge 149:5
A. jie 149:5
B. jie 149:5
C. xie 149:5
D. xie 149:5
gong 149:5
qiu 149:5
su 149:5
qi 149:5
bi 149:5
hu 149:5
shang 149:5
zhi 149:5
chu 149:5
jue 149:5
XT 149:5
yan 149:5
ding 149:5
fu 149:5
hong 149:5
ji 149:5
xun 149:5
h6ng 149:5
tio 149:5
xu 149:6
jie 149:6
A. dan 149:6
B. yi 149:6
ren 149:6
xun 149:6
shan 149:6
qi 149:6
tuo 149:6
ji 149:6
e 149:6
ya 149:6
song 149:6
jue 149:6
ne 149:6
you 149:6
xiong 149:6
^ng 149:6
chao 149:6
she 149:6
xu 149:7
su 149:7
he 149:7
zhen 149:7
zhu 149:7
zheng 149:7
A. zT 149:7
B. zT 149:7
A. zhan 149:7
B. che 149:7
gu 149:7
dT 149:7
li 149:7
yi 149:7
ju
zha
A.dai
B. yi
zhao
ping
bi
xiong
qu
zu
d
y6ng
xu
xun
yi
shi
shT
cha
gou
guT
quan
jie
hua
gai
xiang
shen
zhan
huT
tiEo
ISi
zhu
kua
ji
zhi
ren
a. kuang
b. kuang
XT
shi
dan
you
keng
qiao
A. yu
B. yu
cheng
471

472 Lexicon
149:7
149:7
149:7
149:7
149:7
149:7
149:7
149:7
149:7
149:7
149:8
149:8
149:8
149:8
149:8
149:8
149:8
149:8
149:8
149:8
149:8
149:8
149:8
149:8
149:8
149:8
149:8
149:8
149:8
149:8
149:8
149:8
149:8
149:8
149:8
149:8
149:8
149:8
149:9
149:9
149:9
149:9
149:9
149:9
149:9
149:9
jie 149:9
a. wu 149:9
b. wu 149:9
wu 149:9
gao 149:9
song 149:9
hui 149:9
A. shuo 149:9
B. shui 149:9
C. yue 149:9
a. shui 149:9
b. shei 149:9
ke 149:9
sui 149:9
fei 149:9
ta 149:9
yi 149:9
ym 149:9
A. tiao 149:9
B. diao 149:9
C. zhou 149:10
chan 149:10
A. zhun 149:10
B. zhun 149:10
tan 149:10
wSi 149:10
A. qlng 149:10
B. qmg 149:10
C. qing 149:10
zheng 149:10
zhuo 149:10
liang 149:10
jian 149:10
chu 149:10
A. lun 149:10
B. lun 149:10
sh&n 149:10
yu 149:11
die" 149:11
A. plan 149:11
B. plan 149:11
shi 149:11
xuan 149:11
shi 149:11
him 149:11
e 149:11
di 149:11
xie 149:11
jian 149:11
yu 149:12
ZT 149:12
XT 149:12
hui 149:12
an 149:12
xidn 149:12
nan 149:12
chen 149:12
a. feng 149:12
b. feng 149:12
zhu 149:12
yan 149:12
xuan 149:12
nuo 149:12
m6u 149:13
ye 149:13
wei 149:13
teng 149:13
jian 149:13
huo 149:14
ge 149:14
a. mi 149:14
b. mi 149:14
C. mei 149:14
xiao 149:14
mi 149:15
xue 149:15
su 149:16
bang 149:16
qian 149:16
Jiang 149:16
xie 149:17
tao 149:17
yao 149:17
qing 149:17
mo 149:18
zhe 149:18
a. miu 149:19
b. niii 149:20
ou 149:20
A. ao 149:22
B. ao 150:0
jin 150:0
hu
A. mdn
B. man
hud
XT
dui
zheng
nao
6
jue
JT
zen
A. shi
B. zhi
qido
tan
pu
z^o
j'ng
0
yiyi
qian
hu
zhou
hao
A. yu
B. yu
A.du
B. dou
bian
yan
chou
wei
chan
rang
Ian
chen
zhe"
huan
zan
dSng
yan
du
A.gfl
B. yu

Index 473
150:0
150:10
150:10
150:10
150:10
151:0
151:3
151:3
151:4
151:4
151:6
151:8
151:8
151:11
151:21
152:0
152:3
152:4
152:4
152:5
152:6
152:6
152:6
152:7
152:7
152:9
152:9
152:9
152:10
152:11
152:13
153:0
153:3
153:3
153:3
153:5
153:6
153:6
153:6
153:6
153:6
153:6
153:6
153:6
153:7
153:7
C. lii
a. XT
b. qT
a. hu5
b. hu6
d6u
Jiang
qT
a. chT
b. shi
deng
wan
shu
feng
yan
shi
hul
tun
ba
xiang
huan
jian
ken
XT
hao
yu
zhu
jia
bTn
zong
fen
zhi
bao
chai
an
diao
xiu
A. huan
B. xuan
Aa.hao
Ab. h6
B. mo
C. ma
mo
mao
If
153:9
153:10
153:11
153:11
153:18
154:0
154:2
154:2
154:2
154:3
154:3
154:3
154:4
154:4
154:4
154:4
154:4
154:4
154:4
154:5
154:5
154:5
154:5
154:5
154:5
154:5
154:5
154:5
154:5
154:5
154:5
154:5
154:5
154:5
154:5
154:6
154:6
154:6
154:6
154:6
154:6
154:6
154:6
154:6
154:6
154:6
mao
Pf
mb
chu
huan
bei
a. zhen
b. zheng
fu
cai
gong
te
pin
hud
fan
tan
A. guan
B.wan
ze
zhu
shi
ZT
er
gui
bian
mai
dai
kuang
A. fei
B. fei
C. bi
tie
yi
mao
he
A. bi
B. fen
C. ben
lu
a. lin
b. ren
hui
gai
zi
A. gu
B.jia
154:6
154:6
154:6
154:7
154:7
154:7
154:7
154:7
154:8
154:8
154:8
154:8
154:8
154:8
154:8
154:8
154:8
154:8
154:8
154:8
154:8
154:9
154:9
154:9
154:9
154:10
154:10
154:10
154:10
154:10
154:11
154:11
154:11
154:12
154:12
154:13
154:13
154:14
154:14
154:14
154:15
154:15
154:17
154:17
155:0
155:4
Cjia
a. z6i
b. ze
zhen
she
bin
qiu
fu
zhou
lai
a. si
b.ci
sh&ng
geng
xian
mai
jian
c6ng
Aa. zhi
Ab. zhi
B. zhi
du
Jin
lai
feng
sheng
zhuan
fu
g6u
sai
ze
zhi
zhui
zeng
zan
shan
ymg
Jin
gan
zang
shu
yan
A. gan
B. gong
chi
she

474 Lexicon
m
zhu 157:10
kua 157:10
gui 157:10
qiong 157:10
kul 157:10
lu 157:11
A.jian 157:11
B. yan 157:11
zhi 157:11
A. tiao 157:11
B. tiao 157:11
ju 157:11
ji 157:11
cun 157:11
y6ng 157:11
ta 157:12
jian 157:12
wo 157:12
chud 157:12
A.ji 157:12
B.ji 157:12
ju 157:12
a. huai 157:12
b. hua 157:12
ju 157:13
chi 157:13
tT 157:13
bo 157:13
A. qT 157:13
B. jT 157:14
A. cu 157:14
B. di 157:14
yu 157:15
duo 157:15
zh6ng 157:15
A. di 157:15
B. zhi 157:15
ch£n 157:15
ju 157:15
plan 157:18
rou 157:18
tf 157:20
jian 158:0
dao 158:3
cuo 158:11
a. XT 159:0
b. xi
ta
qiang
dian
ji
bl
cu
A.dai
B. zhi
su
JT
zhi
A. zhi
B. di
zong
bi6
fan
a. dun
b. cun
cu
A. jue
B. gui
A. qiao
B. jue
zao
bi
zhu
A.chu
B.chuo
chou
JT
yue
lie
zhi
A.B
B. luo
zhi
chan
chu
nie
qu
jue
shen
gong
qu
A. che
nan 157:6
tdng 157:6
xi 157:6
cheng 157:6
he 157:6
cheng 157:6
zhe 157:6
xia 157:6
zou 157:6
jiu 157:6
fu 157:6
qT 157:7
chen 157:7
chao 157:7
yue 157:7
zhao 157:8
tang 157:8
cuT 157:8
A. qu 157:8
B. cu 157:8
C. c6u 157:8
qu 157:8
qi£o 157:8
zao 157:8
ti 157:8
zan 157:8
A. zu 157:8
B. ju 157:8
fu 157:8
zhi 157:8
A. qT 157:8
B. qi 157:8
ba 157:9
die 157:9
tuo 157:9
cT 157:9
pao 157:9
zhi 157:9
cheng 157:9
fu 157:9
A. b6 157:9
B. bi 157:9
jii 157:10
gen 157:10
JT 157:10
xian 157:10
155:5
155:6
155:6
155:7
155:7
155:9
155:9
155:9
156:0
156:2
156:2
156:3
156:5
156:5
156:5
156:7
156:8
156:8
156:8
156:8
156:8
156:10
156:12
156:13
156:14
156:19
157:0
157:0
157:4
157:4
157:4
157:4
157:5
157:5
157:5
157:5
157:5
157:5
157:5
157:5
157:5
157:5
157:5
157:6
157:6
157:6

Index 475
159:0
159:1
159:2
159:2
159:3
159:3
159:3
159:3
159:3
159:4
159:4
159:4
159:4
159:4
159:5
159:5
159:5
159:5
159:5
159:5
159:5
159:5
159:5
159:5
159:5
159:5
159:5
159:5
159:5
159:6
159:6
159:6
159:6
159:6
159:6
159:6
159:6
159:6
159:6
159:6
159:6
159:7
159:7
159:7
159:7
159:7
B. ju 159:8
ya 159:8
guT 159:8
jun 159:8
yue 159:8
dai 159:8
xuan 159:8
fan 159:8
ren 159:8
tun 159:8
e 159:8
na 159:8
qi 159:8
ruan 159:8
qu 159:8
ling 159:8
zhen 159:8
gu 159:8
e 159:9
ba 159:9
a. zhou 159:9
b. zhii 159:9
zhT 159:9
yao 159:9
A. ke 159:9
B. ke 159:9
C. ke 159:9
A. yi 159:9
B. die 159:9
shi 159:10
g6ng 159:10
ju 159:10
A.jiao 159:10
B.jue 159:10
lu 159:10
quan 159:10
zhou 159:11
A. zai 159:11
B. zai 159:11
C. zai 159:12
zhi 159:12
wan 159:12
zhe 159:12
wan 159:12
fu 159:12
qing 159:12
kan
huan
dui
jian
hong
pei
B
lu
xin
gu
A. bi
B. pi
zui
la
ban
bian
ci
bian
chen
a. ru
b. ru
n6ng
chen
yu
qi
xun
A. yi
B. yT
wang
A. ying
B. ying
A. jin
B. jin
ya
fan
wu
tiao
A. yT
B. yi
ji6ng
jia
dai
di
PO
die
a. ze
zhou 159:13
ni 159:13
zhan 159:14
liang 159:14
ZT 159:14
huT 159:15
wang 159:15
chuo 159:16
A. gud 160:0
B. hua 160:5
C. hui 160:6
y! 160:6
gun 160:6
nian 160:7
ping 160:9
bei 160:9
lun 160:12
liang 160:14
ruan 161:0
a. rou 161:3
b. r6u 161:3
jf 161:6
chuan 161:12
cou 162:3
chun 162:3
you 162:3
shu 162:3
fu 162:3
fii 162:4
A. zhan 162:4
B. nian 162:4
yu 162:4
wen 162:4
gu 162:4
xia 162:4
yuan 162:4
lu 162:5
A. zhuan 162:5
B. zhuan 162:5
a. zhe 162:5
b. che 162:5
jiao 162:5
zhan 162:5
fen 162:5
fan 162:5
hn 162:5

476 Lexicon
162:5
162:5
162:6
162:6
162:6
162:6
162:6
162:6
162:6
162:6
162:6
162:6
162:6
162:6
162:6
162:6
162:7
162:7
162:7
162:7
162:7
162:7
162:7
162:7
162:7
162:7
162:7
162:7
162:7
162:7
162:7
162:7
162:7
162:7
162:7
162:7
162:8
162:8
162:8
162:8
162:8
162:8
162:8
162:8
162:8
162:9
b. zuo 162:9
shu 162:9
hui 162:9
mi 162:9
JT 162:9
nai 162:9
yi 162:9
A. zhuT 162:9
B. duT 162:9
tul 162:9
song 162:9
kuo 162:9
tab 162:9
pang 162:9
hou 162:9
ni 162:9
bu 162:9
y6u 162:9
xiao 162:9
tou 162:9
zhu 162:10
qiu 162:10
tu 162:10
jing 162:10
fl 162:10
dou 162:10
t5ng 162:10
shi 162:10
cheng 162:10
su 162:10
A. zao 162:11
Ba. zao 162:11
Bb. cao 162:11
qun 162:11
feng 162:11
lian 162:11
beng 162:11
huan 162:11
A. dai 162:11
B. di 162:11
jin 162:12
Chuo 162:12
km 162:12
wei 162:12
yi 162:12
bT 162:12
yu 162:12
dim 162:12
sui 162:12
chuan 162:12
yu 162:13
you 162:13
yun 162:13
e 162:13
bian 162:13
A. guo 162:13
B. gu6 162:13
e 162:13
xia 162:14
huaiig 162:14
qiu 162:14
A. dao 162:15
B. dao 162:16
A. da 162:19
B. ta 162:19
wei 162:19
gou 163:0
yao 163:3
xun 163:3
A. t^ 163:3
B. dai 163:3
di 163:4
A. yu&n 163:4
B. yuan 163:4
su 163:4
qian 163:4
ao 163:4
A. shi 163:4
B. di 163:4
su 163:4
zao 163:4
zhe 163:4
dim 163:5
A. di 163:5
B. shi 163:5
C. di 163:5
A. chi 163:5
B. zhi 163:5
lin 163:5
zun 163:5
qian 163:5
xuan 163:5
yu
A. yf
B. wei
liao
ju
bi
yao
mai
xie
A. hua"n
B. xuan
zhan
sui
er
miao
bian
yuan
a. lu<5
b. luo
IT
yi
yong
h^n
mang
qi6ng
bin
fang
xing
A. nuo
B. n&
C. n^
C. nuo
bang
yuan
A. xie
B. ye
hdn
han
tai
qiu
bi
a. pi
b. pei
bTng
shao
di

Index 477
163:6
163:6
163:6
163:6
163:6
163:6
163:7
163:7
163:7
163:7
163:7
163:7
163:7
163:7
163:7
163:7
163:7
163:8
163:8
163:8
163:8
163:8
163:8
163:8
163:8
163:8
163:8
163:9
163:9
163:9
163:9
163:9
163:9
163:9
163:9
163:10
163:10
163:10
163:10
163:10
163:10
163:10
163:10
163:11
163:11
163:11
zhu 163:11
shT 163:11
yii 163:11
zhi 163:11
xun 163:11
jiao 163:11
ch6ng 163:12
chT 163:12
fu 163:12
gao 163:12
a. h&o 163:12
b. he 163:12
lang 163:12
jia 163:12
jun 163:12
ylng 163:12
xi 163:12
A. bu 163:If
B. p6u 163:1'!
A. pi 163:18
B. pi 163:18
gu6 163:15
tan 163:15
lai 163:15
ni 163:15
chen 164:0
you 164:2
du 164:2
yan 164:3
mei 164:3
ruo 164:3
e 164:3
juan 164:3
yu 164:4
yun 164:4
ZT 164:4
zou 164:5
wu 164:5
A. xiang 164:5
B. xiang 164:5
yun 164:5
A. qiao 164:6
B. hao 164:6
a. yong 164:6
b. yong 164:6
bT 164:6
fu 164:7
ym 164:7
zhuan 164:7
yan 164:7
zhang 164:7
man 164:7
xu 164:7
deng 164:8
ceng 164:8
zheng 164:8
mao 164:8
shan 164:8
lin 164:8
po 164:9
dan 164:9
ye 164:9
kuai 164:9
you 164:9
h'ng 164:9
XT 164:9
feng 164:10
A. zan 164:10
B. zuan 164:10
C. cuo 164:11
B 164:11
y6u 164:11
ding 164:11
qiu 164:12
zhuo 164:12
pel 164:12
zhou 164:13
yi 164:13
jiu 164:13
A. dan 164:13
B. zhen 164:13
xu 164:14
tu6 164:14
zu6 164:17
han 164:18
gu 164:18
su 164:19
mlng 164:19
a. lao 164:20
b. luo 165:0
chou 165:0
tong 165:13
che"ng
yin
jiao
kii
suan
lei
pu
yan
pei
zh&n
chun
zui
cu
A.ti
B. tl
hu
xu
A. xlng
B. xlng
tan
ch6u
yun
hai
If
lao
Y.Tjiang
bu
jiao
XT
nong
yi
IT
ju
yi
ru
xun
niang
xin
jiao
a. sT
b. shai
yan
A. cSi
B. cai
shi

478 Lexicon
A. ju 167:7
B. chu 167:8
zhu 167:8
qian 167:8
a. qian 167:8
b. yan 167:8
yue 167:8
bo 167:8
g6u 167:8
shu 167:8
zheng 167:8
xing 167:8
jiao 167:8
yin 167:8
long 167:8
zhi 167:8
xian 167:8
xing 167:8
quan 167:8
zhu 167:8
ming 167:8
A. yao 167:8
B. diao 167:8
C. tiao 167:9
xian 167:9
xian 167:9
rui 167:9
qiu 167:9
xiao 167:9
cuo 167:9
mei 167:9
lang 167:9
w5n 167:9
A. yan 167:9
B. chan 167:9
ding 167:9
jia 167:9
feng 167:9
A. yu 167:9
B. wu 167:10
lyue 167:10
A. qln 167:10
B. qian 167:10
chu 167:10
mang 167:10
A. pu 167:10
B. pu
ju
gang
lu
zhui
kun
chui
zi
zheng
A. chiin
B. dui
A. yT
B.qi
A. qian
B. jian
zhui
jTn
gu5n
XT
diao
gu
A. cuo
B. cuo
kai
lian
guo
du
e
yang
duan
cha
qie
mou
hou
tou
huan
jian
zhen
zhong
xia
lian
rong
sud
chui
bo
kai
166:0
166:2
166:2
166:2
166:4
166:5
166:5
166:11
166:11
167:0
167:2
167:2
167:2
167:2
167:2
167:3
167:3
167:3
167:3
167:3
167:3
167:3
167:3
167:3
167:4
167:4
167:4
167:4
167:4
167:4
167:4
167:4
167:4
167:4
167:5
167:5
167:5
167:5
167:5
167:5
167:5
167:5
167:5
167:5
167:5
167:5
IT 167:5
A. chong 167:5
B. zhong 167:5
C. zhong 167:5
ye" 167:5
A. liang 167:5
B. liang 167:5
A. If 167:5
B. XT 167:5
jin 167:5
zhao 167:5
A. dmg 167:6
B. ding 167:6
fu 167:6
zhen 167:6
diao 167:6
kou 167:6
chuan 167:6
ban 167:6
A. gong 167:6
B. gang 167:6
A. dai 167:6
B. di 167:6
chai 167:6
ye* 167:6
fu 167:6
dun 167:7
qian 167:7
bSn 167:7
sa 167:7
A. chao 167:7
B. chao 167:7
niu 167:7
jun 167:7
ling 167:7
bo 167:7
pi 167:7
A. tian 167:7
B. dian 167:7
jia 167:7
ju 167:7
A. shi 167:7
B. she 167:7
xuan 167:7
zhao 167:7
bao 167:7

Index 479
167:10
167:10
167:10
167:10
167:11
167:11
167:11
167:11
167:11
167:11
167:11
167:11
167:11
167:11
167:11
167:11
167:11
167:11
167:11
167:11
167:11
167:11
167:11
167:11
167:11
167:11
167:12
167:12
167:12
167:12
167:12
167:12
167:12
167:12
167:12
167:12
167:12
167:13
167:13
167:13
167:13
167:13
167:13
167:13
167:13
167:13
sou 167:13
hao 167:13
zhen 167:13
yi 167:14
A. shai 167:14
B. sha 167:14
zu 167:14
xuan 167:15
ao 167:15
mo 167:15
liu 167:15
df 167:15
a. ao 167:16
b. ao 167:17
keng 167:17
qiang 167:17
qi 167:17
tang 167:17
man 167:18
a. yong 167:18
b. yong 167:19
chan 167:19
jing 167:19
lou 167:19
C6ng 167:20
zan 167:20
nao 167:20
jue 168:0
zun 168:0
A. liao 168:0
B. liao 169:0
dui 169:2
A. xm 169:3
B. tan 169:3
zhong 169:4
A. deng 169:4
B. deng 169:4
ao 169:4
juan 169:4
lian 169:4
zhuo 169:4
ti6 169:4
huan 169:4
duo 169:4
A. dang 169:5
B. cheng 169:5
A. qu 169:5
B. ju 169:6
C. ju 169:6
zhu 169:6
huo 169:6
bin 169:6
jian 169:6
zhi 169:6
la 169:7
shuo 169:7
lyii 169:7
biao 169:7
lu 169:7
bo 169:8
a. yao 169:8
b. yue 169:8
chan 169:8
xiang 169:8
guan 169:8
ni^ 169:8
luo 169:8
A. zuan 169:9
B. zuan 169:9
luan 169:9
a. zao 169:9
b. zuo 169:9
jue 169:9
A. chang 169:9
B. zhang 169:9
C. zhang 169:9
men 169:9
shan 169:10
han
bi
kai
hong
run
xian
A. jian
B. jian
C. xian
A. jian
B.jian
m!n
A.zha
B.g6
bi
he
ge
ge
fa
gUT
a. mm
b. mln
kun
a. lang
b. lang
lyu
yue
chang
yan
yan
A.e
B. yan
hun
yu
wen
qu
wen
an
wei
yin
kuo
que
Ian
A.du
B. she
tian
nie
ta
kai
he
a. que
b. que
A. chen
B.chuSng
kuT
guan
wei
kan
xi
hui

480 Lexicon
169:12
169:13
169:13
169:13
170:0
170:2
170:3
170:3
170:4
170:4
170:4
170:4
170:4
170:4
170:4
170:4
170:5
170:5
170:5
170:5
170:5
170:5
170:5
170:5
170:5
170:5
170:5
170:5
170:6
170:6
170:6
170:6
170:6
170:6
170:6
170:6
170:7
170:7
170:7
170:7
170:7
170:7
170:7
170:7
170:7
170:8
chan 170:8
pi 170:8
hudn 170:8
ta 170:8
fu 170:8
le 170:8
qian 170:8
zhi 170:8
A. e 170:8
B. ai 170:8
bSn 170:8
keng 170:8
ruSn 170:9
zhT 170:9
jlng 170:9
fang 170:9
£ 170:9
zu 170:9
zuo 170:9
a. dian 170:9
b. yan 170:9
a. e 170:9
b. a 170:9
c. a 170:9
tup 170:9
A. bei 170:9
B. bi 170:9
fu 170:10
du6 170:10
lou 170:10
mo 170:10
A. xiang 170:10
B.jiang 170:10
xian 170:10
er 170:11
gai 170:11
xmg 170:12
bi 170:12
shSn 170:13
sheng 170:13
zhi 170:13
d6u 170:13
yuan 170:13
zhen 170:14
chu 170:14
pel 170:14
z6u 170:14
yln 170:15
chui 170:16
A. chen 171:9
B. zhen 172:0
pi 172:2
ling 172:2
A. ta"o 172:2
B. yao 172:2
xian 172:3
a. lu 172:3
b. liu 172:4
yln 172:4
zhu 172:4
yang 172:4
reng 172:4
A. dT 172:4
B. ti 172:5
yu 172:5
16ng 172:5
wei 172:5
nie 172:5
A. dui 172:5
B. zhui 172:6
sui 172:8
huang 172:9
jie 172:10
a. ge 172:10
b.jie 172:10
yun 172:10
w6i 172:10
A. e 172:10
B. ai 172:10
xi 172:10
ji 172:10
zhang 172:11
tuf 172:11
deng 172:11
sui 172:11
sui 173:0
A. ao 173:0
B. yu 173:3
xian 173:3
JT 173:4
xi 173:4
A. yln 173:4
B. yin
huT
16ng
n
zhuT
he
zhT
a. sun
b. zhun
a. qiao
b. que
yan
xi6ng
ya
ji
A.hii
B. gu
zhi
gou
juan
CT
yong
JQ
luo
diao
suT
shuang
guan
chu
za
y6ng
JT
Aa. XT
Ab. gui
B. suT
A.li
B. li
A. nan
B. nan
A. yu
B. yu
yu
xu6
fBn
paiig
yun

Index
173:5
173:5
173:5
173:5
173:5
173:5
173:6
173:7
173:7
173:7
173:7
173:7
173:8
173:8
173:8
173:8
173:8
173:8
173:9
173:9
173:9
173:10
173:10
173:10
173:10
173:11
173:11
173:11
173:12
173:12
173:13
173:13
173:13
173:14
173:14
173:14
173:16
173:16
173:16
173:16
173:17
174:0
174:5
174:7
174:8
174:8
A. ling 175:0
B. lian 175:7
16i 175:11
a. bao 175:11
b. bo 176:0
dian 176:7
xu 176:12
mu 176:14
xiao 177:0
ting 177:0
zhen 177:3
pel 177:3
hu6 177:4
Sha 177:4
fei 177:4
zhan 177:4
ni 177:4
lin 177:5
shuang 177:5
ling 177:5
xia 177:5
a. mai 177:5
b. mo 177:5
yun 177:6
liu 177:6
wu 177:6
ym 177:6
xi 177:6
xian 177:6
lu 177:7
A. ba 177:7
B. po 177:7
pi 177:8
jl 177:8
mai 177:8
meng 177:8
li 177:8
ai 177:8
dai 177:9
ling 177:9
ai 177:9
qlng 177:9
jing 177:9
jing 177:9
dian 177:10
jing 177:11
fei 177:12
kao 177:14
A. ml 177:14
B. mi 177:14
mian 177:15
tian 177:17
hui 178:0
ye 178:3
A. ge 178:5
B. jl 178:5
jian 178:8
di 178:8
qm 178:9
jin 178:9
xue 178:9
yln 178:10
s& 178:10
ban 178:11
tao 178:12
bei 178:13
hong 179:0
pao 179:10
yang 180:0
A.jid 180:5
B.jid 180:10
tao 180:11
xie 180:13
an 181:2
g6ng 181:2
man 181:2
A. shao 181:2
B. qiao 181:2
kong 181:3
bSng 181:3
A. blng 181:3
B. bT 181:4
a.ju 181:4
b. ju 181:4
rou 181:4
qiu 181:4
ju 181:4
jian 181:4
bian 181:4
dT 181:4
pan 181:4
kuo 181:4
JT
A.hu
B. huo
xian
du
jian
w6i
ren
bi
fu
ban
chang
yun
she
wfci
tao
gou
bi
wei
du
jiu
JT
yln
shdo
yun
an
xiang
ding
A. qlng
B. qing
A. qiu
B. km
xiang
shun
xu
xu
A. song
B. rong
kul
qi
hang
yu
wan
A. ban
B. fen
dun
481

482 Lexicon
181:5
181:5
181:5
181:5
181:6
181:6
181:6
181:6
181:6
181:6
181:6
181:6
181:6
181:6
181:7
181:7
181:7
181:7
181:7
181:7
181:7
181:7
181:7
181:7
181:7
181:8
181:8
181:8
181:8
181:8
181:9
181:9
181:9
181:9
181:9
181:9
181:9
181:10
181:10
181:10
181:10
181:12
181:12
181:13
181:13
181:13
pan 181:13
A. po 181:14
B. p6 181:15
ling 181:16
e 181:18
Aa. xie 182:0
Ab.jie 182:0
B. jia 182:5
yi 182:5
a. ke 182:9
b. hai 182:9
ping 182:9
A. tiao 182:10
B. fu 182:11
tou 182:11
hui 182:11
A. kiri 182:12
B. qiu 183:0
jia" 184:0
ting 184:0
yun 184:0
ban 184:2
jlng 184:2
tui 184:3
pin 184:4
A. qln 184:4
B. ban 184:4
a. ke 184:4
b. kS 184:4
cui 184:4
A. ti 184:4
B. di 184:4
6 184:5
yan 184:5
kan 184:5
yong 184:5
zhuan 184:5
yuan 184:6
sang 184:6
dian 184:6
lei 184:6
hao 184:6
gu 184:7
hui 184:7
Aa. zhan 184:7
Ab. chan 184:7
B. bu
jun
sii
yu
hun
xing
jian
blng
A. tan
B. dan
A. n6i
B. wei
guSn
A. yun
B. bun
hu
tie
h6u
ai
A. xmg
B. tang
fen
gao
xi
kui
ye
JTn
kui
zhuan
chi
yi
JT
rao
yong
tao
xiSng
zhan
fen
meng
yan
chan
xiSng
A. shou
B. shou
kuf
guo
B. shan 184:7
xian 184:7
pin 184:7
hi 184:7
quan 184:8
A. feng 184:8
B. feng 184:8
zhan 184:8
sa 184:8
ST 184:8
sou 184:8
yang 184:8
yao 184:8
A. liu 184:9
B. liu 184:9
piao 184:9
biao 184:9
fei 184:9
A. shi 184:9
B. si 184:9
C. yi 184:9
JT 184:9
Si 184:10
sun 184:10
tun 184:10
ren 184:10
yu 184:11
chi 184:12
A. yTn 184:12
B. yin 184:12
A. fan 184:12
B. fan 184:12
yi 184:12
bi 184:13
si 184:13
bao 184:13
shi 184:13
ci 184:13
xiang 184:14
A. ySng 184:14
B. yang 184:17
er 184:17
can 185:0
nei 185:0
e 185:2
A. bu 185:8

Index 483
186:0
186:9
186:11
186:11
187:0
187:2
187:2
187:2
187:3
187:3
187:3
187:3
187:3
187:4
187:4
187:4
187:4
187:5
187:5
187:5
187:5
187:5
187:5
187:5
187:5
187:5
187:5
187:5
187:5
187:5
187:5
187:5
187:6
187:6
187:6
187:6
187:6
187:6
187:7
187:7
187:7
187:7
187:7
187:7
187:7
187:7
xiang 187:7
fu 187:7
a. xln 187:7
b. Xing 187:7
m& 187:8
yu 187:8
A. feng 187:8
B. ping 187:8
A. tuo 187:8
B. duo 187:8
chi 187:8
xun 187:8
zhu 187:8
ri 187:8
sa 187:9
zhi 187:9
bo 187:9
jiong 187:9
ju 187:9
zhu 187:9
nu 187:10
ju 187:10
pT 187:10
A. zang 187:10
B. zu 187:10
jia 187:10
A. tai 187:10
B. dai 187:10
fu 187:11
Shi 187:11
tuo 187:11
si 187:11
tao 187:11
shen 187:11
hai 187:11
bo 187:11
yln 187:11
luo 187:12
xie 187:12
s6ng 187:12
qm 187:12
mang 187:12
ban 187:12
tu 187:12
xuan 187:13
tui 187:1]
jun 187:13
ch6ng 187:13
xmg 187:14
ai 187:14
lu 187:16
zhuT 187:17
plan 187:18
tao 187:19
lai 187:20
A. qf 188:0
B. ji 188:3
qf 188:6
A. fei 188:6
B. fei 188:6
wu 188:7
pian 188:8
xia 188:8
zong 188:10
kui 188:11
gua 188:12
qian 188:13
zhi 188:13
liu 188:13
teng 188:13
XT 188:14
yuan 188:15
zou 189:0
sao 190:0
zhi 190:0
mo 190:3
luo 190:3
A. ao 190:4
B. ao 190:4
can 190:4
piao 190:4
cong 190:5
qu 190:5
yu 190:5
xu 190:5
hua 190:5
xiao 190:5
lin 190:6
tuo 190:6
jiao 190:6
tie 190:7
yan 190:7
j«ng
yi
a. zh6u
b. zou
lyu
ji
huan
K
biao
gu
w6i
hai
qiao
&
gSng
pian
bi
b6
lou
xiao
du
zang
suT
tl
bin
kuan
gao
A. biao
B. shan
kun
fi
fSng
xiu
mao
dan
tiao
ZT
fa
ran
bi
fu
xiu
kuo
ji
zhua
shao

484 Lexicon
190:8
190:8
190:9
190:9
190:10
190:10
190:11
190:12
190:13
190:14
190:15
191:0
191:5
191:6
191:8
191:14
191:16
192:0
192:19
193:0
193:0
193:3
193:7
193:8
193:9
193:12
193:12
193:12
194:0
194:3
194:4
194:4
194:5
194:5
194:5
194:5
194:7
194:8
194:8
194:8
194:11
194:11
194:14
195:0
195:4
195:4
fi 195:4
qu£n 195:5
jian 195:5
du6 195:5
qi 195:5
zhen 195:5
m£n 195:5
xu 195:6
huan 195:6
bin 195:6
lie 195:6
d6u 195:6
nao 195:6
hong 195:6
xi 195:6
d6u 195:6
jiu 195:6
ch^ng 195:6
yu 195:6
A. ge 195:6
B. 11 195:7
guO 195:7
fu 195:7
xin 195:7
zong 195:8
A. yu 195:8
Ba. zhu 195:8
Bb. zhou 195:8
guT 195:8
mei 195:8
km 195:8
hun 195:8
ba 195:8
A. po 195:9
B. tuo 195:9
mei 195:9
xiao 195:9
wang 195:9
liang 195:9
wei 195:9
chT 195:9
mo 195:10
yan 195:10
yu 195:10
yua"n 195:10
lu 195:10
farig 195:10
gun 195:11
man 195:11
tfc 195:11
bao 195:11
fu 195:11
zha 195:11
xiSng 195:11
€r 195:12
wei 195:12
A. t6ng 195:12
B. zhou 195:12
qi 195:12
wei 195:12
jiao 195:12
A. guT 195:12
B. xie 195:13
C. wa 195:13
A. xian 195:13
B. xian 195:13
gun 195:14
geng 195:14
IT 195:15
Sh5 195:16
A. qing 195:16
B. zheng 196:0
zh6u 196:1
ni 196:2
kun 196:2
chang 196:3
a. jTng 196:3
b. qing 196:3
ling 196:3
tf 196:4
ji 196:4
hu^ng 196:4
qiu 196:4
qiu 196:4
e 196:5
fu 196:5
sai 196:5
jian 196:5
pu 196:5
Shi 196:5
guan 196:5
yao 196:5
qi
lian
tido
man
biao
zhuan
a. yong
b. yong
bie
xun
xun
shan
shan
A. gui
B.ju6
hn
h6u
kuai
zhan
IT
cha^ig
xu
zhen
e
lu
niao
yi
fu
jiu
shT
feng
ming
yuan
ju6
zhen
bao
yan
ya
ji^
ling
ge
yuSn
qu
xiao
chl
gQ

Index 485
196:5
196:5
196:5
196:6
196:6
196:6
196:6
196:6
196:6
196:6
196:7
196:7
196:7
196:7
196:7
196:7
196:7
196:8
196:8
196:8
196:8
196:8
196:8
196:8
196:8
196:8
196:8
196:9
196:9
196:9
196:9
196:9
196:9
196:9
196:9
196:10
196:10
196:10
196:10
196:10
196:10
196:10
196:10
196:11
196:11
196:11
mi
she
lih
cu
a. mai
b. mo
fu
m6u
qu
rnian
ma"
mo
huT
hua"ng
t6u
hong
shu
If
ni£n
a. hei
b. he
yi
qidn
dan
mo
dai
chu
y6u
dian
y>
xia
qing
If
dang
an
zh&n
yan
du
zhT
fu
fu
A. rrJn
B. mi&n
C. o6ng
yuan
cha"o
ou 198:9
zhi 198:10
liu 198:12
jiao 198:22
A. big 199:0
B. bi 199:0
jiao 199:4
liao 199:6
jiu 199:8
xian 199:9
yu 200:0
lu 200:3
yTng 200:4
xue 201:0
yi 201:5
zhan 201:13
yu 202:0
lu 202:3
yTng 202:5
guan 203:0
qu 203:0
If 203:3
luan 203:4
lu 203:4
xian 203:4
cuo 203:5
jian 203:5
yan 203:5
lu 203:5
you 203:6
JT 203:6
So 203:8
A. pao 203:8
B. biao 203:8
zhu 203:9
jun 203:10
zhu 203:14
mf 203:15
yu 204:0
jun 204:5
nf 204:7
qf 205:0
lu 205:0
jun 205:0
A. li 205:4
B. If 205:5
yu 196:11
yang 196:11
ya 196:11
er 196:12
yan 196:12
hong 196:12
luo 196:12
ru 196:12
ge 196:12
xiu 196:12
juan 196:12
yu 196:12
tf 196:13
e 196:13
A. hu 196:13
B. gu 196:13
wu 196:14
fu 196:16
peng 196:17
diao 196:18
a. qiao 196:18
b. que 196:19
yuan 196:19
zhuT 197:0
kun 197:9
chun 197:10
geng 197:10
qiu 197:13
hu 198:0
e 198:2
jf 198:2
h6 198:4
A. mu 198:4
B. wu 198:4
ju 198:5
cang 198:5
yTng 198:5
he 198:6
chu 198:7
liu 198:7
jf 198:8
Cl 198:8
yan 198:8
zhe 198:8
yao 198:8
yT 198:8

486 Lexicon
205:11
205:12
205:12
206:0
206:2
206:2
206:3
207:0
207:8
207:8
207:8
208:0
208:5
208:5
208:5
208:5
208:7
208:8
208:10
208:10
209:0
209:2
209:3
210:0
210:0
210:0
210:0
210:3
210:5
210:7
210:9
211:0
211:2
211:3
211:4
211:4
211:5
211:5
211:6
211:6
211:6
211:6
211:9
212:0
212:3
212:3
&> 212:6
bie 212:6
tu6 213:0
ding 213:0
mi 214:0
nai 214:5
ZT
g*
yuan
PI
gao
shu
qu
sheng
shi
you
wu
jing
a. XT
b. xf
bi
qiu
ban
A.qi
B.ji
C ZT
D. zhai
zhai
ZT
JT
JT
chr
chen
he
ym
xie
ze
ling
A. ym
B. ken
nie
ySo
qu
long
A. pang
B. long
gong
kan
A. guT
B. qiu
yue
he

BIBLIOGRAPHY
PRIMARY SOURCES
See Pulleyblank, Middle Chinese, 1984.
SECONDARY WORKS CITED
Ding Shengshu 1966. Gujin ziyin duizhao shouce
. Hong Kong: Taiping shuju
Guangdong, Guangxi, Hunan, Henan Pivnan xiudingzu and Shangwu
yinshuguan bianjibu, 1987. Ciyuan single volume reduced size
edition. Hong Kong: Commercial Press
Hanyu cidian . _1947. Abridged, one-volume edition of the
Guoyu cidian , 4 vols., published by Commercial Press,
Shanghai, 1937. Hong Kong: Commercial Press
Hanvn da/idian bianji weiyuanhui, ed., 1986-90. Hanyu dazidian
vols. Chengdu: Sichuan cishu chubanse and Hubei cishu
chubanshe
Karlgren, Bernhard, 1957. Grammata Serica Recensa. Reprinted from
Bulletin of Far Eastern Antiquities 29:1-332
Li, Fang-kuei, 1977. Handbook of Comparative Tai. Honolulu: University
of Hawaii Press
Luo Zhufeng ed., 19 86-: Hanyu dacidian , 12
vols., Shanghai: Shanghai cishu chubanshe
Morohashi Tetsuji 1955. Dai Kanwa jiten 13
vols.
Pulleyblank, Edwin G., 1970. 'Notes on the hP*ags-pa alphabet for
Chinese.' in M. Boyce and I Gershevitch, eds., W. B. Henning
Memorial Volume, London: Lund Humphries
Pulleyblank, Edwin G., 1984. Middle Chinese: a study in historical
phonology, Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press
Pulleyblank, Edwin G., 1986a. 'Some issues in CV phonology with
reference to the history of Chinese.' Canadian Journal of Linguistics 31:
225-266
Pulleyblank, Edwin, G., 1986b. Tonogenesis as an index of areal
relationships in East Asia,' Linguistics of the Tibeto-Burman Area 9:65-
82
Pulleyblank, Edwin, G., 1989. The role of coronal in articulator based
features,' Papers for the 25th Annual Regional Meeting of the Chicago
Linguistics Society , Part 1, 379-393
Pulleyblank, Edwin, G., 1991. The Cantonese vowel system in historical
perspective,' to appear in Wang Jialing and Norval Smith, eds., Studies
in Chinese Phonology. Dordrecht: Foris Publications
Wu Jingrong et al., eds., 1979. The Chinese-English Dictionary.
Beijing: Commercial Press

488 Lexicon
Zhongguo shehui kexue yuan, yuyan yanjiusuo cidian bianjishi, ed., 1979.
Xiandai Hanyu cidian ,„ . ^ ,_ _ , Beijing: Commercial Press
Zhonghua shuju bianjibu, 1965. Cikai new edition, 2 vols.
Shanghai: Zhonghua shuju. Reprinted 1979. Hong Kong: Zhonghua
shuju
